
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE SERMONS PREACHED AND PENNED BY RICHARD ROGERS Preacher of Weatherſfield in Eſſex, directly tending to theſe three ends. Firſt, to bring any bad perſon (that hath not committed the ſinne that is vnpardonable) to true conuerſion. Secondly, to ſtabliſh and ſettle all ſuch as are conuerted, in faith and repentance. Thirdly, to leade them forward (that are ſo ſetled) in the Chriſtian life, to bring foorth the fruite of both. WHEREVNTO ARE ANNEXED diuers godlie and learned Sermons of another reuerend and faithfull ſeruant of God, Mr. SAMVEL WRIGHT, Bachelor of Diuinitie, late Preſident of Sidney Colledge in Camebridge deceaſed, tending alſo to the ſame ends, with diuers particular points in both, profitable and fit for theſe times.
            
               1. IOHN 5.13.
               I write vnto you that beleeue in the name of that Sonne of God, that yee may know that yee haue eternall life: and that yee may beleeue in the name of that Sonne of God.
            
            LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for Thomas Man 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE EDVVARD DENNY, Lord Baron of Waltam, &c.
            
               IT is recorded in holie Scripture (right Honourable) that Iehoſhaphat King of Iudah,2. Chron. 17.7. much renowned for his pietie, did ſend out his Princes to teach in the Cities of Iudah. By which act of his, and the ſetting downe of it by the holie Ghoſt, although I goe not about to confound their office and dutie with the Prophets and Leuites, yet they are not on the other ſide, to be taken and counted as nothing; I meane both his act, and the report of it by the holie ſtorie. For though they did not preach to the people in the cities whither they came, hauing Leuites with them, to doe that ſeruice, yet their countenancing, authorizing, and backing of the Leuites, who did teach the people indeed; is not without cauſe ſaid to be a preaching; ſeeing it made way to the people receiuing of it with much more readineſſe and cheerefulneſſe, then otherwiſe they would haue done: yea, they were much more incouraged to the zealous embracing and profeſſing of it, with fruits following, and that by the aduancing and magnifying of it by ſuch noble and worthy perſons,

then might haue bin looked for at their hands otherwiſe.
            For though the word of God, and the pure doctrine taught out of it, be of ſufficient authoritie to draw and perſwade the hearers to ſubmit themſelues to it; yet conſidering the blindnes, vntowardnes, and rebelliouſnes of mans heart againſt heauenly things, a number would neuer haue ſet foote in the holie place to heare, for all the report that might haue come to their eares of the price and benefit of the glad tidings preached, if they had not been incouraged and brought on by ſuch worthie examples.
            Oh, wee know what force there is in ſuch meanes. In ſo much, as euen with vs, howſoeuer there are of the Nobilitie, many who haue the preaching of the Goſpel in ſingular account, yet the people that dwell farre off from them, and be not ſeated neere to them, they (I ſay) hearken not after them, neither are any thing moued by them. But where ſuch are ſeene by the people that liue by them, to haue the preachers of the word in high account for the meſſage they bring, and to bee ſubiect to the holie doctrine which they teach; euen that is a ſtrong cord to draw the inferiour ſort to ſhew reuerence to the ordinance of God, and to cauſe them to think, that if ſuch great perſons ſo highly eſteeme of their miniſtery and meſſage, that there is (doubtleſſe) ſome great matter that moueth thē to it. And though that be not all, neither is of any power to conuert the heart, (for that is the proper worke of the holie Ghoſt) yet many are at the firſt brought on to receiue the preaching of the Goſpell, (who after feele the power of it alſo, and enioy the benefit of it) when yet their firſt beginnings therein,

are chiefly occaſioned by the zeale and forwardnes of ſuch good patternes.
            And this is one cauſe (Right Honourable) why we Gods Miniſters doe much wiſh and pray for the ſuperiours and great perſons, and eſpecially thoſe who are noble and growing toward the higheſt places, that they may be ſincere and zealous for the truth, becauſe, though they be no Preachers, as neither Iehoſhaphats Princes were; yet wee know, how greatly they may ſet forward preaching, and honour God in going before the people in their holy courſe, I ſay, we pray that many of them may be ſuch, euen as wee highly praiſe God for thoſe, who are ſuch alreadie.
            And as wee are glad to ſee them fauourers and followers of that which we preach by the authoritie of God, (one father of vs all) ſo we deſire (which is the next thereto) that they would be patrons of our writings, which we ſet foorth with the ſame mindes for the common edification of the Church of Chriſt, that when it is ſeene that ſuch as are in high place, and zealous profeſſors of the truth alſo, do make account of them; there may be farre greater hope that many others will doe the ſame.
            And therefore I humbly craue of your Honour, that I who haue preſumed to dedicate theſe few Sermons to your Honour, may be with your good liking allowed ſo to doe. The which though they be things of ſmall account, (as they are commonly reckoned to be) yet I would not haue offered them, if I had thought they might not promiſe that good to the Church, which I know your Honour is willing to further. Beſides, if there be any thing in them worthy

your accepting, and reading, they are your due, by good right, and the teſtimonie of my thankfull heart, and the beſt that I haue to preſent to your Lordſhip; who though you neuer ſaw my face, yet euen vpon report of me to your Honour, did giue me cauſe to haue you in daily remembrance while I liue. But a word is enough of this.
            To lay out the matter of the Sermons, I thinke it not meete to bee tedious to you about it, and the rathe for that it is in the ſhort Epiſtle to the Reader done ſufficiently; further then thus, to ſignifie, that the thing which is chiefly aimed at in them, (among many other to good purpoſe) is to giue helpe to the Reader, as need ſhall require, to make his calling, and conſequently his election (as the Apoſtle Peter willeth) ſure. And thus not to bee further tedious to your Lordſhip, I end, praying God, that as hee hath honoured you in a double manner, ſo he would accompanie your earthlie honour with abundance of ſuch bleſſings as are wont to goe with it, and multiplie your beſt honour with the varietie and increaſe of his heauenly graces. From Weatherſfield this 20. of Aprill 1612.
            
               Your Honours in all humble dutie to commaund in Chriſt, RICH. ROGERS.
            
         
         
            
            TO ALL TRVE CHRISTIANS, AND WELWILLERS TO to the Goſpel, or ſuch as yet are further off from the power of it, whom the Lord in time may call: Richard Rogers wiſheth al good that they want to make them trulie happie for euer.
            
               CHriſtian and gentle Reader, I offer to thy view in this little booke, certaine Sermons tending to the good of all that can finde time and willingnes to reade and regard them. And more particularlie, at this they aime; ſome of them, that they may helpe forward and perſwade ignorant, profane bad perſons, and hypocrites, to diſtaſt and waxe wearie of their euill and dangerous courſe. For out of all theſe kinds of wicked perſons doth the Lord daily call home ſome, effectually; where the Goſpell is ſoundly, plainly, and powerfully preached. And I would they ſhould know as much as I ſay, to the end they may not harden their hearts againſt God, (as they may poſsibly and eaſily doe) while they ſee many ſafely and happily guided in their liues, and themſelues nothing ſo, but may heare his voice willingly by repairing to ſuch wholeſome Sermons, wherein the Lord ſheweth himſelfe willing to be reconciled vnto them, and wherein he thus ſpeaketh; O nation, not worthie to be beloued, yet for all

this, if thou wilt returne from thine iniquitie, I will receiue thee graciouſly.
            And what ſhould make them like glad as the hearing of this? as the Gentiles were, when they heard firſt, that God had granted vnto them as well as to the Iewes, the glad tidings of ſaluation. Euen this ſort of people may haue no ſmall incouragement by reading theſe Sermons, and eſpecially thoſe among the reſt, which ſhew how they that wander out of the right way, may returne, and come home vnto it againe. Some of theſe Sermons doe aime at this, to keepe ſuch as are drawne out of their ſinfull courſe alreadie, to the certaintie of ſaluation, and to keepe ſuch ſtedfaſt in their faith, hope, and repentance; and that they may not fall from them. And other ſome of them, ſerue to helpe forward all ſuch ſo ſtabliſhed, that they may grow in knowledge and grace, and ſo bring foorth fruits beſeeming the Goſpell. And I would they might finde no leſſe fauour and acceptation with the readers, then I am ſure they found with them who heard them preached.
            I haue ſhewed what the matter is that is handled in theſe Sermons: now I will ſhew my reaſons, why I haue gathered not one, but ſundrie of the ſame argument together, and ſet them foorth ſo. And after, I will declare to thee, in what order I place them in this treatiſe, and why.
            The firſt reaſon why I ſet downe many in one booke of the ſame argument, and not of diuers, is this; for that this matter and doctrine of the conuerſion of a ſinner, is very hard to be perceiued and diſcerned of many hearers, and eſpecially: ſo as they may cleerely ſee how to trace the way, and goe in it. Therefore that which could not ſo eaſily be perceiued in one ſermon, I haue thought good to lay foorth in many, and out of diuers texts of Scriptures, which tending all to this end, to wit, to ſet downe the conuerſion of a

ſinner to God, doe giue more light in this matter, and offer occaſion of more things about it, then one alone can doe.
            Theſe therefore being read with conſideration, may (through Gods bleſsing) make this point cleere, who, how, and when a man is conuerted, and make him able to trie whither he himſelfe be ſo or no. And if one be well grounded in the doctrine that teacheth this, and haue the vſe of this, he ſhall much the eaſilier attaine to further knowledge, and conſequently, to the vſe thereof: both which are meanly, and of few attained to, ſeeing ſo few are well ſetled in the other.
            The next reaſon of this my thus doing, is becauſe this doctrine of the conuerſion of a ſinner, is but little, and too ſeldome taught, I meane al the parts of it are ſeldome ſet downe together; eſpecially at one time, and in one ſermon. All which were meete to be done, and oft; the weake capacitie, ſlipperie memorie, and many other defects in the moſt hearers, requiring it; and that they might ſee, both how farre they are from conuerſion, while they are in their firſt condition of ignorance, and vnbeliefe; and how they are to be brought to it, and alſo how contrarie their hearts and liues ſhould be to that they were before, when they be conuerted Theſe parts of it are ſeldome handled altogether in preaching, though one ſometime, another of them another time be taught and deliuered. But it is a long time, though the word be diligently preached (as in few places it is) before the moſt part of the hearers are able to lay one part and point of it with the other, and to make the whole worke of conuerſion of them all.
            And to adde the third reaſon, ſeeing all that the people know and practiſe without conuerſion is nothing, I meane, either pleaſing to God, or profitable to ſaluation vnto themſelues. They may (I denie not) know many points, and learne ſundrie inſtructions, as concerning the letter, but to know

ſo as they beleeue (without which faith it is impoſsible for them to pleaſe God) they cannot without conuerſion; and to practiſe ſo in their liues, as that they may be ſaid to repent and liue holily, (without which they ſhall periſh, and neuer ſee the Lord) that is impoſsible without the ſame conuerſion.
            For theſe cauſes and ſome other, of which this is not the leaſt, that by experience I haue ſeene great fruit come of this doctrine diligently and much taught, and little fruite, where it hath not been much in vſe; for ſuch cauſes (I ſay) I haue of purpoſe ſet out many ſermons of this argument, deſiring that the people may be made better acquainted with it, and that ſuch Preachers as thinke me worthie to be heard in this requeſt, would frame themſelues to teach it in their owne, or in other places where they come.
            As for them that feare they ſhall glut the people with beating thus vpon the ſame things, as though they could preach no other, I anſwere, if wee preach to the end the people may practiſe that which we teach, and if the people alſo make vſe of that which they learne about this matter, it ſhall be found ſo hard and precious to know themſelues conuerted, that they ſhall themſelues deſire that doctrine concerning it, to be taught againe and againe, and namely of faith and repentance, rather then to be wearie of it; for they ſhall ſee, that when the ſame thing ſhall be taught out of new texts, euen the old matter ſhall be in manner new to them.
            Now it followeth to ſhew, why theſe texts are ſet downe in the order in which they are placed in the treatiſe. The firſt texts are Acts 16.24. and Matth. 24.12.13. and the ſermons on both, tend directly to ſhew, how a ſinner is conuerted, except the beginning of the Sermon in the 16. of the Acts, which yet maketh a way to the doctrine of conuerſion in the ſtorie of the Iailer. And in thoſe two Sermons the reader may ſee the three parts of conuerſion. And diuers of the other

Sermons doe alſo giue good light in the ſame: and namely the 5. of Deut. In the next place followeth the 13. of Matth. verſ. 46. and Eſay 55. verſ. 1.2. In the former of theſe texts is commended to the reader what an excellent thing this conuerſion and namely faith is, by a parable of the pearle: and the latter text containeth doctrine to incourage and hearten on all to thirſt after, & moſt earneſtly to deſire theſe graces of faith & repentance, and other graces accōpanying them. The next in order is the 5. of Deut. 29. which, beſide that I haue ſaid of it alreadie ſetteth downe the fruit of conuerſion, which is a godly conuerſation, and how liuely it floweth and proceedeth from this conuerſion. The Sermons in the ſixth text, to wit, in Matth. 11. verſ. 20. tend to draw on and perſwade to this conuerſion, threatning woe to thoſe that conuert not. In the Sermons of the ſeuenth text in Acts 9. verſ. 31. there are examples, not of three perſons, but of three particular Churches, who ſhewed foorth as ſhining lights, the fruit of conuerſion in their liues, and vſed their libertie and time of reſt free from perſecution (vnder which they had liued before) to the growing in grace and knowledge with much comfort. In the laſt text, the 4. to the Philippians, verſ. 4▪
                the Sermons tend to ſhew what ioy the repentant life accompanied with the fruits of amendment, doth bring to all that leade it, and are conuerted, notwithſtanding the diſcouragements that are on euery ſide againſt them. I haue ſaid now what I minded to do: that which remaineth, is this. The Lord make that which I ſet out to thee, with all other holy inſtruction, profitable to thee for the making thee trulie happie.
            
               Thine in the Lord, RICHARD ROGERS.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVERALL TEXTS OF THE Sermons contained in this Booke.
            
               
                  3 Three Sermons vpon the 16. of the Acts, ver. 24. &c.
               
                  2 Two Sermons on Matth. 24.12.13.
               
               
                  2 Two Sermons on Matth. 13.46.
               
               
                  2 Two on Eſay 55.1.2.
               
               
                  2 Two on Deutronomie 5.29.
               
               
                  2 Two on Matth. 11.20.
               
               
                  2 Two on Acts 9.31.
               
               
                  4 Foure on Philippians 4.4.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THREE SERMONS PREACHED ON ACT. 16. VERSE 25. &c.
            
               
                  
                     Verſ. 25
                  Now at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and ſung Pſalmes vnto God: and the priſoners heard them.
                  
                  And ſuddenly there was a great earthquake, ſo that the foundation of the priſon was ſhaken: and by and by all the doores opened, and euery mans bands were looſſed.
                  
                  Then the keeper of the priſon waked out of his ſleepe, and when he ſaw the priſon doores open, he drew out his ſword and would haue killed himſelfe, ſuppoſing the priſoners had been fled.
                  
                  But Paul cried with a loud voice, ſaying, do thy ſelfe no harme: for we are all heere.
                  
                  Then he called for a light, and leaped in, and came trembling, and fell downe before Paul and Silas,
                  
                  And brought them out, and ſaid, Sirs, what must I do to be ſaued?
                  
                  And they ſaid, Beleeue in the Lord Ieſus Christ, and thou ſhalt be ſaued, and thine houſhold.
                  
                  And they preached vnto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his houſe.
                  
                  Afterward he tooke them the ſame houre of the night, and waſhed their ſtripes, and was baptiſed with all that belonged vnto him, ſtraightway.
                  
                  And whē he had brought thē into his houſe, he ſet meat before thē, & reioyced that he with all his houſhold beleeued in God.
               
            
            
               
                  IN this Scripture there are two things to be conſidered; the one,
                     The vnfolding of the text.
                   the behauiour of Paul and Silas in the priſon; the other the conuerſion of the Iayler. Of the firſt, I will ſay no more,
                     The parts two.
                   then may make way and giue light to the ſecond. The occaſion hereof

was this, that Paul hauing caſt the diuell out of a maid that had been poſſeſſed thereof, and ſo had thereby diſabled her from bringing in gaine to her maſters by diuining and telling of things to come, whereby they had gotten much: they beholding what Paul had done, and how he had ſitten in their light thereby; they forthwith like mad men, drew Paul into the market place vnto the Magiſtrates, accuſing him that he with Silas had troubled the citie.
               And by meanes thereof, the people roſe vp againſt them, and the Gouernours commanded them to be beaten with rods, which, when they had done, they caſt them into priſon, commanding the Iailer to keepe them ſurely. He caſt them into the dungeon or inward priſon, and made their feet faſt in the ſtockes. This was the occaſion of theſe words, as it is plainly ſet downe by Saint Luke in the words going before; and then he ſheweth how Paul and Silas behaued themſelues, being thus cruelly and tumultuouſly handled, as grieuous malefactors, when all may ſee not onely their innocencie, but alſo the good, charitable and godly worke, which they did ſhew on the maid.
               It is ſaid, that they receiuing this iniurie at their hands patiently, and being ſtrangers, and ſo finding no helpe at mans hands, did ſhew, what account and fauour they were in with God, in that he did not forſake them in their diſtreſſe; but comforted them by his Spirit in token of the goodneſſe of their cauſe, and made them able to teſtifie the ioy of their hearts by ſinging Pſalmes of thanks to God, declaring thereby that they being innocent, though they ſuffered as euill doers, yet reioyced in the Lord, that they were counted worthy to ſuffer for well doing. And this be ſaid of Paul and Silas.
               
               Now, to ſpeake of the Iailer, who was one of them that had his hand among the reſt of that barbarous company, and was readie to execute the cruell commandement of thoſe Gouernours, and that alſo with more rigour then he needed haue done; it is very ſpecially to be marked how God dealt with him, to make him ſee his rigourous and vnconſcionable handling of his good ſeruants, by caſting a feare vpon him that made him deſperate: and not only ſo, but ſhewed him

mercie by them whom he had vſed cruelly, ſo that he was conuerted both from that, and from all other his wicked waies, in ſo ſtrange a manner, that it rang all the citie ouer, that all the reſt of them that had been partakers in that odious fact againſt Gods faithfull ſeruants, might be prouoked by his example, to turne from their wickedneſſe alſo.
               But as I ſaid,
                     The ſfirst part: The behauiour of Paul and Silas in priſon: wherein three things are to be conſidered.
                   my meaning is not to ſtand largely vpon both theſe parts of the text. Noting therefore two or three points in the firſt, I will lay forth the conuerſion of the Iailer more particularly and fully afterwards, which is the ſecond. The things which I haue thought good to ſhew and lay downe in the firſt part, are three.  The firſt is of God, comforting and taking part with his deare children in their trouble.  The ſecond is of Paul and Silas, and the ioyfulneſſe of them in their ſuffering for well doing.  The third is of the wicked Iailer, and what he gained in the end by his crueltie (God terrifying him deadly by the earthquake) how bold and vnrulie ſoeuer he was in the beginning.
               Concerning the firſt, namely, Gods dealing with his,
                     First: that God ſtandeth by his ſeruants in their troubles.
                   we may ſee in this Scripture, that he doth not bring his ſeruants into the briars, I meane great dangers, and then leaue them to ſhift for themſelues how they can, as the manner of the diuell is to do, as alſo his inſtruments do, which learne of him. But God vpholdeth and comforteth them in the middeſt thereof, when a man which looketh but to the outward face of things, would ſay, they are deſolate, they are vndone and vtterly forſaken. This is a point that may be clearly ſeene heere, as it were in a glaſſe, for Paul and Silas were brought into many and ſore perils for doing their dutie, and for caſting the diuell out of the poſſeſſed maid; all the citie both Gouernours and people were againſt them, ſo that after ſcourging they were caſt into priſon, vntill further ſentence ſhould be giuen vpon them. They found no friends in the place: what ſhould I ſay? they might (a man would haue thought) ſeuerally haue cried out, and haue made that woful complaint, which the Prophet made in the anguiſh of his ſoule, ſaying: there is no griefe like to my griefe.
                  Lament. 1.12. And how farre were they off in mans iudgement, from that woe, which is

not euery woe,Eccleſ. 4.10. when it is ſaid, woe to him that is alone.
               
               But heere we muſt looke vp higher, and lift vp the eyes of our minds, and behold whether God be abſent from them alſo, or againſt them as all men were. But we ſee that to be far otherwiſe: for we behold him ſo readie and preſent at hand, that it might haue been ſaid by him which had a good eye, of Paul and Silas, as Eliſha ſaid to his ſeruant full of feare, when armies of the Aramites were about the houſe to take him,2. King. 6.16. 
                  that they had more with them then against them. So the Lord being with Paul and Silas, what hurt could they all do to them, who were againſt them? And that was ſo apparent, that whereas men lying in priſon are commonly filled with deadly ſorrow, and are at their wits end; theſe were in the middeſt of ioy; in ſo much that they expreſſed the ſame by ſinging a Pſalme.
               
                  Act. 12.11. Dan. 6.22.Euen as he did accompanie Peter with an Angell in the like condition, and was preſent with Daniel in the Lions den, ſo he was with Paul and Silas at this time. So that though Satan comming firſt as a tempter to allure to ſinne, commeth afterward as an accuſer,Matth. 27. to condemne for ſinning: and although the high Prieſts toled Iudas with money and faire allurements to betray his Maſter; but when he being wounded in his conſcience for his ſo doing, brought the money againe to them, and complaining in what diſtreſſe he was; they left him in the ſnare, and bad him ſhift for himſelfe; yet the Lord doth not ſo to his.
               But if they ſuffer hardnes for his ſake, and at his commandement, yet that may be verified in them, which is written by the Apoſtle,2. Cor. 
                        •
                     .8. and 6.10. though they be afflicted on euery ſide, yet they are not in diſtreſſe nor forſaken; and though they ſorrow in the world, yet they alwayes reioyce to God-ward: and though they haue nothing in their penurie; yet they poſſeſſe all things by contentation. And euen when they feele it not, by reaſon of their weake faith, yet it is with them as it was with Gedeon, when great heauineſſe was vpon him, the Angell of God ſaying to him,Iudg. 6.12. 
                  God is with thee thou valiant man. This is the condition of Gods people, ſo that as he ſhewed his preſence to Paul and Silas euen in the deep and darke

priſon, ſo doth he to all that truſt in him, in what affliction ſoeuer.
               Let all ſuch reioyce, ſaith he in the Pſalme,Pſalme 5.11. who knew it ſo well, yea let them triumph for euer, yea let them that loue thy name (O Lord) reioyce: for in what weake eſtate ſoeuer they be,Pſalme 3.4. he is their buckler to defend them from their ſtrongeſt enemies, and when they be moſt contemptible, yet they may be bold to beleeue it, and to profeſſe their faith and ſay, they are in honorable account with him. And wheras it is demanded, why then are they ſo caſt downe in their troubles, diſmaied and vncomfortable. It is (I anſwere) all long of this,Iohn 20.25. that they faile in beleeuing, as Thomas did, becauſe he ſaw not with bodily eyes Chriſt Ieſus in preſence; but when their faith is ſet on worke, then appeare they more then conquerors, for by it only they preuaile, according to the Apoſtles words; This is the victorie that ouercommeth the world,
                  1. Iohn 5.4. 
                  euen your faith. And this of the firſt point, namely how God forſaketh not his in their trouble, but ſtandeth by them.
               The ſecond is,
                     The ſecōd point. How Gods children are affected in their troubles.
                   how the godly are affected in their ſufferings (vnleſſe they forget themſelues, and faile through their owne default) and that is as Paul and Silas were, I meane ioyfull and comfortable. No otherwiſe need they be minded, if they did duely conſider their libertie; nay I ſay more, if they did well weigh the commandement of the Lord, which is,Phil. 4.4. that they ſhould do ſo. For thus he ſaith: reioyce in the Lord alwaies (and therefore in tribulation) and leſt he ſhould be thought to ſpeake raſhly, and not well aduiſed, he doubleth his words, ſaying, againe I ſay, reioyce. Which commandement if it were obeyed, they might find a great part of heauen▪ (that I may ſpeake to their full comfort) more then they do▪ heere vpon the earth.
               But as it is truly ſaid of Paul and Silas, that they ſung for ioy when their feet were pinned in the ſtockes, and that alſo in the inward priſon; and ſo of Dauid the Scripture affirmeth, that when he was in ieopardie of death,1. Sam. 30.6. 
                  he comforted himſelfe in his God; ſo there is no let or cauſe on Gods behalfe, why it ſhould not be ſo now with the reſt of his deare children; he could willingly afford it them. But as it commeth

to paſſe, that the things that are moſt precious, are alſo rare; ſo in this one it is moſt true, that as comfort in affliction, and ſpecially in the greateſt, is more worth and more to be accounted of, then gold or the beſt earthly treaſure; ſo is it alſo more hard to be found and enioyed.
               How great was the glorie of it in the Martyrs, the Aduerſaries themſelues being iudges, and in others that in grieuous paines and ſickneſſe lie comfortable and ioyfull? And ſo ſhould it be ſtill, if it were more regarded and better looked to.
                     Why troubles are ſo vnwelcome to vs.
                   But in that it is not ſo, what other reaſon can be alleaged of it, but this, that the Lord vſing his, to a more liberall and full diet, and giuing them more varietie of earthly benefits; they find ſuch ſweetnes and ſauour in them, that when wants come or other hardſhip, they are more hardly borne, and ſtooped to: (euen as children daintily brought vp, cannot away with bare and courſe commons.) Eſpecially if this be added, that becauſe they are not much encumbred with afflictions, and thoſe that they haue laid on them, be not ſore nor grieuous; therefore when any come vpon them of any waight indeed, they caſt them off, as impatient in bearing the burthen.
               
                  Pſalme 73.14.Neither let any ſay to me this, that the children of God are alwaies vnder the croſſe, neither are they long without ſome afflictions,Pſalme 126.5. ſeeing their life is compared to a ſowing in teares.
                  
                     As our outward troubles are many, ſo are our bleſſings alſo.
                   For notwithſtanding this; many are their outward bleſſings alſo, eſpecially where the pure preaching of the Goſpell is enioyed: for many troubles may be eaſily ſwallowed vp, where that is, to helpe to digeſt them. And yet what poore and weake commendation may be giuen of the ioyfull welcoming of the troubles which are ſent to ſuch for the moſt part? And this to be true which I ſay, thoſe times do proue, wherein they haue ſome load of affliction laid vpon them, for what earneſt ſeeking to God is in them, or patience to beare them? Indeed, if they continue, or waxe more grieuous, ſo that they can neither auoid them, neither is there any hope of earthly helpe left vnto them, to come out of them: then perhaps, and not till then for the moſt part, when they ſee no other remedy, it may be ſeene, that God is ſought

vnto ſeriouſly, and then they ſtirre vp their faith to lay hold of aſſiſtance from God with ſome confidence, when all other helpe faileth.
               For example, when by ſome ſore viſitation and ſickneſſe, that is like to be vnto death, God awaketh any of his, (the diſeaſe permitting and giuing libertie to the partie afflicted, for ſome ſickneſſe is more violent then other,) it may be ſeene ſometime, that he lieth more like vnto one that preacheth, and giueth encouragement and exhortation to repentance ioyfully; rather then as one readie to die: but how rare is this to ſee? for in many ſmaller troubles, perhaps patience will hardly be found. And whereas ſome of Gods corrections cauſe ſorrow only to the afflicted, without paine to the bodie, as the loſſe of friends or goods; ſome cauſe ſorrow that commeth from paine, as ſickneſſe and grieuous diſeaſes: it may be that the former may worke ſome good now or then; but for the moſt part, the latter (if extremitie hinder not) leaue the beſt fruit behind them.
               Howſoeuer it be, there is no doubt, but that this grace is too much wanting, and the rather it is the leſſe ſought, ſeeing we leane too much to temporarie holds and ſtayes, and for that our hearts runne after earthly things inordinately, as health, riches, peace, &c. though we ſee by long experience, that there is no hold of them, nor any ſafe reſting in them. And this lingring heere like Lots wife,Gen. 19.26. muſt be purged out of vs and chaſed from vs, or elſe we ſhall degenerate from the faithfull in former ages, and ſhew too truely, that we be not led with their ſpirit, when we being ſo neſtled heere, can ſo hardly go out of our ſelues, to welcome the troubles which God ſendeth to weane vs from hence, and do not rather pray that we may reioyce vnder them, and be thankfull in them.
               The third thing in this firſt part of the text, is:
                     The third point: They that purſue Gods ſeruants▪ ſhall haue ſmall cauſe of reioycing in the end.
                   that euill perſons ſhall haue ſmall cauſe in the end to reioyce of their hard proceedings againſt the ſeruants of God, howſoeuer they purſue them with great delight; for God will ſurely take part with them againſt their enemies. As heere we ſee in the Iailer, whom he terrified, while Paul and Silas ſung for ioy; in ſo much that he and other his companions, when they

heard it, might ſee that they had a God that could and would comfort them, when hee himſelfe their wicked aduerſarie thought he had loaden them with anguiſh and ſorrow; and that this their God could aſtoniſh him with feares and deſperateneſſe, when they whom he oppreſſed were merrie.
               How God doth this in the world to come, it is cleere enough by that Scripture to the Theſſalonians, where it is ſaid;2. Theſſ. 1.6. 
                  That it is a righteous thing with God to recompence tribulation to them that trouble his, and to them that are troubled, rest; when the Lord Ieſus ſhall ſhew himſelfe from heauen with his mighty Angels in flaming fire. Indeed in this world that is not alwaies ſeene, but yet God doth it euen heere alſo, while he profeſſeth,Gen. 12.3. that he will bleſſe them that bleſſe his, and curſe them that curſe his, and while he ſheweth fearefull iudgements vpon them who did ſore vexe his good ſeruants, and conſtraineth other to crie out, and with their owne mouthes to acknowledge, that he plagueth them for their ſakes, whom they hated and perſecuted.
               
                  
                     Examples.
                  For examples of the firſt kind Zidkiiah is one, the arch-prophet of Baal, who did not only feed Ahab with lies and falſe meſſages, as from God, when he demanded of him what the will of God was in a doubtfull and waightie caſe;1. King. 22.25. but alſo ſmote Micaiah the true Prophet of the Lord, and withſtood him for ſpeaking the truth. For this very cauſe he was conſtrained afterwards with feare to hide him from chamber to chamber.
                  Numb. 16.30. Another example of the firſt kind is Corah with his companie, for reſiſting and riſing againſt Moſes the true ſeruant of God, charging him to be an vſurper of the Prieſts office, and to take too much vpon him, and himſelfe to bee Gods true Prieſt: for the which, as Moſes witneſſeth, he was ſwallowed vp of the earth with thoſe which were of his conſpiracie.
               Examples of the latter ſort, is Pharaoh, who after ten warnings by God in ſtrange puniſhments, for not letting the people of Iſrael go to ſerue the Lord out of his land, but purſuing them ſtill euen into the ſea, was in the middeſt thereof drowned, when he was conſtrained to confeſſe that the Lord tooke part with Iſrael againſt him, all the Egyptians ſaying,

                  We will flie from the face of Iſrael,
                  Exod. 14.25. 
                  for the Lord ſighteth for them against the Egyptians. Another example is Iudas, who betraying his Maſter into the hands of the high Prieſts for money, was compelled to confeſſe before them that ſet him on worke, in a moſt heauie torment of conſcience, caſting the money againe before them,Matth. 27.4. 
                  I haue ſinned in betraying the innocent blood.
               
               By all theſe it appeareth, that they ſhall haue ſmall cauſe to glorie of their winnings in the end, who offer hard meaſure to Gods people, the Lord himſelfe crying out thus vnto them, Touch not mine annointed, nor do my Prophets no harme.
                  Pſalme 105.15. Neither let any obiect heere, that they know them not to be ſuch, for ſo they will affirme in their mad mood and raile on them, who yet, when they will ſpeake, as they are perſwaded in good aduiſedneſſe, will ſay of them, as Saul did of Dauid, that he was more righteous then he,
                  1. Sam. 24.18. Dan. 6.20. and as the King of Babylon ſaid to Daniel, thou art the ſeruant of the most high God. So let faithfull Chriſtians reſt in their innocencie, and in the witneſſe of a good conſcience, and let them count it banquetting cheere, to be accompanied with that; and their greateſt enemies which want it, ſhall oft count them bleſſed, and deſire to taſte of their dainties, howſoeuer they oftentimes ſet themſelues againſt them. And thus much be ſaid of the firſt part, and of the three points thereof.
               The ſecond followeth,
                     The ſecond part of the text. The conuerſion of the Jailer. Three things heere to be marked.
                   and that is concerning the conuerſion of the Iailer. For the better vnderſtanding wherof, and the vſe which we are to make of it, three things are to be marked. The firſt, what his eſtate was before his conuerſion: the ſecond, the meanes whereby hee was conuerted, and the third, the effects that followed his conuerſion, and were proofes and fruits of the ſame.
               His eſtate before he was turned to God was wicked, as all other mens is: but more laid out in three things, by which we may the eaſilier iudge of his whole life beſides.  And theſe were his crueltie againſt Paul and Silas, his deſperatenes in his affliction, minding to haue killed himſelfe, and by conſequent his ſenſuality and drunkenneſſe in his proſperity while he enioyed it.
               
                  
                   The meanes of his conuerſion were, partly more remote and further off: partly more neere vnto it. And both of them are ſeuerally three. Of the firſt ſort was the earthquake, whereby he was aſtoniſhed and terrified: then Pauls words diſſwading him from hurting himſelfe: and thirdly, how they wrought vpon him, and that was ſo farre, as that they turned his heart toward them, and he ſought to be comforted of them. All theſe did ſet him forward, though afarre off, to his conuerſion: in ſo much as, although they wrought it not, yet without theſe he had neuer come to the other, which were more neere meanes thereof, and did effect it. The latter kind of meanes were alſo three. Firſt, he deſired to know of them how he might be ſaued. Secondly Pauls anſwere, that he muſt beleeue. And thirdly, his teaching him how: whereupon hee receiued and conſented to the doctrine, ſo that he beleeued in the Lord Ieſus, and was conuerted.
               
                   The effects and fruits of his conuerſion follow, and they were alſo three, which were proofes of it. One, that he was baptiſed: another was his ioy for ſo happie a change: and the third his kindnes to them many wayes declared; as his bringing them out of the loathſome priſon into his houſe, what danger ſoeuer it had procured to him: his ſetting of meate before them; his waſhing of their ſtripes; and with all theſe the condemning of himſelfe for his former crueltie towards them, and his reuenge that he tooke on himſelfe for the ſame.
               
                  
                     The estate of the Iailer before his conuerſion.
                  Now, according to the parts of this ſtorie, I will proceed to ſpeake of euery one in order. And firſt, to begin with the eſtate that he was in before his conuerſion, ſomewhat is to be noted of it in generall, and then his particular ſinnes are to be conſidered. Generally, this is to be obſerued, that he being prophane,Epheſ. 2 12. and 4.17. and (as he ſhewed himſelfe) ignorant, and without God in the world; as Paul ſpeaketh of all the Gentiles, I ſay, it is to be obſerued, how vile and wretched we are before God ſhew his worke of mercie vpon vs: euen filthie and vncleane, ſtinking in our ſinnes, loathſome to God, and euen to men alſo, who are themſelues any better guided and graced.
               
                  The which to be true, the ſaying of Ezechiel doth moſt cleerely ſhew: who bringeth God in to ſpeake thus, with many other words to the like purpoſe, When I paſſed by thee,
                  Ezech. 16.6. 
                  I ſaw thee polluted in thine owne blood; in thy natiuitie when thou wast borne thy nauell was not cut, thou wast not waſhed in water to ſoften thee: thou wast not ſalted with ſalt, no eye pitied thee, &c. ſhewing hereby, that before God waſh vs and giue life to vs, there is nothing but filthineſſe and death. Thus the Scripture brandeth the woman of Samaria,Iohn 4.18. (though ſhe afterward brought many to Chriſt) with a note of infamie, that ſhe had been an harlot; that ſhe had been full of ignorance, maliciouſneſſe, a ſcorner, &c. And Zacheus,
                  Luke 19.7.8. though his repentance was famous, had been a ſore griper and deceiuer, and Paul had been a perſecuter,
                  1. Tim. 1.13. 
                  a blasphemer and an oppreſſor.
               
               And ſuch a miſerable perſon was this Iailer. For though there was no direct occaſion offered to Saint Luke to lay out his whole wicked courſe; yet by the few ſinnes that were expreſſely mentioned to haue been in him, or by neceſſary conſequence, it may be eaſily gathered that he was ſuch an one: which ſins ſeeing they were ſetled in him by long cuſtome, as habites and courſes of life, they did both rule him, and alſo drew many like companions to them, to make him a vaſſall and ſlaue of the diuell. And ſo it is with all, though all breake not forth into the ſame notorious euils.
               Well might the Prophet Ieremie therefore ſay,Lament. 3.22. it is the Lords mercie that we liue and breath, and are not vtterly conſumed. And all may wonder that he will pitie vs, and be patient toward vs, in giuing vs a time of repentance: as they that beleeue do when they find it ſo, and it ſhould humble the proudeſt, and ſhame and feare them that are not ſo; euen as it houldeth all in lowlines and abaſement euer after, who haue found from him a gracious deliuerance out of ſuch intolerable bondage. And the vſe that ſhould be made of the very knowledge of this miſerable condition of man, is no leſſe then I haue ſet downe, euen as humble and thankefull walking with God ought alwaies to accompanie thoſe who haue eſcaped it, as I haue ſaid.
               
                  But alas, though there may be ſeene ſome ſuch dutie to be practiſed of the latter, I meane the faithfull; yet no ſparke of ſhame or ſorrow for ſo great calamity can be perceiued to be in the former, that is, the vngodly: in ſo much that a man would thinke there were no ſuch vengeance hanging ouer them as I ſpeake of, if he ſhould marke the looſeneſſe, boldneſſe and ſecuritie of ſuch; and neither any damnation waiting them, either old or yong, men or women: when (yet) it is the ſenſeleſſenes of them through vnbeliefe, that they giuing no credit to the Scriptures, which in euerie place doe proue it to be ſo; therefore they feare nothing, no not the greateſt woe, till it come vpon them, and that they feele it. This is that which we haue to note of and by the eſtate of the Iailer in generall.
               
                  
                     His particular ſinnes. 1. Crueltie.
                  Of his particular ſinnes, crueltie is the firſt, accompanied with adulation and ſlauerie; he being readie to put in execution that which was moſt vniuſtly commanded him. But beſides that, he did (I ſay, exerciſe crueltie vpon the ſeruants of God, in doing more then he was enioyned. For he was bidden but to keepe them ſafe; which he might haue done; if he had but put them in the common priſon. And yet he would not haue done that, if there had been but ciuilitie, eſpecially any dram of compaſſion in him, but would haue kept them ſure in his owne houſe, they being neither murtherers nor rebels, nor like to be dangerous perſons; but he moſt cruellie caſt them into the bottome of the priſon, euen into a dungeon, and yet euen there made their feet faſt in the ſtockes.
               The barbarous and ſauage act of this Iailer is ſet downe to withhold all that heare of it from that ſinne, and to ſhame them that practiſe the ſame or the like crueltie: not onely for that God hath threatened,Matth. 7.1. that with what meaſure men meat it ſhall be meaſured to them againe, and that iudgement ſhall be without mercie to them that are mercileſſe,
                  Iames 2.13. but alſo ſeeing it is vnnaturall to be cruell. If any receiue ſentence of death for his iuſt deſerts, as Achan: or iniuſtly, as our Sauiour did, yet if thereto ſhould be added other vexations, as mocking, railing,Ioſh. 7.19. &c. that were crueltie: therefore Ioſhua ſhewed mercie on Achan, to bring him to repentance, when he was adiudged

to die; but the cruell Iewes and ſouldiers were accuſed of beaſtly crueltie, and that moſt iuſtly:Matth. 27. verſ. 28. &c. when Chriſt being to be crucified, was alſo handled deſpitefully and mocked of them.
               
                  Sauls crueltie to his ſonne Ionathan,
                  1. Sam. 14.44. who would haue put him to death for taſting a little honie with the top of his ſpeare when he fainted, to reuiue himſelfe; was moſt ſauage and vnnaturall. Not vnlike vnto it is that barbarouſnes and vnmercifull dealing of ſtep-mothers and ſtep-dames to orphans and poore ſuccorleſſe children, whom they vſe worſe then many a bad man will vſe his beaſt, when yet nature teacheth them that they can neuer ſhew kindnes and tender compaſſion enough to their owne children. For which cauſe the Iewes in vſing correction, were ſtinted by the Lord, that they ſhould not giue aboue fortie ſtripes at once.
                  Deut. 25.3.
               
               And for the ſame cauſe, to meete with their crueltie, God commanded that an eye ſhould be put out in him that had done the like; and a tooth for a tooth, to bridle them.Exod. 21.24. And how was that ſeruant dealt with in the Goſpell, who being forgiuen ten thouſand talents by his Lord, would not forgiue his fellow ſeruant an hundred pence, but laid hands on him and throtled him, ſaying, pay me that thou owest?
                  Matth. 18.28. His Lord was wroth with him, and deliuered him to the tormentors, till he ſhould pay all that was due to him.
               And as all crueltie is fearefull and monſtrous, ſo that which ariſeth from enuie and hatred, is diuelliſh. According to that which Salomon ſaith: Anger is cruell, and wrath is raging;
                  Prou. 27.4. 
                  but who can ſtand before enuy? But not to ſay that which yet might to good purpoſe be ſaid, to make this ſinne odious vnto vs, let them who haue aduantage of their neighbours by forfetting their bonds into their hands, and all ſuperiours who may vſe poore ſtrangers, fatherleſſe ones, and poore ſeruants at their pleaſure, and finally all, whoſoeuer they be, beware of hard-heartedneſſe and crueltie which it bringeth forth, eſpecially of enuie, knowing that they haue a Maſter and a Superiour in heauen, who will recompence ſuch brutiſh barbarouſneſſe, and as they deſire that all other ſhould doe the ſame to them, let them exerciſe and practiſe mercie and compaſſion,

kindneſſe, gentleneſſe, meekeneſſe, and ſuch like vertues.
               
                  
                     His ſecond ſin
                           ••
                         Desperateneſſe.
                  The ſecond ſinne apparently to be ſeene in the Iailer, was deſperateneſſe: which was ſuch, that when he aroſe out of his ſleepe by the fearefull earthquake at midnight, and ſaw the priſon doores open, he drew out his ſword and would haue killed himſelfe, ſuppoſing the priſoners had been fled. Such a ſinne is this deſperateneſſe, that when men haue loſſes, diſpleaſure of their betters, or other great diſcommodities, or when they be but ſtriken with the feare thereof, they haue no ſtay of themſelues, but without all conſideration are carried by it, as by a whirlewind, to very madneſſe. Oh, if men be croſſed, hauing no grace to vphold them, they are beſide themſelues, and at their wits end.] Many maruaile, when the ſtorie is remembred in companie, at the murmuring of the children of Iſrael,Exod. 16.3. when they had no food in the ſecond month of their entring into the wilderneſſe, their ſtore being ſpent that they brought with them out of Egypt. And it muſt be confeſſed, that it was their ſinne, that they murmured againſt God when they were in need. But alas, we who] are readie to cenſure them do much worſe: for we grudge when we haue no want but abundance, if any thing go againſt vs. Indeed, while all things go with vs to our hearts deſire, and we liue in proſperitie, we can praiſe God, as though we were not inferiour to the forwardeſt in religion: but if God lay his hand vpon vs,Iob 1.11. we will (as Satan ſaith in Iob) euen curſe him to his face. Examples want not, euen of ſuch as are of the viſible Church.Iudg. 17.2. The woman ſpoken of in the Iudges, Micahs mother, when ſhe had loſt her money, what was her refuge to the eaſing of her heart, but curſing?
               
                  2. Sam. 17.23.When Achitophels counſell was refuſed of Abſalom, which had bin in great account, was he able to put vp that diſgrace? No, but he was ſo throughly vexed for it, that he recouered not himſelfe,1. Sam. 28.7. &c. but went and hanged himſelfe. Saul had baniſhed the witches out of his land, according to the commandement of the Lord; yet when he was in a ſtrait (for all the commandement) he enquired for one, and asked counſell of her. But oh, that we in this age had learned wiſdome

and conſtancie in the ſeruice of God, to be faithfull to him in our troubles, as we profeſſe it to be our dutie in peace.
               But I feare we are not behind the worſt of theſe in the committing of this ſin, but before them rather. For they murmured in great diſtreſſes; but we in very ſmall trials, as though we could beare nothing, neither ſuffer our ſelues to be croſſed in the ſmalleſt things: but we flie to our ſhelter, which is by anger, rage, curſing▪ impatience or threatnings, if not by worſe ſhifts to auenge our ſelues, when we ſhould rather be aſhamed to be ſo diſguiſed. Eſpecially conſidering who we are, and from whence we come; euen from worſe then the dunghill, and ſhould maruell that we be not conſumed, rather then thinke much to be touched, yea with the little finger, when we ſuffer iuſtly whatſoeuer we ſuffer, yea the moſt grieuous calamities: according to the ſaying of the Prophet in the Lamentations: Wherfore doth the liuing man complaine?
                  Lament. 3.39. 
                  man ſuffereth for his ſinne.
               
               And this were more fit to be done of vs (a wiſe man would thinke) rather then that we ſhould be led with ſuch frenzie, which I ſay not is monſtrous in them that go for godly, but an vtter ſhame for thoſe that are meere naturall men, being trained vp vnder true religion, and liuing in the light of the Goſpell. And they that cannot ſubmit themſelues to this inſtruction (which in their owne conſciences they cannot but confeſſe they ought to doe) let them ſee their bondage and acknowledge their ſin, that ſo they may make way to the obtaining of pardon and amendment.
               The third ſinne to be noted in the Iailer,
                     His third ſinne: Senſualitie in prosperitie.
                   was the reſting and pleaſing of himſelfe in his proſperitie, when he enioyed it. For this ſenſualitie is in carnall men, that if they may haue their harts deſire in the things that are of price in this world, they are made drunken therewith. And therfore much more he muſt needs be ſo, who was a Pagan, and knew nothing of heauen, to hold him within compaſſe. And although this ſin be not expreſſely ſaid to haue been in him, yet by neceſſarie conſequence, it is gathered to haue been ſo, by a reaſon drawne from contraries: for whoſoeuer is deſperate in his loſſes, and is brought to his wits end for the ſame, he (doubtleſſe)

made his proſperitie and the enioying of his goods,
                     Note. 
                   his heauen and his paradiſe.
               Euen as the contrarie is ſaid of Iob, that he loſt his riches without any great griefe; therefore he enioyed them (while he had them) without any great loue.
                     To be ſenſuall in prosperitie, a greater ſin then to be impatient in aduerſitie.
                   And this ſinne, to become diſguiſed and made drunken with the commodities which a man enioyeth, is farre worſe then to be impatient for the loſſe of them, and bringeth for
                     •
                  h many greater inconueniences. For ſuch not only loue them, and their pleaſures which they follow thereby,2. Tim. 3.4. more then God, which is idolatrie; but alſo they doe by meanes of them, more boldly commit any ſinne,Prou. 18.11. that they delight in, ſeeing they make their riches their ſtrong hold. It would not be thought to be true, but that men haue bewrayed what lieth hidden in their hart, by their tongue; that many, and thoſe of no great patrimony neither, ſo as they might enioy the eſtate they liue in heere, they would with all their heart giue ouer all hope or intereſt in heauen which might poſſiblie abide them.
               And what place is there for inſtruction in ſuch? This ſinne is called the pride of life;1. Iohn 2.16. namely, to glorie in that which men haue, and that they may heare of no aduerſitie, but health, wealth, eaſe, credit, fauour with their betters, and aduancement aboue others, is their paradiſe, from the which to be plucked, is vexation to them, and the moſt deadly tormenting that could befall them. And by theſe three ſins we may gather, what the Iailer was in the whole courſe of his life, in which theſe three bare ſway, and other ſinnes which did accompanie them. And like to him is the condition of all other, while they be ſtrangers and enemies to God; and yet behold greater abomination then this; namely, that they waxe hardened in this eſtate, and worſe and worſe, rather then fit to be called backe, and to be reclaimed.
               Oh therefore, what hope was there either of him, that he might be made a Chriſtian, or of other like vnto him, to be brought backe from ſuch a diſguiſed eſtate? And therefore what a wonderfull worke of God is it, to conuert ſuch to a contrarie condition and courſe, ſo that neither they would, although they might without puniſhment, wallow againe

in that mire, after they be waſhed; neither can they in a long time be pacified nor quiet in themſelues afterward, to remember what manner of perſons, and how vile and odious they haue been. And ſeeing the Lord did ſhew ſuch a worke of mercie vpon this wretched man, let vs ſee further into it, and by what meanes he brought it to paſſe, as ſhall follow in the next Sermon.
            
            
               THE SECOND SERMON CONTINVED VPon the ſame text.
               
                  IN the former Sermon I ſaid before,
                     The meanes of his conuerſion.
                   ſome of theſe meanes of his conuerſion were more neerely adioyned vnto it, and ſome were further off; I will ſpeake of both, as occaſion is offered.
                     The first meane a farre off.
                   Of thoſe which were further off, this was the firſt, that the Lord ſent a mightie earthquake, whereby he awaked him, and ſeeing the priſon doores opened; ſuch aſtoniſhment and feare of the runming away of the priſoners tooke hold of him, that he was at the point to haue killed himſelfe. 
                     Obiect. 
                   But what of this, ſome man (perhaps) will ſay? was this a meane to conuert him, and to bring him thereby toward ſaluation? when all may ſee that there was (as one may ſay) little more then a haires breadth betweene him and vtter confuſion and deſolation by killing himſelfe, whereto he was fully bent, and hardly held backe. 
                     Anſw. 
                   Whereto I anſwere, that he was held back from that attempt by the prouidence of God, who had prouided and ſet in a readineſſe there, not his wife or familiar friend to keepe him, but euen Paul, to whom he was a deadly enemie, that he might be a meane to ſaue his life, rather then that he ſhould miſcarie. And for the other part of the obiection, whether that deſperateneſſe of his, was a meane of his conuerſion, I ſay, it was (though a farre off) as God handled the matter.
               For by this ſhaking and fearing him, his iollity was abated,

his pride allayed, and he was, though not tamed, yet in a good way to it, and well prepared for it, as appeareth by that which followeth, when this was added thereto, that Paul had ſo kindly diſſwaded him from hurting himſelfe, and in ſo fit a ſeaſon. And as we ſay in the prouerbe, that ſometime the furtheſt way about is the neereſt way home; ſo by Gods good hand it was in this; that the trouble and vnſetling of him, that was like to haue ſent him to hell, the Lord vſed as a meane of his conuerſion and ſaluation. There is no doubt, but that many felt the earthquake, as well as he, and yet neuer were the better for it, as he was; neither ſhould he haue been, but that the Lord intended and purpoſed it.
               
                  
                     Doctrine
                  And heere we may learne, that God goeth about to doe them good who are his vtter enemies, when they little dreame of any ſuch thing; and hee entendeth their good, when they neither obſerue nor conſider it. To ſpeake more particularly, in ſending croſſes, ſickneſſe and ſundrie viſitations, men at the firſt do in their raſhneſſe and haſte, rage againſt God and curſe him; whereby they ſhew, that this is all the good that they can draw out of them. But if the Lord do intend and meane their good by ſending them, he will pull downe their ſtomackes, and make them ſee themſelues thereby, and how little they ſhall gaine by ſetting vp their briſtles againſt him. Yea he will make them glad of the helpe and counſell of ſuch, as they did before both ſcorne and abhorre,1. Sam. 24.17. as in the example of Saul we may ſee, who for all his loftineſſe and iollitie, was caſt downe, as they who are moſt meane and miſerable; and full glad of Dauids kindneſſe to him.
               This bridling of the rage of wicked men, and breaking of their hearts by afflictions, though it be not repentance, yet God vſeth them as meanes to bring them thereto in time and by degrees; I ſpeake this of ſuch as the Lord will honor and do good vnto. And they that do well weigh it, ſhall ſee, that it may well be ſo. For as they who will make crooked things ſtraight, do bow them a contrarie way, that ſo they may the eaſilier bring them betwixt both, which is to be ſtraight and right: ſo the Lord, when he entends to make a proud man

humble and meeke, he will breake his heart with ſorrow and affliction, wherewith when hee hath been throughly exerciſed, he is the fitter to be brought to the meane betwixt both, that is, broken-heartednes and humilitie.
               For as a log in the deepe mire, hauing long lien therein is ſo faſtened to the place, as it is impoſſible to remoue or pluck it out, vnleſſe it be looſened and turned into another place; but being ſo handled, it may with eaſe be taken out: Euen ſo, if a man ſet vpon his dregges, I meane, being riuited into his ſinnes, be not looſened from them by ſome terrour and heart-ſmart, though hee be brought neuer the neerer to repentance thereby, yet he ſhall (if he be ſuch a one as God wil ſhew mercie vnto) hee ſhall (I ſay) much more eaſily be perſwaded thereto. According to that which wee ſay in our common ſpeech, and that truly, of a wicked man bent to his will and to liue licentiouſly, that hee is neuer like to amend and come to good, vnleſſe the Lord awake him by ſome great affliction.
               This manner of Gods dealing with men, to bring them to ſo happie an eſtate by ſo vnlikely meanes, and ſo farre off, ſhould teach the men of this age, that wiſedome, hauing knowledge, which the ignorant cannot learne, that in their troubles and aſtoniſhments, they ſhould not think that they are puniſhed ſeeing God taketh delight therein; and ſo wax hardened: but to know, that they not humbling their hearts to ſeeke the Lord by preaching, and by Gods benefits, they haue need to be awaked by his iudgements, and that he doth therefore afflict them, that they may know they are farre gone in their euill courſe, that ſo they may lay ſurer hold of his word, and take direction and counſell from thence, to be brought to God.
               But let vs ſee how God wrought by the ſecond meane that was farre off, and ſo, how hee brought him on by degrees to true conuerſion.
                     The ſecond meane: Pauls care of his life.
                   This ſecond meane was Pauls care of him in his deſperate eſtate, to hinder and diſſwade him from offering violence to himſelfe, and his kindnes towards him, in ouercomming euill with good. For whereas the Iaylor had ſhewed himſelfe cruell towards him,Rom. 12.21. when he had giuen

him no cauſe ſo to doe, and therefore looked for no good will at his hands (if poſſibly he ſhould ſtand in neuer ſo great need thereof) behold hee had no greater friend then him, whom he had deſerued to be his greateſt enemie: for euen by him was his life preſerued.
               This when he weighed and conſidered, which hee could not but ſee, Paul ſo earneſtly beſeeching him to doe himſelfe no harme, who had not otherwiſe been held back from killing himſelfe, I ſay, when he laid theſe things together, he was againe amazed at this, but in another manner and better, then before. For before, his heart was troubled deſperatly, thinking what loſſe he was like to haue; but now hee was moued in a more commendable manner, to ſee Pauls vnlooked for kindnes towards him. This began to draw his heart towards Paul; which (we know) muſt needs be a great change, from that which was before.
               
                  
                     The beautie of vertue & grace in Gods ſeruants.
                  And by this we may mark the beautie of vertue and grace in Gods ſeruants, how greatly it moueth the hearts euen of wicked men. Surely, if they were carefull that their light might ſhine in good conuerſation among men, they ſhould not a little prouoke them out of their bad courſe, and to bee in loue with a better. I doe not denie but it moſt moueth them, when it bringeth any benefit to them, as heere Pauls loue and care did to the Iaylor: they had double force to worke vpon him. And although it helpe much (I grant) to the further drawing him on toward goodneſſe, yet that only was not to be ſeene in him, but that did beate into him a perſwaſion, that he was a good man, and was able to doe him good alſo, and therefore a little after he deſired to know of him how he might be ſaued.
               So that kindnes and harmeleſnes, and other fruits of loue, if they were more vſually and plentifully ſhewed foorth by Chriſtians, they would (vndoubtedly) pearce the hearts of many wicked men, and cauſe them to thinke that they are farre from the courſe which they ſhould walk in. For though many ſcorners and profane perſons doe trample goodneſſe and good men vnder their feete; yet the beautie of pietie and Chriſtianitie doth much moue and auaile with many. As

we ſee by Peters words to Chriſtian women, where he ſaith: Let the wiues be ſubiect to their huſbands,
                  1. Pet. 3.1. 
                  that euen they that obey not the word, may without the word be wonne by the conuerſation of their wiues.
               
               But eſpecially, if Gods ſeruants would, as opportunitie is offered, ſhew their loue in ſeeking to win them to God, and to help them towards eternall life; much more ſhould they perſwade them to forſake their bad courſe, and to embrace a better. As our Sauiour Chriſt talking with that woman of Samaria, brought her to repentance.Iohn 4. And this be ſaid of the ſecond meane of the conuerſion of the Iaylor, though farre off: which as it was a degree before the former, ſo they who are moued as hee was, are ſenſiblie ſet forward, as he was; though I denie not, but that many comming thus farre, and further from their euill courſe, may yet be farre enough off from true conuerſion.
               But let vs heare the third meane,
                     The third meane: His cleauing to the Apoſtles.
                   which the ſecond now ſpoken of, procured and brought foorth: and that is a neerer degree to goodneſſe, then the former. And this it is, that he conceiued ſo well of them, of Paul and Silas, I meane, that for all the commandement of the Magiſtrate, hee brought them out of the priſon, and fell downe before them, in token of reuerence to them, and ſo fell to neere acquaintance with them, who being good men, it gaue hope of his further good taking by them. And here I will ſtay a while to teach how we may profit by this.
               To this end, this I ſay,
                     The benefit of familiaritie with Gods ſeruants.
                   that as his neere clinging and cleauing to them, was another meane to bring him to true conuerſion; euen ſo God vſeth the familiaritie and acquaintance that wicked men haue with his ſeruants▪ to this end, that they may diſtaſte their former courſe, and bring them to heare the word preached, and ſo in time to be changed. Thus many become beleeuers in Chriſt, by companie and acquaintance with Preachers; who being appointed by Chriſt to be fiſhers of men, doe ſhew the loue to them,Matth. 4.19. Iohn 21.15. that Chriſt ſhewed to themſelues before, that if they be men of God indeed, they will lay open to them their treaſures, which they haue

gathered out of the hoard of the Goſpell, and impart the ſame vnto them.
               
                   For although many of that profeſſion, I meane the Miniſterie, be blinde themſelues in the myſterie of ſaluation, and others who haue knowledge in the letter, yet for want of loue are vnprofitable, and rather puffed vp with their knowledge, then carefull to doe good with it, to the perſwading of men to faith thereby: yet they whom God hath trulie inlightened, doe farre otherwiſe. For they hauing daily before their eyes the words of the Lord Ieſus,Iohn 21.15. that as they loue him they ſhould feed his lambes and his ſheepe; and againe, that they who turne many to righteouſnes,
                  Dan. 12.3. 
                  ſhall ſhine as the ſtarres for euer and euer; they labour through loue to perſwade them to giue ouer their ſinfull and bad courſe,Pſal. 34.8. and to taſte and ſee how good the Lord is in his word, to ſuch as turne to him.
               And the people who conuerſe with ſuch, if they be appointed to ſaluation, ſhall embrace ſuch kindnes offered vnto them, and how farre off ſoeuer they haue been from the aſſurance of it, and from true godlineſſe, yet, by good inſtruction and example, they ſhall moſt readily looke after both. And thus God wrought in the Iaylor, and thus he worketh in many. As examples hereof are many in the booke of the Acts of the Apoſtles, where Paul trauelled among the ignorant nations; ſo I can truly ſay, vpon mine owne remembrance almoſt fortie yeeres agone, (and yet in thoſe times the light of the Goſpell ſhined nothing ſo cleerely as it hath done ſince) that by familiar companying betwixt the faithfull Miniſter of God and the ignorant people, the Lord wrought wonderfully and mightily amongſt them. And I am ſure the fruit of the Goſpell that hath been ſince in thoſe parts, (that I ſay no more) and that is to be ſeene at this day, did flow from that well-ſpring, and had the beginning there. The Lord did bleſſe weake meanes, when they were vſed in ſimplicitie, and that in admirable manner, when the ſubtiltie of the wicked was not yet at thoſe times growne to ſuch an height, to diſmay the people in their firſt beginnings. But ſince thoſe daies, ſome of them, though ſeeking to grow vp

in further meaſure of knowledge and grace, and to bring on others by their example, haue met with ſuch diſcouragements, that they haue not anſwered (I ſpeake not of all particular perſons) as many other haue done, to the hope that they gaue ſo long before, by many degrees.
               But while I ſhew how the Iaylor and many other haue taken ſo great good by the companie and fellowſhip of Gods ſeruants, it is not to be paſſed by,
                     Many that may enioy this benefit, looke not after it.
                   how little vſe many make of ſuch good meanes now a daies. Who although they dwel neere godly Preachers, yea and are readie enough in ciuill manner to haue their conuerſing with them, yet in things pertaining to God and to eternall life, they haue no appetite to them. Which I ſpeake to their ſhame, ſeeing ſo much good might be gotten thereby. For what though they dwel neere ſuch, and haue thereby acquaintance with them, yet many further off, ſeeking heartily to take good by them, are in farre better caſe, and ſhew themſelues farre wiſer, becauſe their deſire is farre greater to benefit themſelues by them.
               For euen as the corne that is kindly ſowen in the field, though it be held backe by vnſeaſonable weather, is in farre better caſe, then that which groweth on the houſe top, though it be forwarder in the blade, and commeth ſooner to earing: Euen ſo it is with them, wiſedome is eaſie to finde of them that ſeek it diligently, though they be further off from the meanes, then they who may enioy them with more eaſe, when there is not an heart in them to take good by them as they may. Thus ye ſee the firſt three meanes, though a farre off, by which God brought the Iaylor, and ſo doth many other by the like, to conuerſion. All which degrees tending thereto, though I grant, that many goe beyond them all, and neuer attaine thereto; yet in thoſe who haue been further off, if they be ſuch as God will call, they haue brought them on in ſuch wiſe, that they haue ſet them forward to faith and repentance.
               Ye haue heard laſtly of the meanes of the Iaylors conuerſion, which are more remote and further off:
                     The meanes of the Iaylors conuerſion which are more neere.
                   Now follow thoſe which are more neere, and did effect the ſame. Of the

which the firſt is,1. His queſtion about ſaluation.
                   that he queſtioned with them about his ſaluation ſaying; Sirs, what muſt I doe to be ſaued? And that we may know that he asked not this queſtion, idlely, vainly, or curiouſly; but ſeriouſly from his heart, and being vrged by neceſſitie, it is ſaid, that hee came trembling, and fell downe before them: and in that feare and terror hee moued the queſtion. Whereby it appeared, that hee had heard ſomewhat from them, that cauſed feare of Gods wrath, and doubting of, and about his ſaluation, and thereby was brought ſo willingly vnto them to ſeeke helpe. And this came neerer the matter, I meane his conuerſion, then all that went before.
               
                  
                     Doct.
                  And now for our inſtruction, this teacheth, that when a wicked perſon,
                     Whē a looſe perſon doubteth that all is not well with him, he is in the way to true conuerſion.
                   who hath walked at his owne libertie, ignorantly, and profanely, as the moſt part doe, whether hee haue any light and wandring thoughts about his ſaluation, or no; I ſay, when ſuch a one beginneth to tremble and feare that all will not goe well with him, but that his ſins hauing found him out, doe threaten his damnation, and thereupon beginneth to make queſtion about his ſaluation, what hee ſhould doe to attaine to it; then hee commeth toward conuerſion and true repentance; then there beginneth to be ſome hope of him: And although, I know that ſuch fearefull thoughts doe ſometime vaniſh and come to nothing, and in ſome they breake into raging and deſpaire, when they bee not kindly and ſeaſonably wrought vpon, yet where no ſuch tozing and breaking of the heart is, there (without all doubt) the partie remaineth farre off from all likelihood of turning to God.
               For notwithſtanding we iudge charitablie of them, who reſort ordinarily and willingly to the preaching of the Goſpell; yea and conceiue hope of others alſo among vs, though further off from goodneſſe then they (as being meere worldlings, ignorant, or vaine perſons) and we waite when God ſhall call ſuch to repentance (for he bringeth out of both ſorts thereunto); yet till ſuch time that they beginne to complaine of their eſtate, and to crie out, not only ſuſpecting that all is not well with them, but alſo know it to bee ſo, at leaſtwiſe feare and feele it, and ſo aske counſell about it, there is no ſound

approching neere vnto God, to ſpeake as the Scriptures doe, namely, that the whole need not the Phyſition,
                  Matth. 9.12. and that it is the ſick-hearted ſinner, which ſeeketh ſeriouſly for mercie and forgiuenes.
               For as all that repaire to Markets and Faires, goe not to buy, (but many are wilie wanderers, who goe to gaze,Gen. 34.1. to ſee and to be ſeene, as Dinah did) but ſuch as want prouiſion for their families both cheape and buy; euen ſo, they who are pinched with ſeeing their neceſſitie and want of Gods fauour, and yet are perſwaded, that without it, they cannot bee ſaued, nor haue any peace; they beſide going out to heare, will alſo queſtion further about their eſtate, and in the heauineſſe of their hearts will ſay to the Lords Merchants, who are furniſhed with all ſtore fit for them; Sirs, what ſhall we doe to be ſaued? that ſo we may attaine thereto.
               But this is further to bee marked,
                     Vnto whom ſuch ſhould repaire.
                   that as the Iaylor heere ſought out for himſelfe, and moued queſtion about his ſaluation, was perſwaded that they were both able to tell him that which hee asked them, and was reſolued, as wee ſee by that which followeth, to reſt vpon and embrace their anſwere, as from God; ſo there muſt bee in thoſe who are pricked in their conſciences, ſo much wiſedome, as to repaire to thoſe men and brethren,
                  Acts 2.37. who can and will reſolue their doubts, and they muſt bee alſo readie to receiue the ſame from their mouthes, as from the meſſengers of God, when it ſhall in the euidence of the ſpirit, and the perſwaſion of their conſciences bee deliuered vnto them. For the word of God being rightly applied, will work kindly vpon them, and quiet them, whereas other comforts will not faſten on them, nor ſatisfie them.
               But vntill men doe begin to queſtion about their eſtate, they are in no forwardnes toward their ſaluation.
                     Queſt. 
                   If it bee asked, whether all muſt of neceſſitie moue queſtions about it, 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, yea: vnleſſe ſuch doubts as ariſe about the ſame, be cleerely anſwered by publike preaching. And yet herein they who propound them, muſt be wiſe and prepared, (as I haue ſaid) to be directed by the anſwere which ſhall be giuen them from God;Acts 10.33. euen as Cornelius ſaid vnto Peter (when

he came to his houſe to tell him what he ſhould doe,) of himſelfe, his kinſmen and eſpeciall friends; Wee are now here preſent before God, to heare all things that are commanded thee of him. And thus much of the Iaylors queſtion, one of the neerer meanes of his conuerſion.
               
                  
                     The ſecond meane: The Apoſtles anſwere.
                  Now followeth another of them, and that is the Apoſtles anſwere, namely, that hee ſhould beleeue in the Lord Ieſus, and he ſhould be ſaued. This therfore is well to be conſidered. For this was the thing which he ſtood in need of, and that, without the which he could not be ſaued. For hee being alreadie throughly troubled in his conſcience, needed not to bee vrged to ſorrow and prick of heart, fearing damnation alreadie for his horrible ſinnes; but had need of comfort rather through the forgiuenes thereof, which hee could no otherwiſe obtaine, but by faith. And therefore they required this of him, namely, that he ſhould beleeue in the Lord Ieſus for the remiſſion of his ſinnes, rather then any other thing, becauſe hauing this, the loue of Chriſt which hee ſhould ſee thereby towards him, would conſtraine him, ſooner then any thing elſe, to ſet vpon, and endeuour after the doing of his will, which is repentance.
               
                  
                     Faith is not in our power, but the free gift of God.
                  Neither let any here gather by this, that it was in his power to beleeue, faith being the free gift of God, but it was neceſſarie that hee ſhould know ſo much, namely, that hee muſt beleeue, to the end he might both be the better prepared to aske and learne of them how hee ſhould come to obtaine it, and alſo eſteeme more highly and preciouſly of it, which is the next way to come by it. This point is the more to be marked, becauſe that which I haue ſaid of the Apoſtles words to him, muſt without any further labour, be receiued and applied to all that are in the ſame eſtate that he was in.
               For (to make this former expoſition of their words to ſerue alſo for doctrine) what is needfull for any which are as the Iaylor was, terrified and troubled with the feare of hell, and ſtricken with the wound of conſcience for their ſinnes; I ſay, what is needfull to ſuch in any ſort, like vnto this, that they ſhould know they are all waſhed away by the blood of Chriſt? which is all one as to beleeue in him, that

he hath pardoned them.Luke 19.10. For to ſuch as ſo feele themſelues loſt, is the promiſe made, ſo that they beleeue not before the time, but haue good leaue and libertie from God ſo to do, neither therefore ought they to neglect or refuſe ſo to doe, while they feele what need and deſire they haue of it. And this be ſaid of the Apoſtles anſwere, which was the ſecond meane of the Iailers conuerſion, more neare.
               The third followeth, which was their preaching of the word of God vnto him, whereby he was brought to beleeue,
                     The third: Their preaching of the word of God vnto him.
                   and ſo to be conuerted. Heere for the clearing of this point, becauſe it is not particularly expreſſed what doctrine they preached, but only in generall, the word of God, it need not trouble any, what the things were which they taught; for ſeeing it is ſaid afterward, that he beleeued, it is manifeſt, that they preached of ſuch points to him as might worke and beget faith in him. And ſeeing he was alreadie terrified, and full of anguiſh for that he ſaw himſelfe in the eſtate of damnation, it is certaine, that they told him that he was in the way to receiue mercie.
               And it is alſo out of doubt, that they preached this,
                     What things they taught him out of the word.
                   that Ieſus Chriſt came into the world to ſaue ſuch as (in the caſe in which he was) were void of all other hope. And that they taught him to applie wiſely and kindly his merits, as the only remedie and medicine fit to heale his deadly and running ſore: and that they heartened and encouraged him in Chriſts name, to lay hold of the ſame, and to beleeue and to be perſwaded, that he was giuen and ſent into the world of his Father, to ſaue and deliuer from endleſſe thraldome and woe, ſuch miſerable ſinners; and alſo that they anſwered his obiections, namely, that he doubted he came not to ſaue ſuch great ſinners as he was, and ſuch like. For this is the doctrine that he had need to be throughly inſtructed in, and furniſhed with, and all to this end, that he might be bold to beleeue it.
               Thus they preaching vnto him, and confirming in him that which he had, namely, the deſire he had in that heauie eſtate of his, to be ſaued; and helping him to that which he had not, that is, the promiſe of eternall life; God ſo wrought

in him thereby, that he embraced it, and reſted vpon it by faith, ſo that he, euen he appeared then, to be one of them for whom Chriſt died, and whom he came to ſaue: according to that which is ſaid by the Apoſtle, faith commeth by hearing of the word of God preached:Rom. 10.17. verſ. 10. and againe, with the heart man beleeueth vnto righteouſneſſe, and conſequently to ſaluation. To that doctrine they (I meane Paul and Silas) added alſo this, that he which beleeueth,1. Iohn 3.3. and hath the hope that maketh not aſhamed, purgeth himſelfe alſo from the ſinne that he findeth in himſelfe, that as he is made the adopted ſonne of God, ſo he endeuoureth to reſemble his father in purity, of the which more ſhall be ſaid afterwards by a fitter occaſion. And this of their preaching.
               And this which I haue ſaid of the preaching of Paul and Silas to the Iailer, doth likewiſe inſtruct vs, that the ſame doctrine is to be preached to all ſuch as are in his caſe, and they muſt know it, who heare; that if at any time God exerciſe them, as he did him, with a troubled conſcience for their ſinne, and an vnfained deſire to be ſaued, they may long for the ſame promiſe of life, and as they ſee what need they haue of it, may be readie to embrace it, and by faith to reſt vpon it, that ſo all teares may be wiped from the cheekes of their ſoule, and they may be ſoundly comforted, or at leaſt ſtayed for the time, as their weakneſſe will permit.
               For this is the firſt and eſpeciall fruit of preaching to ſuch as groane vnder the burthen of their ſinne, and lament after God, longing for pardon: there is nothing able to eaſe their conſciences and to giue reſt to their ſoules, beſides this, namely, that they beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt is as readie to releaſe them of their ſinnes, as they be deſirous of it, and that they hold this as confidently, as they beleeue any article of their faith.
                     Note. 
                   But the chiefe difficultie about this matter is, to be fit and prepared for this faith, that is, to feele indeed that they ſtād in need of it. For hereby the Iailer was before many a thouſand Proteſtants at this day, euen before he beleeued, in as much as he ſaw in what woe he was, and earneſtly de
                     •
                  ired to be deliuered out of it, which is not only wanting in the greateſt part of hearers, but as hard to perſwade them to it.
               
                  Euen ſo,
                     That he ſo ſoone beleeued, was more then ordinarie.
                   it was more then common and ordinarie in the moſt hearers, that he ſo ſoone and eaſily beleeued in Chriſt, that is to ſay, while they preached to him. For although faith come by hearing, yet it is not alwayes attained at the time of hearing, eſpecially in ſuch a meaſure that a man can affirme and profeſſe, that he beleeueth, and ſo is able to crie Abba,Rom. 8.15. that is, to call God Father, No nor immediately after neither, for the moſt part, doth a broken hearted ſinner receiue ſuch light to beleeue; but is holden in doubting and feare, and troubled with the greatneſſe of his ſinnes, and with many other obiections. For though Lydia, Zaccheus, and ſome other,Act. 16.15. Luke 19.8. by Chriſts and the Apoſtles preaching beleeued by and by; yet with many it was otherwiſe, euen a harder matter, and namely with Paul himſelfe, who was not comforted nor releaſed of his ſinnes and burthen of griefe by Chriſt at Damaſcus gates, whē he was caſt downe & terrified by him,Act. 9.8.9. &c. but ſent into the citie to receiue further light and ſatisfaction to his heauie heart from Chriſt by the miniſterie of Ananias, a diſciple in the ſame citie; he was his inſtructer, who, if Paul had not now by Chriſts gratious goodneſſe, been conuerted, ſhould haue haue bin his priſoner. And this I thought good to ſay, which may be in ſtead of an anſwere to ſuch as obiect in theſe our dayes, that many lie in ſorrow and feare many daies, and ſome, whole yeeres before they beleeue and receiue comfort, and ſeldome at the ſame time, when they are wounded and troubled firſt for their ſinnes.
               I ſay,
                     Why ſome are holden vnder heauines longer then other.
                   God doth not alwaies keepe one and the ſame time in raiſing vp ſuch as are brought low in themſelues by the ſight of their ſins, but ſometimes doth it ſooner, ſometimes later, euen as the ſeed that is ſowen, commeth not vp alwaies together. And ſome are ſtayed and eaſed of their feare and griefe before other, both becauſe they are not fit nor able to go vnder it any longer, and alſo that their example may encourage other not to be diſmaied, and that they themſelues being ſet at libertie, may the ſooner helpe their brethren out of bondage. And ſome are holden vnder a longer time, other becauſe they haue not been touched deepely, but only in a paſſion, nor in good aduiſedneſſe, but in a raſh heate and

zeale, whoſe hot pangs are ſoone cooled without any comfort, or if they haue been truely humbled, yet for example to others or ſome other end beſt knowne to God. And yet this I ſay, for the auoiding of ſcruple and doubt about this matter,
                     He is kindly pricked, who is kindly healed.
                   that he is kindly pricked, who is kindly healed; namely, who is partaker of faith vnfained, and prooues the ſame by a godly and repentant life after, come it ſooner or later. And this be ſaid of the meanes, both further off and nearer, by the which the Iailer was brought to beleeue; and of his faith it ſelfe.
            
            
               THE THIRD SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  HAuing ſpoken of the points of the diuiſion, that is of the meanes by which he was brought to beleeue, and of his beleeuing it ſelfe. Before I proceed to ſpeake of the fruits of his faith, I will note briefely ſuch particular things beſide, as both the text offereth fit occaſion of, and alſo will illuſtrate the ſtorie of his conuerſion more clearely, from the 28. verſe to the 33.
               
                  Verſe 28.
                  Paul ſeeing this miſerable Iailer in this extremitie, that he was at the point to haue killed himſelfe, what doth he? It is worthie our marking. He doth not ſuffer him to kil himſelfe, but cals to him to ſpare himſelfe. Paul might haue had a good pretence to haue let him go on to lay violent hands on himſelfe. For God had ſhaken the earth, to ſhew himſelfe angrie with the Iailer for his crueltie againſt his innocent ſeruants: and now (as it might haue ſeemed) he would make this man a ſpectacle to perſecutors; and Paul, if he had been many a man, would haue ſaid, let him kill himſelfe, I ſhall the more eaſily eſcape. But he ſhewed that his mind was farre from reuenge,Rom. 12.21. and readie to requite euill with good. And therefore he cals aloud to him, leaſt through diſtance of place, or his paſſion, he ſhould not haue been able to heare him.
               
                  Whereby we muſt learne, not only to do no hurt,
                     Doctrine.
                   but to loue our enemie, according to Chriſts commandement, euen as if he were our friend. Therefore Moſes ſaith;Exod. 23.5. 
                  If thine enemies oxe or aſſe fall vnder the burthen, thou ſhalt helpe him vp againe: And as the Apoſtle ſaith, be not ouer come of euill,
                  Rom. 12.21. 
                  but ouercome euill with good.
               
               Alſo Paul takes away his feare, ſaying, we are all heere: which he did, that the Iailer might ſtay himſelfe from hurt, and be fit to attend further vnto good inſtruction; for in great feare a man is fit to do no good thing. Thus gratiouſly God doth deale with vs, to releaſe vs, when we are bound faſt, and when we are, as it were, running vpon the ſwords point, and ruſhing to our owne deſtruction,
                     Note. 
                   he holdeth vs backe, and in the extremitie of feare deliuereth vs, that we may afterward ſee ſome great good effect to come thereof, as heere is to be ſeene in him.
               Heere now the Iailer begins to ſtay himſelfe,Verſe 29. but yet betwixt hope and feare, he cals for a light, to ſee if it were as Paul ſaid, and leaping in, and trembling yet with feare, and finding all things to his deſire, he falles downe before Paul and Silas. The ſhaking of the earth and the ſetting open the doores amazed him, but when he ſaw that none of the priſoners were fled, this was yet more admirable vnto him. And this ſtrucke into his conſcience an accuſation of himſelfe, for his hard vſage of theſe men, whom he ſaw ſo kind to him, and carefull of his good, perceiuing indeed that the miracle was wrought for their ſakes. Whereby God ſheweth how neceſſarie it is for men to be caſt downe and abaſed, before they be raiſed vp: as we ſee in him, in Manaſſes, and in Paul at the gates of Damaſcus, and many other; for great is the pride, and ſtrong is the ſtoutneſſe of mans heart.
               Then becauſe the place where they were, was loathſome,Verſe 30. and vnfit for ſpeech to be had in it, he bringeth them out, not fearing what the Magiſtrate ſhould ſay vnto him. Which cleerely ſheweth, that many which ſhew crueltie againſt Gods innocent and faithfull ſeruants, if they did a little better know and conſider, who they are, in what account with God, and alſo if they would bethinke themſelues how vile

they themſelues haue been, would become more calme and kind vnto them, and be wounded for their owne great ſinne againſt them.
               But he proceeds further, and deſires to be inſtructed of them, and that in the moſt waightie matters of all. As if he ſhould haue ſaid, Sirs: I ſee now it is true, which I beleeued not, that ye are the ſeruants of the moſt high God, and this ye haue made apparent to me. For I, like a moſt vile beaſt, put you in the dungeon, but I ſee, he regards you, and ſhakes the earth,, and workes wonders for your ſakes. You haue ſaued my life, for I was but a dead man. Now ye haue ſhewed ſuch care of my life, ſhew me, I pray you, the way to eternall life. What ſhall I do, &c. He thus ſheweth himſelfe willing to heare and learne of them, and he acknowledgeth them able to ſatisfie him therein.
               And indeed then are men in good way to true conuerſion, when they are thus teachable, and when they are perſwaded that ſuch as they repaire vnto, for direction and comfort, are meete to reſolue them. And they who are the elect of God, do conſult and take counſell what to do, of them whom God hath ſent with the word of reconciliation. Theſe are guides ſent of him to bring men into the right way, and to guide them in it.
               O the wonderfull worke of God! would the Iailer thus haue attended to learne of them, if God had not drawne him? would hee that had ſo cruelly vſed them, haue come to bee taught of them? nay, would he not haue vſed them worſe? The Lord therefore meekeneth him, and maketh him a veſſell fit for grace to be powred into. And although many that God humbleth with his terrors, become not humble indeed; yet it was otherwiſe with him. Obſerue heere what a change God can make, hee that ouernight would not haue heard them,
                     How the Lord can change a vile ſinner.
                   though they had fallen downe at his feet to entreate him, now he fals at their feet, deſiring them to teach him.
               Euen as the Lord promiſed to the Church of Philadelphia, that he would make them that were of the ſynagogue of Satan,
                  Reuel. 3.9. 
                  to come and worſhip at their feet.
                  
                     A great comfort to all faithfull Ministers.
                   This among many other miniſtreth comfort to all faithfull Miniſters of God, for hereby he

teacheth them, that hee can meeken the proudeſt, when he ſeeth good, and therefore they ought to reſt contented in the carefull diſcharge of their duties. But if he do not, yet it ſhall be little to their reioycing in the end, who after all meanes remaine hardened.
               
                  Paul readie to teach in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon,Verſe 31. taketh the opportunitie, ſeeing him as the hot iron, fit to be wrought vpon: euen as he did to Agrippa, and as godly Miniſters ought to do. And in bidding him beleeue, they preached not the Law, (as I haue ſaid before) becauſe they ſaw him humbled, but powred oyle into his wounds.
                     Faith alone ſaueth.
                   A full anſwere to ſuch: for Chriſt hauing life in him, it followeth, that he that hath him, that is, by faith layeth hold on him,1. Ioh. 5.11.12. Rom. 3.28. Galath. 2.16. 
                  hath life alſo. And faith alone ſaues, as Paul teacheth in all his epiſtles, and therefore is the popiſh doctrine falſe and diuelliſh,
                     Popiſh doctrine erronious.
                   teaching that we are ſaued by workes, as cauſes. For then is Chriſt no perfect Sauiour, if we helpe him in the ſatisfying for ſin, and in meriting heauen. And as for the obiection out of Iames,
                  Iames 2.24. that we are ſaid there to be iuſtified by workes, his meaning is, that we are iuſtified thereby before men, to be faithfull as Paul teacheth, and no otherwiſe; and therefore this is a maine ground to ouerthrow Purgatorie, merits, Maſſe, &c.
               And Paul labouring to make as plentiful an harueſt to the Lord as he could, puts him in mind, that not himſelfe only,
                  
                     Paul couetous to winne ſoules.
                   
                  but his houſhold alſo might be ſaued. See wherein he is couetous, euen to winne ſoules; thus putting the Iailer in mind of his dutie, that is, to haue his familie inſtructed in the way to ſaluation. For maſters of houſholds are not only to ſeeke the way to heauen themſelues,
                     The duty of maſters of families.
                   but they muſt haue care of all that be vnder their roofe. Command. 4. Thou and thy ſon,
                  Exod. 20.10. 
                  and thy man ſeruant, and maid ſhall keepe holy the Sabbath; and not ſuffered to run and roaue at their pleaſure, no more then to toile. And ſo the Miniſters of God are in like manner to labour with, and draw them on, as well as the other.
               The Iailer by and by brought them to heare,Verſe 32. that they might beleeue & be ſaued: yea though it might haue ſeemed to haue been out of ſeaſon, being after midnight, which is to the iuſt reproofe both of maſters that will not bring their

ſeruants, and of ſeruants that will not be brought from their gaming, and worldly dealings, on the Sabbath day to be inſtructed.
               
                  
                     An excellent example of pain in teaching.
                  Alſo in Paul is ſet out an excellent example of paine in teaching. It was midnight, they had not ſlept, they were ſore and hungrie; yet their calling makes them forget all: as our Sauiour in the fourth of Iohn, being wearie, hungrie, and thirſtie,Iohn 4.32.34. yet hauing opportunitie to commune with the woman of Samaria, forgets them all. And ſo ought Gods Miniſters to do, when he offereth opportunitie, the paine and labour to ſeeke the ſaluation of men ought to ſeeme none to them, but pleaſure.
               And as he taught him, that he muſt beleeue in Chriſt, ſo he preached him out of the word of the Lord.Rom. 10.14. For How ſhall they beleeue in him, of whom they haue not heard, as the Apoſtle ſaith? therefore he teacheth him to know Chriſt. For a cleare and diſtinct knowledge of him is neceſſarie, before we can beleeue. And not only he preached Chriſt, but alſo more generally the word of God, that is, euen other things to aſſure them of Chriſt.
                     Gods word the foundation of faith.
                   And that muſt be the matter of our preaching, we muſt not build our faith on the word of man, but of God; and great reaſon. For faith vpholds a great waight; euen our ſaluation lieth vpon it. Faith in Chriſt therefore needs a ſtrong foundation, and ſuch an one is Gods word, that which is built on it, is built on a ſure rocke: mans word is ſandie, not able to beare vp any thing.
               
                  
                     The effects of his faith.
                  And thus hauing briefly noted (as I promiſed) other things in the text, I will returne to the points following in the diuiſion of the text. Therefore now follow the effects of his faith, which alſo are the fruits of it. Theſe, as they are ſet downe heere, and ſuch as for that time, he had opportunitie to ſhew, by which alſo we may certainly gather that other fruits of faith were in him, theſe (I ſay) may be referred to three,  The firſt was his baptiſme:  the next his reioycing for his owne and his houſholds beleeuing:  the third containe certaine duties of mercie and loue, as his bringing them out of priſon into his houſe, his waſhing their ſtripes, and refreſhing of their hungrie bodies with meate.
               
                  Where firſt note this generally,
                     Good workes follow faith.
                   that good workes follow faith, as the heate doth the fire. So ſoone as the theefe beleeued, he confeſſeth Chriſt, & ſheweth other fruits of his faith, ſuch as in that time he could. So this man doth the ſame by his loue to Gods ſeruants. And he doth it immediately, euen the ſame houre of the night: as they were readie to teach; euen ſo was he, to miniſter to their neceſſities. But this doctrine is manifeſt, looke we into the particulars. Of the which I will begin with that which moſt neerely concerneth this matter, and that is the ſealing and confirming of his faith,
                     The first fruit of his faith: He receiued Baptiſme.
                   and the making of it ſure vnto him, that he beleeued indeed, I meane, that he was baptiſed.
               For what would a man in his caſe deſire more, then to haue proofe and teſtimony that he beleeued, when thereby he was partaker of Chriſt, and of eternall life? And Baptiſme was an open badge of Chriſt, and of his righteouſneſſe receiued by faith: euen as Circumciſion was vnto the Fathers in the old Teſtament. 
                     Obiect. 
                   But what haſte, ye will (perhaps) ſay;Rom. 4.11. could not that be deferred till day at leaſt? for it is ſaid, he was baptiſed in the ſame houre of the night, after they had preached to him and his houſhold, which was a little after midnight.
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, it is not to be maruelled at, that he deſired ſpeed in that ſo waightie a matter. For they that haue faith, thinke long, till they may haue it ſealed and ratified. And is there not good reaſon thereof?
               If a man had the writing of a great inheritance paſſed ouer to him, would he not thinke it long, till he had the ſeale? And great matters were that night paſſed ouer by the Lord to him: euen heauen, life, ſaluation and happineſſe. Theſe therfore he deſireth to haue Gods ſeale ſet vnto. And ſo as he may haue this, he cares not for his ſleepe, or his eaſe, neither feares he any trouble that might enſue vpō it.
                     Doct.
                   And this teacheth al ſuch as God endueth with faith,
                     Deſire to haue faith confirmed.
                   whē they haue ſought it earneſtly, to ſeek by al means ſpeedily to haue it confirmed vnto them, and to get all poſſible teſtimonies thereof. For as nothing in the world is ſo precious as it is, and therefore not with like care to bee ſought: ſo neither is any thing with like regard to be preſerued and witneſſed to them that haue it.
               
                  Which I ſpeake as well for the ignorants ſake, who know not that there may many euidences be gathered of their ſaluation: as to ſtirre vp thoſe who haue better vnderſtanding, who though they know it, yet find many wayes to hinder themſelues from this benefit. For it may iuſtly be complained of, that it is too ſlightly looked after, of the moſt part. But to ſet downe any of them heere, I forbeare, becauſe I haue done it in many other places, and ſome follow immediately to be mentioned.
               
                  
                     The ſecond fruit of his faith: Ioy.
                  The next fruit of faith, which alſo (to make good my laſt ſpeech) is an infallible token of eternal life to them that haue it, is ioy, for that he beleeued in God. Which being rightly vnderſtood,Luke 8.13. is no leſſe. For although many heare, and receiue the word with ioy, becauſe they heare moſt precious and ſtrange things brought to light by the preaching of it: yet this is not the ioy I ſpeake of: but to haue inward peace and ioy through beleeuing that al ſinne is put away, which ſometime weighed vs downe for the feare of hell deſerued, and ſore diſquieted our hearts: this ioy, I ſay, is a fruit of faith, and a token of ſaluation, as Saint Paul ſaith, we haue peace with God,
                  Rom. 5.1. which cannot deceiue vs, if we be once by faith iuſtified.
               For when we who were without hope ſometime, yea in great feare that we ſhould neuer ſee God in his glorie, ſhall come to haue our hearts eaſed,Matth. 11.28. Hoſe. 14.3. and find rest to our ſoules. Is it not a ſure argument, that God hath put away all our iniquitie, and receiued vs graciouſly, no more to turne his diſpleaſure and angrie countenance toward vs? what is able to make vs ioyfull, but that perſwaſion? and yet, if that can do it; it followeth alſo, that by ſuch ioy we haue that which cauſeth it. 
                     Obiect. 
                   And becauſe many boaſt of falſe ioy, from which none can diſſwade an Hypocrite; therefore who can be ſecured from feare of it, but he may, (ye will ſay) be deceiued?
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, as the painted fire may be diſcerned from that which burneth indeed, ſo may the beleeuers ioy be diſcerned from the other: euen as true ſorrow, which is ſorrow indeed, may be, from that which is counterfeit.
               For as Salomon ſaith, the heart knoweth her owne heauineſſe,

and the ſtranger ſhall not be partaker of her ioy;
                     The difference betwixt true ioy and counterfeit.
                   ſo thereby we may gather, that as heauineſſe is felt, ſo is ioy alſo, which no other but he that hath it, can haue any part in. For the other trieth it not in the true weights of Gods word, which is proofe enough, that it is frothie, deceiueable, and not ſound. whereas the true beleeuer thinketh he can neuer beſtow too much labour to know that his comfort is wrought by God, and ſhed into his hart by the holy Ghoſt,
                  Rom. 5.5. becauſe it is his crowne and glorie, and that wherein his happineſſe conſiſteth;Act. 8.8.39. as the Queenes chiefe chamberlaine, the people of Samaria when they were conuerted by Philip, and the other churches of Iudea, and Galile did well teſtifie.
               Neither let this trouble any,
                     Why Gods people want this ioy.
                   that the godly do oft want this ioy, yea and haue it many times drowned with deepe ſorrowes, cauſed by ſinne and afflictions. For they want it at no time,Pſal. 51.12. Iohn. 16.20. but to the end they may returne to God againe by feruent prayer to recouer it; and tribulation muſt be admixed with it, while they liue heere, although it cauſe ſorrow, which yet drieth vp much ſinne, and without which tribulation, they ſhould be too high minded.2. Cor. 12.7. And when they haue the beſt times of reioycing heere, they muſt know, that as they are imperfect in all things, ſo are they alſo in this, God ſo diſpoſing it in his wiſe prouidence, ſeeing alſo their life is a ſowing in teares, while they liue in the fleſh,Pſal. 126.5. although they endeuour as they are commanded,Philip. 4.4. 
                  to reioyce in the Lord alwayes. And this of the Iailers ioy, being the ſecond fruit of his faith.
               The third followeth, which being his loue to them,
                     The third fruit of his fa
                           •
                        th: his loue to the Apoſtles.
                   containeth in it many particulars, euen ſuch as he had opportunitie to ſhew vnto them. For they being in the inward darke dungeon, what better fruit of his loue could he ſhew them, then to bring them out into his houſe? Secondly, they being wounded and pained with whipping and ſcourging, what could be more welcome to them then to haue their ſtripes waſhed and bathed, eſpecially by him through pitie and compaſſion, who had himſelfe made the wounds. And thirdly, they being alſo hungrie (for they were long kept without meate) how could he at that time better ſhew his loue to

them, then by feeding and ſo refreſhing them? All theſe three therefore together, how great loue did they teſtifie towards them? To the which may be added his reioycing for the conuerſion of his houſhold.
               
                  
                     Doct.
                   
                  
                     Cruell men coruerted be kind.
                  All which ioyntly conſidered do teach vs, that how cruell and barbarous ſoeuer men haue been in the time of their ignorance and vnbeleefe, to the faithfull preachers and ſeruants of God; yet if the Lord plucke them out of them, and giue them new hearts,Eſay 11.6. &c. he will endue them alſo with new qualities and behauiour towards them. Is it not a worthie thing to behold a brutiſh and ſottiſh mad-braine to be thus changed into a louing and well gouerned Chriſtian? and this being wrought by the ſound preaching to him of the word of God, the Lord working in him thereby, who can chuſe but commend and highly approue of ſuch a change?
               No worſe fruit would the fame preaching bring foorth in others, if men worthily and highly price and reuerence that grace of God in him and ſuch others. The like may be ſaid of the people in the ſecond of the Acts,Act. 2.13.37. who railed on the Apoſtles, and ſaid, they were drunke with new wine, whiles they remained in their prophane eſtate, but when they had heard Peters ſermon which told them, in what a wofull and damnable condition they were, how did they reuerence them afterward, ſeeke counſell at their hands, and walke after their doctrine, hauing fellowſhip moſt ſweetly and kindly with the people of God? ſo that a man might haue ſaid, that the lambe and the lion did feed together.
                  Iſai. 11.6.
               
               And they that can find no ſuch fruit of preaching as the Iailer and theſe men did, but continue in their leaud, ſhameleſſe and prophane liues, and ſcoffe at them that do better, I bewaile their miſerable eſtate,Pſa. 12.4. 2. Pe. 2.3. 
                  their tongues are their owne, and their damnation ſleepeth not.
               
               
                  
                     Particular fruits of his loue.
                  Now to ſhut vp al with a few words of the particular fruits of the Iailers faith, euery one yeeldeth good inſtruction.  For firſt, his bringing Paul and Sitas into his houſe out of the loathſome priſon, doth condemne his former act of caſting them in. Which ought to teach vs, not to iuſtifie all that we do, further then Gods word will beare vs out: which I ſpeake

to the ſhame of them, who will haue all well to be thought of, that they haue done; yea, although many things haue bin done of them very offenſiuely, and though ſome of them might worthily make them bluſh and to be aſhamed. Euen ſo, it is great credit to them, who diſlike and in a godly ſort vndoe, I meane, repent of that,Pſal. 51.3. which they haue vngodly done.
               
                   The next of his actions, in that he waſhed their ſtripes, doth teach; that beſides the condemning of his ſcourging them before, he did as much as he could reuenge himſelfe of himſelfe.2. Cor. 7.11. For he put him ſelfe to reproch in waſhing their wounds, who ſought great credit by making them. A good fruit (doubtleſſe) of his godly ſorrow and repentance for his cruell fact, and it is to be likewiſe found in other who haue truly turned from any ſinne, as the woman in the ſeuenth of Luke,
                  Luke 7.38. who made her eyes a baſen of water to waſh Chriſts feet, and her haire a towell to wipe them, whereas ſhe had before abuſed them both to laſciuiouſnes and wantonneſſe.Luke 19.8. And Zache to be reuenged of himſelfe for getting his goods vniuſtly, made a fourefold reſtitution, and gaue halfe of the reſt to the poore, to the end he might haue little pleaſure in the enioying of them, (that I ſay no more) which he had taken ſo great pleaſure in, by his vnlawfull comming by them.
               
                   The third fruit of his faith, was his ſetting meate before them. What? at midnight or ſhortly after? It was in good ſeaſon, they being hungrie and ſupperleſſe. And if our Sauiour ſaid well in Matthew,
                  Matth. 10.41. 
                  that he that receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, ſhall receiue a Prophets reward, then did this receiuing and relieuing of them witneſſe no leſſe to him, and therefore it gaue teſtimonie of the faith which he had. Such liberalitie to the Saints, to giue thē not only for Chriſts ſake, which may be done to the vnbeleeuing, but becauſe they were deare vnto him, is the like teſtimony to thoſe that, according to their abilitie, do ſhew it.
               Which is to be marked,1. Cor. 13.2. becauſe a man may giue all that he hath to the poore in other reſpects, and yet, as Saint Paul ſaith, if he haue no loue, by which faith worketh, it ſhall profit him

nothing. I heartily wiſh that they who beleeue in Chriſt, were more rich in all other, and in this kind of good workes alſo. But yet this is to be knowne, that numbers of ſuch as haue giuen much toward the relieuing of the needie, looking to purge away their ſinnes by ſuch meanes, and to make God beholding to them for giuing to him or the poor that which is his owne, do nothing leſſe then merit or receiue any thing at his hands for the ſame; they ſhall (as I haue ſaid) profit them nothing. Euen as they to whom he ſaid for the like offerings;Iſai. 1.12. 
                  who required theſe things at your hands? And this of the third fruit of his faith.
               
                  
                     Doct.
                  From the which, and both the other particular fruits of the ſame, and of his loue, this I adde, that whatſoeuer dutie of loue can be performed to the ſeruants of God without the omitting of greater, as the workes of our calling, our health, the empairing of our outward eſtate, or ſuch like, yea or theſe in caſes of neceſſitie; ſuch duties (I ſay) are not to be neglected. Euen as the Iailer heere did, as he could, performe all theſe. And where that helpe is miniſtred mutually amongſt Chriſtians, as well in the beſt things as in the meaner, much outward and inward peace is there enioyed, good example ſhewed, as a fruit of the Goſpell, and good hope that many ſhall be gained and brought thereby vnto it.
               
                  
                     Note. 
                   And heere I do ſpecially deſire all people of God to heare me in two things moſt needfull to this purpoſe. The one, that ſuch as be of more hard, froward, auſtere and impatient diſpoſition, and yet religious, would take a little paine to bridle and ſubdue the ſame, and with grauitie and integritie, to be more amiable, that ſo they may diſcourage none of the weaker ſort. The ſecond, that ſuch as receiue helpe of their brethren, would not burden them, and wearie and diſcourage them from ſuch duties doing, by their vndiſcreet importunities, looking for that which is beyond their compaſſe for them to aske, or the other to grant, and yet to iudge and cenſure them for not yeelding vnto them.
               
                  
                     The fourth fruit.
                  Now the laſt fruit of the Iailers faith, and that is touching his houſhold, followeth, that he reioyced that they alſo beleeued in the Lord. Therein he declared himſelfe to be a right

kind and louing maſter, euen as he was a ſound and good Chriſtian: and alſo that he was become a faithfull friend vnto Chriſt his maſter:Luke 159.10. who ſo counteth of all them that reioyce at the conuerſion of a ſinner. Euen ſo, ſuch maſters may haue good hope of their true profiting, and reioycing, that deſire to haue their houſhold to be a little Church: and beleeuers in Chriſt, and all other may know that Chriſt accounteth highly of theſe, who reioyce for them that of great ſinners are conuerted to God.
               And thus to make an end of the whole ſtorie, as we will iudge of the ſtature and proportion of a Giant, by his hand or legge; ſo we may iudge of the Iailers whole courſe of life by theſe parts of it. That he was made a rare paterne in faith and godlineſſe, of a moſt barbarous and prophane perſon. Now wherefore ſay I this, but to the end, that many, who as yet are eſtranged from God and enemies to him, euen a farre off, may yet at leaſt bethinke and reſolue themſelues to returne againe vnto him, and neuer to leaue off, till they bee truely come home, and haue more in them, then any reprobate that may fall away againe, can haue.
            
         
         
            TWO SERMONS VPON MATTH. 24.12.13. PREAched by RICHARD ROGERS.
            
            
               
                  
                     Verſ. 12
                  And becauſe iniquitie ſhall be encreaſed, the loue of many ſhall be cold.
                  
                  But he that endureth to the end, he ſhall be ſaued.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     The ſumme and ſcope of this Sermon.
                  
                  AS I vſe and thinke it expedient ſo to doe in preaching a Sermons, to acquaint the hearers firſt with the things which moſt concerne them to attend vnto: ſo I will firſt ſhew, what matters I meane to ſtand vpon▪ And as it was the vſuall manner of our Sauiour to ſpeake to the people of the things that concerned all that heard him, that there might be hope that all ſorts might take good thereby: ſo my purpoſe is to do. Now therefore ſeeing all ſorts of hearers are either workers of iniquitie, and ſuch, as fill the world with ſinne; or ſuch as haue receiued the loue of the word into their hearts, of which ſort ſome haue been diſcouraged, and haue begun to faint, and to waxe cold, and ſome hold on their courſe commendablie, though theſe be the feweſt; therefore to all theſe three ſorts I will direct my ſpeech, that the firſt may repent betimes, and returne to the Lord; the ſecond may riſe out of their falles, and ſtand faſter in the good eſtate, wherein they had begun; and the laſt may hold on in their firſt loue and continue to the end, wherein their happineſſe conſiſteth.
               
                  
                     The opening of the text.
                  And that I may not be thought to ſpeake what I liſt, I will ſhew how our Sauiour Chriſt doth giue occaſion hereof moſt fitly, ſpeaking himſelfe of all theſe three ſorts in the words which I haue read vnto you. For he foretelling many

things that ſhould afterward come to paſſe, putteth in this one amongſt the reſt, ſaying: It ſhall be in the latter dayes; that people ſhall be giuen ouer to ſinne, and euen where the Goſpell ſhall be preached, euen there iniquitie ſhall abound in ſuch wiſe, that it ſhall draw away many of them who haue embraced and loued the truth; ſo that they ſhall faint and fall from the goodneſſe that hath been in them, but let them (ſaith he) rouſe vp themſelues againe, and returne to their firſt loue, and they who yet hold it, let them abide ſtill in it, for they only who continue to the end ſhall be ſaued.
               And by this which he ſaith, it may eaſily be gathered,
                     Three parts thereof.
                   that he ſpeaketh of three ſorts, as I alſo entend to do: and withall three things he ſetteth downe. One, that iniquitie ſhall abound: the ſecond, that by meanes thereof, the loue of many ſhall waxe cold: the third; that they who wiſely decline and ſhunne both, and enter and keepe on in the good way, wherein God hath ſet them vnto the end, they ſhal vndoubtedly be ſaued, and haue euerlaſting life.
               Now to begin with the firſt, I wil handle it thus.
                     Three points handled in the first part.
                   I will before I go further, proue the words of our Sauiour to be moſt cleare & true, that all may ſee into thē. Secondly, applie them in more particular manner to all ſuch as do cauſe iniquitie to abound, that all who deſire, may be able to ſee, whether they be of the number of them, that they may thereafter prouide for themſelues. And thirdly, I will ſhew what vſe all ſuch ought to make of the doctrine which they haue verified in hauing been helpers to encreaſe iniquitie; and that is this; that when they ſee they haue liued in times paſt to no other end, then to helpe to fill the world with ſin, they may giue all diligence to ſeeke the pardon of their euill doings, and neuer reſt quiet vntill they haue obtained it, and come out of them, which is the right vſe of knowing it. But if they ſtill go forward in their euill courſe, they may ſhew themſelues to be, as they are, that is, contemners.
               And that the world ſhall be full of iniquitie in theſe latter daies of ours, it is proued by two reaſons:
                     The truth hereof proued by Scripture and experience.
                   the one drawne from Scripture, the other from experience. The Spirit of God ſpeaketh thus in the Scripture,Matth. 24.37. that as it was in the dayes of

Noah, ſo ſhall it be in the comming of the Sonne of man. For as before the floud came, they did eate and drinke, marrie, and giue in marriage, vntill the day that Noah entred into the Arke, and knew nothing vntill the floud came and tooke them all away, ſo ſhall it then be. Whereby Chriſt ſheweth that in the latter dayes, a part whereof this age is wherein we liue, the people ſhall be as they were in that wofull time before the world was drowned with waters, which times were fraught with all impietie and iniquitie, with contempt of Gods word and all abomination.
               
                  2. Tim. 3.1.Saint Paul agreeth with our Sauiour Chriſt herein, and ſaith, In the last dayes (as theſe are wherein we liue) ſhall come perillous times: yea and know (ſaith he) that it ſhall be ſo. But if yee would know how perillous, hee anſwereth; ſuch, as wherein men ſhall be louers of themſelues, couetous, boasters, proud, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient to parents, vnthankefull, vnholy, without naturall affection, truce breakers, falſe accuſers, intemperate, fierce, no louers at all of them that are good, trayterous, high minded, headie, louers of pleaſures more then louers of God. And if all theſe with the like do now flow, is it not true, that iniquitie aboundeth?
               
                  
                     Iniquity aboundeth among all ſorts.
                  But for that, let experience (from which the ſecond reaſon is to be drawne) declare, what is found in this part of the latter age in which we live, and whether the times be ſo bad as it was foretold they ſhould be. Conſider it by the ages of men,
                     Yong men.
                   as yong or old; by the ſexe, as men or women; and by their eſtate and condition, as the rich and the poore, the mightie and the meane. To ſay a little of euery one, what ſtoutneſſe, pride, diſobedience, is to be ſeene euery where in youthes? who being but as the flower that to morrow withereth, yet lift vp their creſt, as though they were riuited into a long life, and had a promiſe of eternitie heere, which if it were, yet had they but an eſtate in miſerie. But I may not ſtay to make large diſcourſes of euery one.
               
                  
                     Old men.
                  What ignorant ſenſeleſnes, to conceiue knowledge of heauenly things is in the aged? and as much vnwillingnes to learne? And what elſe, but frowardnes, malice, and an inſatiable deſire of getting, while yet they haue more then one

legge in the graue? In ſo much, that he who ſhould hope of the ſaluation of the moſt of them, muſt ſtretch out his charity beyond his warrant and ground. As for the wealthie,
                     Rich.
                   what is their occupation and practiſe, but to ſeeke with might and maine to grow more wealthie, minding that labour, as if they ſought after heauen it ſelfe? In the meane while, not regarding the multitude of thoſe that want, to ſerue the neceſſitie of them with their ſuperfluitie; neither embracing the Chriſtian life euer the more for all the goods they haue, but turning aſide from it rather, and as little longing after heauen it ſelfe: which kind of life, while they ſo pleaſe themſelues in, what wiſe man would iudge any otherwiſe of them, but that they thinke, they ſhall neuer die, or that they ſhall come againe when they be dead, to take the benefit of that which they haue.
               But what ſay we then of the poore?
                     Poore.
                   
                  Ierem. 5.4. The Prophet Ieremie ſaith of them, ſurely they are fooliſh, they know not the way of the Lord, nor the iudgement of their God. And experience proueth it to be ſo. For who doth not ſee, that the poore ſort take themſelues to be priuiledged that they ſhould not ſeeke after knowledge? For theſe are their ſpeeches, Sermons are for rich folke, as though they had no account to make to God: and therefore we ſee they are rude and brutiſh for the moſt part, contemning inſtruction, ſpeaking ill of the wealthier ſort, ſhifting, ſtealing, idle, further then neceſſitie driueth them to worke and labour. And by this that hath been ſaid of them, it is not hard to iudge of the reſt, namely how miſerable, as our Sauiour hath heere foretold, their whole courſe of life is.
               And the like may be ſaid of Miniſter and people,
                     Ministers and people.
                   and of one and other. What faithfulnes to God is in the moſt of them, who take vpon them to bee guides to Gods inheritance? What loue is there in them to their flocke? what diligence in preaching and priuate ſtudie and reading? And for their liuing with thē (if ſo be they do liue with thē) what is their conuerſing with them, but either in hollow peace and fained loue; in gaming, and carnall merrie making; or elſe they liue among them in ſtrangenes, hating one another,

and in ſutes and controuerſies, but what fellowſhip haue the people with them for their inſtruction, and edification; but that they feare or flatter them for a peniworth in their tithes, and for their priuate commoditie?
               And thus by laying open the particular kindes of perſons, it is too manifeſt, that iniquitie aboundeth, and that Chriſts prophecie of our age is moſt true, in fortelling that it ſhould be ſo. What remaineth therefore, ſeeing ſcripture and experience proue it to be thus, and yet that the workers of iniquitie ſhal be driuen from Gods preſence, and are accurſed; what remaineth (I ſay) but this? Firſt, that it be proued by plaine demonſtration, who are they that cauſe it to increaſe, for as much as few or none will applie this to themſelues, but will ſhift it off one way or other. Secondly, when it ſhall be ſeene who they be, that they make all poſſible haſte to repent, and ſeeke mercie.
               
                  
                     The ſecond point: Application of the former to foure ſorts of people. The firſt ſort of thoſe that multiplie ſinne.
                  And to finde out who they be that fill the world with iniquitie, it is no hard matter; and they may all fitly be brought to foure kindes. The firſt are notorious ſinners, and ſuch as cannot be hidden, as adulterers, drunkards, idolaters, oppreſſors, reuengers and ſuch like. Theſe as they cannot be ignorant, that their doings are odious and horrible, ſo they goe not alone, but haue their attendants and handmaides waiting vpon them; as the Apoſtle deſcribeth them in the Epiſtle to the Romanes,Rom. 13.13. ſaying: walke not in gluttonie, and drunkennes, in chambering and wantonnes, in ſtrife and enuying. Theſe therefore whoſoeuer they be, whoſe ſinnes may be written in their foreheads with great letters, for the appearance and certaintie of them, theſe (I ſay) fill the world with ſinne, and cauſe iniquitie to abound, they cannot bee excuſed, they haue nothing to cloake them.
               
                  
                     The ſecond ſort.
                  The ſecond ſort are ſuch as are counted honeſt townes men, who looking after nothing for the moſt part, but how they may liue, are as forward in, and as fit for one religion as another. Who partly for law ſake, partly by example and cuſtome, ſeeing what others doe, come to Church indeed: but for any knowledge or goodneſſe they get thereby, all is one whether they goe or not. And if it were no more but this,

that they haue neither zeale nor knowledge to worſhip God by, it may eaſily bee gathered what their liues be towards men. Theſe, although for want of better, they muſt beare office in townes; yet all diſorder is where they dwell, ſeeing they are as bad themſelues as others, vnleſſe (perhaps) ſome of them haue a little more ciuilitie then the worſt and rudeſt.
               And who doubteth in the meane while, but that all kinde of ſinne ſwarmeth there? as the bold prophaning of the Sabbath, drunkennes, whoring, contention, vniuſt dealing, ſcorning of thoſe that bee better then themſelues, cauilling, reuenging, ſtoutnes to reiect all good admonition, with many other of like ſort: which where they are intertained, can it be choſen, but that iniquitie ſhould abound there? So that this ſecond ſort doth alſo fill the world with ſinne. And ſeeing this kinde of people is ſo common euery where, that they goe for honeſt men and good Chriſtians, and they walke vncontrolled and vnpuniſhed, and thereby are the leſſe noted to be ſo euill as they are, the Lord doth oft take the matter into his owne hands, to detect and bewray them: So as, either they fall to ſome ſinne, for which the Magiſtrate taketh them in hand; ſuch was Achan,
                  Ioſ. 7.25. Leuit. 24.10. and he that blaſphemed in Leuiticus, who both were put to death; and thruſt out from amongſt their neighbours; or elſe God puniſheth their ſinne himſelfe directly, by letting them lay violent hands on themſelues, as did Ahitophel.
               
               The third ſort who cauſe iniquitie to abound,2. Sam. 17.23. The third ſort.
                   are the hypocrites, properly ſo called; who profeſſe religion, and take the word of God into their mouthes, but they hate to be reformed; and boldly affirme that they know God,Pſal. 50.17. 2. Tim. 3.5. Matth. 7.21. but in their deeds they denie him; and ſay, Lord Lord, but doe nothing leſſe, then go about to fulfill the will of the Lord. Theſe cauſe the holy word of God to be ill ſpoken of, which they heare and talke of, more then the moſt of others do. And will not ſticke to commit ſinne the more boldly, vnder a colour and cloake of holines: which behauiour of theirs, being a practiſe and common courſe of liuing with them, ſo that daily much euill is wrought by them; all that liſt may ſee, that theſe alſo

as the two former ſorts, (that I ſay no more of them, as being ſo well knowne) doe cauſe iniquitie to abound.
               
                  
                     The fourth ſort.
                  The fourth ſort are they, who are not properly called hypocrites with the former, although hypocriſie beare much ſway in them, but they in many things doe obey God, and the courſe of their liues is much more framed after Gods word, then all the former, if they were put together: alſo they doe more ſtreightly vrge good order in others, as their place will giue thē leaue; & yet in ſome things they will not be brought within compaſſe, but are wedded to their will, and know that they do ill; ſome ſin they intertaine, and take libertie to commit, being not willing to ſearch their hearts, nor to looke into their waies, and ſo they deale alſo about faith, they hold a confuſed perſwaſion and hope, that they ſhall bee ſaued, but they cannot bee brought to trie it, and therefore they are deſtitute both of it and good life.
               Now theſe alſo, howſoeuer they come neerer a godly life then any of the former, and that by many degrees; yet becauſe they in ſome things giue themſelues leaue to offend and diſhonour God, and doe not feare the Lord with all their hearts, and in one thing as well as in another ſeeke to pleaſe him, therefore God abhorreth their ſacrifice of praiſe and prayer, and curſeth the obedience which they offer vnto him. And therefore the Apoſtle S. Iames, hauing to deale with ſuch people, ſaid vnto them, whoſoeuer ſhall keepe the whole law,
                  Iam. 2.10.11. 
                  and yet faileth in one point, he is guiltie of all. For hee that ſaid, Thou ſhalt not commit adulterie, ſaid alſo, Thou ſhalt not kill. Now then, though thou doest none adulterie, yet if thou killeſt, thou art a tranſgreſſor of the law.
               
               And thus whiles they haue all their doings reckoned againſt them for ſinnes, as it hath been proued that the beſt of them are no better, they come within the ranke of them, who multiplie iniquitie, and cauſe ſinne to be increaſed. 
                     Obiect. 
                   And if it be obiected, that there be other ſorts of people beſides theſe foure,  who increaſe ſinne in the land, 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, that ſome of Gods children by their infirmitie are in ſhew like the former;1. Kings 8.46. yet becauſe they would not ſinne, and doe breake out rather of infirmitie, then wilfully and wittingly to lie

therein, and doe endeuour in one thing as well as another to pleaſe God, therefore they are not ſaid to increaſe ſinne, who doe faithfully labour to ſuppreſſe, and keepe it downe both in themſelues and others.
               And ſuch muſt the other foure ſorts be,
                     The third poynt.
                   before the Lord will count and take them for his. Thus it is manifeſt,
                     The vſe.
                   who they be that fill the world with ſinne, that none can be ignorant of it, who is not wilfully blinde. Now it remaineth what theſe ſhould doe, that is, before all things that they repent and ſeeke mercie, and hold it by faith; both which as they haue ſufficient cauſe to looke after, with all ſpeed, (becauſe without the one, it is impoſſible to pleaſe God, that is faith,Heb. 11.6. and without the other, I meane, repentance and amendment of life,Matth. 3.7, 8. the vengeance of God cannot bee auoided) ſo they haue two great incouragements to ſet them forward to ſeeke both: this being added,
                     Two incouragements to draw all theſe ſorts to faith and repentance.
                   if they feele what neede they haue thereof, (as all may ſee they haue, and that very great) and then, if they deſire earneſtly to be partakers of them, they be not farre from them.
               The firſt is, that the Lord hath other ſheepe,
                     The first.
                   which are not yet of his fold, and hee counteth many to be his people, who are not yet called to know that they are his,Iohn 10.16. who may by the preaching of the Goſpell, be added to his faithfull ones. And in hope hereof, they ſhould giue all diligence to waite vpon the Lord in his ordinance for this bleſſing.
                     The ſecond.
                   The ſecond is this: that they ſearch and trie their waies, what is amiſſe in them, (though they ſhall neuer finde out the hundreth part of the ſinne that is in them) and then conſider the woe they are in thereby, which if they can bee perſwaded to doe, it is the moſt direct way to make them turne to the Lord, both, in imbracing Gods promiſe of mercy, which then belongeth to them by Gods free grant, and alſo in reforming their liues, from the which, by their ſinne, they were eſtranged.
               Both theſe kindes of turning to God the Prophet Ioel exhorteth the people vnto, ſaying: read your hearts (that is,Ioel 2.13. by ſearching into them, to ſee the foulnes of them) and not your garments, and turne to the Lord your God. And Ieremy in his

Lamentations doth the ſame,Lament. 3.40. when he ſaith; Search your wayes, and turne againe vnto the Lord. And this is the onely way, for ſuch as haue brought themſelues out of fauour with God, and drawne downe his wrath vpon themſelues, (by multiplying iniquitie) to recouer themſelues againe, that they may both break off the courſe of their wicked liues, and alſo be healed and deliuered from that vengeance of God which tooke hold of them before.
               
                  
                     A watchword to all the former ſorts.
                  This I haue thought good to ſay, of this firſt ſort of people, and of the foure kinds of them, all which doe fill the world with iniquitie: who leaſt they ſhould too ſleightly regard that which hath been ſaid to perſwade them to faith and repentance, I thought it not amiſſe, to adde this one thing, as a watchword to them all. And that is, that they take ſpeciall heed, that they harden not their hearts to abide ſtill in that which they haue ill done, neither againſt the inſtruction that calleth them backe from it, neither make light of their ſins, as Eſau did;Gen. 25.32.33.34. who when he had ſold his birth-right (being a ſigne of eternall life) he made a ſleight matter of it, ſaying, what is this birth-right vnto me, as if he ſhould haue ſaid, what good would it haue done me?
               But it ſhall be their wiſdome to ſift and ſearch themſelues as they haue been taught to do, rather then go further and further: ſeriouſly conſidering the words of the Prophet,Ierem. 8.6. which are theſe, Doth a man fall and not riſe againe, or go out of the way and not returne? And they ſhould ſay, as the Apoſtle ſaid, when their maſter told them, that one of them ſhould betray him, anſwering ſeuerally (as fearing leſt ſuch a miſchiefe might light vpon them) is it I master? and another, is it I? And they ſhould, as they which are wearie of their doings, and willing to repent, ſay, euery one by himſelfe, (the men apart,
                  Zach. 12.12. as the Prophet Zacharie ſpeaketh, and the women apart) what haue I done? And ſo ſhall they ſee, that God will ſoone turne away from his diſpleaſure, and be mercifull to them:Oſea 14.2.3.4. According to that in Oſea, where the Lord giueth a moſt ſweet and plaine direction, both to repent and obtaine mercie, ſaying:
               Verſ. 1. O Iſrael, returne to the Lord thy God: for thou hast

fallen by thine iniquitie.
               
               2. Take vnto you words, and turne to the Lord, and ſay vnto him, take away all iniquitie, and receiue vs graciouſly, ſo will we render the calues of our lips.
               
               3. Aſhur [that is, the Aſſirians] ſhall not ſaue vs, neither will we ride vpon horſes, [that is, to truſt in them] neither will we ſay any more to the worke of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the fatherleſſe findeth mercie.
               
               4. I will heale their rebellion, I will loue them freely [ſaith the Lord] for mine anger is turned away from them.
               
               Herein the Lord ſetteth downe his louing kindnes toward them ſundry waies, that they or any that price and highly ſet by it, may the eaſilier be perſwaded of it and beleeue it, and he requireth of them repentance, to the end, they and all beleeuers may yeeld and performe it. And thus much be ſaid at this time, and of this firſt ſort heere, which our Sauiour ſpeaketh of, namely of thoſe which fill the world with ſinne.
            
            
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE 24. OF MATthew, the 12. and 13. verſes. The ſecond part.
               
                  THe ſecond part of the text followeth,
                     The ſecond part of the text.
                   in which is ſhewed that by the abundance of iniquitie, the loue of many ſhall waxe cold: that is, when the ſimple harted and godly minded people, who would moſt willingly go on in a holy courſe, ſhall yet ſee the horrible abominations in the world, on euerie ſide ſwarming, and thoſe alſo with boldneſſe vpholden and defended, bearing ſway and preuailing; though at firſt they vtter diſlike them, yet being continually annoyed with them, and grieued therewith; by little and little they are diſcouraged and weakened in their good courſe; till time they be cooled, and fall from it, deſeruing thereby the ſharpe reproofe which was giuen to the Church of Epheſus, which

was this;Reuel. 2.4. 
                  I haue ſomewhat against thee, euen for that thou hast left thy first loue.
               
               This point laying out another ſort of people to vs, beſides thoſe who haue been ſpoken off; to the end we may ſee our Sauiours mind the better therein, and make our profit of it; Firſt I wil ſhew what he meaneth by this loue,
                     Fiue things handled in this part.
                   when he ſaith, the loue of many ſhall waxe cold; ſecondly, that it is much decayed and waxen cold indeed, in this our age, as he foreſaid it ſhould: and thirdly by what meanes and how: namely, by the abundance of iniquitie, flowing round about them. Fourthly, I will ſet downe a remedie for ſuch as haue fallen, how they may riſe againe: and adde reaſons to diſſwade from ſuffering their loue to waxe cold in them.
               
                  Reuelat. 2.4. 
                  1. What our first loue is.
                  Now this loue heere ſpoken of, is the ſame that Saint Iohn calleth our firſt loue, which is a holy and heauenly affection ſtirred vp and wrought in our hearts, as ſoone as we be perſwaded of the loue of God in Chriſt to vs. And it cauſeth vs to ſet our loue on God more then euer we loued father, wife, or friend, or any thing elſe of the greateſt account and reckoning.2. Cor. 5.14. For this loue of God conſtraineth vs ſo to do, and for his ſake, to loue our brethren. For he that loueth him that begate,
                  1. Iohn 5.1. 
                  loueth him alſo which is begotten, alſo it draweth vs in a moſt feruent manner to loue the word of God, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith:Pſalme 119.97. Rom. 10.15, 
                  Oh how loue I thy word? and the true Preachers of it, for beautifull are the feet of thoſe, that bring glad tidings.
               
               And what maruell? For who can ſufficiently haue his hart enlarged in this manner toward God, who being by his former ſinfull life brought euen to hell gates, and that without hope of recouerie by any way that he could ſee; did when he leaſt looked for it, and that of Gods meere loue and mercie obtaine deliuerance from the ſame, and withall ſaw himſelfe adopted, and taken to be heire of euerlaſting life? This vnſpeakable benefit as a ſpring ſending forth, and accompanied with many other bleſſings freely beſtowed vpon him by Chriſt, what can be too deare for him, that hath beſtowed it? He is readie therefore for his ſake, that did all this for him, to giue and conſecrate himſelfe againe to him, and to be at his command in all things. From whence it followeth, that in

great zeale and feruentnes he ſeeketh to do the will of God to the admiration of others, euen as he himſelfe ſaith,Iohn. 
                  if yee loue me, yee will keepe my Commandements. And this in few words, is the loue that Chriſt heere ſpeaketh of.
               Now this loue is cooled, or waxeth cold,2. How this loue is ſaid to be cooled.
                   when this feruentnes is abated, and this exceeding loue of Chriſt, which before, could neuer be thought great enough, is now ſlaked, as if it were almoſt put out. Which commeth to paſſe, when it is not daily and duely conſidered and remembred, priſed and valued aboue all other things, as it is meete it ſhould be, and ſometime alſo was in ſuch account and reckoning with vs, when we firſt beleeued. And then alſo it is aſſwaged and decayeth, when our loue faſteneth ſtrongly vpon tranſitorie delights, profits or preferments, and eſpecially, if it be linked into any of theſe when they ſhall be ſinfull and vnlawfull. Thus I ſay, when God, his word, faithfull Preachers, and ſeruants of his, with obedience to his will ſhall not be in the greateſt price and eſtimation, but thruſt out by things of leſſe and meaner value, our loue is iuſtly ſaid to become cold, and that reproofe incurred, which our Sauiour heere ſpeaketh of.
               And this decay of loue to God and the beſt things,3. By what meanes.
                   is ſaid of our Sauiour heere to be occaſioned, as otherwiſe, ſo eſpecially by the multitude of great ſinners, and the beholding of ſuch wicked examples of men, as fill the world with iniquity and offences. For oh! when men ſhall be alwaies cloyed with the looſe and profeſſed ill behauiour of ſuch as they liue amongſt, (as righteous Lot was with the filthines of the ſtincking Sodomites) it is not eaſily ſeene, what force is in it to dampe and quench goodneſſe in them that behold it; and that; ſometime at the firſt: but when afterwards they ſhall not be able to wind out from their company, and their prouocations of them, but that they ſhall be alwaies croſſing their good courſe, diſgracing their innocent liues, cauilling at their zeale in ſeruing God, and bearing downe all honeſtie, as it were a ſtreame, yea and more then all this, hunting, threatning, and diſquieting them, that cannot approue their bad conuerſation, what ſtraits (thinke we) ſhall they be in?

yea how hardly ſhall they be able to withſtand their leaud examples, but rather in time be corrupted by them?
               And eſpecially, if theſe that thus vex them, be men of authoritie, and haue power to hurt them, as well as a mind to trouble thē, they ſhall find how true this Scripture is, through the abundance of iniquitie the loue of many ſhall wax cold. And if euill words alone be able to corrupt good manners how much more wicked life alſo,
                     If euill words corrupt good maners, wicked life much more.
                   wherof bad talke is but limbe or arme, and eſpecially if this be in the wealthie and great men? So that, it may be rightly ſaid, O good companie, and holy examples, how much worth are ye? How happie are they who may enioy you, if they can ſee. It is (doubtleſſe) a corner of heauen to be aſſociated to ſuch, both in mariage and neighbourhood, in compariſon of the helliſh companionſhip of the other. And this be ſaid briefly, of theſe three, what this loue is that Chriſt ſpeaketh of, that it is cooled, and how, namely, by much iniquitie in others.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 1 And although many may perhaps heere obiect and ſay thus; cannot ſuch as haue receiued the doctrine of the glad tidings with comfort,Hebr. 3.6. and been purged thereby from their old conuerſation, can they not hold their confidence, and reioycing of their hope vnto the end, as they began? 
                     Obiect. 2 And againe, if any hauing felt the vnſpeakable loue of God ſhed into their hearts by the holy Ghoſt, haue, at the firſt enioying of this grace, ſet their loue on God in a moſt feruent manner (as they haue good cauſe ſo to do) and haue in like manner loued his people, who are fellow heires with them of the glorie to come; and the Word and the Miniſter, by whom they were begotten to the aſſured hope of immortalitie, if they haue done this (ſay they) at the firſt, is it not meete, that they ſhould much more do this afterward? If when they did but taſte of Chriſts louing kindneſſe, at the beginning they were thus affected, ſhould they not much more do this, after long experience and proofe of the benefit thereof, many yeeres after?
               
                  
                     Anſw. 
                   To both theſe obiections one anſwere may ſerue. Namely, that it is meete, it ſhould be ſo: that men ſhould hold both their confidence in God, and continue their vnfained loue

feruently to all theſe mentioned, as at any time they did: neither can I excuſe the contrarie. But yet we muſt conſider, that it is verie hard and difficult ſo to do, and that it requireth the whole heart to be taken vp with it, and poſſeſſed of it. And this is a great hinderance to it, if there were no other but it; that ſuch muſt liue and haue to do with the prophane ſort of people, who doe many wayes prouoke, diſcourage, and worke vpon them. Indeed it muſt be granted that the euill heart is a maine hinderer from this holy courſe, which I doe not ſay, as though I would take vpon me to excuſe or defend them who are waxen cold in the duties of loue, for which they had ſometimes been commended; but rather to aduiſe ſuch as are to ſtirre vp men to continue their firſt loue,
                     Note. 
                   that they may exhort and perſwade them to it wiſely and in all kindneſſe; not hotly, roughly, and raſhly, as though words may force it, when all good encouragements are little enough to perſwade to it.
               For though Chriſt foretell heere,
                     How the Miniſter ſhould deale with ſuch as are fallen from their first loue.
                   that through the abundance of iniquitie the loue of many ſhall waxe cold, as thereby caſting a reproch vpon ſuch as ſhall verifie his words; yet we that are the Lords remembrancers, and haue experience of the frailtie that is in our brethren, being priuie to our owne; muſt in ſhewing how eaſily they fall from this grace or any other; by all good meanes labour and helpe them to preuent it; or if they haue alreadie fallen, to reclaime and call them back againe. But if by none of theſe meanes we preuaile with them, know they, that they ſhall fall from this their loue to their coſt, and beare their burthen whoſoeuer they be.
               For to ſpeake as the truth is, what can they do either more vnbeſeeming their holy profeſſion, or the Lords vnſpeakable kindneſſe, then to reward him after ſuch a manner? And after an heartie acknowledging of Gods great loue to them, at their firſt taſting the ſweetnes of it, afterwards to forget it, or vnthankfully to bring it into a common and meane account? The Hebrewes who had in like maner offended, were reproued ſharpely by the author of the Epiſtle written to them, in this manner: Now call to remembrance the dayes that are past,
                  Hebr. 10.32. 
                  wherein, after ye receiued light, ye endured a great fight in afflictions,

being made a gazing ſtocke to them in reproches, and were companions with ſuch, as were ſo toſſed to and fro, and ſuffered with ioy the ſpoiling of your goods, knowing that ye haue in heauen a better and enduring ſubſtance. And will ye now caſt away your confidence, which hath ſo great recompence of reward?
               The ſame reproofe, though not in the ſame particular thing, the Apoſtle gaue the Galathians; who, when they had receiued ſuch manifeſt gifts of the holy Ghoſt by his preaching, that they were cleere patterns of excellent Chriſtians to many, and after that, were ſo bewitched by the falſe Apoſtles; that they ioyned the obſeruing of the law with faith; he ſpake thus to them:Gal. 3.1. 
                  O yee fooliſh Galathians▪ who hath bewitched you, that after ye haue begun in the ſpirit, ye will now bee made perfect by the fleſh, that is, by the keeping of the law?
               
                  4. How to remedy it. Reuel. 2.4.The redreſſe and remedie to recouer this decayed loue, is that which ſaint Iohn giueth to the Church of Epheſus, againſt the ſame diſeaſe, when they had left their firſt loue, ſaying: remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and doe thy firſt workes. Wherin he teacheth vs, as he did that people, that this decay in our loue to Gods miniſterie and people, muſt bee called to mind and conſidered duely, what a great ſinne it is; then truely lamented, pardon craued with the prayer of faith, and full purpoſe and endeauour againſt the ſame after, and then to ſet afreſh vpon the practiſe of chriſtianity againe, and neuer to thinke it well, vntill this remedy be vſed. This is to be done, when this loue is decayed, which to doe, is a certaine violence vſing againſt our ſelues by more then an ordinary turning to God againe; and a wary walking afterward to preuent the like.
               
                  
                     Two reaſons why we muſt labour to preuent this ſinne. The firſt.
                  And he
                     •
                  re I thinke it very meete to admoniſh you the more earneſtly to beware of, and to preuent this ſin, for two reaſons, which I vrge out of the text. The one this, (the other followeth afterward) ſeeing it ſhall bee the caſe of many to fall thus; for ſo our Sauiour foretelleth, ſaying: becauſe iniquitie ſhall abound, the loue of many ſhall waxe cold. And if many be like to fall thus, what are we in this age, to whom this watchword ſhall come, that we ſhould looke to auoide the

danger of it, vnleſſe we be daily and much occupied in laboring and endeauoring to ſhun and preuent it? And for mine owne part, I am not aſhamed to confeſſe, (if any leſſe experienced herein regard the word of him that hath troden in this way before them) that for more then thirtie yeares, I haue feared the looſing of this firſt loue, by reaſon of the ſtrong prouocations thereto, that I haue obſerued from time to time to ariſe one after another: by meanes whereof, I haue ſeene good cauſe to auoide the ſame with all poſſible care, that ſo doing, I or any other in like ſtate may much the better finiſh our courſe with ioy.
               And yet this caueat I would might be well marked,
                     A caueat.
                   that all zeale in our firſt receiuing of the Goſpel, and beleeuing in Chriſt, hath not been to be commended, as that which may of neceſſitie vrge a Chriſtian to the retaining, and continuing of it afterwards; as if it were a part of our firſt loue: when as, it is not to be denied, that there was in our firſt beginning, as there is daily in thoſe who are effectually called to beleeue vnto ſaluation, eſpecially of the ignoranter ſort, much good meaning without knowledge, and much froth in a great deale of zeale: ſo that it ſhould vnwiſely be done of Preachers, and farre from good diſcretion, to vrge vpon them their former practiſe ſimplie without reſpect had of zeale voide of good ground, and warrant of Gods word.
               
                  
                     Examples of zeale without knowledge.
                  
                   As for example, many well minded, when they were firſt brought to the true imbracing of the Goſpell, thought, that all other, who were not as themſelues, and iumpe of their fiſe and meaſure in zeale, were to be iudged and cenſured, as they thought good, namely to haue had nothing in them, neither were to be kept companie with: whereas, both themſelues bewray their owne weakenes ſufficiently, all may ſee: and beſide, who doubteth, but that ſuch as are teachable, ſhould be well hoped of, and incouraged to be ſtedfaſt in the good things wherein they had well begun, and ſo to be brought on to the receiuing of faith, and the bearing of Chriſts yoke, as true Chriſtians doe.
               
                   Another great weakeneſſe hath poſſeſſed others, and as full of error, that in their zeale, at their firſt beginning they

haue thought, that they muſt oft breake off their neceſſarie worke to pray and reade, yea and that in the time of doing of their worke, they muſt be praying rather then minding of, and duely regarding the buſines they had in hand. Then the which, what might be thought more ſauoring of ignorance and blindneſſe? whereas they ought to haue knowne, and been perſwaded, that God hath appointed a time to pray, and all other things to giue place thereto, when opportunitie ſerueth; but yet in time of neceſſarie buſineſſe, that the ſame ſhould be faithfully and diligently attended and followed, and the mind not to be carried after other matters; ſeeing God is ſerued therein euen as he is in reading, praying and the like.
               
                   Alſo many haue fondly and falſely been perſwaded, that whiles they are occupied in holy exerciſes, as prayer, reading, conference, then they haue been more holy then others of their brethren, but if they haue by frailtie failed therein, yea or by other waightie occaſions, or if they haue waxen afterward more dull through want of knowledge or forgetfulnes vnfitter to Gods ſeruice, then they were before; then they haue iudged themſelues the worſt of all Gods people, if they haue not denied that they were any of them at all.
               Many ſuch weakneſſes which yet they count points of holines, accompany the moſt of Gods faithful ones of the ignoranter ſort, at their firſt entrance into Chriſt, who ſeeing better things are found in them, are not imputed to them by the Lord: but yet muſt they not, for all that, be iuſtified in them and borne with, neither thinke, that all things wherein they haue a good meaning, muſt be holden for a vertue. Euen as Naaman the Syrian,2. King. 3.17. being brought from his idolatrie by the Prophet Eliſha, and perſwaded to worſhip the true God Iehoua only, did in zeale and of a good meaning, deſire of him, that two mules load of the earth that was in the land of Iſrael might be giuen him, wherupon he might ſtand to offer ſacrifice, when he ſhould come home, as though that earth had been holier then that which was in his owne countrie.
               Likewiſe Mary Magdalene and the other good women, whom Chriſt before his death had moſt ſweetly ſeaſoned

and perfumed with the odours of his heauenly doctrine, ſo that they beleeued in him and followed him,Marke 16.1. came of a zealous mind the third day after his buriall to the ſepulchre to ſee him, ſuppoſing that he had been ſtill dead, and not riſen againe, and brought ſweete ointments with them to annoint his bodie. By the which ceremonie and cuſtome vſed to their dead in thoſe dayes, although they did confirme their faith in the hope of the reſurrection after the manner of their Fathers, who did ſo: yet who doubteth, but that they were led with blind zeale therein toward Chriſt, both in ſeeking him that liued among the dead, and alſo in going about to annoint Chriſts bodie, as if it ſhould haue putrified in the ſepulchre like other mens? By this that hath been ſaid it is manifeſt, that all things that the faithfull do in a good meaning, are not to be paternes for themſelues or others to follow, vnleſſe they haue had good warrant for the doing of them; and eſpecially at their firſt conuerſion.
               Thus much for the caueat or watchword before giuen, namely, that all zeale in good people at the firſt ought not to be taken for ſound and ſubſtantiall: I will now proceed. Remember therfore that I ſet downe two reaſons, why Gods ſeruants ſhould take heed in a ſpeciall manner, that they be not made cold in their loue, as Chriſt hath foretold it ſhall be the caſe of many, by meanes of the wickedneſſe which they ſhall ſee in the world. One of theſe reaſons I haue handled; and that is, ſeeing it ſhall be the caſe of many to do ſo.
               The other is this,
                     The ſecond reaſon.
                   becauſe they whoſe loue waxeth cold to God, to the preaching of the Goſpell, and to his people, they fall alſo from the duties which by that loue, they ſhould performe: or which is all one with it, they do them to no purpoſe; ſo that God accepteth them not. According to the words of the Apoſtle, If I giue all my goods to the poore,
                  1. Cor. 13.1.2.3 
                  and my bodie to be burnt, and haue no loue, and though I ſpeake with the tongues of Angels, I am as ſounding braſſe, or a tincking cymball. So then, if the beſt things which we do be ſin without this loue, it followeth that if that grace of loue be cold and dead in vs, all that we do is abhorred of God.
               I haue now ſpoken of the ſecond ſort propheſ ied of,
                     The third part of the text.
                   by our

Sauiour,
                     Of the third ſort.
                   whoſe loue waxeth cold by the abundance of iniquitie which they ſee in the world, and this I haue done as briefely as I might with any edifying. I paſſe to the third, namely, of thoſe who continue vnto the end in a godly life; ſuch he ſaith, ſhall without queſtion be ſaued.
               Which words of Chriſt muſt wiſely bee conſidered, for hee doth not exclude from eternall life all ſuch as haue left their good beginnings for a ſeaſon, if they do bethinke themſelues better afterwards, and returne againe to the Lord by true repentance; for elſe, none of the laſt mentioned ſort could be ſaued, neither doth he exclude ſuch, as haue a long time led a wicked race, if they find mercie in their life time at Gods hands to be conuerted, for if it were ſo, then none of the firſt ſort could obtaine eternall life.
               
                  
                     Who may be truely ſaid to continue to the end.
                  But though he meane ſuch as continue to the end in the good courſe in which they begun long before their death, (of which there is no queſtion): yet he meaneth alſo ſuch, who at their death ſhall be found penitent, whether they begin then, or whether long before, and reuolted, or turned aſide againe; ſo as in the truth of their hearts they returne at the laſt. But let not this be taken, as though▪ it were a ſmall matter to do the one or the other; nay rather they doe both boldly and dangerouſly, which dare tempt God after ſuch a manner; yet if any dare aduenture in that ſort; it is true, that no man ought to debarre them of this libertie, that if they confeſſe and forſake their ſinne,
                  Prou. 28.13. 
                  they ſhall find mercie.
               
               
                  
                     They who ſhall continue.
                  Now to come to the words, ſeeing they only who continue to the end, ſhall bee ſaued, and are bleſſed; the chiefe point heere to be debated, is, who is he that continueth, and how he groweth to it.
                     Firſt begin well.
                   The anſwere whereto is at hand, that they who begin well, and daily go forward, ſhall continue to the end; and thereby, and no other way we come to it, that being excepted that I ſaid before; that they muſt not be denied mercie who repent at laſt. Of both theſe therefore ſomewhat is requiſite to be ſaid, which briefely ſhall be done. And of the firſt the leſſe, ſeeing in ſhewing before in the firſt point how they who haue cauſed iniquitie to abound, ſhould repent; I haue declared, that ſuch repenting is the right way to

make a good end. Therefore this onely I will ſay of a good beginning, that it is requiſite, that all that intend and go about it, be ſtedfaſt and ſtabliſhed therein, I meane in faith, in loue, in patience, &c. not flitting and inconſtant.
               This Saint Peter requireth, when he ſaith, Take heed,
                  2. Pet. 3.17. 
                  that ye be not led away from your ſtedfastneſſe in knowledge and grace. This requireth truth, care and wiſedome, therefore doe the fewer attaine to it, to be builded and ſetled in their most holie faith, but the moſt profeſſors are off and on; cheaping,Iude 20. but not buying: therefore in euery temptation or affliction, for the moſt part, they are doubting, that they haue not repented aright, and that they haue no faith, neither euer had: whereas a foundation well laid, ſtands in ſtormes and tempeſts, and is not throwne downe with wind nor weather.Matth. 7.27.
               
               And in ſpeaking of this ſo worthie a point, I cannot but bewaile, a common and dangerous practiſe amongſt people, and thoſe of the better ſort, that few by all their hearings and readings are able to collect, and lay together a plaine pathway to ſaluation, and a direction to a godly life; but by halues, or by ſhreds and pieces: for either they faile in knowledge, and ſo they are farre from the right way, ſo that if they would neuer ſo faine enioy the benefit of both, they know not how to go about it, or elſe they ſeeke not with all their hearts to follow that which they know, if their iudgements be ſound; and that maketh all that they pretend or go about, as farre from a good foundation as the former. And ſhould men (thinke we) begin in faith and repentance in ſuch a maner? Is ſuch a confuſed and raw entrance into it, like to profit it? This is all that I will ſay of the firſt of the two things that lead to a perſeuering in a godly courſe to our end, and that is a right manner of beginning. For he that hath made a good entrance, is halfe the way to a good end, but he that begins erroniouſly and amiſſe, ſhall the further he goeth, the further go out of the way: let this therefore be well regarded and looked to.
               The ſecond which being adioyned to the former,
                     Secondly: They grow accordingly.
                   wil moſt certainly bring continuance in a Chriſtian courſe, is a daily proceeding in, and according to ſuch a good beginning as I

haue ſaid to be required, that is, to build proportionably to it, that as ſome true meaſure of knowledge, faith, hope, patitience, the feare of God, and other grace is attained, and ſtedfaſtnes therin; ſo that they be vpholden, maintained and preſerued daily, as precious things worth the coſt and labor that is beſtowed vpon them: I meane, that they who haue beleeued and repented, do ſo ſtill; and endeuour aboue all things to hold out therin from day to day. As the Fathers mentioned in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, were ſaid to liue by faith; that is,Hebr. 11. ſet it a worke, after they beleeued: and they that repented at Iohns baptiſme,Matth. 3.8. were exhorted by him, to bring forth the fruits of amendment afterward, that ſo they might well teſtifie, that they went on in repentance ſtill.
               And therefore muſt Matth. 26.41. watching, Luke 18.1. praying, 1. Pet. 2.2. hearing, and ſuch other good meanes be vſed daily, with as good appetite as at the firſt beginning, that we may grow thereby. The which courſe being obſerued, we cannot faile, but be found of the Lord in peace, whenſoeuer he ſhall come for our deliuerance out of this vaile of miſerie,Matth. 
                  and happie ſhal that ſeruant be, whom his master, when he commeth, ſhall find ſo occupied: he ſhall bid him enter into his masters ioy. But ſeeing this aduice and direction is not ſo ſoone receiued and vſed, as giuen; therefore there are many ſtartings aſide, and goings out of the way, and ſo they leaue their firſt loue, as I haue ſaid of the ſecond ſort, to their ſmall comfort.
               And amongſt many troubles and griefes which they bring vpon themſelues thereby, they complaine, that they cannot haue the ioy that they firſt had at their beginning: and what maruell? ſeeing they haue waxed wearie of that eſteeming and priſing of faith and godly life, which at firſt was in them. Whereas they who with the good Philippians,Philip. 1.5. 
                  hold on their fellowſhip in the Goſpel from the firſt day afterwards, are alwaies readie to welcome death the Lords meſſenger. For they thus growing on and abiding; doe continue and ſhall be found faithfull and conſtant at their end, whether by naturall or by violent death they be taken away, all is one, and they perſeuering ſo ſhall be ſaued, as Chriſt ſaith heere, and receiued into heauenly habitations for euer.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            TWO SERMONS VPON DEVT. 5. verſ. 28.29.
            
               
                  
                     Verſ. 28
                  Then the Lord heard the voice of your words, when yee ſpake vnto me: and the Lord ſaid vnto me, I haue heard the voice of the words of this people, which they haue ſpoken vnto thee: they haue well ſaid all that they haue ſpoken.
                  
                  Oh that there were ſuch an heart in them to feare me, and to keepe all my commaundements alwaies; that it might goe well with them, and with their children for euer.
               
            
            
               
                  MY purpoſe is (beloued) to ſhew what the things are which I intend (God willing) to deliuer to you at this time,
                     The ſcope of this Text and whole Sermon.
                   to the end ye may the better heare them and not wander vncertainely, as ye muſt needes doe, if ye know not what is intended to be taught you. But yet ſo I will doe it, as I may ſhew that the holy Ghoſt purpoſeth the ſame alſo, in the words which I ſhall ſpeake of. The thing which I propound to teach, is this. That whereas the greateſt part of people among vs, doe thinke, that if they can ſay Lord, Lord, they ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen:Matth. 7.21. (as our Sauiour giueth vs to vnderſtand, whereas they thinke alſo if they can vtter good words of the Scripture and profeſſors of the Goſpell, that they ſerue God as well as the beſt, and that God will bleſſe them accordingly, and their poſteritie; they may know that it is nothing ſo, for God requireth another and greater matter: and that is, that there be a true change, both of heart and life, and a conſtant holding out in both, vnto the end. To this purpoſe, I intend to ſpeake that which I meane to ſay of the words which I haue read vnto you. And the ſame meaning had the Lord in ſpeaking the words himſelfe.
               
                  
                  
                     The occaſion of theſe words.
                  For (to ſhew the occaſion that moued him to vtter them, (which Moſes repeated in the words before the text) when the people of Iſraell had heard the Lord on mount Sinay to deliuer his law to thē out of the middeſt of the fire, in clouds & darkenes, and were afraide to heare God ſpeak vnto them any further, they deſired Moſes euen all the chiefe of the tribes and elders, to goe neere to the Lord, and heare all that he ſhould ſay to him, and they would heare it againe at his mouth, and doe it: Then the Lord heard the voyce of their words, when they ſpake to Moſes; and the Lord ſaid to Moſes, I haue heard the words of this people, which they haue ſpoke vnto thee: they haue ſaid well, all that they haue ſpoken. Oh that there were ſuch an heart in them, that they did feare mee, and keepe all my commaundements alwaies, that it might goe well with them, and their children for euer.
               
               Thus yee ſee alſo, how the Lord in this text ſpeaketh the ſame of the people to Moſes, which I am to deliuer vnto you. This being done, I will now ſhew in what manner I meane to handle the text, and what order to follow therein, and then proceede to the particulars.
               
                  
                     The parts of the text three.
                  This text deuideth it ſelfe moſt fitly into three parts. The firſt is a mixed ſpeech which the Lord vttereth to Moſes, commending ſomewhat, and diſliking ſomewhat of the peoples anſwere, in theſe words: This people hath ſaid well, but their heart is not ſutable vnto their words. The ſecond thing is, what the Lord wiſheth to them: and that is, ſuch an heart as might ſute with their words, from which onely, and from no other heart, this feare of God and obedience to his will, which he liked of, could come. In theſe words; Oh that there were ſuch an heart in them to feare mee, and to keepe all my commaundements alwaies. The third is the fruite of ſuch an heart and life, and that is proſperitie and welfare to them and to their children for euer.
               
                  
                     The first part. The Lord commendeth the peoples words, but condemneth their heart.
                  Now to begin with the firſt, this mixed ſpeech of the Lord (which I ſo call, becauſe it commendeth ſomewhat in the peoples anſwere, and diſliketh ſomewhat in them: it aloweth their words, but condemneth their heart) this mixed ſpeech of the Lord (I ſay) teacheth vs clearely, that men may

poſſibly vtter good words, and yet themſelues bee without grace, their words may be good but their hearts naught:
                     Doct.
                   ſo that while they commend religion, the preaching of the Goſpell, and the profeſſion thereof; yet for all that, they may be vnprofitable in their liues, and not ſound and vpright in their hearts, without which their ſpeech helpeth them nothing. And if it be ſaid, it is not ſufficient for the proofe of this doctrine, that is here ſaid in the text, for poſſiblie it may be gathered amiſſe, let it be prooued by two or three witneſſes, that there may be no exception brought againſt it. As that for example in the 50. Pſalme, verſe 16. where yee may finde this: 
                     Ʋnto the wicked ſaid God, what hast thou to doe,
                  Pſal. 50.16. 
                  to take my word in thy mouth, and hatest to be reformed? What needeth there any explanation of theſe words? The Lord vehemently reprooueth them for ſpeaking of his word, as though they bare great affection to it, when in the meane while they would not be ſubiect to it, nor be directed by it. To the which, that may be added, which our Sauiour ſaith: This people draw neere to me with their lips,
                  Matth. 15.29. 
                  but their hearts are farre from me, in vaine doe ſuch worſhip me. And the Prophet Ezekiel agreeth moſt fitly with them both, when he ſaith,Ezech. 33.30. 
                  Sonne of man, this people talke of thee by the walles, and doores of their houſes, and ſay one to another, come (I pray you) and heare what the word is that commeth from the Lord; and they heare thy words, but they will not doe them. By all which, it is manifeſt, that to haue good words in our mouthes, without the vprightneſſe of the heart, doth not commend vs to God.
                     Good ſpeech commendable, yea commanded.
                  
               
               And yet let not this be thought of any one to be ſpoken by me, as though I made light of good ſpeech, or thought it little worth, which I acknowledge to be an excellent gift of God, (as Paul ſpake of it in the people of Corinth) and I doe bewaile that the want of it is ſo great, in ſo long continuance of the Goſpell preached, yea I ſay more, that wee are commaunded of God, to take vnto vs words,
                  Hoſ. 14.2. to expreſſe our requeſts, confeſſion of ſinnes, thankeſgiuing, and our couenants of amendment of life, and to be examples to others in our communication, as well as in our conuerſation,1. Tim. 4.12. and woe to them that indeuour not after it. But to reſt in it, as if that

were ſufficient, it is nothing; and to ſtay our hope vpon it, as if we thought it a teſtimonie of our happineſſe, it is no better then a bruiſed reede. This therefore, or any other ſuch gifts of God are ſeemely ornaments, in them that haue them, for in moſt parts of the land, ye ſhall not finde good words and godly ſpeech common: I need not ſay in Wales, or Ireland, but not in many places of England, but diſpiſed rather, and laughed to ſcorne; and rotten and filthie communication intertained with great applauſe in ſtead of it, but yet, (as I haue ſaid) this alone of it ſelfe without other gifts of God, is not currant,
                     But it must not goe alone without other gifts.
                   nor that in which a man may haue contentment.
               
                  Ierem. 17 9.The reaſon is, the heart of man is deceitfull, and goeth not alwaies with the tongue, and therefore we may well when we heare the one,2. Cor. 11.14. doubt of the other, and yet the diuell can change himſelfe into an angell of light, and therefore can eaſilie perſwade vs, that euery good word or deed comming from vs, is enough to ſaluation, eſpecially men being ready to thinke euery little to bee ſufficient to ſerue God withall. Whereas wee ought to ſearch diligently and trie our waies, and the whole courſe of our hearts and liues, and pull downe the olde ruines of both, and ſet vp the contrarie in ſtead thereof in both, and all little enough to make a due proofe vnto vs, that we are partakers of the promiſe of eternall life: which to be neceſſarie to aſſure vs of the ſame, and no leſſe; that ſaying of the Prophet Micah doth liuely ſhew: where he bringeth in the wicked ſpeaking thus, when they ſought how to be acceptable to God, that they might pleaſe him.
               
                  Micah. 6.6.
                  Wherewith ſhall we come before the Lord, and bow our ſelues before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings? Will the Lord be pleaſed with thouſands of Rammes, or with ten thouſand riuers of oyle? Shall I giue my first borne for my tranſgreſſion? Euen the fruite of my bodie, for the ſinne of my ſoule? But the Prophet anſwered farre otherwiſe then they looked for: ſaying, He hath ſhewed to thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee: ſurely to doe iustice, and to loue mercie, and to humble thy ſelfe, and to walke with God.
               
               
                  Whereby he ſheweth, that man cannot direct himſelfe in the great matters of pleaſing God, and ſeeking his fauour, but God muſt guide him therein, to the end hee may haue peace, and conſequently that good words are not ſufficient to reſt in, for welfare and happines, without better furniture of grace and goodnes. And to goe a ſteppe further, if good ſpeech, (as commendation of the word, praiſing of God, and communication of his works and will) be not to be reſted in, in what caſe are they, who haue almoſt no good ſpeech, but rather that which commeth from them is profane, fooliſh, corrupt, and ſuch as ouerthwarteth and croſſeth goodneſſe?
               But here a queſtion ariſeth about the people mentioned in the text, for if their anſwere were good,
                     There is a middle ſin betwixt hypocriſie and ſinceritie.
                   why was it not allowed? meant they not as they ſpake? I ſay, yes, but that freed them onely from hypocriſie, but was no argument of their ſinceritie for there is a middle ſinne betwixt them both, and may be called halting or not vpright, and may cleerely be diſcerned by that which is ſpoken of the Iſraelites in the Pſalme. Who made a couenant there with God,Pſalm. 78.35. and had not to doe with men; and therefore though they brake and went from it, they could not be charged with hypocriſie, but yet they dealt treacherouſly with the Lord, in that they were not carefull to keepe and performe it. The words are theſe in effect: When he ſlew them, they ſought him, yea they returned, and ſought God early: but they flattered him with their mouth, and diſſembled with him in their tongue, for their heart was not vpright with him, neither were they faithfull in his couenant.
               
               Now from this that hath been ſaid in the anſwere to the queſtion, a good poynt is to bee obſerued, namely,
                     Great heed to be taken to our couenants with God.
                   that wee take great heed when we couenant with God, about amendment either in generall, or to forſake any particular ſinne in our life, (though we doe it in ſecret, no man knowing thereof) I ſay great heed is to be taken, that we doe not afterwards waxe remiſſe, and cold in going about to performe the ſame; for then God will count it but flattering and deceiuing of him, which he will not put vp at our hands, for why? men will not beare ſuch indignitie one at anothers hands. I ſpeake

this, ſeeing many neuer ſuſpect any danger to be comming toward them by breach of couenant to God, if they cannot be challenged for hypocriſie before men. Which indeed, is the groſſer of the two, and it is the ſinne of the moſt, to vtter great words before men of their godlineſſe, when yet they deny the power thereof, but yet the other is alſo odious to God, when men ſo ſlightly regard the promiſe which they haue in their good moode made to him of obedience, as though it were not to be looked after.
               Such are al they, who hauing in their trouble, ſicke bed, or at their receiuing of the Sacrament, profeſſed ſeriouſlie to turne to the Lord,Pſal. 78.57. haue yet ſtarted aſide afterwards like a broken bow. I haue my ſelfe ſometime had good hope of people, when I viſiting them in their likeliehood of death, haue heard their franke and free promiſe made to God, of forſaking their former ill life. But when I haue ſeene ſo ſlight fruite to follow in many of them, they returning after their recouerie,2. Pet. 2.22. to their wicked courſe, as the dogge to his vomit, tempting God thereby in a fearefull manner, (which is Pharaos ſinne) my good hope hath been much cooled, and this I haue learned to bee ſo true, by long experience, that I dare not reſt vpon ſuch couenants. And yet God forbid, but that many couenanting the ſame by like occaſions; ſhould looke conſcionably to performe their couenant afterward, though too many fall from them, according to that which is ſaid by Dauid in the Pſalme:Pſal. 119.106. 
                  I haue ſworne and will performe it, that I will keepe thy righteous iudgements.
               
               
                  
                     The ſecond part, and doctrine out of it.
                  Thus much of the mixed ſpeech of God in the firſt part of the text. Now it followeth what the Lord wiſhed to the people in the ſecond part. And that is, firſt, ſuch an heart as they might feare him: for therefore their anſwere was diſliked although their words were good, becauſe they proceeded not from ſuch an heart. But this ſpeech of the Lord, in this manner vttered, raiſeth a doubt in the hearer, what hee ſhould meane by wiſhing ſuch an heart, as though the feare of God could not grow in any heart, and likewiſe come from it: and if it bee ſo, what heart is that hee wiſheth vnto them? To the which may be anſwered, that the feare of God

and obedience to his commaundements doe not come from euery heart, neither doth ſuch fruite grow in euery garden,
                     Note. 
                   
                  
                     The feare of God cannot dw
                           •
                        ll in euery heart.
                   and it muſt be ſuch an heart indeede as cannot be matched, neither hath any fellow or companion. But what manner of heart is that, you will ſay, you doe not vnderſtand what hee meaneth. I anſwere therefore further, that by ſuch an heart, he meaneth in one word, an heart conuerted to God: more particularly, an heart broken with ſorrow for ſinne,
                     Three things requiſit in a heart fitted to feare God.
                   and the feare of damnation, yet quieted againe and eaſed by beleeuing the remiſſion of ſinne, and ſanctified alſo to newnes of life. Euen ſuch an heart is fit to breed the feare of God, and in ſuch an heart it can dwell, and in no other. And that is called by our Sauiour a good heart, which onely,Luk. 6.46. and no other can bring forth good things. For ſo he ſaith, a good man out of the good treaſure of his heart, bringeth forth good things, and contrariwiſe: ſo that if the heart be good, that is, truely turned to God, then it is fitted for that which God here wiſhed to his people, that is, to feare him, and keepe his commandements, and not elſe.
               Now for proofe that it muſt be thus,
                     First, that it be troubled for ſin.
                   the ſcripture is cleare and plentifull. As firſt that the heart muſt bee wounded for ſinne, and broken with ſorrow and feare, till it bee ſicke againe, is prooued by the words of our Sauiour, where hee ſaith: The whole haue no neede of the Phyſitian but the ſicke.
                  Luk. 5.31. Act. 2.37. And they in the Acts were pricked in conſcience for their wofull eſtate, before they came to Peter to aske how they might bee healed: but then they came to him and the other Apoſtles, though they had railed on them before, and ſaid, Men and brethren what ſhall we doe? As if they ſhould haue ſaid; in this our diſtreſſe and diſpayring in our ſelues what helpe can ye miniſter vnto vs, or eaſe vnto our ſoules? This contrition and ſorrow is one of the three things which helpe to make the euill heart good. And yet this without the other two, is nothing to this purpoſe, but fit onely to raiſe vp flaſhes and feares of hell to the tormenting of the conſcience, and the holding of it in ſlauerie and bondage, for which cauſe, it is called of the Apoſtle, the ſpirit of bondage.
                  Rom. 8.15. But this being rightly vſed, maketh a moſt direct way to the renuing

and changing of the heart, that it may be good.
               
                  
                     Secondly, that Faith must be adioyned.
                  To proceede therefore, the ſecond thing required to make the heart good, is faith vnfained: that the afflicted minde may ſee and beleeue the ſinnes of it to bee pardoned, to the eaſing and quieting of it, which then ſtandeth in need of it, and moſt earneſtly deſireth it, and the Lord hath giuen a free grant of it vnto ſuch as are thus prepared for it, by earneſt deſiring it;Luk. 5 31. euen as in the forementioned place, the Lord ſaith, I am a phyſitian for the ſicke,Iohn 7.37. and in another place, I will giue the water of life vnto ſuch as thirst, which the ſicke and troubled conſcience hearing, counteth it the happieſt and welcomeſt tidings that could be brought vnto it, and ſo by due and aduiſed conſidering it, laieth holde of it, though weakely and by little and little, the Lord inabling the partie; and ſo beleeueth, that it is as effectuallie offered to him, as to any of Gods children, that haue already imbraced it. And this mightily worketh both to eaſe, and quiet, and alſo to quicken him who was before ſo caſt downe and troubled.
               
                  
                     Thirdly, that Sanctification must goe with both.
                  And thus (to paſſe to the third thing requiſite to the reforming and rectifying of the heart, that the true feare of God may proceede from thence, the partie being thus perſwaded of the loue of God, and the free remiſſion of ſinne, and what vnlooked for contentment he hath thereby, breaketh forth into the praiſe of God with admiring his kindnes, and ſaith, what thankes ſhall I giue vnto the Lord for his vnſpeakeable mercy vnto me? What ſhall I offer vnto the Lord for this his great goodneſſe? And ſo, hee being conſtrained by the loue of God ſo ſhed into his heart, is perſwaded and inabled in good ſort to goe about the dutie which God requireth, indeuoring and purpoſing to walke before him in vprightnes and innocencie for euer after. And this deſire of his, not being frothie and raſh, ſtirred vp of more and painefull feare, as in many wicked ones it is, but proceeding from faith (which worketh by loue) and from the certaintie of the fauour of God aſſured to him by the holy Ghoſt; is not a ſuddaine paſſion in him (which is hot and feruent for the preſent onely) but comming from ſo good a foundation and ground; ſanctifieth him effectually, by working a diſlike of

euill, becauſe it is euil, and an heartie and vnfained loue of al goodneſſe; which grace being thus wrought in him, is the third thing required to the changing of the heart, and turning of it vnto God. And this muſt go with faith, as we are taught in the Epiſtle to the Corinthians, where he ſaith,2. Cor. 7.1. 
                  Seeing we haue theſe promiſes, let vs clenſe our ſelues from all filthineſſe of the fleſh and ſpirit, and grow vp to full holines in the feare of God. With this agreeth that of Saint Iohn,
                  1. Iohn 3.3. that if we haue the hope, which is the daughter of faith, we purge our ſelues from ſinne as it commeth to our ſight.
               Thus I haue ſhewed what graces of God muſt neceſſarily be planted in the heart, that it may bring foorth this fruit, I mean the feare of God, & that ſo it may become ſuch an hart, as God heere wiſheth the people, when he ſaith, oh that there were ſuch an heart in them. Now that the Chriſtian Reader may not be deceiued in iudging whether he hath ſuch an heart or not, I will adde ſome caueats about theſe three properties which make the heart good, that he examining and obſeruing them, may ſee whether he haue them or no.
               And to begin, let him know, that about the firſt of them,
                     Two caueats about wound of conſcience.
                   which is pricke or wound of conſcience and feare of Gods diſpleaſure for the ſame, I giue theſe two caueats or watchwords.  The one is this, that if God preſſe our conſciences with the powerfull preaching of his word,
                     Note. 
                   and accuſe and arreſt them thereby, that we in no wiſe reſiſt that worke of grace, but ſubmit our ſelues thereto, ſeeing he vſeth to do ſo to them, whom he will ſaue.  The other, that being arreſted thus by him, in any wiſe we deſpaire not. In both which we might be like eaſily to offend, if we ſhould not take this warning and watchword.
               Both are very neceſſarie: for as we are readie to run to extremities in all other things, rather then to keepe a meane, and that which is commendable betwixt both: ſo do we eaſily encline thereto in theſe. For either men are ſlie and ſubtill to ſhun all ſorrow and checke of conſcience for ſinne; or if they can no longer, they are readie to deſpaire. In the firſt, they may fitly be compared to them, who are taken with ſickneſſe, and yet will beare it out too long, as though they

would driue it away by ill entertaining it, rather then to betake themſelues to their chamber, or to fall into the Phyſitians hands: euen ſo will they wind out of Gods hands (I ſay) rather then they will be holden vnder of feare and griefe. In the laſt they are like to a theefe, who being apprehended vpon ſtealing ſome twelue-penie matter, fals to confeſſe, that he hath ſtollen a horſe, without any examining, and ſo brings him ſelfe into perill of his life. So theſe men, if they once be checked in their conſcience iuſtly, whereby they ought to accuſe themſelues, and bewaile their ſinne with hope of pardon; fall to remember many other faults, and ſo caſt off all hope of forgiueneſſe, and ſo deſpaire. For as men are verie hardly brought to yeeld to any wounding of their conſcience, be it neuer ſo iuſt: ſo if they muſt needs; commonly they haue no ſtay, but go too farre, whereby they are conſtrained to crie out they are damned, and ſo lie long in woe and torment, where they need not. Theſe two things therefore regard about the firſt point, namely, the pricke of conſcience.
               
                  
                     Two caueats about beleeuing.
                  About the ſecond, which is faith, theſe two caueats are to be marked.  The one, that a man ſeeking faith, (for no other ſhall find it) beleeue not too haſtily and raſhly, that is, without warrant of the Scripture and word of God.  The other, that hauing warrant,
                     Note. 
                   he refuſe not to beleeue, neither reaſon againſt it, but applie it to himſelfe, and reſiſt doubting. Both are alike neceſſarie: the firſt for the bold, and ſuch as feele their ſin to be no great burthen to their conſcience, and yet of al other are moſt ready to affirme, that they beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, which he himſelfe flatly denieth, ſaying, I came not to call the righteous (that is, ſuch as feele as little burthen of their ſin as if they were righteous) but ſinners (who feele the burthē of their ſin, as a debter doth his debt) vnto repentance. The ſecond caueat is as neceſſary for the afflicted conſcience, who though he haue right to the promiſe by Chriſts free grant, yet through weakneſſe and want of experience, is holden from beleeuing and claſping about it, and all becauſe he doth not duly conſider his libertie, and the warrant that he hath from Chriſt for his ſo doing. Wherein although I deny

not, but that Gods prouidence ruleth, yet the partie offendeth, for that he doth not embrace that which is freely giuen him by God, and by meanes thereof, he cannot praiſe and be thankfull to God for it.
               About the third point that is neceſſarily required to make the heart good, which is ſanctification,
                     Two watchwords about ſanctification.
                   theſe two watchwords are to be receiued.  The one, that he of whom we ſpeak do loue goodneſſe, and loath euill; not ſome one or few, leſt he deceiue himſelfe about it, but all; nor in priuate reſpects, but becauſe it is euill and hated of God.  The other, that theſe two, namely, to loath and loue, be conſtantly ſetled in him for continuance.
               The reaſon of both is manifeſt, as of the former: for if one ſin ſhould be loathed, and another loued, ſome diſliked and ſhamed, and other delighted in, and embraced; what could be more ridiculous, and further off from the nature of true repentance? For the offence to men, and the diſhonor which might ariſe to God thereby in ſome few euill actions,
                     Note. 
                   could not be ſatisfied nor anſwered by many good actions. A thing worthie to be noted; ſeeing many take libertie againſt their conſcience, to doe what they deſire to doe, and yet will be counted repentant perſons, as well as the beſt, and this be ſaid of the firſt of theſe two caueats. For the ſecond, if a man ſhould be very forward in abhorring ſinne at the firſt, and afterward ſhould grow ſlouthfull and careleſſe, and make no conſcience of wicked deſires, and breake out into looſeneſſe of heart; this were enough to blemiſh his ſanctification, how ſound ſoeuer it might haue ſeemed, if not to bewray it to haue beene meere hypocriſie: which of the two would bee thought moſt likely.
               Thus I haue ſaid that which I thought meete of this matter, to helpe him that deſireth it, to attaine ſuch an heart as bringeth forth the feare of God; euen that which God requireth. And ſeeing thus much is neceſſary, and no leſſe,
                     Note. 
                   to get ſuch an heart; namely, to haue it broken, healed againe by faith, and mortified: and ſeeing ſo great heede is to be taken, that all theſe be wrought in the heart aright, and indeede; all may ſee good reaſon why God wiſheth ſuch an

heart to be in all thoſe, who would be accepted of him, and what a rich iewell and treaſure ſuch an heart is, and by neceſſary conſequence, how ill it will go with all ſuch as be without it.
            
            
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  I Shewed laſt of all what a iewel ſuch a good heart is, and in what wofull and dangerous eſtate they are in, who are without it: but more heauy it is, that it is not regarded; which is too common, becauſe the moſt are fooliſh, and weigh nothing throughly, if it agree not with their appetite; when yet, to ſpeake as the truth is,
                     Note. 
                   whatſoeuer wit, eloquence, or learning bee in any; whatſoeuer nobility, birth, or dignity; whatſoeuer manhood and ſtomack, wealth, or beauty; they are all as nothing without this, that is, ſuch an heart as I haue mentioned, to make a man happie, or to commend him to God: Nay, I ſay more; whatſoeuer ſhew of Religion bee in any, as that he could ſpeake out of the Scripture plentifully, if he could alleage all authorities out of the word of God, and of Fathers; yea, if he could poſsibly ſpeake with the tongues of Angels, and had not this, euen ſuch an heart as God wiſheth to be in them that ſhall pleaſe him, it were nothing; for ſuch a one ſhould bee but as S. Paul ſpeaketh in the like caſe of loue, a fruit of it, as a ſounding braſſe,
                  1. Cor. 13.1. 
                  and as a tinkling cymball.
               
               And therefore how much is the eſtate of ſuch to be bewailed, as haue ſcarcely any whit of all this, which I haue now named, and are as farre from ſuch an heart, as the Eaſt is from the Weſt? And to come home to our ſelues; how is the people of this age bewitched, and blindfolded, that when God hath thus ſpoken, that no good words nor ſhewes of godlineſſe ſhall do them good, vnleſſe they haue ſuch an heart alſo, as I haue deſcribed, can yet walke merrie and locant

through the day, although they be deſtitute of it? Euen as if they ailed nothing, as though no danger were toward them, but as though they had made a league with hell and a couenant with damnation, that they might not come neere them. If they thinke this will excuſe them, for that they are ignorant of ſuch points, and know no ſuch matter, who cannot tell them againe, that it is preached amongſt them, and is as a Princes proclamation, which all muſt take knowledge of? If they will flie to another ſhelter, that they haue other matters to looke after, let them likewiſe take this for their anſwere, that they haue alreadie their reward: let thoſe other matters be their comfort and ſtay, but from God they may looke for none.
               Now let vs proceed with the reſt of Gods words to this people. Oh that there were ſuch an heart that they did feare me,
                  
                     
                        The end why God wiſheth that there were ſuch an heart in the people.
                     
                     
                        First, that they might feare him.
                     
                   &c. Heere ye may ſee to what end ſuch an heart is wiſhed, euen to breed Gods feare. For God plainely teacheth, that there cannot be in any, the feare of God without it. This let vs a little conſider of, particularly. We know all, with what ſcorne and deteſtation, this ſpeech would be reiected of thoſe that ſcarcely profeſſe the Goſpell, if the graueſt Diuine in the greateſt aduiſednes ſhould vtter it, that the feare of God is not in them. All, euen the worſt are ſo ſtrongly perſwaded, that they feare God. And therefore they will be readie to ſay, it were pitie they ſhould liue, if they did not ſo.
               And yet behold, without ſuch an heart,
                     The feare of God a rare iewell.
                   as hath been ſpoken of, which alſo is the hardeſt thing in the world to attaine to, without that, (I ſay) God himſelfe being witneſſe, the feare of God is not in them, but farre from them. For from whence ſhould it come? Is it a ſudden paſſion of the heart that riſeth and falleth? or that with the tide, it ebbeth and floweth? Is it not rather a ſanctified affection which continueth, euen as the heart is ſanctified, in which it groweth? And as it had need to be choice ground, and well fitted and prepared, that precious ſeed and fruit ſhould be ſowen and planted in; ſo the heart had need to be made good ground, in which this rare fruit, I meane, the feare of God ſhould grow and be nouriſhed.
               
                  And that none may maruell, that I ſpeake thus, let all further know, that this feare of God, is ſuch a gift of God, as by the which a man is preſerued and kept from euill, neither dareth he that hath that, come neere it, therefore when the Lord ſpake of Iob, and commended him for fearing God, he added this, that he eſchewed euill alſo. This will more liuely appeare by a ſimilitude or two, drawne from commō experience, for this purpoſe, note what force there is in naturall feare. The blind and ſuperſtitious people in the time of Poperie, were made ſo affraid of ſpirits walking, that they durſt not go thorow a churchyard in the fearful time of the night: and he that carrieth a great ſumme of money dareth not paſſe alone by woods and mountaines: ſo he that is well ſeaſoned with the feare of God, dareth not drink vp the draffe, & commit the ſinnes of the times in the which he liueth, but aboue all things doth carefully auoid them. And he that ſhall liue among the common ſort of bad people, and will not be like vnto them, nor dares not taſte of their dainties, had need to be well armed, and to haue his hart well fenced againſt them.
               And ſeeing the feare of God is ſuch a grace, and hath ſuch force in whomſoeuer it dwelleth, I may by this as a ſecond argument conclude,
                     Common profeſſors want this feare.
                   that the common profeſſors of the Goſpell and ſuch as draw neere to God with their bodies, hauing their hearts farre from him, haue not his feare in them, ſeeing not only they make no queſtion in matters they doubt of to be euill, for they ruſh and breake thorow them boldly; but alſo in things which are apparantly wicked, they do the ſame and neither blancke nor bluſh at it, when they haue done, whereas the feare of God bringeth foorth moſt contrary effects, as hath been ſhewed.
               
                  
                     Secondly, that they might keep his Commandements.
                  Now let vs heare of another fruit which commeth from ſuch an heart, and from the feare of God alſo ioyntly together, and this is a good and godly life, and a keeping of Gods Commandements. For ſo the Lord ſaith; Oh that there were ſuch an heart in them, that they did feare me, and keepe all my Commandements alwaies: which to do, what is it elſe, but to lead a godly and Chriſtian life? For as the feare of God proceedeth from ſuch an heart, as I haue ſpoken of; ſo a godly

life commeth from both. For they breed not dumpiſhneſſe, deadneſſe and melancholy, as the wicked world imagineth, but an holy care and deſire to pleaſe God in all things, neither take they away delight from a man in doing the duties of this life, but enable and ſtrengthen him rather to do them in good ſort.
               Such a life goeth with the fear of God. And though I mean as the Lord alſo doth, by keeping his Commandements, no perfection, but an endeuour to keepe them,1. Chron. 28.7. nor any other life then is accompanied with infirmities, & ſuch an one as without a conſtant watch, may breake forth ſometimes into dangerous offēces; yet I mean ſuch a life as endeuoureth to keep all the commandements of God (in omitting euill and doing good) as wel as any one of them, and in the ſame to perfeuere and abide as well as to begin. Which grace we muſt know, is granted by God to be enioyed of ſuch as delight in it, & haue it in great price, euen in this life, whereby they may ſhine as lights vnto others which is a rich portion in ſo wicked a world as this is, and yet few haſten to bee acquainted with it.
               But how ſafe and ſweet a life it is, and how free from many great calamities wherewith the contrary life is filled, another place fitter for it, ſhall declare and teſtifie. Only let this be granted, which cannot be denied, the words of the text ſo cleerely prouing it, without any ſtraining of them,
                     This must be in particular and constantly.
                   that it is no godly life, in which there is not conſcience made of the particular actions of it, neither is the feare of God there, where there is not a faithfull endeuour and labouring to keepe all his Commandements conſtantly, for ſo it is in the text, (all my Commandements, and alwaies). But this point I paſſe ouer more briefely, and preſſe it not at large, ſeeing in other places I handle it more fully. And thus much of the ſecond part of the text, namely, what God wiſheth vnto the people, and alſo of the ſecond effect of a good heart, namely, a good life.
               Now followeth the third part of the text:
                     The third part: The fruit of ſuch an heart and life.
                   in which hee ſetteth downe the fruit of ſuch an heart and life; and that is

twofold:
                     First, to the parties themſelues.
                   one redounding to the parties, in whom they are, the other to their poſteritie and children. And the bleſſing annexed is one to both, that is to ſay, proſperitie and welfare, both temporall and eternall. For ſo hee ſaith, That it might goe well with them, and their children for euer. So that the Lord would haue vs know, that all, in whom there is ſuch an heart, that they doe feare God, and indeuour to keepe his commaundements alwaies, ſhall proſper and be well liking in that courſe. For by ſaying, it ſhall goe well with them, his meaning is, they ſhall ſee Gods bleſſing ſo to accompanie them in that courſe of life, as they ſhall confeſſe it to be to their exceeding good liking, and ſo, as in no other they could finde the like by many degrees.
               And yet this is not to bee vnderſtoode of outward proſperitie, peace, and welfare, in riches, honour, and ſuch like, ſimplie, but conditionally ſo farre as they be good for Gods children. Whereof the godly for the moſt part are voide, and this hungrie ſcrambling world will keepe them farre enough off from them: and yet this is no cauſe of griefe to them neither, God prouiding better for them, that they ſhould be leſſe wedded to this world. But God principallie meaneth hereby that hee will make their life pleaſing and comfortable to them with inward peace and gladneſſe of heart, which farre ſurmount the other, and yet as hee ſeeth it expedient, they ſhall haue ſufficiencie of the other alſo.
               All men much deſire peace euen with men; they finde malice and contention with the vnquietnes that goeth with it, to be tedious, troubleſome and vnwelcome to them, and euen outward peace to be imbraced. And ſo we are willed by the author to the Hebrewes, ſaying, follow peace with all men, ſo as it goe with holineſſe:
                  Heb. 12.16. as if he ſhould ſay, although it flie from you, yet let it not goe, but purſue it, till ye obtaine it. For it is a ſingular gift of God to liue without feare by men, one man being, vſually as the prouerbe ſaith, a wolfe, nay a diuell to another. But if men had as good inſight into the worth and price of the inward peace, namely to be without

feare of Gods diſpleaſure, and the burden thereof,
                     To haue peace with God a ſingular treaſure.
                   and what is the libertie and holy ſecuritie of his beloued ones, they would much more deſire that, yea although they wanted all which a man may want hauing it.
               Oh! to be without feare of condemnation, the iudgement day, and of the day of death, whoſe ſting being plucked out is not fearefull to Gods people: and contrariwiſe, to bee in that account with the Lord, that nothing ſhall bee wanting which is good for them, (for ſo the Prophet ſaith,Pſalm. 23.1. 
                  The Lord is my ſhepheard therefore ſhall I want nothing) we may continually wonder, that God will be ſo bountifull, to loue them here to their end, and after, to receiue them to glorie.
                  Iohn 13.1. Pſalm. 73.14. And yet when I haue ſaid what I can of this matter, I muſt leaue it raw and vnperfect, but that we may know by a little, what the whole meaneth in ſome ſort.
               But heare in few words what the ſcripture ſpeaketh to this purpoſe: Hee that walketh vprightly,
                  Prou. 10.9. Gal. 6.16. (ſaith Salomon) walketh boldly; therefore ſafely. Saint Paul ſpeaking of the like, ſaith, He that walketh after this rule, peace ſhall be vpon him. S. Peter,
                  1. Pet. 3.12. 
                  The eyes of the Lord are euer ouer the righteous, & his eares are open to their praiers (but the face of the Lord is against them that doe euill) and who is he that ſhall harme you, if ye follow that which is good? For ſuch ſhall ſee good daies, that is, leade an happie and bleſſed life.
               But whileſt I thus ſpeake, caſting downe all pompe of the world at the feete of godlineſſe, as it were, me thinkes from hence ſomewhat is to be anſwered to ſuch as obiect thus:
                     Obiect. 
                   what, is there ſuch gaine in godlineſſe? Is it an eſtate ſo highly to be magnified? Surely, then the wiſe men of the world are deceiued, who count it the greateſt bane to their pleaſures. 
                     Anſw. 
                   I ſay it is ſo to ſinfull pleaſures, with the which what wiſe man would meddle or haue to doe?
                     Note. 
                   But it ſeaſoneth our lawfull delights, and brings them into their kinde, that they become ſweet and pleaſant without any danger, (as roſes in a pozie, rather then growing vpon prickes) whereas they not being ioyned with godlines, they bee no better then poyſon, and as it maketh Gods chaſtiſements to

be eaſilie borne, ſo it maketh proſperitie doubly pleaſant: Oh great is the gaine of godlineſſe,1. Tim. 4.8. 
                  which hath the promiſes of this life and of the life to come!
               
                  
                     The fearefull. estate of ſuch as are not at peace with God.
                  Therefore much to bee lamented and bewailed is the eſtate of all ſuch, who are ſtrangers to it, and much more they who ſhunne and loath it; as they who are ſpoken of in Iob, Who ſay to the Lord depart from vs,
                  Iob 21.14.15. 
                  we deſire not the knowledge of thy waies? Who is the Almightie that we ſhould ſerue him, and what profit ſhall we haue, if we ſhould pray to him? Oh this woful progenie, who can ſufficiently lay forth the vengeance that hangeth ouer it?1. Pet. 4.18. For if God begin iudgement amongst his owne, what ſhall the end of them be that obey not the Goſpell, as S. Peter ſpeaketh? And if the righteous be ſcarcely ſaued, where ſhall the vngodly and the ſinner appeare?
               
               What is become of the generations of all thoſe, who in their daies went about to iuſtle godlineſſe to the walles? Who counted it fooliſhneſſe; and contrariwiſe, the greateſt happineſſe to inioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon? As Iezabel the miſtreſſe of perſecutors, and Corah with his company, the rebell againſt Gods faithfull Miniſters, and Haman the proude, a deadly enemie to all that worſhipped God truely? Did not theſe with their companions, finde that they met with their match? And did they not leaue ſufficient teſtimonie behinde them, that their glorie was their ſhame, and their happineſſe had been to haue loued that which they loathed, and purſued in the ſeruants of God, I meane true godlineſſe?
               Euen ſo the liues of thoſe, whom they perſecuted is bleſſed, euen as their memorie alſo is, and ſo ſhall all they be, that follow their ſteps, accordingly as the Lord ſaith here, It ſhall goe well with them that feare me and keepe my commandements: And ſo I conclude this poynt, maruailing at them, who thinke it more then needeth; to bee more forward this way then others,1. Pet. 4.4. and therefore ſpeake euill of vs, becauſe we walke not after the ſame exceſſe of riot that they doe.
               
               But one thing more is to be marked, that to all the proſperitie which Gods ſeruants ſhall inioy in this preſent life, of

which I haue ſaid ſomewhat, this he addeth,
                     Hap of Gods children euerlaſting,
                   
                  that it ſhall alſo goe well with them hereafter, euen for euer: which ſaying of his maketh vp to the full whatſoeuer might ſeeme to be wanting. For what can be further deſired, then that after ſuch a ſweet and plentifull partaking of Gods benefits, and that in his fauour while we liue here, yet that the beſt ſhould be behinde,Pſal. 16.11. namely to inioy fulneſſe of pleaſures at Gods right hand after wee goe hence, and that for euer? Yea and this in the middeſt of the anguiſh and torture of the reprobate? For ſo our Sauiour ſaith, when the wicked ſhall bee at their wits end, then looke vp ſaith hee to his,Luk. 21.28. 
                  and lift vp your heads for your redemption draweth neere; meaning that the effects thereof ſhall then appeare. And therefore S. Peter teacheth a moſt ſingular vſe of this, that the Lord ſhall come to iudgement in a fearefull manner to the wicked, but to the euerlaſting comfort of his elect;2. Pet. 3.11. agreeing with that which the Lord requireth here, ſaying: Seeing theſe things must be, what manner perſons ought we to be in holy conuerſation and godlineſſe.
               
               Now it followeth to ſhew what the fruite of a godly life is to the children of them that leade it,
                     Secondly, to their children.
                   as I haue done alreadie to themſelues, who are parents: for ſuch a promiſe God maketh to them, and ſo the Lord ſpeaketh here,
                     Parents fearing God prouide wel for their children after them.
                   
                  that it may goe well with them, and with their children. So that Parents fearing God, doe thereby prouide well for their children, as well as for themſelues, and deriue Gods bleſſings to them aboundantly: which promiſe is confirmed by the Lord in the ſecond commaundement, where he ſaith: He will viſit the ſinnes of the fathers vpon the children vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him,
                  
                     Comman. 2. 
                  and ſhew mercie vnto the thouſand generation of them that loue him and keepe his commaundements:Deut. 28.46. This is alſo further confirmed by the contrarie in Deuteronomie, where God ſpeaketh thus to the people of Iſraell; Becauſe thou diddest not ſerue the Lord thy God with ioyfulneſſe and a good heart for the aboundance of all things, therefore theſe curſes ſhall be vpon thee for ſignes and wonders (that is, euident ſignes that he is offended with thee) and vpon thy ſeeds for euer.
               
               
                  And if it be ſo, then it followeth, that if we loue our children, we ſhould indeuour aboue all things to leade a godly life. Which is vrged by the Lord, at mens hands in the entrance into their mariage: that couples ſhould be eſpouſed to him, before they be ſo one to another. And it may be truly ſaid, that they ſet not by, neither care for the welfare of their children, who doe not firſt regard their own good and welfare of their ſoules, by walking obediently vnto Gods commandements themſelues. And how vnnaturall a thing is it, that any ſhould bee the meanes to bring children into the world,
                     Wicked parents are alſo vnnaturall towards their children.
                   to ſend them to hell? And that they ſhould be ſo pitileſſe, as to caſt their poore ſhiftles progenie vpon the curſe of God, more grieuous then if it were vpon the ſwords point, and that through their ſinne and wickedneſſe? For thereby, that is by bad example giuing, they make them like themſelues, as much as in them lieth. For as by a godly care in themſelues, and a chriſtian education of them, they commonly haue the fruite thereof in their children, that by the bleſſing of God they be religious alſo, ſo a thouſand to one, if in the profaneneſſe of themſelues, the children become faithfull and good chriſtians; but if they doe, no thanke to them, they did as much as in them lay, to make them prooue otherwiſe.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 
                   And whereas many of them will be ready to obiect, that they will bee vnruly and diſordered howſoeuer they bring them vp in the feare of God and good inſtruction, yea, though they be carefull alſo themſelues to walke vprightly in their whole courſe before them; 
                     Anſw. 
                   they may be anſwered, that it falleth not out oft to be ſo: but we ſhould truſt God for that, and commit the ſucceſſe to him, by doing our duties conſcionably towards them. And if it pleaſe God, that the meanes ſhall not alwaies take effect;
                     Why good education hath not alwayes like effect.
                   partly leſt wee ſhould aſcribe the good ſucceſſe to our ſelues, and ſo take the glory from him, and partly for other cauſes vnknowne to vs; let vs leaue Gods ſecrets vnto himſelfe, but there ſhall be alwaies cauſe enough why God doth ſo, and to iuſtifie him, ſeeing few are ſo carefull about the good education of their

children, but that they may be iuſtly charged with default that way.
               This be ſaid of the fruit that ſhall follow the godly life of parents in their children, that they ſhall proſper, and it ſhall goe well with them, as with their parents, in reſpect of other, who liue among them, and beſt of all hereafter, when they goe hence. For they ſhall be receiued with their parents into the paradiſe of God, into an habitation not made with hands, but euerlaſting, to the which our Lord Ieſus is gone before to prepare a place for them and all his, to the which he vouch ſafe to bring vs, euen ſpeedely, to whom with the father and the holy Ghoſt be aſcribed all honor, praiſe and thanks for euermore.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            TWO SERMONS VPON MATTH. 13. verſ. 45.46.
            
               
                  
                     Verſ. 45
                  Againe the kingdome of heauen, is like vnto a Marchant man, that ſeeketh good pearles.
                  
                  Who hauing found a pearle of great price, went, and ſolde all that he had, and bought it.
               
            
            
               
                  THe ſumme and effect of this Parable is this; that how baſe and vile ſoeuer the Goſpell ſeemes in the eyes of men; yet whoſoeuer commeth to finde the worth, price, and excellencie of it, will giue all that he hath to get it, and will rather part with all, then he will forgoe it.
               
                  
                     What is meant by the kingdome of heauen.
                  For here by the kingdome of Heauen▪ (that I may ſhew what is meant by it) wee are not to vnderſtand the place of the bleſſed manſion of the faithfull after this life, whither Chriſt is aſcended; though the words are thus to be taken ſometimes,Mat. 8.11. as in Matthew: I ſay vnto you, that many ſhall come from the East, and from the West, and ſhall ſit downe with Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob in the kingdome of heauen: neither is it taken for the abſolute kingdome of God, whereby he guideth and gouerneth all the world, and all his creatures, from the greateſt vnto the leaſt of them: neither laſtly, is it taken for that eſpeciall rule and regiment, which Chriſt as the head, hath ouer the Church his bodie, which is likewiſe called a kingdome after a more eſpeciall manner: but here by kingdome wee are to vnderſtand the Goſpell of the kingdome,Mark. 1.14. as it is called in Marke: Ieſus went forth into Galile preaching the Gospell of the kingdome, and in diuers other like places.
               
                  And this Goſpell of the kingdome is not only in many places of this Chapter, but moſt euidently, in the 21.Math. 21. Chapter of this Euangeliſt, called the kingdome of God; in theſe words: Therefore I ſay vnto you, the kingdome of God ſhall be taken from you and giuen to a nation, that will bring forth the fruite thereof. The kingdome of God, ſhal be taken away,
                     Why the Goſpell is called the kingdome of heauen.
                   that is the Goſpel ſhould be taken away from them. Now the Goſpell is called the kingdome of heauen or the kingdome of God, becauſe it is that powerfull meane, or inſtrument, that God hath appointed for the pulling of vs forth of the kingdome of darknes, and tranſlating vs into the kingdome of his Sonne, for the Goſpell is the power of God vnto ſaluation,
                  1. Rom. 1.16. 
                  to euery one that beleeueth.
               
               This kingdome is alſo called the kingdome of heauen, to diſtinguiſh it from all eorthly kingdomes, ſuch as many imagine, and the Apoſtles long dreamed the kingdome of Chriſt the Meſſias, ſhould haue bin. And therefore the people were ſometime ready to haue crowned him;
                     What maner of kingdome this is.
                   other whiles his diſciples diſputing, and contending among themſelues, who ſhould be the greateſt, and made ſute for the places of greateſt dignity (as the ſonnes of Zebedeus,
                  Matth. 20.21.) one to ſit at his right hand, the other at his left. But this kingdome, as it beareth the name of the kingdome of heauen: for it is a ſpirituall, and heauenly kingdome, not earthly and pompous in glory, to the ſight and view of the world. And therfore, our Sauiour being demanded in Luke by the Phariſes, when the kingdome of God ſhould come, he anſwereth:Luk. 17.20. 
                  the kingdome of God commeth not with outward obſeruation, neither ſhall men ſpeake of it loe it is here, or loe it is there, for behold the kingdome of God is within you. It is a kingdome ouer the inward hart and conſcience; there he hath ſet his throne, and there he wil reigne euen in vs; and therefore the lawes of our king doe not bind the outward act onely, but his lawes binde the very conſcience. And he ſearcheth and tryeth, (as himſelfe ſpeaketh in the Reuelation,) the Reynes, and the harts,
                  Reuel. 2.23. 
                  to giue euery man according to his workes.
               
               It is therefore called the kingdome of heauen; firſt, in 
                     〈…〉
                   it is ſpirituall. Secondly, this kingdome is heauenly,

becauſe it is a righteous, ioyfull and peaceable kingdome.
               
                  Rom. 14.17.
                  The kingdome of God (ſaith the Apoſtle to the Romanes) is not meate and drinke, but righteouſnes, and peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt. It conſiſteth in the inward righteouſnes of the heart, and conſcience, in the peace and tranquillity which we haue with God our king, and within our ſoules, and in the ioy that is ſhed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghoſt.Rom. 5.5.
               
               Now this Goſpell which is the powerfull inſtrument of God for the erecting of this his kingdome in vs, and is therefore called by the name of the kingdom of God in this place, is here commended vnto vs by a parable. The effect whereof, as I ſaid, is this, that how great a reckoning ſoeuer men make of other things, and how ſmal and ſlight account ſoeuer they make of the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt,
                     Note. 
                   yet whoſoeuer he be, that commeth to know the incomparable value, and excellency of it, he will thinke no paines too greate, nor coſt, to much, that he may obtaine it: nor any care too greate to keepe it when he hath it: but rather he wil part withal he hath, Houſe, Land, Goods, pleaſure, friends, and whatſoeuer els, then hee will forgoe ſoe pretious and ſo inualuable a iewel, as he ſeeth the Goſpell to be.
               But for our more cleare vnderſtanding of this Parable, we are to know, that the Goſpell or kingdome of heauen, is here compared not to the perſon, as the words may perhaps ſeeme at the firſt, to carry it, when it is ſaid: the kingdome of heauen is like to a marchant man, ſeeking good pearles: but to the pearle the rich and pretious pearle, which the Marchant findeth.
               So that the meaning of the words is all one, as if they had bin layed downe in this forme and manner; The kingdome of God is like vnto a moſt pretious pearle,
                     The fruitfull hearer of the Goſpell is like vnto a marchant man in three reſpects.
                   which a marchant hauing found, that ſought for good pearles, ſold all that he had to buy it.
               According to this expoſition, I will handle the parable. We are therefore to vnderſtand, that the fruitfull and kind hearer of the Goſpell, is reſembled heere to a merchant man: and that in three properties, though they be not all commendable:

neither therefore is the hearer a profitable hearer, till he be commendable.
               So that the beſt hearer in his beginning and firſt eſtate that he is in to God-ward, thereby is likened to a merchant man, and to ſuch an one, as by the kind of his trafficke and merchandize, whereabout he is occupied, ſeeketh pearles.
               
                   For as he doth, ſo euery hearer at firſt, ſeeketh pleaſure and profit, &c. that is his pearle.  Secondly, he is cōpared to a merchant, in reſpect of the euent that commeth after his ſeeking, that as he ſeeking common pearles, lighteth ſometime on a pearle of great price, ſo many a hearer, while he is buſie about commodities and pleaſures, beginneth to ſee in the Goſpel preached, a pearle of greater price, then he had found before, that is, aſſurance of ſaluation.
               
                   Thirdly, and laſtly, this hearer is compared to the merchant in another reſpect, namely, of the effect that followeth. For when he hath found that pearle of great price, he ſelleth all that he hath and buyeth it. So the hearer that hath found this pearle of ſaluation in the Goſpel, that he neuer found before, and knoweth the value of it, he ſetteth light by all his common pearles and former delights, and ſelles them all away, to the end he may enioy this.
               To proſecute theſe three therefore in order, that yee may haue the right vſe of this parable, vnderſtand that the hearer is compared (to ſet it downe briefely) to the merchant in three things, to wit, in ſeeking, finding, and buying.
                     All men ſeeke after pearles; ſuch as in their opinion may make them happie.
                   In ſeeking good pearles; in finding one of great price: in buying that, and ſelling all for it. Of theſe in order more largely. The firſt propertie therefore of the merchant, fitly reſembleth the eſtate and condition of all men that are hearers: for all ſeeke pearles, that is, they ſeeke for that, which may in their opinion, make them happie and bleſſed men, and looke what they haue imagined in their own conceit, to be like to bring them to be happie, that they labour, and by all meanes endeuour to obtaine. In that (I ſay) the hearer is like to a merchant man, that careth not to trauell by wet and drie, by ſea and land; ſo that he may ſtore himſelfe with rich and precious pearles. For there is no man, but if he look into his owne

heart, and diligently examine himſelfe, he ſhall find ſomething, which aboue all other things for the time, he doth affect; and whereunto the ſway of his deſires carrie him, and that thing is the pearle of that man, and he vſeth al the means he can to compaſſe and attaine it.
               Thus one man ſtudieth and bendeth all his paines and care, only for this, how he may liue at eaſe and in pleaſure, and voluptuouſnes. Another, he ſeeketh after gaine and profit, and to adde houſe to houſe, and land to land. A third, he followeth his ambitious humour in ſeeking after fauour and authoritie, and renowne in the world. But theſe are all but deceitful pearles. They make a gliſtering ſhew to a mans cō
                  ceit a farre off,
                     But are neuer ſatisfied.
                   but when he hath them, and conſidereth them aright, and as they are; then the vanitie and the baſeneſſe of them appeares, and therefore they that follow theſe, with tooth and naile, as they ſay, they are alwaies reſtleſſe, while they think of the vncertainty and momentany ſtate of them; and neuer ſatisfied with any thing they haue attained. Neither the voluptuous man with his pleaſure, nor the couetous man with his wealth, nor the ambitious with his honor, nor any man with that he hath neuer ſo greatly deſired.
               
                  
                     The voluptuous man.
                  For euen the very pleaſures, and ioyes, and delights of the voluptuous man, are as a continual feauer or ague, to vex and diſquiet his mind, howſoeuer he make a faire ſhew, and ſeem to be merry & happy; yet he euer carries a ſting in his conſcience, that inwardly prickes, and torments him in ſuch ſort, as in his greateſt mirth and iollitie he neuer can heartily and ſoūdly reioyce. And though the pleaſures be as hony for a little time in his mouth; yet he ſhal find thē, whē they are ſunck into his ſtomacke, to be as bitter and as vnpleaſant as gall. The like may be ſaid of the couetous and ambitious perſon.
               
                  
                     The couetous man.
                  Firſt for the couetous man, ſuppoſe he hath heaped vp, and gathered together his cheſts full of gold and treaſure, at leaſt more then euer he thought he ſhould, yea let him haue got all the pearles and precious ſtones into his owne poſſeſſion, that the Eaſt and Weſt Indians can afford; what hath he gathered together, but euen a heape of cares to vex & to diſquiet himſelfe withall? for as before he got and ſcraped them

together with great paine and toile, and infinite dangers, which he hath paſſed through; ſo now he is to take no leſſe care to keepe them, as being many wayes in continuall danger of loſing them. And ſuppoſe he loſe them, as he ſhall either in his life or at his death, then it is an exceeding griefe and heart-ſore vnto him, to ſee by experience, how vaine, flitting and vncertaine things they be, that he hath ſo exceſſiuely toiled for, and kept with ſo great care. And hence it commeth oft to paſſe, that he hauing loſt that, wherein the confidence of his heart was ſet, he fals into deſpaire, whence hardly he is euer able to be recouered.
               The ambitious man in like ſort,
                     The ambitious man.
                   he highly priceth promotion, and riſing vp from a meaner eſtate, to an higher degree: as the meane cottager, if he could be but a yeoman; and he a man of worſhip, he ſhould be therwith content; and if the worſhipfull could come to be but a Knight, and the Knight a Lord, or an Earle, then he would deſire to be no higher, he ſaith, but would reſt well ſatisfied: but when he hath gotten his Knighthood, Lordſhip, or Earledome, which were the pearles he trauelled for, he cannot yet be at reſt, becauſe he ſees other in places aboue him; he is yet a ſubiect, and vnder a Prince, if he were a King, then he thinkes he ſhould be full content, and aſpire no further. But it is not a kingdome of a whole countrie, no, nor of the whole world that is able to ſtay the ambitious affection of men. Alexander the great Monarch, hauing in a manner conquered the whole world, is ſaid to haue wept when he heard ſome diſpute that there were no more worlds.
               But not to ſtand particularly in exemplifying this point, I will bring one, who had his part in them al, pleaſures, profits, and honor: let him tell vs the worth of them.
                     Example of Salomon.
                   
                  Salomon was ſuch an one; he made triall of all wayes, and ſpared no paine, labour nor coſt, to trie what fruit and commoditie was to be reaped of them all. He had honor and fame, the greateſt that euer any Prince had, that liued on the earth. For pleaſure he inioyed whatſoeuer his wiſdome could deuiſe, and his hart deſire. He had his Orchards and Gardens, planted and ſet with all the moſt choice and excellent trees and herbes,

whereof he had not only the ſight to feed and pleaſe his eye; the ſent to feed his ſmell; and the fruit to pleaſe his taſte; but the exact knowledge of euery tree and ſimple therein, which he alſo committed after to writing; and imparted to others.
               If muſick might delight, he had beſides the ſolemne quier of ſinging men, ſuch a quier as no Prince in the world had vnto this day; ſinging men, ſinging women, which he had priuately for his owne delight: he had his poſſeſſion of ſeruants, of Beeues, of ſheep, of houſes, of vineyards, of ſiluer, of gold, of all precious ſtones, and all the choice treaſures of other kingdomes and prouinces, aboue any King that euer raigned in Ieruſalem, or that we can reade of in any hiſtories. And all theſe did he enioy, with great peace and proſperitie, both at home and abroad.
               So that if any man could euer be happie by following his pleaſures, Salomon was the man. He had a greater wiſedome, then euer had any to inuent, and contriue and deuiſe, and he had all meanes at will, to compaſſe and effect them all. If any man could be happie by his wealth, Salomon was the man, for he had ſiluer as the ſtones of the ſtreet, and gold for all his veſſels, and the adorning of all his buildings, and ſtore of rich and precious ſtones. If honor might make a man happie, he had more then euer any Prince in regard of the incomparable glorie and wiſdome, which God gaue vnto him.
               All theſe Salomon enioyed, as much to his deſire as euer any hath done or ſhall do. And what was the happines that he found in them?Eccleſ. 1.14· Surely, vanitie, and vexation of ſpirit. And what then ſhould we account of theſe? Did Salomon find theſe to be vanitie, and moſt vaine, and emptie of all goodneſſe, and ſhall we thinke to find ſomething, where he could find nothing? to find ſubſtance, where hee found but ſhadowes and vanitie? and to find happineſſe, and a paradiſe of pleaſures, wherein he found nothing but trouble, diſquiet, and vexation of ſpirit? He tried all theſe, and he tried them throughly, and as they ſay, vnto the proofe; and found them in experience ſuch, as in his Eccleſiaſtes he hath laid them downe to be, and as euery one that will be ſo fooliſh as to make triall, ſhall find them to bee by his owne experience.

Let this be inſtead of many examples vnto vs.
               So that all men, we ſee, ſeeke for pearles, and for good pearles, but the moſt are deceiued with falſe and counterfeit pearles, when they come to the triall, they find them as baſe, and of as ſmall value and reckoning, to reſt in, as the dirt which is vnder their feet; ſo vaine and vile are all the pleaſures, and riches, and honors, and worldly things (to make a man happie) which men ſo highly price in their owne conceit. And this vilenes and baſenes, is much more in all other pearles, that is, in all worldly things, which men heere hunt and ſeeke after.
               The vſe of this doctrine is,
                     Vſe.
                   that no man pleaſe himſelfe in the moſt precious things in this world, but ſeeke for thoſe which may make him happie. And that theſe pearles are all ſo meane and little worth. Our Sauiour Chriſt very euidently noteth vnto vs, in the words following, when he ſaith, the merchant found one pearle of great price.
               By the which is meant the Goſpell, giuing vs thereby to vnderſtand, that it is a pearle of great price and value, he abaſeth the other pearles, and noteth them to be of no price, nor value to reſt vpon. But of this afterward in the next point: In the meane while we ſee (and with that I will conclude this firſt point) that in this firſt act of the merchant, all men that are hearers in the viſible Church, agree with him: namely, that they ſeeke for pearles, that is, one way or other to be happie in this world. I haue ſhewed alſo, what vſe we ought to make thereof. Now it followeth that I come to the ſecond act or propertie of the merchant, and that is,
                     
                        The ſecond propertie wherein the hearer reſembleth the merchant man. Two things here to be conſidered. First, the thing that be is ſaid to find.
                     
                     
                        The Gospell in diuers respects compared diuerſly.
                     
                   that he finds one pearle of great price.
               In this propertie two things are to be conſidered. Firſt, the thing that he is ſaid to find: ſecondly, what it meaneth and importeth, that he is ſaid to find it. Firſt, the thing that he is ſaid to find, is one pearle of great price. By which pearle he meaneth nothing elſe (as I haue ſhewed) but the Goſpell, that is to ſay, the glad tidings of ſaluation by Ieſus Chriſt, for the kingdome of heauen, as elſewhere, and ſo in this chapter, is in diuers regards compared and reſembled diuerſly. In regard of the manner of teaching and receiuing it, and the diuers effects

it hath in the hearers, it is compared to ſeed caſt by the hand of the ſower. In regard of diuers corruptions and errors that commonly ſpring vp together with it, where it is taught it is compared vnto a field, wherein tares are ſowen and grow vp among the good corne. In regard of the ſmall beginnings and mightie encreaſe, it is compared to a graine of muſtardſeed. In reſpect of the power and force it hath to change and to alter the heart, it is compared to leauen. In that God draweth by it, of all ſorts of men, good and bad, one and other into the compaſſe of the viſible Church, it is cōpared to a drag or draw-net, that draweth as well weeds and ſtickes, and other ſuch vnprofitable baggage, as it doth good fiſh. In regard of the hidden and ſecret excellencie thereof, it is compared to treaſure hid in a field. In regard of the inualuable worth and excellency of it,
                     In this place it is compared to a pearle.
                   in compariſon of all other things, it is heere compared to a pearle of great price. That before he compared it to treaſure, it did in part ſet forth the excellency of it: but this doth more amplifie and encreaſe it. Treaſure, we know, conſiſteth either in ſiluer or in gold, which are of great account: but yet pearles paſſe them both farre, in value and eſtimation; as both it is commonly knowne, and if we knew it not, Salomon could teach vs thus much, Prou. 3.14.15. where he ſaith; the merchandize of wiſdome is better then the merch indize of ſiluer, and the reuenue thereof better then gold. It is more precious then pearles, and all the things thou canſt deſire are not to be compared with it. Firſt, he preferreth wiſdome before ſiluer. Secondly, he preferreth it before gold, which is yet more excellent; and in the third place, as before the moſt excellent, he preferreth it before pearles.
               The meaning of our Sauiour then in this parable, is to preferre the Goſpell in regard of the excellencie of it, infinitly before all other things, were they neuer ſo rich, rare, or precious. For if it be more precious then pearles, then much more precious then gold, then ſiluer, then any other thing of leſſe reckoning and account. And this is the reaſon, why Salomon hauing preferred it,Prou. 3.14. Prou. 3.14. before ſiluer and gold, and pearles, he addeth, that all the things a man can deſire, are not to be compared with it: as if he ſhould ſay, ſuppoſe

either there be, or you can inuent any thing more precious then pearles, yet wiſdome is more precious then it. And Iob in the 28. of his booke, 15. verſe, and ſo-on,Iob. 28.15. becauſe hee would extol wiſdome before al precious things, he repeateth a great many of them. Gold, ſaith he, ſhall not be giuen for it; neither ſhall ſiluer be weighed for the price thereof. It ſhall not be valued with the wedge of the gold of Ophir, nor with the precious Onix, nor the Saphir; the gold, nor the Crystall ſhall not be equall vnto it, neither ſhall the exchange be for plate of fine gold; no mention ſhall be made of the Corall nor of the Gabiſh, for wiſdome is more precious then pearles.
               
               Now we ſee wherein the compariſon ſtandeth,
                     Wherein this excellencie of it conſisteth.
                   let vs a little conſider wherin this great and inualuable excellency conſiſteth. And that is, in that it exhibiteth Chriſt vnto vs, who were loſt, and had no way any hope of recouerie out of our deadly woe, that euen then he is our deliuerer, our iewell, our life, our ioy, our happines, and whatſoeuer our heart can deſire. All the pearles of the world do not ſo enrich a man,Epheſ. 2. Philip. 2. Iohn 4.10. as Chriſt enricheth all them that by true faith lay hold vpon him, for if it do not ſo, he hath not faith. For Chriſt is a ſhelter where we that bee in tempeſts and ſtormes may ſhroud our ſelues, and be ſafe from the wrath and vengeance of God that hangeth ouer, and ſhal fall vpon the heads of other men. He is our attonement and propitiation for all our ſins, ſo that we ſhall neuer haue them imputed vnto vs, or haue any puniſhment inflicted which was due for them, his death, and his bloodſhed hath deliuered vs from eternall death and condemnation; yea Chriſt is our ſtorehouſe, and treaſurie, in whom and from whom we haue all varietie of good things that may make men truly happie.
               In Chriſt we are righteous (our owne righteouſnes being as a filthie and menſtruous cloath) becauſe he by imputation, doth cloath and couer vs, as it were with the robe and veſture of his righteouſneſſe. From him alſo we receiue inward ſanctification and holineſſe, wherein we labour to be pleaſing and acceptable to God in all things, whereas otherwiſe we could not haue any true euidence of this faith. From him we receiue ſuccor and comfort in all our tribulations and wants,

and ioy in all our ſorrow. Hee hath all power giuen him in heauen and in earth, and therefore he will ſupplie both our outward and inward neceſſities, and powre vpon vs that ſtore of his graces, as ſhall be moſt for our good, and beſt for the bringing of vs to eternall glorie. But heere I will ſtay and go forward with the reſt, in the next Sermon.
            
            
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  
                     The ſecōd point: what it is to find the pearle.
                  
                  I Haue ſhewed in the former Sermon what it is, that the hearer hath found, when it is ſaid of him, that he hath found the pearle of great price. Now let vs ſee, what it is to find this pearle. To find the pearle of the Goſpell, which is the next thing that I propounded to ſpeake of in this ſecond propertie of the hearer, is nothing elſe, but by the powerfull hearing thereof, to ſee and to perceiue, what excellent and worthie graces, benefits and prerogatiues it conferreth vnto ſuch as feele great need thereof, and that Chriſt is thereby to be made theirs, that hee may bee a defence and protection vnto them to ſhelter them from the wrath of his Father; that he may looſe the bands and chaines, wherewith they are tied and faſt fettered in their ſinnes to the will of the diuell: and that he may vnite them in ſoule, and in bodie, to himſelfe and to God. In a word, the Goſpell layeth out moſt plainly the way to eternall life.
               The due and ſerious beholding, and conſideration of theſe and infinit other graces depending vpon theſe, which God by the hand of the Goſpell reacheth out, and offereth vnto vs, is the firſt finding of this pearle, which many heare a long time, and yet neuer ſee thus much, I meane the beautie of it. And ſo long as men do in hearing, neuer ſee and behold this admirable and vnualuable treaſure in it, they haue not yet found the pearle of great price. For the Goſpell howſoeuer

it be in the declaration of the many good things of it, continually ſounded in their eares, yet it is a myſtery hidde, and ſecret to their vnderſtanding.
               The Goſpell is, to all ſuch as yet, as the light of the ſunne to the man that is ſtarke blind. The ſunne, it ſhineth vpon the blinde man, as it doth vpon the ſeeing man, but the blinde he hath no greater benefit of the mid-day, then hee hath of the midnight, and therefore for himſelfe he careth not for the ſunne, in reſpect of any light hee hath by it, becauſe hee is blind: So the light of the Goſpell, it ſhineth vpon the blind and vpon them that ſee: the faithfull, and vnfaithfull: but here is the difference. The one hath the eies of his vnderſtanding opened by the ſpirit of God, though it be but a common gift of the ſpirit, and hee ſees the light of the Goſpell, and accounts and priſeth it at a great reckoning: But the other cannot diſcerne any whit of the excellencie of it.
               The vſe then that we are to make of this point, is this;
                     Vſe.
                   becauſe we ſee finding goeth in order,1. Cor. 2.14. Matth. 11.25. before the getting and the purchaſing of the iewell and pearle of the Goſpell; and that none findes it, but he to whom God by his ſpirit reueiles it: it is our duty when we come to heare the Goſpell of Chriſt preached, to lift vp our harts with prayer to the Lord,
                     Pray vnto God that we may ſee the excellency of the pearle.
                   that he would giue vs eyes to ſee into the riches, and excellency of it, that thereby our heart may be inflamed, and kindled with an earneſt deſire and longing after the ſweetnes of it. For the reaſon why men are ſo cold, and ſo backward in affecting the Goſpell, and why they take ſo ſmall delight, and pleaſure in it, and eſteeme any pleaſure and commodity of their owne before it, it is this, becauſe they haue not yet found either the vanity of other things, or the excellency of the Goſpell.
               And if we haue found that the Lord hath in part opened our eyes, that we can but dimly and darkly diſcerne it,
                     If we ſee it in part, pray that we may ſee it yet more clearly.
                   as the man in the Goſpel, that at firſt ſawe men, but he ſawe them as trees, vntill Chriſt againe put his hands vpon his eyes; let vs deſire the Lord, againe, and againe, to lay his hand vpon the 
                     〈◊〉
                   minds, & vnderſtandings, that we may clearly ſee

the excellencie of the Goſpell, whereof we have as yet but a darke, and obſcure glimpſe. So will it come to paſſe, that, that which now we haue a ſaint, and litle deſire vnto, we ſhall daily growe more hoately and earneſtly to affect, and labour for it, which the other cannot abide.
               And ſuch as God loueth; ſhal, though they haue not ſometime looked after it, but haue been worldly minded; they ſhall, I ſay, haue their eyes opened to ſee into the beautie, power, neceſſity, and comfort of this Goſpell, and what happineſſe it bringeth, by hearing it preached; which to doe, is to finde it: Yea he whom God will ſaue ſhall bee brought to heare, if not otherwiſe, by father, ſonne, friend, neighbour, himſelfe not intending any ſuch thing. And thus hearing what the treaſure is,Coloſ. 3. ſhall finde that which is hidde in it. And ſo he beginneth to ſee, conſider, weigh, reſolue of the all ſufficiency of that, which the Goſpell hath brought to light vnto him; and to wonder at the ſame, Pſalm. 87.3. Ioh. 6.66. Pſal. 84.Tim. 1.16. And wondring, ſhall deſire a part in it againſt all lets, and diſcouragements, and ſearching with Salomon, and finding nothing like it!1. King. 3.7. Oh how ſhal he maruaile, that he neuer ſawe ſo much before. And ſuch a one hath found this pearle in the Goſpel, and may be ſaid truly to haue found it: and yet it may be, he hath heard a hundred ſermons before, who yet neuer had his eyes opened to ſee that which he now doth.
               Thus the woman of Samaria found it, when ſhe had heard Chriſt.Act. 26. And Agryppa Acts 26. when he ſaid to Paul, almoſt thou perſwadeſt mee to become a Chriſtian. Now when he hath thus beheld the beauty of the Goſpell, and ſeeth it to bee of ſuch value, as I haue ſaid, he is much before the firſt ſort of hearers, who haue their felicity in this world, and yet commeth much ſhort of, and behind the laſt ſort following who hath bought it; 
                     Note. 
                   and ſaieth with the Queene of Sheba, I haue heard much of it, but now I ſee farre more then I haue heard. But if ye aske,
                     1. King. 10.7.
                   is he, now that hath found it, paſt the worſt? that is to ſay; happy, and hath he done all that is required? I ſay noe, till he hath bought it: but he may fall away from his eſteeming ſo preciouſly of it, and become ſecure againe, notwithſtanding he is ſo well affected, euen better then 
                     ••
                  er he

was, for he is but of the ſecond or third ſort of hearers,Mat. 13.19. mentioned by our Sauiour, out of this which hath bin ſaid three things may be noted:  firſt, let not ſuch thinke,3. Obſeruation.
                   they be conuerted, that in this ſort are thus reuiued, and thus inlightned to ſee the price of it; no, though they ſigh for ſin or ioy for the hope that the Goſpell offereth, yea, though they weep at a ſermon, for we muſt not more flatter, then diſcourage men.
               
                   The ſecond thing is, that we maruaile not, if we ſee ſome, who haue bin ſo forward as theſe that I haue ſpoken of; to fall away; neither ought we to be diſcouraged at it; if wee haue true faith our ſelues, as though we muſt needes fall away too: for ſuch were neuer ſetled in beleeuing, neither euer had ſauing knowledge, though they haue bin zealous.
               
                   Thirdly, ſuch as haue long prized the pearle, and yet are now dazeled againe with pleaſure and profit, let vs bewaile them, whether they be miniſters, or people. Many learned men haue bin ſuch, who had the Goſpell in an high account ſometime. Oh they haue profitted fairely,
                     Note. 
                   and be come about commendably, are they not, thinke we? that they bee turned to their firſt ſottiſhnes, when God had done ſo much for them, as to reueale himſelfe ſo farre vnto them. All this danger they are come, to ſeeing they did not nouriſh their ſparkles of good deſires, which gaue good hope, but they quenched them, and ſuffered them goe out.
               Therfore it followes, that the wiſe Merchant went by and by and ſolde all that he had, and bought that pretious pearle. And here I will paſſe to the third point, and ſhew how the good hearer is herein like to the merchant man, as he hath reſembled him in both the former, that is, in ſeeking good pearles, and finding one of great price.
               Now becauſe the excellēcy of this pearle doth yet more appeare heerby that this hearer, doth as the marchant,
                     The third thing wherein the hearer is compared to a merchant man.
                   
                  go and ſel al that he hath & buyeth this pearle, I wil firſt ſpeak of this laſt action of his, and then make vſe of it. It is ſaid, he went his way and ſold al that he had, and bought that pearle. This going away firſt ſheweth, that he did not ſtand ſtill to muſe, doubt, and linger out the time; but as a wiſe marchant, ſoe ſoone as he ſeeth a penyworth to be bought, which may inrich

him; he leaues all other things, and ſets himſelfe about that buſines.
               
                  
                     The pearle being found, muſt be bought without delay.
                  And this teacheth vs, that we are not to linger, nor deferre the time, when God reueileth any excellent fruite, or benefit that the Goſpell bringeth vnto vs; but preſently goe our way, and endeuour to make it our owne. But how rarely ſhal we finde this to be done, when for the moſt part euery where men practiſe the contrary? Many ſee, and will confeſſe, that there is in the Goſpell moſt precious treaſure and worthy to be imbraced; but they thinke the time too ſoone as yet to goe about it: when they haue followed their other pleaſures and delights, in their youthfull dayes: or when they haue obtained theſe or thoſe purpoſes of theirs, then they will entertaine the Goſpell, and ſell their other delights for it: euen as he who would firſt goe bury his father (which Chriſt reproued) and then he would follow him. And thus it comes to paſſe vſually with theſe men, as it doeth with careles, and vnthrifty marchants, that ſlacke, defer, and driue off the time of their commodity whiles it is to be had, and repent them after, when it is too late.
               So theſe men, they defer and delay the time, in which God ſetteth out the pearle of the Goſpell, as it were to ſale, that they may buy it at a ſmall, and eaſie reckoning, vntill the market of God be done, and the day of grace be paſt, that they cannot then haue it, would they neuer ſoe gladly. For as wiſdom calleth and crieth vnto men a long time, and cannot be entertained of them, for their owne good: Soe wiſdome threatneth; that ſhe will refuſe to heare them in the middeſt of their trouble,Prou. 1.20. and in the day wherein affliction and anguiſh, ſhall, like a whirlewind, come vppon them: Though they cry neuer ſo loude, and ſeeke her neuer ſo earneſtly, ſhe will not anſwer, nor be found of them.
               Wherefore it is good for vs to follow the counſell of the holy Ghoſt,Heb. 3.15. 
                  while it is called to day to heare the voice of God, and to hearken to wiſdom, whiles ſhe calleth vnto vs; for we know not how long the day of grace will laſt with vs. It may be not a yeere, or a day, or an houre, and if that be paſt, then it is too late for vs to ſeeke after it, we muſt haue our lamps ready

burning with the fiue wiſe virgins, if we wil enter in with the bridegrome,Matth. 25.34. but if we linger and deferre the buying of our oyle till hee come, wee may knocke and call, but ſhall finde no entrance nor ingreſſe for vs,Luk. 14.15. as they in the Goſpell, that were bidden to the ſupper, and refuſed, of all other they were debarred from it. So wee ſee then the wiſedome of this marchant commended vnto vs. Hee doth not foreſlacke nor foreſlowe any time, but preſently goes about the purchaſe of this pearle. So that in earthly delights we ſee we ſoone reſolue; but twenty lets are in the way to hinder vs in heauenly.
               Let vs next ſee what courſe he takes to get it.
                     By ſelling all and buying he meaneth not as the Papiſts teach.
                   
                  He ſels all that he had, and buyeth that pearle. By ſelling and buying here we are to vnderſtand not ſuch a marchandiſe, as Papiſts make that ſay, by their goods and ſubſtance they thinke to purchaſe heauen to themſelues. For there is no equality betweene all that we haue, or can haue, and betweene the kingdome of heauen; but in things that are bought there is ſome equality betweene the price, and the thing that is bought. So that if they by their almes, or good works whatſoeuer, be able to purchaſe heauen at Gods hand, it followeth that they are as profitable to God, and benefit him as much by their almes, and other good workes, as he by heauen, doth benefit them.
               But we know the doctrine of our Sauiour, when we haue done all we can do, though we giue al our ſubſtance, yea and our owne life for Gods glory, we muſt ſay, and acknowledge, as the truth is, we are but vnprofitable ſeruants vnto him.Luk. 17.10. 
                  For we haue done no more then duty required at our hands.
                  Rom. 6.23. And therefore marke how the Apoſtle Paul calleth death the wages of ſinne, but life eternall, the free gift of God. For the wages, ſaith he, of ſinne is death; but life eternall is the free gift of God, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. So that death and condemnation, we may deſerue, for it is the wages of ſinne: but life eternall, we cannot deſerue, becauſe it is the free gift of God.
               But to proceede by ſelling all, he meaneth the ſame that he doth in other places by forſaking, and leauing all,
                     Who may truly be ſaid to ſell al, and buy the pearle.
                   and by buying the pearle and getting the right poſſeſſion and aſſurance

of it to our ſelues, he meaneth, that we ſhould be ſure of it, euen as thoſe things which we haue bought, and paide for, are our owne. As for that which he ſaith, firſt he ſelleth al, this is not ment ſimplie, as if the poſſeſſion of our goods and the enioying of the Goſpell would not ſtand together, but he ſpeaketh comparatiuely that rather then we will not get the Goſpell, when we may haue it: we will abandon al whatſoeuer beſide; and retaine it.
               
                  Luk. 14.26.The like ſpeech is vſed by our Sauiour. If any man come vnto me, and hate not father, and mother, & wife, and children, and brethren, and ſiſters, yea and his owne life, he cannot be my diſciple. The meaning of our Sauiour is not ſimply, that a man ſhould hate his father, his mother, and ſo forth, or make away himſelfe, which were wickednes, and impiety: But, as the Euangeliſt Matthew interprets it,Mat. 20.37. 
                  he that loueth father, or mother, aboue mee, is not worthy of mee, and he that loueth ſonne, or daughter aboue mee, is not worthy of mee.
               
               
                  
                     The Goſpell is not ſo eaſily come by, as men ſuppoſe.
                  The meaning therefore we ſee clearely to be this, he that getteth the pearle of the Goſpell, he prizeth it farre aboue all the things he hath beſides in the world, and will rather forgo them all, then part with it. Hence we ſee that the pearle of the Goſpell is not ſo eaſily come by, as men ſuppoſe commonly. For it is no eaſy matter, as experience may teach, when triall is made, for a man, to abandon his pleaſures, to leeſe his goods, to forſake his deareſt, and neareſt friends, and to lay downe his owne life for the loue of it. But the Goſpell it can be bought with no leſſe price; if we will haue it as our owne iewel, we muſt ſell goods, ſell our name, ſel friends, ſell liberty and life, and all we haue, and giue them for it: and account that we haue made a very good bargaine of it, as indeede we haue.
               For what compariſon is to be made betweene the earthly riches, that here men enioy, and thoſe vnſpeakeable and vneſtimable treaſures that Chriſt Ieſus bringeth vnto vs thereby? what compariſon betweene that name we can leeſe here for the Goſpell, and the eternall weight, and crowne of glory, that ſhal be ſet vpon our heads in heauen? what is the loue and friendſhip of all men, to the loue and fauour of God;

which we gaine by the Goſpell? and what is the life we can leeſe, to the life which we obtaine in Chriſt? And yet if we trie and examine our ſelues, we ſhall find that we come farre ſhort of forſaking all; when we are priuie in our ſelues, that a little pleaſure doth many times ſtay vs from the hearing of the Goſpell, and how much more then from obeying it? And that a little expence and charge ſhall hinder vs, or ill companie ſhall hold and keepe vs away from the benefit which we might enioy by it.
               Nay our hearts can tell vs, that many times when we are preſent with our bodies, where it is preached, yet we ſcarce will vouchſafe to lend our eares, to harken to that which is taught vnto vs, but our mind is ſet vpon other matters, either on profit or pleaſure, or elſe ſome vaine, idle and wandring conceits, or elſe we euen ſhamefully giue our ſelues to ſleepe. So baſe and vile account and reckoning do we make of the precious and vnualuable pearle of the Goſpell.
                     As men price the Gospell, ſo will their zeale be to the hearing and practiſing of it.
                   For accordingly as men price it, ſo vndoubtedly will their zeale be to the hearing and practiſing of it.
               And therefore marke how Dauid bewailes his abſence from the houſe of God: he was baniſhed the court, and countrie, yet that did not ſo much moue him, as this,Pſalme 84.1. that he was barred and baniſhed from the place, where he vſed with ioy to feed vpon the comforts of the word of God, taught and preached in the aſſemblies of Gods people: and this made him ſay with griefe, that the ſparrowes and the ſwallow might haue nearer acceſſe then he, to the place where God was ſerued, and his word preached. This he did, becauſe he ſaw Gods word to be of more true value then all his thouſands of gold and ſiluer, of more ſound delight to his ſoule, then all his other delights and pleaſures in the world. It was as hony to his taſte, and as the ſtreames of a fountaine to the thirſtie and drie heart. This ſhould we all do, and this would we do if we were wiſe, and did rightly price the Goſpell.
               And although I haue not particularly ſet downe thoſe things which accompany the buying of this pearle, becauſe the text giueth no neceſſarie occaſion of ſpeaking of them; yet in the way of preoccupation, and anſwering a doubt,

which the ignoranter ſort would put forth, I will ſay ſomewhat, though very briefly of it. They aske, if as ſoone as a mā find the pearle, he by and by that buyeth it, come into the poſſeſſion of it, and nothing elſe be required thereto: I anſwere briefly, when a man hath found it, if God giue him grace, to go further, he doth thus, and goeth to worke after this manner.
               
                  
                     How a man maketh the pearle his owne.
                  He earneſtly wiſheth and deſireth that he had a part in it: then he ſeeth that his ſinne is in the way to hinder him, that he falleth to diſlike and crying out of it: then it troubleth him to thinke, that he is out of fauour with God, and growes vtterly to diſlike himſelfe for both: and ſeeing himſelfe no better then a loſt man, hee heareth that God will pitie and ſhew mercie to ſuch, and that hee is then the perſon whom God ſeeketh to ſaue, and will heale him of his ſorrow: and will loue him freely for euer. And that it is the Goſpel which bringeth tidings of this, and ſundrie other good things, which when he apprehendeth, and ſees, that he may haue them all for his owne proper good, and that freely, and for nothing; God ſo worketh in him by all theſe, that he applieth the promiſes to himſelfe, and ſeeth that without money or recompence, God is well pleaſed that he ſhould take them for his owne, and be fully perſwaded thereof, ſo as now he reſteth therein, which is the purchaſing and buying of it, that is heere ſpoken of.
               And when this is thus brought to paſſe, let all that know what this meaneth, gueſſe how he will loue the Lord for this bountie ſhewed vpon him, and how readie he will be to be guided by him, and alſo what comfort it is to him. But for concluſion of the whole, now that ye haue heard, that the hearer who ſhall be able to reioyce in his worke at the end thereof, is fitly reſembled to the merchant man, as we haue heard, firſt in that he ſeeketh pearles, ſecondly, in finding one of great price; and thirdly, in ſelling all that he hath to buy it; that is to make it his owne; that he may be happie thereby, and all this is done, when he beginneth to beleeue; let him be ſure he doth ſo, and let him get many grounds, and euidences thereof, by the Scripture, and experience. And aboue

all other this vnualuable treaſure of the forgiueneſſe of his ſins, and aſſurance of ſaluation, he beleeuing the Lord, that he may be bold to lay hold on it, as Gods will is hee ſhould.
               And let him well weigh how much he is bound to him for it, and ſo doing, let him liue on his purchaſe, and take the benefit thereof, to the comfort of him and his, no otherwiſe then they do, that haue bought houſe and land. And euery day weigh the fruit of ſuch a purchaſe in true and vnfained peace and comfort, and ſeeing he ſhall liue vnder ſo kind and good a Lord, as he that is Lord of all lords,Deut. 28.46. let it moue him to ſet his heart on him, and delight and endeuour to pleaſe and obey him in all things, and let him do it alſo with ioy.
               For why? if we thinke, they that be in a noble mans houſe, faring well, may be merrie, is there any ſuch merry-making, as in Gods houſe? ſo that the man may be merry at his work, and the woman at hers? They that powre water on the hands of a Prince, or a King, are thought happie: but then to haue the honor that is greater then Kings? is ſomewhat. And by this little that hath been ſaid of, and about the pearle, gueſſe what the reſt is, euen as yee would gueſſe of the whole proportion of a man by ſeeing his foot.
            
         
         
            
            TWO SERMONS VPON ISAIAH 55.1.2.
            
               
                  
                     Verſ. 1
                  Ho, euery one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters. and ye that haue no ſiluer come, buy, and eate: come, I ſay, buy wine and milke without ſiluer and without money.
                  
                  Wherefore do ye lay out ſiluer and not for bread? and your labour without being ſatisfied? hearken diligently vnto me, and eate that which is good, and let your ſoule delight in fatneſſe.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     The ſumme and ſcope of theſe words.
                  
                  SEeing it helpeth much in preaching, to ſhew the teachable hearer, what is aymed at principally to be taught him, that hee may the better bee kept from wandring, and bend his eares and mind to the matter, when he ſeeth what is intended to bee deliuered; I will therefore ſhew you, what the things are which I purpoſe chiefely to handle, and ſpeake of, out of this text. And theſe they are: namely, that ſuch poore ſoules as the moſt, yea and themſelues do thinke to be odious to God, and contemptible in his ſight, are for all that in high account with him, and deare vnto him. And theſe are all ſuch as hunger and thirſt after the kingdome of heauen, and all grace to guide them ſafely thither. And contrarily, that ſuch as bleſſe themſelues, and crie peace, peace
                  ▪ and all things are ſafe with them; and they whom the greateſt part of men do thinke to be happie and beloued of God, are accurſed and abhorred of him. And ſuch are the whole and full, who feele little or nothing amiſſe, that doth

greatly trouble them, or wound their conſciences: it can in no wiſe go well with theſe.
               Theſe things I purpoſe chiefely to teach; and with all ſuch as ſhall be appertaining hereunto, as the text ſhall giue occaſion. But yet you muſt vnderſtand that they are the matters which the Prophet alſo propoundeth to teach out of theſe words, which I haue read. For otherwiſe, my teaching of this, without ground and warrant from him, ſhould be to ſmall purpoſe. And that I may ſhew this to be his full meaning, I will firſt open and vnfold the words which are there ſet downe, which being borrowed ſpeeches, and not ſignifying that which the letter and words do import, do make the matter ſeeme more difficult, and harder to be vnderſtood, vnleſſe they ſhould be opened and made plaine.
               We are therfore to know, that by thirſting (when he ſaith,
                     The opening of the text.
                   
                  if any thirst) hee meaneth feruent and earneſt deſiring. By bread, milke, wine and water,
                  Verſe 1. he meaneth the varietie and diuers kinds of all good things fit to quench the thirſt of the ſoule, and needfull to preſerue the ſpirituall life. By comming and buying without money, he meaneth a receiuing freely and for nothing by faith, ſuch a liberall offer. Thus the ſenſe of the words, in which any difficultie lieth, being cleare, it may eaſily be gathered what the meaning of the whole verſe is; and that is this. That whoſoeuer feeleth ſuch need of the food of eternall life, and of the graces of faith, hope, pardon of ſinne, loue, patience, or the like; if he feele ſuch need of them, I ſay, that he cannot be ſatisfied without them, he may (how vnworthie ſoeuer he thinke himſelfe thereof;) freely, confidently and with Gods good liking, enioy, and take his part in them; euen as he that buyeth houſe or land with his money, may poſſeſſe the ſame ſafely as his owne. And this be ſaid of the meaning of the firſt verſe.
               In the ſecond, he reproueth thoſe among the people,Verſe 2. who refuſing the beſt things offered them by God, and that freely and willingly; yet ſpared neither coſt nor labour for thoſe, which were nothing profitable: and exhorteth them to turne from that error and deluſion, and to take that counſell from him, which would be ſoundly for their benefit and comfort.
               
                  
                  
                     The parts two.
                  Thus much for the meaning. The parts may fitly be theſe two. Firſt the large offer which God maketh by the prophet, in the firſt verſe. Secondly, a reproofe and an exortation in the ſecond.
               
                  
                     Firſt, Gods large offer, wherein three things are to be conſidered.
                  The way and preparation being thus made, let vs come more particularly to the matter it ſelfe, and conſider, firſt, the things which are ſet downe in the firſt verſe, namely, in the free offer which God maketh by the Prophet; which things are three. Firſt, to whom he maketh it; that is to them that thirſt, and to no other; for ſo are the words: Ho, euery one that thirſteth come. Secondly, what he offereth to them, euen whatſoeuer good things will quench their ſpirituall thirſt, as wine, milke and water doe the bodily thirſt: ſaying come buy wine, milke and water without money. Thirdly, vpon what cōdition he offereth this: namely this, that they beleeue him vpon his word, and in token thereof, come, take and inioy it, as their owne: and this is the hardeſt, that the Lord requireth of them by the Prophet.
               
                  1. To whom it is made: namely, to the thirſty.
                  To ſpeake of theſe three points as they lie in order, and to begin with the firſt; we ſee that it is an high degree of profiting in the ſchoole of Chriſt, and a token of Gods loue, to thirſt, and earneſtly to long after heauenly things, as grace and eternall life. For they who doe ſo, muſt needs haue knowledge to diſcerne the price and excellency of them, and alſo feele their owne need and neceſſity of them, that they doe but pine, and are as it were ſtarued for want of them. And for all this, who are more contemptible either in theit owne eyes, or the eyes of others, then ſuch be? And yet theſe are called forth by the prophet (as we ſee) from amongſt all other (while they with the Publican thinke themſelues to be a farre off, and looke for no ſuch thing) to inioy, and be partakers of that which is the beſt of all other.Luk. 18.13.
               
               And after the ſame maner ſpeaketh the holy Ghoſt in other Scripture,Ioh. 7.37. as in the Goſpell by S. Iohn: If any man thirſt, let him come to me and drinke; meaning the ſame that the prophet here doth. And our Sauiour in another place, vttereth the ſame more plainely and fully, though not in the ſame words,Luk. 5.31. ſaying: The whole haue no need of the Phyſitian, but

the ſicke. And againe:Mat. 9.13. 
                  I came not to call the righteous (who ſo thinke themſelues) but the ſinner to repentance. So that to thirſt for grace, is no common grace of God, and according to the price that the holy Ghoſt ſets it at, it aduanceth them that haue it, farre aboue many floriſhers, who yet beare no ſmall ſhew of religion and goodnes.
               And this I doe aduiſedly and willingly teach and publiſh for their ſakes, who through Gods goodnes haue attained to this grace in ſome good meaſure, and yet feare, that they are of all other moſt miſerable. That they may ſee Gods mercy farre greater to them, then they can be perſwaded, that it is. But while they thus meanly account of their eſtate which is right happie: yet I know there are other, who come farre ſhort of them, in feruent deſiring of holy and heauēly things, and haue onely a deſire to heare preaching at ſome time, and (as they ſay) in their good moode, and otherwiſe are as vaine and vnprofitable as others, who yet will be ready to thinke themſelues to be they of whom the Prophet here ſpeaketh; as it commeth to paſſe too cōmonly, that they apply amiſſe cō
                  fortable Scriptures to themſelues, which belong not vnto them; and they to whom they belong indeed, put them from them as faſt through vnbeliefe, as not pertaining to them. I will therefore ſomewhat more fully and clearely ſet downe my minde agreeable to the Prophets, about this thirſting.
               Therefore that men may be able to proue,
                     Foure things to be knowne about thirſting.
                   without deceiuing themſelues, that they haue this thirſting, which the prophet requireth, to the which ſo precious a promiſe is annexed of obtaining that which they ſo deſire, we muſt vnderſtand that foure things are requiſite to be knowne. The firſt is, what are the true properties of thirſting. Secondly, the cauſes why God requires it. Thirdly, how long we muſt thirſt. Fourthly, how we may beſt come to it.
               
                   Concerning the firſt, the properties of it may beſt be ſeene by conſidering them in the naturall thirſt,1. The properties of it, which are two.
                   and namely theſe two: the one, that he which thirſteth, doth moſt hartily deſire drinke, ſo as he cannot be quiet, but through the hope of it:  The other (which alſo is conſequēt to it) is, that if it be deferred, he can do nothing, but is ready to faint for want of it.

Both are moſt clearely to be ſeene in Sampſons thirſt, who hauing ſlaine a thouſand men of the Philiſtims with the Iawe boane of an aſſe, was ſore a thirſt and called on the Lord▪ and ſaid:Iudg. 15.18. 
                  Thou haſt giuen this great deliuerance into the hands of thy ſeruant, and now ſhall I dye for thirst? meaning he could not beare it, nor doe any thing without drinke.
               Now to apply theſe to the ſpirituall thirſt, he is truely ſaid to thirſt for the pardon of his ſinnes, for eternall life, or any grace of ſanctification; not who deſireth and prayeth for them, but yet can goe his way without them, or the certainty and aſſurance of them, and yet can be well contented: but he who fainteth in his ſoule for want of them, neither can goe about any thing readily, nor in kind, without ſome true perſwaſion of inioying them. And this is apparantly to bee ſeene in the ſeruants of God, both in the Scriptures mentioned, and alſo in our daily experience of ſuch as we liue with.
               
                  
                     Examples out of Scripture.
                  For the firſt, looke vpon Dauids example, when he deſired any grace of God, as mercy to couer his ſinne, the liberty of worſhipping him among Gods people, the preſence of God in comforting his ſoule, or knowledge of his will. How doth he witnes this thirſting to haue bin in him when he ſought theſe? In the 51. Pſalme: Haue mercy on me (O Lord) according to thy great mercies and the multitude of thy compaſſions. In the 42.Pſal. 42.1.2. Pſalme he ſaith: Like as the Hart brayeth for the riuers of waters, ſo panteth my ſoule after thee O God. verſ. 2. My ſoule thirſteth for God, euen for the liuing God; when ſhall I come and appeare before the preſence of God? verſ. 3. My teares haue beene my meate day and night, while they daily ſay to me, where is thy God?
                  Pſal. 84.1. In another Pſalme; O Lord of hoaſtes, how amiable are thy dwelling places? my ſoule longeth yea and fainteth. for the courtes of the Lord.
               
               
                  
                     Experience.
                  But that I heape not vp many teſtimonies in a matter ſo cleare; in our owne obſeruation either of our ſelues, or our brethren, what marueilous ſighes and earneſt longings haue we ſeene in Gods people, to obtaine that which they deſired, as when he hath begunne the worke of grace in them, when he hath brought them in loue with the life to come, & giuen them eyes to ſee the bondage of feare, doubting of pardon

of their ſinnes, and what a precious treaſure it is, to mortifie and bring into ſubiection their vnruly paſſions, and the ſtrength of their great offences? what longing (I ſay) to be deliuered and to be ſet at liberty hath there been ſeene? what ſighing and vnwearied deſiring of the grace which they ſought, hath there beene in them? which affections witneſſed that there was this thirſting in them, that till they had ſome word of comfort from God, (who onely can doe it,) they could in no wiſe be ſatisfyed. Neither was this ſo with them onely in a mood, and for a ſeaſon, (for ſo a wicked man may deſire heauenly things alſo) but this continued, till they obtained their deſire, and as they obtained one good thing, they thirſted for another, (as I ſhal haue occaſion to ſhew afterwards) and alſo for a greater meaſure of that grace which they had already.
               And this thirſting in Gods people condemneth that which goeth for it in many,
                     A howrely and flitting deſire no true thirſting.
                   and that howerly and flitting deſire of the word, or the good things which are in it, which falleth as it riſeth, and vaniſheth as a ſhadow, and commeth to nothing in the ende, when the fruite of it ſhould be greateſt. And yet ſeeing either they cannot, or will not learne to put difference betwixt the one and the other, that is the true thirſt, & that which is deceiuable; they are far wide, thinking that they haue that kinde and right thirſting after ſpirituall foode of the ſoule; when yet by this that hath bin▪ ſaid of this matter, it is manifeſt, that they are farre from it; if it were but for this cauſe, that they giue ouer ſeeking, before they haue found the grace which they ſeemed to thirſt for. And this be ſaid of the properties of thirſting, the firſt of the foure things which I ſet downe. And this ought to teach vs not to marueile, when we ſee many to fall away from their zeale, who haue ſeemed forward; becauſe it was neuer aright planted in them.
               The ſecond point followeth, namely,
                     Secondly, the cauſes why God requireth this thirſting.
                   the cauſes why God requireth this thirſting to be in vs, that cannot be in any but in his ſeruants. And the cauſes are ſpecially three. The firſt, ſeeing it muſt be ſutable to the bodily thirſt. The ſecōd, if we thirſted not we could not haue the variety of good things,

which are hoarded vp in the word for vs to make vs happy, foraſmuch as they are drawne out from thence no other way but by thirſting after them: and by it we are made partakers of them, as the bleſſed Virgine ſaith in her ſong: The Lord filleth the hungry with good things,
                  Luk. 1.53. 
                  and ſendeth the rich, or full, empty away, which is the cauſe why the poore people of God doe ſhew their thirſting deſire not onely many other wayes, but alſo by this, namely, in their ordinary labour and trauaile to heare the word of God preached, & that ſundry miles off from their dwelling place, if they haue it not there; though it be with mocking and taunting them for it, by ſuch as are far from thirſting after it themſelues.
               
                   The third cauſe why God requireth thirſting, is becauſe we ſhould otherwiſe neuer know how exceedingly we are beholding to him for the variety of grace, and good things which we receiue thereby frō him: as faith, patience, the forgiuenes of ſins &c.Pro. 27.7. For ſo Salomon ſaith in the Prouerbs: The perſon that is full deſpiſeth an hony combe: but vnto the hungry ſoule, euery bitter thing is ſweete. So that we feeling ſuch neede of them, as that our ſoules ſhould faint and be ſtarued without them, we ſee and acknowledge that, which we could not haue done without it, neither would eaſily beleeue it, namely that the Lord loueth vs dearely, and that his mercy is great towards vs, yea and that in things of the beſt kind, which others hauing offered them of God as well as we, doe ſet no ſtore by them: and all becauſe they feele no want of them, but could (as they thinke) be well enough without them. And thus much of the cauſes of thirſting.
               
                  
                     Thirdly, how long we muſt thirſt.
                  The third followeth, and that is, how long wee ſhould thirſt. For it ſeemeth vnreaſonable to many, that we ſhould be held alwaies at one point: as that either we ſhould euer be thirſting for one grace; or if that be not required of vs, yet that we ſhould bee thirſting ſtill after ſome other. To the which the anſwere is, that we muſt alwaies be thirſting, euen ſo long as God hath any good grace to giue, and till he be wearie of beſtowing vpon vs. Which ſeeing it ſhall neuer be, while we remaine heere, God being a wel-ſpring and fountaine of all good things neuer drawne drie, and more

readie to giue, then we to aske; it is for our ſingular benefit, and not a bondage, that we may be alwaies thirſting, for ſo long there is ſtil ſome good comming towards vs: and otherwiſe we were not liable to the liberall offer which God maketh heere by the Prophet, neither were we the perſons to whom he ſpeaketh, in ſaying: Ho, euery one that thirsteth, come to the waters and drinke.
               
               But yet this I ſay further, that in this manner we ſhould thirſt, namely, for any grace, till we receiue it, if it be heere to be enioyed; or a ſure grant of it, if we cannot partake it heere, that in the life to come we ſhal haue it: and we are not to thinke that when we haue obtained any gift or grace of God, that we are commanded ſtill to be asking of one and the ſame thing, which to do were againſt common ſenſe and reaſon; but for a greater meaſure of it, as encreaſe of faith, loue and patience, when we haue alreadie receiued a part in them: and for ſuch things as we yet want, with the like appetite to deſire and thirſt for them, as at the firſt anguiſh of mind and wound of conſcience, we did long for the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes. And this of the time how long we ought to thirſt, which is the third point in this firſt part.
               The fourth followeth, namely, how we ſhould come to thirſting, and how it ſhould be vpholden;
                     Fourthly, how we ſhould come to thirst.
                   which being ſuch a worthie gift of God, had not need to be neglected; but as an appetite to bodily food for the preſeruing of health, is by all meanes to be maintained and ſought. The meanes are neither coſtly, nor hard to come by, as in bodily dainties it fareth, but readie and at hand. Euen to ſee our wants in grace, and emptines thereof; as how weake our faith is, how faint our hope, how cold our loue, and how hardly we haue proofe of our patience. Alſo to obſerue our corruptions; as touchineſſe, frowardnes, vncleane deſires, wrath, deſire of reuenge, &c. and in what bondage they hold vs. If we obſerue theſe in our ſelues,1. Pet. 2.2. they will make vs deſire the ſincere milke of the Word to guide vs aright: alſo to watch and pray, ſigh and groane, that we may reſiſt the euill, and nouriſh the good. For as the husbandman by toiling and ſweating at hay and harueſt, prouoketh the bodily thirſt; ſo we labouring with

our hearts to plucke vp, and to plant, as there ſhall be cauſe, ſhall thirſt till wee obtaine that which wee goe about and deſire.
               And God who calleth vs to it, and promiſeth largely to ſatisfie vs, will not mocke vs, but do as he hath ſaid, that is to ſay, ſatisfie our ſoules with good things. And thus we come to thirſt. But when we ſee our hearts thus poſſeſſed and taken vp with the feruent and conſtant deſire of the good things which we would haue, we muſt alſo be perſwaded, to labour readily and willingly, as need ſhall require, whether it be by prayer, conference or the like, to obtaine them, remembring that which is ſaid in the Pſalme,Pſal. 111.2. 
                  that wiſdome (and ſo all the parts thereof) is to be ſought out (that is, with all diligence) of thoſe that haue pleaſure therein.
               
               But one obiection heere I will anſwere, which troubleth ſome, and that is, that they ſay: In the beginning when men turne to God firſt, they thirſt, and cannot be ſatisfied to their quiet and contentment, but they ſee no ſuch thing in them after. I anſwere, though all ſhew it not after, as they did at firſt, by complaining, asking queſtions, and lamenting their wants to other, yet they long and thirſt for that which they ſee needfull for them, and yet wanting: but they do not ſhew it ſo much; and that is wiſdome, which other vnexperienced, and more weake in knowledge and faith, cannot do, but muſt ſhew their thirſting, as I ſaid; and it may be perceiued of themſelues to be ſo, by their daily care and diligence to nouriſh the old grace they haue alreadie, and to obtaine new; and by the courſe of their life, it may be perceiued of others, but if they grow full, they be in ill caſe.
               Thus the firſt branch of the three in this firſt part hath bin handled, namely, who they are whom God calleth out by the Prophet, from the reſt of the people, to take part in the beſt tidings that euer were, or can be brought from him: and that is,
                     The ſecond branch: what God offereth to them that thirst.
                   all ſuch as thirſt. The ſecond branch followeth, and that is, what are the good things that they ſhall haue which thirſt. The benefit which they ſhall enioy, is anſwerable to their thirſt, euen the thing which they thirſt for, for the Lords anſwere is, that he will quench it. If they thirſt therefore

for remiſſion of their ſins, and cannot be ſatisfied without it, they ſhall partake that. If for faith to apprehend it, and by which they may know they are forgiuen, that ſhall bee granted them alſo. If for eternall life, they ſhall enioy it in due time, when they haue waited a while patiently; and the ſame I ſay of the manifold graces of the Spirit, which are here reſembled by this bodily refreſhing, which quencheth the thirſt thereof, namely, milke, water, and wine.
               And to tarrie a little in this ſecond branch, to prooue the ſame, as ſomewhat hath been ſaid of the firſt, I will beginne with that which worthily deſerueth the firſt place, namely, how God promiſeth the remitting of all ſin, and conſequently ſaluation for euer, to all that thirſt for it. The word of God is plentifull in prouing that he doth ſo. As that of our Sauiour in Saint Iohn, where he ſaith, If any thirst,
                  Iohn 7.37. 
                  let him come to me and drinke. Why then, if his thirſt be for this; euen this hee may take by Chriſts free grant, and comfort himſelfe therewith. In the eleuenth of Matthew he meaneth the ſame in other words, where he ſaith, Come to me all ye that trauell,
                  Matth. 11.28. 
                  and be loaden, and I will eaſe you. Now ſearch out his meaning, how can he eaſe burdened conſciences, troubled for the feare of Gods wrath, which is due thereto, but he muſt take away the guilt of their ſinne, and the puniſhment due to it, by pardoning and remitting it, as if it had neuer been committed? And by theſe meanes, he doth eaſe the greateſt torment that euer vexed the ſoule of man. Therefore the afflicted perſon may be bold with reuerence to take this, and ſuch like Scriptures to the quieting of his diſtreſſed mind, and to the putting away of his intollerable vnquietneſſe, which before oppreſſed him. And euen ſo do the faithfull ſeruants of God declare his mind and will to people in the like caſe.Act. 2.37. As Peter in the ſecond of the Acts, when certaine men were pricked in conſcience for their ſinne, and came to him and the other Apoſtles, ſaying, (in the anguiſh of their hearts) men and brethren, what ſhall we do, he anſwered in effect, thus: Seeke to haue your ſinnes forgiuen you, and to know that it is ſo, by the ſignes which Chriſt hath left therof, & ye may reſt quiet. But how could they ſeeke that, if Chriſt had not giuen them

libertie both to do ſo, and alſo to find it?
               By all which, it is cleare, that our Sauiour hath prouided a moſt gracious helpe and remedie to all afflicted conſciences, and which is all one therewith, (that I may keepe in your remembrance the manner of ſpeech ſet downe in our text) doth promiſe vpon his faithfulneſſe, that he will quench this thirſt of longing for Gods fauour, and the pardon of ſin, in whomſoeuer it ſhall be found.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 1 But whiles I am ſetting downe this, me thinkes I heare ſome obiecting thus: oh, this is too good to be true: for we, ſay they, haue deepely ſmarted, for that we could neuer faſten vpon this truth, who yet haue ſought it with teares, and haue made bitter complaints, for that we could not beleeue it, and therefore we thinke, that there is no ſuch comfort for vs.
               
                  
                     Anſw. 
                   To ſuch therefore I anſwere, that they ought not to conclude againſt themſelues vpon ſuch weake grounds, but wait ſtill: for this doctrine hath bin ſtrongly proued, and further may be, to ſuch as are not ſatisfied, as well by other teſtimonies, as by that which hath been ſet downe: and therefore they are not farre from the grace, whereby they may be able to applie it to themſelues: and the vnliker it ſeemeth to them, to be true, becauſe it is ſo good and comfortable, they muſt know, that it commendeth the more, the great kindneſſe of God to man, and ſo to them in the depth of their miſerie, when it ſeemeth to them to be vnauoidable, and the more highly hee is to bee praiſed for his vnſpeakeable loue and goodneſſe. And it is true, that nothing doth more ſet fourth the loue of God to vs then this, as being the gift of greateſt price, that he may or can beſtow vpon vs.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 2 Others obiect, that they can hardly thinke that God will ſo eaſily, and for nothing on our behalfe, offer ſo largely vnto ſuch as haue ſo ſore and ſo many waies prouoked him, namely, that if we do but thirſt for the beſt things, we ſhall haue our thirſt quenched, when yet they do not ſee (they ſay) that there is required ſo much as a diſlike and abhorting of ſinne, with this great offer of mercie, without which yet they know, no mercie can be ſhewed.
               
                  
                     Anſw. 1 To the firſt part of this obiection, this anſwere is to bee

made: that it is to the greater honor of God, that he will ouercome mens euill with good; leauing to vs an example therein, that we ſhould follow and be like to him, and that he ſent his Sonne into the world for them that be vngodly and vnworthie.  And for the ſecond part of the obiection,Rom. 5.6. that ſo large and precious a promiſe is made to the bare thirſting after the loue of God and eternall life, without any leauing and forſaking of ſinne; to this point I require diligent obſeruing of mine anſwere. I ſay therefore, that all things cannot be mentioned at once in handling ſome points of holy doctrine, leſt we ſhould thereby fall into confuſedneſſe. Neither in handling plainly this of thirſting, is it neceſſarie to ſpeake of the renouncing or purpoſing againſt ſinne, otherwiſe then in the way of preoccupation, that is, the anſwering of an obiection, as heere I do. Therefore to this part of the obiection,
                     He that thirſteth truely for ſaluation, abhors ſinne.
                   I anſwere, that he who thirſteth truely for ſaluation, cannot do it without the abhorring of the ſin, which hath been moſt delighted in. For while we deſire grace, we abhor ſin, which is contrarie to it, and this thirſting after the water of life, ſhal drie vp the heate of ſin by little and little, no otherwiſe, then the hot and ſcorching ſunne doth the moiſt and ſoft puddle. I meane ſo farre as the ſimilitude ſerueth for this purpoſe. And therefore, let any make this good, that he thirſteth, and I will make it good by the word of God, that his thirſt ſhall be quenched, and his ſinnes pardoned.
               Now therefore, where are they which ſay, oh, Preachers vrge vs ſo hardly, that we ſhall neuer be able to follow the doctrine they teach vs, of the way to eternall life. I ſay, if the way that we ſet downe be hard, it is through the hardnes of your hearts. For otherwiſe, who would deſire the way to be eaſier, then it is heere ſet downe to be? he that thirſteth after it ſhall haue eternall life. And yet ſeeing it is ſo eaſie, let all, who deſire to be partakers of life, looke well and carefully to this, that they haue no leſſe to teſtifie it to them, then this, namely, that they haue the thirſt which hath been ſet downe to be required.
               And heere for the more full handling of this point,
                     The third branch: what God requireth of them whoſe thirst he will quench; namely, that they beleeue.
                   I will enter into the third branch of this firſt part, that is to ſay, what

God requireth of them, whoſe thirſt he will quench; and that is, that they come to him (for it) that is, beleeue that he will do in deed, as he promiſeth, euen ſatisfie the ſoule of him that thirſteth, with the thing that he deſireth, and therefore with remiſſion of ſinne and ſaluation, if that be the thing he thirſteth after. This faith is that, which the Prophet requireth, when he ſpeaketh of comming, requiring it of them that they come. Euen as our Sauiour alſo in Saint Iohn, meaneth the ſame by comming to him, where he maketh comming and beleeuing,Iohn 9.
                        ••
                     
                   both one. He that commeth to me, ſhall not hunger, and he that beleeueth in me, ſhall neuer thirst: meaning, he ſhall neuer want ſpiritual nouriſhment, namely, that which his ſoule longeth for, who beleeueth in him.
               So that, we ſee it is required heere; that the thirſtie perſons who are by the Prophet called out from all other, to drinke and to be refreſhed, ſhould beleeue that God meaneth as he ſpeaketh, and will do it indeed: which ſtandeth with great reaſon, that they ſhould do ſo. For although the Lord bequeath and freely grant it vnto them, yet if they weigh it not, and ſo giue no credit to it, how can they be the better for it? Neither need they feare, that they ſhall preſume and be too bold in claſping about and beleeuing it, for while they deſire it,Rom. 8.33. and God promiſeth to grant them their deſire, who ſhall take it from them? No, if God will iustifie, none ſhall be able to condemne.
               
               
                  
                     Why God will haue them beleeue.
                  And if ye aske, why will God haue them beleeue it? I ſay, to the end they may ſee the louing kindneſſe of God towards them, who hauing been ſo low brought by the ſight of their vnworthineſſe, that is euen to hell gates, in their owne perſwaſion; ſhall the more wonder to ſee the height of glorie, that they are by him exalted to. And this they beleeuing and conſidering,3. Pet. 1.
                        •
                     
                   do, as Saint Peter ſaith, Loue him, and reioyce with ioy vnspeakable and glorious; whereas otherwiſe they could do neither. And doe we not ſee by this, that there is great reaſon why God requires of all his, that they ſhould beleeue in his Sonne? euen that they may ſee his louing kindneſſe, which was before hidden from them, and being made ioyfull thereby, more then they could be brought vnto by

the voice of an Angell, they may loue him, and be zealous in his ſeruice, which by no other meanes they could be brought vnto? Therefore let them labour aboue all things that they may haue this perſwaſion of Gods ſauour, and let them ſee, that they haue no leſſe then this vnfained faith in them, though weake, becauſe ſo great and waightie matters are thereby wrought and vpholden in them.
               But heere one thing more I muſt adde,
                     How a man may prooue that he hath faith.
                   though afterwards I ſhall ſay ſomewhat of it. And that is, how a man may proue that he hath this faith? ſeeing it is eaſily doubted of, and moſt of all by them, who haue leaſt cauſe; and this proofe of their faith and teſtimonie thereof, I thinke it moſt fit to ſtay them vp withall, that they may not wauer, as they who haue it not, ſhall do, and muſt needs, though they ſpeake great words about it. And I cannot brieflier nor more pithily do it, then by telling them, that if they hold faſt this precious promiſe of ſaluation by Chriſt, they muſt know that they receiue the ſpirit of ſanctification alſo, which crieth in them Abba, Father, and ſanctifieth them, and more plainely thus; that as they deſire the forgiuenes of their ſins, they deſire and endeuour after the reformation of their liues, and the weaning of their harts from euill alſo. And this where it is wrought (that I ſay no more of it in this place) ſhall euer prooue, that there is this effectuall faith.
               This I haue ſaid of this firſt part, and the three branches thereof, and namely, of this one kind of their thirſting for remiſſion of ſins, and eternal life. For there are other thirſtings, then for theſe, as I gaue the Reader to vnderſtand, before; whereof I will giue you a taſte, though more briefly in the next Sermon, ſeeing I haue largely handled this in the forementioned inſtance, that it may giue light to the Reader, that whatſoeuer good things he thirſteth for, he may be as ſure, that he ſhall obtaine them.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  
                     Gods people are euer thirsting in this life.
                  
                  NOw to proceed where I left, we are to know, that Gods people are neuer fully ſatisfied, while they wander heere on earth, but are euer thirſting after one good thing or other, or ſome new meaſure of grace, whatſoeuer they haue been ſatisfied in alreadie: for otherwiſe they could not be included among them, to whom this promiſe is made, neither haue they their part in it, when it is ſaid; Ho, all ye that thirst, come to the waters and drinke.
               
               From hence it is, that ſome hauing attained to true faith, yet as feruently deſire to preſerue and ſtrengthen the ſame, as they deſired when they were before in great feare and doubting, to haue any meaſure at all thereof. And ſo the Lord requireth, that we highly eſteeme, deſire and long after the ſame, and the ſaluation which we waite for thereby, euen as at the firſt acquaintance with them, we did. In like manner, Gods faithfull people knowing that he is as a flowing fountaine, rich in all good things, and neuer drawne drie, they thirſt ſtill after other particular graces of the holy Ghoſt, when he hath ſatisfied them with the former. And namely, hope, loue, patience, meekeneſſe, humbleneſſe, ſtrength to beare afflictions, and ſuch like. And he doth no ſooner ſtirre vp in them the deſire and longing after theſe, but he doth withall giue them his word and promiſe, that he will beſtow the ſame vpon them, euen as he heere ſpeaketh, ſaying, He, all ye that thirst, come to the waters and drinke. And in like maner he ſpeaketh in Hoſea,
                  Hoſea 14.6.7. when he hath ſaid, that he will forgiue all their iniquitie, and loue them freely, he addeth, I will be as the dew to Iſrael, he ſhall grow as the lilly, and fasten his roots as the trees of Lebanon: his branches ſhall ſpread, and his beauty ſhall be as the Oliue tree, and his ſmell as Lebanon. By all which the Lord meaneth, that when his people turning to him, and

longing for his mercie, ſhall obtaine it to couer their ſinnes, they ſhall, as the drie ground thirſteth for the dew and raine, and is ſatisfied therewith, ſo ſhall they (I ſay) be refreſhed with the dew of his grace, to grow vp out of their old ſinnes, floriſhing in his Church, as the plants; conſtantly ſetled therin, as the trees deepely rooted, and prouoking others to follow and be in loue with their example and good courſe, euen as a ſweet ſmell, or a beautifull creature prouoketh to the liking thereof. And that which he ſpeaketh of them, he affirmeth of all, which are his true Iſraelites and faithfull people.
               And hereof it is, that they enioy and attaine to many fruits of the ſpirit, becauſe they loue and long much after them, and euery one hath the greater meaſure of them, the more ſtedfaſtly that he beleeueth, God will grant them. And ſo on the contrarie it is verified in others, which is written:Luke 6.28. 
                  Wo be to them which are full, for they ſhall hunger; wo be to them that are rich, for they haue their conſolation. For they who thirſt not for heauenly grace, to refreſh them and make them well liking to God and his people, ſhall turne their thirſt after the pleaſures of ſin, and the vnſauourie froth of their euill hearts, till hauing their fill of them, they caſt vp their ſweet morſels, as their bane and poiſon.
               And this ſhall ſuffice to haue ſaid of this verſe, for our inſtruction and comfort. The ſumme whereof is, not only, that they who hartily long for the great benefit of aſſurance of Gods loue, ſhall haue it, beleeuing it, becauſe God hath promiſed it to them: but euen other grace alſo, as willingneſſe and fitneſſe for the duties of their particular calling, as Salomon in the third of the Kings, and the Publicans and ſouldiers in the third of Luke, obtained: which is a ſingular gift of God with the former. Alſo they ſhall haue patience, yea and ioy in tribulation, mercifulnes and liberalitie to the needie, contempt of the world, willingneſſe and readines to die, and a ſupplie of all other wants, which all being enioyed, as they may be heere, are another manner of portion then all abundance of corne, wine, or any other thing that is earthly, and yet they ſhall to their good contentment, haue their part in theſe alſo.
               
                  
                  Verſe 2.Now followeth the reprehenſion in the ſecond verſe. But heere we muſt marke,
                     The ſecond part of the text, containing a reproofe and an exhortation.
                   that he reproueth not them, whom he before called, in their thirſting after heauenly things, to be ſatisfied therewith. For all may ſee there was no cauſe why he ſhould find fault with them, who did that which he required: but he reproueth them, who did not thirſt nor ſet their delight on the beſt things, telling them, that they beſtowed their labour and trauell vpon that which could not profit, but deceiue them. For by money in this verſe, hee meaneth their precious labour and care: and by bread he meaneth that which in the firſt verſe he did by wine, water and milke, that is, the ſubſtantiall and true nouriſhing food of the ſoule.
               As if he ſhould ſay, why are ye ſo vnthankfull, nay ſo wilfully fooliſh, that when God hath freely offered his bountifull kindneſſe to you, to drinke of the water of life, you affect it not, but rather reiect it, and in the meane while, wearie and trouble your ſelues about that which cannot ſatisfie or giue you contentment? For to ſpeake as the truth is, men are ſo bewitched by the diuell, that they had rather wander vp and downe in by-wayes and croſſe pathes erroniouſly, and to follow their owne opinions in ſeeking eternall life, till they be wearied; rather then to reſt in the ſafe way which God offereth them.
               And when he hath reproued them for this great fault, he exhorteth them to be wiſer, and to heare him attentiuely in ſhewing them a better way, euen the right and true way to happineſſe, that is, by thirſting after it, as the other did, mentioned in the former verſe; and ſo doing, he ſheweth them what a worthie fruit they ſhould reape thereof, euen all abundance of things worthie to be deſired, and reſt to their ſoules thereby, which he meaneth by that allegoricall ſpeech, when he ſaith, Eate that which is good, and let your ſoules delight in fatneſſe. Thus much for the meaning of this verſe: now briefly looke wee into the reproofe and exhortation therein contained, and conſequently what fruit will follow, if they be both regarded.
               
                  
                     The reproofe.
                  In the reproofe we are taught, as well as they to whom the Prophet wrote, and the wofull experience of this age

doth ſhew, that he did not onely expoſtulate with his owne nation at that time, but that he hath alſo iuſtly inueighed againſt all Adams poſterity in what age ſoeuer. For all men naturally are caried away with this frenzy, that in ſeeking of eternall life, they doe all erre and are deceiued, and do chuſe rather to follow their owne fancie and conceit, then the voice or word of God.
               He ſpeaketh not to them, who being drowned in a deepe forgetfulneſſe of God and themſelues, doe not almoſt thinke of the welfare and ſaluation of their ſoules; he complaineth not (I ſay) of ſuch; whoſe number yet who doubteth but that it is exceeding great, yea and that all ſuch are further off from eternall life, then the other? but to them hee directeth his words, who deſire life in ſome ſort, and yet know no way thereto, but wander vncertainly, they know not whether. So that heere are all ſuch condemned as ſeeke amiſſe, and toile themſelues to come to happineſſe any other way then God teacheth in his word, and all their labours and trauels that way, are called of him vnprofitable and ill beſtowed coſt. Whereupon we may iuſtly complaine of the wofull eſtate of ſundrie kinds of people among vs, and lay forth their miſery as cleerely, as if it were ſeene in a glaſſe.
               And firſt of all,
                     Romiſh teachers reproued heere.
                   they who are teachers or be taught in the Romiſh ſynagogues, may manifeſtly ſee, how they incur the bitter and iuſt reproofe of the Prophet, in ſuch ſort as they ſhall neuer bee able to winde themſelues out of it. For to yeld them that, which truely we may; we denie not, but that there are of them which toile and trauell to goe to heauen, (though this muſt be knowne alſo, that others of them couer their knaueries with a colour of their religion, and either know that they are miſled, or at leaſt hold their profeſſion for their eaſe and bellies ſake) euen theſe who ſeeke the way to heauen, which are the ſimpleſt minded amongſt all the reſt of their religion, are they againſt whom the Prophet enueigheth: As for the wilfull and ſubtill among them, they are much further off, and almoſt without hope. But the ſimpler are alſo deceiued with a falſe worſhip of God, and vſe it after the fond and ſuperſtitious conceits and dreames of

their owne braine, though onely of meere ignorance, of whoſe doings yet, the Lord more iuſtly complaineth, then he doth of thoſe to whom theſe words were directed, when hee ſaith,Eſay 1.12. 
                  who required theſe things at your hands?
               
               
                  Mat. 15.9.For in vaine doe they worſhip him, teaching and receiuing for doctrines the traditions of men. To enter into particulars is infinite.
                     Obiect. 
                   And whereas it will be obiected, that they take great paine, and beſtow much time about the ſame: 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, the rightlier do the words of the Prophet fall vpon them, and with a mighty weight preſſe them downe, when hee ſaith, why doe ye beſtow your coſt and care, and yet not for that which will doe you good, neither is able to ſatisfie your ſoules with the foode and bread of life? All which the beſt that can be ſaid of it, is this, that it is but loſt labour. And they in ſo doing, may iuſtly be compared to them, who beſtow their money vpon their luſts in ſundry miſpending of which ſhould be imployed vpon them and their families.
               
                  
                     Carnall Goſpellers.
                  But to paſſe from them, there is another kind of men, whom the Prophets reproofe doth reach vnto, as well as vnto thoſe. And ſuch they are, as although they hold the truth in iudgement, and doe worſhip God in outward maner, yet they draw neare to him with their bodies,
                  Mat. 15.8. Mat. 7.2
                        •
                     . 
                  their hearts being farre from him, who ſay, Lord, Lord, (indeed) but yet doe not the will of the Lord, neither (being naturall men) can be obedient vnto it.Rom. 8.7. 
                  With their lips they confeſſe him, but with their deeds they denie him; and therefore are farre from the happineſſe which I now ſpeake of.
               Among whom this I ſay as of the former ſort, that though ſome of them doe ſimplie deſire eternall life, as they ſeeme to doe, yet they preferre the commodities and vaine pleaſures of this preſent world, and make their commings to Church to be either but couers for their prophane and looſe liues, or at leaſt they abide in them ſtill. And yet the forward
                     ••
                   ſort of them both, who meane more ſimply, are iuſtly reproued by the Prophets words heere, in complayning thus, why doe you lay out your money and not for bread, your labour and yet not to be ſatisfied? For euen theſe follow not the word of God as their guide, to bring them to that which they ſeeke,

and therfore are neuer like to attaine it, ſeeking it after their owne fancie and opinion, and not thirſting after it, as without which they cannot be ſatisfied.
               So that as the Apoſtle ſpake of Iſraell, ſo I may ſpeake of theſe. What ſhall we ſay, (in the Epiſtle to the Romans,Rom. 9.31.32. ſaith he) that Iſrael which followed the law of righteouſnes, yet could not attaine to the law of righteouſneſſe? wherefore? becauſe they ſought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. Euen ſo, they who ſeeke ſaluation, and the bleſſedneſſe that is laid vp for Gods choſen, euen that is enough to depriue them of it, in that they ſeeke it amiſſe; that is to ſay, not as the word of God directeth, namely, that they ſhould thirſt for it, as hath beene ſaid.
               Ye haue heard the reprehenſion;
                     The Exhortation.
                   the exhortation followeth, in which he laboureth to draw them from their owne wiſedome which deceiued them, to hearken to another maner of wiſedome, which was able to lead them to that which he called them to enioy, that is, the true happineſſe which he layeth out vnder theſe ſpeeches, to eate that which is good, and delight their ſoules in fatneſſe.
               
               And heere it is worthie to be marked, that when hee hath told them to what their owne wiſedome bringeth them,
                     The word of God onely directeth to true happineſſe.
                   in leading them to ſeeke ſaluation and happineſſe, and that is to nothing but to deceiue them, and to loſe their labour, for which he reproued them: now he willes them to heare him diligently, who taught them to ſeeke the ſame by the light and direction of Gods word. Whereby he cleerely ſheweth, that there is no other way to find that which they ſeeke. By no wiſedome of man, by no learning, much leſſe by any other means of blind deuotion and ſond zeale without knowledge. And yet as the word of God onely doth it, ſo we muſt further marke, how and when it doth ſo. That is,
                     How and when it doth it.
                   as hee ſaith heere, when we harken diligently vnto it, as declaring therby, that we be willing to be guided by it. For ſo hee requireth, ſaying; hearken diligently vnto me in that which I ſhall ſay to you from God. For as Salomon faith of ſeeking wiſedome, that there is a ſeeking of it ſleightly, negligently and ſlothfully, by which men neuer find it: and there is a ſeeking

of it,Prou. 2.3. as ſiluer is ſought of the Merchant, that is, with all diligence, and by all good opportunities, not reſting till they find it, if it be to be had; ſo there is an hearing of the word coldly without profit, and there is an hearing which will draw and perſwade him that heareth, neuer to giue ouer, till he hath found and bought the pearle which is hidden in the Goſpell, becauſe he knoweth that it is there to be had.
               This hearing the Prophet requireth, and hee that heareth not with this mind, nor to this end, he loſeth his labour, and beſtoweth all his trauell in vaine.
                     Queſt. 
                   But it will be asked heere, what is that which the Prophet would haue them heare of him, to the end they might proſper, attaine the aſſurance of eternall life, and the happineſſe which they deſired? For hee doth not expreſly mention in this verſe, wherein hee would haue them heare him.
                     Anſw. 
                   For anſwere to this, we are to remember, that in the firſt verſe he ſpake to all the people, and asked among them all, who they were that thirſted: to whom he gaue an anſwere from God, according to their hearts deſire, that they ſhould be ſatisfied with all ſuch good things as they thirſted for.
               Now in this verſe wee heard hee reproued all the reſt of them that ſought for pardon of their ſins and eternall life, or other graces of the ſpirit amiſſe; euen by their owne wiſedome and fancie, not longing after and thirſting for it, as Gods word teacheth them to doe. Therefore theſe hee exhorts to heare him, that they would alſo with the other ſet their hearts vpon it, and thirſt after it. Euen this is that which he requires their diligent attention about, that ſo ſeeking it as their brethren did, they might with them find that which they ſought, euen as they had done.
               And this if they doe, they ſhall enioy, he telleth them that good diet, yea and banquetting cheere, which bee meaneth by the allegoricall ſpeeches which he vſeth heere, when hee ſaith, then they ſhall eate that which is good, and their ſoule ſhall be ſatisfied with fatneſſe. Whereby he meaneth, that as a man which is kept at a good diet with wholeſom good & ſauourie meats, is healthfull and well liking in body; euen ſo ſhall his ſoule be ſatiate and filled withal variety of heauenly dainties,

and be made ioyfull and well liking thereby, which with an appetite doth ſeeke the ſame.
               And ſo all they find it, who are euer thirſting after one good thing or other: this being added, that they beleeue God vpon his word, and doubt not but that it ſhall bee ſo. Which I adde to quicken vp many of my deere brethren and ſiſters heereunto. Who (I deny not) thirſt feruently after ſundry graces of God, and yet for all this comfortable promiſe of the Lord publiſhed heere by his Prophet, doe not beleeue the ſame to belong vnto them, but complaine with deadly diſtruſt, that they haue no part therein. But I ſhould now enter into that againe, which I ſpake of thirſting and the ſatiſfying of ſuch as thirſt in the firſt verſe, if I ſhould proceed. From whence, that may be fetcht which here were to be vttered, ſeeing it hath been ſpoken of at large already.
               
                  
                     Queſt. 
                   Onely this I ſay, and with it I conclude, that to ſuch as obiect, whether they may be ſaid truely to thirſt, who doe not find themſelues alwaies, as at ſome time, ſenſiblie to long after the ſpirituall and heauenly gifts of God, they being oft in heauineſſe, and their minds taken vp with other matters, ſo that they do not ſo ſenſiblie feele it, as at ſome other times: I ſay, to theſe I anſwere; 
                     Anſw. 
                   It cannot be, neither doth God require it, that the mind ſhould alwaies be occupied about one thing; For then neither eating, ſleeping, working, nor the thinking of other many good things of the word ſhould bee admitted: But as it is commanded, that wee ſhould pray alwaies, but yet not ſo that we are vrged therby to vſe and practiſe it euery houre, but to labour to bee fit and ready at all times, and by all good opportunities vſe it; ſo this is to bee vnderſtood: not that we ſhould alwaies feele our ſelues to thirſt, but to poſſeſſe our hearts with it, and intend and nouriſh it, and ſo, as oft as it ſhall be expedient, we ſhall feele that we doe ſo. And thus much of the whole.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            THREE SERMONS VPON MATTH. 11.21.
            
               
                  Wo be to thee Corazin: wo be to thee Bethſaida: for if the great workes which were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long agone in ſackcloth and aſhes.
               
               
                  IF the greater that Gods works haue bin among vs, and benefits to vs, (dearely beloued) the more and greater fruit he looketh for at our hands, as in Amos 3.3.Amos 3.3. it is to be ſeene, and where he findeth it not to be ſo, there he is moſt diſpleaſed, as appeareth in this chapter, and particularly in this verſe: it is ſo much the more needfull for vs in this nation and the countries therof, where it is well knowne we haue receiued much; and as well knowne that we haue yeelded little, it is (I ſay) the more needfull for vs, to heare ſomewhat, and to be put in mind of this matter. And for this cauſe I haue choſen this Scripture, which giueth ſingular good occaſion to vs all, to conſider aduiſedly of the ſame.
               To the which purpoſe I will firſt lay open the words of our Sauiour Chriſt vnto the cities heere named, they being the ground of that which I meane to deliuer vnto you, and then proceed in the doctrine which they fitly giue occaſion of, and ſhew the vſe thereof.
                     The opening of the text.
                   Our Lord Ieſus therefore being borne in Bethlehem, brought vp in Nazareth, but hauing his chiefe habitation and abode neare to theſe cities, Corazin and Bethſaida, namely in Capernaum, in which three he had

preached moſt, and done moſt of his miracles, when he ſaw that they were little regarded there, he was moued in compaſſion of them, by reaſon of the danger they lay in for contempt of ſo great fauour as was offered to them, rather then to many other cities, to caſt in their teeth their groſſe and great vnthankfulneſſe. And as they had encreaſed their ſinne more then others, ſo to ſhame them for it, he aggrauated it, by making their condition worſe then their neighbour cities, vpon whom he had beſtowed no ſuch coſt nor benefits; Tyre and Sidon I meane, whom they counted to be moſt odious, and knew them to be moſt diſſolute, and for their wicked liues infamous. And therefore he ſpake thus vnto them, Wo to thee (Corazin); wo to thee (Bethſaida); for if the great workes which haue been done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented long agone in ſackcloth and aſhes.
               
               Thus much be ſaid of Chriſts words to theſe cities, and of the occaſion thereof: now I will lay forth the chiefe points of them which miniſter matter of inſtruction vnto vs,
                     The parts two.
                   and they are drawne from the generall partes of the text, which are two: For in Chriſts words now read vnto you, there are theſe two; the one a curſe pronounced vpon them,1. The curſe pronounced vpon theſe cities. 2. The reaſon of it.
                   in theſe words, Wo to thee; the other a reaſon of the ſame, in theſe words, For if the great workes, &c.
               Both of theſe affoord three particular branches a peece, vpon the which I meane to ſtand; and they are theſe: In the former three, firſt, that many great workes had beene done amongſt them, which might haue wrought repentance in them: ſecondly, that although they had them amongſt them, yet they repented not: thirdly, therefore he pronounceth the woe vpon them. In the latter generall part, namely, the reaſon; theſe three are to be conſidered: Firſt, that many, if they had enioyed them, had repented indeed: Secondly, they would not (he ſaith) haue driuen off from day to day, but would haue done it long agoe: Thirdly, in a moſt hearty and ſolemne manner; that is to ſay, in ſackecloth and aſhes.
               And out of theſe ſixe points in Chriſts wordes,
                     Three points in the first part.
                   ariſe for our vſe and edifying, euen as many profitable inſtructions and doctrines. And firſt, in that he ſaith that thoſe great

workes were done amongſt them,1. The end of all miracles and preaching is the conuerſion of the people.
                   which might haue drawne them or other to amend their liues, we may gather that the end of them, & namely of preaching, the greateſt of them all, as in Ioh. 14.12. I ſay, wee may gather from hence, that the end of them is the conuerſion of the people,Iohn 14.12. where they are done, and the calling of them to true repentance. 
                     Obiect. 
                   For the miracles which he wrought then, if any obiect that we haue them not in theſe dayes,
                     Anſw. 
                   I ſay againe, neither haue we any need of them; which being then wrought for the confirmation of the doctrine which was preached by Chriſt and his Apoſtles, I meane the doctrine of the Goſpell, do as well ſerue now to confirme it, being the ſame in the preaching of euery faithfull and true Miniſter. And as for preaching, ſeeing it is the ſame it was then, and a farre greater worke then the doing of miracles, we are to know, that whereſoeuer the Lord is pleaſed to haue it ſoundly and plainely planted, and the dutie of it rightly diſcharged, there he commandeth euerie one to repent, and to become a new creature.
               
                  Matth. 17.11.So the end of Iohn Baptiſts preaching was, to restore all things amiſſe, and to bring them to good order, Matth. 17.11. So Philip came to Samaria, which citie had a long time been bewitched by Simon Magus the ſorcerer, and preached Chriſt there, to conuert them from their blindneſſe, ſuperſtition, and other iniquities. And the Lord ſo wrought thereby, cauſing the people to giue heed to the words which Philip ſpake, that the citie was conuerted,Act. 8.6. &c. which the holy Ghoſt ſetteth downe in the ſtorie by a ſure token thereof, that there was great ioy amongſt them, and they forſooke the ſorcerer, who had deceiued them.
               
                  
                     This end ſhould be aimed at in bearing.
                  All which with many other ſuch examples doe teach hearers of Sermons to aime at this point firſt and chiefely, that they may be changed in their minds and hearts from their former blind iudgement, and corrupt nature, embrace Chriſt for their only Sauiour, as being loſt in themſelues, and declare their loue and thankfulneſſe for the ſame to him euer after, and to bring foorth the fruits thereof in a godly and Chriſtian life: which being farre otherwiſe in the moſt hearers at this day, layeth hardly to their charge, that either they

know not the end of preaching, nor 
                     •
                  o what end they heare, or elſe a worſe thing, namely, that they regard not, but ſet light by Gods ordinance, which he will moſt certainely be reuenged of, when it ſhall be little welcome vnto them.
               And to follow this point of the end of preaching,
                     The power of the word.
                   that it is to turne people to God, it is not to be maruelled at, for great is the force of it, as we ſee in thoſe that were mockers & raile
                     ••
                   on the Apoſtles, in the ſecond of the Acts,Act. 2.37. who were yet conuerted by Peters Sermon. And ſo throughout the whole booke, where Paul preached among the Gentiles through whole countries and cities, they who had long ſit it darknes, as hauing neuer heard of Chriſt, ſaw great light, and were perſwaded to beleeue in him, and receiued the word with great ioy. For the word of God is mightie in operation,
                  Hebr. 4.12. 
                  and ſharper then any two edged ſword, and entereth thorow euen to the diuiding aſunder of the ſoule and the ſpirit, and the ioynts and the marrow, and is a diſcerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
               
               For although all men are borne in ſin, and ſo they loue and like well to lie therein,Rom. 8.8. and though the naturall man is not obedient to the will of God, neither can be,
                  Iames 4.4. and being at amitie with the world, is at enmitie with God (in which eſtate they are farre from the hope of the life to come,) yet when they ſo heare the Goſpell that they beleeue,Prou. 2.10. and when the wiſedome of God once enters into their hearts and the knowledge of his word delights their ſoules, it is maruellous, what a change is wrought in them thereby. For as children while they bee without diſcretion▪ are wholly carried after childiſhneſſe and babiſh folly, yet if they come to yeeres of vnderſtanding, and begin to ſee that they muſt liue in the world, they let go childiſhneſſe, and wax thriftie: euen ſo when God by the wiſdome of his word, teacheth vs to put away our childiſh folly, youthfull luſts, and works of darkneſſe (then the which for the time we knew no better) we do with a holy deteſtation come out of our filthie Sodome, euen as Ephraim when ſhe repented of Idolatry, which ſhe had ſo entirely loued, expreſſed it thus, ſaying: What haue I to do with Idols?
               
               And how doth God worke this mightie change in men?

Surely by perſwading them that they gaine an hundred to one thereby, that I ſay no more, the Prophet making good my words to the full,Pſalme 84.10. when he ſaith, One day in thy courts (O Lord) is better then a thouſand elſewhere. And though this be not ſeene with bodily eye, yet it is perceiued by a farre more cleere and vndoubted teſtimonie then if it were ſeene, while it is receiued by faith and beleeued. Oh! he that is perſwaded of this, doth with the Apoſtles forſake all, and follow Chriſt in waiting,Matth. 19.29. till that hundred fold in Saint Matthew promiſed, be accompliſhed and enioyed.
               And what maruell that we may be thus drawne by ſuch ſtrong perſwaſions as God vſeth in his Goſpell euery where, when we reade in humane authors, that rude and barbarous people, were brought to great matters, euen ciuilitie and to good order,De Orat. lib. 1. by the perſwaſion of eloquent men. There was a time (ſaith Tulli
                        •
                     
                  ) when men wandered vp and downe in woods and fields without any dwelling, as the beaſts do: but by the wiſdome and eloquence of ſome, they were perſwaded to fellowſhip, and were drawne to haue habitation in cities and villages. And may not the moſt mightie perſwaſions of the almightie, much more draw ſuch as haue been blindfolded with error and deluſions, from their vncleane conuerſation to that which is holy, and from bondage to Satan to beleeue in the liuing God?
               
                  
                     Obiect. 
                   Neither let any obiect and ſay, that it is a ſmall matter to be drawne by perſwaſion to beleeue the Goſpel, and worſhip God according to it, when we ſee that Papiſts can draw people to their religion by perſwaſion.
                     Anſw. 
                   To the which I anſwere; they can perſwaded to their religion indeed, ſo can the euer to their fellowſhip and companie, and adulterers draw women to their lure thereby. But we are not ſo much to ſtand vpon this, that they be able to perſwade, as to conſider what it is whereto they perſwade. For who doubteth but that men may eaſily be perſwaded, to that which is agreeable to their nature, and ſuting with their deſire; as theſe whom I haue mentioned and ſuch like?2. Theſſ. 2.9.10.11.12. For they are all done by the working of Satan in all power, and ſignes, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe among them that periſh, becauſe

they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be ſaued, Therefore God ſendeth them ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleeue lyes, that all they may be damned, which beleeue not the truth, but haue pleaſure in vnrighteouſnes.
               
               But to be perſwaded of the truth of that which is againſt our nature and liking, ſo that thereby wee beleeue it, and to caſt away the pleaſures of ſinne and ieopard our ſoules vppon the doctrine that is taught vs, this, I ſay, is another matter then bare perſwaſion, from what ground ſoeuer it come. And this is the heauenly worke of the holy Ghoſt, which mouing and leading vs, ſhal wel ſhew it ſelfe to be ſo indeed. This being ſo, we may gather neceſſarily hereby, that the ſound? plaine, and powerful preaching of the Goſpell,
                     The ſound plaine and powerfull preaching of the Goſpell, amoſt bleſſed gift of God.
                   whereby onely through the worke of grace we may be perſwaded to turne to God aright, is a moſt bleſſed gift of God, and therefore that it is no marueile that he hath appointed that, rather then other meanes to ſoe excellent an end.
               But here I muſt adde this, becauſe many euen of the priuate ſort of men, who haue been happily trained vp vnder a good miniſtery, can diſcerne, and do complaine, that this holy ordinance of God, (I meane the publiſhing of the Goſpel) is taken in hande of ſundrie Miniſters, who are vtterly vnfit for it, and the duty thereof is diſcharged in much vnreuerence, and nothing beſeeming the worthines of it; if this be not better looked vnto by ſuch as haue authoritie in this behalfe, I ſee not how it can be had in ſuch honour as is due vnto it, neither yeeld the fruite that otherwiſe it promiſeth. For while ſome that take vpon them to preach are vnſound in religion; ſome ignorant;
                     The cauſes why preaching is in ſo little account.
                   ſome ſtuffe their ſermons with authorities of men, whereas it is the word of God that hath authority ouer mens conſciences;Heb. 4.12. ſome go aboue the peoples capacity, and reach; few preach diligently, conſtantly, and carefully; that I ſpeake not of the loſe and diſſolute behauiour that is not tolerable amongſt their hearers; how ſhould preaching keepe the credite that it ought to be in, and bee like to drawe or perſwade people to faith and repentance? Nay what greater cauſe is there of the generall ignorance, careleſſnes, and profanes of life in the people, then theſe and

ſuch like abuſes ſeene in the Miniſtery?
               And while they he thus farre out of the way, them ſelues, they are yet more bold to open their mouthes againſt the diligenter ſort, who knowing that Chriſt requireth it at their hands, that as they loue him, they ſhould feed his ſheepe and his lambes,
                  Ioh. 21.15. doe of conſcience ſeeke to diſcharge their duties, and they are therfore cried one of as doing more then they need; And whiles this is ſuffred, what hope is there that any great remorſe for ſinne, or pricke of conſcience ſhould be wrought in the people by their ſtanding vp amongſt them, or any true hope of eternall life wrought in many? But theſe things being remoued, and good preaching and liuing in ſtead thereof, interteined, and practiſed, ſuch a Miniſtery, as it is highly pleaſing to God, and commanded by him, ſo it giueth good hope of gathering a plentifull people vnto him. As for the profane ſpeeches of them which count the preaching of Chriſt, and ſuffering for his name, to be fooliſhnes, let Saint Paul put them to ſhame if not to ſilence, who hath taught them if they will learne their anſwer from him, that they whom God wil ſaue ſhall and muſt by this obtaine it,1. Cor. 1.21. or elſe they ſhall neuer haue it.
               I haue now ſpoken of the firſt point, that the end of this great worke of Chriſt namely preaching, is to conuert the bearers thereof to God, now the ſecond in this firſt part, followeth;
                     The ſecond point of the firſt part. Few regard or looke after the right end of preaching.
                   and that is this. Though that be the ende of it, yet the moſt part commonly regard it not, neither conſider it, but goe away without that bleſſing. Euen as our ſauiour here chargeth theſe cities for their contempt ſaying: If ſome, yea ſuch as in your own iudgement are profane and worldly, had ſeene and hard the great workes of God, that haue been done among you, they had repented, but ye haue not done ſo vnto this day. The complaint is iuſtly made of the like careleſnes in all ages, that when the people had the Prophets and Apoſtles, yea our Sauiour himſelfe, by whom they might haue beene made happy, and with the eyes of faith ſeene the ſaluation offred them,Luk. 19 42. yet they ſought not to know the things that concerned their peace.
               
               
                  Noah the preacher of righteouſnes was diſpiſed and laughed

to ſcorne, when he told them of the deſtroying of the whole earth by water, and yet he gaue them an example by his preparing the Arke, and ſo they had a double motiue to beleeue it; Eſay crieth out when he ſaw the people made a mocke at his preaching, and a ieſt of his children, whom he begat to the Lord thereby,Eſay 22.1 ſaying turne away from me and let me weepe bitterly, and labour not to comfort me, becauſe the people periſh. Ieremy to whom they of Anathoth anſwered, preach no more to vs in the name of the Lord, for we will not heare thee,
                  Ier. 
                  but preach vnto vs pleaſant things, bewailed them thus.Ier. 9.1. 
                  Oh that mine eyes were a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe bitterly for the loſſe of this people.
               
               Iohn Baptiſt, when he ſaw the Phariſies come to his Baptiſme, (of whom Chriſt ſaid to his Diſciples,Mat. 5.20. 
                  except your righteouſnes exceed theirs, ye cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen,) ſaid to them, O ye generation of vipers,
                  Mat. 3.7. 
                  who hath taught you to flie from the vengeance to come? Bring forth fruites of amendment, and ſay not with your ſelues we haue Abraham to our father. And how our Sauiour lamented the people, as many places teſtifie, ſo that one doth liuely proue.Mat. 23.37. 
                  O Ieruſalem Ieruſalem: which ſtoneſt my Prophets, and killeſt them whom I haue ſent vnto thee, how oft would I haue gathered thee together, as the henne doth her chickens, but thou wouldeſt not. Behold thy dwelling ſhall be left to thee deſolate. And againe,Luk. 19.42. 
                  O that thou haddeſt knowne in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but they are hidden from thee.
               
               And Paul oft turned from the Iewes and refuſed to teach them, becauſe of their contempt: All the which, with others many like vnto them doe proue, euen as our Sauiour foretold, that it ſhould be in theſe latter dayes as it was in the time of Noah and Lot) that for all the coſt the Lord beſtoweth vpon the people in ſending the glad tidings of ſaluation amongſt them,Luk. 17.26.28. yet (admirable and fearefull to ſay) few receiue and imbrace them, but it commeth to paſſe, what by mens rebelliouſnes and vnthankefulnes, and all the ingines and allurements that ſtand vp in their way, that they that come forwardeſt (a very few excepted) be but as Agrippa,
                  Act. 26.28 that is, almoſt Chriſtians.
               
                  One would thinke that when God hath done more for one place and people then for others. And that he hath giuen to it for a long time ſound and ſauory inſtruction, while others haue wanted it, that he ſhould looke both for much people there, and thoſe alſo well ſeaſoned, although it be not ſo among others: but when they ſhall faile there, how iuſt cauſe ſhall he haue to expoſtulate with them and to complaine, as Chriſt doth here, that they contemned and ſet light by his kindnes? And yet where almoſt ſhall hee find it otherwiſe? If not as he found it among the Iewes to whom he ſpake in the tenth of Iohn verſe 32.Ioh. 10.32. where he ſayeth, many good workes haue I ſhewed you from my father▪ for which of theſe workes doe ye ſtone me: yet at leaſt, as is mentioned in the fifth of Eſay verſ. 4. that when after great coſt beſtowed vpon his vineyard, he looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes, it brought forth wilde grapes. So it was with them of whom we read in the Prophet Michah who acknowledged that they owed much to God,Micha. 6.6. and deſired much more at his hands, but what fruit did they yeeld him? euen wilde grapes, euen falſe and feined repentance for that which was true and ſound?
               For that, they could not hitte vpon, when yet, excepting that, they offred him ſeruice with their great coſt. For thus they ſay, as one man. Wherewith ſhall I appeare before the Lord, and bow my ſelfe before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offrings, and with calues of a yeare olde? will the Lord be pleaſed with thouſand of rammes, or with ten thouſand riuers of oile? Shall I giue my firſt borne of my body for the ſinne of my ſoule? But the Prophet reproueth them for that they tooke not the right way, ſaying. I will tell thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee. Suerly to deale iuſtly, and to loue mercy, and to humble thy ſelfe, and to walke with thy God.
               
               
                  Mat. 13.21.So in the 13. of Matthew, they who receiued the word readily and with ioy, yet becauſe it was not rooted in the heart, it withered away and came to nothing. In like manner the Church of Sardy,Apoc. 3.1. though it heard the glad tidings that might haue made it happy, could not hold faſt the things that it had receiued, but obtained onely a name that it liued, but was dead, And they profited not thereby, ſeeing they were not mixed

with faith, in them that heard them. And by theſe and many other ſuch examples it is euident, that though many haue bin called by the preaching of the Goſpell, yet but few of them haue giuen proofe and teſtimony by their fruits of amendment, that they were of the elect of God, and appointed before, vnto ſaluation.
               And euen ſo it is with vs at this day in many places of this lande, to ſay nothing of them who are ſlothfull hearers and necligent, who declare thereby that they finde ſmall taſte by their hearing, and of ſuch as refuſe to heare; what fruit reape euen the moſt of the other, who repaire to the word more oft and willingly? For all their ſhewes and note that is taken of them, do they not proue too plainelie that they be but almoſt Chriſtians? And though they ſay they beleeue, yet doe they not declare that they know not what faith is, or at leaſt, are they not farre from it? And doe they not,
                     Note. 
                   for all the ſtrong conceit, that they haue of their repentance, do they not (I ſay) the ſame euill things that they did before, and ſo deceiue themſelues, and looſe all their hearings, confeſſions, and prayers?
               For though they be euer cheaping (as it were) yet they buy not the precious wares which the Lord ſetteth out to ſale amongſt them, no (which maketh their fault the greater) though they might haue them freely and without mony.Eſay. 55.1. And although they commend the doctrine that they heare, yet can they not be brought to proue and try themſelues, whether they be caſt into the mould of it or no, and bee faſhioned like vnto it, that ſo they might finde reſt to their ſoules indeed. But we muſt not reſt in being almoſt, as Paul tolde Agrippa a King, but muſt be ſo altogether,Act. 26.29. which is another matter, then a pricke of conſcience, for ſinne, and a bare purpoſe of amendment, but there muſt goe with both, a beleeuing in Ieſus for the remiſſion of ſinne, and a walking with God, that ſo it may be a true conuerſion to God indeed.
               And this is that fruit of hearing which pleaſeth God, and which is alſo the true fruit of the miniſtery, and he that barketh againſt this courſe as too ſtrict and preciſe, barketh againſt

God, who vrgeth all that looke to be ſaued, vnto that repentant eſtate, and that vpon a heauie condition, ſaying: except ye repent ye ſhal al periſh.
                  Luke 13.3. And this be ſaid of this ſecond point, namely, though many haue great meanes to call them to repentance, yet they are neuer the better, for all their warnings they cannot be brought to take heed.
               
                  
                     The third point. They that neglect the meanes of ſaluation, ſhall pay dearely for it.
                  The third point in this firſt part ſheweth, that though ſo many as we haue heard of, take libertie to themſelues to contemne Gods gratious offer of the beſt things that can be enioyed, by the preaching of the Goſpell, or at leaſt neglect the ſame, when they might enioy them: yet they ſhal do it to their coſt, & pay dearly for the ſame. And that the Lord Ieſus proueth to be true, in ſaying to them that did ſo, euen theſe two cities, wo be to thee Corazin, wo be to thee Bethſaida, whereby we ſee, that the Lord wringeth the dregges of his wrath vpon the heads of all ſuch: God curſeth them and pronounceth his vengeance to hang ouer them. Which Iohn Baptiſt confirmeth when to the Phariſies which came to heare him, but meant not to be amended by him, he ſaid: O ye generation of vipers,
                  Matth. 3.7. 
                  who hath taught you to flie from the vengeance to come? But he anſwered them, that they could not auoid it, if they lay ſtill in their ſinnes. Euen ſo the Lord Ieſus pronounced to the Scribes & Phariſies though they pretended great holines to the people, Wo be to you,
                  Matth. 23.27. 
                  Scribes and Phariſies, hypocrites, for ye are like to whited toumbes, which appeare beautifull outward, but are within full of dead mens bones, and all filthineſſe: ſo yee within, are full of briberie and exceſſe. Here if any ſhould obiect, and ſay: God forbid that all which repent not, ſhould be in the ſame caſe that they were. I anſwere, thou ſayeſt ſomewhat, but not all. For indeed they were the more vnexcuſable,Iohn. becauſe they know their masters will, and did it not; neither had any cloake for their ſinne, ſeeing he came and ſpake to them. But other that know leſſe, and haue not had ſo many things againſt them as they, yet becauſe they are willingly blind, and are content to go on in their bad and vnrepentant courſe, they ſhall be beaten alſo, and can pretend no excuſe to couer their fault.Hebr. 12.14. According to that in the Hebrewes, without holineſſe ye ſhall not ſee the Lord;

and alſo in Luke,
                  Luke. to them that ſhall alleage as much in their owne defence, and for their excuſe, as the moſt are able, ſaying: We haue eaten and drunke in thy preſence, and thou hast taught in our ſtreet, our Sauiour ſhall anſwere, I tell you I know you not, whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquitie,
               
               Thus we ſee, both by the teſtimony of our Lord Ieſus himſelfe, in other places as well as this, as alſo of his faithfull meſſengers, that the hearers of the Word who are not alſo doers of the ſame, are ſo farre from any hope of being iuſtified, that they ſhall certainly be condemned, and are vnder the wo and the curſe. Now if it be ſo, they walke in that eſtate whereſoeuer they become; and therefore curſed in the houſe, and in the field, in their pleaſures taking, and in their merrie companies, ſo as if it pleaſe the Lord in their flouriſhingeſt eſtate to take thē away, whether in their mirth, as Agag,
                  1. Sam. 15.32. Numb. 16.32. and 25.8. Act. 12.23. or in their rebellion with Corah, or in their filthineſſe as Zimrie and Coſby, or in their pride as Herod, all that obſerue it, may ſee, and bee able to ſay, that the curſe doth take hold of them, and accompany them, and before it breake out ſo openly, the word of the Lord affirmeth the ſame, that it followeth them whereſoeuer they become, though ſecretly.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 
                   And if any ſhall obiect, and ſay, they ſee no ſuch thing, ſeeing they proſper and ruffle it out, when other are ſad and hang downe the head; it may pleaſe them to know, that all ſuch proſperings and iollities in perſons, whom God hath branded with the marke of infamie and miſerie, ſhould be taken for more apparent tokens of curſedneſſe: if they can be luſtie and ioe and when God calleth to mourning and heauineſſe. 
                     Anſw. 
                   For ſo the Lord ſpeaketh to ſuch, Clenſe your hands,
                  Iames 4.8. 
                  (ye ſinners) and purge your hearts ye wauering minded: ſuffer afflictions and ſorrow ye; and weepe ye; let your laughing be turned into mourning, and your ioy into heauineſſe.
               
               Would not any count him twiſe miſerable,
                     A ſimile
                   who being led to execution, ſhould call his companions to laughing and drinking? So he ſhewes his curſed eſtate manifeſtly to the world, when he glorieth and walketh ſecurely vnder the ſtate of condemnation. 
                     Obiect. 
                   If ye ſay, God would neuer forbeare him,

if he were accurſed; but would cauſe it to breake foorth by ſickneſſe, diſeaſes, penurie, and other calamities, 
                     Anſw. 
                   To that I anſwere, that it is the long ſuffering of the Lord and his ſpeciall diſpenſation towards ſuch, in that hee doth forbeare them, whereas he might iuſtly do all that and much more vnto them: and this he doth, both that they might thereby be brought to repentance,Rom. 2.4. and alſo for that if he ſhould ſo purſue ſinners, as they do giue him occaſion, and prouoke him to do, there ſhould ſcarcely any be left to continue the generation of mankind in Church and Common-wealth.
               But concerning this I may iuſtly complaine, as the Prophet did in his time,Eſay 53.1. and ſay; Lord, who hath beleeued our report? For (to ſpeake as the truth is) who beleeueth this, or careth for it,Epheſ. 5.6. that the wrath of God hangeth ouer the chidren of diſobedience?
                  
                     Few ſee or beleeue the danger they are in.
                   eſpecially, who applieth it to himſelfe? Oh the ſenſeleſſe blockiſhneſſe of man, who paſſeth ouer theſe matters ſo ſlightly, which are moſt weightie. If he be told but once of a ſhrewd turne that is comming towards him in his cattell or goods, hee beleeueth, and preuenteth it with all ſpeed poſſible. But an hundred warnings of this ſpiritual danger, maketh him nothing at all to beleeue it; or if he do, he dare expoſtulate and diſpute with God, that he is too ſeuere againſt man for ſo ſmal a matter, whoſe boldnes is to be beaten downe, as it were with mallets and hammers, that ſo the conſcience may be bruiſed, rather then the whole perſon be rent in pieces,
                  Pſalme 50.22. 
                  as of a lion, while there is none to deliuer him.
               
               And becauſe I know the feareful danger of vnbeleefe, and that it ſhaketh off the wholeſomeſt inſtruction, I will heere ſtay a while, and labour to perſwade ſuch, into whoſe hands this ſhall come,Iames 2.19. 
                  to beleeue and tremble at leaſt, (for ſo much the diuels do) and then to ſearch better into themſelues, and try what depth of euill is in them,Lament. 3.40. and ſo turne againe vnto the Lord. To this end let them weigh duely what the Apoſtle writeth:Rom. 2.8.9. to them that are contentious, and diſobey the truth, and obey vnrighteouſneſſe, ſhall be indignation and wrath: tribulation and anguiſh, ſhall be vpon the ſoule of euery one, that doth euill; but to euery one that doth good, ſhall be glorie, honor and peace. If the Lord ſay, anguiſh ſhall be to ſuch, how are they

blindfolded and hardened, who ſtand againſt him, and ſay, it ſhall not be ſo?
               Our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith to the like purpoſe,Iohn 3.18. 
                  He that beleeueth in him ſhall not be condemned, but he that beleeueth not, is condemned alreadie, as if he ſhould ſay, euen while he liueth in this eſtate of vnbeleefe, he is condemned; and when he dieth in the ſame eſtate, it ſhall be executed vpon him.
                     Obiect. 
                   If any will obiect: but what if he repent before?
                     Anſw. 
                   I ſay then the caſe is altered, that is the thing we looke for, and deſire to heare of ſuch as I ſpeake of, but there are few of them that are haſtie to propound that queſtion, as purpoſing to make triall of it, for then they ſhould remoue the wo farre from them, and be deliuered out of the curſed eſtate that they were in.
               Beſides,
                     Reaſons to draw men to repentance.
                   there are reaſons forcible enough to draw them vpon their knees, and to beleeue that it is no leſſe then is told them, and preached vnto them.  One is this, that ſundrie of them who haue been as farre off as they, haue yet bin brought to change their iudgements, and forſake their former boldnes, which nothing but vnbeliefe had bred in them, which is a ſtrong motiue to appale them that ſhall heare of it.  Secondly, they who liue heere in deſpaire doe feele it,Reuelat. 6.16. and that the wrath of God is ſo heauie vpon them to oppreſſe their ſoule, that they cannot caſt it off.  Thirdly, the damned haue found it to be ſo without recouerie.  And laſtly,Luke 16.24. now is their time to whom I ſpeake, to preuent it, or elſe it is moſt like that they ſhall go take part with the damned in it.
               And if this curſe and wo pronounced vpon them, reached but to the end of this preſent life, or were afterward but a loſing and forgoing of the kingdome of heauen, it were ſomewhat: (and yet who would let go his part in that for a whole world) but when it accompanieth damnation, and the caſting of them into vtter darknes,
                  Matth. 22.13. 
                  where ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth for euer, how terrible and intollerable is it to thinke of? To ſee one to bee but famiſhed to death by hanging in chaines, is able to make a ſtonie heart to quake and tremble: and what is it then, to be tormented with paine more grieuous then any death, and yet neuer to be dead? Wherefore I conclude, that if ſuch woe be pronounced by our Sauiour

Chriſt to them that profit not by his workes, the greateſt whereof is the ſincere preaching of the Goſpell, and if it be impoſſible that Chriſt ſhould lie, I conclude (I ſay) that they in our age are in an high degree of miſerie, not onely which contemne this ordinance of God, but who giue not all diligence thereto,
                  2. Pet. 1.10. 
                  that they may make their calling and election ſure thereby.
               
            
            
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  
                     The first point in the ſecond part.
                  
                  NOw followeth the firſt point in the ſecond part, and that is, if many did enioy the meanes of their ſaluation, which ſome others doe, they would vndoubtedly repent. Euen as our Lord Ieſus ſaith heere, If the great workes which haue been done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented, &c.
               Heere we muſt not make Chriſts words a ſtumbling blocke, as though he meant to ſet himſelfe againſt his owne word, which ſaith, that no reprobates (ſuch as Tyre and Sidon moſt diſſolute cities were) can be conuerted: but we muſt looke to his meaning, which was this: that as many heatheniſh cities of the Gentiles were conuerted by Pauls preaching Chriſt to them, as Theſſalonica, Philippos, Corinth with many other, were: ſo is it as likely, that theſe heere mentioned might haue done, (which if they had done, then ſhould they not haue bin reprobates,Matth. 21.31. for Chriſt ſpeaketh by ſuppoſition) euen as he ſaith to the like purpoſe in another place, Harlots and publicans ſhall enter into the kingdome of God before the chiefe Prieſts and the Elders of the people, which yet was nothing likely in the ſight of men.
               So we reade that they who were mockers, and railed on the Apoſtles, (ſo farre were they from ſauouring their heauenly doctrine): yet when the Lord in his mercie towards them,Act. 2.37. cauſed them to attend to Peters ſermon reproouing

their ſinne: they were ſo pricked in their conſciences, that they came to him and the other Apoſtles, for further inſtruction and comfort, and obtained it. Samaria that had long been bewitched by Simon Magus the ſorcerer,Act. 8.8. yet at the preaching of Philip (a thing very vnlike to come to paſſe) was conuerted to Chriſt, ſo as the fruit thereof appeared not to be ſmall, namely, that it brought great ioy into the citie:Luke 15.1. ſo they who were notorious offenders came flocking about Chriſt to heare him, when the Scribes and Phariſies not only did not ſo, but ſcorned that they ſhould.
               And therefore it may iuſtly bee lamented, that the preaching of the Goſpell is not with credit and authoritie in a ſound and plaine manner planted in ſuch places, where it is wanting, and where it were like to do much good; as our Lord Ieſus bewailed it,Matth. 9.36. when he ſaw the people ſcattered as ſheepe without a ſhepheard and willed that prayers ſhould be made to the Lord of the haruest,
                  Verſe 38. 
                  that he would ſcud labourers into his haruest. For it is very probable, if it were ſo, that numbers would embrace it ioyfully, who now for that they know not the power and worth of it, paſſe by it and ſcorne it, as nothing or little worth.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 
                   And whereas ſome will bee readie to ſay, wee may eaſily gueſſe what good it is like to do, if it were in ſuch places, by the ſmall account that is made of it, where it is: 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, 
                     The Gospell with due reuerence preached, returnes not in vaine.
                   that where the Goſpel is with due reuerence beſeeming ſuch an holy ordinance of God, preached; it doth not returne in vaine, but draweth them which were diſperſed to one bodie of the Church. And (doubtleſſe) if the Prachers themſelues be men of ſinceritie, loue, grauitie, and will put on the perſon of the people to conſider their ignorance, forgetfulneſſe, looſeneſſe, vnſetledneſſe, and other infirmities, and applie themſelues vnto them, as their needs do require, and would ſeeke to winne them, rather then ſet vp themſelues; none need to doubt, but that they ſhould perſwade many to become true Chriſtians, and to bee tractable to good duties, when they be kindly and wiſely aduiſed and directed.
               Oh they that haue not experience will hardly be perſwaded, how much vnfained loue and labour in the Miniſter, is

like to preuaile with the people to winne them from folly, vanitie, ignorance, and the common ſinnes, which through cuſtome and company they haue been drowned in. And what maruell, when they ſhall by wiſe and friendly dealing, be made to ſee how they were deceiued, and that very dangerouſly; whiles they following the deſires of their euill hearts, walked after the ſinnes of the times in which they liued? and when other manner of pleaſures and delights ſhall be offered them, which they neuer had taſted of before, I meane heauenly.
               
                  
                     The 
                           ••
                        rmer doctrine exemplified 
                           〈◊〉
                         experience.
                  I may ſpeake the more boldly, becauſe I know I ſpeake the truth, that almoſt fortie yeeres agone, when I came yong from the Vniuerſitie, to a people blind and farre gone in the ſinnes that were then commonly committed in the world, ſauouring no whit of pietie, and I had little in mee to commēd me vnto them, my knowledge being not much, though my deſire (I may ſay) was feruent in ſeeking it, and to do them good; and my authoritie ſmall, as being then vnder another, which was Paſtor to them, but reſident in another charge hard by: euen ſo long ago, I ſay, I remember that which is not vnworthie the mentioning and ſpeaking of in this place.
               And that is, how maruellouſly God wrought among vs: that when there was no preſident nor example in the corner thereabout of diligent repairing to the place of Gods worſhip on the Sabbath in the afternoone; but all diſorder in dancing, playing, haunting the Ale-houſe, and other like, and little power of godlines to be ſeene or heard of round about; it pleaſed God by care and diligence in example giuing among them, and labouring in that weake manner that I was able to teach and exhort them, with familiar conuerſing with them in priuate, who were more teachable then the reſt, in good communication drawing them on, that in two yeeres ſpace I might haue perſwaded them to any good thing that I ſaw meet: (the bodie of them I meane) and a louing conſent might haue bin ſeene among them to that which was good: neither can I ſay any worſe of them for the time that I could ſtay amongſt them, which was full ſix yeeres.
               
                  Which I ſay not for vaine glorie, (God is record) and well nigh fortie yeeres is a reaſonable time to deſpiſe that, and yet I would haue ſaid more, but for auoiding the ſuſpicion of it: but I ſpeake this to moue ſome of my fellow brethren in the Miniſterie; ſuch as in an honeſt and good heart deſire to ſee fruit of their labours, to thinke of the way of obtaining the ſame. And that is (no doubt) to ſuch as hartily ſeeke it,
                     How a Miniſter ſhould deale with a people to do them good.
                   to labour for the gift of perſwading the people, and familiar applying the Scripture to the perſons particularly, in a right and wiſe manner, as well as to teach them the truth generally: and to vſe diligence and conſtancie in both, and withall to take all occaſion to commune and confer of good things in companying with them, and not to ſpend the little time that they are with them in play, nor to vſe to talke of worldly things to them, whereto the people be ſo readily carried, nor idlely and vainly to keepe them company, which dulleth and maketh blunt the edge of their Miniſtrie amongſt them, and raiſeth a meaner conceit of the perſons themſelues, and by conſequent of their Miniſterie, which had little need to be.
               This manner of liuing amongſt them, with an eſpeciall care to auoid iuſt ſuſpicion of couetouſneſſe, and loue of this world, and other offences, which are too common, is like, through Gods bleſſing to knit them ſo in firme and true loue together, that they ſhall call home to true repentance ſuch as God hath in thoſe places ordained to eternall life, and they ſhall by ſuch manner of liuing with them, be like with loue and readineſſe to receiue their doe at the peoples hands, about the paying and requiring of the which, the greateſt pritches are taken, and the ſoreſt conceits ariſe betwixt them, which are the beginnings and occaſions of continuall broiles and contentions afterwards, or at leaſt of ſtrangeneſſe, or hollow and hauerly loue betwixt them, whereby it commeth to paſſe, that preaching doth little good vnto them. And thus by occaſion of anſwering this obiection, I haue ſtayed the longer in this matter.
               Now I will returne to the words of our Sauiour againe,
                     Such as are leaud and farre gone may be reclaimed.
                   which I laſt mentioned, that if his great workes, and namely

preaching, ye greateſt of thē al, had bin in ſome place the people there would haue repented? by this ſpeech of his, we may obſerue, that ſuch as are lewd & farre gone, may be brought home to be members of the militant Church, and Chriſt looketh for it that it ſhould be ſo, and layeth for it, by ſending forth and appointing his Miniſters for that purpoſe. As for example, who was farther off from hope them Mary Magdelen out of whom Chriſt caſt ſeuen diuels?
                  Luk. 8.2. Or who among many might haue bin like to be reiected rather then Paul himſelfe?1. Tim. 1.15. 
                  who was a perſecutor, an oppreſſor, and a blaſphemer? likewiſe the great ſinners in the time of our Sauiour, who for the odious account they were in, euen with the Phariſies themſelues, were abhorred of them, and commonly reckoned with the heathens, and Publicans, And yet how did the Lord Ieſus loue Mary? how did he regard Paul as he confeſſeth himſelfe, that for al his ſinnes, he obteined mercy, and was counted faithfull, and put in his ſeruice? And the great ſinners acknowledging and forſaking their ſinnes, were preferred and iuſtified before the Phariſies.
               
                  
                     This giues no incouragement to the bad and wilfull.
                  And yet this giueth no incouragement to the badde and wilfull, as though they may thinke heauen to be atteined with eaſe, idlenes, and ſecuritie. For we know, that no ſuch ſhall enter into the kingdome of God. And yet it is not to be denied, that the teachable hearers that begin to lende their eares to the preaching of the Goſpell, though they haue bin farre gone in time paſt, may conceiue great hope hereby of the pardon of their ſinnes, and ſhould not deſpaire. Which I thinke needfull to ſay, ſeeing many who haue long lien in a lewd courſe of life, when they are aduiſed to turne againe vnto the Lord, (and they could alſo be content to doe ſo) yet take deadly diſcouragement, ſaying of themſelues through ignorance and feare; It is too late for them to repent, and that their ſins are ſo great that they cannot be forgiuen. But of this firſt point in the ſecond part this be ſaid. The ſecond point followeth of the ſecond part of the text according to the deuiſion.
            
            
               
               THE THIRD SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  HEre our Sauiour ſayeth,
                     
                        The ſecond point in the ſecond part.
                     
                     
                        Repentance not to be deferred.
                     
                   if they of Tyre and Sidon had inioyed the like meanes as the Cities of Corazin and Bethſaida did, they had long agoe repented: wherein he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that the gift of conuerting to God, is ſo great and precious, in reſpect of the want of it, in any eſtate of life beſides, that all wiſe folke would lay for it betimes euen at the firſt hearing of the Goſpell, when it is new come amongſt them; and not driue of, as too many doe, till it be too late, or at leaſt wiſe till they hazard their ſaluation. This is that which he would haue vs learne out of theſe words. And to ſay the truth, if it were a meaner matter, then the meſſage and glad tidings of eternall life is, if it were but the offer of leaſe or fee ſimple of land in a good ayer and ſoile, who would not lay for the firſt offer, and labour by friends and coſt that none might haue the liberty of chooſing or refuſing before him? eſpecially if it were a good peny-worth. But alas, what is the greateſt Manour or Lordſhip, if it were a whole Country, which is yet but a corner of it, if it be compared with that ſpacious kingdome of heauen, already furniſhed withall manner of pleaſures and delights? Or what is the ſumptuous building or princelieſt dwelling (which can be but of ſtone and clay) in compariſon of an habitation not made with hands, but euerlaſting; which the Goſpell offreth not as a purchaſe to be bought for mony, but a free gift,2. Cor. 5.1. and yet the greateſt of all gifts, giuen for nothing.
               And yet as if wiſdome were taken away from the wiſe, and all vnderſtanding from the prudent, how are the learned, noble, and mighty men of this world (to ſpeake of the greateſt part) without iudgement and light to diſcerne the worth and value of theſe things? but their eyes are dazled with the deceitful beauty of things preſent and temporall. Whereby

it commeth to paſſe; that they imbrace not the other at al (if many of them ſcorne them not) ſo farre is it off, that they be the firſt that receiue the glad tidings of the kingdome. If newes of any great importance or weight be brought into a lande, who are the firſt partakers of it but they? And good reaſon, for they are the chiefe and greateſt. If any dainties be, who aske for them ſooner then they, and why ſhould they not be for them before others, who are beſt able to buy them?
               But oh then, the greateſt dainties of all, which alſo neuer waxe common nor ſtale, but are ſtill fragrant and ſauoury, that they ſhould not be asked after nor regarded! And the newes and tidings, that make the ſoule leape for ioy, as oft as they be brought and receiued,Pſal. 119.54. and are ſo farre from cloying and being weariſome, that they be matter of ſong euen to Kings, yea and without them their liues are but troubleſome and full of feares; Oh that theſe ſhould not moſt affect them, euen when they are thus in their prime, it is doublely to be lamented.
               But let vs weigh the words, euen all ſorts of vs. Long agoe (he ſaith) they would haue repented. If we deſire to profit aright by them, then we ſhould reſolue with our ſelues, that we ſhould not ſtay and linger behinde, when the Goſpell commeth firſt to be ſoundly preached amongſt vs, ſuffering who ſo liſteth to goe before vs, in the harty imbracing of it, but as the people did in Iohn Baptiſt time, to receiue it with violence, and as it were with greedines, labouring to goe before others therein; and as ſoone as wee perceiue the benefit that is offred thereby, which is, that we may finde the pearle; then to lay to buy it forthwith, and get it as our owne, that we and ours may be euer after inriched thereby.
               We ſhould not like ill husbands forſlow the time, or as careleſſe chapmen, let goe a good peniworth, leaſt letting paſſe the opportunity, we come not to the like offer againe. The Apoſtle wiſhing Timothy to preach in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon,
                  2. Tim. 4.2. 
                  becauſe in time the people wil not ſuffer wholeſom doctrine, but hauing their eares itching, ſhall after their owne luſts get them an heape of teachers; doth by the ſame reaſons, aduiſe

the hearers, that they take the opportunity to heare and imbrace the truth, and ſound doctrine while they may, and therefore eſpecially at the firſt. And ſo they ſhal be able afterwards, when others begin to loath it, and ſo fall into the dangers that the Apoſtle would haue wiſe men to preuent and auoide; they ſhall be able againe, I affirme, to ſay with ioy; we haue laied our foundation already, we haue beleeued and repented (as our Sauiour would haue it) long agoe, and we will not alter our iudgement and practiſe for any other.
               There are three eſpeciall cauſes,
                     Three cauſes why we ſhould haſten our repentance.
                   why all ſhould haſt to repent at the firſt hearing, ſo ſoone as they can be able to diſcerne the authority and power of the word?  The firſt is becauſe if we doe it not at the firſt, perhaps we ſhal neuer after: and eſpecially if any ſuch of vs be cauillers and reſiſters of it. I deny not,Mat. 20.5.6. but the Lord calleth at the ninth and eleuenth houre, which refuſe to come at the ſeauenth: but who is ſo deſperate, as to ieopard his happines by ſo bolde an aduenture? ſeeing the wicked and the deceiuers waxe worſe and worſe?
                  2. Tim. 3.13. and he that is not fit to be vrged to day is like to be leſſe fit to morrow. For who knoweth that he ſhall haue minde or meanes, or if he haue both, yet whither he ſhall haue opportunity by health and freedome from paine and diſeaſes, to vſe and inioy them? And although he doe, yet whether the Lord will bleſſe them?
               In all which reſpects the wiſe man adulſeth thus; Remember thy maker (O man) in the dayes of thy youth,
                  Eccleſ. 12.1. 
                  whiles the euill dayes come not, nor the yeares approch, in which thou ſhalt ſay, I haue no pleaſure in them. I haue (I denie not) ſeene the ignorant and careleſſe, who haue not been able to diſcerne and conſider what they doe, in neglecting and refuſing the benefit of the Goſpel offred them, I haue ſeene ſuch (I ſay) to haue bin brought to repentance, and that God hath not called their ſinne to remembrance againſt them: though many euen of them yet, haue neuer found it ſo.
                     Note. 
                   But the ſcornefull and the cauiller, who againſt his knowledge hath reſiſted the truth, and ſtriuen againſt it, I haue rarely in mine obſeruation ſeene, but their death hath bin like their life, without any pregnant ſignes of repentance.
               
                  
                   The ſecond cauſe why men ſhould be deſirous to conuert truely to God at the firſt hearing of the Goſpell, is this: that though we might be ſure to doe it at the laſt, (whereas (yet) in all experience late repenting is dangerous) what wiſe man would be content to goe without the fruit of it in the meane ſeaſon? No, if it were but for one day, when he might inioy it.Pſal. 84.11. 
                  Seeing one day in the houſe of God, is better than a thouſand in any eſtate whatſoeuer out of a godly life. And thus it ſhuld be, ſeeing thus it might be with a man: that ſo he may inioy, euen all his life long, the moſt ſweet peace of God which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, (though not without tribulation in the fleſh) which no vnbeleeuer nor impenitent perſon can taſt of, his reioycing being onely momentany and deceitfull.
               
                   The third reaſon is this, that the ſooner we repent, the ſooner we make ioyfull and glad al the true ſeruants of God, yea the very Angels,Luk. 15.7. whom our Sauiour affirmeth to reioyce thereat: and beſides, the ſooner we ſhall be fit to teach the waies of God to ſinners,Pſal. 51.14. and helpe to conuert the wicked vnto him, when we ſhal our ſelues be able to reioyce in our ſaluation, being made aſſured thereof by his holy ſpirit. And who would lye idle from ſo great imployment, to draw ſinners vnto God,Dan. 12.3. when we reade, that they who winne many ſhall ſhine as the ſtarres for euer and ouer.
               
               
                  
                     Obiect. 
                   If it be obiected againſt this which I haue ſayed; why is the repentant ſtate in ſo meane account in the world then, if it be ſo gainefull, and ſo highly commended? 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, for three cauſes.Cant. 1.4. 
                   Firſt ſeeing the deareſt to God are in this life vnder many troubles,
                     Three cauſes why the repentant eſtate is in ſo meane accoūt.
                   as the Church complaineth, I am blacke (O ye daughters of Ieruſalem,) that is, disfigured with troubles; therefore the bad world ſhunneth and deſpiſeth her: For which ſhe anſwereth in the Prophet Micha. Reioyce not at me (O mine enemy: for though I am fallen, yet ſhall I riſe againe,
                  Micah. 7.8. 
                  and I will beare my puniſhment becauſe I haue ſinned. And yet when they, ſuch Deſpiſers I meane, and their like are afflicted, and the godly in proſperity, they thinke them the onely happy people.
               Secondly, they narrowly obſerue the ſlips and infirmities of Gods ſeruants, and make them odious, and are readie to

take hurt by them, but the good courſe of their life they regard not, neither think that they need to follow them therein. Nay ſhall I ſay as the truth is? If the godly keepe a narrow watch ouer their waies, oh then they be too preciſe for them to keepe company with, they ſay: and on the otherſide, if they ſlip offenſiuely at any time, nay if they be but reported of to haue done ſo, be it true or falſe, they crie out in another manner thus; oh, theſe be your profeſſors, doe you not ſee what fruits they bring forth? So, they who are purpoſed to take no good by them, can alwayes lay ſtops in their owne way, and while they be at that point, it is no maruell though they ſet not much by repentance, which is that whereof Gods people haue their name that they be called repentant or godly.
               The third reaſon why ſuch haue the godly life in no better account and reckoning, is, for that they know little (nay they are farre off from it) what ioy and comfort it bringeth with it, neither the ſweete and holy peace which they who liue godly doe enioy. For Salomon truly ſetteth downe, that he that is a ſtranger from the life of Gods people,Prou. 14.10. Reuelat. 14.3. 
                  ſhall not be partaker of their ioy. Neither, as S. Iohn ſaith, can any know, what that ſong meaneth, which maketh the godly merrie and ioyfull; but themſelues which are the Lords redeemed ones, which if they did know, they would (as our Sauiour ſaid to the woman of Samaria) firſt haue asked it of him,Iohn 4.10. as the thing that is moſt precious,Hebr. 11.25. and would haue preferred it before the pleaſures of ſinne, which (yet) laſt but for a ſeaſon. And this be ſaid of the ſecond point in the ſecond part, namely of repenting betimes.
               Now this repenting which Chriſt heere ſpeaketh of,
                     The laſt point in the ſecond part.
                   what it is, (which is the laſt point in this ſecond part) this (I ſay) let vs examine a little, and ſo make an end. His words are theſe, they would haue repented in ſackcloth and aſhes. This muſt needs be (as we may well gather by his owne words) a matter of great importance. And that the repenting which men commonly ſo call, is nothing leſſe then that which he heere meaneth and ſpeaketh of. For the Lord Ieſus in ſaying, They would haue repented in ſackcloth and aſhes, meaneth, that they

would haue done it heartily and ſoundly; as theſe outward ceremonies did teſtifie ſuch a thing. And he ſpeaketh ſo, becauſe it was well knowne to them, to whom he ſpake, that they who repented vnfainedly in times paſt, ſhewed it that way, though he did not thereby iuſtifie all to be truly penitent, that vſed theſe ceremonies.
               
                  
                     Repentance must be ſound, not hypocriticall.
                  Therefore according to his meaning, let vs learne this: that when we make account that we do repent, let vs ſee that it be true and heartie, not fained and hypocriticall. And therin we muſt ſee, that we be ſetled and ſtabliſhed, not flitting, nor off and on, as the manner of the moſt is, to offer to God ſuch cracked halfe ſeruice. Now as by repentance heere, he meaneth the whole conuerſion of a man, which conſiſteth in the pricke of conſcience, faith in Gods promiſes, and care of amendment of life; ſo muſt mens repentings be, and not be patched and pieced with ſhreds and rags of our owne deuiſing, but currant and approued, hauing all theſe three parts in it. For elſe as a ragge it will ſoone weare away, whereas it is to be preſerued, vpholden and continued, and the longer we liue, to be better teſtified that it is true and vnfained indeed.
               And thus do and proſper: ſuch a foundation laid, ſhall be fit to be builded vpon proportionablie, and when wee haue thus begun, in the ſame manner go we forward, till we and all other that liſt, may ſee, that our repentance is that which is not to be repented of. And for want of this, as they who did neuer rightly begin, ſhall haue nothing whereof they may reioyce, whatſoeuer their ſhewes be: ſo they who haue begun well; yet without ſuch a proceeding, ſhall euer be readie to ſtagger, and to doubt whether they did euer rightly begin to beleeue and repent or no, which, who doth not ſee, what a continuall diſquietnes and diſcomfort it breeds? whereas they who are ſetled and commendablie go forward, ſhall hold the confidence and reioycing of their hope vnto the end. And this of the whole.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            TWO SERMONS VPON ACTS 9.31.
            
               Then had the Churches rest through all Iudea, and Galilie, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the feare of the Lord and the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied.
            
            
               
                  HAuing in ſome of the former Sermons taught that Chriſtiās ſhould paſſe the whole time of their dwelling heere in holy feare of offending God, and namely,
                     The opening of the text.
                   that part of their life which is paſſed in outward peace and proſperity, (which bleſſing of God the moſt part doe greatly abuſe;) I thought it both verie pertinent, and alſo profitable, to ſhew and ſet downe ſome examples of ſuch as haue done ſo; and examples not of one man, two or three, but of whole particular Churches, who may be paternes of well vſing outward peace, and reſt from perſecution, and trouble to the worlds end. Here therfore, in this text I meane, (to lay out the meaning thereof,) you may ſee people of no long continuance (for the moſt of them) in the profeſſion of the Goſpell, who as they had been hardly holden vnder of trouble and perſecution, in all the three places of Iudea, Samaria and Galily, and yet reuolted not from their religion, neither fainted in their hope; ſo now, when God gaue them a breathing time (as it were) of outward peace and reſt from their former perſecution, they neglected not the occaſion offered them, but tooke the opportunitie

to benefit themſelues in the practiſe of godlineſſe, to their high commendation, and to the example of all poſteritie that ſhould come after them. For they vſed all good meanes both in communion and meeting together publikely and priuately, by hearing the Apoſtles doctrine, and conference of the ſame, and euery one by himſelfe in reading and prayer, to ſet themſelues forward therein.
               And by theſe and ſuch like meanes they builded vp themſelues in ſauing and effectuall knowledge, in faith, hope, patience, loue, and other graces of God, and reſted not there, but alſo ſhewed the ſame forth in their liues before men, with great ioy of heart to themſelues. Neither was this their holy and heauenly courſe without fruit, for the Lord bleſſed it abundantly to the praiſe of his name in the conuerſion of many. For ſo it is ſaid in the text, that they were multiplied, that is, the number of them who were beleeuers in Chriſt, was encreaſed; the Lord adding vnto them, that is, to the Church, through the good example which they gaue; many, euen of the bad ſort, which liued among them. And ſo the word (multiplied) is to be vnderſtood, as in the originall tongue moſt clearely may appeare; and not as it is taken in ſome tranſlations, that is to ſay, that they were multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost: for that altereth the ſenſe of the place, which is this, as I haue ſaid; that the faithfull were multiplied, encreaſed in number; other who had been vnbeleeuers before, being brought to the faith; and not as the tranſlaters take it, that the comfort of the faithfull was multiplied. Thus much be ſaid for the coherence of this text with the former, and for the laying out of the meaning of it.
               
                  
                     The parts of it, two.
                  Now follow the parts of it, and they are generally two. The one is the ſetting downe of the ſtate of theſe Churches, of Iudea, Samaria and Galilie at that time, namely, that they were not vnder perſecution, as a while before they had been; but they had reſt from it. The other part is the vſe that was made of it amongſt them. The vſe of this peace or reſt from perſecution, was made by two ſorts of people· the one was the faithfull and beleeuers: the other, thoſe which beleeued not. The vſe that the faithfull made of it, was threefold; the

one, that they for their owne parts grew in grace and in the gifts of God. For it is ſaid, they were edified, that is, builded vp: if ye aske wherein? the anſwere is, in faith and the fruits of it; as Iude in his Epiſtle wrote to the Churches,Iude 19. 
                  that they ſhould be builded vp in their moſt holy faith. The ſecond vſe they made of their peace, was, that they did ſhew foorth the ſame grace and faith in their liues before men: for ſo it is ſaid, they walked (through the courſe of their liues) in the feare of the Lord. The third was, they did by both prouide and procure to themſelues a ſweete and a ſound comfort in their liues, (which few heere enioy:) for ſo it is ſaid, they were comforted by the holy Ghost. The vſe the bad ſort and vnbeleeuers made of it, was this, that they learned by the examples of the other, to embrace the Goſpell, and to be good in that time of reſt from perſecution, and became followers of the Churches; for they would not haue been multiplied, if the other had not been added to them.
               But to begin; before I ſpeake of outward peace and reſt from perſecution, firſt let it be marked,
                     First, the ſtate of the Churches. 1. Vnder the croſſe.
                   that thoſe Churches were before this, vnder perſecution: to teach vs, that although God loue his people dearely, and can afford them his good benefits of all ſorts in this life, as he beſtowed the beſt vpon theſe; yet he ſeeth it good, to exerciſe them with ſundrie afflictions, as he ſaith, whom I loue, I correct.
                  Reuelat. 3.19. And ſeeing Saint Peter ſaith, he doth not this,Hebr. 12.5 1. Pet. 1.6. but when need is (for hee doth nothing needleſſely, nor without cauſe) therefore wee muſt know, that it is needfull, that it ſhould be ſo: yea and that alſo, though they be ſharpe and fierie. The Lord knoweth what is beſt for euery one of vs. And it is meet, that wee ſhould be well perſwaded hereof alſo; both becauſe we doe ſo ſoone ſhrinke backe, at the very hearing, that any croſſes are comming towards vs, and alſo for that we muſt enter into the kingdome of heauen by bearing our part in them.
               And for theſe cauſes, and for that they are layed on vs by him who doth all things well, and for the good of his; therefore we muſt both ſtoope to them willingly, and looke vp to him who hath ſmitten vs, that he may heale vs.Rom. 8.2
                        •
                     . And the Lord ſheweth vs many other reaſons, why he leaueth vs thus to be

ſubiect to many tribulations, though hee be not bound to ſhew vs any: euen for that we be not fit to vſe proſperity well a
                     •
                  y long time together, and therefore that we may not bee poiſoned therewith, and ſo periſh with the world thereby, he weaneth vs from the baites thereof by afflictions. The vſe of this is of two ſorts. 
                     Vſe 1 The one that we ſhould prepare for them before,Iohn 6.33. as Chriſts doctrine teacheth when he foretelleth that in the world we ſhall haue tribulation; and as Iobs example incourageth,Iob. who in the middeſt of his proſperity, did looke for his change. 
                  
                     Vſe 2 The other vſe is, that we ſhould take vp our croſſe daily,
                  Luk. 9.23. and that with a willing and ready minde, as in Luk. 9.23. we are taught▪ and pray, that we may doe ſo, to the end our ioy may be all,
                  Iam. 1.2. as S. Iames promiſeth it ſhal be, if wee receiue them in that manner. And this for the firſt point.
               
                  
                     Secondly, in proſperitie.
                  As we haue heard that theſe Churches had been vnder perſecution, ſo yet, now it appeareth that they had reſt from it, at this time here mentioned. Whereby God would haue vs learne,Hoſ. 6.2. Pſal. 30.5. Pſal. 125.3. that he doth not afflict long, but as Hoſea ſpeaketh, after three dayes, that is after a ſhort time, he wil returne and deliuer: and ſo though heauines indure for a night, yet ioy ſhal come in the morning. For he will not ſuffer the rod of the wicked, to lye alwaies vpon the lott of the righteous, leſt they ſhould reach forth their hand to iniquity: But further he bleſſeth them oft and ſundrie wayes, more then is eaſily perceiued; both that it may be ſeene that godlineſſe is not without reward, no, not in this life, and alſo that God can afford good things vnto his ſeruants, though he ſometime afflict them.
               And to come to particulars, he giueth freedome from perſecution, and ſendeth outward peace, whereby we may liue ſafely,
                  1. King. 4.25. 
                  vnder our vine, and vnder our figtree, as it was in the dayes of Salomon. Which benefit if we haue ſo long enioyed, and yet cannot price it in any ſort, according to the value of it, but count it common; wee may aske of them who are or haue been in the heate of perſecution, who can readily tell, how much this peace and reſt from perſecution is worth,
                     The benefit of proſperitie and peace.
                   how many precious liberties it holdeth from vs, and how many good things it depriueth vs of: All which we partake, who haue freedome from that perſecution, and enioy this

outward peace which I ſpeake of. Among the which, theſe are none of the ſmalleſt, that as wee enioy our habitation peaceably thereby; ſo wee haue the benefit of the vtterance of our commodities, and the exchange of our wares, and ſafe trauelling from place to place; all which bring freedome from feare, and other vnquietnes. And, which maketh all theſe to be ſauourie, and to be enioyed with more ſweetnes by this freedome from perſecution, where wee liue vnder a Magiſtrate, that is a maintainer and defender of true religion; we enioy alſo the benefite of the Goſpell truly preached, which is the pearle ſo highly prized by our Sauiour.Math. 13.45. Whereas in domeſtical at home, and forraine warre abroad, as alſo in perſecution, all theſe commodities are wanting. In the booke of Iudges wee reade, that when there was no King in Iſrael, euery man did what ſeemed good in his owne eyes.
                  Iudg. 17.6. 
                  In the daies of Iael the high waies were vnoccupied,
                  Iudg. 5.7. 
                  and the trauellers walked in by-waies, for feare of the enemies, the townes were not inhabited. And in the deſolation of Ieruſalem, as we reade in the Lamentations, ſhe was left ſolitarie, Iudah was carried away captiue: the waies of Zion lamented,
                  Lam. 1.1.4. 
                  becauſe no man came to the ſolemne feaſts,
                  Pſal. 42.4. as they had been wont to come vp with mirth and ioy, all her perſecuters tooke her in the ſtreights. By which it may be ſeene what a benefit, peace and freedome from perſecution is: which ſhould cauſe vs when we may enioy them, to ſtudie to doe all the good that wee may poſſibly, in them; which only is to make the right vſe of them. And ſo did the Churches here, when they had them but a while.
               But what haue we done in the golden dayes of our peace, for theſe fifty full yeares inioyed? It may truly be ſaid, it hath bin worſe with the moſt part, then if they had bin wanting. For then ſhould there neuer haue ſuch foule and horrible ſinnes bin committed, as through and by meanes of peace and proſperity, al places well nigh haue been tainted with. Beſides many haue neuer the more peace with God,
                     Note. 
                   for all the peace that hath been in the land, neither once looke after it: no, nor with men, ſaue in euill; otherwiſe at warre: no, nor in their owne houſes, but are at ſtrife and contention, in

brawling and railing euen betwixt man and wife: nor with themſelues, which is moſt diuelliſh. What quietnes haue many, but when they haue what they would, and while their luſts be ſatisfied (which peace forſaketh them in euery blaſt of affliction) elſe, they are euer vnquiet, and vexed within themſelues, for euery thing that goeth againſt them. But ſeeing the vſes of outward peace are ſet downe in the text, I wil follow that, in the laying out of them.
               
                  
                     The ſecond part. What vſe the godly made of their peace. 1. They were edified.
                  To begin with them therefore, it is ſaid firſt, that they did edifie and build vp themſelues. In what? It muſt needes be, that the holy Ghoſt meant in ſuch inward grace, as inabled them to ſhew it foorth outwardly in their liues before men, as the feare of God, knowledge, faith, hope, care to pleaſe God, and ſuch like; in which, it is ſaid after, they walked amongſt men. And therefore outward duties cannot bee meant thereby, ſeeing the performing of them was another vſe of their peace, ſpoken of afterward ſeuerally by it ſelfe. And how did they build vp themſelues thus in grace? It was by vſing all holy meanes for that purpoſe, both publike and priuate, as the hearing of the Apoſtles doctrine, praying, and vſing other godly fellowſhip together. So that this is as much as if it were ſaid, that they vſed all diligence, and armed themſelues now while God gaue them this little breathing from perſecution; that ſo by their confidence, pure heart, good conſcience, loue, and patience, and other grace, they might be fit to leade a godly life in the world with eaſe, and ſtrengthen themſelues againſt falles, and the baits of ſin on euery ſide. And it is manifeſt to all of vs who can iudge, that by ſuch meanes, and a ſound miniſterie, watching, praying, and the like; the Church of God can grow in grace, and no otherwiſe. And that they did thus it is apparent, by that which we reade in the ſecond of the Acts,Acts 2 43. where it is ſaid, that they were daily in the temple, and continued in the Apoſtles doctrine, and fellowſhip, and in breaking of bread, and prayer.
               
               And this vſe ſhould all true particular Churches and people of God make of their libertie of peace, and of liuing free from perſecution. From the which God hath a long time

freed many of his good ſeruants in this age, howſoeuer ſome are much and oft vnder the croſſe, yea and that right heauie and ſharpe; ſuch therefore ſhould glorifie God by bringing forth fruit, not in a common ſort, yea al poſſible good ſhould be done of them, and not omitted. For as for priuate lets, and thoſe which are vſuall; may more eaſily be ouercome (either inward corruptions, or outward ill examples, or other diſcouragements) as long as the word of God may haue free paſſage to be ſincerely preached.
               But if outward peace alone be counted ſo great a benefit, and ſuch holy and fruitfull vſe made of it,
                     Note. 
                   then how much more ſhould we thinke ſo, when that one is accompanied with abundance of other good things? when health, wealth, friends, and fauour of the godly ſhall go herewith, and meet altogether in one perſon, what manner of people ought ſuch to be in all godlineſſe? And how God looketh for it that it ſhould be ſo, that place of Deuteronomie doth liuely ſhew: Where Moſes ſaith,Deut. 28.47. that we must ſerue the Lord with all ioyfulneſſe and a good heart, for the abundance of all good things. The meditations of ſuch mens harts ſhould be acceptable to God,Pſalme 19.14. and to follow the metaphor of building vſed heere, a little; the people that is ſo bleſſed of God, ſhould do as builders are wont: that is, to pull downe the ruinous corners, & ſet vp new frames in their roomes: ſo ſhould Gods ſeruants plucke downe the old ruines, and breaches of their corrupt hearts, as anger, wrath, impatience, bitterneſſe, and ſuch like vncleane luſts, and ſet vp mercie, tenderheartedneſſe, loue, zeale, faith and ſuch like.
               Yea and more particularly,
                     How all ſorts ſhould be occupied in the time of their peace.
                   according to the diuers ages of Gods children, they ſhould exerciſe themſelues: that is to ſay, the tender conſciences and yong beginners ſhould haue their thoughts and meditations about the fauour of God, deſiring aboue all things to be aſſured of it: the middle aged Chriſtians, and ſuch as are ſomewhat ſtayed in faith and the feare of God, ſhould chiefely be occupied in ſtriuing againſt their luſts, and fighting with them: the ancient and experienced, who haue done both theſe; ſhould much be taken vp in calling to mind, what they haue heard of Gods manner of

dealing in guiding his Church, and the fruit thereof, and in declaring to other, and what they haue ſeene and found themſelues worth the reporting, to be in the ſeruing of God, that thereby they may be encouraged to walke fruitfully and circumſpectly ſtill, as they did long before, and not to be led away from their ſtedfastnes in their Chriſtian courſe,2. Pet. 3.17. 
                  by the error of the wicked, as hauing found that courſe by long proofe, to haue been the moſt gainfull of all other vnto them. Theſe vſes and the like, all ſorts and ages of Gods people, ought to make of Gods bleſſings towards them, and of freedome from trouble.
               
                  
                     The right vſe of peace little looked after.
                  But do the people of this age thus? (for that were a kind vſe of peace, and his other benefits, and would well become them). No, for in this land theſe fiftie yeeres now fully paſſed, what knowledge might haue been? ſo that one might haue been able to teach another, and there might haue been that grace of the ſpirit, which might haue ſeaſoned Chriſtians hearts no leſſe ſenſiblie then the dew doth moiſten the mountaines. So that our Church might haue been a paterne to others, as the Theſſalonians were examples to all that beleeued in Macedonia and Achaia,
                  1. Theſſ. 1.7. and it might now haue been verified, if euer in any age ſince the Apoſtles time, that out of the bellies of beleeuers might haue flowed riuers of waters of life;Iohn 7.38. whereas (except ſome perſons heere and there) there is great ignorance, vnfaithfulneſſe, hollowneſſe, ſecuritie, vncharitableneſſe, maliciouſneſſe, and what not of that kind? I ſpeake not of the diſorders of life (for they are more fitly to be reprooued in the next vſe, which the Churches made of their peace) but of the groſſe diſtemperatures of the heart: for although theſe times of proſperitie and peace, haue been the fitteſt ſeaſons for men to encreaſe in goodnes and grace; euen as the harueſt is to gather in the corne: yet whether we enquire into particular Churches or perſons, we ſhall find nothing more true then this; that peace and plentie haue poiſoned (for the moſt part) the enioyers of them.
               
                  
                     Euen Gods children are ouer taken with this ſinne.
                  But if the people of God, whom I teach now to make this vſe of his bleſſings, were not wound in by the diuels cunning ſleights among the reſt of the world, it were the leſſe maruel:

but euen they cannot be ſholed out from them, but haue their teeth ſet on edge with their courſes by liuing among them, and beholding how they runne headlong into all exceſſe, by meanes of their proſperitie; ſo that euen they forget their couenant made with God, that is, that they ſhould endeuour to vſe ſoberly in this preſent world, all their lawfull liberties, till with ſhame and ſorrow afterward, they are faine to returne againe to repentance. And thus many euen of them not holding gouernment ouer their hearts, breake out into offenſiue life, and become eye-ſores to their brethren, who will not be pent in, to keepe the bounds of vnoffenſiue walking, till experience conſtraine them to wiſh they had been wiſer, and before their ſtraying out ſo far, to haue kept themſelues well, while they were well. And this teacheth vs, that Moſes ſaw good cauſe to giue this warning to Gods people, when they were to go to the land flowing in abundance of Gods bleſſings, out of the barren wilderneſſe, ſaying, When the Lord hath brought you into that land,
                  Deut. 6.10. 
                  with great and goodly cities which ye builded not, and houſes full of all manner of goods, which ye filled not; and welles digged which ye digged not, and vineyards and oliue trees, which ye planted not; and when ye haue eaten and are full; beware lest you forget the Lord which brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the houſe of bondage.
               
               Now to make vſe of this in few words,
                     Miniſters faultie herein.
                   both we of the Miniſterie firſt, and then you the people; conſider how little the like admonition hath preuailed with many of vs. For to ſpeak of our ſelues firſt, how many, when they were ſchollers in the Vniuerſities, haue taught themſelues and others, (as I haue heard it from ſome of them, my ſelfe being then a ſcholler in the Colledge) that a ſtudent hauing a bed, a table,
                  2. King. 4.10. 
                  a ſtoole, and a candlesticke to furniſh his chamber, meaning neceſſarie implements and prouiſion, ſhould attend diligently to his booke, and to the duties of his calling, as hauing ſo good encouragement. And ſo haue many done there, verie commendablie to the good example of others, and the benefit and comfort of many; who (yet) when they haue afterward been conueniently placed in the countrie, with large

prouiſion, and good allowance, entring vpon liuings, which they neuer toiled themſelues, nor paied for, (I ſpeake of ſuch, for elſe their ſinne is double) when (I ſay) they haue bin thus bountifully prouided for, they haue not made their ſtudie and care of preaching for the peoples ſaluation, their geateſt delight, (which yet if I know any thing, or if they taught well in their Colledges) ſhould haue been: the Apoſtle teaching ſuch,1. Tim. 4.13. that they ſhould attend to reading, that ſo they may the better attend to exhortation and doctrine.
               But they haue, as commoditie hath come in, and waxen ſweet, as faſt laid aſide their dutie of labour, and care taking in their Miniſterie, and haue embraced the world with Demas,
                  2. Tim. 4.10. they ſoon became vnfit to draw others out of the world, who lay drowned in it themſelues, but rather by their example, held them faſter in it, and ſo haue decayed in their feruent zeale and loue of preaching, and in other gifts of God, that they rightly verified the Scripture,Luke 8.18. which ſaith, from him that hath not, that is, who vſeth not well the gifts which he hath, ſhall be taken away, euen that which he hath; at leaſt, that which it ſeemeth he hath. And this without ſtanding long vpon it, proueth that many of vs Miniſters, haue not made this firſt vſe of our many bleſſings of God, which the Churches heere mentioned made of their peace and freedome from perſecution.
               
                  
                     People alſo iuſtly reproued.
                  Now to ſay ſomewhat of the people who feare God, what vſe they haue made of proſperitie and the bleſſings of God, what great commendation thinke we, may be made of it? For excepting ſome few,Pſalme. who may truely be called Gods remembrancers, who as Moſes; ſtand in the gap, to hold the wrath of God from breaking in more furiouſly vpon vs, by their daily and feruent prayers, & care that they haue, for the peace & welfare of Sion (the number of whom God vouchſafe to multiplie among vs): beſides thoſe few (I ſay) what great matter can be ſaid of the reſt? For euen the moſt of them, who haue the Goſpell preached among them both purely and painfully, what heartie loue haue they to it? what power hath it ouer their affections? how few are caſt into the mould of it, to be made humble, lowly, vpright, innocent,

zealous, mercifull, kind; and on the contrarie to caſt vp the vnſauourie gorge of their rebellious corruptions?
               Oh how few of them haue plied the meanes with ſuch reuerence and diligence, that they may teſtifie that they haue growne in knowledge, faith and other grace, but haue rather employed themſelues wholly about the flitting & vaniſhing profits and pleaſures of this preſent life, as though they had not been borne to farre more excellent ends and purpoſes? Oh how doe many forget themſelues, when they thus lie drowned therein, till God do by ſome great afflictions draw them out of them to true repentance, and thus trifle out a deale of precious time, which ſhould haue been redeemed to farre better and more precious vſes.
               And thus it appeareth how far both Miniſters & people are from making this vſe that the Churches did, of their peace, although they haue many other bleſſings withal. And yet as little as it troubleth them, it may eaſily be ſeene what a great ſinne it is, as many other wayes, ſo this one eſpecially, that the diuell himſelfe affirmeth, that it is no maruell though ſuch feare God more then others, who liue in proſperitie, and are free from ſore afflictions: for thus he ſaith, (when God commended Iob, as a man that feared God and departed from euill Doth Iob feare God for nought? Hast thou not been a bulwarke to him? thou hast bleſſed the worke of his hand,
                  Iob 1.9. 
                  and his ſubstance is encreaſed in the land: whereby we may ſee, that they haue much to come againſt them, who in their proſperitie ſerue not God. And this be ſaid of the firſt vſe of peace and freedom from perſecution, and what we ought to learne thereby.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  
                     The ſecond vſe of their peace. They walked in the feare of God.
                  
                  TO proceed now, the ſecond vſe which theſe Churches made of their peace, followeth; and it is this: that they approued themſelues to men outwardly by walking in the feare of God, as they were before commended for growing in grace inwardly before God: they profeſſed that they feared God, by liuing godly through the whole courſe of their liues. The feare of God is an excellent gift of God, and a ſtrong bridle to hold from ſinne: I meane not that terrible feare, which the ſpirit of bondage worketh,Rom. 8.15. but that child-like feare that Salomon ſpeaketh of,Prou. 28.13. ſaying, Bleſſed is the man that feareth alwaies. This feare to preuent ſinne to come, and trembling for ſinne paſt, are as the two eye-lids to the eyes, to keepe away danger from the ſoule.Prou. 15. And this feare is the beginning of wiſedome, and the continuance of it is the continuance of wiſedome;Deut. 5.29. and if this be wanting, all grace is wanting alſo.
               
                  
                     To walke in the feare of God, what.
                  But to walke in this feare of God, is a further thing. For that is a ſhewing before men that we haue it, and a reaching out of the fruit of it, and a declaring of the beautie and excellencie of it, in the ſight of men. For it muſt not onely be in vs, but profeſſed of vs, that we are not aſhamed to teſtifie to all, that we feare to offend, how little conſcience ſoeuer others make of dutie, and that we are content to heare of it, if any can conuict vs of the contrarie: which I ſay not, as though we ſhould ſeeke to ſeeme better then we are, (which hypocriſie God abhorreth) but yet that we ſhould be lights vnto others,2. Cor. 12.6. Matth. 5.16. Act. 23.1. as we are commanded; and as Paul profeſſed of himſelfe, ſaying, among thoſe who had accuſed him: I haue in all good conſcience ſerued God vntill this day.
               
               And in this feare of God Ioſeph declareth that he walked

as throughout his life, ſo at thoſe times when he had ſore tentations to the contrary; one, when his whoriſh miſtreſſe did ſo vehemently allure him to wickednes, whom he reſiſted by the helpe hereof, ſaying,Gen. 39 9. 
                  how can I doe this great euill and ſo ſinne againſt God? The other when his brethren after their fathers death feared that he would be reuenged vpon them, to whom he anſwered, am not I vnder God?
                  Gen. 50.19. or doe not I feare God? as if he ſhould haue ſaied, dare I by any ſuch doings prouoke God? So that by all this which hath bin ſaid, it may eaſily be gathered, that we are not to reſt contented with the well ordering of our hartes alone, but we muſt alſo teſtifie it, by the gouernment of our liues.
               And this is the ſecond vſe that theſe Churches made of their peace, and reſt from perſecution, which is commended by the holy Ghoſt to all true Chriſtians to follow them in, and to teach them, that when God enlargeth their liberties, and multiplieth his bleſſings vpon them, they ſhould not, as the men of the world doe, eate and drinke, and ſleep, and play, as though they ſhould neuer be called to their account for the miſpending of their time, and the ill vſing of his benefits: but rather they ſhould know, firſt that all Gods good bleſſings are talents committed to them of their heauenly father, and therefore that they ſhould occupy them carefully and faithfully, till he come to demand how they haue vſed them, and what good they haue done with them. And ſecondly, that they ſhould conſider, that it is the very end why God hath freed them from many great calamities, and ſet them at more liberty then ſundry others of their brethren, to the end that they may thus honour him with a godly and a fruitefull life, which they that want them, can hardly doe. So that although he is not a Chriſtian, who is onely one in outward ſhew, as Paul ſpeaketh of the Iew:Rom. 2.28. yet whatſoeuer inward grace men haue, it muſt be teſtified by forſaking all ſinne outward, and by a godly life, both in their word and deed.
               This did that noble gouernour Ioſua with high commendation regard, and this vſe he made of Gods fauours, that as in godly zeale and other grace inward he excelled others,

ſo he profeſſed boldely, that whatſoeuer others did, in and about their religion;Ioſ. 24.15. 
                  he and his houſe would ſerue the Lord. And the example of Dauid was whiles he liued, of great force, and to this day an example worthy to be followed. Who when he ſaw,2. Sam. 7.2. that God had giuen him reſt from his enemies on euery ſide, he could not tell how he might ſufficiently reſt and content himſelfe in ſhewing himſelfe thankefull, and therefore reſolued to builde an houſe euen a temple to the Lord, for all the people to worſhip him in. And al ſuch as haue duely conſidered, and throughly weighed Gods louing, kindnes to them, haue euer thought it their duty to conſecrate themſelues wholly both ſoule and body, (as the Apoſtle alſo wiſheth, and earneſtly exhorteth,Rom. 12.1.) vnto the Lord.
               
               Which practiſe in men, as it is the moſt beautifull ſight to behold, (as Balaam was conſtrayned to ſay of Gods people, how goodly are thy tents,
                  Num. 24.9. 
                  O Iacob, and thine habitations, O Iſrael, ſo it is bleſſed to themſelues who are ſuch, and to thoſe who wiſh well to them, according to another of his prophecies, where he ſayeth, bleſſed is he that bleſſeth thee and curſed is hee that curſeth thee.
               
               But doe we make this vſe of our peace and other fauours of God which we inioy? to profeſſe our ſelues ſuch as indeuour to walke vnoffenſiuely and without reproofe, in the middeſt of a froward generation which hateth to be reformed? And they who go indeed for beleeuing Chriſtians, and are ſo counted, doe they glory in nothing more then in glorifying God?1 Tim. 4.12. Then ſhould their innocency breake forth as the light, and their vprightnes ſhine as the noone tyde. Then ſhould ſuch be examples in communication and conuerſation, to the ſhame of their enemies and accuſers. As God be thanked ſome doe, and yet acknowledge themſelues in humility to be farre frō that they ought to be, that is, vnprofitable ſeruants. But howſoeuer they who beleeue in Chriſt, are careful to doe good workes as occaſion ſhall be offered, yet if they ſhould not be commended, till the ignorant and profane ſhould doe it, they were not only like to go away with little allowance, but euen with great diſgrace and reproch: ſeeing they count the beſt, the worſt, and haue no other cauſe to

ſpeake il of them then this, that they be ſo vnlike themſelues in euill, As S. Peter ſayeth; therefore they ſpeake euill of ſuch,
                  1. Pet. 4.4. 
                  becauſe they walke not after the ſame exceſſe of riot, that they doe. But (to ſay no more of this) it may appeare, that they which make right vſe of their peace, and other ſweet benefits, which God beſtoweth vpon them, are herein commendable, that they not onely haue the feare of God in their hearts, but they are as carefull to walke in it, through the whole courſe of their liues.
               It followeth in the next words,
                     The third vſe. The comfort they found, as a fruit of the two former.
                   that as they walked in the feare of the Lord, ſo did they alſo In the comfort of the holy Ghoſt. For ſo are the words to be red, as I haue ſaied before, not as in ſome tranſlation they are ſet downe, namely thus: (And were multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghoſt) but they ought not ſo to be taken, neither is this reading according to the Greeke coppy. Therefore to follow the firſt tranſlation, the third vſe that they made of their peace is ſet downe, namely that they paſſed their dayes, and walked through them comfortably, and in ioy and gladnes of heart. And in theſe words note two things. The one is the vſe they made of their peace, namely that they liued comfortably. The other; how or by what meanes they did ſo: for we know that all ſuch as liue in peace, and haue reſt from perſecution, do not for all that, liue comfortably.
                     Two things to be obſerued here.
                   The meanes whereby they obteined it was their godly life, for they building vp themſelues in grace, and walking in the feare of the Lord, did thereby obteine this alſo, to liue comfortably.
               By the firſt of theſe two, we all,
                     The firſt, that they liued a comfortable life.
                   who profeſſe the feare of God, are taught to make this vſe of our freedome from great affliction and trouble; to liue ioyfully, and to delight our ſelues in the Lord, and in his al ſufficiency. Which thing one would thinke, is more then God would affoord vs. For there is no greater bleſſing inioyed in our life, then to reioyce aright, and to liue comfortably, we ſee how greedily al earthly, delight and pleaſure is laied for, and imbraced: and yet it is all but a ſhadow of this that I ſpeake of, euen as this holy and heauenly ioy is but a glimpſe and taſte of that which is eternall. And but that the Lord hath giuen this liberty, nay

commandement, to ſeeke this ioy, we might eaſily be perſwaded, that it is aboue our reach, and not to be inioyed of vs in this vale of miſery wherein we liue. And yet as great a gift, and as precious as it is, he is forced to hire vs to it by promiſes and incouragements,Pſal. 37.4. as in the Pſalme, ſaying: delight thy ſelfe in the Lord, and he will giue thee thine heartes deſire: As though he would ſhew, that of our ſelues, we haſted not after it,Phil. 4.4. but held backe from it. Alſo Saint Paul to the Philippians thus writeth, ſo that men be willing to reioyce in the Lord, and ſo to imbrace the true ioy, they may hold it as long as they will, euen alwayes without looſing. The which two Scriptures if they be duely conſidered, doe ſhew, that although the people of this world preferre the vaine pleaſures of this life before the beſt things, yet of Gods ſeruants this ſpirituall and holy reioycing is principally to be regarded, and cared for. And that doth ſo much the more commend the examples and practiſe of theſe Churches, for yt in the time of their peace, they ſo laboured this point, namely, to ſeeke for the ioy which the holie Ghoſt worketh, inſomuch that their commendation is ſet downe vnto all poſterity. And to ſay the truth, what ſhould more be regarded of vs, then to follow their example, and to prouide, whiles we may liue in outward peace in the world, that we may be comforted in God and make our dayes, which otherwiſe are euill, to be pleaſant and ſweet, by abiding in his loue, which maketh all things ſauoury and ſweet, which we goe about, or take in hand?Ioh. 15.10.12.
               
               
                  
                     Men neglect the ſweet liberty that God offereth for that which is worſe then nothing.
                  And if we neglected ſo weighty commandements as this is, that we ſhould reioyce in the Lord, If (I ſay) we neglected this for greater and weightier cauſes, it were another matter, but what is of like weight vnto it? or what is to be ſo much deſired, as that we may liue in ſound comfort from day to day? whereas yet, we who loſe our part therein, (which with Gods good allowance and liking we might inioy,) wee caſt it away and reiect it for moone ſhine in the water, as they ſay, euen for nothing, nay for leſſe then nothing, euen for the pleaſing of our ſelues in that, which is not a ſhadow of pleaſure to him that can iudge, and thereby make our ſelues as ridiculous

as Eſau, who for his belly, loſt the greateſt benefit,Gen. 25.33.34. Heb. 12.16. and for a meſſe of pottage, the kingdome of heauen. For if we duely conſider it, what is it that men preferre before this precious iewell of ſound ioy,Heb. 11.24. but the pleaſures of ſinne which yet laſt but for a ſeaſon? as whoriſhnes, deceiuing, and oppreſſing, enuy, reuenge, &c. which are properly ſo called: the dreaming of the painted felicity of this world, and drowning themſelues in it, till they be meerely beſides themſelues by it, though I ſay not for all this, that dealings in the world, be in their owne nature, euill.
               A man would thinke, that except people were bewitched,
                     What need we haue of ſpirituall comfort.
                   they meeting with ſo many calamities, as make their liues euen weariſome to thē, and bring thēſelues to their wits end, ſhould ſeeke out, if there were not ſome way to abate their ſorrowes and vexations, and if they know how and can finde any, then to eaſe themſelues ſpeedily without any ſtay. Alſo, whē they ſee, that they walke among many poyſoned allurements, which they cannot but be ſnared, and deceiued with; and yet ſting as the ſerpent and Cockatrice, when they haue their fill of them, who would thinke, but when by experience they had found it ſo, that they would be wiſe after, and beware of being in like manner carried to their accuſtomed baits, being their bane? but being ſtung, a man would thinke they would ſeeke to be healed; eſpecially knowing that there is ſuch a ſoueraigne medicine, as this heauēly comfort is, that I ſpeake of, to heale al anoyance whatſoeuer, yea and is it ſelfe able to giue them contentment aboue all other delights.
               But when they ſhall not haue wiſdome to helpe themſelues againſt theſe two ſo ſore anoyances, namely; calamities, to moderate and aſſwage them, and vaine pleaſures, to renounce them, (as this one reioycing in God will do both,) what wilfulnes or rather madnes may it be accounted? And yet if it were the caſe of profeſſed euill men only to do thus, it might be the leſſe marueiled at; but when better then they, yea euen ſuch as deſire to be reckoned among the beſt, ſhall thus be beſotted, and thus diſguiſe themſelues, to thinke, that becauſe they liue among thē that do ſo, they muſt needs be like vnto them: how can this be ſufficiently bewailed?
               
                  Now if we haue not this care and wiſdom, to prouide wel for our ſelues when we may, and to ſeeke to ſerue God with ioy and gladnes, (without the which our life is not ſo much as a ſhadow of a life, but the beſt that can be inioyed, is but a dainty miſery,) how are we like to care for others; our owne eſpecially, to the which (yet) we are ſtreightly bound by the commandement of God? But of this vſe of their peace, namely that they atteined thereby to a ſweet and comfortable life, and how we by their example ſhould make the like vſe of ours, thus much.
               
                  
                     The ſecond 
                           •
                        how and by what meanes they atteined to ſuch a comfortable life
                  The next point to be conſidered (as in the entring into this third vſe was mentioned) is, how and by what meanes they made this vſe of it. For all haue not this ſound comfort in their liues, who are free from perſecution, and haue outward peace in the world. And how this came to paſſe, is ſhewed in the text: namely, that they builded vp themſelues in grace, and walked in the feare of the Lord, and hereby were comforted by the holy Ghoſt, which, to ſet it downe more plainly, is thus much. They liued godly, and therefore they liued ſweetly and comfortably. This point though it be moſt cleare in it ſelfe; yet the blinde multitude are of a contrary iudgement, yea they fight, with tooth and naile, (as they ſay) againſt it; vpholding among them, that the pleaſant life hath no greater enemie then godlines, and therefore this muſt be well proued.
                     The godly life is the onely ſweetlife.
                  
               
               To this purpoſe, read that ſaying of Dauid to Salomon his ſonne a little before his death. His wordes are theſe. I goe the way of al the world,
                  2. King. 2.2. 
                  be ſtrong therfore and take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walke in his wayes, and keep his ſtatutes, commandements and iudgements, and his teſtimonies, as it is written in the law of Moſes, that thou maieſt proſper in all that thou doeſt, and in euery thing whereunto thou turneſt thee, what doth he here teach to be the direct way to proſper, but the looking to the charge which God giueth, that is, to liue godly? And what differs his ſpeech from the Lords owne word in Deuetronomie?Deut. 5.28.29. For thus he ſaith, this people hath ſaied well all that they haue ſaied. But oh that there were ſuch an heart in them, that they did feare me, and keepe all my commandements

alwayes, that it might go well with them, and their children for euer. Loe, what is mens proſpering, ioy, or well liking in their liues, but that which riſeth from hence, that they reſolue to liue godly? Agreeing with that which Paul ſpeaketh; This is our reioycing,
                  2. Cor. 1.12. 
                  euen the testimonie of our conſcience, that in ſimplicitie and godly pureneſſe, we haue our conuerſation in the world.
               
               By all which teſtimonies it is cleere, that the godly and Chriſtian life is the only ſweet and comfortable life, which is worthie to be marked to the ſhame of all ſuch, as barke againſt the innocent and holy ſeruants of God,
                     Note. 
                   affirming that none are worſe then they, that I ſay no more. And ſecondly to the no leſſe ſhame of them, I note it, who patch vp and peece their comfort, they care not with what ſhreds and fragments of their owne vaine and fleſhly deſires, baniſhing away godlineſſe, as that which in no wiſe can ſtand with their delights. And thirdly, it might pleaſe all ſuch as maruell why ſome cannot bee content to ſerue God as others, euen the moſt do, to take anſwere from hence; that there being no ſound comfort but in godlines, they deſire to liue comfortablie; though it be to the little liking of ſuch as maruell at them.
               And this comfort is ſo much the more precious by this, that it may continue, and cannot be taken from vs; according to that which our Sauiour ſaith,Iohn 16.22. 
                  This ioy ſhal no man take from you. And further alſo, becauſe the godleſſe can haue no part in it, neither be partakers of it. For ſo ſaith Saint Iohn,
                  Reuelat. 14.3. 
                  None knew what that ſong meant, but the hundred and foure and fortie thouſand which were redeemed from the earth. And ſo ſaith Salomon: The heart knoweth the bitterneſſe of his ſoule,
                  Prou. 14.10. 
                  and the ſtranger ſhall not medale with his ioy. But this be ſaid of the third vſe which the Churches made of their peace; and conſequently of all the three vſes that the godly made thereof.
               Now it followeth, to ſee how euen the bad ſort vſed it.
                     The vſe that the bad made of peace.
                   For the holy Ghoſt teaching that the Churches encreaſed and were multiplied, ſheweth that it was by this that they were added vnto them, and brought into the way of ſaluation,

who were before farre from it.
                     They were conuerted to God, and ioyned to his people.
                   As if he ſhould ſay, euen the bad, while the Churches had reſt, were mooued and drawne by the examples of the godly, to follow them and to do as they did: that is to ſay, they heard the word of God, and they ioyned themſelues in fellowſhip with them, and the Lord wrought thereby in ſuch wiſe, that they diſclaimed their former euill courſe, and were conuerted vnto him.
               This is a moſt famous and notable example, to teach euen the bad how they ſhould behaue themſelues in the dayes of peace, and what vſe God looketh, that euen they ſhould make of it. They haue not libertie to liue as they liſt, nor to trifle out their precious time as though neither any good were to be done in it, and as though they ſhould giue no account how they haue paſſed it. But that they ſhould look vpon them whom God hath ſet as examples among them, to be moued thereby, to be out of loue with their owne courſe, and to like the good which they ſee in them, and long to haue their part in it.
               For to this end, doth the Lord raiſe vp many good examples in ſundrie places, and giues them ofttimes peace, to the end that when they haue both theſe, with the pure preaching of the Goſpell, they may haue nothing to complaine of, why they ſhould not embrace the Chriſtian courſe, as others do. And therefore the eſtate of all ſuch is dangerous in no common ſort, who neuer aske wherefore all theſe good examples ſerue, but rather ſcorne and diſlike them, or at leaſt haue no fellowſhip with them.
               
                  
                     Encouragement to the bad to returne, and ſeeke after God.
                  And againe, if any who as yet ſauour not the precious Goſpell, ſhould thinke that they ſhall neuer profit by it to come to faith and repentance; they are to know, that not only they may, but alſo that God looketh for it at their hands. For why did God giue Ahab great victories ouer his enemie Benhadad, but to the end hee ſhould know the Lord to be God, and acknowledge him, beleeue in him, loue and feare him? And did God prouoke him, an Idolater and wicked man, to forſake his euill way, and will he reiect other who would draw nigh to him if they durſt? No, God is readie to receiue, yea he ſeeketh ſuch as flie from him, and which wander

out of the right way, yea,2. Cor. 5.19.20. and beſeecheth them to be reconciled to him; ſo that none ſhall need to feare that God will turne from them, if their chiefe care be that they may turne to him.
               And ſeeing I haue gone ſo farre in this matter,
                     How they ſhould do it.
                   I will proceed a little further, and put on the perſon of ſuch as are yet in darkneſſe, and would willingly ſee light. Such (I know) would aske, how they may come home, and be receiued into the fauour of God. To ſuch I anſwere: they muſt be mooued by the reports of them who are in Chriſt alreadie, and be perſwaded, what beautie is in the Goſpell, how precious it is, and how many, who haue been farre off, haue by the power and perſwaſion of it, come home to true repentance, as the Publicans and great ſinners, who heard our Sauiour preach to them.
               Secondly, they muſt heare the word of God diligently, as Salomon willeth; that they who will be bleſſed,Prou. 8.33. ſhould watch daily at wiſdomes gates, and giue attendance at the postes of her doores; yea and further, they muſt with the good people of Berea, receiue the word with all readineſſe.
                  Act. 17.11. They muſt alſo draw to good companie,Act. 9.27. as Paul cleaued to Barnabas at his conuerſion; and the people, both Iewes and Gentiles, who embraced the Goſpell, did, whereſoeuer he preached. And by theſe meanes God worketh ſo in thoſe whom he will ſaue, that he changeth their hearts and maketh them new perſons.
               For though many people haue ſundrie kinds of lets to hinder them from beleeuing, yet they to whom God hath a fauour, he will draw them by ſome excellent thing that they heare, or by means of ſome doubt that troubleth them, of the which they deſire to be reſolued; that they ſhall not breake off their hearing, till they receiue that chiefe and moſt excellent light by preaching, which bringeth contentment, and reſolution of that which did moſt trouble them, and that is, faith vnfained. And this is that which ought moſt of al to occupy and take vp the minds of vnſtaied perſons, who haue no ſure hold of eternall life: and this is the vſe which they ought to make of their liuing in peace, and beholding the good example of thoſe who are better then themſelues: to waite in

their hearings, and long for this, namely, that they may know they ſhal be ſaued. As for al other taking vp of their thoughts and deſires, the beſt of them are but deceiuable, that I ſay nothing of further miſchiefes which they bring vpon themſelues.
               But doe the common ſort of the ignorant and prophane make this vſe of their peaceable liuing among Gods ſeruants? Indeed, God be praiſed, ſome do, for how ſhould the number of penitent perſons otherwiſe grow greater daily? But for the moſt part euen where the Goſpel is purely preached, they looke after no ſuch thing, but as though they knew not to what end God hath ſet godly Chriſtians among them, they giue them leaue, euen they who are of the forwarder ſort of them, to walke alone, rather then to conuerſe and haue fellowſhip with them; but ſome thinke, other ſpeake euill of them; and (which is worſt of all) becauſe they are ſuch: which ſort of people for the moſt part grow hardened, and waxe worſe and worſe: ſo farre it is off, that they take good by them. And this be ſaid of this latter ſort who liued among the godly, what vſe they made thereof.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            FOVRE SERMONS VPON PHILIP. 4.4.
            
               Reioyce in the Lord alway, againe I ſay, reioyce.
            
            
               
                  NOw I adde this as the laſt text of the reſt, to ſhew you, yt they who obey the former doctrine may be ioyfull perſons: and therefore a ſeaſonable time it is now to teach ſuch doctrine, and ſo to ſtand vpon the vnfolding of this exhortation. It is a dutie much iterated and ſtood vpon by this Apoſtle, in other of his Epiſtles; but eſpecially in this: in euerie chapter whereof, either by his owne example or by ſpeciall precept, he ſtirreth vp to this reioycing. In the firſt chapter verſe 18. Chriſt was preached, and therefore he did, and he would reioyce, chap. 2.17.18. he reioyceth, and reioyceth with them, and wiſheth them to reioyce, and reioyce with him. In the 3.1. Furthermore, my brethren, reioyce in the Lord; and yet heere againe, reioyce in the Lord, and that with a double exhortation, againe I ſay reioyce.
               
               And the Apoſtle Saint Iohn 1. Epiſtle 1.4. profeſſeth, hee wrote his whole Epiſtle to this end, that he might repleniſh and fill vs with this ioy; and theſe things, that is, this whole Epiſtle, I write vnto you, that your ioy may be full. And we are not to thinke, that theſe excellent Apoſtles would haue taken ſo great paine, in often exhortation to this dutie, and writing ſo much to this end, but that it is of eſpeciall waight and moment; & indeed ſuch is the neceſſity of it: that without it, we cannot performe any good duty well; whether it be of

our particular calling, or of our common calling, as we are Chriſtians: no place, no time, no dutie may be without this ioy, whereunto we are in theſe words exhorted; as hereafter in the particular handling of them, I ſhall haue iuſt occaſion to ſhew.
               To come therefore more neere vnto the matter in hand. The occaſion of this exhortation by conſidering the circumſtances which go before, and which follow after, ſhould ſeeme to be, both to confirme and arme them the better againſt the iniuries of falſe teachers, or whatſoeuer trouble elſe: and to prepare them to the duties whereunto he after exhorteth them, of moderation, patience, confidence, &c.
               
                  
                     The diuiſion of the text.
                  In the words themſelues, we are for orders ſake to conſider them as they lie. Firſt, the exhortation it ſelfe. Secondly, the iterating or doubling of it. And the exhortation is fully laid downe in theſe words, Reioyce in the Lord alwaies; redoubled in thoſe that follow, againe I ſay reioyce.
               
               In the firſt exhortation as alſo in the ſecond, (for they are both one) and that which is not fully ſet downe in the ſecond, is to be ſupplied out of the firſt. In both of the exhortations, I ſay, are to be obſerued theſe principall and eſpeciall points.  Firſt, who it is that exhorteth, ſaying: I ſay vnto you, reioyce. 
                   Secondly, whom he exhorteth, and that is the Philippians, whom he called in the firſt verſe, louing & longed for brethren. 
                   And alſo thirdly, whereunto he calleth them, that is, to reioyce: which is firſt limited by the manner, in God, that is to ſay, reioyce in God: ſecondly, enlarged by this word alwayes, ſaying, reioyce alwayes. Of theſe briefely in order.
               
                  
                     The first point: the perſon that maketh this exhortation.
                  And firſt for the perſon, he was ſuch a one as did as well practiſe this dutie, as exhort theſe to the practiſe of it. In the third chapter, 17. firſt he propoundeth his owne example; I reioyce, and reioyce with you: and then in the eighteenth verſe he exhorteth them to reioyce, and to reioyce with him: and by diuers other places, both in this Epiſtle and others, I could eaſily ſhew, and ſhall haue occaſion to ſhew afterward; that the Apoſtle was as well a forward practitioner of this duty, as an earneſt exhorter of others vnto it: he himſelf was filled and

repleniſhed with ioy, and then he laboured to fill and repleniſh others with it. Hence then by the example of this our Apoſtle, we are taught an excellent duty, and that is;
                     Doct.
                   looke what we exhort and perſwade others vnto, wee exhort them according to the rule of our owne practiſe.
               It is not for a drunkard ſo continuing, to exhort to ſobriety: for a glutton to exhort to temperance: nor for an adulterer and vncleane perſons, to exhort to chaſtity: nor for a ſwearer, ſo continuing, to reproue ſwearing: nor for an impenitent man to perſwade to repentance: theſe exhortations, though good in themſelues, in the mouthes of ſuch men, are but parables in the mouth of fooles: that is, as Salomon compareth them, Prou. 26.9. as thornes in the hands of drunkards, they hurt both themſelues and others with them.Pro. 26.9. And therefore Pſalme 50. the Lord asketh of theſe men,Pſal. 50.16. 
                  what they haue to doe to take his word, and theſe good exhortations in their mouthes; and hate to bee reformed by them? And this Apoſtle in the ſecond to the Romanes,Rom. 2. earneſtly reaſoneth againſt this kind of men, ſaying: thou that teacheſt another, teacheſt thou not thy ſelfe? thou that teacheſt a man ſhould not ſteale, ſtealeſt thou? thou that teacheſt a man ſhould not commit adultery, doeſt thou commit adultery? as if he ſhould ſay, if you teach theſe things, you ſhould not practiſe the contrary; or if you will doe the contrary, ye may not be teachers of them: but firſt we muſt haue receiued the grace our ſelues, and then labour to communicate it to others.
               
                  I haue beleeued, ſaith this our Apoſtle, 2. Cor. 4.13.2. Cor. 4.13. 
                  therefore I haue ſpoken. Hee taught faith vnto others, but it was when faith was firſt wrought in himſelfe. And in the firſt chapter of the ſame Epiſtle, God firſt comforted him,
                  2. Cor. 1.
                        •
                     . 
                  that hee might be able to comfort others. Remember him thirtie ſeuen yeeres agoe, who durſt not preach contrary to his owne practiſe. In like maner our Sauiour Chriſt ſaid to Peter,
                  Luk. 22.32. 
                  when thou art conuerted ſtrengthen thy brethren: firſt hee muſt bee conuerted and ſtrengthened himſelfe, and then hee muſt labour to conuert and ſtrengthen others. And Dauid in Pſal.Pſa. 51.15. 51. ſomewhat after the middeſt of the Pſalme, deſireth God to conuert him and then hee would teach the waies of God

vnto the wicked, and ſinners ſhould be conuerted vnto him, this example if it were well conſidered and obſerued of al exhorters, and teachers of others, there would be more hope that more good ſhould be done, then commonly is: their exhortation, would then be earneſt, and harty, as we ſee this our Apoſtles was; he ſtirreth them to it againe and againe, and in many places, that it may worke the like impreſſion in them, that it had in his heart.
               
                  
                     A teacher muſt ſo alwaies begin with himſelfe.
                  Begin with thy ſelfe to ſay, I haue repented and hate my ſinne, therefore I exhort and call vpon others to repent: I haue left my ſwearing and therefore cannot abide it. I reioyce in God, and am filled with ioy, and therefore I exhort others vnto it. This then being a duty, required of all that are to exhort, obſerue what ſpeciall duty it layeth vpon the miniſter and publike teacher of the word of God, for he being by his place and calling, to exhort to euery good duty; and to dehort from euery vice, he had neede to take more eſpecial and extraordinary paines with his owne heart, that he may himſelfe be wanting in nothing, but his mouth may ſpeake from the abundance of that which his heart hath wrought in it, that there be not any vice, but his heart hath both expelled it out, and ſetled in it the hatred of the ſame: not any vertue of faith, of repentance, of ioy, but he hath had them already wrought in his heart.
               
                  
                     Doct. 2 Againe, ſecondly for the perſon that giueth this exhortation, cōſider that it is Paul an Apoſtle that exhorteth vs, as an Ambaſſadour ſent from God, and ſpeaking from God; as the preface of the Epiſtle ſheweth. Which conſideration, as it ſetteth an edge vpon the exhortation; ſo ought it to ſharpen and whet vs on to be the more eager, to follow it. And thus much it ſhall ſuffice, to haue obſerued of the party, exhorting: Expreſſed in the repetition of the exhortation, (I ſay.)
               
                  
                     The ſecond point the perſons exhorted:
                  Now I come to the perſons exhorted, and they are the Philippians, as I ſaid, faithfull, and righteous, whom the Apoſtle in the firſt verſe, called beloued and longed for brethren, and ſo to thoſe who are ſuch,Pſal. 32.11. this exhortation, in many places is expreſſely limited. In the 32. Pſalme be glad yee righteous and reioyce in the Lord, and be ioyfull all yee that are vpright in heart,
                  
and in Pſal. 33.1. Reioyce in the Lord, O ye righteous,
                  Pſal. 33.1. Luk. 10.20. 
                  for it becommeth vpright men to be thankefull, here we ſee the wicked are ſhut out, & haue no part nor portion in this ioy: and that is wel ſeene, for what ioy haue worldly men in God, or heauenly things, but in pleaſures & profits? But another duty belongeth vnto thē, which the Apoſtle S.Iam. 5.1. 
                  Iames exhorteth them vnto, bidding thē 
                  to weep & howle, though they be rich men; if they be oppreſſors and wicked, & be not rich in God. And againe, chap. 4. verſ. 9. Waile and ſorrow ye ſinners, and weep,
                  Iam. 4.9. 
                  let your laughter be turned into mourning, & your ioy into heauines.
                  
                     Why this exhortation is limited to the faithfull.
                  
               
               The reaſon of the reſtraint and limiting of it, to the faithfull is eaſy, and yet very worthy to be ſtood vpon, for as for the righteous, they haue both great cauſe to reioyce, and great neede to be ſtirred vp to this duty, whereas the wicked haue neither any true cauſe of ſound ioy? neither feele they any need of it. That the faithfull haue need to be ſtirred to this duty; we cannot be ignorant, if we conſider that which the Pſalmiſt writeth; Pſalme 34.19. and the whole Scripture accordeth with that, Many are the troubles of the righteous,
                  Pſal. 34.19. And whoſoeuer will follow Chriſt, he muſt forſake father, mother, goods, lands, brethren, ſiſters, life & al, and take vp his croſſe daily, & follow him, for ſuch is the rage of Satan, & the malice of the wicked, as againſt the whole Church in generall, ſo againſt all the godly, that they neuer can haue, as it were, peaceable houres; but ſo ſoone as they haue giuen their names to Chriſt, and are entred into his ſchoole, they haue one trouble and vexation or other, to wreſtle withall. They ſee matter of griefe, ſorrow within them, without them, and round about them. Within them they haue wicked rebellion of their owne harts, to be as it were pricks and thornes in their fleſh, to gall, and vex, and diſquiet them: they haue Satan continually caſting his deadly and fiery darts of tentations into their ſoules; And all the world in a manner, they ſhall ſee to be as it were banded and combined together againſt them; in mocks, in taunts; in ſlanders, in whatſoeuer iniuries, and ill turnes and miſchiefes they can doe vnto them. Alas, any one of theſe were cauſe ſufficient to make the children of God heauy, penſiue and ſorrowfull, for their ſtrength is not

the ſtrength of ſtones, nor their fleſh of broſſe, as Iob ſpeaketh of himſelfe,Iob. 
                        •
                     .12. in the ſixth of his booke, but theſe pearce and wound them deepely, to their very ſoules: great need therefore the faithfull haue, to be raiſed vp from this ſorrow and heauines of heart, to reioyce and be made merry in the Lord. for ſhould they haue no ioy to help to counteruaile their ſorrowes,
                     Note. 
                   the life of the Chriſtian were too tedious and grieuous to be endured, by any the moſt patient ſufferer in the world, (the troubles that accompany it are ſoe many, and the ſorrowes ſoe grieuous; that they would eate out the very heart of the faithful quickly) if it were not that ioy, mixed and intermedled withall, did mittigate the ſenſe, and eaſe and lighten the burthen of them.
               
                  
                     The wicked haue no neede to be exhorted to reioyce.
                  As for wicked men, they haue no ſuch burthen of trouble and ſorrowes, to be eaſed of. The diuell is not grieuous vnto them with his tentations, be the tentations what they wil be they like them well: they entertaine them: they make much of them: they are the welcomeſt gueſts that can come vnto them, for their is no ſuggeſtion of Satan, but it is euill: there is no kinde of euill, but the heart of a wicked man, is prone vnto it. If the diuell prouoke him to wrath and anger, the heart is before ſtraying after it: If to vncleanneſſe, to prophaneſſe, to ſwearing, &c. theſe are all pleaſing motions vnto the vnregenerate perſon; Sin alſo and corruption, that dwelleth and raigneth in him, is not troubleſome and grieuous vnto the wicked man. Nay he is ſo farre from ſorrowing becauſe of this corruption, that it is his darling and his delight; It is as his right hand, as his vſe as his life and ſoule, ſo deare is it vnto him, yea rather he can endure to haue his goods, his delights, yea his very life taken away, rather then to forgoe this ſinne and corruption of his heart.
               As for the world, they and it are in a very quiet and friendly league, for becauſe they are of the world, the world cannot at but loue it own,
                  Ioh. 15.19. as our Sauior teacheth vs (Ioh. 15.19). So that the wicked haue no ſuch enemies, no troubles nor ſorrowes as the righteous haue; but they liue at peace with their ſinne, at peace with the deuill, and at peace with the world; They haue mirth enough and too much for them. They neede not

as they thinke, neither care they for God, or any godly mirth to make them merry. No neede therefore to exhort the wicked to reioyce,Iob. 22. that are euen ſurfetted already with ioy and pleaſure, but the righteous that mourne, the righteous that be heauy; theſe haue need to haue God and his ſeruants to comfort and cheere them vp.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 1 But here it may be replied the righteous man hath indeed need of this ioy, whereunto the Apoſtle exhorts them, but how is it poſſible that the righteous, ſo beſet and compaſſed with troubles, can reioyce? for this ſeemeth to be a ſtrange paradoxe and opinion to the world; that the righteous can, in the midſt of ſo many troubles and croſſes, finde any matter to take ioy in. 
                     Anſw. 
                   But yet, if we will but open our eyes, wee ſhal eaſily ſee that the righteous man, and he alone hath cauſe, euen in his greateſt troubles to reioyce and be merry, and euen to triumph for ioy of heart: for what though the world be bent and banded with all the ſpite and hate it can, againſt him? yet euen in this hath he more cauſe of ioy, then of ſorrow. Reade and marke to that ende, the words of our Sauiour Chriſt who is truth it ſelfe. Matth. 5.2.12.Math. 5.2.12. 
                  Bleſſed are yee whē men reuile and perſecute your, and ſay al manner of euil againſt you, for my ſake, falſely. Reioyce and be glad; for greate is your reward in heauen. For ſo perſecuted they the Prophets, which were before you. To be hated of the world, to be reuiled,
                     To be hated of the world a ſigne of bleſſednes, and therefore a cauſe of reioycing.
                   perſecuted, ſlandered; marke, it is a ſigne yt we are bleſſed and therfore a cauſe to make vs to reioyce. Nay, we ſee, that all the hatred, reuiling, perſecution and ſlander they can raiſe, do helpe to increaſe our reward, and the brightneſſe of our glory, and the waight of our crowne in heauen. Nay hereby are we aſſured that we are in the ſtraight and beaten way to heauen. For thus, ſaith our Sauior, they hated, they reuiled, they perſecuted the Prophets which were before you; as though he ſhould ſay, by this you may know that you are in the direct way to heauen. For thus haue all the Prophets before you, paſſed thither, and ſo we ſee ſince, our Sauiour Chriſt to haue paſſed this way into glory, and by the ſame to haue carried to the ſame glory, al his Apoſtles, Martyrs, and holy men that haue liued and died vnder the Goſpell. Behold then, in a word, what ioy euen the

hatred of the world and wicked men affordeth vnto vs, and that is, that our heauenly reward of glory is both increaſed, and confirmed and ſealed vnto vs. And to this precept of our Sauiour,Iam. 1.
                        •
                     . wel agreeth, that of the Apoſtle Iam. 1.2. my brethren count it all ioy, when ye fall into diuers afflictions: meaning, as I take it, of ſuch as were inflicted by the world, which then was moſt vſuall: we muſt then reioyce; and that withall ioy, in the greateſt meaſure, we are able, becauſe thereby, we attaine to be patient and ſo ſhall be perfect and compleate men in Chriſt. An example of this precept; we haue both in the example of all the Apoſtles Act. 5. in the ende, who being beaten for profeſſing Chriſt,Acts. 5.41. went away reioycing from the counſel taking it as an honour done to them. And ſo of this our Apoſtle (2.2. Cor. 12.10. Cor. 12.10.) I take pleaſure (ſaith he) in infirmities, in reproches, in neceſſities, in perſecutions for Chriſts ſake, For when I am weake, then am I ſtrong. He tooke pleaſure in theſe, becauſe he found that euen by them, God miniſtred greater ſtrength and comfort to him.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 2 But here, againe, I know that many good diſtreſſed ſoules wil be ready to reply, that if it were, but for the world, and for men, and afflictions thence, they would be cheerefull and merry, in theſe regards we haue ſeene. but now they haue not fleſh and blood alone and theſe afflictions, to wreſtle againſt; but againſt principalities and powers; againſt Satan the prince of the world, and againſt ſpirituall wickedneſſes which are in high places. Theſe are of great power and of great might; & theſe are continually laying ſiege againſt their ſoules to take them: how can they be merry that be night and day beſieged thus dangerouſly? eſpecially, of legions of deuils, of ſpirituall wickedneſſes, that are diligent and watchfull night and day to ſurprize and take their ſoules. Alas, theſe are many and ſtrong enemies, and we are weake and in continuall combat with them.
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere, true it is, theſe enemies are many, and of great power, dilligence and ſubtilty, ioyned with deadly hate and malice againſt vs. But conſider againe, bee they neuer ſo ſtrong and powerfull, yet if we doe but reſiſt and ſtand out againſt them, they will flie from vs. Reſiſt the deuill ſaith the Apoſtle Iames.Iames 4.7. 4.7. and he will flie from you.
                  
Reſiſt him, though he be neuer ſo ſtrong. Reſiſt him, though he haue his legions of diuels with him againſt thee, and he ſhall flie from thee. Marke it: he ſhall flie, and that from thee.
                  
                     Note. 
                   Thou ſhalt put him to flight, be thou the weakeſt Chriſtian in the world,Epheſ. 6.16. if thou wilt but reſiſt him with the ſhield of faith, the ſword of the Spirit, &c. Heere therefore we haue greater cauſe of ioy and triumph, then of ſorrow. For what cauſe hath he but to reioyce, that may euery day ſo eaſily triumph ouer ſo great and ſo many enemies? that being a poore weake man, may put to flight whole armies and legions of diuels?
               
                  
                     Obiect. 3 But ſome man may except thus: Indeed I haue a great promiſe from God, I ſhall do this, if I reſiſt; but alas, many times through my weakneſſe I am readie to ſlumber and to ſleepe, and cannot be euer as I ſhould be watchfull to reſiſt. Nay, I find ſuch a curſed rebellion in my heart, that carries me continually as a ſlaue and captiue to the will of the diuell. 
                     Anſw. 
                   Indeed I muſt needs confeſſe, there is a great cauſe of ſorrow and lamentation. Miſerable man (ſaith the Apoſtle Paul, (Rom. 7. the end) who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie of ſinne?
                  Rom. 7. the end.) But yet we haue alſo, by the mercie of God, ſufficient, wherewithall to raiſe vs vp in this ſorrow:1. Iohn. Pſalme. for we haue the Spirit of God within vs, to helpe our infirmities: we haue the Angels of God night and day to pitch their tents about, vs, to aid vs againſt the euill angels: we haue God himſelfe,Pſalme. who neither ſlumbereth nor ſleepeth; that watcheth and careth for vs. Be we neuer ſo weake, and the diuell neuer ſo ſtrong, God who is with vs, will vphold vs, and no diuell ſhall plucke vs from him, or out of his hands.
               If I ſhould further enter to lay downe all the cauſes that may and ought to moue the faithfull vnto ioy, I ſhould not eaſily find an end of ſo large and long a Treatiſe.
                     Cauſes of ioy.
                   I will therefore, in a word only, entreate euery man, who is deſirous to learne what cauſe he hath to reioyce being a righteous man,  to conſider firſt throughly with himſelfe, how fearefull a thing it were to fall into the hands of the liuing God.
                  Hebr. 10.31. And how terrible a thing the wrath of God is, which ſhall be reuealed vpon the wicked and diſobedient, euen this ſhall giue him

great cauſe to reioyce, that by the pardon of his ſins he hath eſcaped the wrath that is to come.
               
                   And ſecondly, let him conſider how great is the glorie prouided for all them that feare the Lord, in which they ſhal be like the heauenly Angels, alwayes beholding the face of God in heauen. Yea, their bodies ſhall become like the glorious bodie of our Sauiour Chriſt;2. Cor. 15. and wherein no part of miſerie ſhall remaine, but all teares ſhall bee wiped from their eyes, and no part of bleſſedneſſe ſhall be wanting vnto them.
               
                   Thirdly, let him conſider, how ſweete the loue of God muſt needs be, euen heere, vnto the faithfull ſoule, when he hauing loued him euen when he was his enemie, and not yet reconciled to him, and that he gaue his only begotten Sonne to the death for him, that he might not periſh, but haue eternall life:Iohn 1.12. and that he hath now adopted him, and giuen him the title and priuiledge to be called his ſonne, and to be the heire of God,Rom. 8. and coheire with Ieſus Chriſt: that he hath giuen vnto him, and put into his heart his Spirit, the ſeale and earneſt of his adoption.
               
                   Fourthly, let him alſo conſider, what a couenant and league of friendſhip he is now entred into with the Lord, that he can but call and aske of God,Iohn 4.10. and God is readie to lend his eare to him, and grant his ſuit; that he can but knock and God ſtands at the doore, as it were readie to open and to welcome him; that he cannot ſeeke any good thing at the Lords hands, but he is readie to miniſter vnto him. Nay, that God not only is readie night and day, in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon to heare his mone, and to fulfill his deſires; but his eyes are euer vpon him to do him good, euen then when he thinkes not vpon it; and that which we neuer minded to craue at his hands, yea, that the Lord will vouchſafe to come to him,
                  Iohn 14.23. Reuelat. 3.20. 
                  to abide with him, to ſup and to dine and to conuerſe with him, as he promiſeth, Ioh. 14.23. and Reuel. 3.20. Behold, I ſtand at the doore and knocke: if any man heare my voice, and open the doore, I will come vnto him, to carrie him, as it were, into my heauenly cloſet, and impart to him of my dainties. But heere I ſtay for this time.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  I Will proceed where I left. The priuiledges of the faithfull ſet downe before as the peace of a good conſcience, cleared and clenſed by the blood of Chriſt, the hope of ſo great glorie to come, and the ſo bleſſed communion with God, that they may talke, as it were, friendly and familiarly, and conuerſe with him and he with them; howſoeuer the men of the world imagine them all to be but dreames and conceits; yet can they not but make the righteous man, that hath the true and liuely ſenſe and feeling of them, leape and ſhout for ioy of heart.
               I will not ſtand by further reaſons, which are many, to enlarge the proofe of this point, that the righteous as they haue need to be ſtirred vp to ioy, ſo they haue iuſt cauſe, (notwithſtanding all that may ſeeme to make to the contrarie) to be merrie and glad in heart. It is not thus with the wicked,
                     The wicked haue no part in this ioy.
                   for though they haue peace with Satan, and peace with the corruption of their owne hearts, yet want they the pardon of their ſin, and therefore are at warre and enmitie with God, though they labour to forget the ſame; and all that fearefull wrath to come hangeth ouer their heads, and may fall, they know not how ſoone, vpon them.
               Secondly, they want that imputation of Chriſts righteouſneſſe to couer their ſhame before God: ſo that they cannot aſſure themſelues, that they haue any part or portion in the glorie of the ſonnes of God, that is to be reuealed. They cannot behold God as a louing Father, as their redeemer in Chriſt Ieſus. They are wholly poſſeſſed with the ſpirit of feare and bondage, that they cannot with boldneſſe call vpon God. They haue no promiſe nor aſſurance that God will heare them;Iohn 9. nay his eares are ſtopped that he will not heare

them; his eyes are turned from them, that he will not regard and pitie their miſerie. He will haue no communion, no ſocietie, companie, nor fellowſhip with them. I ceaſe to ſpeake of thoſe helliſh terrors of an accuſing conſcience, that cannot but expell all ioy and comfort foorth, ſo oft as their ſleepie conſcience is awakened, and omit many other things, which might be added to this purpoſe. By this little which hath bin ſaid, the truth of this point is cleere; that the righteous, and they alone, haue both need and iuſt cauſe wherefore to reioyce: we will now come brieflie to ſome few vſes of this point, and paſſe to the next in order.
               
                  
                     Vſe 1 Firſt therefore, if the righteous only and the faithfull haue need of this ioy,
                     Ministers duty.
                   as we haue ſhewed. It is not for the Miniſters of God to comfort and cheere vp any but theſe. For we know the Miniſter is a Phyſition of the ſoule, to cure the diſeaſes; and a Chirurgion to cure the wounds of the ſoule. Now it is not for a Phyſition to preſcribe to the whole, but to the ſicke; nor for the Chirurgion to plaiſter that which is ſound, but that which is hurt and wounded. The wicked are whole, they are not ſicke or wounded with ſorrow.
               No need therefore haue they of the Chirurgeon, to bind vp that which is broken; neither of the Phyſition to reſtore health, when none is loſt: but the righteous man, and he that truly feareth God, he is caſt downe with ſorrow, and hath need therefore to be raiſed vp, when he is ſicke of ſorrow, and hath need of heauenly chearing to reſtore him, he is wounded in ſoule euery day, and therefore hath need to haue the oyle of gladneſſe to be powred into his wounds.
               
                  
                     Vſe 2 Againe, haue the faithfull, and they only iuſt cauſe to be merrie? let the bad learne then to magnifie the life of the faithfull, as the moſt happie and bleſſed life. For this is certaine, he is moſt happie and moſt bleſſed, who hath in deed and in truth greateſt cauſe of ioy, and to reuerence their gifts, that they may haue a part in them.
               
                  
                     Vſe 3 Thirdly, haue the godly alone need of comfort and chearing, becauſe they are ſicke and wounded alreadie with ſorrow? Then marke the Tyger-like crueltie of the wicked, that are ſo farre from comforting and releeuing them as they

ought; that they adde ſorrow to their ſorrow, and affliction to affliction, what they can. This is beſides all bounds of common humanitie, as we know, and ſauoureth of a diuelliſh nature, to rend and to teare the wounds that we ought to heale and to bind vp. But this do the wicked, when they ſeeke to vex and grieue the faithfull, that be alreadie wounded and caſt downe with ſorrow in their ſoules, yea and for that they carry corruption ſtill about them. I ſay not he is the happieſt that reioyceth moſt: for that (no doubt) many times he may do; which is but in a verie wofull caſe, as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, wo be to you that laugh: but he (I ſay) is the happieſt man that hath the greateſt cauſe of ioy.
                     He is the happiest man that hath greateſt cauſe of ioy.
                   For this is the argument of all thoſe bleſſedneſſes which our Sauiour Chriſt pronounceth, Matth. 5. the poore in ſpirit are pronounced bleſſed, becauſe they haue cauſe to reioyce. So they that mourne, they that be meeke, &c. are bleſſed, becauſe theſe, though they do not reioyce, yet they haue euery one of them iuſt cauſe to reioyce.
               But to proceed, hath the faithfull and righteous alone iuſt cauſe of ioy? Then if thou deſireſt ſoundly to reioyce, practiſe carefully and conſtantly a iuſt and righteous life: for without this faith and vprightneſſe it is impoſſible (though thou haſt made a beginning therein alreadie) euer to find any ſtate that will giue thee cauſe (all things well weighed) to take any ioy in it. It is not the throne of a Prince, nor the treaſure of the earth, nor the pleaſures of the world that can afford it. 
                     Vſe 4 Laſtly, hath the righteous man cauſe to reioyce? then ought he to ſtirre vp himſelfe vnto the dutie following, namely, that he do reioyce indeed. This nature it ſelfe teacheth euen naturall men, that if they ſee iuſt cauſe why they ſhould be glad, they will ſtirre themſelues vp to be ioyfull and merrie.
               And the rather are the righteous to be mooued to this dutie, becauſe they haue the Lords commandement heere by the Apoſtle to ſtirre themſelues vp vnto it. For is the Lord ſo carefull of his, that he cannot endure to haue our hearts poſſeſſed with ſorrow, but will haue it to be expelled thence by his heauenly ioyes; and ſhall we be behind in this duty? Shall

he command, and ſhall not we obay? ſhall he exhort, and ſhal not we attend to that which wholy tendeth to our owne ioy and comfort?Eſter. 1. King. 8.64. If the King, or prince, command their ſubiects to be merry as Salomon, 1. King. 8.64. Eſter. 5.1. this alone ſtirreth them vp to mirth, though there were noe other cauſe: but the kinde ſpeeches and greetings of the prince. And ought not Gods voice much more to preuaile with vs to this ende?
               
                  
                     The limitation of this ioy: it muſt in the Lord.
                  But I come now to the limitation firſt, and then in due place, to the enlargement of this ioy. It is limited firſt, by the manner of it, that it muſt be in the Lord, and then ſecondly, enlarged, by the time, that it may be alwayes. to reioyce in the Lord, is to reioyce for that we know him to be our God alſufficient, and Chriſt Ieſus our Lord: alſo to reioyce for the Lords cauſe,Ioh. 17.3. who alone giueth & miniſtreth vnto vs cauſe of reioycing. as 1. Sam. 21. in the thankſgiuing of Hanna. Mine heart reioyceth in the Lord, mine horne is exalted in the Lord: So Mary: my ſpirit reioyceth, that is, my heart reioyceth, becauſe of the Lord, who hath giuen mee this cauſe of ioy: and mine horne is exalted in the Lord, who hath bin fauourable, and gratious vnto mee.
               
                  
                     Hereby it is diſtinguiſhed from many other ſorts of ioyes.
                  By this limitation then, we ſee the ioy of the faithfull; which only is true ioy, to be diſtinguiſhed from other ſorts of ioyes; which are many. For ſome there are, who reioyce in themſelues, and in that ſeruing of God, that liketh them; and not in the Lord:  as firſt many naturall men, if they haue a good meaning, and liue quietly and ciuilly among men, they thinke they cannot chuſe but be ſaued; Theſe men ioy, but all the ground of their ioy is not from God; but from themſelues; from their owne blinde reaſon, and the preſumption of their owne heart: Secondly Papiſts and ſuch as follow the ancient Phariſies; Theſe men not onely doe many ciuill good duties, but they faſt, they pray, they pay tythe of all they haue, they giue almes, they abſtaine from iniuſtice, extortion, &c. They are very ſtrict and very preciſe in many things; they wil not marry, they wil not eate ſuch and ſuch meates, and at ſuch times. Theſe men they reioyce alſo, yea and boaſt themſelues not only, before men, but before God, as the Phariſie did

Luk. 18. But their ioy ariſeth from themſelues, and from their owne good deeds, and meritorious actions; as they hould them, They reioyce not in the Lord.
               
                   Others yet there bee, who reioyce in the things of this world. For which, indeed, it might be lawfull for a man to reioyce, but this their reioycing is altogether after a ſenſuall and a carnall manner. They reioyce in riches, in honor, in pleaſure: but this their ioy, it neither ariſeth from God, nor endeth in him: but either it proceedeth only from the creature; and reſteth in it; or els it is aſcribed to their own paines and labour; or for that they haue attained to this wealth, or that place, by their owne induſtry, or ſome friend or other is magnified for it: or els, rather thē any part of their ioy ſhould ſeeme to proceede from God; it is aſcribed to good lucke, and good fortune, theſe all offend in this, that they reioyce in theſe things, but not in the Lord as the author of euery good thing they haue.
               
                   Againe there are ſome that ioy in lawfull things, but their ioy is not taken lawfully, they neuer waigh whether they vſe them in ſuch a manner as God in his word hath giuen them warrant for, or not. They delight and ioy in duties of their calling, to looke vnto their buſineſſe; This is well: But to be taken vp with them as the chiefeſt matters, and on the Lords day, the day of the Lords reſt, when they ſhould aſſemble themſelues in the congregation of Gods people to heare his wo
                     •
                  d and to learne his will, or when they ſhould priuately be holily occupied, this is not to reioyce in the Lord: for it is againſt the Lords will and commandement, who hath giuen vs charge to reſt the ſeauenth day.
               So many other thinges in themſelues, are lawfull, and a man may reioyce in them. I meane recreations, and refreſhings of body or minde after labour, but to ſpende whole dayes in them is euil: alſo the fellowſhip of marriage, and the liberty of eating and drinking, but if we doe them, without thankſgiuing, without keeping a meaſure and moderation, and if we reioyce in any of theſe actions, (though lawfull of themſelues) not baniſhing the ſinnes that accompanie them in the world, and obſerue not a holy and a righteous manner

in the doing of them; neither doe them by faith, all this our reioycing is vaine and wordly, and not in the Lord: becauſe it is not with thoſe circumſtances obſerued, which he hath preſcribed in his word.
               
                   But of all other, the worſt ſort is of them; that reioyce in actions ſimply euill, as in vncleane and filthy talking, in ſwearing, in drunkennes, whoring, and blaſpheming of the name of God; Reproue, and rebuke thoſe men for it▪ Their anſwere is ready, what? may we not ſpeake? may we not bee merry? Yes? mirth is lawfull. The Lord by the Apoſtle ſtirreth vp here children vnto it: but marke to what mirth, not that which is taken in the ſore mentioned ſinnes, and other like vnto them, but in the Lord. Complaine not therfore without a cauſe, as if God were too ſtrict and preciſe to thee, to reſtraine thee from all mirth: Here indeed is a reſtraint, but it is from vngodly mirth, from reioycing▪ as I may ſay, in euil, thy ioy muſt not be vnchaſt, diſhoneſt, ſenſual, earthly & beaſtly.
               The Lord is bountifull enough to thee, in lawfull ioyes vouchſafed vnto thee, to take thy part in. Learne therefore hence,
                     Vſe.
                   
                  
                     Try our mirth by theſe notes.
                   to try thy mirth, for when thou art reproued for thy lewd mirth, it is no ſufficiēt excuſe to ſay, we were but merry: For know, that there is a double mirth, a holy mirth, and an vngodly mirth; a mirth in God, and a mirth in the deuill. Try therefore, and examine thy mirth: of whether ſort it is. If it be in God.  Firſt, God, is alwaies in the one ende thereof, and the heart is lifted vp in praiſe, and thankſgiuing to God, but for other he wil bring thee to a ſtraight account & reckning.  Againe, if thou wouldeſt know that thy mirth is in the Lord, try and examine whether thou thy ſelfe art in Chriſt. For none can reioyce in the Lord, but he that is already in Chriſt. Be the thing wherein thou reioyceſt, neuer ſo lawfull, obſerue neuer ſo ſtrictly the time and meaſure in it, this thy ioy is but a prophane and carnall ioy; and not in the Lord. Euen the very delight thou takeſt in moderate eating, and drinking, and recreation, if it be not of faith, (as it cannot be, if thou be not in Chriſt) it is ſinne, and therefore not in the Lord. And by this we ſee, that only the righteous man can be truly ioyfull. The worldly, and the carnall he may reioyce

in lawfull things, but he cannot reioyce lawfully, but in a carnal and fleſhly manner this ioy neither proceedeth from God, nor tendes to God, but reſteth in the matter: neither is it ruled by the direction of Gods words, but is diſorderedly carried by the ſway of his profane and wicked heart.
               
                   And as I haue ſaid, that we muſt beleeue in Chriſt, and know that our names are written in heauen, before we can reioyce in the Lord; ſo there are other ſignes, whereby we may know it, for it being a thing of ſuch worth and excellency, I thinke it good to ſet downe more euidences of it. We ſhall therefore better know that our ioy is in the Lord, if we loue God greatly, that is, more then all that is precious in the world (for the perfection of loue is ioy) and therefore be carefull to obey him, and, if we loue our brethren for his ſake.
               
                   And further, if we ſigh to be vnburdened,
                  2. Cor. 5.1. 
                  and long to be with Chriſt, which is beſt of all; for by our reioycing that we haue in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, we die daily:
                  Phil. 1. 1. Cor. 15.31. And therefore by daily growing more ready to die, we doe well teſtifie the ioy that we haue in him.  Laſtly, if our ioy haue vnfained thankes, and feruent prayer for the continuāce of it, as her companions, for ſo doth the Apoſtle require that it ſhould be accompanied, it ſhall well appeare, that we reioyce in the Lord. And here an other thing ſhall not be out of ſeaſon to ſignifie to the reader, that while he is commanded to reioyce in the Lord,Theſ. 5.16. he muſt know that it nothing derogateth from it, to delight in the word of God, which Dauid oft profeſſed, that he did, and that it was more ſweet to him, then the hony to his mouth:
                  
                     To reioyce in the word &c. hinders not our reioycing in the Lord.
                   for the word and the preachers that bring glad tidings out of it, are the inſtruments and meanes whereby we delight in the Lord.
               And when we are taught to reioyce in the Saints which are on the earth, and ſuch as excell in vertue, it hinders nothing our reioycing in the Lord, but furthereth it;Pſa. 1 6. ſeeing they are heires of the promiſe of life with vs, and therefore helpers of that ioy. The ſame I may ſay of reioycing in a good conſcience. For that is a teſtimony of our reioycing in the Lord. Theſe and the like concurre with our ioying in God, and are all helpers of that ioy. And ſo that remaineth ſtill firme, that he that will reioyce, ſhould reioyce in the Lord.
               
                  
                  
                     The enlargement of this ioy.
                  Now I come to the time when and how long this our ioy is to be in God, and that is, alwaies: the Lord (ſo that we wil be contented but to limit our ioy within thoſe bounds we haue ſeene) is liberall and bountifull for the time, he doth not ſtint and limit vs to any ſet and certaine time, but he will haue vs to reioyce in him euermore. Herein differeth the ioy of the faithfull from the ioy of the world, that worldly ioy is neuer conſtant and perpetuall,Prou. 14.13. but euen in laughing, as Salomon teacheth, the heart is ſorrowfull, and the end of that mirth is heauineſſe.
               
               
                  
                     The righteous may reioyce at all times.
                  But the ioy of the faithfull flouriſheth at all times, and in all ſeaſons, it is like to the Laurell tree, that neither winter nor ſummer caſteth the leafe. For this ioy hath continuall meanes to feed it withall: neither can the righteous man, if he conſider it, euer want cauſe to ioy and be merrie in God. We haue ſeene the righteous man hath cauſe to reioyce in affliction, and ſo much more hath he in proſperitie. Hee hath cauſe to reioyce when he prayeth, becauſe God is neere to heare his prayer; and when he readeth, becauſe he ſeeth God to ſpeake to him in his Word, and to giue peace vnto his conſcience.
               
                  
                     And in al things he goeth about.
                  And ſo in euerie thing: the righteous go about, they haue cauſe to go ioyfully about it, their calling eſpecially be it neuer ſo baſe,Deut. 28.47. yea euen the pooreſt labouring men if they be Gods children: they are then imployed in Gods buſineſſe when they are about their calling, he hath ſet them in: the ſeruant, when he is about his maſters buſineſſe, he may reioyce in doing it.Epheſ. 6.6. For reade (Epheſ. 6.6. you ſhall ſee that which their maſters ſet their ſeruants about, is called the will of God, and that in ſeruing their maſters with care and in a good conſcience,Pſalme 19.11. 
                  they ſerue God and Christ. And God will giue them a reward and pay them their wages for it.
               They reioyce alſo when they haue occaſion to giue and diſtribute; for they are aſſured, that what they giue to the poore and needie brother, they giue to Chriſt, and that in feeding him,Eccleſ. 7.2. they feed Chriſt, in cloathing him, that they cloath Chriſt,Reuel. 14.14. yea they reioice in death it ſelfe. For they know it is not to them as to the wicked, the end of ioy, and the beginning

of ſorrow. But it is the end of all labour and ſorrow, and the beginning of great and eternall ioyes.
               
                  
                     Vſe 1 The vſe of this laſt point may be firſt to teach vs, to acknowledge the tender reſpect that God hath ouer his children, that though hee weane them from the ioyes which heere men take in toyes and trifles of this world, yet he leaueth them not deſtitute at any time of ioy and comfort; but willeth them to reioyce alwayes: for we know that euerie commandement of the Goſpell hath a promiſe annexed vnto it, if by faith we lay hold on it. If he command vs to repent, (in the Goſpell) this commandement hath a promiſe annexed, that is, if by faith we endeuour to repent, we ſhall repent. So when he commands vs to loue our enemies, he giues with all to his a promiſe, which being by faith apprehended, enables vs to that dutie. In like fort, God commanding vs to reioyce alwaies, promiſeth, if we be not wanting in our faith, we may euer continue to reioyce.
               
                  
                     Vſe 2 Secondly, if this be a dutie which the Lord requireth of vs at all times, that we reioyce in him, we ought continually to looke and haue an eye into our hearts, to ſee whether this ioy in the Lord be there to be found or not:
                     Note. 
                   and if we find it not, neuer to reſt vntill we find it wrought in vs: yea we are to looke in whatſoeuer we ſet our ſelues vnto, that we find this ioy to carrie vs, and accompanie vs in the doing of it. For as it is ſaid (2. Cor. 9.7.) The Lord loueth a cheerefull giuer: ſo the Lord loueth a cheerefull ſeruer and worſhipper of him, a cheerefull hearer, and cheerefulneſſe in euery good duetie. If we had more knowledge, we might better reioyce: if wee pray, he requires cheerefulneſſe in prayer: if we be employed in our calling, he requires that this alſo be performed cheerefully, and with a glad heart.
               Heere then commeth to be reprehended,
                     Note. 
                   that naturall dulneſſe and deadneſſe of men, when they come to pray and to do any dutie of Gods worſhip. For we ſhould come vnto them with our hearts filled and repleniſhed with ioy. So ſhould we to whatſoeuer good thing and buſines of our calling we ſet our ſelues about. We muſt not go heauily about our buſineſſe, as a beare that had need to be haled and pulled

to the ſtake, Neither wiſh, Oh that this buſines or that worke were done. If God in thy calling appoint thee vnto it, thou muſt go about it cheerefully.
               
                  Hebr. 13.Thus Miniſters (Heb, 13.17.) muſt watch ouer their flocks with ioy & cheerfulnes, though the duty be very full of care; and ſleightly rewarded of men. And Iacob, we reade though his ſeruice was very laborious and toilſome, which hee did vnto Laban,
                  Geneſis. being pinched with the froſt in the night, and the heat in the day▪ yet the time of his ſeruice ſeemed but ſhort vnto him. One cauſe whereof (no doubt) was, becauſe he willingly tooke ioy and delight to walke in the duties of his calling, with painfulneſſe and diligence. So ſhould Maſters reioyce in prouiding for the familie, and doing the duetie of Maſters. Seruants, in pleaſing their Maſters, and doing the duetie of ſeruants. O
                     •
                   how happy and ioyfull a ſight were this, to ſee euery man thus to trauell with ioy and cheere in his calling? To ioy, I ſay, not after a naturall and carnall manner, but with a holy and religious ioy, in doing both the generall dueties of Chriſtianity, and the particular dueties of his owne proper and peculiar calling. This would cauſe both great ioy to euery man in his owne conſcience that thus walketh, and giue much encouragement to all that ſhall ſee and behold it.
            
            
               THE THIRD SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  Philip. 4.4.
                  NOw to goe forward in the Text; the repetition which followeth after, thus, (Againe I ſay reioyce) briefely ſheweth vs, firſt the earneſt affection the Apoſtle had to draw them to this dutie, which proceeded from the abundance of his loue, whereby he thought euery one of their ioy to be his owne, as ye may reade, 2. Cor. 2.3. He accounteth both the ioy and ſorrow of the Corinthians to be his,2. Cor. 2.3. as they tooke his to be theirs. Secondly, this proceeded from the reaſon I touched before: becauſe himſelfe

was filled with this ioy: and it is of that nature, that in whoſe heart ſoeuer it is, it cannot but dilate and communicate it ſelfe to others. As we reade of the Iailer, he reioyced, and he could not keepe this ioy to himſelfe, but communicated it to his whole houſe (Act. 16.) For it is ſaid, he reioyced, hauing beleeued with his whole houſe. So Lydias heart being opened,Acts 16. and dilated by the holy Ghoſt, and the ioy of the Spirit, ſhe made her whole houſhold partakers (ſo farre as ſhe could) of the ſame grace.
               The end whereunto this repetition tendeth, is to make the exhortation more forcible: and to imprint it the better and deeper in their hearts, minds and memories, and to make them more carefull of the practiſe of it. For where the Spirit of God vſeth theſe often doubled exhortations, we muſt and ought to employ our greateſt care, and as it were, our double diligence to learne them.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 
                   But you will ſay, wherefore was the holy. Ghoſt ſo earneſt to repeat and redouble this precept aboue others? 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere,  Firſt, becauſe this is a dutie (as we ſee) that is neceſſarie and requiſite in a Chriſtian at all times.
                     Reaſons why this precept is redoubled.
                   As without the which he can neither heare the Word aright, nor pray aright, nor do any dutie of his calling as he ought. And if it be asked how other do, that haue no part in this ioying in the Lord: I anſwere, they ioy in ſinne. And it would be ſeene, that the wicked would be vtterly wearie of their life, but for their goods and delights that they haue.
               
                   Secondly, this dutie of reioycing thus in the Lord, is the ground of all our thankſgiuing vnto God: which is a maine and principall part of Gods worſhip. For no man can truly be thankfull to God for any thing, but he who hath wrought, by one meanes or other, ſome holy and heauenly ioy and delight in his ſoule.
               
                   Againe, thirdly, this reioycing in the Lord, is a dutie very hard to performe: for though it be eaſie for a man in worldly proſperity to reioyce after a natural and worldly manner; yet to reioyce in the Lord, and in a righteous and ſound manner, this is a moſt heauenly dutie, and as croſſing to the dumpiſh and earthly ſpirits of men, as any thing can be. And therefore

we need, as it were, the more prickes and ſpurs to quicken vs on to this dutie, being of our ſelues ſo flow and dull vnto it. Dauid, though he had an extraordinarie meaſure and portion, for the moſt part of this ioy was wrought in his hart by the Spirit of God; yet he complained oft of the loſſe and decay and abſence of theſe heauenly ioyes. Reade the fourth Pſalme,Pſalme 4.43. verſ. 43. Why art thou cast downe my ſoule, and why art thou diſquieted in me? Trust ſtill in God, &c. His ſoule was ſo vexed, caſt downe and diſquieted in him, that he could not raiſe it vp to any ioy and comfort: ſo it is with the beſt at ſometime. Further obſerue, whom hee heere exhorteth thus often to reioyce in the Lord, and that is, the faithfull, that alreadie had this ioy begun in their hearts. Theſe men that alreadie do reioyce, they muſt reioyce, and againe reioyce in the Lord. It is not for a righteous man to beginne a good thing, but he muſt labour to perfect and encreaſe it to the end of his life.
               
                  1. Iohn 5.13.Marke a notable place to this purpoſe (1. Ioh. 5.13.) Theſe things haue I written vnto you that beleeue in the name of the Sonne of God, that yee may know that yee haue eternall life, and that ye may beleeue in the ſonne of God. He writes to them that beleeue, that they may beleeue. And in the firſt chapter and fourth verſe, he writes theſe things to them that reioyced alreadie,1. Iohn 1.3. 
                  that their ioy, which was begun, might be full. So thus our Apoſtle in this place writes to them, that alreadie reioyced, that they reioyce in the Lord; to them that reioyce in part and in ſome meaſure, that their ioy might be full.
               
                  
                     The Ministers dutie.
                  Heere then we ſee, firſt, what is the dutie of the Miniſter, and that is, (that he content not himſelfe to haue laid a good foundation of ſaith in his people; and of ioy and hope, and ſuch other good vertues. But he is to build them vp, that they may grow from faith to faith, from hope to hope, and from ioy to ioy: euen ſo long as theſe or they may grow, which is as long as men liue in this world) it is the Miniſters dutie to continue his exhortations vnto them. It is not for him to ſay as many retchleſſe and godleſſe Miniſters: I haue taught them more then they haue learned alreadie; when they haue learned that, I will teach them more. No, thou muſt teach

and exhort them the ſame duties againe and againe, and neuer giue ouer exhortations, till thou haſt by the mercy of God euen filled them with ioy, and faith, and patience.
               And with all we ſee the duty of the people:
                     The dutie of the people.
                   It is not enough for them to ſay; They beleeue already, they need not more preaching, to exhort them to beleeue: and they reioyce in God already, and therfore need not to be exhorted to this ioy. But rather, it is meere and neceſſary for them; to haue (with the father of the poſſeſſed child (Mark. 9.24) at leaſt) one eye vpon their infidelity, as well as the other vpon their faith, and to ſay, I beleeue, Lord, helpe my vnbeleefe.
               
               Beleeueſt thou? well, yet thou haſt remaining a great deale of vnbeleefe. Doeſt thou reioyce? yet remember thou haſt need againe, and often to be exhorted to this duty, that thy ſmall ioy may grow in the end, to be full and compleate, that euen thou maieſt with peace reſigne thy ſoule into the hands of God.
               The text being thus vnfolded, and the vſe of it ſet downe; yet two things I ſee of neceſſary vſe to be added, before I make an ende. The firſt is the anſwering of ſome obiections riſing from the former doctrine. The next is; that ſeeing the neceſſitie, the profit, and the difficultie of performing this duty, is ſuch as I haue in ſome ſort ſhewed, I thinke it not amiſſe to ſpend a little time in teaching, how a man may both procure this ioy, if yet he neuer had it: and keepe, and increaſe it, if he haue it, and recouer it, if at any time he haue loſt the ſenſe and feeling of it.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 1 For the obiections, theſe are ſome, why Chriſtians cannot alwayes reioyce, to wit, ſeeing many of them are vſually heauy and ſad: yea ſo farre, that they cauſe other to be ſo, and they make many to thinke, that their religion alloweth no ioy: which holdeth ſome backe from it; and therefore ſuch are farre from reioycing in the Lord alwaies.
                     Anſw. 
                   To this I anſwer, that examples are not to be alleaged againſt rules: for ſuch, as are ſad, of Gods children, haue not yet learned to know their liberty, that they may reioyce, as I haue ſaid, but would moſt willingly, and ſhall in time doe ſo, but in the meane while are to be pitied, and helped forward, and therefore

theſe hinder not the truth before mentioned, that the righteous cannot reioyce.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 2 Againe, it is obiected, that ſome who did reioyce in the Lord, haue left and giuen it ouer, and take vp their ioy in other things, as though either their heauenly ioy could not be held, and as though they had done more then they could defend.
                     Anſw. 
                   To the which I ſay that either they had no good ground nor warrant to reioyce ſo at firſt, or if they had, they ſinne in leauing it off, and muſt returne to it againe.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 3 Other ſay, they cannot reioyce, as they did when they were firſt inlightned,
                     Anſwere.
                   to beleeue. To whom I ſay, that either they labour not to preſerue it ſo carefully, nor their faith from which it commeth,Rom. 15.13. neither prize them both, as they did when they firſt beleeued; or if they doe, then they may ſtill reioyce as they did at the firſt: if otherwiſe, then what maruaile is it, that they cannot reioyce, as ſometime they did: let them repent their negligence and ſinne, and doe their former workes, and God will reſtore their ioy to them, yea, and that rather more ſoundly, which they were wont in him to finde.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 4 And where it is demanded, how can they reioyce in tribulation?Rom. 5.5. 
                  
                     Anſw. 
                   I ſay with the Apoſtle they may, through hope. For though no affliction be for the time preſent ioyous, but greeuous, yet the ſenſe of heauenly ioy is onely abated for the time,Pet. 1.7. but ſhall returne againe, and as S. Peter ſayeth: it is meet if need be, that we be in heauines for a ſeaſon, that the triall of our faith, being much more precious then gold that periſheth, may be found to our honour. And yet when God will, he giueth ioy in heauines, as to Paul and Silas who ſung in the dungeon at midnight: and more then that, as Daniel was inabled to reioyce in the Lions denne, the three children in the fierie fornace, and the Martyrs in our remembrance, did at the ſtake.
               
                  
                     Obiect. 5 As for ſuch as aske at the hearing of this, why may not any reioyce in the Lord, as well as theſe before ſpoken of? 
                     Anſw. 
                   I anſwere: ſeeing they haue ſet their delight in other things tranſitory, or euill. For as the Prophet aduiſeth, the rich may not reioyce in their riches, nor the wiſe in their wiſdom, but he that

will reioyce, let him reioyce in the Lord. For no one of thoſe reioycings can ſtand with this.
               Thus much for anſwere to the obiections, the other thing is, how this ioying in the Lord is to be gotten, kept, and recouered being loſt. which that you may the better regard, and diligently attend vnto; Know this of a ſuerty, that he that is not in ſome meaſure partaker of this ioy here;
                     He that is not partaker of this ioy here, ſhall neuer partake the ioyes of heauen.
                   ſhall neuer be partaker of the ioyes in heauen. For as our ſpirituall life whereby we liue in Chriſt, is not begun but in this life: ſoe certaine and doubtleſſe it is, that this ioy which is a fruite of that life, muſt either be begun here, or we ſhall neuer paſſe into them ioyes in the kingdome of heauen. Deſpiſe therefore this ioy, and ſcorne it, as many doe, who count it but a fantaſie, and withall, thou refuſeſt the ioyes of heauen, whereof this ioy is but the beginning. On the contrary, procure, keepe and encreaſe this ioy, and theſe are a certaine and ſure pledge vnto thee, of the ioyes of the life to come. And the more thou canſt fill and fraught thy ſelfe with this ioy, the nearer doeſt thou come vnto the life of the Saints in heauen. For this ioy here on earth, and that in heauen, is not differing in kinde. But the ioy of the faithfull militant, is the ſame with that of the faithful triumphant. The ſame, I ſay, for the nature and kinde of the ioy, though not for the degree and perfection of it. So that as I ſaid, the more we grow on in this ioy, the nearer we come to the bleſſed life of the Saints triumphant.
               Let vs then ſee by what meanes this ioy of heauen may be here begun in vs on earth.
                     How this ioy may be begun here in this life▪ we muſt firſt be reconciled to God.
                   And firſt this is a cleane & an euident trueth; that we can neuer attaine to any true and ſound ioy in the Lord, vntil we be by faith in Chriſt recōciled vnto him, For vntill then, ſo far ar we from taking any ioy in him, that we take the greateſt pleaſure in eſtranging and withdrawing our ſelues, ſo far as can be, from him. As Adam before he was reconciled vnto God after his fall, he could not endure the ſight and preſence of God, but hid himſelfe amongſt the trees of the garden. As well can the theife take pleaſure in the preſence of the iudge, that is to condemne and pronounce ſentence of death vpon him, as we can reioice

in God the Iudge, and the auenger of all our ſinnes committed againſt him.
               
                  
                     Reconciliation to be proceeded in by three degrees.
                  Now then that we may know how this reconciliation is to be made with God, without the which we cannot ioy in him; we are in it to proceed by theſe three degrees.  Firſt, we are to come to the knowledge of our ſin by the Law of God: we are to bring the Law, rightly taught and vnderſtood of vs, as a light into our hearts: to ſee what heapes of filthie ſins lie in euery darke corner of our hearts: to ſee what are the duties required in euery ſeuerall precept; and how we haue omitted them: what ſinnes are condemned in euery precept: and how and in what degree we haue ſinned in the commiſſion of them.  Secondly, we are to weigh the iudiciall ſentence of the Law againſt vs. Curſed is euery one that continueth not in all things written in the Law, to do them. And then not to bleſſe our ſelues, that yet all ſhall be well, nor to make a league and couenant with hell and death, which ſhall not be kept: but in token we beleeue, our hearts muſt be filled with ſorrow, and all our vaine reioycings are to bee turned to mourning, till we melt and relent, be abaſed and humbled thereby, and brought to an vtter deſpaire of all helpe in our ſelues.  Thirdly, being thus truly caſt downe in our owne ſoules, we are then to learne to know, what meanes God hath appoined, to free vs from the bitter curſe of death and hell. The meanes he appointed for the freeing vs (were) the death, paſſion and ye obedience of Chriſt Ieſus: that he might vndergo the curſe and wrath of God for ſuch loſt and forlorne ones, as we are: and that we might be freed from it, and ſo make a full and perfect ſatisfaction for vs: and fulfill the Law, that his obedience might be imputed vnto vs. But yet this paſſion and obedience of Chriſt are not ours, except they be applied to vs by faith in the promiſes of the Goſpell. Theſe promiſes therefore are to be knowne, and then by faith to be laid hold on: the promiſes tending to this purpoſe, are euery where very comfortable and plentifull in Scripture, Ioh.Iohn 3.14. 3.14. As the Serpent was lift vp in the wilderneſſe; ſo must the Sonne of man be lift vp: that whoſoeuer beleeueth, ſhould not periſh, but haue eternall life. For God ſo loued the world, that he

ſent his onely begotten Sonne, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in him, ſhould not periſh, but haue eternall life.
               
               Which being ſo, how can it be that we being freed frō the ſting, affrighting and thundring threatnings of the Law, and tranſlated by this faith into ye glorious liberty of the ſons and daughters of God, but that wee ſhould bee exceedingly rauiſhed in ioy at this ſo vnſpeakable loue and mercie of God vnto vs? If onely we were freed from the curſe of the Law, which is eternall death and torment, and had only this hatred of God turned from vs, that he ſhould no more hate vs, this were cauſe enough, one would thinke, if we did duely conſider it, of great reioycing. But truly to beleeue that God ſhould further loue vs, and loue vs, as it were, aboue his owne Sonne, that he ſhould wound him to ſpare vs, and curſe him to bleſſe vs; that he ſhould kill him to quicken vs, that he ſhould abandon and forſake him, that he might againe take and receiue vs; this I ſay, to beleeue, it cannot but cheare and reioyce the ſaddeſt heart, and heauieſt ſoule that euer was. It is ſaid in the Acts,Act. 2.42. 
                  All that beleeued continued in the Apostles doctrine, and ate their meat with gladnes and ſinglenes of heart. This faith made them all, though they were in a moſt dangerous eſtate, in regard of the world, and the enemies they had in it, to reioyce and be merrie in the Lord; notwithſtanding all the ſnares and dangers, that infeſted them on euerie ſide. And the Apoſtle Peter writing to all the diſperſed beleeuers of the Iewes in many countries, in his 1. Epiſtle, 1.8. ſaith, Ye beleeuing in him, that is in Chriſt, though you ſee him not, you reioyce with ioy vnspeakable and glorious. Though Chriſt were abſent in bodie, yet this faith of theirs in him, made them all to reioyce, with vnſpeakable and glorious ioy, as the people of Samaria did after they beleeued in Chriſt. Thus then we ſee briefely what is the only way to attaine, and come vnto this ioy heere in this exhortation of the Apoſtle commended vnto vs. But I haue both in a direction, and in Sermons handled this at large, and will ſay no more of it.
               Let vs now ſee when we haue it,
                     
                        How to keepe and encreaſe this ioy.
                     
                     
                        The first meane.
                     
                   how we may both keepe and encreaſe this ioy in our hearts. And this is to be done by many meanes. The firſt and the moſt principall is, by the reuerent,

heedfull and attentiue hearing of the word of God. For that, as it hath bin the principall meane of God to beget faith, and to breed and begin this ioy in thine heart: ſo is it the chiefe and ſoueraigne meane, whereby God will both continue and encreaſe this ioy in thee: for he hath giuen this charge to his ſeruants; whom he truſteth with his word, to reueale and to diſcouer daily in the preaching of the Word, more plainely vnto vs the riches of his grace in the Goſpell. Now it cannot be but the more cleere fight we come to haue of the mercie of God in Chriſt, the more our hearts muſt needs take ioy and pleaſure in it. Secondly, by the preaching of the Word, we haue not only the eye of our vnderſtanding cleared, and the miſts and vailes of our ignorance remedied, but our affections are alſo whetted on to a greater delight and ioy in the goodneſſe of God alreadie knowne vnto vs. Our memories alſo are continually renued and refreſhed, when we heare the ſame or the like doctrine, promiſes and exhortations iterated and repeated vnto vs. Would we therfore euer haue our ioy to continue freſh and flouriſhing, then let vs neuer be wearie of hearing the word of God taught and preached vnto vs: this was the ſeed of our ioy, and this is that which feedeth it, cauſeth it to continue, grow and floriſh, and without which, it cannot but wither, decay, and die in vs.
               
                  
                     The ſecond.
                  But beſides the preaching of the Word, the Supper of the Lord is very effectuall to this purpoſe. For hereby theſe mercies, the cauſe of all our ioy, are brought, not onely to our minds and memories, which is done by the preaching of the Word; but nearer yet, euen to our view, and touch and taſte, that we may after a ſort euen feele them with our hands, and ſee them with our eyes, and taſte them with our mouthes.
               
                  
                     The third.
                  To this ſeale of the Word, we ſhould adde the daily and continuall reading of the Word and Scriptures of God. For what are the Scriptures, but as one well termeth them; the letter of the Creator to the creature, the letter of God vnto man? If we be delighted in reading ouer many times, the kind letter of ſome ſpeciall friend, vnto vs; we cannot but much more ioy in reading ſo kind and louing writings of

God vnto vs. But the word of God is more fitly, as I take it, in the Scripture called the will and teſtament of God. For herein the Lord hath ſet downe what inheritances, what bequeathes and legacies, he hath willed and bequeathed vnto vs. Can we reade theſe continually, carefully and attentiuely, and not be moued to ioy? No, it is impoſſible. For it is not in this Teſtament of God, as it is commonly in the wils of men. There, though there be many and great things bequeathed; yet in a few readings ouer, a man may come to ſound the bottome of them. But the will of God containeth an endleſſe and bottomleſſe ſea of riches, that a man can neuer ſound the depth, nor reach the bottome of it.
                     Note. 
                   If he could reade ouer the Bible ten thouſand times, euery time hee ſhould find, if hee reade it carefully and heedfully, new matter of ioy, and more cauſes of reioycing then euer he found before.
               Practiſe therefore this dutie of reading: oh! how glad would many great Kings and holy Prophets haue been, to haue had theſe holy bookes of Scripture to reade, which we haue now, and could not? To haue had (I ſay) thoſe bookes which we now haue, and are contented to let them lie by vs the whole day, or weeke, and neuer looke into them. They reioyced to reade continually the darke and obſcure promiſes of the bookes of Moſes and the Prophets: but we ſcarce vouchſafe to reade the cleare and manifeſt declaration of the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt; as it is by the Euangeliſts and Apoſtles written and recorded vnto vs. Their care in this, and our careleſneſſe in reading the Scriptures, is one cauſe why they in thoſe darke and miſtie times, reioyced by faith to ſee the day 
                     •
                  f Chriſt to come, and we ſcarce reioyce to behold the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  hriſt paſt, and recorded vnto vs. Yee are therefore all 
                     〈◊〉
                   be exhorted, that are deſirous of this happines and ioy, whereunto you are by the Apoſtle exhorted, if yee can reade; that ye take euen euery day, if it may be, ſome little time, ſome quarter of an houre at leaſt, to reade ſomething in the Scripture or ſome godly books, which may make you the more ioyfull and merrie in God, all the day and night after. If ye cannot reade, nor cannot get conuenient means to learne;

yet be carefull that your children or ſeruants may, that at the leaſt you may heare them reade.
               
                  
                     Mens excuſes anſwered.
                  
                   I know men will be readie heere to find excuſes. Thou doeſt not vnderſtand it, thou wilt ſay, when thou readeſt it, or heareſt it read. This, it may be true in part, ſome things thou canſt not vnderſtand: but many things, and thoſe that moſt directly ſerue to comfort, to inſtruct and cheere thee, are ſo plaine and eaſie, that it is impoſſible not to conceiue them. For therefore hath the Lord written the greateſt part of Scripture, not by men of deepe and profound learning; but by ſhepheards and fiſhers, and heardmen, and tentmakers, that the ſimpleſt man that is willing to learne, might conceiue them: and no pretence or excuſe might be left to them that will not.
               
                   Againe, thou wilt be readie to find excuſes from the buſineſſe of thy calling: thou haſt wife and children to care for, and a familie to prouide for: therefore thou muſt follow thy calling, to prouide for them and maintaine them. Theſe are idle and cold excuſes: for what if thou haſt not only thy ſelfe, thy wife and children, and familie to prouide for; but haddeſt a kingdome to rule and to order the cares, troubles and buſineſſes thereof? theſe are no ſufficient excuſes to exempt thee from the reading, and the daily reading of the word of God. Marke the charge that is giuen to the King, Deut. 17. the end. He is to haue the booke of God continually by him. And what muſt he then do? let it lye by him for a ſhew, or for other men to reade in? No, he muſt reade in this booke. And marke, when? Al the dayes of his life, that he may learne to feare God, and to keepe the words of the law, and not 
                        〈◊〉
                      from the commandements to the right hand, nor to the 
                        〈…〉
                      may prolong his dayes. This duty that is there layed vpon 
                     〈◊〉
                   King, lieth vpon euery Chriſtian, he is to reade the word of God, that he may obſerue it, and it may be well vnto him Ioh. 5.39. Chriſt ſpeaketh it to all the Iewes. Search the Scriptures, which they muſt doe by the continuall reading of them. And euery where, our Sauiour Chriſt alleageth to thē the reading of the word, ſaying, Haue you not read what Dauid did? and,

what the Scripture ſayeth, the ſtone that the builders refuſed,
                  Acts. 4.11. 
                  is made the head of the corner. He that readeth let him conſider, And Reuel. 3. Bleſſed is he that readeth, and heareth the words of this booke. And without this reading often of the word, it is impoſſible, to reſiſt readily the tentations of Satan. For the deuill will bring ſuch colour of Scripture, for his tentations, as we cannot reſiſt, if we haue not by diligent reading, the Scripture ready at hand, and vpon our fingers ends, that we may anſwere with our Sauiour out of the Scripture, It is written, and, againe it is written: and ſo againſt euery tentation.
               
                   Some will here excuſe themſelues from their ability. They are poore men and they are not able, to lay out the mony to buy them a Bible withall. But alas, this is eaſily anſwered: For there is no man, I take it, not among you that are of the poorer ſort, but he will finde ſpare money, at leaſt, once in the yeare, to make merry withall, and to refreſh himſelfe, for al the labor and trauaile of the yeare; why? canſt thou thē find money to lay out, to make thee merry for a day, and wilt thou not find money▪ to beſtow vpon the Bible, and booke of God, which may make thee merry the whole yeare, and make thee euery day as it were, a ioyfull feaſt in thy conſcience? Reade therefore, and to this end, if thou wouldeſt heare more of reading, reade a Chapter of this argument in my booke, the third treatiſe.
               But yet alſo to thy reading,
                     A fourth meane
                   holy meditation and conference of the word of God is to be ioyned. For examine and thou ſhalt finde them that haue attained to the higheſt degree of ioy in the word, to haue been continuall meditators and conferrers of it; and by meditation and conference to haue nouriſhed and foſtered this their ioy. Dauid that was a man euen filled with this heauenly ioy in the word, and therfore crieth out, Pſal. 119.13. part, How ſweete is thy law vnto my mouth? yea ſweeter then honey vnto my mouth. This Dauid, I ſay, was a man of daily and continual ſtudie and meditation in the word: verſ. 1. hee ſaith, Thy word it is my meditation continually. And in the ſixth part, I will talke of thy teſtimonies before Kings▪ and will not bee aſhamed. The preſence of Kings and great Princes ſhould not abaſh him; but euen before

them, he would conferre and talke of the word of God. Reade an excellent place to this purpoſe containing both an exhortation and a promiſe. Ioſh. 1.8. The Lord commandeth Ioſhua that he let not the booke of God go out of his mouth. It muſt not goe out of his mouth, that is, he muſt be talking, ſpeaking, and conferring of it.
               Secondly, he muſt meditate therein day and night, that he may obſerue and doe, according to all the law of Moſes, that ſo hee might proſper whither ſoeuer he went. So that, wouldeſt thou proſper and reioyce in whatſoeuer thou goeſt about? the way is to meditate, talke, and conferre of the word of God. And in the firſt Pſalme, they that meditate in the law of God day and night, are pronounced bleſſed. For whatſoeuer they doe, ſhall prosper. Which proſperitie hath alwaies ioy as an attendant vpon it. But as all meditation of the word is a meane, in ſome ſort, to continue and increaſe our ioy in God: ſo eſpecially meditating and conferring of the moſt gracious and comfortable promiſes of the Goſpell. The meditation and conference of theſe are as it were bellowes, to blow and kindle the ſp
                     •••
                  es of our ioy, which are in our ſoules.
               So then, we ſee the hearing of the word preached, and the reading of the word written, and the meditation and conference of both, and eſpecially of the comfortable promiſes of the Goſpell, are ſingular meanes to continue, and to encreaſe our ioy in the Lord.
                     The fifth meane. Practiſe.
                   But withall, let vs remember to ioyne to theſe the practiſe of the word, thus heard and read, and meditated and conferred on. In that place I quoted, Ioſh. 1.8. The law muſt be in his mouth; he muſt ſpeake of it, and hee muſt meditate in it. But to what end? to reſt there? No: but that he may obſerue, and doe according to all the law of Moſes, &c. and then he ſhould proſper. For this is a moſt certaine truth, that without the practiſe of the word, neither hearing, neither reading, neither conferring, neither meditating, can cauſe or continue any ſound ioy in the heart. Reade 2. Eccleſiaſtes: Surely, ſaith the Preacher, to a man that is good in his ſight,
                  Eccleſ. 2. 
                  God giueth wiſedome, and knowledge, and ioy: but to the ſinner he giueth paine, &c. God giueth ioy (ſaith the Preacher)

to him that is good in his fight. Reade againe Ioh. 15.10. If you keepe my commandements you ſhall abide in my loue, as I haue kept the commandements of my father, and abide in his loue. And then immediatly hee addeth in the next verſe: Theſe things haue I ſpoken vnto you, that my ioy may abide in you, and that your ioy may be full. Our Sauiour giueth charge to his Diſciples, to keepe and to practiſe his commandements, that his ioy may abide, and that it may grow to be full in them. Many places might eaſily be alleaged to this purpoſe. Prouerbs 29.6. In the tranſgreſſion of an euill man is his ſnare, but the righteous doth ſing and reioyce. The wicked man by his tranſgreſſion inſnareth and intangleth himſelfe in ſorrow: but the righteous that directeth his way by the word, hee ſhall be merrie, and ſing for ioy. The ſcripture in ſundry places beateth vpon this point: and therefore I will not ſtand ſo vpon it. Doe we therefore deſire to leade and liue a ioyful life? Let vs become good men by the practiſe of Gods word. Otherwiſe let vs not looke to haue our ioy continue. But rather let vs looke for ſorrow, yea for ſorrow vpon ſorrow. As it is written, Pſal. 32.10. Many ſorrowes ſhall come to the wicked man.
               
               To theſe meanes that I haue ſpoken of, may be added,Pſal 32.10. ſome, that are touched by this our Apoſtle, 1. Theſ. 5.17.18.
                     The ſixt meane. Prayer.
                   &c. For hauing exhorted them in the 16. verſe to reioyce alway. In the words following, he ſheweth by what meanes they may continue this their ioy. And that is, firſt by continuall prayer. For we haue the promiſe of Chriſt, that whatſoeuer we aske of God, according to his will, in the name of Chriſt it ſhal be giuen vnto vs. Now this we know, and are well aſſured of, that it is according to the will of God, that we ſhould reioyce, ſo that if we pray for it earneſtly, and continually, he will be moſt willing and ready to grant our petition. Seek therefore the continuance and increaſe of this ioy at Gods hand, and thou ſhalt finde it, knock for it by prayer, at the doore of Gods mercy, and he will giue it vnto thee. But alas, this duty of prayer for ioy is careleſly, for the moſt part, neglected. Men preſume, as it ſhould ſeeme, they can keepe it well enough, though they neuer ſue and ſeeke to God for it,

the fountaine and author of it. If they that haue continued a long time in Chriſts ſchoole, ſhould trie, and examine how ſmall proceedings they haue made in this Chriſtian duty, and ſearch to finde out the cauſe of their ſo little profiting, they ſhall finde by triall, one maine cauſe to haue bin, the neglect of prayer for ſo excellent a grace as this is.
               
                  
                     The ſeuenth: Thankſgiuing.
                  Next vnto prayer, the Apoſtle, in the place before named, addeth thankſgiuing: For though we craue and beg neuer ſo much, this ioy at Gods hands; yet if he ſend vs ioy according to our deſire; and we be not mindfull to returne thankes vnto him, he will withhold and withdraw his hand from giuing it to vs. God indeed hath bound himſelfe to giue grace, and to giue ioy vnto them that aske it; but yet ſo, that they be thankefull after: without which thankefulneſſe for benefits receiued, they, that come to God, plainely declare that they pray not as they ought. For when we pray for ioy, or pray for any grace, wee are not ſimplie to reſt in the deſire it ſelfe: but our deſire muſt aime at a further ende; and that is, that we receiuing theſe, may praiſe and bleſſe God for them. Marke the Prophet Dauid in the ſixth Pſalme, in the thirtieth Pſalme, and in diuers others: he deſireth that the Lord would giue him life: but he asketh not life ſimply, that he might liue; but becauſe the dead cannot praiſe God, here as the liuing doe. And therefore deſireth life, that liuing he might praiſe God: After the ſame manner, is framed alſo the prayer of Hezechiah Eſay. 38. So therefore we are to pray for life, that liuing we may praiſe God: and pray for ioy, that reioycing we may praiſe him. we are not to aske life ſimply to liue, but that liuing we may praiſe God, neither are we to aske ioy ſimply for it ſelfe; but, that reioycing in God and in his goodnes, we might haue cauſe, and be the fitter to bleſſe God for it. And thus if we come to God for ſupply of new ioy with thanks, for the former obtained, God is ready, and willing to heare vs, But ſeeing I cannot goe through all the meanes of preſeruing our ioy, at this time, I will here ſtay for this time.
            
            
               
               THE FOVRTH SERMON VPON THE SAME TEXT.
               
                  NOw to proceed where I left,
                     The eighth: Not to quench the ſpirit.
                   the next duty preſcribed by the Apoſtle for the continuance and encreaſe of our ioy, is, That we quench not the Spirit. Where, by the ſpirit, I take to be meant, the good motions of the Spirit of God in our hearts. For when theſe good motions, cauſed in vs by the ſpirit, are cheriſhed; the ſpirit of God is cheriſhed: and being cheared ſo, he cheareth and filleth our hearts with ioy, and annointeth vs with the oyle of gladnes. On the contrary: quench theſe good motions, and thou quencheſt the ſpirit of God, which ſhould cauſe this ioy in thine heart. Therefore, commeth there at any time, any good motions into thine heart? be carefull, by all meanes poſſible, to entertaine them, to cheriſh and to make much of them. So ſhalt thou make glad the good ſpirit of God, and hee ſhall giue peace, and ioy to thy ſoule. But is this commonly practiſed? Nothing leſſe. For as it was ſaid of the Iſraelites, fortie yeares long, they grieued the Spirit of God: ſo may it be ſaid of the moſt among vs, our whole life hath bin, a continuall grieuing, and prouoking the good ſpirit of God. For which of vs can excuſe our ſelues, but that we haue had diuers good motions, ſometimes from others, ſometimes from our ſelues; and yet we haue reſiſted them. Sometimes we haue bin moued to heare the word of God; yet either for ſome vaine pleaſure, or ſmall profit, we haue neglected it. Many times we haue had a motion to leaue ſwearing, curſing, lying, and ſome eſpeciall ſinnes we haue bin giuen vnto; yet haue we not cheriſhed theſe motions: nay we haue baniſhed them away, and ſhut; as it were, the doores of our hearts againſt them. No maruell therefore, the ſpirit of God affordes vnto vs ſo ſcanty meaſure of heauenly ioy, when we thus daily and continually grieue him; when as faſt as he kindleth any grace, or good

thing in vs, we are readie to quench it, and as it were to caſt water vpon it.
                     Note. 
                   If we will haue ioy, we muſt make much of the Spirit of ioy: that we ſhall doe, if we neuer croſſe any good motion, but be readie with all cheerefulneſſe and alacritie, to foſter and to cheriſh it in vs: ſo that of a good motion, it may grow to be a ſetled and a conſtant affection in vs: otherwiſe looke for no ioy from that Spirit, whom thou careſt not to grieue. Rather feare, as iuſtly thou mayeſt, that heauie ſorrow, or at leaſt a deadly and ſenſeleſſe numneſſe will befall thee. For experience hath ſhewed moſt fearefull examples, not only of them that haue loſt their ioy for a while; but of them that haue died in moſt lamentable deſpaire, by reſiſting theſe good motions: and others, that for all the time of their life, with all the meanes they could vſe, were neuer able to recouer the feeling of their ioy againe, loſt by the reſiſting ſometime of one good motion: quench not therefore the ſpirit, that is, the good motions of Gods Spirit.
               
                  
                     Quench euill motions.
                  But yet if thou wilt keepe thy ioy, remember and be carefull to quench another ſpirit, that is, all the motions and ſuggeſtiōs that he ſeeketh to put into thy mind. For as the Spirit of God is the Spirit of ioy,; and being cheared by thee, will cheare thy heart in God: So Satan is a ſpirit of heauineſſe, and a ſpirit of deſpaire; entertaine him and follow his motions; and thou falleſt into the way of deſpaire and heauineſſe: reſiſt him and his ſuggeſtions, and thou ſhalt both cheare the Spirit of God, and free thy ſelfe from all that ſorrow and heauineſſe, that the diuell ſeeketh to bring into thy ſoule,
               
                  
                     Our ioy in the best things must be predominant.
                  Againe, that thou mayeſt keepe thy ioy in God: remember it is not ſufficient for thee to keepe ſome kind of ioy and delight in good things: but thy ioy in theſe things, muſt be a predominant,
                     Note. 
                   & an euerlaſting ioy. For if thou ſuffer the delight of any earthly matter, to poſſeſſe & to occupie the chief place in thy heart, thy true ioy is gone. Herod, he had ſome kind of ioy in hearing Iohn Baptiſts preaching, whereupon alſo he did many good things, but becauſe his ioy was not predominant, but the ioy of pleaſures did exceed it, which he tooke in his inceſtuous adulterie, therefore he loſt euen that ioy he had. And this experience teacheth vs, that the ſetting

of our ioy vpon one thing, remoueth it from other things: he that hath his chiefe delight taken vp in his profit, is the leſſe ſet vpon paſtimes: & he that is chiefly ſet vpon one pleaſure, is leſſe bent vnto another. But this muſt needs fall out rather, that in the ſetling our minds vpon earthly pleaſures, we ſhall withdraw them from heauenly ioies. For there is a far greater oddes & cōtrariety betweene earthly pleaſures and heauenly ioyes, then is betweene one earthly pleaſure and another. The rule therefore is, that we vſe a temperancie and a moderation in the lawfull pleaſures of this life, and ſo reioyce, as the Apoſtle teacheth vs, 1. Cor. 7.30. as if we reioyced not. And this rule we muſt remember, is to be kept euen in lawfull pleaſures, and ſuch as we haue good ground and warrant to vſe from the word of God. For as for pleaſure in ſinne, be it in any time, in any place or companie, with what circumſtance ſoeuer, it hinders and quenches our reioycing in God.
               But you will aske me,
                     How this may be attained.
                   how you may come to haue a predominant ioy in the beſt duties,: for it is not an eaſie matter to alter our affections, ſet vpon theſe inferiour delights. I anſwere, we ſhall come to a predominancie of delight in good things, if we be euer diligent in accuſtoming and exerciſing our ſelues in them. Accuſtome thy ſelfe to earneſt prayer, and thou ſhalt delight in nothing more then in calling vpon God: exerciſe thy ſelfe in repentance and mortification of ſinne, and this ſhall become euerie day more eaſie and leſſe grieuous, yea and in the end delightſome vnto thee. On the contrarie, doeſt thou find thy heart taken vp with ouer great delight in the things of the earth? The daily and diligent exerciſe of holy and heauenly duties will ſlake, and quench thy ioy in them.
               And againe, as by the practiſe of them, thou haſt taken that delight thou haſt in them; ſo if thou ſhalt diſuſe, and vnaccuſtome thy ſelfe from them, both from the practiſing of them, the ſpeaking of them with pleaſure, and the muſing and thinking vpon them: thou ſhalt leſſen and diminiſh thy ioy in them. For this experience can teach vs,
                     Note. 
                   alwaies they take greateſt delight in any thing, that giue themſelues moſt to the practiſe of it. None ſo much giuen to the loue of drink or wine, as they that are continually lying at it. And it was a

good precept giuen by a Heathen Philoſopher, which may well beſeeme a Chriſtian to learne: that a man ſhould make choice of the beſt life, and cuſtome would make it eaſie and pleaſant vnto him. We muſt not firſt looke for ioy, and then to practiſe good duties; but we muſt labour and ſweat with exerciſing and accuſtoming our ſelues thereto, and afterward we ſhall find true ioy, from the continuall practiſe of them. Practiſe ſobrietie, patience and mildneſſe, and a delight in them will follow of it owne accord.
               
                  
                     Intermiſſion of good duties dangerous.
                  Hence then we ſee, it is very dangerous in regard of the loſſe of our ioy, to omit for a time, and to make intermiſſion of good duties: as alſo to giue leaue for a time to our ſelues, to the practiſe of ought that hath been, and is like to be a hinderance to the progreſſe and proceeding of our Chriſtian ioy. For omit a good dutie this day, and thinke it is not long to the next, it ſhall be done as well then; thou ſhalt find leſſe diſpoſition in thy ſelfe vnto it; and leſſe delight in the doing of it, by that intermiſſion of thine. And againe, giue thy ſelfe libertie, but at one time, to practiſe that thou ſhouldeſt not, and thinke thou wilt not be ſo farre carried with thy delight another time; that one action of thine ſhall make thy delight ſtronger,
                     Note. 
                   and thee leſſe able to withſtand it. This men commonly ſee not, and therefore if they haue had any ioy, in any good dutie, they quickly loſe it.
               Againe, becauſe they intermit it ſtill, and deferre, from this day to the next, the practiſe of it. Or if they haue growne to ſome leſſe delight, or ſome diſlike of ſomething that were to be left; yet by this taking of libertie now to do it, and then vpō another occaſiō to do it, the delight returneth as great as euer it was. If mē haue come to take pleaſure in the Sabbaths of God, in ye hearing of his Word, in prayer, in reading, cōference and other holy duties vpon that day; this delight many times groweth cold in them, becauſe they thinke, yet they may take libertie, and diſpence with themſelues for a day, when either their profit calleth them away to worldly affaires, or ſome ill cuſtome to vanitie and paſtimes, draweth them away. For this abādoning thy ioy, which thou mighteſt take in the holy duties of the Sabbath but for one day, will make thee the more vnfit to take any ioy in them for many

dayes after. This keeping of one Sabbath to the deuill,
                     Note. 
                   will make thee thou ſhalt after take little pleaſure in keeping any to God. Let him therefore ſue vnto thee, but for one Sabbath in the yeare, to be kept vnto him in wantonneſſe, & vanity; and let him labour to further it what he can, and pleade old, and ancient cuſtome for it: yet if (I ſay) thou feaſt him, and makeſt him merry but one day in the yeare, hee will ſo winde in himſelfe, and grow in one day into ſo familiar acquaintance with thee, that thou ſhalt not be able to winde thy ſelfe out of it, when thou wouldeſt.
               The laſt meanes which I will note, whereby we may both keepe, and encreaſe our ioy, is, that whenſoeuer the Lord ſhal call vs out to troubles and croſſes,
                     The laſt meane. To ſubmit our ſelues to the Lord in our troubles.
                   that we ſubmit our ſelues willingly and patiently to goe thorough them. For this is a certaine and a ſure poſition alwaies in Gods children, that ſorrowes and troubles ſent vnto them of God, are a direct way whereby the Lord intendeth to bring them vnto greater ioy; and the greater, and more continued troubles the Lord bringeth vpon them, to the greater ioy doth he carry them, if they willingly, and patiently paſſe through them. Reade, 2. Cor. 1.5. As the ſufferings of Chriſt abound in vs; So our conſolation aboundeth, through Chriſt. Marke, As the ſufferings abound, ſo the conſolation and ioy likewiſe doth abound. And this is ſutable, and well agreeing to all the actions of God, for the moſt part. For when hee meaneth to exalt thee higheſt, then he firſt humbleth thee by afflictions, and caſteth thee downe loweſt. None was euer ſo lowe abaſed, and ſo deepely caſt downe as was our Sauiour. Therefore alſo, as it is ſaid. Phil. 2.9. God highly exalted him,
                  
                     Note. 
                   
                  & gaue him a name aboue euery name, that at the name of Ieſus ſhould euery knee bow, both of things in heauen, and things in earth; and things vnder the earth. The like we ſee in Dauid, when God meant to exalt him to the kingdome, he led him thither, through many troubles and afflictions. The Iſraelites God led them into a land flowing with milke and hony; but he led them through barren, and a terrible, and feareful wildernes. Ioſeph was exalted to be next the King in Egypt, but he was carried thorough pits, and priſons and bondage, vnto it.
               
                  On the contrary, marke the dealing of God with the wicked: he ſpareth them here, becauſe he meanes to puniſh them in hell. He feedeth them in fat and good paſtures, becauſe he meaneth to kil and to ſlaughter them after. Doth God therefore call thee to trouble, this is the way he hath prepared to bring thee to ioy, if thou wilt follow it. Reade an excellent place to this purpoſe. Acts 20.22. And now behold, ſaith the Apoſtle Paul to the elders of Epheſus, I goe bound in the ſpirit to Ieruſalem, not knowing what ſhall befall me there, ſaue that the holy Ghoſt in euery city witneſſeth, that bonds and afflictions abide for mee. Marke now his reſolution, but I paſſe not at all, (ſaieth he) neither is my life deare vnto my ſelfe, that I may fulfill my courſe with ioy. He ſaw many dangers, and many troubles before him: but yet he would not auoide them, for in ſo doing he ſhould haue bereaued himſelfe of former ioy, and depriued himſelf of much comfort, that by theſe he aſſured himſelfe of. I ſpeake not this, that I would haue men to ruſh themſelues into needles dangers. No, if God giue meanes to auoide them lawfully, and with a good conſcience; it is preſumption in vs, and a tempting of God, to caſt our ſelues into them. But when we know, and are aſſured we are called vnto them by God,
                     Note. 
                   as Paul was, (for he went vp to Ieruſalem bound in the ſpirit) Then we may and ought, willingly to vndergoe them. And when we are thus called, it is eaſily knowne. For if trouble, be before vs, & no meanes with ſafety of a good conſcience to auoide them, then God calleth vs. And we if we wil with Paul finiſh our courſe with ioy we may not go about to auoide them. Heb. 12.11. Thus then we ſee, how this bleſſed ioy is to be gotten, and alſo how it is to be maintained, and encreaſed in vs.
               
                  
                     Of the recouery of ioy.
                  In the laſt place, we are to ſee, how it is to be recouered, when we haue loſt the ſenſe and feeling of it in our hearts. In this caſe, the remedie is to be preſcribed, according to the occaſion thereof, that is the looſing of it. For ſometime it is taken away by God, to try our patient and conſtant mindes. Sometimes againe, either by ſome great ſinne committed againſt God; or by continuall neglect of the meanes, whereby we ſhould continue it. In the former kinde there is required

of vs, both a more diligent and carefull continuance in all good duties and exerciſes of Chriſtianity; and a patient attending and waiting for the reſtoring of this continuall ioy▪ Pſalme 5.8. For God doth not take away the ſenſe of our ioy, to bereaue vs cleane of it; but to keepe and exerciſe our patience, and ſtirre vp our faith, and to make vs to long and deſire after it, thus he tooke from Iob the feeling of his ioy, and troubled him with feares and terrors: but it was to no ill end, neither that he tooke away al he had. For when he had tryed him, he reſtored double to him againe. And no doubt, but he gaue him alſo a double portion of ioy, for that he had taken from him.
               Here it may be demanded, how we may know, when the loſſe of our ioy, is by the former occaſion of Gods tentation, I anſwere ſift and try thy heart narrowly whether ſome ſpeciall ſinne, or ſome want of practiſe of good duties hath not cauſed this loſſe of thine. If thou examine diligently, and finde thy conſcience before God to excuſe thee, thou maieſt then take it, as a fatherly triall and tentation, ſent from God to try thy patience with. Yet this know withall, though thou canſt finde nothing in thy ſelfe, yet Gods eyes are ſharper ſighted then thine are; and he can ſee iuſt cauſe in thee to puniſh thee, for that thou thinkeſt thy ſelfe the cleareſt in.
                     The firſt meane to recouer our ioy being loſt.
                   And therefore euen in this caſe thou muſt humble thy ſelfe, as Iob did before God; and then God will reſtore thee thy ioy with aduantage, as he did vnto Iob whatſoeuer he had taken from him▪ but eſpecially this humiliation is to be put in practiſe, when by triall we finde, either ſome grieuous ſinnes, or our continuall negligence, to haue bereaued vs of the treaſure of our ioy. For without this humbling our ſelues before God, and harty confeſſion of our ſinne, it is impoſſible, euer to recouer it againe.
               Looke into the example of the Prophet Dauid, he had committed adultery with Batſheba; and murder vpon Vriah, and this loſt his ioy, as we reade Pſal. 51.12. Restore vnto me the ioy of thy ſaluation. What did Dauid firſt? reade Pſal. 32.3. He hold his tongue at ye firſt. But what came of it? came his ioy againe? No: his very bones conſumed with griefe, and he rored all

the day long, Gods hand was heauy vpon him day and night; his moiſture turned into the drought of ſummer. In the next place therefore, he be thought himſelfe to acknowledge his ſinne, and to confeſſe his wickedneſſe, againſt himſelfe, and then he found comfort. God remoued from him his heauy hand; the bone which God had broken in him, then reioyced, and God forgaue him the puniſhment of his ſinne.
               
                  
                     The ſecond meane.
                  But often, yet, it falleth out that ſome men, for want of a ſufficient vnderſtanding of the word of God, and their owne caſe, cannot by this meane receiue any comfort. For theſe men therefore, it is a good courſe to reſtore either vnto the miniſter, if he be a man of knowledge and learning in the word of God, and of conſcience and fidelity, accordingly: or els to ſome other of truſt and experience in the word of God; And reueale, and diſcouer vnto them, what it is that maketh them either, troubled in minde, or dead and blockiſh, for want of ſpirituall ioy and comfortt. For not only we are like to haue the help, and benefit of their counſell, for our particular caſe; but euen the very diſcouery of the cauſe of this our deadnes, and helpe how to remedie it, is a meanes oftentimes to begin againe the ſenſe and feeling of our ioy.
               To theſe meanes, if they alone will not ſerue, it were good to adde faſting and prayer.
                     The third meane.
                   For theſe are of that power, that they are able, being rightly vſed, to caſt out the deuill himſelfe, out of thoſe, in whom he hath taken corporall poſſeſſion. As our Sauiour teacheth. Mat. 17.21. And much more no doubt, will it be able to expell that heauineſſe and deadnes of ſpirit, that poſſeſſeth vs. And to raiſe vs vp againe to the ſenſe of our former ioy, But here it will be good, eſpecially to haue regard of that which I ſpake of before, to obſerue moſt dilligently euery good motion of the ſpirit of God; and to giue them the beſt, and the kindeſt entertainment we can. For as we commonly leeſe our ioy, by reſiſting the good motions of the ſpirit of ioy and comfort; ſo by a harty and kinde entertaining of them, one time or other thy ioy is likeſt to returne vnto thee againe.
               But to draw to a concluſion of all, we haue ſeene how earneſt the Lord is by the Apoſtle, to call and exhort vs to this

duty of reioycing in the Lord: we haue alſo ſeene, by what meanes we may attaine to this ioy, if we yet haue it not, and how many and ſpeciall meanes God hath giuen vs, to keepe and to encreaſe it when we haue it, and to recouer it, if we haue loſt the ſenſe and feeling of it. What then is our duty, but that we try and examine our owne hearts, to finde whether euer we felt in our hearts any true reioycing in God, and in good things, and if we neuer knew, what it meant, let vs learne, (in that ſort that I haue ſhewed) to get it: and ſo after; to keepe it.
               And eſpecially by weaning our ſelues, for the loue of this ioy, from other delights, pleaſures, and profits, wherein we haue bin taken vp: and willingly vndergoing troubles, and croſſes, (when God hath called vs vnto them,) for the ſame, and ſo to keepe it.
                     If our ioy be loſt, neuer reſt til we finde it againe.
                   And if we haue by careleſſe negligence ſuffered the deuill, to bereaue vs of this ſo rich and pretious a iewell of our ioy; yet let vs by al meanes poſſible, labour vnceſſantly, day and night, to renew and recouer that we haue loſt: and let vs neuer giue any reſt vnto God, nor vnto our owne hearts, vntil we feele the heauenly ſparkles of our former ioy againe kindled in vs. And when it hath pleaſed God, againe to reſtore it to vs, let vs beware greatly of a ſecond relapſe. It is very eaſie without dilligent care taking to be loſt,
                     Let none take thy crowne from thee.
                   and many enemies lie in waite, to take it from vs. But it is not ſo eaſie to be found againe, when it is loſt. The thiefe is not ſo chary to keepe thy gold from thee, when he hath ſtolne it, as the deuil is to keep away, and to hide thy ioy from thee, that thou mighteſt neuer finde it againe.
               Now though I haue already vſed ſome reaſons to perſwade vs to be carefull of this duty, yet conſidering our dulnes and vntowardnes vnto it;
                     Motiues to ioy in God.
                   it ſhall not be vnfit to adde for a finall concluſion, a few motiues to make vs the better to remember, and to put in practiſe theſe meanes, whereof you haue now heard. And to omit to ſpeake of that which before I touched, that al other ioy, beſides this, vaniſheth away, and nothing in the end remaineth, but ſorrow and vexation of Spirit. As Salomon hath left his owne experience to teach vs. And that this ioy is of it ſelfe, the moſt compleate,

and abſolute ioy that can be poſſeſſed, as being founded in God himſelfe; conſider beſides it ſelfe, what excellent priuiledges this ioy bringeth vnto vs: It bringeth vnto vs comfort aboundantly, againſt all the croſſes that can befall vs, and againſt all the enemies we can haue in this life; Let famine, Let nakedneſſe, Let danger aſſaile vs; we haue God yet to reioyce in, to feed vs, to cloath vs, to protect vs▪ ſo far as ſhall be for our good. Let wicked men baniſh vs, Let them hate vs, let them impriſon vs, let them take our liues from vs, yet we haue God to reioyce in; who will accompany vs in baniſhment, in priſon, or in what place ſoeuer; whoſe loue ſhal more then counteruaile all the hatred of the wicked. And the life that he hath hid and treaſured vp for vs, ſhall be better, then a thouſand liues which they can take away.
               
                   This ioy is as ſalt, to ſeaſon and to ſauour al our other ioyes whatſoeuer they be: for without this, our pleaſures are vnſauourie, and haue no taſte nor ſauour of pleaſure in them.  Againe, laſtly, marke what an excellent promiſe the Lord maketh to this ioy, Pſal. 37.4. Delight thy ſelfe (ſaith the Pſalmiſt) in the Lord, and he ſhall giue thee thine hearts deſire. There is no man but would bee glad to haue his deſire ſatisfied. Loe then the way: Delight thy ſelfe in God, be carefull to keepe this bleſſed ioy; and God, who cannot lie, hath promiſed to giue thee whatſoeuer thy heart can deſire: ſo ready is the Lord to fulfill the deſire of them, that reioyce and delight themſelues in him. It was a great fauour of the Lord vnto Salomon, 1. King. 3. to aske him what he ſhould giue him, and he would be readie to giue it; yet God made him promiſe but for one requeſt: what a fauour of God is this then vnto thee, that there ſhall be no good thing thy tongue can aske,Pſal. 84.13.14. or thy heart deſire, but the Lord will giue it to thee, ſo be it, thou delight thy ſelfe in him? But conſider, for thy further care yet of this dutie, that this promiſe implieth alſo a threatning in it. And that is, if thou refuſeſt to delight in God, and wilt take thy pleaſure and delight in vanitie, in ſin, in the breach of the Sabbath, and of other duties; God will deny thee euery deſire of thy heart. In that which thou deſireſt ioy in, God will ſend thee ſorrow: in that thou deſireſt a

bleſſing in, God will blow vpon it with his curſe.
               The not regarding this duty,
                     A note of an Hypocrite not to ioy in God.
                   is a plaine and euident token of an hypocrite, whom God hateth, For read Iob. 27.10. The hypocrite, (ſaith Iob) will he ſet his delight in the almightie? will he call vpon God at all times? making both theſe alike to be notes and brandes of a diſſembling hypocrite, that he will not at all times call vpon God: neither will ſet his conſtant and continuall delight, in God. A fearefull thing we know it is, to be an hypocrite, whoſe portion is hell fire. Mat. 24.51.Matth. 24.51. it is ſaid, the Lord of the euill ſeruant ſhall cut him off, and ſhall giue him his portion with hypocrites, where ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. If thou wilt haue no part nor portion in this lot of hypocrites, bee no hypocrite: delight in the Lord, which hypocrites doe not, neither can doe; and ſo thou ſhalt auoid it. On the contrary, this holy ioy, is a note of a man renued and regenerated by the Spirit of God. Read Gal. 5.22. The fruite of the ſpirit, is loue, ioy, peace, long ſuffering, gentlenes,
                  Galath. 5.22. 
                  goodnes, faith, meeknes, temperancy. And againſt theſe is no law: They that find this ioy in their hearts, from the Spirit of God. There is no lawe, or curſe of God to ſeaze vpon them. For they are guided, by the Spirit of God.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   