
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ THE GENERAL
Session,
CONTEINING AN APOLOGIE
of the most comfortable doctrine concerning
the ende of this World, and
seconde comming of
CHRIST,
Written by THOMAS ROGERS.
            
               The first part,
Wherein for the comfort of the godlie is proued
not onely that God wil, but also that
he doth iudge this world.
            
               2. Pet. 3. verses 3, 4.
This first vnderstande, that there shal come in the last daies,
mockers, vvhich vvil vvalke after their lustes, and saie,
vvhere in the promise of his comming?
            Allowed by auctoritie.
            
               AT LONDON,
Printed by HENRIE MIDDLETON for
Andrew Maunsell.
            
            ANNO. 1581.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable,
Sir THOMAS BROMLEIE, Knight,
Lord high Chancelor of England &c.
his most gratious Patron: Glorie
eternal and happines by the
comming of our Sauiour
CHRIST.
            
               RIght Honorable,The miserie of mankind in general. experience
doth prooue
that miserable is the
state of mankinde in
this life. For we doe
both come into the
world in paine; and liue in cares; and die
with griefe. Our bodies are subiect to manifolde
infirmities; and perils: & our minds
to innumerable vngodlie perturbations.
Our whole life is verie trouble som; & how,
or where, or when we shal depart out of this
worlde, it is vncertaine.
            And although this condition be alike to
the iust, and to the wicked; to the good,The great miserie of the godlie in this world and
to the pure, and to the pollutedEccles. 9, 2.: yet none do
feele the smart hereof so extremelie as the
vpright dealers in the world, and such as



vnfeinedlie be religious. For theie are for
the most part oppressed, when the wicked
haue fauour; there impouerished, when the
wicked encrease in wealth; theie imprisoned,
when the wicked are at libertie; and
theie grieuouslie afflicted, when the vngodlie
do triumph.The troubles of the godlie dismaie them sometimes. This good men obserue manie-times,
and it dismaieth them not a litle.
As it did both King Dauid, & also the Prophet
Ieremiah, when the one saidPsal. 73, 2., My feet
were almost gone, my steps had welnere slipt.
For I fretted at the foolish,3. when I saw the
prosperitie of the wicked.4. For there are no
bands in their death, but theie are lustie &
strong.5. Theie are not in trouble as other mē,
neither be theie plagued with other men.
Therefore pride is as a chaine vnto them,6.
and crueltie couereth them as a garment.
Their eies stand-out for fatnes;7. theie haue
more than their heart can wish.8. Theie are
licentious, & speake wickedlie of their oppression:
theie talke presumptuouslie. Theie
set their mouth against heauen,9. and their
tongue walked through the earth,12. &c. Loe,
these are the wicked, yet prosper theie alwaie,
and encrease in riches.13. Certainlie I



haue cleansed mine heart in vane; and washed
mine handes in innocencie.14. For dailie
haue I bine punished, and chastened euerie
morning, &c. And the other exclamedIere. 12, 1.,
wherefore doth the waie of the wicked prosper?
Whie are al theie in wealth,What the reprobate do gather by the troubles of the godlie. that rebelliouslie
transgresse? The reprobate also do
marke this, and therbie with corrupt iudgements
theie falselie imagine, first, that either
there is no God at alPsal. 10, 4.; or that he hath
forgotten his seruantes which put their
trust in himPsal. 10, 11.; or that he doth neither gouerne
the world, nor see their waiesEzek 9. 9.: & secondlie
that there is no life after this lifeWisd. 2, 2.,
nor iudgement to be fearedPsal. 94, 7.. Therfore saie
theieWisd. 2, 6., Come, and let vs enioie the pleasures
that are present; & let vs cherefullie
vse the creatures as in youth.7. Let vs fil our
selues with costlie wine, & ointments; & let
the floure of life passe by vs.8. Let vs croune
our selues with rose buds afore theie be
withered.9. Let vs al be partakers of our
wantonnesse, let vs leaue some token of
pleasure in euerie place: for that is our
portion, and this is our lot. Let vs oppresse
the poore that is righteous;10. let vs not
spare the widowe, nor reuerence the white



haires of the aged that haue liued manie
yeares.11. Let our strength be the lawe of vnrighteousnes:
for the thing that is feeble,
is reproued as vnprofitable.12. Therfore let vs
defraud the righteous: for he is not for our
profite, and he is contrarie to our doings: he
checketh vs for offending against the lawe
of God; and blameth vs as transgressors of
discipline.13. He maketh his brag to haue the
knowledge of God: and he calleth himselfe
the sonne of the Lorde.14. He is made to reproue
our thoughtes.15. It greeueth vs to looke
vpon him: for his life is not like other mens:
his waies are of an other facion. He counteth
vs as bastardes,16. &c.19. Let vs examine
him with rebukes and tormentes, that wee
maie know his meekenes, and proue his patience.20.
Let vs condemne him vnto a shameful
death: for he shalbe preserued, as he him
self saith, &c. Thus speak the reprobat Epicures
of this world. And so of eroneous suppositions,
namelie that there is not, neither
shal be a iudgemēt, theie do greedilie giueouer
themselues vnto sinne; and are wholie
resolued neuer to repent. Which Atheistes
if euer theie did, I am perswaded theie



swarme in our age: as the present state of
this worlde can witnesse.The blessed state of the righteous.
            
            Not withstanding, neither are the godlie
for al this to be out of hart; nor the wicked
ouer-vanelie to insult. For both the
righteous shal florish like a palme treePsal 92, 12.; &
abide vnmoueable like the mountanes about
IerusalemPsal. 12
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 2.: & the wicked shal soone
be cut-downe like the grassePsal. 37, 2., and wither
as the greene herbe. Because God wil arise,
and his enimies shalbe scatteredPsal. 68, 1. 2.; theie also
which hate him, shal flie before him.The heauie iudgements of God vpon the wicked. As
the smoke vanisheth: so wil he driue them
awaie; and as the waxe melteth before the
fire, so shal the wicked perish at the presence
of the Lord. For manie sorowes shal
come to the wickedPsal. 32, 10.. He wil breake their
armesPsal. 37, 17.; crush their bones with a scepter of
ironPsal 2, 9.; and breake them into peeces like a
potters vessel. He wil raine vpon them
snares, fire, and brimstonePsal. 11, 6.; and bring them
at length into helPsal. 9, 17., into euerlasting tormentesMatth 25, 41.,
where shal be weeping and gnashingLuke 16, 25.
of teethLuke 13, 28.. Euen this shalbe their portionPsal. 11, 6..
The righteous shal see it, & reioice
when he seeth the vengeance: he shal wash



his feetee in the blood of the wickedPsal. 58, 10..
            The righteous, I saie shal see it, & feare,
and shal laugh at the destruction of the vngodlie
man, saiengPsal. 52, 6. 7., Behold the man which
tooke not God for his strength, but trusted
vnto the multitude of his riches, and put his
strength in his malice.
            The wicked theie also in themselues
shal freate for griefe of minde, and saieWisd. 5, 3.,
This is he whom we had sometime in derision,4.
and in a parable of reproch. We fooles
thought his life madnes, and his end without
honour.5. How is he counted among the
children of God; & his portion is among the
Saints,8. &c. What hath pride profited vs? or
what profit hath the pomp of riches broght
vs?9. Al those things are passed-awaie like a
shadowe, and as a post that passeth by, &c.
            And so al men shal acknowledge, howe
there is a God which iudgeth the earthPsal. 58, 11..
            These thinges would the godlie haue
continualie in remembrance, doubtlesse neither
could the prosperitie of the wicked astonish,The fruite of meditating vpon the iudgements of God.
nor their own trouble some cōdition
ouerthrow thē, as it doth manie times: but
boldlie both with Paul theie would saieRom. 8, 35.,



who shal separate vs frō the loue of Christ,
 and with Dauid protestPsal. 23, 4., that though
theie should walke through the valleie of
death, yet they wil feare none euil; yea; they
wil not feare though the earth be moued,
& though the mountanes fal into the mids
of the seaPsal. 46, 
                     •
                  2.. Because God is with them,
and hath laide-vp vnspeakeable blessings
for themPsal. 31, 19.; doth great things for them euen
before the sonnes of men; and in the end too
wil aduance them vnto euerlasting glorie,
honor, and peaceRom. 2, 10.. The wicked also in considering
these things must needes be terrefied
from much wickednes. For the verie diuels
when theie remember the iudgements
of the Lord do tremble againeIam. 2, 19..
            Wherefore especialie (for other causes
I haue elsewhere specified in this my booke)The occasion whie this Booke was written.
both for the comfort of the one sorte, and
for the terror of the other, I haue written
this treatise following, wherein out of the
worde of God I haue proued, not onelie
that God wil (which thing manie Atheistes
doe doubt, and manie vtterlie denie)
but also that God presentlie doth iudge
this worlde.
            
               
For which causes I haue intitled the same,
THE GENERAL SESSIONS, because
there is not a man, whom God doth not; neither
shal there be anie, whome he wil not
iudge. At which iudgement howe he wil
deale with vs, we are ignorant; what he
maie do in his iustice, we know ful wel.
            And therefore, as that good King, of an
Heathen Prince, Philip of Macedon in his
cheefe prosperitie thought it the readiest
waie to deteine him both from insulting
proudlie ouer his vanquished enimies the
Athenians: and from oppressing tyrannicalie
his distressed subiectes the Grecians, if
he were tolde euerie morning that he was a
man; and as the noble men of Aethiopia
had alwaies whensoeuer there went abrode,
a crosse, and a basen of golde filled ful with
earth born before them, that the one might
put them in remembrance that earth must
be resolued into earth, and the other renue
the memorie of Christ his passion; and as
the Aegyptians at al their solemne banquets
had the image of death laide before
their faces, that the sight thereof might
withdrawe them from defiling themselues



with those vices which commonlie doe followe
after rioting, and bellie-cheere; and
finalie as S. Ierome, whether he did eate, or
drinke, or whatsoeuer he did, seemed to
heare the terrible trompet sounding vnto
iudgement: so the readiest waie to please
God, and to auoide his heauie indignation,
is, in our prosperitie while the euil daies
come not, euerie morning with Philip to cal
into minde that we are men; when we are
abrode with the noble men of Aethiopia to
thinke that we are but earth; in our feastinges
and triumphes, with the Aegyptians
to fore-think what we shalbe; and with
good S. Ierome in whatsoeuer we are doing
to remember that a iudgement there must
be, yea and is neere at hand, at which God
wil bring euerie worke into iudgement with
euerie secrete thing whether it be good or
euilEccles. 12, 14.. For theie which cal into minde what
theie haue bine, haue theie anie grace, wil
blush; what theie are, wilbe humble; what
theie maie be, wil tremble.
            And this treatise,Causes of this dedication. Right Honorable, I
thinke most meete to come from your Honors
hands into the world. First in respect of



my selfe. For greatlie I doe knowe, and confesse
that I haue bine bound vnto your Honor
for manie great wordes of encouragement
which it hath pleased you to giue me,
but especialie for that fauour which of late
I found at your Honors handes, and that
when I least looked for the same: the Lorde
requite you for it, and make me thankeful.
            Secondlie in respect of the highnes of
your calling. For being, as you are appointed
the chiefest Iusticer vnder God and her
Maiestie in this realme, mee thinkes none
either ought sooner to be a reader, or wil
more gladlie be a patron, of God his iudgements
than your Honor.
            Last of al, in respest of their profite, who
are inferior persons both in the Church and
common-weale. For sure I am, the more
your Honor calleth into minde, which thing
your wisedome cannot be ignorant of, the
condition of the godlie in this life, the more
you wil being their special Patron by office
administer both comfort vnto them, which
theie haue neede of; and encouragement,
being manie waies by the wicked, which
make a praie of them, dismaied, while there



is none almost wil helpe. Thus I surcesse;
beseeching both your Honor in good part to
accept these my labors; and our Sauiour
Christ, who is ordeined of God a iudge of
quicke & of deadAct. 10, 40., euerlastinglie to blesse
you, & the virtuous Ladie your wife, with
your children, and familie. The 20. daie of
Nouember Anno 1581.
            
               At your Honors commandement,
THO. ROGERS.
            
         
         
            Faultes escaped.
            Page 8. in the margine read, Iauel Epit. p. 29. in the margine
r. z Gal p. 31. line 3. r. doe theie. p. 31. l. 11. r. nevv heauen
p. 73. in the margine r. Smetonius. p 74. l. 17. read by authoritie.
p. 88. in the margine r. g. Gen. 6. 3.
         
         
            
            The contents.
            
               1 THAT it is not onelie comfortable for the
godlie to heare; but also commendable
for euerie Christian reuerendlie to entreat
of the second comming of our Sauiour
Christ.
               2 Whether there shalbe an end of this world; à
resurrection of the flesh, and à general iudgment,
or no.
               3 Against such as thinke how the world neither
had beginning, nor shal haue an end.
               4 Against them which allowe the beginning,
but denie the end of this world.
               5 Against the Manichies, and their adherenets,
who saie there shalbe no general iudgement,
nor resurrection of mankinde.
               6 Against H. N. or the Familie of loue, who
thinke that nowe the daie of iudgement is
come.
               7 Against the fauourers of Hymeneus, and Philetus,
who saide that the Resurrection is alreadie
past.
               8 Against the Saturnians, Valentinians &c. who
denie the resurrection of the flesh.
               9 That vndoubtedlie there shalbe à general
iudgement of al flesh.
               10 Whether God doe iudge this present worlde,



or no.
               11 Howe God doth iudge mankinde in this present
world.
               12 Whether al the wicked be iudged in this
world; and whie these are suffered, in the opinion
of man, to florish.
               13 Causes whie the godlie are afflicted.
               14 That the godlie deseruedlie for their sinnes
are punished.
               15 That none be perfectlie righteous in this
world.
               16 Whether the sainctes in this world endure
greater affliction than other men; and whie
theie doe so.
               17 Where the bodies and soules of men doe remaine
vntil the daie of iudgement.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CHAP. 1.
            That it is not onelie comfortable vnto the
godlie to heare; but also commendable
for euerie Christian, reuerendlie
to entreat of the seconde
comming of our Sauiour
Christ.
            
               SVCH is the nature of
al men generalie, bee
they bad or good, that
what theie loue, wanting
it, theie long for.
As the couetous for
profite; the epicure for
pleasure; the bondman for libertie; the
banished for his natiue countrie. So doe
Christians for the cōming of their Christ:
and that so much the more earnestlie as
heauenlie ioies are better than the comfort
of this world; & the felicitie to come
more excellent and surpassing than prosperitie



present, betweene which there is
no comparison.
            Hence the faithful doe crie, Come Lord
Iesus
               Reue. 22, 20.. And therefore, as theie long exceedinglie
for his returne: so doe theie à
thousand times more hartilie reioice,
when theie heare but an inkeling that he
is at hande, than doe worldlinges at the
newes of anie profit towardes them.
            Which of late theie haue notablie declared,
especialie in England, by the wel
acceptation of à treatise, to this purpose
entitled, Of the ende of this worlde, and
second comming of Christ &c. A work both
liked of the godlie, allowed of the learned,
wel bought-vp of al sortes, and often
imprinted in à smale time. Notwithstanding,
what through the securitie
of Atheistes;Aduersaries to this doctrine. the malice of Heretiks; ye ignorāce
(shal I cal it ennie rather, or both?)
of som it hath bene oppugned, & vndiscretelie,
vnorderly, & vncharitably cōdē
               ned.
Wherfore, knowing how thākfully,The occasion whie this discourse was written.
and gladlie the virtuous of this land haue
accepted that worke; and seeing how vnchristianlie
others haue condemned the
same, I haue thought it my duetie, hauing
now some leasure, and being some
instrument of bringing that discourse into



our English tongue, both for the comfort
of ye one sort, and confutation of ye other,
to entreat once-againe of the second
comming of Christ. And surelie it is not
vane curiositie either for me to write, or
for anie christian to thinke thereof; but
mere security wer it, either quite to forget
or but seldome to cal ye same to mind. For
is it cōmēdable to prognosticat ye seasons
of the weather for the safetie of ye body;
& it is not cōmendable to search-out the
time of our redēption; so far foorth as the
word of God wil permit, for our euerlasting
welfare? Are they rebuked which regarded
notLuk. 12, 56., and cōmended that searchfoorth
1. Pet. 1, 10, 11.when, & what time the first cō
               ming
of our sauiour should be; and shal
theie be blameles ye seeke not earnestlie
for his second cōming? Shal our sauiour so
gratiouslie foreshew ye signes immediatly
before his cōmingMatt. 24, 3. 4. &c., and shal we neglect
them?Mark. 13. 4. 5. &c. Shal he tel vs, that when we see
al those thinges doe come, he is at the
dooresMat. 24, 33., & shal we thinke with mockers,
that he wil not come at al2. Pet. 3. 3, 4. or not so sone?
Shal he, as our Lorde and master,Matt. 25, 13. command
vs to watchMatt. 24, 42, 43. &c., to take heedeMark 13, 23. 33., to
praieLuk. 21, 36., to looke-vp, & lift-vp our headsLuk. 21, 28.,
when those tokens do but begin to come



our redemption draweth neere, and shal
not we obeie him? O most wretched we,
if we doe not; but blessed, if we do! For,
blessed is that seruant whome his master,
when he commeth, shal finde so doing
               Mat. 24, 46.
            
            My mind is not to set an houre,The sūme of this treatise. à daie,
à yeere, or anie season of his comming,
that were extreme impietie: but my
purpose is, through Gods assistance, to
proue especialie that he wil come, how
soone no man knoweth, no not the Angels
of heauen
               Matt. 24, 36., and that to keepe both
my selfe, and others from securitie. For
he which thinketh the end of al thinges
to be at hande, as saith à right learned
manN. Hēmingius in cap. 4. epist. 1. Pet. 
               wil flie sin for feare of punishment; continue
in godlines in hope of the promises; endure
aduersitie through the cogitation of glorie;
and in prosperitie be meeke, through thinking
of the blessed immortalitie to come, of
which theie onelie shalbe partakers, which
reteine faith and à good conscience vnto the
end. For theie who finish their liues on this
wise, shal come vnto God euē the end of their
desires, who shalbe seene without end, alwaies
loued, and neuer loathed, and euer praised,
but neuer misliked. And then at length shalbe
fulfilled that canticle, Blessed are theie
which dwel in thine house, ô Lord, for euer



and euer, theie shal praise thee.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 2.
            Whether there shalbe an ende of this world; à
resurrection of the flesh; and à general
iudgement, or no.
            THere is nothing so certaine, but it
hath beene denied; nor anie thing so
necessarie to be beleeued, but it hath bin
doubted-of; nor anie thing so profitable
for Common-weales, but it hath beene
spoken-against; nor anie thing so godlie,
but it hath beene oppugned.
            What so certaine as that there is à God?
yet haue some denied the same, as Diagoras,
TheodorusCice. de Nat. Deor. lib. 1., and othersEpist. of Iude vers. 4..
            What so necessary as that sinners should
repent?Theodoret. lib. de principiis. yet haue the MontanistesHierom. lib. 2. aduersus Iouin., and
the NouatiansDionys. Alex. apud Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. defended that it is both
needelesse, and bootelesse so to doe.
What more profitable than gouernment
in à Common-weale? yet haue the ArriansTheodoret. lib. 2. cap. 31.,
and the Anabaptistes of our time
Melanct. in locis suis cōmu. Tit. de Baptis. Infantium. Georg. Maior, Tom. 3. Homi. suarum. fol. 129. b. 572.inueighed against the same. And what
more godlie than to thinke the worlde
shal haue an ende; al flesh shal rise-againe,
and appeare before the iudgement-seat



of Iesus Christ? yet haue there bine monsterous,
and heretical opinions hereabout.
            For some haue flatlie, but most blasphemouslie
giuen-out that the worlde
neither had beginning, nor shal haue end:
so did the Priestles, and Magicians of BabylonHector Boē
                  thius lib. 2, ca. 3.,
with certaine Philosophers.
Some, thought it had à beginning, that
it shal haue none ende, as do the mockers
of whome Saint Peter prophecied2. Pet. 3, 3., and
we heare of in our time. Some haue altogether
denied ye general iudgement, as
the Manichies, &cEccles. hist. Cent. 3, cap. 11.. Some haue granted ye
last iudgement, but denied the resurrection
of the flesh, as the SaturniansIrenaeus li. 5., the
Valentinians, the Marcians, the Cerdonites,
and manie moe.
            Which damnable and curssed opinions
I would not haue recited, but suffered
them to be buried, as be the Autors,
were I not perswaded that in these
daies, Satan by his ministers had sowed
the like ful-thicke in the heartes of manie
men; and therefore that it were verie
needeful, that theie were both written-against
in Bookes for the posteritie
to come, and inueighed-against moste



zealouslie with tongue for à present
profite.
            Wherefore against al, and euerie of
these opinions somewhat, according to
the measure of that grace which God
shal giue me.
         
         
            CHAP. 3.
            Against such as thinke howe the
worlde neither had beginning,
nor shal haue
an end.
            
               SVndrie arguments to
defende their damnable
opinion do theie
bring, who thinke the
world hath bine, and
shalbe euerlasting.
            
               First theie saie with
               I. Argument.
               Aristotle
               Arist. lib. de Coel. & Phy. li. 8 Of nothing nothing can bee
made. Therefore seeing the world cannot be
made of nothing, it must of necessitie be eternal.
            I aunswere, Certaine it is of nothing



no creature can make any thing: but God
who doeth whatsoeuer he wil both in
heauen and earth, of nothing can make
whatsoeuer he list.
            O Lord of hostes, God of Israel, thou hast
made the heauen, and the earthIsai. 37, 16.
            
            Thou hast made the heauen and the earth
by thy great power, and there is nothing hard
vnto theeIerem. 32, 17..
            Thou hast afore-time laide the foundation
of the earthPsal. 102, 25., and the heauens are the
worke of thine handes, theie shal perish, but
thou shalt endure;26. euen theie al shal waxe
olde as doth à garment; as à vesture shalt
thou change them, and theie shalbe changed.
But thou art the same,27. and thie yeares shal
not faile.
            Let al the earth feare the LordPsal. 33, 8. let al
that dwel in the worlde feare him. For he
spake,9. and it was done; he commanded, and it
stoode.
            Of nothing he did make the worldeWisd. 11, 14..
            Therefore no good reason is it, but à
meere fallacie, to saie, because we cannot
make of nothing some-what,2. Argument. therefore
God cannot; or because man doth not,
therefore God did not.
            
               Secondlie, saith Iauel,
               Iauel. epist. in lib. 1. Artist. de Coelo tract. 4. c. 5 
               according to
the minde of Aristotle,
               The Maior. Al men thinke



that heauen is Gods abiding place.The Minor. But an eternal
thing cannot haue à corruptible place.
For the place, and the thing placed must haue
like proportionArist. Phys. lib. 4.
            
            Therefore heauen, which is supposed to be
God his abiding place,Conclusion. is eternal, as God is.
            
               I answere, the Maior is false. For al
men thinke not that heauen is Gods abiding
place. For Salomon wiselie
               1. King. 8, 27. 2. Chron. 6, 18., Behold
the heauen, and heauens of al heauens, are
not able to conteine thee. And Bernard notablie
               Bern. de triplici cohoerentia vinculorum serui.,
Whether then is the beloued gone
from the beloued, and we will seeke him?
Where is he? What said I, wretch that I am?
But where is he not? He is higher than heauen,
deeper then hel, broader than the earth,
huger than the sea. He is no where, and yet
is euerie where, because he is neither absent
from anie; nor contained in anie place.
            
               But God saith by the Prophet Isaiah
               Isaie. 66, 1.,
Heauen is my seate, and earth is my footestoole.
I grant: so doth the Spirite of God
in S. Peter saie
               1. Pet. 3, 12. The eies of the Lorde are
ouer the righteous, and his eares are open vnto
their praiers; and the face of the Lorde is
vpon them that doe euil. Yet hath not God
either eies, eares, or face. But it is an vsual
phraze of the Scripture to giue vnto God
members, actions, and affections of man for



our capacitie, & vnderstanding, saith Hemmingius
               Hemmingius in c. 3. epist. 1. Pet.,
by the figure Anthropopathie:
and by à certaine excellencie he is said to be
in heauen, as proueth Zanchius
               Zanch. de tribus Elohim p. 1. lib. 1. c. 4. 
               For the
eies of God signifie his fauour; his eares, his
willingnes to heare; and his face, his displeasure,
saith Thomas Aquinas
               Tho Aquin. in cap. 3. Pet. 1.. And though
it cannot be douted that God is euerie-where:
yet is he so in heauen, as in respect thereof, he
seemeth not to be in earth at al, as maie appeare
in Bernard
               Bern. in explic. Psal. 90, serm. 1..
            Thirdlie, and last of al (to omit the other
vane reasons vsed of the Philosophers)
saie theie:3. Argument. 
               It is impossible that God
who is infinite,
               The Maior. 
               either could, or maie be euerlastinglie
idle.
            
            But God both had bine idle, if the worlde
had not continued frō euerlasting;The Minor. and should
be idle, if it continue not euermore.
            Therfore, theie conclude,
               The Conclusion. the world hath
bine, and shalbe euerlasting.
            I answere, the Minor containeth à fallacie
fetcht from no cause, as if it were à
cause. For it followeth not that God
should be idle, though he made not the
worlde from euerlasting. For his workes
are eternal in himselfe, though none of
them appeare outwardlie.
            Nowe, if anie be not yet satisfied, but



wil needes knowe, what God was about
before the world was made, I answere,
yet not I, but AugustineAugustine., He was preparing
of hel for al such as curiously enquire
there-about. If yet not satisfied, hee wil
further demaund, what he wil doe, when
the world hath an end, not Augustine but
I make answere, hee wil not ceasse from
tormenting thee, and such like in hel, and
also reioyce with his saincts in perpetual
blisse.
         
         
            CHAP. 4.
            Against them which allowe the beginning,
but denie the end of
this world.
            SAint Peter through the spirit of God
did foretel, that in the last daies mockers
shoulde come, who wil deride, and
scoffe at the doctrine of the worlds consummation.
Whose wordes, because
they are continualie to be fixed in mind,
I wil recite as I finde them placed in the
sacred Bible.
            This first vnderstand, saith S. Peter
               2. Pet. 3. 3., that
there shal come in the last daies mockers,
which shal walke after their lustes, and saie,



where is the promise of his comming?4. For
since the fathers died, al thinges continue alike
from the beginning of the creation.5. For
this theie willinglie knowe not, that the heauens
were of olde, and the earth that was of
the water, and by the water, by the worde of
God.6. Wherefore the worlde that then was,
perished,7. and ouerflowed with water. But the
heauens, and earth which are nowe, are kept
by the same word in store, and reserued vnto
fire against the daie of iudgement, and of the
destruction of vngodlie men.
            In which wordes among other notable
pointes, these are chiefelie to be considered
for this place. First, the speakers,
who they are; secondlie, the arguments
which they do vse; thirdlie, the answere
of the Apostle; last of al, the manner of
the worlds destruction.
            The enimies of this doctrine are described
here to be mockers, such as deride
al religion; and walke after their lustes, not
according to Gods word. Therfore none
wil impugne this comfortable doctrine,
but such as are meere Epicures for their
leude conuersation, and Atheists for their
diuelish opinions.
            
               One argument which they doe vse, is
this:
               1. Argument. Since the fathers died, al thigns continue



alike from the beginning of the creation.
Therefore they shal continue after vs, and after
our posteritie too at one staie, as they haue
done, neither is there anie iudgement to bee
feared, nor resurrection to be hoped for.
            Vnto this vngodlie assertion the Apostle
answereth by an argument taken
from ye vndoubted historie of the floud.S. Peters answere vnto Atheistes.
which historie, he saith, they against their
conscience denie, who be of opinion that
the world shal haue none end. For he denieth
that euer the worlde was drowned
with water, who denieth that the worlde
shalbe destroyed: yea, he thinketh that
the Raine-bowe, which is the signe of the
couenant betweene God and vs
               Gen. 9, 13., is but à
toie to mocke men with al. For we are to
thinke, and learne vndoubtedlie by that
great punishment, First, that the worlde
and al therein, was made to serue for the
vse of the godlie and virtuous, not of the
wicked; and that the saincts of God euerlastinglie
shal enioie the same, the reprobate
being cast into vtter condemnation.
            Secondlie we must thinke, that God assuredlie
wil punish wickednes, although
he haue promised, and the Raine-bowe
doth witnes, that he wil not ouerwhelme



the world again with an vniuersal floud,
but consume it with fire. For which cause
he hath set diuers colors in the Rain-bowColors of the Raine-bow, and what they signifie.
as blew principalie, and red: whereof the
one sheweth howe it hath bene drowned,
the other howe it shalbe consumed
with fire.
            At these things, saith Peter, doe these
Atheists and Epicures euen contrarie to
their verie conscience, denie. And therefore
there needeth none other confutation,
but onelie to laie before them either
the historie of Noahs floud, or the Rainebowe
in the cloudes. For beholding either
of them, they cannot choose but cō
               fesse
that the world must haue an ende.
            
               Another of their arguments,
               2. Argument. 
               is this:
Had God minded to bring the world vnto an
end, he would haue done so before this. But
seing it hath continued these 5500. yeres, &
vpwarde: likelie it is that euermore it shal
endure.
            Thus do they miserablie deceiue themselues,Answere.
saith Peter in effect, not considering
that God being eternal, is not encluded
within the compasse of anie time. For
one daie is with the Lorde as a thousande
yeares
               2. Pet. 3, 8. 
               and a thousande yeares, as one daie.
Therefore it followeth not, because hee



differreth the destruction of the worlde,
that he wil not make an end thereof. But
hee is patient toward vs, and would haue no
man to perish, but would al men to come vnto
repentance.
               Whie the world hath continued to this daie. The cause then whie it is
not yet vtterlie ouerthrowne, is his great,
and infinite mercie, for our euerlasting
welfare. For the patience, long-sufferance,
and bountifulnes of God, leadeth vnto repentance.
               Rom. 2, 4.So did he spare the old world
an hundred and twentie yeares before he
drowned itGen. 6, 3.; and Ierusalem 40. yeares
after Christ his death before he destroied
the sameEcclesi. hist. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 14. fol. 664. It is therefore a special cause
whie wee shoulde seeke to please so gratious,
and merciful à God, no cause to
make vs secure.
            The manner of the worlds destructionThe manner of the worlds destruction.
at the day of iudgement, is signified
by à comparison. For as the worlde in
time passed for the wickednesse of men
was after à sort destroied with water: so
it shall burne, and bee consumed with
fire.Whie the world must be consumed with fire. And that, both for a signe of the eternal
paines, which ye vngodlie shal endure;
and also for the purging, and repairing
of the world. For as filthily diseased
persons infect the places where they are:



so haue the wicked polluted this worlde
with their manifolde sinnes. Therefore
it must be purged with fire, that it maie
be à meete, fit, and pleasant theatre, as it
were, both for Angels, and the chosen
seruants of God with Christ for euermore.
         
         
            CHAP. 5.
            Against the Manichies, and their adherents,
who saie there shalbe no general
iudgement, nor resurrection
of mankinde.
            THeie who denie the general iudgement
to come, are diuers, & of diuers
opinions. For some doe holde that it shal
not be at al; some, that it is nowe; and
some, that it is alreadie past. The first sort
are Manichies; the seconde H. N. or the
Familie of Loue; the laste the fauorers of
Hymeneus and Philetus2. Tim. 2, 17. 18. as the Familie
of Loue. Al wicked, heretical, and abhominable.
For proofe whereof they al doe
bring, not humaine reason altogether, as
they did whom alreadie we haue confuted;
but they abuse ye diuine Scripture, as
shal appeare. Of euerie of these therefore



as they stand.
            The Manichies,1. Obiection. and their adherents, to
proue that there shalbe no general iudgement,
doe bring-out first à place out of
the thirde of Iohn, where it is thus written:
Iohn. 3, 17.
               God sent not his sonne into the world,
that hee shoulde condemne the world, but
that the worlde through him might be saued.
If therefore, saie they, hee came not to
condemne the world, it shal not be iudged.
            Against which their allegation I might
bring à contrarie place out of the same
Gospel, where our Sauióur saith,Iohn. 9 39. 
               I am
come vnto iudgement into this world, and so
let one place answere vnto the other. But
I answere, there is à two-folde comming
of our Sauiour Christ,A twofold comming of Christ. à first, and à seconde;
the first is past, the seconde is to
come.
            The principal cause of his first cōmingWhie Christ came in the flesh.
was not to condemne, but to be condemned;
the principal cause of his seconde
shalbe to execute iustice,Whie Christ wil come. iustice with seueritie
vpon the reprobate, iustice with
mercie vpon his elect, yet iustice vpon
both, vpon the one sort for imbracing
his Gospel by à liuelie faith vnto their
saluation, vpon the other for contemning



the same vnto their vtter condemnation.
Therefore according to his diuerse
commings hee beareth the persons
of diuerse men, in his first comming of à
priest, whose part is both to teach, and to
offer sacrifice: in his seconde of à iudge,
whose duetie we haue shewen.
            
               Secondlie,
               2. Obiection. 
               theie cite this place out of
the same Chapter of Iohn
               Iohn 3, 18., He that beleeueth
in him (which is Christ) shal not
bee condemned: but hee that beleeueth not,
is condemned alreadie; because he beleeueth
not in the name of the onelie begotten sonne
of God. They saie therefore
               August. de agone Christ. cap. 27., If he who beleeueth,
shal not come into iudgement, and
he who beleeueth not, is condemned alreadie;
where are they whom hee shal iudge at the
daie of iudgement? In effect, if none are
to bee iudged, there shalbe no iudgement.
            
            I answere; first touching the righteous
who beleeue, that, though they shal not
bee condemned, yet that they shal bee
iudged.A twofold iudgment of Christ. 
               For Christ wil rewarde euerie-man
according vnto his workes
               Rom. 2. 6.. There is then
a iudgement of saluation, and a iudgement
of condemnation. The righteous
shalbe iudged, yet not condemned, but
quited by proclamation: the wicked



shalbe iudged, and condemned both by
God, and the countrie, that is by their
owne conscience, and al the Angels in
heauen.
            Secondlie, against the wicked I saie
with our Sauiour, because they beleeue
not, they are condemned. But doth it
followe thereof that they shal not bee
iudged? I beleeue not. For it is à phrase vsed
much in ye holie Scripture, to take the
time present for the time to comeAugust. de agone Christiano. Cap. 27.. As,Theophylactus in cap. 23. Lucae.
               cursed be he
               Deut. 27, 26., or more plainelie, cursed
is euerie man
               Gal. 3, 10. 
               that continueth not in al
things, which are written in the booke of the
Lawe to do them. It is not, Cursed shalbe euerie
man, but, Cursed is euerie man &c. For
God hath signified what shal become of
vnbeleeuers, and wicked men; onlie there
lacketh but pronouncing of sentence at
his general Sessions. So saith Saint AugustineAugust. de agone Christian
                     •
                   cap. 27.,
He that beleeueth not, is now iudged,
that is, condemned by the foreknowledge of
God, who knoweth what hangeth ouer the
heads of vnbeleeuers. And verie notablie in
another place he saithAugust. in 3. cap. Ioan.: Iudgement hath
not yet appeared, and yet iudgement is
come. For the Lord knoweth who are his: hee
knoweth who are to be crowned, & who to be



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
burned: He knoweth his wheate, and hee
knoweth his chaffe: He knoweth his good
corne, and he knoweth his tares. He who beleeueth
not, is now condemned.
            
            By which their obiection,The state of the wicked euen in this world. occasion is
giuen for our profit and comfort to consider
these three thinges. Firste, the
wretched state of the wicked, theie are
condemned, that is, in the eies of the Almightie
theie goe euen with their handes
bound; their feete fettred; and their necks
be in cords, onely theie tarie but for these
wordes, Hangman, dispatch them, or, Tormentors,
spare them not; or, as our Sauiour
saith,Math. 25. 41 
               Depart fro me you curssed into euerlasting
fire &c. Secondly, the cause of their
miserie, Vnbeleefe. It is in themselues, not
in God that they are condemned. For,
God woulde haue al men saued, and come
vnto the knowledg of the trueth,
               1. Tim. 2, 4. 
               He that
beleeueth not, is condemned, as in an other
place,Iohn 3, 36. 
               He that beleeueth not, shal not see
life, but the wrath of God abideth vpon him.
Thirdelie, the waie to auoide this condemnation,
euen To beleeue. Laste of al,
among other vane argumentes theie alledge3. Obiection.
these wordes of our SauiourIohn 12, 47., If
anie man heare my wordes and beleeue not,
I iudge him not: for I came not to iudge the



worlde, but to saue the world. Wherebie they
wil conclude howe there shalbe no general
iudgement.
            Vnto which place I saie, that as was
their first, so must this also bee vnderstoode
of his first cōming, when he iudged
not. For at that time he brought, and
preached not the Lawe, but the Gospel,
wherebie he declared howe, and
which waie they might escape the bitter,
and byting cursse of God his heauie indignation,
and be saued, euen if they receaued
the recōciliation promised, which
was himselfe, by faith.
            In his seconde comming he wil iudge
the worlde. For so is it plainelie setdowne:
Rom. 14, 10.
               We shal al appeare before the iudgment
seate of Christ. And yet more plainlie,
if plainer it may be, We must al appeare
before the iudgement seate of Christ,
that euerie man maie receiue the thinges
which are done in his bodie, according to that
he hath done, whether it be good or euil. In
which places the wordes of the Apostle
are most diligentlie to be considerd, one
saith, we shal, the other, we must, both of
them import à necessitie of à iudgement
to come, and that of al men: monie shal
not saue the rich man; nor might the honorable;



nor learning, the student; nor
yeeres, the aged; nor weakenes, the sicke;
nor anie thing, anie man, but Al must
appeare, and that before the Iudgement
seate of Christ, where he wil shewe himselfe
to his foes terrible, but amiable to
his friendes.
         
         
            CHAP. 6.
            Against H. N. or the Familie of Loue,
who thinke that nowe the daie of
iudgement is come.
            AMong al the sectes which haue bene
since the Apostles time, I am perswaded
there is not one which hath bene either
more foolishlie fantastical, or more
miserablie caried-away from ye truth vnto
fables, & fantasies of mans grosse inuē
               tion,
than (I onelie except the most blasphemous
companie of Papists) that new
disordered Familie of Loue, as theie cal it.
And among al their errors, displaied by
one, battered by another, & ouerthrown
by à thir de, I verilie doe thinke there is
not one which for impietie is more abhominable,
than that which theie haue concerning
the daie of iudgement.
            
               
When I name the Familie of Loue,
               Who are the Familie of Loue. I
vnderstand so many as know and defend
the errors of H. N, not those who knowe
them not, much lesse defend them. For euerie
one which leaneth vnto the sect, is
not priuie to their errorsIn the displaieng of the Familie of Loue, leafe H. 4. Art. 6 6.. For the il-luminate
Elders knowe right wel, that manie
which fauor them for the open shew
of godlines that they see in them, would
vtterlie abhor them, if they knew the dā
               nable
heresies2. Pet. 2, 1. 
               Which priuilie they bringin.
Therefore like subtile fellowesEphes. 4, 14. they
disclose not them-selues but onelie vnto
such, as be either of no religion at al, & so
readie like waxe to receiue the print of al
opinions; or sworne enimies, against
the Gospel of Christ; as for those, who
zealouslie doe hunger and thirst after
righteousnes, and abhor al wicked opinions
contrarie to the worde of God, they
make such not acquainted with their errors,
but feede them with faire wordes,
as they can wel enough, either to make
them in time euen to denie the Lord which
hath bought them
               2. Pet. 2. 1., and so bring vpon them
selues swift damnation; or to be some countenance
vnto their curssed sect. For who
neuer seeing their bookes, nor hearing of
their errors, woulde thinke that to bee à



Familie of vngodlines, & heresies, which
so discrete men, sober women, so ancient
fathers, so graue and so godlie matrons,
doe fauor? Oh the subtiltie of Satan! Oh
the deceit and craft of men! O dangerous
daies! O time of trial!
            Notwithstanding, as the venemous
Adder lurketh manie times vnder the
greenest grasse; and as euerie thing which
glittereth is not gold: so vnder their faire
shew of à vertuous life, the elders doe
hide venemous opinions; and though
theie haue the shew of Godlines: yet they
denie the power therof2. Tim. 3. 5.. Euen tares they
be, like wheatMatt. 13, 24.; false Prophetes vnder
sheepes cloathing2. Cor. 11, 14.; seducers, yet like the
ministers of righteousnes2. Cor. 11, 15.; and as Cyril
saithCyril. Catech. 4. de decem dogmat., such as bite lik wolues though they
would faine seme euē as simpleE. R. one of the Familie in his Epist. sent vnto M. Iohn Rogers, and is to be found among the Epist. annexed vnto the displaieng of the Familie. leafe L. 6. as sheep,
& so louing as lambes. As their opinions
extant to be seene, & iudged of al men do
sufficientlie declare; and shal appear euen
by their errors which theie haue concerning
the daie of iudgement, had they no
moe but them.
            And what are theie? I saide in the title
of this Chapter, and also in an other
placeAfore, Chap. 5. pagi. 16., howe theie holde not onelie that
the daie of iudgement is nowe; but also



that is alreadie past, as in the chapter
following shalbe proued. For confirmation
of their former opinion, I wil not
frame an argument, as I might wel, and
one doth wittilie, by the verie wordes of
H.N. after this sort, Whatsoeuer the vngodded,
or vnilluminated Men out of the imagination,
or Riches of their owne Knowledge,
and of their Learnednesse of the Scriptures
bring-foorth, institute, preach, and teach, is
assuredlie al false, and lies, seducing, & deceit
ful
               H. N. in his 1. Exhort. cap. 16 sen. 17. page 43. b.
But the vngodded, or vnilluminated
men (which are al the godlie learned that
abhor the heresies of H. N.) preach and
teach that there shalbe à general iudgemēt of
al mankind, and à resurrection of the flesh.
            Therefore it is false, lies, seducing, and deceitful
to preach, and teach so.
            If I should thus reason, perhaps theie
woulde saie I presse them too sore, and
as it were violentlie wrest à confirmation
from their bookes. Their owne words
therefore for mee, shal confirme what
I saie.
            That theie holde that the daie of iudgment
is now, he that waieth with iudgment
these fewe places out of their owne
workes, wil easilie confesse. I wil recite
but three of them, and that from sundrie



of their workes, omitting à great many
both in the first ExhortationH.N. in his first Exhort. cap. 6. sent. 1, 2. 3. 5. cap. 7. sent. 42.; in the Instruction
of the vpright faithH.N in his Instruct. praef. Set. 1. 3, 5. Art. 8 sēt. 35. Arti. 11. sent. 42. Exhort. after to those Art. sent. 1.; in the
Prophecie of the SpiritH.N. in Prophecie of the spirite of loue, cap. 14. Sent. 7. cap. 16. Sent. 6, 7, 8. Cha 19 sent. 14. in ye ProuerbsH.N. in his Prouerbs Chap. 1. sent. 17. 18.
of H.N; and also in Elidad his exhortationElidad a fellowe Elder with H.N. in his Exhort. sent. 33, 34 35..
Wherebie it maie be gathered that
it is not à scape, but à doctrine aduisedlie
taught of H.N. and his scholers.
            
               The first is this
               H. N. in his Euang. Chap. 2. sent. 1., Beholde in this present
daie theIsai 3. b. Mat. 24, d Mat. 25, d glorious comming of our Lord
Iesus Christ, with the many thousands of his
Saints, be commeth manifested: which hath
set himselfe Now vpon the seate ofIsai. 16, b. his maiestie
for to iudge in this same daie which the
Lord hath ordeined, or appointed: the whole
Acts 17, d.worlde with equitie, and with faithfulnes
Zacha. 8. 
                     •
                  .and trueth according to his righteousnesse.
            The wordes are plaine enough, that
Christ in this present daie is come; and hath
Now set himselfe vpon the seate of his Maiestie,
for to iudge in this same daie the whole
world. Yea, he is so come that he may euen
Nowe, not he onely, but thousandes of his
Angels also sensiblie be seene and perceiued.
Therefore doth hee saie, Beholde,
in this present daie the glorious comming of
our Sauiour. Which some haue seene, as



that dreamer Vitel for an ensample, beleeue
him that list.
            
               For so himselfe doth saie
               Christopher Vitel in his Libel against the Booke intituled, The displaieng of an horrible sect of grosse, wicked Heretikes, naming themselues the Familie of Loue.: Moreouer
there was made manifest vnto me, through
the same seruice of Loue, and the Lords minister
H.N, the comming of Christ with his
Saints, and his righteous iudgement.
            
               The second place is this
               H.N. in his documental sentences chap. 15. sent, 4.: This is the
daie which GodActes. 17, e. hath appointed for to iudge
in the same the compasse of the earth with
righteousnes through his worde, in whome he
hath concluded his iudgement.
            
               The thirde shalbe this
               H.N. in his preface before the instruct. of the vpright Faith, sent. 2.: For asmuch
then, as that nowe in this same newest daie
Matt. 24, 25. d Luke 17, c. 21.the cōming of Iesus Christ as à Lord in his
maiestie from the right hand of God his Father
appearethAct. 1, b. 2. 2., and becommeth manifested
vnto vs,Thes. 1. b. with ful clearing of his heauenlie illumination,
according to the Scripture.
            
               In al which places he either saith Christ
cōmeth in this present daie; or, Now he is set
in iudgement to iudge in this same daie; or,
this is the daie which God hath appointed for
to iudge in the same the compas of the earth;What the Familie of Loue doth meane by the iudgement, in this present daie, or nowe executed.
               or finalie, Now in this same newest daie the
comming of Iesus Christ, as à Lord in his maiestie,
&c. appeareth; al are in the time present.
It wilbe good therefore to examine
what he meaneth by this present daie; by


               
Now, by this daie; by this newest daie. For
therbie the hed of this viper wil notablie
peepe-out to the destruction of it selfe.
            
               For interpretation whereof, I wil not
alleage the wordes of anie aduersarie of
theirs, but euen their owne iudgement;
yea the iudgement of the whole Familie,
which is this
               In the answer of the Family of loue vnto the notes of the Bishop of Rochecter, placed before the confut. of M. Wilkinson, leafe A, 4. line 34. He (meaning H. N.) affirmeth
this present time of the light of loue,
to bee the daie of the cleare and righteous
iudgement of God: wherein God wil restore
al thinges to their right (to wit) bring or set
the lie in his lieng being to be condemned in
the hellish caue, and the trueth likewise in
his right forme or degree, to wit, to preuaile,
flourishe, or beare swaie ouer the vnrighteousnes
for euermore, wherebie that the wil
of God might be accomplished in earth as in
heauen.
            In which wordes note with mee, I beseech
you, first, what theie think the daie
of iudgement to be; secondlie, at the daie
of iudgement what thinges be renued; &
thirdelie, the ende of his iudgement.
            For the first, it is manifest that the daie
of iudgement among them is nought els,1. Daie of iudgement what in the opiniō of the Familie of Loue
but this time wherein the Light of Loue,
that is, their obscure and erronious opinions
are published. For so theie doe expresselie



saie: He affirmeth this present
time of the light of loue to be the daie of the
cleare, and righteous iudgement of God. By
which I gather, either that their doctrine
is but newlie vp-start, and so afore this
time that God had no Church; or if theie
grant, that it hath from time to time, and
from hand to hand euen from the beginning
beene deliuered, that the daie of
iudgement was alwaies, which is impietie
to be thought, and heresie to be spoke.
Let them take which parte theie wil, as
one of them theie must, they shal see how
theie runne into manie, and absurde opinions.
            If their doctrine hath beene from the
beginning, then hath the iudgement bin
from the beginning. For when their doctrine
peeped-foorth, the iudgement appeared.
But that the iudgement hath bin
alwaie, I thinke theie wil not saie.
            Therefore their doctrine is but newe.
And if it bee but newe, then is not the
same, which the olde Patriarches, Prophets,
and Apostles preached, and beleeued;
and wherebie theie were saued. And
being not the same, it must of necessitie
leade vnto damnation. And the teachers
thereof are to be helde accurssed, according



vnto the commandement of the ApostleGal. 1, 8..
            If theie saie the iudgement of Christ
hath bene from the beginning, how is it
that theie saie, Beholde in this present daie
the glorious comming of our Lorde Iesus
Christ, with the manie thousandes of his Angels
becommeth manifested, and not, The
glorious comming of our Lorde Iesus Christ,
&c. hath bin manifested from the beginning?
And yet were it shameful and vile heresie
to saie so. For what godlie man euer
was of that opinion? Or howe by Scripture
can there proue the same? Into which
error theie must needes fal, if theie holde
their doctrine hath bene alwaies; and the
iudgement to appeare, that is, the glorious
comming of our Lorde Iesus Christ, with manie
thousandes of his Angels to appeare to
iudge the world, whē the light of the Loue
brake-out.
            But whether theie thinke that their
doctrine hath bene alwaies, which theie
can neuer proue; or whether theie thinke
that of late it sprang-vp, which al the
worlde doth know; theie vtterlie denie
à iudgement to come, and saie that
nowe it is: which is à verie detestable opinion.
            
               
Secondlie,2. What shalbe renued. for the thinges to be renued,
marke their verie wordes: They saie,
In this cleare and righteous iudgement God
wil restore al things to their right. That is,
the head, and it seemeth goodlie, but in
the taile which followeth, great poison
doth lurke. For doe theie saie, That wee
shal al be changed, or, that this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal immortalitie,
as Saint Paul doth1. Cor. 15, 51. 53.? or that
the elements shal melt with heate, and the
earth with the workes that are therein shalbe
burnt-vp, as S. Peter doth2. Pet. 3, 10.? or finalie, that
al thinges shalbe so renued, that there
shalbe a newe heauen, and à newe earth, as
Saint Iohn dothReuel. 21, 1.? No. Yet do theie saie,
God wil restore al things to their right.
            
            What doe theie meane then therebie?
To wit, God wil bring or set the lie in his lieng
being, to be condemned in the hellish caue, &
the trueth likewise in his right forme or degree.
Then to bring or set the lie in his lieng
being, to bee condemned, &c. is to
restore al thinges. A goodlie reason no
doubt. That which the Scripture speaketh
of, theie neuer mention; and that
which the Scripture is against, theie auouch.
The Scripture saith, al things shalbe

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               


               
& it nameth what, as afore I said,52.
namelie the bodies of al men,
               53. 
               be they aliue or
dead
               1. Cor. 15, 51.; the elements
               2. Pet. 3, 10.; heauen and earth
               Reuel. 21, 1.:
but that the lie in his lieng being shoulde
be restored,2. Pet. 3, 13. I finde no mention neither
in the worde of God, nor in the writinges
of godlie men. And therefore in
my iudgement it is à great error to saie
so.
            And the rather I thinke it, because I
neuer finde that à restoring shalbe made
of things either absolutely good, or absolutely
euil: but of things indifferent. For
neither can virtue bee turned into vice,
nor vice into virtue; trueth cannot become
falsehoode, nor falsehoode become
trueth. No, theie cannot degenerate
in anie sort from their verie natures. And
therefore à restitution cannot be made of
them, as though theie had changed either
into others nature. But man for that
being left in his owne handes to chuse
either good or euil, he left that good was
and followed the contrarie, hee must be
restored vnto his first integritie: and the
creatures which haue serued to the lust
of man, theie shalbe renued.
            Thirdlie, and last of al, the end of the
iudgement which theie faine,3. Ende of the iudgement. is, That



the wil of God maie be accomplished in earth
as in heauen. The grossenes of the former
mer pointes maie palpablie be perceaued,
and yet theie wil seeme more blasphemouslie
wicked, when the impietie
of this last clause is discouered.
            These thinges come to passe, saie the
Familie, That the wil of God maie be accomplished
in earth, as in heauen. Wherebie,
as I nowe sit, me thinkes theie imagine
verie baselie, and grosselie of
the euent of this iudgement. Saint Paul
saith1. Cor. 15, 28., When al thinges shalbe subdued vnto
him, (meaning Christ) thē shal the sonne
also himselfe be subiect vnto him, that did
subdue al thinges vnder him, that God maie
be al in al. That God maie be al in al is
the euent of this iudgement, saith Paule:
that the wil of God maie be accomplished
in earth as in heauen, saie the Familie.
Thus are the Scriptures, and the
Familie of Loue cleane contrarie, not in
this point onelie, but in the other points
beside. For the Scripture saith, That in à
momēt in the twinkling of an eie
               1. Cor. 15, 52., iudgemēt
shalbe: the Familie make it either euerlasting,
or of long continuance, & saie that
Now it is. The scripture testifieth yt al mē,



and other creatures shalbe restored: the
Familie restraine it vnto the Lie in his lieing
being, and to the truth; of which there
is no mention in the Scripture. The scripture
maketh nothing capable of euerlasting
felicitie, but the obedient seruantes
and sonnes of God: the Familie make virtue
capable both of the same, & of damnation
too; as though virtue could be
contrarie vnto virtue, that is, Trueth vnto
Righteousnesse, or Righteousnesse vnto
Trueth. Finalie the Scripture proueth
the ende of the iudgement to be, that
God maie bee al in al: the Familie wil
haue it, that the wil of God maie be accomplished
in Earth, as in heauen, that is,
that theie maie leade à life answerable
vnto the forme which H.N. hath prescribed
in this present worlde.
            For proofe of which my wordes I
could cite manie places both out of the
Prophecie of the spirite of LoueH.N in his prophesie of the spirite of Loue Chap. 7, sent. 19. Chap, 19, sent. 12, 14., and
out of the Prouerbes of H. N.H. N in his Prouerbs Chap. 1. sent. 16, 17, 18. Chap. 4 sent. 9. 10. &c., and also
out of the spiritual land of peace
               H.N spiritual. terr. pacis cap. 44, sent. 9, 10, 11, 12. &c., but for
al heark what in his Euangelie he doeth
saieH. N. in his Euangelie Chap 35, sent. 8.. Beholde nowe in This present daie is
the Scripture fulfilledScripture in this daie of Loue fulfilled. and according to the
testimonie of the Scripture, the raising vp, &
the resurrection of the Lordes dead commeth



also to passeResurrection is come. Presentlie in this same daie
through the appearing of the comming of
Christ in his maiestieChrist in his maiestie appeareth.. Which resurrection
of the dead, seeing that the same Is come vnto
vsResurrection come vnto the Elders of loue. from Gods grace, we doe likewise this
present daie, to an Euangelie or ioieful message
of the kingdome of God and Christ, publish
in al the world, vnder the obedience of
the Loue, In which resurrection of the dead,
GOD sheweth vnto vsNone but the il-luminate Elders knowe the fulfilling of the Scriptures. that the time is
Now fulfilled, that His dead, or the dead,
which are fallen à sleepe in the LordeThey onelie do rise-vp which are fallen à sleepe in the Lord. rise
vp in This daie of his iudgementDead do arise in this daie of iudgement., and appeare
Dead appeare vnto H.N. and to the Elders of the familie of loue, and that in glorie.vnto vs in godlie glorie, which shal
from hence-forth liue in vsThe dead shal liue in the Elders of the familie., euerlastinglie
The dead shal liue in the Elders euerlastinglie.with ChristDead shal liue in the Elders euerlastinglie with Christ., and raigneThe dead shal raigne vpon earth; or in this world enioie absolute felicitie. vpon earth.
            Were it my minde to stande vpon
this place of H. N. I could easilie proue
moe curssed errours in the same than it
containeth lines: but I hasten vnto other
matters, I alleage it in this place onelie to
shewe, that he teacheth happines to bee
naught els, but à pretended righteousnes
in this present worlde, and that such as
be risen-againe from the dead, and enioie



felicitie, doe liue and raigne vppon
earth.
            Then by their owne wordes, if the
iudgement be come; if the dead be raned;
if happinesse bee attained, they shal neuer
be partakers of the fruites of the second
resurrection, nor of those thinges
which eye hath not seene, neither eare
hath heard, nor heart conceiued prepared
for such as loue God1. Cor. 2, 9.. For they are happie
alreadie in their owne opinions, in
mine theie are of al men the most miserable;
and that partlie because they are altogether
destitute both of faith, without
which it is impossible to please God
               Heb. 11, 6, and also
of Hope, without which they cannot bee
saued
               Rom. 8, 24.. For Faith is the grounde of thinges
that are hoped for, and the euidence of things
that are not seene
               Heb. 11, 1.. Which thinges being
once seene and attained, Faith cesseth, and
hope vanisheth-awaie. For howe can à
man hope for that which he seeth
               Rom. 8, 24. 25.? But if we
hope for that wee see not, we do with patience
abide for it.
            
            They therefore being come vnto the
top of blessednesse, haue banished-awaie
al Faith, Hope, and feare of God. Maruel
then I wil no more whie they cal
themselues the familie of Loue; neither



whie they so highlie commend Loue, sayeng
of those three virtues, Faith, Hope,
and Loue, the chiefest is Loue
               1. Cor. 13, 12.; neither
whie they wil needes be caled, not the
householde of Faith
               Gal. 6, 10., but the Familie of
Loue, for I haue them nowe. They are
come, forsooth, vnto the third forme, and
become capitanes in the schoole of
Christ, they are past Faith, and Hope
               yea and grace too.,
and are come vnto Loue, which is the
chiefest, wherebie they are like Angels,
what saie I like Angels? Theie are Godded
with God
               H.N. in his first Exhort. ca. 16. sent. 16. but more truelie they are Diueled with the diuel, as their own phrase is, though in another sense. Christopher Vitel in his Libel, leafe D. 3, b. line 21., or incorporated with God
in al Loue; and are consubstantiated or
conformablie vnited as one man of God in
God
               H.N. in the prophecie of the spirit of Loue..
            Especialie I account them of al men
the most miserable,Chap. 7, sent. 19. for that theie take
drosse for golde, miserie for happinesse;
this life for à blessed life; earth for heauen;
yea theie dreame or doate rather
that theie see God, not through à glasse
darkelie1. Cor. 13, 12., but face to face; and knowe
him not in parte, but as theie are
knowen; and are in such à state wherein
theie laugh alwayes, and neuer
weepe; liue alwaies, and neuer die;
alwaies reioice, and neuer bee sadde; alwaies
merrie, and neuer sorrowful,



in pleasure alwaie, and neuer in paine.
For that is ye state of an happie lifeReuel. 21, 4.. And
yet who seeth not that they liue wretchedly
as sinners; and die like men, to
speake no worser of the ends which commonlie
they haue.
            Nowe, by what auctoritie of scripture
doth H. N. proue that the iudgement is
nowe (for that would be considered?) His
principal places be taken out of the 24.
and 25. of Matthewe; the first and the
17. of the Actes; the 17. and the 21. of
Luke; the 2. Thessal. 1; and the Epistle
of Saint Iude. In al which places mention
is made of the vtter destruction of the
worlde, and of the seconde comming of
our Sauiour vnto the general iudgement:
and proue as wel that the daie of iudgement
is come as that text, where it is said:
Mal. 3, a. 4, a.
               Beholde I sende mine Angel or messenger,
               Math. 11, 17.
               which shal prepare the waie,
               Marke 1. 
               or make plaine
the path before Me,
               Luke 7. set afore most of their
Bookes, doth proue that H. N. is the messenger
of Christ. Thus much against the
Familie of Loue, and this one opinion of
theirs, as wicked, as it is strange, and vnheard-of
vntil these late yeares.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 7.
            Against the fauorers of Hymeneus, and
Philetus, who saide that the resurrection
is alredie past.
            AS had S. Paul in his time Hymeneus
and Philetus: so haue we in our time
such as fauor Hymeneus and Philetus,
namelie the Familie of Loue, who denie
the iudgement to come, and saie the resurrection
is past. Yet so I woulde not
write of them, did not both Christopher
Vitel, and also H. N. himselfe auouch the
same.
            
               For saith Vitel,
               C. Vitel in his Libel leafe F. 1. The Lord hath accomplished
according to his promises through the
spirite of Christ,line 3. in him (namely H.N.) al that
he hath spoken through the mouth of his seruants
the Prophets. And, in this daie are al
Prophecies fulfilled, saith H.N. himselfe.
               H.N in his Euang. Chap. 36. sent. 13..
            In which two places, although expresse
mention bee not made either of
the iudgement, or comming of Christ: yet
in that they saie, Al Prophecies are fulfilled,
and that the Lord hath accomplished al that
he hath spoken through the mouth of his seruants
the Prophets, they do comprehend
the iudgement, and comming of Christ,



so wel as anie thing els.20. For the Prophets
haue foretolde thereof.21. As the Prophet
IsaiahIsai. 26, 19.; the Prophet EzekielEzek. 37, 4., the Prophet
DanielDan. 2, 44.
               Dan. 7, 13., and others.5. If therefore
whatsoeuer the Lorde hath spoken by
his seruantes the Prophets,6. be fulfilled;
and the Lord hath fore-tolde by his seruants
ye Prophets of à general resurrection,14.
iudgement and seconde comming of
Christ:Dan. 12, 2. Then is the resurrection,3. iudgement,
and seconde comming of Christe,
come and past already, euen by the verie
words of the arch-pillers of the Familie.
            Yet would I not thinke that so wretchedlie
theie do erre, had I not read, that
one of the Familie gaue-out that Christe
was already come. For one of the Familie,
being asked before manie witnesses, touching
Christ his comming vnto iudgement, did answere
plainlie that he was alreadie come
               Answere vnto the Libel of C. Vitel, leafe l. 17, line 12..
            Neither yet should I so conceiue of thē,
did I not finde, that not onelie H.N. himselfe
was
               H.N. in his Euang. Chap. 1. H.N. in his 2. Epist. Chap. 2. sent. 1., but also the Lords deade are alreadie
raised-againe
               H. N. in his Euang. Chap. 35. sem. 8..
            Which opinion theie woulde neuer
stand-in,H. N. in his preface before his instruction of the vpright Faith sent. 1. or defend, if theie did thinke anie
other resurrection to be, than onelie à
rising from sinne; à casting-of of the olde
man; and à putting-on of the newe.
            
               
But as Hymeneus and Philetus were deceaued,
for yt theie deuided not the word
of God aright2. Tim. 2, 15.: so the Familie of Loue
do so perilouslie erre, because theie vnder
stand not the worde of God aright. For
did theie so, theie would confesse, and beleeue
not à single, but à double; not à
spiritual onelie, but à corporal resurrection
also: wherof the one which is spiritual,
must go before the other, that is corporal.
Wherefore to auoide the error of
the aboue mentioned,Twofolde resurrection. we are to beare in
minde yt there is à twofold resurrection,
of the dead; one spiritual, of the mind; the
other corporal of the bodie.
            When I saie there is à spiritual resurrection:Spiritual resurrection what.
I meane, not that the Soule or
Spirite can die, and be raised vp-againe.
For the soule is immortal. But the spiritual
resurrection is, when à man who was
dead in sinne, through the preaching of
the Gospel, is reclamed frō the death of
vngodlines, vnto life, that is vnto faith,
and knowledge of Christ, wherebie he is
made à new creature. According as Irenaeus
doth saieIrenaeus lib. 5. aduersus haereses Vlentini. &c., Agnitio Dei renouat hominem,
that is, the knowledge of God maketh à
new-man.
            
            For,A double death, and a double resurrection. as there is à double death, to wit à



spiritual and à corporal: so is there á double
resurrection. He is spiritualie dead,
though he seeme healthful in bodie, who
is à blasphemer,Spiritual death what. à traitor, an adulterer,
an vserer, à murtherer &c. For he is as
à dead man in the sight of God. Euen as
we count him, who either hath done
some horrible fact worthie death against
the lawes of man, or else is condemned to
die, but for à dead man: because he standeth
at ye mercie of the magistrate either to
be saued, or cast-awaie, as our phrase is.
            He therefore who by the preaching
of the Gospel is sorie for his sinnes,Who spiritualie risen. and
beleeueth that through the bloode of
Christ al his offences are washed, and
wypt-awaie; and through the virtue of
his faith, doth so fight against his wicked
affections, that he is become à newe
man, that is, of à blasphemer, à continual
praiser of God; of rebellions, obedient;
of incontinent, pure and chast; of an vserer,
à free lender, yea à liberal giuer; of à
murtherer, à careful preseruer of mē, &c.
this man, I saie, through the power of
the holie Ghost is raised from the death
of sinne,Spiritual resurrection before the corporal. and risen with Christ.
            Which spiritual resurrection, as euennowe
I saide, must goe-before the corporal



resurrection. For vnlesse we arise
spiritualie by Faith vnto newnes of life,
let vs not looke to rise-againe corporalie
vnto eternal life. For our Sauior doth
doth saieIohn. 5. 29., Theie shal come-foorth that
haue done good vnto the resurrection of life:
but theie that haue done euil vnto the resurrection
of condemnation.
            
            So then,None arise corporalie vnto saluation, who haue not risen spiritualie from sinne. if anie man desire to liue eternaly
in the sight of God, and to be à
partaker of the felicitie to come, let him
first arise from sinne; beleeue that his
offences are pardoned through the death
of Christ; and spende the time he hath
in this worlde, godlie, righteouslie, and
soberlieTit. 2, 12., and assuredlie he shalbe raised
at the second resurrection vnto eternal
lifeReue. 20, 6..
            The corporal death is when as the soule
doth forsake the bodie;Corporal death what. and the bodie returneth
vnto duste, where out it was taken.
Which bodie we Christians doe beleeueAs appereth by the Creede, Apostolical, Nicene, Athanasian.,
shal rise-againe at the daie of
iudgement. But the fauorers of Hymeneus
& Philetus wil not be so perswaded
to thinke. And therefore, because theie
vnderstande not the Scriptures aright,
theie holde that there is onelie à spiritual
resurrection. But the Scripture



doth so wel speake of à corporal, as of
à spiritual.
            
               For, as it is written
               Coloss. 2, 13., ye which were
dead in sinnes, and in the vncircumcision of
your flesh, hath he quickened-together with
him; which is the spiritual: so is it wtitten
               1. Cor. 15. 52. 53.,
The dead shalbe raised-vp incoruptible,
and we shalbe changed. For this corruptible,
must put on incorruption, & this mortal must
put on immortalitie, which is the corporal
resurrectiō. And as it is writtē
               
               Coloss. 3, 1., If ye be risen
with Christ, seeke those things which are
aboue, which is ye spiritual: So is it wtitten,
               Iob. 19, 25.I am sure that my redeemer liueth, & he shal
stand the last on the earth.26. And though after
my skin wormes destroie this bodie: yet shal I
see God in my flesh.27. Whome I my selfe shal see,
and mine eies shal beholde, & none other for
me, though my reines be consumed within
me; which are the corporal. Which difference
theie marke not; and therfore they
goe-astraie, and haue made shipwracke
as concerning faith
               1. Tim. 1, 19..
         
         
            CHAP. 8.
            Against the Saturnians, Valentinians,
and such like, whoe denie the resurrection
of the flesh.
            
               
AN hard thing it is to make flesh and
blood beleeue, that there shalbe à resurrection
of the flesh. Therefore haue
theie who defended the affirmatiue part,
had manie aduersaries. Much contradiction,
saith CyrilCyril catech. 18., yet but one trueth. Grecians
denie it; Samaritanes beleeue it not;
Heretikes saie it shal not be, And al of them
to proue their vane opinions doe bring
either reason, as theie thinke, or scripture.
            Their reasons are these. Man dieth, rotteth,
& is eatē-vp of wormes; which wormes
also doe perish: Seeing therefore the
body so putrifieth, and perisheth, how can
it rise-again? Manie are drowned, and
deuoured of fishes, which fishes afterwarde
perchance be taken, and eaten-vp.
Howe then shal the whole bodie
arise? These and manie moe idle imaginations,
which of purpose I ouer-passe,
theie bring-foorth to proue the impossibilitie
of the bodies resurrection. Vnto
which. S. Cyril as in other places christianlieCyril catech 4, and 14.;
so most diuinelie, in his 18. Catecheis
doth answere to this effect:
            Thou which we beleeuest not those things
which are written concerning the resurrection,
being carnalie minded, look-vpon earthlie,
and material thinges, and thou shalt see



most notable examples of the resurrection.
Beholde the seede which is sowen, how doth
it spring-afresh, and florish if it putrifie! if it
putrifie not, it would neuer spring. Which
seede is created for vs, and our vse, not for
it selfe. Shal therefore that which is made
for man, being euen dead spring-afresh; and
shal not man himselfe rise-againe when he is
dead?
            Looke somewhat higher vpon the trees,
consider them as theie are in the winter season,
and consider them as theie are in Sommer.
In the winter theie are dead without
both leaues and fruite: in the Sommer most
goodlie to beholde either with greene leaues,
or goodlie fruite, or with both. For God who
knoweth thine hardnes of heart, euerie yeere
setteth à resurrection before thine eies, that
by thinges without soule, thou mightest beleuee
the resurrectiō of reasonable mē which
haue soules.
            Looke higher yet vpon heauen, and thou
shalt finde à most euident proofe of the resurrection.
The Moone sometime is in the
waine, and sometime at the ful: sometime it
is bright as daie, and sometime red as blood.
Which thing God doth, saith Cyril, that
thou man consisting of blood, shouldest not
doubt of the resurrection of the dead; and



that thou shouldest beleeue that of thie selfe,
which thou seest happen to the Moone in
heauen. With manie other both strong
and Christian arguments doth Cyril in
that fore-saide place ouerthrow the foolishe
opinion of fleshlie minded men, the
which, either because I studie to bee
brief, or for that I know these by me now
alledged be sufficient to preuaile with à
man anie whit reasonable, I omit: confuting
their error, & concluding this point
with an excellēt place of Irenaeus, which
is this
               Irenaeus aduersus haereses Valentini &c. lib. 5..
            Theie therefore denie the power of God,
and see not the trueth, who looke vpon the
weakenes of the flesh, and consider not his
power who raised it from the dead. For if
he doe not quicken that which is mortal, neither
make that incorrupt which is corruptible,
God is not almightie. But inasmuch as in
al these things he is mightie, we should thinkvpon,
and cal into minde our beginning.
For God tooke duste of the grounde, and
made man. And vndoubtedlie more harde,
and incredible is it to make man, yea and à
liuing and reasonable man too of bones, and
sinewes, and veines, and forme which neuer
was before; then to raise-againe that
which sometime was beeing dissolued into



earth, for those reasons aboue mentioned; yea,
though it returne vnto that, whereof at the
first he made him to be who was not, when he
thought good: much more wil he now, & that
willinglie restore thē whe sometime were into
that life which he giueth. Hitherto Irenaeus.
The principal place of scripture wherby
theie would proue that the body shal not
rise-againe, is this
               1. Cor. 15, 50.: Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdome of God. Which place
maketh no whit to their purpose. For
ye Apostle in that whole chapter wherout
that text was taken, as no where else
so forceablie, proueth the resurrection of
the flesh. What therefore doth the Apostle
meane by these words, Flesh and blood
cānot inherit the kingdome of God? Is it that
so manie as are not regenerated by the
holie Ghost, shal neuer be partakers of
heauenly cōsolation? or equiualent with
that of our Sauiour
               Ioh. 3, 36., He that beleeueth
not, shal not see life, but the wrath of God
abideth vpon him? yes vndoubtedlie. Of
which iudgement Irenaeus is, as appeareth
in these his wordes
               Irenaeus aduersus haereses Valent. lib. 5.: The Apostle adhorting
vs vnto the participation of the spirit,
according to the reasons aboue mētioned,
did saie: Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdome of God. As if he should saie: Be not



deceiued, for vnles the word of God abide, &
the Spirit of the Father be in you, vanelie, as
it falleth out, ye haue spent the time, & so being
blood and flesh, ye cannot inherit the kingdome
of God. This to the ende we should not
refuse the ingraffing of the spirit by following
& fauoring the flesh. And thou being, saith he
Rom. 11, 17.à wild oliue, wast graffed into the good oliue,
and made partaker of the fatnesse of the Oliue.
As therefore à wilde Oliue, if, being
ingraffed it continue as first it was, is cut-waie;
but if it keepe the ingraffing, and
change into the nature of à good oliue, it beareth
fruite as though it were planted in the
paradise of à king: so mē, if through faith they
profit in godlines, & take the spirit of God, &
prosper in bringing-out fruit of the same, they
shalbe spiritual, & as it were planted in Gods
paradise. But if theie refuse the spirit, and abide
as theie were at first, liking better of the
flesh, than of the spirite; thē rightlie it is saide
of such,Diuers significatiōs of the word flesh. Flesh and blood shal not inherit the
kingdome of God. Againe, ye more fullie to
answere them, I saie the word Flesh, hath
not alwaies one signification in the holie
scripture. Frr somtime it is properlie taken,
as the nature therof doth import, for
à masse & substāce of flesh, as where Paul
faith
               1. Cor. 15, 39., Al flesh is not the same flesh, but
there is one flesh of mē, & another of beasts &



another of fishes, and another of birds. Sometime
vnproperlie, both by the figure Synecdoche
it is taken, sometime for man
onelie, a where it is saide
               Gen. 6, 12., Al flesh had
corrupted his waie vpon earth, meaning al
men; sometime for euerie liuing creature,
as in this sentence
               Gen. 6, 13., An ende of al
flesh is come before me: and also by the figure
Metonymie it signifieth, first ye state
& condition of this life, as in these words
of Paul
               Gal, 2, 20., In that I nowe liue in the flesh; I
liue by the faith in the son of God; secondlie,
ye outward shew or appeerance of things,
that Christ meant when he said
               Iohn. 8, 15. ye iudg
after the flesh; thirdlie, & last of al, it signifieth
the corruptiō of our nature, or what
soeuer is in à man not regenerate; this
meant both our Sauiour in saieng
               Iohn. 3, 6., That
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and Paul
too
               Rom. 8, 13., If ye liue after the flesh, ye shal die.
            Therefore Paul in saieng, Flesh & bloud
cannot inherite the kingdome of God, meaneth
that fleshlie minded men, such as
delight in the workes of the fleshGal. 5, 19. 20. &c., as adulterie,
fornication, vncleannes, wantonnes,
idolatrie, witch-craft, hatred, &c. shal
not inherite the kingdome of God. Now
had he meant the earthie or fleshie substance
of man, as these heretiques doe



dreame, he should therebie haue spoken▪
against that which he had not onelie so
couragiouslie maintained both at Athens
in the streete of MarsAct. 17, 22. 23. &c. 31. 32.; and at Ierusalem
in the counsel of the IewesAct. 23, 6.; and at Cesarea,
before Felix the gouernourAct. 24, 14. 15. 16.: but also
so learnedlie by arguments taken frō
the resurrection of Christ1. Cor. 15, 12. 13. &c.; from the end
of our Baptisme1. Cor. 15, 23.; from absurdities which
arise by the denial thereof1. Cor. 15, 13. 14. 32.; from similitudes
of thinges created1. Cor. 15, 36. 37. &c.; from comparisons1. Cor. 15, 48. 49.,
& from sundrie other special places,
proued and confirmed. But leaue we
these heretikes.
         
         
            CHAP. 9.
            That vndoubtedlie there shalbe a general
iudgement of al flesh.
            THus I haue both shewed their opinions,
who either doubt-of, or denie
the general iudgement; and also confuted
the argumentes which theie alleage. I wil
nowe therefore proceede to proue the
certaintie of the iudgement to come.
            And although in M. Scheltco à Ieu
                  •
               ren
his booke, this matter hath notablie bene
handled▪ yet, because I do know the godlie
cānot chuse but receiue great comfort



& profite by hearing of them, I wil vnto
his arguments adde sundrie others of no
smal importance to confirme our faith in
this point.
            
               First therfore (to omit ye testimonies
of men;
               1. Proofe from the testimonie of the Prophets 
               be theie Fathers, as theie vse to
cal them, or late writers) ye Prophets haue
at large, & in manie places fore-tolde the
same. As the Prophet Isaiah
               Isai. 26. 19., Thie dead
men shal liue; euen with my bodie shal theie
rise. Awake and sing, yee that dwel in dust:
for thie dewe is at the deawe of herbes, and
the earth shal cast-out the dead.20. Come, my
people, enter thou into the chambers, and
shut thie doores after thee; hide thie selfe for
à verie litlewhile, vntil the indignation passe
ouer.21. 
               For lo, the Lorde cōmeth out of his place
to visit the iniquitie of the inhabitants of the
earth vpon them: and the earth shal disclose
her bloud, & shal no more hide her slaine. Also
in ye prophecie of Hosea it is thus written
               Hos. 13, 14.:
I wil redeeme them from the power of
the graue: I wil deliuer them from death: O
death, I wil be thie death; O graue, I wil be
thie destruction; repentance is hidde fro mine
eies. And againe for al by the Prophet
Daniel it is saide
               Dan. 12. 1.: And at that time shal
Michaël stande-vp, the great Prince,
which standeth for the children of thie people,



and there shal be à time of trouble, such
as neuer was since there began to be à nation
vnto that same time: and at that time thie
people shalbe deliuered, euerie one that shalbe
found written in the booke.2. And manie of
them that sleepe in the dust of the earth shalawake,
some to euerlasting life, and some to
shame and perpetual contempt.3. And theie
that be wise, shal shine as the brightnes of the
firmament: and theie that turne manie vnto
righteousnes, as the starres for euer and euer.
I omit the places in Iob, in Ezekiel,
in the 4. of Esdras, and manie mo. I saie
nothing also of the whole Booke of wisdome,
especialie of the 3. and 5. chapters
of the same, the which what are theie but
euen à verie Sermon concerning the last
iudgement of God; of the rewards of the
godlie and paines of the reprobate?
            
            
               Secondlie,
               2. From the testimonie of Christ. 
               our Sauiour Christ, who is
trueth it selfe
               Iohn. 14, 6., doth auowe the same. For
in one place thus he saith
               Matth. 12, 36, I saie vnto
you, that of euerie idle worde that men
shal speake, theie shal giue à count thereof
at the last daie: in another
               Matth. 24, 30., Then shal
appeare the signe of the Sonne of man in
heauen; and then shal al the kinreds of the
earth mourne, and theie shal see the Sonne
of man come in the cloudes of heauen with



power,31. and great glorie. And he shal send his
Angels with à great sound of à trompet, and
theie shal gather-together his elect, from the
foure windes, and from the one ende of the
heauen vnto the other.
            
               Thirdlie,
               3. From the testimonie of Angels. 
               the Angels of heauen do testifie
ye same, when theie saide
               Act. 1. 11., Ye men of
Galile, whie stand ye gazing into heauē? This
Iesus who is taken-vp from you into heauen,
shal so come, as ye haue seene him go into
heauen.
            
               Fourthlie,
               4. From the cō
                  mandement of Christ. 
               Christ hath not onelie testified
this matter himselfe, but besides
enioined the Apostles to preach the same
in ye eares of al men. For so Peter saith
               Act. 10, 39.:
We are witnesses of al thinges which he did
both in the land of the Iewes, and in Ierusalē,
whom theie slew hanging him on à tree.40. Him
God raised-vp the thirde daie, & caused that
he was shewed openlie:41. Not to al the people,
but vnto the witnesses chosen before of God,
euen to vs which did eate and drinke with
him,42. after he rose from the dead. And he cō
               manded
vs to preach vnto the people, and to
testifie, that it is he that is ordained of God à
iudge of quicke and dead.
            Fiftlie, the testimonies of the Apostles
do confirme this point.5. From the testimonie of the Apostles. For Paul, besides
that he stoode hereineuen to the teeth of



his aduersaries, as in the end of the Chapier
immediatelie going-before, I haue declared,
he proueth the same, though most
effectualie in ye 15. chap. of his first epistle
vnto ye Corinthians:Rom. 2, 3. 4. 5. &c. yet verie forceablie
in diuers other places.Rom. 14, 10. As in the 2. and 14.
Chapters vnto the Romans;2. Cor. 5, 10. & in the 5.
Chapter of his latter epist. vnto the Corinthians.
Peter also he saith: The end of al
thinges is at hand
               1. Pet. 4, 7.; & that the wicked shal
giue accountes to him that is readie to iudge
quicke and dead. Againe, Their iudgement is
not far-of, saith he2. Pet. 2, 3., & their damnation sleepeth
not, &c. Furthermore the last Chapter
of his 2. epistle is wholie in à manner
to proue this article of christianitie. Now
seeing the Prophets, Christ himselfe, his
Angels, & Apostles, who haue not lied
nor deluded men at any time before with
vane prophecies, haue foretold of à iudge
ment to come, the godlie doubtlesse wil
build their faith vpon their wordes, especialie
because theie al haue spoken therof,
moued thereunto by the spirite of God,
who cannot lie. Which testimonies maie
bring much good vnto al mankinde. For
first the godlie herebie in al their troubles
maie receaue great and vnspeakeable
comfort, considering that their afflictions



shal not alwaie endure, but that one daie,
when the Lord thinketh good, theie shal
be adorned with euerlasting glorie, and
life, according to his promises. This made
S. Paul to breake into these wordsRom. 8, 18.: I account
that the afflictions of this present time,
are not worthie the glorie, which shalbe shewed
vnto vs. Secondlie, the wicked hearing
these prophecies of the Lorde touching
the last iudgement, maie be terrified frō
displeasing so gratious à God, who of his
mercie hath reuealed what shal betide
the wicked and vngonlie, that theie maie
with heartie sobs and sorowe repent.
            Last of al, both good and bad maie
herebie as in à glasse beholde howe the
world neither is gouerned by chance, nor
shal endure euerlastinglie: but that, as the
old world, the sinnes of men being come
vnto ripenes, was drowned with water:
so the whole world, when iniquitie hath
gotten the vpper hand, shal perish and be
cōsumed with fire, Theie also, both good
and bad I meane, ought herebie to learne
so to set thēselues in order by repentance,
that when theie shalbe summoned to appeare
at that general Assise, theie maie
boldlie stand in the presence of his glorious
Maiestie.
            
               
But beside these testimonies which I
haue aleaged,6. From the iustice of God. there be sundrie other great
arguments of the worlds consummation.
For, the present condition of men in this
life is a manifest proofe that this worlde
cannot alwaie endure. For who are in
more prosperitie then the wicked; and
who more afflicted thē the godlie in this
life? Therefore of necessitie there must be
a iudgement, where at both the vngodlie
are to be condemned for their wickednes,
and the virtuous to receaue rewardes for
their wel-doing. For euerie good master
to his power, wil prefer his good seruants;
and euerie vpright iudge, wil quite
the innocent, and punish malefactors.
Is this vprightnesse among mortal men, saith
CyrilCyril. Catech. 18., and shal not God the immortal king
reward euerie man according to his workes?
Hee which otherwise thinketh, is in a wrong
opinion. For, as it is in à certaine Psalme
Psal. 5, 4., God is not a God that loueth wickednesse,
neither shal euil dwel with him.
               5. 
               The foolish
shal not stande in his sight: for hee hateth
al them that worke iniquitie.
               6. 
               He shal destroie
them that speake lies. The Lorde wil abhorre
the bloudie man, and deceitful. Wherfore
seing, though now & then some; yet



al the wicked are not destroied; there
must be à iudgement, at which al the vngodlie
shal perish from the face of the
earth, and be damned. For the Lord neither
can, because he is iust; neither wil,
for that he is holie, suffer his seruants, and
holie ones alwaie to be afflicted, alwaie
to be oppressed, to be kept in thraldome
and bondage of the reprobate alwaie.
            Let the wicked then consider that à
daie wil come when tribulation and anguish
shalbe vpon the soule of euerie man that
doth euil
               Rom. 2, 9.. And though either through
policie, or friendship theie escape the displeasure
of man: yet that they cannot auoide
the wrath of God. For idolaters,
blasphemers, and al wicked persons God
wil iudge, though man do not: because he
is righteous.
            Further let them note, that though
they suffer, and that deseruedlie in this
worlde: yet if theie die impenitent, the
ende of their life, is but the beginning of
an euerlasting death. For God is righteous,
and wil punish most seuerely, vnles
his wrath be turned-awaie by the teares
of Christian repentance.
            Moreouer man punisheth outwarde offences:
but god outward and inward too.



Man executeth correction for one, or à
few: but God for al sinnes, which either
the heartMath. 5, 21. 22. &c., mouthMath. 12, 36., or any member of
the bodie hath committed2. Cor. 5, 10., and that because
he is righteous.
            Againe, the ende whie this worlde was
created,7. From the end of the worldes creation. is an vndoubted argument, that à
iudgement one daie must come. For it
was created onlie to serue for ye vse of the
saints & sonnes of God, not of Atheists, &
Epicures. A iudgemēt therfore is to come,
whereby the wicked must be cast-into euerlasting
torments, that the godlie, and
none beside, maie enioie the creatures of
almightie God. Hitherto maketh that of
the ApostleRom. 8, 19. For the feruent desire of the
creature waiteth when the sonnes of God
shalbe reueiled,
               20. 
               because the creature is subiect
to vanitie, not of it owne wil, but by reason
of him, which hath subdued it vnder Hope.
Because the creature also shalbe deliuered
               21.
               from the bondage of corruption into the glorious
libertie of the sonnes of God.
               22. 
               For we knowe
that euerie creature groaneth with vs also,
and traueleth in paine together vnto this present.
This Peter meaneth when he saith2. Pet. 3. 12.,
by the comming of the day of God, the heauēs
being on fire shalbe dissolued, & the elements
shal melt with heate.
               13. 
               But we looke for newe



heauens, & a new earth, according to his promise,
wherein dwelleth righteousnes.
            
            Againe,8. From the base estate of the god lie in this world. the base estate of the saints in
this world doth proue the same. For they
are now humbled: therefore they shalbe
exalted. for before glory goeth humility.
So then, We are with Christ to suffer
               Rom. 8, 17., that
with Christ we maie be glorified. And the life
of the saints is hid with Christ in god
               Colos. 3, 3.. There
remaineth then à manifestation, and à
glorification of the godlie. When Christ
which is our life shal appeare
               Colos. 3, 4., then shal yee
also appeare with him in glorie. Nowe, saith
Iohn1. Iohn 3, 2., are we the sonnes of God, but yet it
doth not appeare what wee shalbe: and wee
knowe that when hee (which is Christ) shal
appeare, we shalbe like him. For we shal se him,
as he is. In this worlde, wee are saued by
Hope
               Rom. 8, 24.. Therefore the time must come
when our Hope shal cesse, and we shalbe
saued in deede, and by the sentence of à
righteous iudge be pronounced the verie
sonnes of God, and heires with Christ of
that kingdome which hath bene prepared
for the elect euen from ye foundation
of the worldMath. 25, 34.: where we shal see god face
to face1. Cor. 13, 12.; and know not in part, but as we
are knowen.
            Moreouer the verie conscience of men



is an euident argument of à iudgement
to come.9 From the testimonie of mans conscience. By this murtherers, whoremongers,
& wicked liuers be pricked, & tormented.
This made Cicero to saieCicero Epist. ad Aitici
                     •
                   li. 11.: There
can no euils bee imagined, but I am troubled
therewith, notwithstanding in respect of the
griefe of sinne, which is greatest and eternal,
theie are al easie to brone. Therefore vndoubtedly
those torments of mind are tokens
that God is the auenger of wickednes,
and that a seuere iudgement shalbe
pronounced against al the wicked.
            Furthermore, wars, famine, pestilence,
afflictiō,10 From temporal punishmentes. al temporal & corporal punishments
in common weales; what are theie
but arguments of euerlasting torments to
come for sinne and wickednes after the
general iudgement? Finalie,11. From the curse appointed to the wicked for breaking the lawes of God. we are to beleeue
yt the lawes of God were not giuen
out in vane; but that God, as he requireth
an exact performance of them: so if hee
find not ye same, he wil seuerely punish ye
transgressors, according as it is writtenDeut. 27, 26.,
Curssed be he that cōfirmeth not al the words
of this Law,
               Gal. 3, 10. 
               to do them. Wherbie it maie be
gathered thē an vniuersal iudgemēt must
come, wherin this cursse shalbe executed
vpon ye wicked, & the righteous receiued
into ye felowship of ye saints. And as that



Moral Lawe of Moses was not giuen-out
in vane: so neither hath God written the
same in the minde of euerie man in vane.
For so manie as haue sinned without the Law,
(saith Paul)Rom. 2, 12., shal perish also without the
Law: and so maine as haue sinned in the Law,
shalbe iudged by the Law (For when the Gertiles
which haue not the Lawe,
               14 
               doe by nature
the things conteined in the Lawe, theie
hauing not the Lawe, are à Law vnto themselues,
               15.
               which shewe the effect of the Lawe
written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witnesse, and their thoughts accusing
one another, or excusing) At that daie
when God shal iudge the secrets of men by Iesus Christ,
               16.
               according to my Gospel. In which
wordes of Paul it is euident, that as the
wicked shal perish for breaking of the
Law of God, whether it bee the written
Lawe, or of Nature: so is the time expressed
when destruction shal come vppon
the wicked, namelie when God shal iudge
the secrets of mē by Iesus Christ. There shalbe
therefore à general iudgement.
         
         
            CHAP. 10.
            Whether God do iudge this present
world, or no.
            
            BVt one perhaps wil saie, yea, I thanke
God, I vtterlie detest al such as either
doubt-of, or anie waie denie the general
iudgemēt to come; I beleeue it shal come,
and I praie God it maie come this weeke
before the next. For doubtlesse wee had
neede of à iudgement, wee haue lacked
iustice à great while: too to long hath god
neglected his seruants, too to long hath he
winked at the vngodlie, and suffered his
faithful children either with pouertie, or
with infamie, or with slauerie, or with per
secutiō, or with one crosse or other to be
afflicted: where-as the wicked, theie doe
continue for riches, welthie; for health,
lustie; for auctoritie, of countenance; euerie
waie at their hearts ease, florishing,
iocunde, and happie.
            This I knowe manie doe thinke; and
some, comparing the state of the godlie in
this world, and of the wiked together, wil
not let to saie so much: not considering
that by such words they vtter out as dangerous,
and damnable opinions, as anie of
them are which they doe detest. Wherefore,
albeit when I tooke this discourse in
hand, I thought not to handle this question:
yet, because I see both how it springeth
of ye premises, & is also very needful



to be discussed in these wicked daies, and
the handling thereof beside wil much
confirme the mindes of the weake, & aduance
the glorie of almightie God, I wil
alleage such proofes for the affirmatiue
part, as no cause, I hope, shalbe left of
doubting, whether GOD hath care
of this seruants, or doe iudge mankinde in
this world.
            Thou therefore who saiest, God hath
no care of the godlie in this worlde,Diuers reasons, and arguments, prouing that God iudgeth mankinde. answere
I praie thee, is hee their father? If
thou saiest, No; thine wordes shal condemne
thee. For thou saiest in thy daielie
praier, O our Father. If thou saiest, Yea;
then hath he à fatherlie affection toward
his children. For can a woman forget her
childe
               Isai. 49, 15., and not haue compassion on the
sonne of her wombe? Though theie should
forget: yet wil not God forget his children.
God then doth not forget, naie he cannot
but haue à care of the godlie, because
they are his children. If therefore without
great follie it cannot bee saide, that
earthlie fathers wil neglect their children;
without extreme folishnesse thou
canst not saie, God neglecteth the godly:
because he is their father.
            Againe, is he their Lord? If thou saiest,



No, whie dost thou serue him? whie dost
thou feare him? whie doest thou dreade
his displeasure? if thou saiest, yea; then
doth he gouerne; and if he gouerne, hee
doeth iudge. For where à gouernement
is, there is also administration of iustice.
If therefore without great absurditie, it
cannot be denied yt he is à Lord; without
foule absurdities thou canst not deny that
he iudgeth: because he is a Lord.
            If thou saiest, he is à Lord but in litle,
he doth not the office of à Lorde, he executeth
no iustice: in sayeng so, thou bewraiest
thy madnes. For what realme;
naie, what towne; naie, what house; naie
what one man can prosper without à gouernour?
For an house without an inhabiter
commeth quicklie to decare; à ship without à
master, goeth to warcke; and à bodie without
à soule cannot liue, and do wel. So LactantiusLactant. de falsa Sap. ca. 10..
Then if smal things, in the iudgemēt
of the wise, must needs be gouerned; the
whole worlde is gouerned: and if gouerned,
then iudged. For hee that is à
gouernour, is a iudge. If therefore without
meere madnesse it cannot bee saide
that smal thinges can continue without
gouernours: it is extreme madnesse
to saie, God iudgeth not the worlde: because



he is gouernour of the same.
            He gouerneth the world, thou wilt say,
but hee iudgeth not among men; for the
innocēt are oppressed of the wicked. But
listen, can God, thinkest thou, iudge the
whole worlde, and yet not iudge à part?
Or wil he gouerne things senselesse, and
liuelesse, and neglect reasonable men?
            Againe, if he be à iudge, and yet doe no
iustice, what doest thou make him, but à
rechles, & careles person, one that fetteth
al at sixe and seuen, not caring which end
goeth-forward? which thing thou canst
not conceiue in thy mind, much lesse report,
without great impudencie; and assure
thy selfe God wil not hold thee giltlesse
for thinking so of him, who is onelie
wise1. Tim. 1, 17..
            Last of al, I aduise thee, O mā, take heed
what thou saiest. for, if thou grant, as thou
canst not denie, that God iudgeth al men,
and yet saiest the innocent are punished,
or oppressed without iust cause whie, and
the wicked cherished; then is he not à
righteous iudge; and if not righteous, then
à tyran; which is blasphemie be it either
thought or spoken. Wherefore laie thine
hand vpon thy mouth.
            
               These are good reasons, thou confessest.



If they bee, they wil perswade thee, bee
thou à reasonable man. Happilie, thou
lookest for scripture. Wouldst thou haue
it proued that God doth iudge? God is the
iudge of the whole worldGen. 18, 25.. He sitteth in his
throne and iudgeth rightPsal. 9, 4.. That God hath
care of ye godly? Behold the eie of the Lorde
is vpon thē that feare him, & vpon them that
trust in his merciePsal. 33, 18.. That he hath cōsideration
too of ye wicked? The face of the lord is
against thē that do euil, to cut-off their remē
               brance
from the earthPsal. 34, 16.. That he beholdeth
ye waies of al men? The Lord looketh downe
from heauen, and beholdeth al the children of
menPsal. 33, 14. 15.. From the habitation of his dwelling, he
beholdeth al thē that dwel in the earth, euen,
the euil & the good, & that in euerie placeProu. 15, 3.
            Thou seest therefore first, that God doth
nowe iudge, that thou maist thinke al iustice
is not reserued vntil ye time to come.
Secondlie that God hath an eie vpon the
godlie, that thou maist note howe hee is
charie ouer them. Thirdly, how his face is
against them that do euil, that thou maiest
vnderstand, howe his wrath is kindled a
gainst the wicked. Last of al, howe he beholdeth
al men, that thou maist know,
how he neglecteth no man: and not giueout,
that he winketh at the wicked. For



he beholdeth, the good for their welfare, and
the euil to their destruction. With whō looke
thou to haue à part, who deniest that God beholdeth
the waies of mē. And not onely know
thou that God doth cleerelie behold thee, but
acknowledge also that he wil assuredly cōdēne
thee. For seing the face of the Lord is against
them that doe euil, to cut-off their remembrance
from the earth: of the gouernement of
of God it must ensue, that thou who through
infidelitie deniest the countenance of God,
must through destruction vnderstand the
wrath of the beholder, saide SaluianusSaluianus de gubernat. Dei. lib. 2.,
and so doe I.
            But the more to preuaile, vnto these
reasons, and testimonies of scripture, I
wil annexe moste euident examples of
the iudgementes of God. For, if wee
into the holie Bible,Examples of God his iudgements in foretime. wee shal finde the
same to be euen à glasse as it were of God
his iudgementes from time to time. For
our first Parents Adam & Euah were expelled
out of ParadiseGen. 3, 23., through the iustice
of God. The murther which Kain
committed, was reuengedGen 4. 10. 11. through the
iustice of God. The whole worlde was
drownedGen. 7, 21.; Babel ouerthrowneGen. 11, 6.; Sodome
and Gomorh burnedGen. 19, 23. 24,; Pharao and
al his host brought vnto destructionExod. 14, 23.,



through the iustice of God.27. 28. Againe,
that Noah and his housholde were preseruedGen. 7, 23.;
Lot with his wife and daughters
sauedGen. 19. 16.; Moses and the Israëlites,
deliueredExod. 14, 21. 22., it was through the same iustice
of God.Wisd. 10, 15. 16. Againe, that Dauid in the
the deflouring of his wife; rauishement
of his daughter; rebellion of his sonnes;
banishement from his kingdome; defection
of his subiectes; and in the odious
death of his sonne Absolom was punished;
what was it but the righteous iudgment
of God, for his sinnes committed
against the cōmandements of the Lord?
            In al these examples, saith Saluianus
               Saluianus de gubernas. Dei. lib 1.,
what is there not? would you see à ruler? Lo,
he both reformeth that which is presently a
               
                  •
               isse
& disposeth thinges to come. Would you
see à seuere iudge? Lo, he punisheth malefactors.
Would you see à iust, yet à merciful iudg?
Lo, he spareth the innocent. Would you see
yet à iudge in al thinges? Lo, here is iudgement.
For he reproueth as à iudge, and gouerneth
as à iudge. A iudge pronoūceth sentence,
à iudge condemneth the guiltie, and à
iudge rewardeth the innocent. Againe saith
he
               Saluianus de gubernat. Dei lib. 2., And althese thinges, Whie? Whie? but
that we should vnderstand that as God hath
iudged and punished; so he wil euermore.



And therefore we reade how euen holie men
were corrected afore time by the iudgement
of God, that we should know how God wil iudg
vs in this present world. Because God, as he
liueth alwaie, so he iudgeth alwaie; as his
omnipotencie lasteth euer, so his righteousnes
edndureth; and as he is eternal, so is his iustice
from age vnto age.
         
         
            CHAP. 11.
            Howe God doth iudge mankinde
in this present world.
            NOw God iudgeth mankinde in this
present world three maner of waies;
sometime by men, by himselfe sometime,
and somtime both by himselfe, and
by man too.
            By man diuerslie, as by eeclesiastical
peesons; and by the ciuil magistrate: by
the worde and power of the one; and by
the sworde of the other. Therefore the
worde of the preachers is saide to be the
sauor of death vnto death to some
               2. Cor. 2. 16., and the
sauor of life vnto life to others; and that
which officers of the Church doe binde
on earth, is saide to be bounde in heauen,
& that which they loose on earth, is loosed
in heauenLuk. 18, 18.: and Magistrates for that
cause are caled the ordinance of God
               Rom. 13. 1, 2., and



saide to execute the iudgements not of man,
but of the Lorde
               2. Cor. 19, 6., and are named the ministers
of God
               Rom 13, 4. 6., yea, Gods
               Psal. 82. 1. 2. too, not simply,
but for that theie sit in the roome of God
here vpon earth.
            So that, when either the vengeance of
God against obstinate sinners; or a gratious
pardon vnto the penitent, is pronounced:
or theeues be hanged, witches
burned, traitors quartered, malefactors
punished; when the innocent are desended,
right mainteined, and iustice duelie
executed according to the lawes of God,
it is the iudgement of the Lord.
            I saie, when iustice is executed according
to the lawes of God. For al the
iudgements of men, in authority, though
according to lawes, are not the iudgements
of God. Because, manie times both
ecclesiastical persons, and that by lawe,
condemne those whom God doth pardon;
and absolue those whom God doth
condemne: and temporal gouernours
also allowe that by their lawes, which
God abhorreth. So both theeuerie in
LacedemoniaEx Heraclid. de politiis.; publique whoredome in
AssyriaOsorius de gl
                     •
                  
                  ria lib. 1.; incest in PersiaBoëmius de moribus, & legibus gentium, lib. 2., was: & cōmon
stewesCor. Agrippa de Vanit. Scien. cap. 64., yea and Sodomitrie somtime of
yeere at RomeTho Swetonius cōtra Hamiltonium Apostatam. p. 102., and grosse idolatrie in



al places where the Pope hath supreme
power is mainteined. And therefore magistrates
iudging according to such laws,
are not the ministers of God, but of Satan;
and execute the iudgementes of the
diuel, not of the Lorde.
            When therefore be magistrates the
ministers of God? or when doe theie execute
his iudgements? Surelie when they
iudge according to Gods lawes. Which
lawes of his be either imprinted in the
mindes of al and euerie man, and are for
that cause termed the lawes of nature; or
else written in the worde of God, which
is the scripture, and are called the Decalog
or Ten-commandements. Whatsoeuer
is by the authoritie enacted contrarie to
these lawes, it is the law of Satan; & what
is either grounded vpon them, or done
by them, God alloweth the same.
            And such good magistrates, and their
lawes the Lord so fauoreth, that he commandeth
them to be obeied, as his owne
ordenance
               Rom. 13, 1. 2. &c., and that theie maie be duelie
put in execution, he reueileth hainous
malefactors often-times; and those
whom men by no policie can either get,
or knowe, he by his omnipotencie in his
iustice doth descrie. Thus come theeues



and murtherers commonlie, and traitors
dailie into the magistrates hande. And
whie? No doubt, because the Lord would
haue it knowen, that he is à righteous,
and à most iust auenger of enormous
crimes, and y• albeit by his almightie power,
he can: yet through his wisedome
he wil haue the ciuil magistrate to punish
such, and that partlie that others maie be
terrified by their punishment from following
their example: but especialie that
notorious offenders maie haue notorious
and deserued correction.
            Againe, he iudgeth by the ciuil Magistrates,
when throgh strength of armes,
and force of warre, the innocent are defended
against al enimies whatsoeuer, be
theie domestical or forreigne vsurpers of
anothers kingdome, or Tyrants in their
owne. And theie who take such warres in
hand, are saide to fight the Lordes battel, as
both IoshuaEccles. 46, 1. 2. &c., Dauid2. Sam. 17, 24 2. Sam. 18, 1. 2. &c., Machabeus2. Macc. 15, 7 8. &c. did,
& praised be God our renoumed Queene
doth, both in defending her loial subiects
against al enimies; and in protecting the
oppressed against vsurpers.
            By himselfe the Lord also doth iudge
and that diuerslie. And though in al his
workes he be maruelous: yet most wonderful



is he in those his iudgements. For
he iudgeth secretelie, and he iudgeth openlie;
he iudgeth particularlie some, &
he iudgeth vniuersalie, al mē by himselfe.
            By his secrete iudgement he stirrethvp
the hearts of man against man manietimes,Secrete iudgements of God.
and againe maketh some to be extraordinarilie
fauoured. This do the godlie
note. And therefore when either theie
do finde for loue, enimitie; for good wil,
hatred; for benefites, ingratitude, or get y•
friendship which theie neuer looked for:
the one theie impute vnto the righteous
iudgement of God for their neglecting
his loue, & requiting his friendship with
vnkindenes, & his manifold good turnes
with vnthankfulnes; and for the other
theie crie with the PsalmistPsal. 75, 6., To come vnto
preferment is neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South, but God is
the iudge,
               7. 
               he maketh, low, and he maketh hie.
By this iudgement the Lord both taketh
awaie good magistrates sometimes; turneth
the heartes of Princes; and changeth
the state of Common-weales. For à true
sentence is that of CominaeusPhil. Cominaeus Commens. suor. lib. 6.; God suffereth
no wickednesse to goe vnpunished, although
sometime it be long ere he take vengeance.
For so often as we see anie notable alteration



in mightie Princes, we ought certainlie
to persuade our selues that it proceedeth
from the iustice of God. And by this
iudgement he succoureth, yea and preserueth
his Church miraculouslie from
destruction; and also punisheth the enimies
of the same from time to time.
            Secretelie also the Lorde doth iudge,
when hee toucheth the minde of man
with the feeling of sinne and wickednes.
And this iudgement of God, if the holie
spirite be not assistant, is vnportable. For
herebie diuers haue desperatelie finished
their lines; as Kain, Iudas, and in our age
Franciscus Spira. By this iudgement diuers
which seeme in manie outward and
worldlie respectes, as either for authoritie,
or for their nobilitie, or for their places,
or for their learning, or for their profession,
or for their wealth, happie; yet are
theie by the testimonie of their gnawing
conscience, which accuseth them continualie
of hainous and manifolde crimes,
in à curssed state, and condition.
            Last of al, when the wilful despisers
of God his mercies preached by the
Gospel, and the malitious resisters, or
peruertors of his worde be deliuered-vp
into reprobate mindes, wherebie there



take darkenes, for light, sower, for sweete;
for trueth, falsehoode, wickednes, for holines,
superstition, for true religion, mans
fantastical imaginations, for the verie seruice
of God: and folowe, without remorse
of conscience, or sense of wickednesse,
sinne, and that with greedinesse,
what is it but the secrete, yet righteous
iudgements of the LordRom. 1, 21. 22. 23. &c.?
            Secondarilie, without the ministerie
of man God iudgeth by himselfe openlie
to the sight of the worlde by diuers
means,Open iudgemēts of God. as by the fire somtime, by water somtime,
by the earth sometime, &c. By
which, and such like the Lorde in his iustice
doth punish vs in these daies manie
times. So haue we bine by great fires,
great inundations, great earth-quakes,
great plagues, corrected: yet verie mercifulie.
For we are neither consumed of
fire, as Sodome wasGen. 19, 23. 24., nor drowned of
water, as the olde world wasGen. 11, 6., nor swallowed-vp
of the earth, as Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram wereNumb. 16, 31. 32.: and that, not because
we are more innocent nowe in the sight
of God,Psal. 106, 17. than theie were, nor God is, either
lesse righteous, that he wil not, or of
lesse power, that he cannot punish so seuerelie
as euer he did: for both we are by



so much more wicked thantheie were, as
we contemne greater benefites than euer
theie enioied, and God also is as righteous
for iustice, and for his power as mightie,
as euer he was. For he is the Lorde and
changeth not
               Mal. 3, 6. But of his infinite mercie
he bringeth vs not vnto vtter confusion,
but punisheth vs by litle & litle, because
we should amend.
            Thirdlie, by himselfe God openlieExamples of God his iudgements vpon particular men.
punisheth particular men, and that notoriouslie,
that others maie beware. Thus
hath he punished long-ago both Herode
Antipa, for his crueltie, and Herode Agrippa
for his pride, and Cerinthus, and
Arius curssed heretikes, for their blasphemies,
and the enimies of Narcissus for
their periurie, and Hatto of Maguntia, for
insatiable couetousnes, and crueltie, and
Dalburgius of Wormes in Germanie, for
his lewde and vnchaste conuersation, and
to omit à number mo, Frier Bacon for his
familiaritie with Satan. For one of those
Herodes hee threwe from hie authoritie
downe to extreame beggerieEccles. hist. cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 30., the other
was eaten-vp of vermineAct. 12, 23., Cyrinthus
was bruzed into peeces with the fal of an
housePaulus ab Eitzen Eth. doct. li 2. ca. 19., the bowels of Arius gushed-out,
and so horriblie ended his daiesPaulus ab Eitzen, ibidem., one of



Narcissus his enimies with fire, another
with an odious sicknes, & ye third hauing
lost his eies with weping perished miserablieEuseb. lib. 6. cap. 9.;
Hatto was pursued, yea at ye lēgth
deuoured of Myce and RatsEccles. hist. Cent. 10. ca. 10. p. 590.; Dalburgius
going to naughtie companie in the
night, fel into à cellar, and so tooke his
deathGeorg. Maior Tom. 2. Homil. fol. 746.; and Frier Bacon pined-awaie
with hunger, hauing both à greedie desire
to eate, and plentie of meate to feedevponFrancis Coxe in his briefe treatise concerning the detestable wickednes of Magical sciences..
            And of verie late yeares, what notable,
and howe manie examples of God
his iudgements against wickednes haue
we seene? What à death came Anne Auerie
(à notable example of auarice) for her
wilful periurie vnto? How died widowe
Barnes, because she wold haue defrauded
her owne children of their portions of
goods due vnto them by Lawe? Howe
desperatelie did father Lea finish his life,
for bearing false witnesse to à matter?
Howe died one Thomas Hil at Feuersam
in Kent for murthering his owne Mother?
Did not the verie excrements of
Anne Auerie come-out of her mouth?
Was she not stroken with such à sickenes,
and that sodenlie, that neither her
feete could moue, nor her mouth speake,



nor anie member of hers in à manner do
the duetie it should? Died she not odiouslie
in à stinking stable for her abhominable
couetousnes and periurie? Fel not widowe
Barns out of an hie windowe, and
so brake her necke? Did not Father Lea
dispatch himselfe with à rustie knife, and
that two yeares after hee had forsworne
himselfe? And did not fiue smal points
strāgle, in strange manner, Tho. Hil? Read
the litle treatise intituled, A viewe of examples;
               The Booke was printed at Morges this yeare 1581. par Iean le Preux.
& if thou haue the French tongue,
reade also the Booke intituled, Des grands
& redoutables iugemens & punitions de dieu
aduenus au monde, &c. and there thou
shalt see that punishments haue bine executed
vpon some one or other, for the
violating of euerie commandement of
the Lord. The which, and such like examples
God he sendeth daie by daie, that
men should know & consider, how that
maie happen vnto euerie forsworne, blasphemous,
& wicked person, which happeneth
to anie. Finalie, God as he iudgeth
particularlie some for some special
sinnes: so he iudgeth vniuersalie al men,
when he taketh them out of this worlde
by death. For the wages of sinne is death
               Rom. 6, 23..
Of which sith euerie man is guiltie, no



man escapeth the punishment of sinne,
which is death. For, it is the condition of al
times
               Eccles. 14, 17., Thou shalt die the death: And it is
appointed vnto men, that theie shal once
die
               Heb. 9, 27., For so much as al men haue sinned
               Rom. 5, 12..
            But the law of the spirite of life which
is in Christ Iesus, hath freed vsRom. 8. 2. from
the lawe of sinne and of death; whie therfore
doe we die, and are not forth-with
clothed with immortalitie? I aunswere
with BernardBern. serm. ad milites, Cap. 11., It is that the trueth of God
maie be fulfilled. For seeing God loueth mercie
and trueth, man is to die, because he prophecied
that he should, & yet shal rise-againe,
least God seeme to forget his mercie. So therfore
death although it beare not dominion alwaie:
yet notwithstanding it abideth for the
trueth of Gods sake, or for à time in vs: euen
as sinne although it nowe raigneth not in our
mortal bodies: yet are wee not without the
same.
            
            The thirde manner of God his iudgements
is both by himself, & by man too.
As when he not onelie suffreth ye Magistrate
to punish the bodies, but also himselfe
tormenteth ye minds of malefactors
by himselfe. Exāples of which his iustice
I wil recite two: one shalbe of à murtherer
executed at Vienna, named Paul; the



other of Muntzer the traitor put to death
in Germanie.Paul the murtherer. For Paul, hauing not onelie
robbed his owne master of that monie
which with great paines and toile he had
gathered for the reliefe of him and his in
necessitie: but also murthered, to make his
waie sure, first his felowe workman, then
à maide seruant, then his master, next his
mistres, and last of al à poore young infant
à maiden childe, and being miraculouslie
by God himselfe apprehended at
Ratisbone à citie distant from Vienna 50
Germane miles, deliuered into the hands
of the magistrate, by them conueied to
the place where that horrible fact was
perpetrated, and there, according to the
lawes of that countrie, adiudged vnto à
most bitter death, amid his paines, which
were most greeuous to fleshe and blood,
he openlie confessed yt al his bodilie torments
did not so much afflict his flesh, as
the last wordes of the poore infant and
innocent, whome among the rest he had
murthered, did torment his minde. For
when he came with bloodie hands to kil
her, ye sweet babe entreated him earnestlie
to saue her, promising ye best thinges
which she had for a recompence of his
mercie, in these words: O Paul, good Paul,



do not thou kil me, and thou shalt haue al my
poppets whensoeuer thou wilt. Those words
from the time hee had murthered her,
were as corosies at his heart; and at his
death as the paines of hel to his soule: so
testifieth à good, and à godlie wtiterD. G. Maior Tom. 6. Hom. fol. 509. b..
            Muntzer also,Muntzer the Traitor; Father of the Anabapstes. being readie to be put
vnto death for raising the poore Countrie-men
in Germanie against their leige
Lordes, and gouernours, was so vexed in
minde, that such as stoode by him, when
he was to be executed, might sensiblie
heare his heart to pant, shake, and beate-againe.
so did God for his part shewe
his iudgement vpon him for his wickednes;
as witnesseth D. George MaiorD. G. Maior Tom. 7. fol. 612, b..
         
         
            CHAP. 12.
            Whether al the wicked are punished in this
worlde; and whie theie are suffered
in the opinion of man
to florish.
            IF God then so fauour iustice, some wil
saie, he should iudge and punish al the
wicked in this world.
            He should in deede,No wicked man but hath his punishment. and he doth. For
there is not à wicked man vpō the earth,



whome God in his iustice one waie or oother;
either by his Magistrates, or by
himselfe; either by his secrete, or by his
open iudgements; either by an accusing
conscience, or by casting him of into à reprobate
minde; either by sickenes, or by
pouertie; by aduersitie, or by prosperitie,
doth not punish. But it maie be obiected,
to haue à guiltie conscience, is an heauie
crosse; and to be vtterlie forsaken of the
Lorde, and possessed of Satan, is of al the
sorest plague, which can fal-vpon man in
this world; aduersitie also is à grieuous
punishment, but that prosperitie can be à
crosse, that is a Paradoxe in the opinion
of the world. I grant it is so. For so theie
haue alwaies thought. Therefore the Romans
with Cicero; the enimies of Iob, &
the aduersaries of Paul in their owne eies
were; & the Turks as theie thinke themselues
are happie. And why? The Romans
had al the world as it were in subiection,
Iob his enimies liued at their heartes ease,
Paul his aduersaries were not touched
with aduersitie, as theie thought, ye Turks
doe florish. Wheras contrariwise ye Iewes
with Cicero, Iob euen of his friendes,
Paul of the barbarous people, Christians
of the Turkes, are iudged accurssed.
            
               
But whie? The nation of the Iewes are vanquished,
are carried from their natiue countrie;
are deteined in captiuitie, said CiceroCicero Orat. pro L. Flacco..
Iob was in miserie; And who euer perished
being an innocent? or when were the godlie
destroied? saide the fained friends of IobIob. 4, 7..
Paul had a viper vpon his hande; Therefore
he is à murtherer, and though hee haue
escaped the sea, yet vengance wil not suffer
him to liue, saide barbarous peopleActs 28, 4.. Christians
are but fewe for number, and for
power nothing so mightie as they haue
bene; theie endure much affliction and
trobles in respect of others; therefore they
are not the sonnes of God, saith MahometAzoara 12..
            These are the rash, and sinister opinions
of the world. When god sendeth prosperitie
hee loueth; but when aduersitie
doth come, hee hateth. But the godlie
are of an other minde. For albeit when
such as feare God enioie prosperitie, they
thinke it an argument of his fauor: yet
when the wicked haue the same, in their
iudgemēt, it is a token of his displeasure.
Therefore Augustine in à certaine place
doth saie, The men of this world are vnhappilie
happie, that is, in their wealth theie are
poore; in their health, sicke; and in their
felicity, they are accurssed. For when the



Lord seemeth not to be angrie at al with
the wicked, he is most displeased. So BernardBern. super Cantic serm. 41,
when God is not angrie, as mē thinke,
he is most angrie. And this may appeare to
be true both in the Romans, in respect of
the Iewes; in Iob his friends, as they were
called, in respect of Iob; in the barbarous
people in respect of Paul; and in the
Turkes at this day in respect of Christians.
For who were out of God his fauour
more than the Romans; than Iobs friends;
than Paul his aduersaries: and who more
miserable in deede than the Turkes, notwithstanding
their prosperitie? And such
is the state of the wicked at al times.
            Then whie doth the Lorde suffer the
wicked in the sight of men to florish?Whie the wicked do florish. and
whie doth hee not in iustice confounde
them speedilie, and vtterlie?
            Sundrie reasons may be giuen hereof.
For either of his wisedome he thinketh
it no due time as yet to punish them;
or of his mercie he spareth them, because
they shoulde repent; or in his iustice hee
hath quite forsaken them. In his wisedome
he spared Sodome, vntil the sinnes
therof were exceeding ripe, and cried-up
to heauē for vengeanceGen. 18, 21.: in his mercie he
spared ye old world an hundred & twenty



yeeres, that theie might amende g: in his
iustice oftentimes he spareth the wicked
in this present world, because he hath giuen
them ouer into reprobate minds, and
reserued thē for euer-during torments in
the life to come. So doe good Physicions
suffer such to haue their wils with-out
gaine-saying them, who are past recouerie.
But, as they who are so desperatelie
sicke in bodie, are nigh vnto death: so
they whom God for saketh, and leaueth
to their owne hists, are nigh vnto damnation.
And as calues the fatter they be, the
nigher they are to be killed; and as trees
the bigger there are, & the more vnfruitful,
the nighter to bee hewen-downe: so
the prosperitie of the vngodlie, is an vndoubted
argument of their destruction at
hande. Which punishment of their shal
thē by so much be the more grieuous &
intolerable, by howe much the time was
great before the Lord executed his iudgment.
Phatao is a notable example hereof.
For hee was long spared, but at the
length ouerwhelmed in the red seaExod. 14, 21. 22..
So is Balthasar,Psal. 78, 13. who in the middes ofWisd. 15, 19.
his iolitie came to destructionDan. 5, 29. 30.. But
they which are best knowen, and most
of al to be noted, are Sodom and the old



world, the one whereof was vtterlie consumed
with fireGen. 19, 24. 25., the other drowned
with waterGen. 7, 17. 18. &c.: both special examples of
the sudden, and vtter damnation of the
vngodlie.
         
         
            CAP. 13.
            Causes whie the godlie doe endure such
miserie, and troubles in this
worlde.
            FVrthermore, it maie bee demanded,
            Whie such as feare God of al others
most zelouslie, and fauour religion best,
suffer such miserie, and affliction in this
present world, as they do?
            I answere: one cause is in them-selues,
through their zeale of godlinesse, they
chuse it: another in Satan their enimie,
through his malice against them, hee seeketh
it: à third in God, who partlie of his
wisedome, and of his iustice partlie, doth
send it.
            For, to speake seueralie of these causes
somewhat, doubtles the godlie endure affliction
oftentimes, when wold they but
assēt vnto sin, or consēt vnto the wicked,
they migh florish in al outwarde happines,



and worldly, as they cal it, felicitie.
But, for that they haue the feare of God
alway before their eies, and thinke-upon
the valor-both of religion, & virtue, they
chuse rather to be afflicted for righteousnes
sake, then either for wickednes to be
aduanced, or that the glorie of their profession
should be blemished. Herebie manie
endure displeasure, which might haue
fauor; manie suffer pouertie, which might
be rich; manie be obscure, which might
be of countenance; and manie are in great
aduersitie, that might doe wel in the
worlde. So Michaiah for speaking the
truth faithfullie without flatterie2. King. 12, 26 27.; Daniel
for seruing the true God zelously with
out hypocrisieDan. 6, 16. 17. &c.; olde Eleazer for obseruing
the holie Lawes of his God religiouslie2 Macc. 6, 28.;
Ioseph for his loialtie to his master
wardGen 39. 12. 20., and such like both were punished,
and are daily afflicted.
            Of which their inuincible courages
manifold commodities do arise. For, first
in so doing albeit they lacke outwarde
comfort of the world: yet they haue the
inward ioie of a good conseience, which, as
Salomon saithProu. 15, 15., is a continual feast.
            
            
               Secondlie, they giue testimonie vnto
the worlde, how they fauor Christianitie



& religiō; not of hypocrisie, or in worldlie
respectes, but of pure zeale: and that
theie regarde those wordes of our Sauior
               Mat. 10, 32.,
Whosoeuer shal confesse me before men,
him wil I confesse also before my Father,
which is in heauen. But whosoeuer shal denie
me before men,33. him wil I also denie before
my father which is in heauen:37. 
               Againe,
He that loueth father and mother more than
mee, is not worthie of me.38. And he that loueth
sonne or daughter more than me, is not
worthie of me. And he that taketh not his
crosse, and followeth mee, is not worthie of
me. He that wil saue his life shal lose it;39. and
he that loseth it for my sake, shal saue it.
            Thirdlie manie-times therebie theie
winne such as are without, & make them
to glorifie God, & to forsake either their
naughtie life, if theie haue beene sinners;
or their idols and errors, if theie haue
beene superstitious.
            And last of al theie both encourage the
weake, and confirme the strong in good
motions, by their examples.
            Again, considering how it is impossible
to please God, and in the world to florish
too; and that such thinges as delight the
bodie, are extreme enimies to the soule,
theie voluntarilie abandon al occasions



that maie with-drawe them from God,
or quench the zeale of virtue within thē.
Whereof it is that theie doe, yea it cannot
be but theie must suffer manie troubles,
as Lactantius notethLactant. de diuino praemio. cap. 5.. For, it is verie
hard to be holie in this worlde, and happie
too. Therefore theie doe chuse and
willinglie for welth, pouertie; for pleasure,
paine; for à florishing state, affliction:
and though theie doe neither with
Democritus, pluck-out their eiesCicero lib. de finibus.; nor
with Spurina, deface their facesValer. Mar. lib. 4, Cap. 5., nor
with the Monches liue by them-selues;
nor with the superstitious Iesuites whip
their owne corpses: yet with Saint Paul1 Cor. 9, 27.,
theie beate downe their bodies, that their
flesh preuaile not ouer the spirite.
            Furthermore, insomuch as the diuel
is for power mightie, in that hee is à
PrinceIohn. 14, 30. Iohn. 16, 11.; and his hatred is deadlie, because
there is enimitie betweene his seede and
the godlieGen. 3, 15.; and his crueltie vnsatiable,
being à draconReuel 20, 2.; and his subtleties manifolde,
because he is a serpentRuel. 12, 9. Reuel. 20, 2,: maruel
it is not, though the saincts of God
in this worlde, wherein theie are but
strangersHeb. 11, 13. 14. Heb. 13, 14., enioie neither such ease, nor
such honor, nor such prosperitie, as the
wicked doe.
            
               
Notwithstanding whatsoeuer the diuel
doth against them,Power of Satan what. it is because God
doth either sende him, or suffer him. And
therefore although his hatred, be mortal;
his crueltie, extreeme; and his subtleties,
past finding-out: yet can he doe
nothing to hurt the godlie, without God
permit. So that his wil is nought, but
his power is good. For his wicked wil is
of himselfe: but he hath no power, but
from God. Which power notwithstanding
the Lorde alwaies doth moderate,
that of his malice he cannot afflict, more
than the wil of God is, he shoulde. This
maketh the godlie neither to feare the
power, nor to set à rushe by Sathan for
al his malice. Because he can do nothing
but by sufferance.
            God also himselfe doth bring the
godlie into troubles, and that as afore I
said, partlie of his wisedome, and partlie
of his iustice. In his wisedome he doth
correct them for diuers ends. First to trie
whether theie are such indeede as theie
would seeme to be. For manie doe both
thinke themselues, and are thought also,
to be valiant Christians, who in the time
of tentation are but verie cowardes. And
therefore, as when warre is hot, men are



proued, whether theie haue hearts or no:
So affliction sheweth who is the faithful
Christian. For God proueth them, and findeth
them meete for himselfe
               Wisd. 3, 5.. He trieth
thē as gold in the fornace,
               6. 
               & receiueth them
as à perfect fruite offering. He hideth himselfe
oftentimes, and turneth-awaie
his face, but not in wrath: It is to trie,
not to destroie them
               Bern. serm. in 
                     〈◊〉
                   Mari
                     •
                  .. Yet trieth he not
Christians the better to know them himselfe.
For he both knew them before
theie were fashioned in the wombePsal. 139, 15. 16.; and
continnalie beholdeth the secretes of
mans hearte1. Sam. 16, 7. Psal. 7, 9. Act. 15, 8.. But that both theie
them selues, & others also should see what
theie are.
            Secondlie, to bring them into his
feare. Because in prosperitie euen the
righteous oftentimes forget the Lord: but
in aduersitie theie remember him. For
as the starres do shine in the night, but in
the day time are not seene: so the virtues
of men which in prosperitie appeare
not, in aduersitie are most glorious to beholde.
And then theie see both the
frailtie of their owne nature, and theie
acknowledge it; and the vnspeakable
mercie of God, and theie commende it;
and the general miserie of mankinde, and



theie bewaile the same. This made the
Prophet to saiePsal. 77, 2. 3., In the daie of my trouble
I sought the Lorde; my sore ranne, and
ceased not in the night: my soule refused
comfort. I did thinke vpon God, and was
troubled: I praied, and my spirite was ful
of anguish. AgaineIsa. 26. 16., Lord, in trouble they
haue visited thee: theie powred-out à praier
when thie chastening was vpon them. And
againePsal. 119, 67., Before I was afflicted, I went astray,
but nowe I keepe thie worde.
               71. 
               It is good for
me that I haue beene afflicted, that I maie
learne thie statutes.
            
            Thirdly, y• they may be like vnto Christ;
and that partelie because he is their eldest
brother. Nowe no reason is it, that
the yonger brethren should haue greater
preheminence then the eldest, so longe
as he is good. But Christ their eldest
and good brother suffered, and so entered
into his glorie
               Luke. 24, 26., wherefore the yonger,
and wicked of necessitie must looke for
troubles. For otherwise theie are neither
the sonnes of God, nor the heires annexed
with ChristRom. 8. 17.. Partlie for that he
is their master. But he was persecutde,
and hatedIohn. 15, 20.. Therfore they are to looke
for persecution and harted. For the seruant
is not greater than his master:
               19. but



à greate praise is it for seruantes rightlie
to follow the steppes of their Lordes. It
sufficeth the disciple to be as his master;
and for the seruant to be as his Lorde.
And partlie, because theie are commanded
to follow his steppes. For so saith
Peter1. Pet. 2, 21., Here vnto ye are caled. For Christ
also suffered for vs, leauing vs an ensample
that we shoulde followe his steppes. And
Paul2. Tim. 2, 11 12., If we be dead with him, we also shal
liue with him. If we suffer with him, we
shal also reigne with him. As who should
saie, If we die not, as he did, we shal not
liue with him; and if we suffer not after
his ensample temporal affliction, we shal
not reigne with him in eternal felicitie.
            Fourthlie, that both themselues should
be assured, and others know howe
theie are not of the world. For God hath
chosen them out of the world. And therfore
theie are hatedIohn. 15, 19.. For which cause the
doctrine of the Gospel is caled the word
of the crosse; and the prouerbe is, Crux
comes Euangelii, The crosse accompanieth
the Gospel, because the worlde doth persecute
the professors of the same: not for
anie euil which theie doe, but for that
theie reproue ye works of darknes which
thing the worlde cannot abide. And



therfore theie persecuted the Prophets,
Apostles, and Sainctes of GOD from
time to time. Then seeing theie protest
the same trueth, let them prepare themselues
vnto the like patience, For we must
through manie afflictions enter into the kingdome
of God
               Act. 14, 22. And al that wil liue godlie in
Christ Iesus shal suffer persecution
               2. Tim. 3, 12..
            Fiftlie, to put them in mind what they
are; and whither theie tende. For in
this world theie are pilgrims, and strangersHeb. 11, 13. 14.;
their countrie is heauenHeb. 133, 14.. Which
countrie theie woulde little couet-after,
enioied theie prosperitie according vnto
their heartes desire. O death, saith EcclesiasticusEccl. 41, 1.,
howe bitter is the remembrance
of thee to à man that liueth at rest in
his possessions; vnto the man that hath nothing
to vexe him, and that hath prosperitie
in al thinges; yea vnto him that is able to receiue
meat▪ O death,
               2. 
               how acceptable is thie
remembrance vnto the needeful, and vnto
him whose strength faileth, and that is nowe
in the last age, and is vexed with al thinges,
and to him that dispaireth, and hath lost patiēce!
Therfore y• Lord knowing this, doth
in his wisedome crosse, & afflict his seruants
on al sides, that theie maie be out of
loue both with the world, and with the



thinges in the worlde1. Iohn. 2, 15., and desire as
Paule did to be loosed, and to be with
ChristPhil. 1. 23..
            Sixtelie, that it maie appeare howe
the godlie doe fauor Christianity and religion
not for temporal profit, or preferment;
not for glorie and praise of men,
or in anie worldelie respect, but principalie
of meere zeale and duetie to Godward.
            Seuenthlie, that their deliuerance,
which in the iudgement of mā could neuer
come to passe, maie assure the consciences
of them, and others too, of God his
continual prouidence, and presence with
his seruantes. So doubtles the miraculous
deliuerance both of Ioseph out of his
troubles; of the Israëlites, out of Egypt;
of Dauid, out of the handes of Saul; of
the three yong men, out of the consuming
fire; and of the godlie from time to
time, out of the cruel pawes of rauening
wolues, tyrants and oppressors, doth not
a litle strengthen the mindes of al the
godlie in their miseries; and confirme
their faith touching the continual presence
of God with his seruāts at al seasōs.
            
               Eightlie, to shew that intolerable shalbe
the paines of the reprobate. For, if



God so afflict his Children; howe wil he
torment his enimies! If he spare not the
righteous! how wil he punish the reprobate.
If iudgement begin at the godlie; what
shal the ende be of them which obeie not the
Gospel1. Pet. 4, 17.! If the righteous scarslie be saued;
where shal the vngodly & the sinner appeare!
If he doe so to the greene wood;18. what shalbe
done to the drieLuke. 23, 31.! And if he plague them
which cal-vpon his Name, how wil he afflict
such as feare him notIer. 25, 29.!
            Last of al, that the righteous maie atteine
the rewards which are promised to
the miserable of this worlde; according
both vnto these words of ChristMath. 5, 10., Blessed
are theie which suffer persecution for righteousnes
sake, and these also of Paul2. Cor. 4, 17., Our
light affliction, which is but for à momēt, causeth
vnto vs à farre moste excellent, and an
eternal weight of glorie.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 14.
            That God in his iustice doth punish his
seruantes for their sinnes.
            IN his iustice God also doth punish euē
his sainctes for their offences. Because
theie are guiltie not onelie of original,
but of actual also; not only of secret, but of



knowne sinnes beside. Of original, because
Theie are borne in iniquitie, conceiued
in sin
               Psal. 51, 5.; and their harts, are euil euen frō their
youth
               Gen. 8, 21. Gen. 6, 5.: of actual, For who can saie, Mine
heart is cleane
               Pro. 20, 9., I am cleane from sinne?
There is no man that sinneth not
               1. King. 8, 46. 2. Chro. 6, 36. Eccl. 7, 22.: of secret,
for, If thou ô Lorde, streightlie markest iniquities,
ô Lord, who shal stand
               Psal. 130, 3.? If I would
iustifie my selfe, mine owne mouth shal condemne
me; If I woulde be perfect, he shal
iudge me wicked
               Iob. 9, 20.; yea my cloathes shal iudg
me filthie:
               31. and of knowne, for, I know
mine iniquities
               Psal. 51, 3., and my sinne is euer before
me; Againe, In manie thinges we sinne
al
               Iam. 3, 2. Seeing then so manie waies the godlie
are guiltie of sinne, what maruel
though God as a righteous iudge, doth
seuerelie in his iustice pinish them for
the same!
            In this their affliction the godlie haueCogitations of the godlie in their troubles
continual consideration both of themselues
and their miserie; and of God and
his mercie. In themselues theie compare
their sinnes, and their miserie together;
and by the greatnes of their afflictiō theie
gather, what an ouglie, filthie, and abominable
monster sinne is. Theie consider
that by their sinnes theie haue offended
not man but God, who is soueraignelie,



and infinitelie righteous: and
that impossible it were for them to be saued,
except some extraordinarie pardon
did come. At the remembrance wher of
theie do euen tremble & quake-againe.
            
               As Dauid did when he saide 
               i;1. Psal. 38, 2. 3. 4, Thine
arrowes haue light vpon me, and thine hand
lieth vpon me. There is nothing sounde in
my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is
there rest in my boanes because of my sinne.
For mine iniquities are gon-ouer mine head,5.
and as à weightie burden theie are too heauie
for me. My woundes putrifie and corrupt6.
because of my foolishnes. I am bowed &
crooked verie sore: I goe mourning al the7. 8.
daie. For my reines are ful of burning; and
there is nothing sound in my flesh. I am weakned9.
and sore broken, I doe roare for the verie
griefe of mine heart. And afterwarde,
               10.
Mine heart panteth, my strength faileth,
and the light of mine eies, euen theie are not
mine owne.
            By which words the affections, & sorrows
of those men who truly doe repent
and weigh their wickednes in equal ballance,
are described. For theie conceiue
of their sins, not as the hypocrites doe, according
to their owne opinions, & fleshlie
imaginations; but theie place before



their eies, first the maiestie of his person
whome theie haue offended, namelie
God: then the filthines and abhomination
of sinne in it selfe: and last of al the
punishment which theie deserue for sinning
by the sentence of the Lawe: and according
to the maiestie of God which is
most sacred; to the nature of sin, which is
most abhominable; and to the torments y•
theie deserued, which are endlesse, & intolerable,
theie do think of their offēces.
            In God theie note iustice and mercie.The great mercie of God in punishing sinneful man.
For of his righteous iudgemement it is
that theie are punished, & of his mercie,
y• theie perish not vtterlie. And although
theie are scourged sometimes gentlie, &
sometime sharplie: yet alwaies fauourablie.
For when he is angrie hee sheweth
mercie
               Tob. 13, 2., and in the time of trouble forgiueth
the sinnes of them which cal vpō him. Therfore,18.
               blessed are theie whome God correcteth
               Iob. 5, 17..
For though he woundeth them,19.
yet hee healeth them: though he smiteth
them, yet he maketh whole againe:
though he sēdeth troubles, yet at length
he deliuereth: though he doeth afflict2. Cor. 4, 8. 9.,
yet he forsaketh not; and though he casteth
down, yet he raiseth-vp againe. For
he tempereth his iustice with mercie vnto



the preseruation of his seruants.
            But howe come theie by such mercie?
Euen through the obedience of Iesus
Christ. For he was wounded for our offencesIsa. 53, 5.;
and made à cursse for vsGal. 3, 13., so
that by his stripes we are healedIsa. 53, 5., & deliuered
though not from worldelie punishment,
yet from the guilt of sinne;
wherbie we appeare boldlie before God,
being iustified through his obedience, &
and made cleane by his bloud.
            These thinges when the godlie doe
thinke-vpon, as seldome theie are quite
out of their minds, theie do magnifie the
goodnes of God exceedinglie, partlie for
punishing them, which is an argument
to their consciences, not onelie y• theie are
his children (for theie who are without correction,
are bastards, and not sonnes
               Heb, 12, 8.) but also
that hee loueth them entirelie (because,10.
               whō the Lord loueth he chasteneth
               Heb. 12, 6.,
and correcteth them for their profite,11. that
theie maie bee partakers of his holines,
and bring-forth the quiet fruite of righteousnes:
Partlie for punishing thē in this
world, and not in the worlde to come;
with lenitie, not in his furie; as his children,
not as seruantes; and as elect, not as
cast-awaies.
            
               
But especialie theie praise him for
their reconcilement vnto God ye FatherCol. 1, 21.
by the pretious bloud of the immaculate
lambe Iesus Christ1. Pet. 1, 19.: wherebie theie bebeleeue
that none afflictions can hurt
them. And therefore theie reioiceRom. 5. 3., knowing
that tribulation bringeth forth patience,
and patience, experience, and experience,
hope;4. and hope maketh not ashamed,
but boldlie to endure al manner
troubles;5. and earnestlie to desire not onlie
à quite deliuerance from sinne, but also
that quiet state, where shalbe no more
death, neither sorowe, neither crieng, neither
paineReuel. 21, 4..
         
         
            CHAP. 15.
            Against à vane opinion that the Saints,
yea in this world, haue no
sinne.
            NOtwithstanding this being so apparent,
that it cannot be doubted of; &
so true, that the Scripture doth confirme
what so euer hath bine written: yet some
fantastical heades wil not let to saie, yea
and to publish also, that the Saintes are
without al manner sinne, or do not sinne
at al.
            
               
Whose wordes if theie be true, then
doth God against al iustice in punishing
them so seuerelie, and that without ceassing,
who deserue not the same, beeing
pure from al contagion of wickednes.
For this necessarilie must be inferred vpon
their wordes, although happilie theie
do not marke so much. To proue their opinion
theie bring diuers, as theie thinke,
substantial arguments; of which I wil recite,
though not al, yet the strongest, that
such as either be assaulted by their Sophismes;
or shal heare their argumentes,
maie the more easilie both dissolue, and
abhorre them.
            Theie saie therefore by an argument
à diuisione:
            
            The Saintes are without both original &
actual sinnes:The Antecedēt.
            
            Ergo theie haue no sinne.The Consequen
                     •
                  
               
            
            For confirmation of their false antecedent,
theie first labour to proue that
theie are without original sinne, and that
by this argument.
            That sin which is forgiuē, remaineth not.The Maior.
But Baptisme is à seale to assure the consciences
of the faithful,The Minor. that original sinne is
forgiuen:
            Therfore it remaneth not.The Conclusion. And if it doth



not remane, then are the Saintes without original
sinne.
            The Maior is vntrue. For original,Answere. yea
al sinnes are forgiuen through the obedience
of Christ. For he being iust, did suffer
for the vniust
               Rom. 5, 6. 7. &c. 1. Pet. 3. 18.; and hath taken-awaie
the sinnes of the world
               Iohn 1, 29.; so y• by his stripes
theie are healedIsai. 53. 5., and sanctified by his
bloud1. Cor. 6, 11. Ephes. 2, 13.. Yet remaineth, though there
raigneth not, much wickednes yea in the
godlie, as both concupiscence of the hart,
and other sinnes. Which sinnes (although
theie remane in them) are not to their
hurt, because theie beleeue in him that
iustifieth the vngodlieRom. 4, 5.. For, their faith
is counted for righteousnesse; and theie
are in God his sight, pure, holie, and
faultlesse. Wherof it is that Theie are pronounced
Blessed, not which are without
sinnes, but whose iniquities are forgiuen
               Rom. 4, 7.;
not theie which are pure from al wickednes,
but whose sinnes are couered.
            
            Secondlie, to proue that theie are without
actual sinne, thus theie reason:
            Where there is no condemnation,The Maior. there is
no sinne.
            
               The Minor. 
               To the Saints there is no condemnation
               Rom. 8, 1.:
Therefore in the saintes there is no sinne.
               The conclusion. The answere.
I aunswere vnto the Maior, where



there is no condemnation, there is no
sinne vnto death. For the sinnes of them
which are in Christ Iesus are venial, or
pardoned, or blotted-out euen as though
they had neuer bene committed. Notwithstanding
they are suffered to be in
the godlie, yea and to assaile them sore,
that they may continuallie beare in mind
howe much they are bound vnto God,
and stil seeke to please him whose helpe
they stande alwaies in neede of. For the
flesh lusteth against the spirit
               Gal. 5, 17., and, as the
prouerbe is, he is liuelesse that is faultlesse.
And yet, who shal laie anie thing to the
charge of Gods chosen
               Rom. 8, 33. 34.? it is God that iustifieth,
who shal condemne? so that, there is
no condemnation to the faithful, not because
they are cleare from al contagion of
wickednes; but for that their sinnes are
not imputed vnto them.
            For mans righteousnes, is Gods mercie
               Bern. super Cantic. ser. 23..
Againe saie they: Whosoeuer is borne of
God, sinneth not
               1. Iohn 3, 9. 1. Iohn. 5, 18..
            But the saints are borne of God:
            Therefore the saints do not sinne.
            For the better answering this argument,The Answere.
it is to be considered, that ye saints
haue à double generation, one à carnal of
their earthly parents, ye other a spiritual,



of God: according to the diuersitie wherof
theie are carried diuerslie, partlie with
humaine, and partly with diuine cogitations.
By the carnal generation, their flesh
lusteth against the spirit
               Gal. 5, 17.; by the spiritual,
the spirite lusteth against the flesh: by the
carnal, they sinne in manie things
               Iam 3, 2.; by the
spiritual, theie shewe their faith by their
works
               Iam. 2, 21. 22. &c.: by the carnal,10. 
               theie are sinners
               1. Iohn 1, 8.; &
by y• spiritual, they abide in God, & auoid
sinne,9. 
               because theie are the sonnes of God
               1. Iohn 3, 2..
            Therefore, saith Augustine
               Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 2. de peccat. merit. &c. ca. 8., consume
that wherebie we are the sonnes of the flesh,
and of the world, and that wil come vnto perfection,
wherebie we are the sonnes of God, &
redeemed in the spirite. This made the same
Iohn to saie, Dearelie beloued, now are we the
sonnes of god, but yet it doth not appeare what
we shalbe. What meaneth this, We are, and
we shalbe, but onelie that we are in hope, but
shalbe indeede? For afterwarde hee saith, wee
know that when he shal appeare, we shalbe like
him; for we shal see him, as he is. Therefore
we both nowe haue begun to bee like him in
this world because we enioie the first fruits of
the spirit; and are yet vnlike him, through the
remnants of the olde man. Then, so f
                  ••
               forth
as we are like him, so farforth we are through
the regeneration of the spirite, the sonnes of



God: but by howe much we are vnlike him, by
so much we are the sonnes of the flesh, and of
the worlde. In respect of the one, wee cannot
sinne: but in respect of the other, if we saie
that we haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues.
and so Augustine.
            
            
               Bernard answereth vnto the maior
on this wise
               Bern▪ in septu
                     •
                   ges. Serm. 1., Whosoeuer is borne of God,
sinneth not, that is, saith he, resteth not in
sinne; or sinneth not, that is, it is so much, as if
he did not sinne. Because sinne is not imputed
vnto him.
            
               Wherefore to conclude mine answere
vnto this argument, I saie with Augustine
               Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 2. contra Epist. Parmen. cap. 7.,
So long as through patience we hope for the
redemption of our bodies, let vs neuer haue
the faces to saie wee haue no sinne; least that
arrogancie of minde, bee a most hainous offence.
            
               Moreouer they reason thus, It is the
commandement of God,The Maior. Do this, that is, fulfil
the commandements, and thou shalt liueLuke 10, 28. Leuit 18, 5..
            The saints doe liue, that is, in the eies of
God they are blessed.The Minor.
            
            Ergo they fulfil the commandementes of
God.The conclusion.
            
            
               Hereunto I answere, first the argument
is false. For it is no good reasō, They
should, therefore theie doe keepe the commandements;



               or, they are commaunded to fulfil,
therefore they do fulfil the lawes of God.
            Secondly, the commaundementes are
fulfilled two manner of waies; by Christ,
and by our selues. By our selues we could
neuer keepe them; and therefore Christ
hath fulfilled thē on our behalfe. For (that
that was vnpossible to the lawe, saith Paul
Rom. 8, 3., in asmuch as it was weake, because of the
flesh) God sending his own sonne in the similitude
of sinful flesh, and for sinne, cōdemned sin
in the flesh, that the righteousnes might bee
fulfilled in vs, which walke not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.
            
            Last of al vnto the minor, I saie, The
saints do liue, but not through any righteousnes
which they haue done, or for
their keeping the Lawe, it is by their faith
in the bloude of Christ, for so saith
PaulRom. 1, 17. Gal. 3, 11..
            Furthermore,The Antecedent they obiect, The saints
be righteous:
            
            
               Ergo they do not sinne.
               The consequent.
            
            If this argumēt be meant of the saints
in heauen, it is true: but if otherwise, I denie
the same. For the saints in this world
be righteous, and yet sinners, Righteous,
because God accepteth them for righteous;
and righteous, not absolutelie, but in



respect of other men. So was Noah righteous,
but in his generation
               Gen. 6, 9., and ye Publicane
righteous, but rather than the Pharisie
               Luke 18, 14.,
and the spouse of Christ fairest, but
among women
               Sal. songe 1, 7. And so the saints in this
world before others, rather than the wicked,
among men, be righteous: but simplie
without al comparison righteous, or
without sinne they are not. For in that respect
God onelie is holie
               Reuel. 15, 4.; and there is none
good but one, euen God
               Math. 19, 17.. For no man liueth,
that sinneth not
               Eccles. 7, 22..
            Who then is righteous? Euen hee, as I
said, whom it pleaseth God to accept for
righteous. Who most righteous? He that
hath the greatest faith, and doth least offend.
Finallie to omit the rest of their arguments,
thus they argue:
            If the godlie do not obserue the commandements
of God,The Maior. no man can fulfil them.
            But the commaundements of God may be
fulfilled,The Minor. because God prescribeth nothing to
be done of man, which is vnpossible to be performed;
or in vane.
            Therefore the godlie do obserue them.The conclusion.
            
            How this argument hangeth together,Aunswere.
I wil not spende time to discusse: onelie
vnto the minor I saie, that the laws of god
are to be fulfilled. For both ye Saints hereafter



being vnloaden from the burden of
sinful flesh, shal; and Christ in the flesh
hath kept them, not transgressing the lest
precept, nor any iote of them. Notwithstanding
that which hee was able to doe,
man cannot do in this world: and yet are
the laws of God prescribed to man, not in
vane. Because manifold commodities do
spring thereof.
            For, first by the Lawe we gather how
there is God.1. Because it is vnpossible, that
those most true and certaine notices touching
the difference of honest and dishonest
thinges, expressed in the law, should
either be knowen, or continue without
the prouidence of some God.
            Againe by the Law we may learne the
disposition of God;2. as that he is al righteous,
al holie, merciful, true &c. For, seing
the seedes and sparcles of those virtues
are in the mindes of man; and that it
is vnpossible that the cause can be worser
then the effect, it must needes be, that the
virtues commended to men in the Lawe
of God, and glitter somewhat in our nature,
bee most gloriouslie, and singularly
in God himself. Neither may it be doubted,
but God by his Lawe doth shewe
himselfe what he is: euen as the ciuil laws



of à countrie declare the inclination of
those men which made them.
            Againe,3. by the Lawe of God we maie,
as in a glasse, behold to what end man at
the first was created, or in what à state
of perfection our first parentes Adam
and Euah were. For with such virtues
were they adorned, yea, and with such, after
the state of this life, shal the saints of
God be endued withal, as the lawe exacteth:
That is, both they did, and we shal,
both knowe God perfectlie, and serue
him zelouslie, and loue him and one another
faithfullie, hartelie, and blessedly.
            Againe, by the lawe we may see howe
filthilie we are polluted, and defiled with
sinne. Wherefore he that would knowe
ye manifold spots, wrinckles, and corruption
of mans nature, let him go vnto the
looking glasse of God his lawe, and he
shal easilie perceiue in the mind, à darke
ignorance of God; in the wil, à declining
from and loathing of true religion; in the
heart vitious affections; & in al the members,
an horrible deformitie.
            Againe,5. by the Lawe we may knowe
what an ouglie, filthie, and abhominable
thing, sinne is. For saith PaulRom. 7, 7.. I knewe
not sinne, but by the Lawe. For I had not



knowen lust, except the lawe had saide, Thou
shalt not lust.
            
            
               Againe,
               6. 
               by the Lawe we are brought
vnto Christ. For the Lawe, as noteth Paul
               Gal. 3, 24., was our pettie schoolemaster vnto Christ,25.
that we might bee made righteous by Faith.26.
But after that faith is come, we are no longer
vnder a scoolemaster. For yee are al the sons
of God by faith in Christ Iesus.
            The office of a pettie-schoolemaster, or
of an Vsher, as we cal him, is to teach; to
reforme manners; to correct; and to bring
vnto an head-master. Al which the Lawe
doth. For first it teacheth what God is,
and of what disposition; and what we
ought both to do, & to leaue vndone. Secondlie,
it is a rule for the directing of our
life. Thirdly, it correcteth, when it denounceth
ye wrath of god against the vnpenitent,
and condemneth. And last of al,
hauing laid-open the abhomination of
sinne, and the anger of God, it bringeth
vs vnto Christ ye headmaster, that of him
we maie learne howe to pacifie the wrath
of his almightie father.
            To conclude (for who is able to recite
al the benefits which it bringeth!)7. by the
Lawe of God, both euerie priuate man
may learne howe to leade à godlie life; &
euerie publike person howe to gouerne



aright; and euerie state, condition, and
calling of men, how to please God. For
the cause of al enormities both publike
& priuate, is the neglect or forgetting of
the holie commandements of the Lord.
         
         
            CAP. 16.
            Whether the saints in this worlde endure
greater affliction, than other men;
and whie they do so.
            THus, I trust it is euident that the saints
deserue their troubles, because theie
are sinners.
            But some wil yet againe obiect and
saie, they deserue not greater troubles in
this word, because they are not so egregious
offenders, as others be.
            Of which their obiection it must follow,
that if they haue more miserie, and
yet deserue greater mercie; that God is
both partial in iudging, and not al holie
for fauoring the wicked. But this is an intolerable
reproch against the maiestie of
god. For it is none hard matter to proue,
that neither the wicked haue more fauor;
nor the godlie deserue lesse troubles, than
they do suffer.
            For, touching the first point, who
are more afflicted, I praie you, theie



whose soules doe triumph with ioie,
though their bodies do smart; or they rather
whose bodies be at ease, and their
minds tormented? they whom God doth
scourge of loueHeb. 12, 6., or they whom he spareth
of hatred? they which in fewe things
Wisd. 3, 6., or they which many waiesWisd. 12, 22., are punished?
they which fauorablie are forsaken
for a litle while in this worldIsai 54, 7. 8.; or they
which both now in this life seuerelie are,8.
and in the time to come shal euerlastinglie
be tormentedMath. 25, 41.?
            Againe, what troubles suffer the godlie,
but the wicked are made to feele ye same?
Is it pouertie? The wicked are poore. Is it
sickenesse? The wicked be diseased. Is it
imprisonment? The wicked haue not
their libertie. Is it vnnatural deathes? The
wicked come vnto them.
            But not so manie wicked men are
poore, as godlie. Who shal be iudge? shal
magistrates? They wil saie; for one godlie
man that is poore, they are troubled
with twentie wicked; some through vnthriftines,
some through idlenesse, some
through falsehoode. Which vices no
godlie man but doth detest. And therefore
in reason there must bee moe of the
wicked, thā of ye godlie in à poore estate.
            But not so manie wicked are sicke as



godlie. Who shalbe iudge? shal the learned
Physicions? They wil saie, for one
godlie person that is sicke, they are troubled
with twentie wicked; some through
dronkennesse, some through gluttonie,
some through incontinencie. Which vices
no godlie man but from his heart
doth abhorre. And therefore moe of the
wicked than of the godly diseased.
            But not so manie wicked are imprisoned.
Who shal be iudge? shal the iudges
of realmes? They wil answere; for one
godlie man they sende twentie wicked
vnto the iayle, some for polling, some
for roaging, some for quarreling, some
for periurie, which vices the godlie wil
not defile themselues withal. And therefore
more wicked, then godly imprisoned.
            But not so many wicked come to vnnatural
ends, as godlie. Who shalbe iudg?
Shal common experience? That must
needes declare, that for one godly person
an hundred come vnto euil ends, some for
thefte, some for murther, some for treason,
some through desperation. With
which vices the godlie wil not be stained
for al the goods in the world. And therefore
mo of the wicked than of the godlie
doe come vnto vnnatural ends.
            
               
On the otherside, what prosperity hath
God promised, for this life, but the godlie
enioy ye same so wel as the wicked? For
riches, they are welthie, for health, lustie;
for power, mighty; learned for knowledg
wise for experiēce, honorable for calling;
for fame renowmed, so wel as they. Yea,
but al the godly are not such. Neither be
al the wicked: But moe wicked yet than
godlie be such. Howe canst thou tel that?
the scripture saithEccles. 9, 1. by outward things no
mā knoweth either loue or hatred,
               2. 
               al things
come alike to al: and the same condition is to
the iust and to the wicked; to the good and to
the pure, and to the polluted, & to him that
sacrificeth, & to him that sacrificeth not: as is
the good, so is the sinner, he that sweareth, as
he that feareth an othe. But doe the wicked
more florish? Let them assure themselues
they haue their reward. And haue ye godly
lesse prosperity? They are to reuiue their
spirites through consideratiō that à time
wil come, when they shal fully be cōforted,
and the vngodlie tormentedLuk. 16, 25..
            Againe, be it that they find lesse fauor, &
moe troubles in the world, not for manifest
wickednes, but through the malice of
Sathan and his mēbers, than the wicked
doe: yet are theie punished, as vniustly of
man, so iustly of the Lord: and that, both



because he exacteth à greter righteousnes
of them than of other men, which he findeth
not, & also looketh for more thankfulnes
for his extraordinary benifites cō
               ferred
vpon them, and they yeeld it not.
         
         
            CHAP. 17.
            Where the bodies and soules of men are
vntil the daie of iudgement.
            SEeing nowe à general iudgement shal
ensue; what becommeth of bodies and
soules vntil ye daie of iudgment? wil some
say. Touching the bodies theie are dead,
without any, either sense or feeling at al
vntil the last daie, & abide in their places
               2. Esd. 2. 16.,
if theie were neuer buried, & in the graues,
if theie were cōmitted to the earth. But
the houre shal come in which al that are in
the graues shal heare (Christ) his voice
               Ioh. 5, 28..
And theie shal come foorth &c.
               29. and such also
as haue beene either deuoured of beastes,
or consumed of fire, or drowned of waters, or
any way dead since the beginning of the
world, theie altogether in à moment in the
twincling of an eie shal arise
               Aug. tom. 9, lib. de vanit. seculi. cap. 3..
            But whie reasteth the bodie, and goeth
not presently with the soule either vnto
ioie or paine? It is because neither the



sins of al ye wicked, are yet perfectly ripe;
nor the number of the faithful fulfilled.
For neither the wicked which haue died
since the beginning of the worlde shal
preuent those which are to come vnto
them in extreme tormentes: nor any of
the godly enioie perfect happines vntil ye
whole nūber of ye faithful com together.
            Whie shal the bodie arise at al? The reason
is easilie giuen. That whole man may
be rewarded according to his deserts: ye
is, that as neither the soule without the
bodie did anie thing; nor the body without
the soule while it was aliue: so both
bodie and soule together maie receiue either
the reward of wel doing, or the punishment
of sinne. For, we blaspheme with
the mouth; we pray with the mouth; we praise
God with the mouth. We are wanton with the
bodie; and we are chast with the bodie. Wee
pil and poll with the hand: and we giue almes
with the hand. &c. Seeing then, saith CyrilCyril Catech. 18.,
the bodie is à doer in al thinges, it shal reape
the fruit of his labour in the time to come.
            
            But some wil saie, How are the dead raised
vp? and with what bodie come theie foorth1 Cor. 15, 35?
O foole,36. that which thou sowest, is not quickned,
except it die.37. And that which thou sowest,
thou sowest not that bodie that shalbe,
but bare corne, as it falleth, of wheate, or of



some other.38. But God giueth it a bodie at his
pleasure, euen to euerie seede his owne bodie.
&c.42. So also is the resurrectiō of the dead. The
bodie is sowne in corruption, and is raised in
incorruption;44. It is sowen in dishonor, & is raised
in glorie, it is sowen in weakenes, & is raised
in power; It is sowen a naturall bodie, & is
raised a spiritual bodie. Wherbie it is euidēt
howe the same bodie in substance which
we haue, but not in qualitie shal arise. For
the qualitie shalbe changed of the same.
Hereunto Cyril beareth witnes when he
saith
               Cyril Catech. 18.; This bodie shal arise, but not subiecte
to infirmities, yet this same verie bodie, being
transformed into an incorruptible body.
Euen as iron burned in the fire, becommeth
fire. But more than so as the Lorde rising
knoweth best. This body than shal arise: but
not remaine as it is, but be eternal. It shal
not stand in neede either of meat to liue withal,
or ladders to climbe by: for it shal become
spiritual. A certaine glorious thing (it
shalbe), such as sufficientlie for theworthines
of the same cānot be expressed. The righteous
shal shine as the sunne, as the moone & as the
brightnes of the firmament. And God foreseeing
this incredulitie of man, hath giuen
to smale wormes bright bodies in the summer
that therebie theie maie shine, to make
men by apparent thinges to beleeue that



which through hope we lookefor. For he that
canperforme a part, can also accomplish the
whole; and hee that hath made a worme to
shine with cleerenesse, can much more make
the iust to be glorious. So then we shal be raised
hauing eternal, and al like bodies: but he
that is righteous shal receiue à celestial body,
that he maie accompanie the Angels; and he
that is wicked shal take an eternal bodie, by
which he maie suffer the punishmēt of sinnes,
and burne in fire, and yet neuer be consumed;
so Cyril.
            
            This being spoken of the place of the
bodie, and resurrection of the same, I wil
nowe shew what I thinke concerning the
places where the soules are, had I recited
the sundrie opinions of diuerse men touching
this matter. For great varietie of
iudgementes haue beene here-about. The
Pharisees haue one opinion, the Dormitans
an other, the Papistes another, the fathers
another; and the purest writers of
our time, another.
            
               For the Pharisees they thought that the
soules of the good had no certaine abiding
place,
               Opinion of the Pharises. but passed from one bodie vnto another
vntil the day of the generall resurrection.Boēmius de moribus Genti
                  
                     •
                  m lib. 1. or in 2. part of the Fardle of faci
                  
                     •
                  ns, Cap. 4,
            
            
               The Dormitans they thought the soules
haue à certaine place, where it is either in



heauen or hel theie shew not,Opinion of the Dormitans. where theie
sleep vntil ye day of iudgement
               M. Ca
                     •••
                  ne in his treatise of the immortalitie of the soules. and I Cha
                     ••
                  on in his se
                     ••••
                   of the 2. comming of Christ.. The Papists
saie before the death of Christ there
were foure places for ye soules, to wit, Hel
Lymbus puerorum, Purgatorie, and Lymbus
Patrum. Hel, as saith IauelIauel Philos. Chri. p. 8. Tract. 4. de felicit. Christ. cap. 3., is the lowest
place, & there such as are damned for actual
and mortal sins, are in torments. Next aboue
that is Lymbus puerorum,Opinion of the Papistes. which is à place for
infants, that died either vncircumcised before
the comming of Christ, or vnbaptized after
his resurrection. Next aboue that is Purgatorie,
à place where such are to be purged
as haue not sufficientlie repented in this life.
Next aboue that Lymbus patrum, where the
souls of such as died godli abode in peace, &c.
Which Lymbus Patrum, as testifieth Dionysius
CarthusianusDionys. Carthus. Col. de iud. Animarum Art. 15. 
               out of Bonauenture,
was also called Abrahams bosome, & Hel. It
was called Hel both because it was inferior,
and also for that after à sort it was à place of
miserie. It was called Lymbus, because the
punishment of lacking was there. And it was
called Abrahams bosome, for that there was
an expectation of glorie. And of this opinion is
Petrus de Tharantasia, Richardus de media
Villa, and Thomas de Herfordia. So Dionysius
Carthus. Which foure places, saith
Iauel
               Iauellus in the foresaide place, doe continue yet, and haue their
situation, albeit the fourth which is the hiest



is quite emptie (hel is so ful by like thorough
Papistical delusions). And with
this felow agree those vnholie fathers of
the late general Councel holden at Trent
in al points
               Catech. Trident. vpon this art. of the creede, Descendit ad inferos., sauing that theie make no
mention of Lymbus puerorum at al; espieng
perhaps that alreadie theie haue set
moe places beside, than theie can by anie
good reason, or Scripture defend.
            
            Furthermore,Opinion of the Fathers. the fathers theie haue
had their opinions. As Irenaeus, who seemeth
to thinke, as in the ende of his 5.
Booke appearethIrenaeus aduersus haereses Valent. &c. li. 5., that the soules so
soone as theie leaue their bodies goe not
presentlie either vnot ioie, or paine; but
are kept in à secrete place against the daie
of iudgemēt: agreeing therin verie much
with the Dormitans aboue mentioned. In
this error also was Pope Iohn 20. But one
of these, which was Irenaeus, seemeth not
to be throghly resolued in this point. For
in another place of the foresaid Booke, he
hath these wordesIrenaeus lib. 5. not far from the beginning.: Wherfore the Priests,
who are the disciples of the Apostles, theie
say that such, as are translated, are translated
thither (For Paradise is prepared for the iust,
and spiritual men, whereinto when Paul was
carried, he heard words that cannot be vttered,
as touching vs at this present) where they
which are translated do abide euen vntil the



consummation beholding incorruption. And
the other,The recantation of Pope Ioh. the 20. to wit, Pope Iohn the 20. of
that name, was enforced by K. Philip of
France, surnamed the Faire, at the sute of
the diuines of Paris, to recant his error in
à solemne and publique audience, as witnesseth
GersonIohan. Gerson serm. de Paschate.. Other fathers, as Chrysostome
and Augustine, according to the
diuersitie of times, haue conceaued diuerslie
of this matter. For touching the
soules of good men (for I saie nothing of
the soules of the wicked, because generalie
al men, the Dormitans, and Atheistes
onelie excepted, do holde that theie are
in hel) in respect of the time frō the creation
vntil the death of Christ, theie think
theie were in one place, namelie in the
lower partesChrys. hom. 4. ad Marcum. Aug. quaest, vet. & noui Testamenti quaest. 121: and in respect of the time
from his death vntil his second comming
in glorie, theie iudge theie are in another,
euen in heauenAugust in Ioan. Tract. 40.. One opinion whereof
is of al good men to be abhorred; the other
no Christian but wil defend. For
touching the former, did theie al, I meane
the Patriarches, and Prophets, our forefathers,
eate the same spiritual meate, and
drinke the same spiritual drinke, which
we doe? were theie saued by the same
hope; iustified by the same Christ; redeemed
with the same blood; sanctified by



the same spirite, yt we are; yea, were theie
as doubtlesse theie were, as good, as zelous,
as holie, as righteous in al respects as
we, & yet shal we thinke, that God wold
be lesse fauourable to them than to vs; &
receaue vs forthwith into his euerlasting
kingdome, and let them remane either
thousandes, or manie yeeres, or anie time
at al, either in dead bodies miserablie, as
the Pharisees thought; or in a dead sleepe
vnsensiblie, as the Dormitās taught, or in
Lymbo vncomfortablie, or piteouslie in
P
                  •••
               torie, as ye Papists would persuade,
or i
                  •
                an out-corner not happily, as some,
or in ye lower partes wretchedlie, as other
fathers gaue out? No, rather think we, that
as now the faithful doe: so then ye godlie
did presentlie, and directlie, and without
anie stopping, & staieng ascend vnto
their masters ioie. And their other opiniō
is to be beleeued & defended,Iudgement of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   writers as yt which
al the godlie and best learned of this age
haue embraced, as consonant & agreeing
to the holie Scripture: of which I wil aleage
the testimonies of one or two. For
saith M. BullingerD. Henrie Bullinger in his 32. Sermon vpon the Apoc. p. 90.: Where be the soules of
thē that are slain for the word of God shewed
vnto vs? vnder the altar. The altar is afterward
in the 8. chap. set in heauen, before the
throne of God. Therfore the soules of al saints



are in heauē before the throne of God, which
was also signified before in the type of the 24.
elders. The Lord hath said also, where I am,
there shal my seruant be likewise. But the
Lord is in heauen: therefore the soules of the
faithful, whose bodies haue bine slaine, or buried
without slaughter, be no where els but in
heauen. And afterwarde within three or
foure sentences he saith: For like as the bosome
of Abraham is called the receptacle, &
hauen of saluation, into the which the soules
of them be receaued which had the faith of
Abrahā: so do we vnderstād the altar to be à
place of blessednes in heauē, wherin they rest,
which with true faith haue acknowledged
Christ the altar, propitiation, sanctification, &
satisfaction &c. Vnder this altar was gathered
the faithful martyr Abel: vnder this altar
are gathered as manie as haue died since
that time for religions sake: and vnder this
altar shal al be gathered hereafter, as manie
as enter into glorie with Christ throgh sundry
tribulations in bearing of the crosse. Hitherto
Bullinger. And D. ChytraeusD. Chytraeus in 6. cap. Apoc.: This is the
rest of the holie soules, which are dissolued frō
the bād of their bodies. It is not an idle rest, or
à certain dead sleep, as manie do fain the souls
of the dead together with their bodies to sleep
vntil the last iudgmēt: but it is à tranquillitie
à ioie, and à peace of that conscience which



hath finished the labours of the warfar which
it susteined in this world with the Diuel, the
flesh, and the world, & now enioieth the companie
of the celestial Church, and resteth, yea
& reioiceth sweetlie in the Lord praising his
goodnes with hie commendations. That treatise
also touching the immortalitie of the
soule written by the reuerend father M.
Iohn Caluine, is altogether to the confirmation
of this matter.
            These late writers agree with the ancient
Doctors;The testimonies of the Scripture and both with the holie
Scriptures. For the soules of the righteous
are in the handes of God, and in peace, saith
the wise manWisd. 3, 1.
               ▪ theie rest from their labors,
saith à voice from heauenReuel. 14, 13.. Which
hand of God, and rest in other places also
is called Abrahams bosome
               Luke 16., & Paradise
               Luke 23..
Therefore the foules of the righteous vntil
the daie of the last and general iudgement,
are in Abrahams bosome, euen in
Paradise, where theie haue from the beginning;
and shal vnto the end of the
world enioie, though not perfect, yet vnspeakable
happines. There euerie of the
saints hath his seueral robe, but shal not be
clothed with double robes vntil we put thē on
too for cōpanie, saith Ber.Bern. in festiuit. omniū sanc. serm. 3.. The 1. robe is the
felicitie and rest of the soules: but the 2. shalbe
the immortalitie, and glorie of the bodies.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   