
      
         
            
            
            A COMMENTARY VPON THE WHOLE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            PREACHED FIRST AND DELIVERED IN SVNDRIE LECTVRES; SINCE collected, and diligently peruſed, and now publiſhed.
            For the benefit generally of all ſuch as deſire to grow in faith and Repentance, and eſpecially of them, who would more cleerely vnderſtand and make vſe of the worthie examples of the Saints, recorded in diuine hiſtory.
            PENNED BY RICHARD ROGERS PREACHER of Gods word at Wetherſfield in Eſſex.
            
            
               HEBR. 12. 1.
               
                  Wherefore ſeeing we are compaſſed with ſo great a cloud of witneſſes, let vs cast off euery thing that preſſeth downe, &c.
               
                  Whatſoeuer is written, was written for our inſtruction, that wee through conſolation of the Scriptures might haue hope.
               
            
            
               BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            
               LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for Thomas Man, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Pater-noſter Row, at the ſigne of the Talbot. 1615.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR EDVVARD COKE KNIGHT, LORD chiefe Iuſtice of England, and one of his Maieſties moſt Honorable priuie Counſel: R. R. wiſheth all bleſsing internall, externall, and eternall, from God our Father through Chriſt Ieſus.
            
            
               RIght Honourable, as it hath alway befallen the beſt both Diuine and Humane lawes to be peruerted by common profanenes and lewd cuſtome: ſo may it be verified in all other things of like precious nature, that they could neuer eſcape the taint of humane errour and abuſe. Witneſſe the inſtitution of the holy feaſt of Shiloh mentioned in this booke: which though firſt was chiefly vſed as a memoriall of Gods benefits, yet in proceſſe of time grew to extreme abuſe, and gaue occaſion to the vnlawful ſtealing of the virgins in their dances. Nay, witneſſe euen this approueable cuſtome of Dedicating bookes: which though it hath been long taken vp and continued for good and reſpectiue reaſons: yet hath it been of old the practiſe of heretikes, and ſtill is of vnworthy writers to conueigh the poiſon of their books into the inferiour ſort, by ſtiling and gracing them with the names of remarkable perſonages.
            Religion and Chriſtianitie, the miniſterie of the Word, and the Profeſſion thereof, are things in name and nature, of the higheſt value: howbeit, as the faireſt apple to the worme, ſo are theſe expoſed to the treble corruption of error, infidelitie, and hypocriſie. Semblably, the writings of Diuine argument (whether

vpon Scripture, as this, or Treatiſes conſonant thereto) are of ſingular vſe in the Church: yet neuer free from the malignitie of ſome men. Eſpecially ſuch as who either out of their curioſitie can endure nothing which clawes not their leprous humor: or through their careleſnes, profeſſe either to meddle with no mans writings at all, or without putting difference to embrace good and bad with equall affection.
            For the two former of theſe three, (I meane the vngratiouſly nice, and the graceleſly ſenſuall:) this I muſt ſay, that ſince the Scriptures themſelues (the moſt ſolemne of all other both for matter and ſtile) cannot relliſh with them: I deſpaire that my writings ſhould procure their appetite. Yea peraduenture this worke of mine will diſpleaſe their daintie eyes and fingers, by the very bignes, and ſo preiudice their further handling. Theſe therfore (if their diſeaſe be incorrigible) I profeſſe not myſelfe a cooke, for to dreſſe their diet; but rather leaue them to feede vpon the chalke and morter of their vnſauourie Pamphlets, while others nouriſh their minds with more wholeſome meate: and ſend them to the trough and akornes, ſince they refuſe Angels food. For the latter ſort, (ſince there is more hope to correct their error, then the others vice) I pray to God, that with their generall willingnes to reade, he would giue them an vnderſtanding heart, to diſcerne aright of things that differ: that the holy eye of their iudgement may be, like a Muſicall eare in the diſtinguiſhing of ſounds, and like the fining pot of the Goldſmith, in ſeuering the gold from droſſe, or his touchſtone in diſcouering of mettals. Alſo my hope is, that ſuch as buy new bookes of all ſorts, may happily light vpon this, among others: which if they ſhall doe, I wiſh them no worſe, then that the gaine they reape, and the taſte they get from this, may diſgrace and diſtaſte with them, all fruitleſſe and offenſiue authors.
            Pardon me (right Honourable) if I haue been ouer bold, in aduenturing to publiſh theſe poore labours, and thruſt them vnder your patronage. I haue not ſiniſterly aimed at the Poets marke, who wiſheth all writers, to ſet a gloſſe vpon their worke 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Pind. by a glorious entrance: But partly to ſhroud myſelfe in God vnder your authoritie, againſt the tempeſt and violence of all

vniuſt cenſurers (ſuch as I named before:) and partly (yet chiefly) to commend the diligent peruſall of this booke to all religious or indifferent Readers, by your Honours example: perſwading myſelfe, that you will not more willingly become patrone to the writer, then a patterne of the things contained in the writing itſelfe. And, as by Gods ordinance, the oyle of Conſecration was firſt powred vpon the head of Aaron, yet Pſal. 133. 2. ſtaied not there, but ranne downe thence vpon his beard, and to the nethermoſt skirts of his clothing: ſo, I iudged this order no whit prepoſterous, if firſt I preſumed to powre this oyle (fetcht out of the Lords Tabernacle) vpon your Honours head: that ſo from you (as the ſweet ſhowres trickling downe from the hill to the valley) the fragrancie and fruite hereof might deſcend lower vnto meaner perſons.
            Among ſundrie other bookes of holy writ, which, in the courſe of my Miniſterie, theſe fourtie yeeres paſt, God hath aſſiſted me to explane and go through with my Audience; I haue (for ſome cauſes) choſen this, to leaue as a poore pledge and memoriall to Gods Church of my fidelitie, paines, and loue. And, though I reſpected alſo the good and requeſt of my owne Congregation herein, into whoſe hearts I deſire doubly to faſten the naile of wholeſome inſtruction (which ſoone ſlippeth out): yet ſeeing my time is ſhort, and my voyce cannot reach beyond her vſuall limits, I haue endeuoured with my pen to draw a long and a weariſome line, that the other defect might be ſupplied: looking vp to him for a requitall, who hath promiſed not to conceale the labour of our loue. Heb. 6. 10.
            
            I haue (Right Honourable) purpoſely altered the courſe of my writing, which formerly I haue vſed in my Treatiſe. As Eliſha the Prophet put his hands vpon the King of Iſrael his 2 King 13 16. hand, when hee bad him ſhoote: ſo, when wee vndertake the handling of Scripture, the holy Ghoſt allowes vs not to ſay all wee can inuent, but requires vs to put our hands in his hands, and to applie our ſelues more ſtrictly vnto his drift, then in Tractates of our owne, wherein generally our ſcope and libertie is more large. Yet as the text hath led me, I haue held myſelfe to theſe two markes: The one more generall to build

vp the Chriſtian Reader in faith and good life: To the which end as I haue alreadie written a large Diſcourſe, (if it haue yet come to your Honours hands) containing grounds and directions for the more eaſie practiſing and growing in them both, ſo now in this I haue annexed liuely examples out of the Scriptures to illuſtrate thoſe precepts: the naturall repugnancie whereof to fleſh and blood might otherwiſe breake out into gainſaying the Art itſelfe and the practiſe thereof. The other, particular: to ſhew to the diligent Reader, what vſe the hiſtoricall examples of the old Teſtament (eſpecially) doe afford vs: a matter in this our contemplatiue but cold age, little reſpected, and leſſe vnderſtood.
            The which (ſuch as it is) I haue boldly preſented vnto your Lordſhip vpon a three-fold conſideration. The firſt this: God who hath made you a principall member in this great bodie of our land, both in gifts perſonall and publique, hath iuſtly proportioned a principall place of employment for you aboue others. Your complements of Nature, Art, Experience, he hath (I doubt not) accompliſhed with ſauing grace. Your pietie towards God, teſtified by your reuerend hearing his word, and reflecting itſelfe in loue vpon his Miniſterie: your ſage and well menaged gouernment of ciuill affaires: your learning bewraied by your iudicious and aſſiduous reading of Schollers bookes, and fauouring their authors: all theſe argue ſtrongly, that though Poperie, ignorance, iniuſtice and euill manners could well forgo you, yet the Church, the Commonwealth and literature could ill want you. And the ſame God who hath thus enriched you, hath crowned his gifts in you, ſo that while you liue, your Name is bleſſed, and at the end of this life, you ſhall not dye vndeſired▪ Why hath the Almightie thus graced you? Doubtleſſe not for yourſelfe onely, but to this end, that as the Sunbeames drawing vp the ſweet vapours from the earth, ſuffer them to fall vpon their thirſtie mother againe, with a doubly fruitfull influence: ſo Gods talents meaſured out largely vnto you, might entirely returne their honour vnto the giuer with ouerplus. The veſſell that is full, and runneth ouer, hath for itſelfe, and bedeweth the earth alſo

which is neere it. And ſeeing the greateſt goodneſſe of the beſt creature cannot reach ſo high as God himſelfe: therefore hee expects that you drop it vpon this lower region of Saints who Pſalme 16. 2. excell in vertue; yea vpon his Church and Goſpell, (whereto he hath by letter of Attorney made ouer all ſuch debts) to the promoting and aduancing whereof, the aduantage of your Honour and authoritie (beſides your other gifts) is chiefly to be employed. Giue me leaue then (I beſeech) to improue that common intereſt, which our Mother the Church claimeth in you, for the vndertaking of this my writing. You are chiefe among the ſonnes of wiſedome, which is iustified of all her children. 
               Matth. 11. 19.
            
            Secondly, your Lordſhip knoweth well, that the Church and Common-wealth are friendly neighbours, each bordering vpon other, both compaſt with one wall, and both yeelding Eadem ſunt Eccleſiae & Ciuitis moenia. mutuall aids & defences each to other. As outward peace could hardly be ſetled, except humane lawes enioyed the brotherly aſſiſtance of the ſpirituall ſword: (which is a law preſent when no other is, euen to the conſcience) So the miniſtery of the word ſhould not ſo much preuaile as it doth, (little though it do in compariſon) except the pleaſant dewes of Hermon did So Moller and others motralize that in Pſalm. 133. 3. refreſh the barren mountaines of Zion, I meane, except the ciuill ſword of iuſtice did backe and authorize the ſame againſt them, who profanely cōtemne the word, as the ſmartles ſtroke of a leaden edge. The due obſeruation whereof (right Honorable) hath cauſed me to offer you this gift, that ſo I (one of the meaneſt) might thankfully acknowledge in the behalfe of the 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Actes 24. 2. whole Church, that vnder his Maieſty ſhe hath obtained much quietneſſe through you, and that many things are worthily done to this nation by your prouidence, (as ſometime that euill man but not euill Orator ſaid to a perſon and in a caſe farre vnlike:) which I haue therefore vttered in your eare, not only for that your Honour is well able to digeſt your owne felicity 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Pind. and merit, but that I might exhort you to excell yourſelfe in time to come, and to bring forth moſt fruite in your age: remembring that it is as hard a thing to ſtand to the reparations of ſome houſe, as to build it out of the ground: and it hath euer

biniuſtly queſtionable whether the purchaſe, or preſeruing of vertue be the more difficult. Sure it is that the Prologue and Scene of your life hitherto worthily carried, promiſe to the beholders a cloſe deſeruing rare applauſe.
            Laſtly, your place and name ſeemed to claime this Dedication. The booke I write vpon conteines the moſt famous hiſtory of the renowned Iudges of ancient Iſrael. And God hath ſet your Honour in the chiefe ſeat of iuſtice, euen made you (vnder his Maieſtie our higheſt Iudge) the principall Iudge in our Engliſh Iſrael. Beſides, the argument of the booke (if it pleaſe your Honour to take a view of it) doth as peculierly concerne you, the preſidents of theſe Worthies well deſeruing your imitation. As that Romane Captaine beholding the images of his victorious anceſtors, found himſelfe enflamed with earneſt zeale of equalling or ſurpaſſing them: ſo, I doubt not but the laying open of theſe Iewiſh Captaines in their liuely colours, will rauiſh your religious ſpirit, with the loue and emulation of their graces. And here (ere I finiſh) ſuffer me to recommend vnto your Honour, two of the moſt heroicall vertues in theſe Gouernours. The one, their inuincible courage, (the Epitome of a Chriſtian Magiſtrates worthines) though Ioſh. 1. 2. they liued in the moſt forlorne times, and diſſolute, wherein the Idolatries and iniquities of Iſrael, ſeemed to ſtriue with her captiuities and calamities, and whether man ſinning or God reuenging ſhould get the vpper hand. A manifeſt token of the immediate warrantiſe of theſe Iudges from heauen; enabling and encouraging them with ſo incredible fortitude and ſucceſſe. The other (laſt named, but in nature firſt) is their admirable faith: which as the Author to the Hebrwes could not Heb 11. throughout. ſilence in that thicke clowd of witneſſes, ſo thereby he importeth, that is generally the life whereby all Chriſtians liue; and Heb. 10. 37. eſpecially the fortreſſe, yea armour of proofe for the Magiſtrate. Not onely the ſword of the Lord in the hands of Gedeon, Barak, Jphtah, and Samſon (mentioned in this booke) to fight with againſt their forreine enemies: but alſo a ſingular both offenſiue and defenſiue weapon, for your Honour firſt, and then for your inferiors in place of gouernment, againſt the

inteſtine aduerſaries (no leſſe hurtfull) of God, his Goſpell, and our common peace. For this ſword ruſteth not, nor looſeth her edge with time. In the deſire of this happy bleſſing vpon theſe my poore trauels, I moſt humbly recommend myſelfe and ſeruice to your Lordſhip, and your Honours perſon and weightie affaires to the protection and direction of the Almightie.
            
               From my poore houſe at Wetherſfield in Eſſex.
                  Ianuary 20. 1615. reſting
               Your Honours moſt humbly deuoted in the Lord,
RICHARD ROGERS Miniſter of the Goſpell.
            
            
         
         
            
            LECTVRES OR SERMONS VPON THE WHOLE BOOKE of IVDGES: and firſt, the entrance into them.
            
               I Confeſſe, it is no ſmall matter for a man to take vpon him to ſet foorth Lectures or Sermons of any part of the word of God, eſpecially of an whole booke thereof: and the rather for that it is a matter of much greater difficultie and danger ſo to doe, then to preach them (ſeeing for mine owne part, I would eaſilier be brought to preach three Sermons, then to ſet foorth or penne one:) and beſides, we ſee that learned men (I ſpeake of many) who might for their excellent gifts profit many, and doe the Church much good, are haraly drawne thereto. I leaue their reaſons to themſelues: perhaps they thinke it a needleſſe worke to ſet foorth more bookes. For mine owne part, I knowing that many would reade little, if there were not new bookes ſet foorth, I thinke it to good purpoſe to labour in that kinde: eſpecially when the things ſet foorth are for the quickening vp of the preſent drowſie age. And ſo I teſtifie my iudgement by my writings, that I am of another minde: not for that I would diſſent from learned men, or ſeeke glorie and praiſe by this my practiſe, when (to ſpeake as the truth is) I confeſſe freely, that Reaſons of this my attempt. as I come many degrees behinde them in gifts for that purpoſe: ſo I would not take vpon me this exerciſe of writing, vnleſſe I were led to it by waightie reaſons: but in the ſimplicitie of my heart I ſpeake it, that I ſet myſelfe to this worke, as I can haue time and leiſure from my publike imployment in my Miniſterie, and other priuate duties, euen to keepe myſelfe from danger in this euill world, as idleneſſe, too much tampering in the world, and ſuch like needleſſe and hurtfull beſineſſe, as well as for the deſire I haue to benefit any other hereby: and beſides, I thinke it better to benefit the Church while wee liue, being but a ſhort time, (other may riſe vp after to perfit ſuch beginnings) then to burie our gifts vtterly, and ſo to depriue it altogether of the ſame by death.
            Alſo I ſee that euery age of men hath ſundrie troubles annexed to it (the old as well as the young) and occaſions are offered of ſinning and offending God many waies by one occaſion or other, which are not thought of before they come. In ſo much as when the danger of youth and of the former yeeres of our life is paſſed with inwara peace, and without any groſſe and iuſt offence to others (which yet to doe is few mens caſes, and rarely obtained, and not without much ſtriuing and watching to enter in at the ſtraight gate:) yet the diuell ſo much the more enuieth our credit in the Church, and the comfort we haue from God, in ſuch an eſtate, eſpecially the Miniſters: and therefore hee doth the more bend his force againſt ſuch, that hee may in their latter end diſgrace them by winding them into ſome reprochfull and foule offences: that ſo he may (as much as in him lieth) make their former vertues and part of life, to be ridiculous and of no account.
            And therefore, as I am not aſhamed to confeſſe, that I haue receiued wonderfull

cauſe of thankſgiuing to God, for his ſo great bountie and fauour towards me (the moſt vnworthie) in my younger yeeres, to keepe me from the infection of the time, and ſins of the age wherein I haue liued, (yet God be mercifull to my many ſlips and infirmities) ſo I am not (I ſay) aſhamed to confeſſe, that I feare in this my declining age, haſting apace to the graue (as with griefe of heart I haue ſeene in many) that I may poſsibly, yea and that full eaſily, be drawne to an vnprofitable, earthly, idle, and dead courſe of life, and thereby, to greater offending of God, and blemiſhing of my profeſſion and Miniſterie, vnleſſe I ſhould labour to preuent it by ſome ſet labour and ſtudy, and ſo to hold faſt that which I haue receiued of the Lord: and that is, by the occupying and vſing the gifts which he hath giuen me, as in this kinde of ſtudie, namely of writing, I may: and alſo if I ſhould not endeuour to grow forward in grace, experience, 2. Pet. 3. 17. and in the knowledge of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, (from the which a man may be eaſily hindred by the error of the wicked) rather then to looke what I haue done heretofore, I might eaſily flatter myſelfe thereby, and ſo (at leaſt) ſtand at a ſtay: or (which is worſe) goe backe, and ſo loſe my part of happineſſe with them that continue to the end. For I make chiefe account of that, hauing it not in fruition as yet, but by hope onely: and I know it may eaſily and many waits be hindred and ſtaied, as Satan can handle the matter, and as I ſee many goe to worke. And for this cauſe I deſire to be occupied vntill the Lord come, and in this manner, hauing more then one foote in the graue. And to the end I may tye myſelfe to liue the freer from dangerous falles and offences, while I am here a ſtranger and abſent from home, and therefore I ſay, I haue ſet myſelfe to this kinde of worke, as being not able through debilitie of body, and lamenes, to trauaile abroad, and helpe other neighbours, more then at home, by preaching, as I haue done ſince I firſt began (where my labour was deſired:) and by conferring much, as occaſion was offered, as I vſed in health to doe. And if any laugh at this which I haue ſaid of my fearing myſelfe, as thinking it meere folly, I cannot doe with it, neither am moued for their ſo cenſuring me: but I tell them this, that while they feare not their frailtie alſo but count it fooliſhnes, they haſt apace to vtter miſerie.
            Now for taking this booke in hand, to ſet out my Sermons vpon it, which I haue before preached, though I haue gone ouer, in the courſe of my Miniſterie, many other beſides this: I take this booke in hand, not as making compariſon betwixt it and other bookes of Scripture: but partly ſeeing no Lectures or Sermons are ſet out vpon it, that I know, to giue light and helpe to ſuch as need it: and partly at the earneſt deſire of thoſe that heard my Sermons on it: and if I may know and perceiue my labours in this to be thought worth the ſetting foorth, I would be willing, as much as in me lieth, to doe the like in ſome other booke. In this worke, beſide the people, who are not brought vp in learning, who may ſee that their whole life may be directed hereby and may much profit by it, ſo I intended alſo in it to benefit Students and Preachers, who are not yet experienced: nor beſt furniſhed with matter for the edifying of the hearers: ſo that beſide the fruite they may reape hereby in common with the people; ſo they may learne how to make vſe of the hiſtoricall part of the Bible, and learne to draw doctrine and inſtruction out of the examples thereof, fit for the people (and that out of the bad as well as the good) euen as well as out of other Scripture: which all haue not learned to doe, neither haue attained vnto: and therefore doe oft times offer violence to the Scriptures, by making allegories of them, and ſo wreſting them to another ſenſe then the holy Ghoſt hath made of them; without which manner of handling them, they can draw none or little matter out of the moſt examples in the

ſtories of them: and ſo beſide that their doctrine is not ſoundly gathered, ſo they giue too fearefull ſuſpition to the ignorant, that ſuch parts of the Scripture are barraine and drie, while they doe by ſuch ſhifts, and yet indirect, ſo hardly draw matter and doctrine out of them, when yet it is certaine and cleere, that they are full of ſound inſtruction.
            But to come to my purpoſe, I will now ſet downe ſome generall things before I enter into the text, which may giue ſome light to the better vnderſtanding of the whole book: ſuch as I gather partly, by obſeruing & laying together that which I read in it, (comparing one thing with another:) and partly out of that learned and reuerend Father Maſter Peter Martyr, whoſe workes neither the moſt priuate men can vnderſtand, nor many Miniſters, though they may vnderſtand them, can come by, neither if they can, ſhall they finde there, that which ſhall be much for their ſimpler hearers benefit.
            And firſt let the reader marke, how this booke agreeth with all the former, from Geneſis to the end of Ioſhua, and what is the ſumme of them and this. Concerning the booke of Geneſis, after mention is made (in the beginning of it) of the creation of the world, and the generations to the flood: it doth afterward ſhew, how God choſe his people out of Abraham and his poſteritie, and how they were ſent into Egypt to auoid the famine. In Exodus theſe things are the principall: how the people of God multiplied and increaſed in the land of Egypt, till there roſe a King who cruelly oppreſſed and vexed them ſore: and how they were deliuered out of the bondage, which they were in there, by Moſes: and how they had lawes giuen them, to gouerne them And this laſt point is the ſumme of Leuiticus alſo. The booke of Numbers declareth their diuers resting places in the deſert, and their goings forward toward the land of Canaan. In Deuteronomy, Moſes being to depart out of this world, and to leaue the people, doth moſt faithfully repeate the law to the generation which came after the former, and which then liued, I meane, to the poſteritie of Abraham. Then came Ioſhua and led the people into the promiſed land, and diuided the land of the Amorites and Canaanites, which partly was ſubdued and gotten out of their hands, and partly remained to be conquered: he (I ſay) diuided it amongst the twelue tribes, according to the commandement of God, after he had brought them ouer Iordan, ſlaine many of the Kings of Canaan, and poſſeſſed their cities and grounds in that countrey. This is the ſumme and contents of the booke of Ioſhua. After his death, (to come to our purpoſe) the Lord gouerned his people the Hebrewes, being placed in that land, by Iudges: whom to that end he indued with excellent gifts, and by them deliuered and kept the people out of the hands of their enemies, who as yet did all the daies of the Iudges remaine in great numbers to vex them.
            But to vnderſtand better the meaning of the word [Iudges] a materiall point in this booke to be vnderſtood, though to iudge ſignifie to know the caſes of ſuch as contend, and be at variance, and to giue ſentence of iudgement betwixt men: yet theſe Iudges mentioned in this booke, had not that office, neither were called Iudges in that reſpect. But (as the word ſignifieth alſo, to reuenge and to redeeme out of bondage) thus did thoſe Iudges deliuer and redeeme the people, as in this booke is at large declared. (I ſpeak
                  •
                not of Samuel, who is ſaid after, to iudge them alſo, by deciding 1. Sam. 7. 6. and 15. controuerſies and ciuill cauſes) But theſe Iudges had that office aſsigned them of God, to deliuer the people (as I haue ſaid) out of their enemies hands, and ſo to iudge them: and therefore were called by that name of Iudges, and this booke that intreateth of them and their acts throughout, is called, The booke of Iudges.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
And briefly to lay out the ſtate and condition that theſe people, the Hebrewes, then liued in: whereby the office of the Iudges may the better be vnderſtood: they hauing not yet conquered the land, were occupied (as at their firſt entrance into it, and after Ioſhuas death a while) in ſubduing it, and their enemies: but afterward they ſuffered them to remaine, and become tributaries to them, and were thereby (as God ſaw it meete, and as need required) in great perill and miſerie by them, and then, becauſe they were his people, leſt they ſhould haue been vtterly deſtroyed, theſe Iudges were raiſed vp by him, without the election of men, to reſcue and deliuer them. But afterward when they were at reſt, and peace, God gouerned them not by thoſe Iudges: (therefore Iphtah, when he was deſired, would not raigne ouer them) neither had they authoritie ouer them: but he vſed the help of ſomeother excellent perſons, fit by their vertues and gifts for that purpoſe, and they ruled the people: but the Iudges (as I ſaid) were ſtirred vp by the Lord, in great dangers, brought vpon them by their enemies, to be helpers and deliuerers vnto them, and to keepe them in peace afterward, while they lined. So that theſe Iudges were not choſen by ſucceſsion, as Kings: neither by the voyces of the people. but were raiſed vp by God (as wee haue heard) indifferently, as well out of one tribe as another: and how meane and vnfit ſoeuer they were before, for that purpoſe: God did furniſh them by and by after he had ſtirred them vp, with moſt excellent gifts for that end, to the which he appointed them. And it went farre better with the people while they were vnder them, then it did afterward, when they would needs haue a King to raigne ouer them. For they did alwaies deliuer the people of Iſrael out of the calamitie with which they were oppreſſed: whereas their Kings did ſometimes waſte them, and bring them into captiuitie, and were (the moſt part of them) Idolaters.
            And although vnder the Iudges, the people were ſomtimes oppreſſed grieuouſly by ſtrangers, and eſpecially vnder Samſon by the Philiſtims (for why? we muſt know, their horrible ſinnes deſerued it, and prouoked God to deale with them in that manner:) yet they were neuer led into captiuitie while they liued with them. Againe, there were few of the Kings good men, in Iſrael, not one: the Iudges (for the moſt part) were all ſuch. A good teſtimonie whereof, we haue in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes: where we thus reade of the commendation of them: The time would be too ſhort for me to ſpeake of Gedeon, Barak, Iphtah, and Samſon: theſe the holy Ghoſt commendeth. And though ſome of them (as men) did ſometime fall, yet we are to thinke they returned and roſe vp againe: ſeeing the Scripture (as I remember) doth neuer condemne them. So that in reſpect of them, and by their helpe, (if the people could haue ſeene it and made benefit of it) we may ſay, they liued in a golden age.
            Now whereas it is not ſo apparantly to be ſeene, that this booke doth ſet foorth Chriſt vnto vs, in all the commendations of theſe Iudges: (who yet is the end of all bookes of Scripture) to ſuch as demaund about it, I anſwere: that Chriſt is not cleerely ſet foorth in any of thoſe bookes of the old Teſtament firſt written: but darkly, and by types and figures, as God ſaw it meete for thoſe ages: and ſo wee are to thinke of this booke, where the deliuerances from ſo great enemies, as are mentioned herein, are types of that great deliuerance and redemption of men wrought by Chriſt, out of the iawes of the diuell. And let the commending of ſundrie of thoſe Iudges by the holy Ghoſt ſatisfie vs, that they could not haue been good men, nor haue liued by faith, as they were ſaid to haue done, if they had not beleeued in Chriſt, and been ſanctified thereby. Beſides, what authoritie ſhall we giue to the old Teſtament, if they who

are commended in it, to haue been men of God, as diuers Kings and Prophets, with many other, did not liue and walke by faith, (ſeeing it is not expreſſely ſet downe) without which they could not pleaſe God?
            Now the ſumme of this booke is thus much: firſt, a declaration generally, of the eſtate of the religion and manner of worſhipping God, which theſe Iſraelites vſed in their Common wealth from the death of Ioſhua to Eli the Prieſt, (for the ſtorie of Ruth containes things done in the daies of the Iudges, Ruth 1. 1.) and more particularly this booke layeth out their ſinnes, and Gods calling them out of them by ſundrie warnings and iudgements, vnto repentance, with many fearefull examples of their reuolting and turning backe againe: whereby may bee ſeene how corrupt they were both in religion and manners: and this booke is a liuely glaſſe (if we well conſider it) of this our age.
            The parts of the booke are three. The firſt ſetteth downe the ſlouthfulneſſe of the Tribes in executing the commandements of God againſt their enemies, and the puniſhment threatned for it, Chap. 1. and 2. and their ſlouthfulneſſe is illuſtrated by the contrarie courſe of Iudah and Simeon (who were forward to goe against them) as in Chapter 1. to verſe 21. is to be ſeene. The ſecond part is from the 2. chapter to the 17. which treateth of the Iudges, and their great actes, according to occaſions offered, who in their due time were raiſed vp. The third part is from chapter 17. to the end: and ſetteth foorth ſome odious and monſtrous acts committed in thoſe confuſed times, when there was no ordinarie Gouernour: and therewithall, the puniſhments which followed.
            The author of this booke is vnknowne, but yet the booke is canonicall, and authorized alſo by the new Testament. The time of the actes of it, from the death of Ioſhua to Eli the high Priest, is gathered to be about 300, yeeres. The end of this booke (as ſhall better appeare in the particular handling of it) is to inſtruct and perſwade vs, in this latter age of the world, to carry our ſelues vprightly, and in a ſtreight and well ordred courſe, both in proſperitie and aduerſitie: I meane, to hold the feare of God in both, and to keep hope and patience in and through out this our pilgrimage, with prayer and repentance: which if we do, God will be no leſſe with vs, then he was with the good people mentioned herein.
            The order which I purpoſe to obſerue in the Lectures vpon this booke, is firſt to giue the ſhort ſumme of the Chapters: then to deuide euery Chapter into parts, for the better diſtinguiſhing the points thereof, that they may be better vnderſtood, and more clearely ſeene into: thirdly, I giue the ſenſe of the verſes more fully, and lay forth the doctrine with the reaſons, and vſe thereof, though for the moſt part, they be not alwaies expreſſely ſet downe, which manner of handling the diuerſe hiſtories of this booke (as alſo I thinke the ſame of our preaching out of all other Scriptures) namely, that after the meaning and ſenſe, apt and fit inſtruction ſhould bee drawne out, with the application to the preſent ſtate, need, and vſe of the hearers, plainely and pitbily as may be for their beſt edifying I hold meeteſt to be vſed.
            And I weuld to God, that there were conſent giuen therto of al Preachers, and that this courſe were aimed at: I wiſh that euery one did not follow his owne priuate courſe who hath neuer learned any good way or order of preaching. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that ſome fill their Sermons with the froth of their owne braines, or the bare authorities of men, and leaſt proofe is brought out of the Scriptures: Alſo ſome preach darkely to the little benefiting of the hearers, not to mention all which were endleſſe.

And although for many other things I leaue the conſideration therof to my reuerend and learned brethren, yet in this I hope without oſtentation, and arrogating ought to myſelfe, I may be allowed to ſpeake: in regard of the long time which I haue ſpent in ſtudying, learning, and practiſing (as I haue been able) the holie exerciſe of preaching. And now to end theſe my Lectures, this I ſay: that beſide the varietie of much good therein contained, there are ſome points to good purpoſe, occaſioned touching faith, and repentance: and ſundrie directions giuen how to ſeeke the Lord when we haue ſlipped, and how to beare trouble aright.
            Thus much I thought good to ſay before I enter into the ſeuerall Sermons, euen to this end, that ſome good light may be giuen, as to him that marketh duly it may appeare. Now I will proceed to the text itſelfe.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               THE FIRST SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  VERS. 1. And it came to paſſe after that Ioſhua was dead, that the children of Iſrael asked the Lord, ſaying: who ſhall goe vp for vs againſt the Canaanites, to fight firſt againſt them?
                  
                  VERS. 2. And the Lord ſaid, Iudah ſhall goe vp: behold I haue giuen the land into his hands.
                  
               
               
                  IN this Chapter two things are chiefly contained, The ſumme and parts of this Chapter. (to ſet downe the ſumme of the Chapter and parts of it together:) The firſt is the commendation of the tribe of Iudah, to the 21. verſe: (the cauſe we ſhall heare afterward.) The ſecond is the ſetting downe of the ſinne of the tribes that are mentioned after, in that they ſlothfully ſuffered the Canaanites to liue by them, and did not expell them, and that is to the end of the Chapter. Iudah is commended in a double manner: firſt for the actes they did now at this time after Ioſuahs death, and they are to the eight verſe: and then for that which that tribe had done before his death in the reſt of the verſes to the 21.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  To come to the meaning of the firſt 7. verſes, ſeeing they lie together, after the death of Ioſhua, who had bin their guide and had gone before them, 
                        The meaning of the 7 firſt verſes
                      the children of Iſrael ſaw that they muſt make warre with the forraine nations: for vnto that day the whole land though it was promiſed and deuided amongſt them, was not yet wonne by them, nor conquered, but in the lot and inheritance of euery tribe there were the Canaanites their enemies ſtill dwelling and remaining. And ſeeing they knew they muſt be driuen out by force and ſtrong hand, as God had commanded; therefore they doubted not, whether they ſhould goe out againſt them to warre or no: but which tribe ſhould firſt begin, and goe before, and gouerne the reſt. And the thing was of ſuch waight, that they went to the Lord about it, and asked of him by the high Prieſt before the propitiatory and Mercy ſeat, as the manner then was in doubtfull caſes, which of their tribes ſhould begin the battaile. Exod. 28. 30. And ſo they had an anſwere from him to their ſatisfaction, who ſhould goe vp before them, and in that their attempt, God proſpered them, for he had

promiſed ſo to do. And Iudah ſought helpe of Simeon his brother and neighbour tribe, who conſented readily ſo to doe: and they proſpered in that their attempt, and had victory ouer the Canaanites, as is ſet downe; together with the deſtruction of Adonibezek their King. Thus much for the meaning of theſe 7. verſes in ſome generall manner.
                  Now we haue the meaning of theſe verſes, it remaineth that we drawe from thence ſuch inſtructions as are afoarded vs out of them, beginning with theſe two former here ſet downe: and firſt out of the firſt verſe. In that this people was now conſtrained to looke about them, and (now Ioſhua was dead) to doe that themſelues for their peace and quiet, which hee Doct. 1. in verſe. 1. was wont to doe for them: wee are taught, that when chiefe & ſpeciall perſons are taken away, who were wont to beare the burden for many other, then they who were left behinde, muſt put forth themſelues, and take the more paine, and be put to greater plondges then they were before. Oh it is a great eaſe, if men could conſider it aright, when they haue others to beare the brunt for them, while they them ſelues may as it were, ſit in peace: while our Sauiour Chriſt was conuerſant with his diſciples on earth, he ſheilded Note. Matth. 9. 11. 12 them, prouided for them euery way, and bare off the blowes from their ſhoulders. As when the Phariſies cauilled with them, (whereby they might eaſily haue bin diſcouraged) he tooke their part, they being too weake, and defended them. So he ſaid to Peter a litle before his aſcention: When thou 
                     Ioh. 21. 18. 
                     waſt young thou girdeſt thyſelfe, and wenteſt whither thou wouldeſt: but when thou art old, another ſhall girde thee, and leade thee whither thou wouldeſt not. When Kings gouerne wiſely and conſcionably, the people ſit vnder their vine and 1. King. 4. 25. figtree, as it was ſaid they did, that liued in the dayes of Salomon, when hee had about him Nathan the Prophet, Zadok the Prieſt, Benaiah a moſt worthy Counſeller, with ſuch like. Alſo when people are ſetled vnder faithfull and able teachers, who watch for their ſoules, they liue (as it were) in a corner of heauen, (if they can ſee) who obediently ſit at their feete to heare them. And ſo I may ſay of children, who haue their prouident and godly parents to regard their welfare, they know not what ſorrow and trouble meane: for the glory of children are their fathers. And of other inferiours, while they haue their good friends and gouernours about them, who ſeeth not, that they be priuiledged and prouided for aboue others: but when all theſe faile, then beginneth the woe and ſorrow of all thoſe, whom they leaue behinde them: which in the vnwelcome parting of couples in mariage, (the husband from the wife, or ſhe from her husband, where true loue was betwixt them, is daily ſeene and proued, to the deepe ſorrow of the longeſt liuer of both.
                  Al this which I haue ſaid, ſhould what on ſuch as are ſo backed by others, to weigh the great goodnes of God in giuing them ſuch helpes, and to yeild them due reuerence, loue, and obedience in the Lord, and to be more carefully giuen to euery good worke, while they haue ſo great incouragements. But becauſe the inioying of ſuch is made ſo common a matter, and a thing of no great reioycing while they liue with them: (for according to the prouerbe, we beſt know what a good thing is worth when wee feele the want of it) therefore it were good for them to ſuppoſe oft times, and to put the caſe, that ſuch worthy helpes and friends are taken from them, and what they ſhould then doe being left without them; for as the vine wanting his

raile to prop it vp, runneth on the ground and waxeth wilde and vnfruitfull: A ſimile. ſo inferiours being deſtitute of their godly ſuperiours, waxe degenerate, and grow out of kinde, lying open to miſchiefe as Saul did after Samuels death. 1. Sam. 28. 15. But to ſpeake the truth (the more is the pitie) this is rare and hardly to bee found, that ſuch take any great good by thoſe helpes while they inioy them, (vnleſſe it be in things temporary, for their eaſe, maintenance, and ſeeking Note. of liberty to the fleſh,) neither when they forgoe them, haue grace to bewaile the loſſe of them in any other reſpect then that which is earthly: neither doe they looke to ſtand vp as they ought (in the want and roome of them) with care and confidence to become lightes and good examples, and to keepe themſelues from euill, as they were kept ſome of them (no doubt) by their good friends before. Such prouide ill for themſelues, ſeeing as it was with this people of Iſrael heere, when Ioſhua was dead, that they had a great loſſe, and were conſtrained now to looke better about them then they needed to doe before, euen ſo they hauing now the like befalne them, muſt now take the burden on themſelues, which was borne by others for them before. The which being ſo, men ſhould make this vſe of ſuch changes, to 
                        Vſe 1. prouide and learne to want their good helpes and friends before hand, and arme themſelues as Iob did, to looke for their change, when they ſee they muſt needs forgoe them. They ſhould alſo acknowledge daily with hearty thankes to God, what a benefit they haue of them, while they inioy them, 
                        Vſe 2. and doe all good that they may by the helpe of them. Which they cannot doe, but they muſt of neceſſitie feele the loſſe of them, to be very great, and ſee that they muſt now lay their ſhoulders to the burden, and therefore labour to be the fitter to beare and vndergoe it, and to want them, who were wont to ſtand them in ſo great ſtead. This as it is wholeſome direction and aduice to ſuch as haue their helpers and friends as yet remaining with them: ſo it is eaſie to ſee euery where, what calamities they ſuſtaine, who made no ſuch vſe of them, while they comfortably inioyed them. For the which purpoſe, this I adde, and ſo I end this point: oh how ſweetly and to their good liking haue many liued, when they had others to beare their burdens for them? as husbands, wiues, ſubiects, children, neighbours, and other by their friends: in which benefits they who inioyed kindely and aright, there is no doubt, but that (which is the chiefeſt of all) they haue therewith, that God is their friend alſo: but ſeeing many depend onely on them in a carnall manner, and on their liuing ſtill with them, and reſt not on God; therefore their proppes faile them, and their deſolation commeth vpon them, as the enemy vpon an vnarmed man.
                  More particularly, we are taught hereby their example, who ſought to God in their doubtes for counſell and reſolution, that in all our doubtfull 
                        Doct. 2. caſes, (which are not fewe) partly touching our eſtate towards God, and partly particular duties and actions of our ſpeciall callings and conditions of life: while we remaine here on earth: we ſhould conſult with and aske counſell of God for our reſolution, in ſuch manner as he hath taught vs: and in no wiſe to conceale and bury our wants and defects that trouble vs, or paſſe by the ſinnes that cleaue to vs, or other difficulties in our dealings and buſineſſe that oppreſſe vs, for ſo we prouide ill for our ſelues, euen to liue in ignorance and ſorrow (with other inconueniences annexed thereunto) for

euer after. And yet when we ſeeke anſwere and reſolution, wee muſt not thinke, that we are inioyned of God to doe it in the ſame particular manner that theſe did, by the high Prieſt, for that might be thought a great trouble to vs, ſeeing there is none in theſe daies to aske counſell for vs: but we muſt know, that we haue Moſes, the Prophets and Apoſtles: and (by the helpe of them) the Miniſters of God, Paſtors and Teachers, to bring vs Gods meſſage and minde out of his word, and thereby to inſtruct vs. And wee our ſelues, as occaſion ſerueth, are to ſearch the Scriptures, and anſwere our owne doubts thereby, and ſettle our eſtate to God ward, as Dauid did in the Act. 17. 11. Pſalmes oft, and namely where he ſaith: Why art thou heauy (O my ſoule) and 
                     Pſal. 43. 5. 
                     why art thou ſo troubled within mee? Still truſt in God, and praiſe him which is the beſt of all. And againe: whereby ſhall (a man yea) a yong man (who doth Pſal. 119. 9. more hardly ouercome his paſſions) denie his way, that ſo hee may proue himſelfe bleſſed? he anſweres out of the Scripture, euen by taking heed thereto as Gods word teacheth. Thus I ſay, we are to ſearch the Scriptures by hearing and reading them, which doe reueale Gods will vnto vs, or conſult with the men and brethren whom the holy Ghoſt hath ſet ouer vs to that ende.
                  But this is the miſery of this age, nothing is to be called into queſtion among Note. vs: we thinke we haue all knowledge, and doubt of nothing, no, not in the waightieſt matters: why ſo, I pray you? is it becauſe we be diligent and carefull to learne, and daily to ſearch into our ſelues and into the word to ſee what is a miſſe, that we neede no helpe of other? Nay, that is fewe mens care, the moſt are no ſuch: but they chiefly are deſirous to enquire further what the good will of God is toward them, who haue moſt profited thereby already, and ſo ought other to doe: who if they were not both careleſſe how they liued, and ſo obſerue no want in themſelues: and drowſie or wandring when they heare, it could not be, but where there is an ordinary miniſtery, they ſhould grow much in ſetledneſſe and ſound knowledge: whereas we ſee, ſtrangers who are not taught at home, but reſort where ſound teaching is, they I ſay, though they know as much as other, are more inquiſitiue and deſirous to be anſwered in their doubts, then ſuch as haue the daily meanes at hand whereby they might be reſolued. It were to be reioyced for very much, if hearers of the Goſpell did frequent the houſes of Preachers, as they do Phyſitians to enquire of their bodily health: then there were ſome hope that they looked to liue for euer, as they deſire to liue long heere in bodily health, though that can be but for a very ſhort ſeaſon. But thoſe daies are gone, which yet I in my time haue ſeene, when in the places, which I meane, both men women and ſeruants would riſe early to diſpatch their buſineſſe on the Lecture day, to the end they might repaire thither, and inquire of God in the congregation, and would be as ready to take good priuatly alſo by queſtions to very good purpoſe, and neceſſary, when they might. About maintenance and bodily prouiſion, how many queſtions (I pray you) are moued before one dayes or weekes worke bee brought to an end? and is any ſo ignorant, that he knoweth not, that he that mindeth his way to eternall life, hath many cauſes in the day and weeke, to aske of himſelfe by ſecret queſtioning, whether all be well with him concerning his account making to God? But there are few or no doubts about

ſuch matters as doe greatly trouble vs now a daies, wee run on at ſixe and leuen as the blinde man caſts his ſtaffe, not looking before vs, that we might be ſafely guided. But what commeth of ſuch raſh proceeding without conſulting with God, by that one example in the booke of Numbers may ſufficiently Numb. 14. 45. appeare, when certaine of the people of Iſrael would needs goe vp to fight with the Amalekites and Canaanites of their owne head, not ſent by the Lord: for they came out againſt them and deſtroyed them.
                  There is another fault committed in this kind, though, I am perſwaded, not with ſo bad a mind: but ſeeing it is not without great danger, I will giue warning about it. And that is, when men do feele many doubts to ariſe, by reaſon of their ſinnes, and fore trouble of conſcience: but yet through feare leſt they ſhould not haue an anſwere to their liking, or for ſhame, leſt they ſhould bewray their ignorance, and ſecrets, and ſo bee reproched and mocked for the ſame, they do conceale them, till ſorrow deuoure them for not opening their mindes about them, euen as water pent in, burſteth out violently Note. and doth much hurt, which in time hauing been let foorth and vented, might haue auoided it. What had become of the people in the booke of the Actes of the Apoſtles, when they were pricked at their hearts, as with the point of a ſword, if they had not come to the Apoſtles, and made their complaint, ſaying: Men and brethren, what ſhall we doe? and yet they had Act. 2. 37. ſtrong temptations not to open their griefe to them, becauſe they had much prouoked them before, and railed on them. Therefore if any be troubled, as theſe were with doubts, eſpecially in their conſcience, and bee in great ſtraights and vnquietneſſe, through feare of Gods diſpleaſure and wrath, if they cannot with their owne knowledge put away their trouble of mind, let them inquire of the men and brethren, whom they are well perſwaded off, for reſolution and comfort, as they did: who, as they haue been inſtruments of God to pricke and wound them, ſo are they alſo to helpe to eaſe them: and they need not feare (God hauing promiſed) but that they ſhall find reſt to their ſoules, how impoſſible ſoeuer it ſeemed to them to bee ſo. And this be ſaid of the firſt verſe.
                  In this next it is manifeſt, that God gaue them an anſwer from the Propitiatory Verſe 2. or Mercy-ſeate: which they receiued by the high Prieſt: for ſo hee vſed to doe, and it was one of the ordinarie meanes, whereby God ſpake to them in thoſe daies. And he did not onely ſo, whereby they were ſatisfied, (their queſtion being anſwered:) but he alſo incouraged them to goe to the worke he ſet them about, promiſing them the victorie in that warre againſt the Canaanites, ſaying: I haue giuen their land into the hands of Iudah, who ſhall goe before the reſt in attempting the warre againſt them.
                  Out of the which words witneſſing ſo gracious an anſwere to them from God, we may clearely ſee, that our ſeeking to God in our doubts and neceſſities, is not in vaine, neither is the labour loſt in ſo doing. For we are to know and be perſwaded, that God anſwereth his in their ſuites and demands, and indeed otherwiſe it were a deadly diſcomfort, and would diſcourage vs much from the well doing of dutie, as it maketh (we ſee) the wicked at their wits end, when they being in great danger, can haue no helpe from God, as we reade it was with Saul; who, when he ſought to God and asked counſell of him, to ſerue his owne turne thereby againſt the Philiſtims, rather then to

pleaſe him, and hee anſwered him not; hee in depth of ſorrow complained and cried out, ſaying: The Lord hath forſaken mee, and anſwereth me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by dreames. But bleſſed be his name, he dealeth not ſo with his: neither let this trouble them, (for ſo they will ſay) that although God anſwered this people of Iſrael here, when they ſought to him, yet hee doth not ſo to vs now: for they are to know, that it is his promiſe to vs, in all that we aske of him according to his will, to grant it, as well as here hee anſwered 1. Ioh. 5. 14. to them in that they asked. Therefore in the Pſalme he ſaith. Call on me in the time of trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou ſhalt glorifie me: which agreeth Pſal. 50. 15. with the words of our Sauiour vttered to all his; Aske, and it ſhall be giuen you: ſeeke and ye ſhall finde. 
                     Matth. 7. 7.
                  
                  So that it is certaine, that euery child of God, that maketh his mone, and thus poureth out his complaint to him, ſhall be heard, which ſhould not a little whet vs on, and animate vs to draw neere to God: wee hauing ſo ſure a word of promiſe, that he will draw neere to vs. For in ſeeking to a mortall man Iam. 4. 8. in our diſtreſſe, though he be little aboue vs, we know how readily & chearefully we goe about it, when we are perſwaded of a good anſwer, and when we doubt not of his kind and louing affection toward vs: and on the contrarie, how hardly wee are drawne to ſue to one, that is alienated from vs. And ſeeing the care thus ſtandeth betwixt God and vs, that the oftener we come to him, the more welcome wee are, (for this is as true as the former ſpeech) ſeeing ſuch are moſt inward with him, and beloued of him, as Abraham, Moſes and Dauid, who of others repaired ofteſt to him, and receiued moſt of him; I ſay, ſeeing it is thus betwixt God and vs, how lamentable is it, and to be bewailed, that this is not more common for men to repaire to God? who if they could marke it, may eaſily perceiue, that while they neglect to doe ſo, they increaſe their trouble, and get nothing. But ſeeing I am entred vpon this matter, I thinke it not amiſſe, to ſhew, how three ſorts offend about this. The common ſort wholly neglect and omit prayer altogether: the firſt thinking that though they pray not, they ſhall ſpeed as well, and haue as good lucke (for ſo they terme it (as others ſhall: boldly affirming, that they ſee no good come of it, they: and yet in their diſtreſſe they thinke they ſhould pray: but then they hauing neither will nor skill thereto, in ſtead thereof, do curſe and rage for that they are not helped and deliuered: though ſome of them do vtter words in their paſſion, the Lord heares them not, as we read, Pro. 1. Pro. 1. 20. For it is all one as if they vttered none. And though they cannot pray to God, yet they make their complaints, and moane to euery man that they haue acquaintance with, and that will heare them. And for them to breake their minds to them that cannot helpe them, when yet they would ſo gladly finde helpe, and to paſſe by him in whom there is preſent and ſure helpe to be found, what folly? nay, what madneſſe is it? for (to ſay the truth) God is not ſought vnto in any ſort of ſuch, no, not when all other ſhifts faile: (as I haue ſaid.) But to ſpeake of the ſecond ſort, who being profeſſors, a forwarder ſort in religion then the former, theſe ſhould pray, and that in faith, confidence, and repentance with comfort, as well as in deſire of obtaining the things which they want, with patient waiting Gods leiſure, but euen they ſeeke not to God in this manner, which yet is the onely right way of praying, that he teacheth vs, or alloweth in vs. For prayers made to him without

theſe properties, are but a bare noiſe of words, vaine repetitions, and idle Matth. 6. 7. ſpeeches, which God abhorreth: neither may ſuch looke to receiue any thing, as S. Iames ſaith: Ye aske and obtaine not, becauſe ye aske amiſſe. 
                     Iam. 4. 3.
                  
                  And when they ſee they receiue not the things they aske, euen they as well as the other who are further off, doe gather, and imagin, though falſelie and vniuſtly, that prayer doth no good, and that it is but loſt labour, ſeeing they are not heard in theirs, when they pray amiſſe, and ſo they waxe more ſlacke and negligent therein, as the other omit it altogether. And the leſſe maruell it is, ſeeing euen good Chriſtians (to come to the third ſort) who go farre beyond both, do ſo forget themſelues ofttimes, and are ſo deluded by the diuell, that euen they omit zealous and ſeruent praying, and fall to pray coldly, deadly: ſo many vaine deluzions, and alurements ſtand vp in their way to vnſettle them, and miſty clouds of trouble to diſcourage them. And while it is thus with them, and while the fleſh iuſtleth againſt all that good is (they not reſiſting it in time) it commeth to paſſe, that euen they who haue Gal. 5. 17. learned to pray aright, and haue oft and vſually done ſo: do yet ſoone decline, ſometime and before they bee aware, fall to pray more by cuſtome Matth. 6. 57. and courſe, then hartily and aright. For we are not to be ignorant of this, that we are as wel vndermined and ſlily deceiued by the malice and ſubtilty of the diuell and our euill hearts, about our prayers to corrupt and hinder Luk. 18. 1. them, as we are in our liues to breake out and be offenſiue therein. And we ought to marke our declinings and decay in the one, as well as our coldnes and deadnes in the other: for pray well and liue well, and contrary. For want of the which, it goeth ſo ill with vs as it doth, that we walke oft times Note. heauily, and cannot ſay that God heareth vs, as it is heere ſaid of this people, that God anſwered them: for euen after we haue prayed, yet we are not ſatisfied, neither reſt we by faith perſwaded that God will heare vs: which yet is one of the chiefeſt fruites of prayer. And thus much of Gods anſwere to them.
                  But yet further we are to marke, that he did not barely anſwere them, as he might haue done, and haue ſaid onely, Let Iudah goe vp: that ſhall be mine anſwere to you: but he addeth to it a gracious incouragement, which was more then they demanded, ſaying: I haue giuen the land into his hands: Commonly men in their ſuites to their betters, aske more then they looke for: thinking by that meanes to obtaine ſomewhat anſwerable to their expectation. But God giues more then is asked, or thought needfull. The which dealing of his doth adde yet greater hartening and incouraging of vs to prayer, when we ſee that he oftentimes promiſeth and giueth more to vs then we looked for: as the deare Saints of God haue found in their time. Ioſeph whoſe feete were pinned in the ſtockes, prayed that he might be deliuered Pſal. 109. 18. out of priſon, whereinto he was thruſt at the ſuite of his whoriſh miſtris, Gen. 39. 19. 20. for not conſenting to her vnchaſt requeſt: but God not onely deliuered him, Gen. 41. 14. but brought him out with great honour.
                  
                     Eſther prayed againſt the ſpitefull attempt of Haman, and that ſhe and her people, which were alſo Gods people, might be preſerued from the deadly Eſther. 7. 10. ſnare, which he had laid for their liues. But what did the Lord? He not onely ſaued them, but vtterly deſtroyed, and cut cleane off, in a moſt ſhamefull and reprochfull manner, both Haman and all his ſeede. So, the woman of Eſther. 9.. 10.
                     
Canaan asked of Chriſt helpe for her daughter poſſeſſed with a diuell: but Mat. 15. 22. he granted vnto her, beſide that ſhe asked, euen what ſhe would. And wee Luk. 15. 22. know, that when the prodigall ſonne, in his penurie and miſerie, being glad to refreſh himſelfe, and fill his bellie with ſwines food, deſired that he might be receuied, but as a ſeruant into his fathers houſe: and he was entertained, and taken in as a ſonne, and nothing of the coſtlieſt apparell, and daintieſt food was thought too good for him.
                  And whereto tend all theſe examples, but to incourage vs, to acquaint our ſelues with God, by ſeeking to know his will, and by oft and earneſt repairing to him: aſſuring our ſelues, that wee ſhall not onely obtaine of him that which we come for in our prayers; but oft times much more, according to that in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes: He that commeth to God, let him know 
                     Heb. 11. 6. 
                     that he is a plentiful rewarder of them that ſeeke him. And he hath no experience of Gods louing kindneſſe, who knoweth not, neither hath found this himſelfe: for doe we aske all particular benefits euery day, which we inioy? no, nor one of many. But we ſhould leade a poore life, maimed, as a body wanting fingers, eyes, tongue, &c. if wee receiued not more oft times then we aske. But to omit other things too long to ſtand vpon, who hath not had proofe of this, (a matter of greater waight) that whereas ſometime, in the anguiſh and heauineſſe of his ſoule for feare of the wrath of God, iuſtly prouoked by his ſinnes againſt him, hee would haue thought it happineſſe not to haue bin at all, but eſpecially in liuing heere, to haue bin freed from feare of condemnation: who (I ſay) hath not proofe of this in himſelfe, that hee hath yet liued to ſee by good and infallible euidence, beſide that which hee deſired) himſelfe to be made aſſured of eternall glory? ſo true it is that God giueth his, more then they could aske or thinke: becauſe they aske in the name and mediation of the ſonne, whoſe merit and interceſſion is infinite.
                  So likewiſe we haue oft times bin in the depth of other calamities: and ſeeking to God for helpe therein, we haue not onely found deliuerance, but therewith bleſſings vnlooked for, to our great admiration and comfort. And if God hath not giuen vs our deſire that way, yet, leaſt he ſhould ſeeme any way to come ſhort of his promiſe, he hath ſuffered the croſſe to remaine, till he hath made vs ſee, and therefore to ſay, that it hath turned to a farre greater benefit to vs, then if he had preſently deliuered vs out of it, or (which is more) then if he had neuer laid it vpon vs at all: ſo true it is that God giueth his more then they could looke for in asking, or thinke to receiue. This ſhould vphold vs againſt grudging, when at other times wee thinke God deales too ſparingly, and ſhortens vs of our deſires. But wee are blinde in Reuel. 3. 18. obſeruing theſe things, becauſe we want the eye ſalue of faith, which onely can make vs ſee it to be thus.
                  But, before I leaue this verſe, another thing heere is worthy to be marked, that he doth not onely incourage vs to ſeeke to him earneſtly, by the Hebr. 2. 6. like large offer which he made here to this people: but here withall, he giueth vs ſufficient incouragement to the worke, that he ſetteth vs about. As Pſal. 1. 3. he doth here to the tribe of Iudah: Thou (ſaith he) ſhalt fight my battels againſt mine enemies, and thou among others ſhalt goe about this worke: and though this were enough to harten thee to it, in that I command thee; yet know this for thy better incouragement, that I will be with thee, aſsiſting and bleſsing thee, yea and I will alſo
                     
                     giue thee the victory, by deliuering them into thy hands. And for better certainty to them, he telleth them, that he hath done it already, when yet it was to do. To teach vs, that if God ſpeake the word, it ſhould be counted all one of vs, as if he had done the deed. Much like to this is that in Hebrwes 6. Where Hebr. 6. 10. God is denied to do as ill maſters doe, that is, to take no knowledge of their ſeruants worke: no, he is not forgetfull of his ſeruants labours, nor vniuſt to leaue them vnrewarded, but telleth them before; that he will deale liberally with them. Hebt. 2. 6.
                  
                  Men promiſe much and performe little: yea many are ſo vniuſt, that they ſet other about their worke, but they are neuer willing to pay them their hire, and to come to a reckoning, becauſe they are well content to defraud them of their due, and to take their labour, in a manner for nothing. But God is a liberall pay-maſter, he promiſeth afore hand more then we can looke for: euen to make vs able and fit for the worke, that ſo it may not bee toileſome nor tedious vnto vs: beſide the reward that he giueth afterwards: euen as he did to Ioſuah before, when he ſhould leade the people at the firſt into the land of Canaan: hee not onely promiſed him the Ioſ. 1. 5. whole land, but added therewith, I will be with thee, I will not leaue nor forſake thee.
                  
                  And this being duly conſidered and belieued, were the ſtrongeſt motiue to ſet vs forward cheerefully, not onely in thoſe duties and workes of out callings, which doe cauſe ſome delight, and are ioyned with ſome profit: but alſo in other, which require much toile and haue nothing to incourage vs, but this, that God commands vs, and would haue vs goe to worke otherwiſe, and namely, both the Magiſtrate and Miniſter to do thoſe great works required of them, with that cheerfulnes and readines, that I haue mentioned: yea the husbandman and the artificer, after the ſame manner to ſet vpon Iohn 4. 34. their workes inioyned them, and ſo likewiſe euen ſeruants, doore keepers, and hewers of wood, and drawers of water, which are the baſeſt ſeruices, and meaneſt of other callings, as alſo the keepers of ſheepe and ſwine, Pſal. 84. 12. to be ſo occupied in their callings, that as long as they know they are in the condition in which they ſhould liue and ſerue God, and that he will bee with them and bleſſe them therein, they may abide in the ſame with comfort, reſting vpon his prouidence, and truſting in his promiſe, that they ſhall reape the fruit of it aſſuredly.
                  And the ſame I would ſay of women, in their places and condition, and the worke that they are occupied about, in bruing, baking, ſowing, ſpinning, and ſuch like huſwifery but that I ſhould ſtay to long. The which behauiour Deutr. 12. 7. ſo heauenly in their earthly buſineſſe, would better become them, (a man would thinke) and ſhould be deſired and ſought for of them, if they were wiſe: that ſo they might liue cheerefully and peaceably: it would better become them (I ſay) then the life which now they leade, which for the moſt part, is led diſtruſtfully, vnquietly, in fretting, raging, and earthly mindednes, &c. And all becauſe they truſt not in God for ſucceſſe, neither belieue that he will be with them to direct and helpe them, as alſo to giue a good end to their labours, though they do not alwayes attaine the outward profit which they ſeeke: God prouiding better for them, euen in that hardnes, (as they count it) that their contentation and patience, ſhall be a greater

bleſſing to them, then if they had inioyed all the commodity that might haue bin looked for of them.
                  Oh wofull people, who like not their labours and worke, which God allotteth and appointeth to them: but take in hand what they thinke good, and therein promiſe to themſelues, as the worldly men did who are mentioned in Saint Iames, namely, what gaine they ſhall haue without the promiſe Iam. 4. 13. of God: and therefore, if they be diſappointed, they could finde in their hearts to contend with God, for not yeelding their hope and deſire vnto them, for though they will not bee directed by him, what and how they ſhould do: yet they will quarrell and diſpute with him, if they faile of that they looke for: for what elſe are their ſecret murmurings and frettings; but againſt him in their diſappointments? Thus we ſee how ill they prouide for themſelues, who take not the worke they goe about from God, that ſo they might alſo proſper therein: but they are wiſe, and ſhall not repent it, who, as Iudah heere did, deſire God to teach them what his good pleaſure is, to haue them to do: for therein they are ſure that it ſhall goe well with them, whatſoeuer they take in hand. In which reſpect Dauid wiſhed the Pſal. 84. 12. meaneſt place in Gods houſe, that is to ſay, where he ruleth: rather then the greateſt and higheſt elſewhere. Wel ſhewing by his example, that the poore who in their ſimplicitie can make the like choice, may liue farre more ſweetly Note. and peaceably, then the mightieſt which refuſe to learne ſo to do: and that Salomon ment, when he ſaid: A diſh of greene hearbs with peace, is better then a ſtaled oxe with ſtrife.
                  
                  But from this and ſuch like places it is obiected, that God dealt farre better Obiection. with that people, then he doth in theſe daies with vs. For they in a particular doubt or trouble might goe and aske counſell of God, and he gaue them an anſwere againe thereto: which if he did grant to vs in like manner; then (they ſay) we had good cauſe in deede why we ſhould ſerue God, as readily and ioyfully, as they did: but we haue no ſuch libertie to aske in that manner: nor the like prerogatiue in his anſwering vs againe. To the Anſwere. which I ſay, that this liberty was granted them in one reſpect, (which diminiſheth nothing of Gods fauour to vs) and this it is: That people of Iſrael had a promiſe of God, that their common wealth ſhould in ſome ſort abide vnto Chriſts comming. For the which cauſe, when they were in great ieopardy to be rooted out by enemies, God gaue them leaue thus to aske of him what they ſhould do, and he reſolued and ſatisfied them according to the promiſe which he had made them, to wit, that they ſhould not be driuen out of the land: whereby they knew, that thoſe troubles ſhould not be (as they feared) their vtter ouerthrow. And as for their captiuity afterwards, it was but for a ſeaſon, and they were at the appointed time, reſtored againe, Pſal. 126. 1. and returned into their owne land. Now what great prerogatiue had they by ſuch anſweres from God about that particular, more then an earthly benefit? They had this temporary bleſſing which they needed: we as we haue it not, ſo we ſtand in no need of it. But we haue farre greater then they had, as the meanes of our ſaluation farre more cleerely brought to light, and this is the greateſt of all benefits. And ſeeing wee haue many bookes of holy Scripture which they had not, eſpecially when theſe things were done, which now are ſpoken of: as the Prophets and the new Teſtament, wee

may well allow them ſomewhat, which we want. And for praying to God, either about and for things heauenly or earthly, we haue farre more eaſie acceſſe to God, then they had, this one thing excepted, that they had this one liberty granted them, (as I haue ſaid.) And it would aſwell appeare by the fruit of our prayers, if we were zealous, and oft, and conſtant therein with vprightnes of heart in the vſe of that liberty of praying, as God hath allowed Rom. 1212. compared with Iam. 5. 16. and taught vs to doe. But it followeth in the third verſe.
               
            
         
         
            THE SECOND SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES. Verſ. 3. 4.
            
               VERS. 3. And Iudah ſaid vnto Simeon his brother, come vp with me into my lott, that we may fight againſt the Canaanites, and I will goe with thee into thy lot; and Simeon went with him.
               
            
            
               ALthough God had promiſed to deliuer the Canaanites into the hands of Iudah, yet it was not to the end they ſhould ſitte idle; The ſenſe. and waite for it: but that they being ſo well incouraged, ſhould vſe ſuch helpe thereto, as was at hand, and ſuch whereby they might bring it to paſſe. And becauſe the tribe of Simeon his brother had his poſſeſſions mixed with, and lying among the fields of Iudah; therefore they called him to helpe them, and they two mutually aſſiſted one the other. So that there neere dwelling and neighbourhood cauſed them to defend one the other. From their practiſe and example, iuſtified by the Scripture, we learne two leſſons: Firſt, that although God hath promiſed any bleſſing to vs of his owne free goodnes, yet it is no let to our faith to vſe Doct. verſ. 3. all good meanes that he offereth vs, for the effecting of the ſame: but rather we ought to doe ſo, as Iudah here did, for as they were to ioyne both Gods promiſe and prouidence together in this action of warre; ſo are we bound to doe in al actions of peace; I meane to beleeue the one and ſerue the other, as we haue ſeene. And we ſhould tempt God if we doe otherwiſe.
            And ſo we are commanded to doe: When God promiſed helpe in the Pſalme, yet he willeth all his to waite for it by meanes vſing, fitte and like to bring it to paſſe: For thus he ſaith; commit thy way to me and be thou doing 
               Pſal. 37. 3. 5. 
               good, and I will bring it to paſſe. Therefore Dauid, when God had ſtabliſhed the kingdome in his hands by promiſe, yet in the treaſon of Abſalom his 2. Sam. 15. & 16. 34. ſonne, he did not onely prouide for himſelfe to ſaue his life, and keepe the kingdome to himſelfe by flying, but he vſed alſo the helpe of Huſhai the Arkite, and the ſonnes of the Prieſtes Ionathan and Ahimaaz, to fruſtrate the attempts of Abſolom.
            
            And when Paul had receiued anſwere from God by an Angell, that there Act. 27. 30.
               
ſhould not one of them that were in the ſhippe with him, loſe their life in that dangerous voyage and ſore tempeſt; yet afterwards, when the mariners would haue gone out of the ſhippe; Paul ſaid to the Centurion, Except theſe abide in the ſhippe, ye cannot be ſafe. Therefore Salomon ſaith, that the ſlothfull 
               Pro. 20. 4. 
               who will not worke in Sommer ſhall ſtarue in Winter. Dauid, though anoynted King in Sauls ſtead, yet did ſo much the more cherefully vſe meanes to attaine it, by how much he was ſecured of the iſſue by promiſe: Euen ſo wee (except God ſhould reueale his meaning to be otherwiſe, that is to helpe without meanes) are bound to doe in all actions both ſpirituall and temporall: neither can we haue peace otherwiſe, whither we enioy our deſire or not. This doctrine we haue great cauſe to learne and marke well, for both in matters of this life, and alſo concerning our ſaluation, we muſt be guided by it. If in ſicknes, pouerty, or any other bodily diſtreſſe wee feele cauſe to complaine; then with our prayer of faith vſe we the helpe of the Phyſition; labour we diligently in our calling, and vſe we all other good meanes, as we haue occaſion, and as godlines will ſuffer, to obtaine and come by that helpe which we want, and God hath promiſed. So in the trouble of minde, wherein we haue large promiſes of Gods vpholding and comforting vs, repaire we to the men and brethren, who as they are skilfull to wound, ſo are Act. 2. 37. they alſo to heale; and God who hath promiſed, will thereby, and by the like meanes, ſend deliuerance.
            And here ſlacknes and negligence are much to be taken heed of, then the which there is no greater bane, if we by faith waite for the promiſe: yet there is another extremity to be auoided, as wel as the neglecting of meanes, and that is, that we aſcribe not ſo much to them, that we tie God thereto, ſo that if we vſe them, we imagine we cannot faile of the helpe we deſire. In one of theſe two extremities, wicked men are continually holden, that either they vſe no meanes, (as they that hearing God hath elected to ſaluation thoſe whom he will ſaue; conclude, that if they be elected, they ſhall be ſaued, howſoeuer they liue, whereas God hath praedeſtinated the meanes, as well as decreed the ende:) or if they vſe meanes, they attribute all to them, and nothing to God: as they who glory of their great wealth, which by their wiſedome and trauaile they haue gotten, which is to ſacrifice to their nets. And thus much of the firſt point.
            The ſecond thing that we haue to learne of theſe men of Iudah, is that as 
                  Doct. 2. they vſed the helpe of their next neighbour Simeon (as they might more commodiouſly doe then thoſe who were farther off: ſo it is to inſtruct vs, Rom. 12. 10. 20. that there ſhould be loue and a readines to helpe one another, as neede requireth Luk. 10. 34. 35. among neighbours, and not an vnkinde refuſing mutually to be aiding one another, as though we could liue alone on earth, becauſe ſometimes we haue no neede one of another; and as though Chriſts charge were ſo little to be regarded of louing one another. The reaſons why wee ought to haue a great care of this dutie is, (beſides Chriſts commandement) firſt, ſeeing one time or other all ſtand in need of the helpe and gifts one of another. I to day, and thou to morrow, and God hath dealt with the ſocieties of men as with the members of the bodie; giuing to euery member a diſtinct facultie, that they might all agree to the good of the whole, ſeeing that none could well be ſpared without blemiſh. Secondly,

neighbours are ſet neere in habitation, to the end they ſhould bee neerely knit together in affection, and be readier to helpe, then they who are farther off.
            The benefit of this, though it be greateſt in trouble; yet it is in all times amiable and full of comfort. It is preſerued by due and daily meeting in the publike aſſemblies at the preaching of the word, prayer and the vſe of the Sacraments: alſo priuately, as they may conueniently, by good communication, Heb. 10. 24. 25. and by kind greetings, ſalutations, and auoiding all wronging one another, and diſcourteſies, in word, deede or countenance. Whereto they Note. who will not be ſubiect, and that readily, knowing that they nouriſh and vphold neighbourhood and loue thereby, they ſhew that they are willing to breake off this knot. It is hindred by ſelfe-loue, whiles euery man regardeth himſelfe onely, or for the moſt part: and eſpecially where men are more frowardly and churliſhly diſpoſed, who had neede oft to remember the words of our Sauiour, ſaying, Hereby ſhall all men know that ye are my diſciples, 
               Iohn 13. 35. 
               if ye loue one another.
            
            But I cannot tell how it commeth to paſſe, that one man is a wolfe and lion to another, (yea, euen ſuch as dwell together neerer then in one towne,) by his Nabal-like churliſhnes, and blockiſh, if not miſchieuous, behauiour: who when they ſhould alſo the more neerely be linked together, doe thereby take occaſion to be ſooner wearie one of another; to contend alſo, and fall out for ſmall trifles, as there ſhal not want matter ſundrie waies, if men be not carefull to preuent the ſame. Wherein yet this is worſe; that ſuch as are euer at iarre with one or other that dwell neere them, or with them, doe couer their ſinne by anſwering, they agree well enough with others who are farre from them. Whereas it were monſtrous if we deſerued bad report among them who know vs not. For who ſeeth not that it is an eaſie matter to bee at peace with ſtrangers, with whom a man hath no dealings, neither commeth oft in their company? But the Apoſtle teacheth, that we ſhould fetch teſtimonie of our Chriſtian behauiour and good conſcience, not ſo much from them that are a farre off, where weſeldome come; but from them eſpecially, with whom wee dwell and conuerſe vſually and deale: for thus he ſaith to the Corinthians amongſt whom he had liued; This is our reioycing, 
               2. Cor. 1. 12. 
               the teſtimony of our conſcience, that in ſimplicitie and godly pureneſſe wee haue had our conuerſation in the world, and moſt of all toward you.
            
            And to draw to an end in this point alſo, it ſhould be throughly reſolued to euery good Chriſtian, not to grieue and offend the meaneſt that he liueth with, either by priuat contention, or iniuring them, or by any other reprochfull Note. behauiour; but to liue peaceably with them, ſo much as in him lieth, and Rom. 12. 18. to looke carefully that he do ſo, and offer them friendly and good meaſure; that ſo he may ſtop the mouthes of the ill diſpoſed, and haue intereſt in the other: ſuch perſons when God ſhal viſit them, to bring them on to Chriſtian religion, and exhort them, and ſo to haue hope to bring them to repentance, and thereby to inioy the fruit of ſuch wiſe, kind, and peaceable liuing with them, in loue and inward comfort, which paſſeth vnderſtanding. But yet if any will needs breake off from vs, becauſe wee will not haue fellowſhip 
               Epheſ. 5. 11. 
               with them in the vnfruitfull workes of darkneſſe, and walke after the ſame exceſſe of 
               1. Pet. 4. 4. Heb. 12. 14. 
               riot that they doe; here we muſt remember, that we muſt ioyne ſpeech with holineſſe,
               
and no further. And (though it grieue vs) forgoe that agreement, which we cannot lawfully hold: and wee ſhould be comforted in this, that we haue ſought it as much as in vs lieth.
            Thus as I haue ſhewed Gods people how to keepe neighbourhood and loue one with another, that they may beware of ſtrāgers, which neuer doth good: ſo I will giue a watchword to the vnruly and diſobedient, of their groſſe and common contentions and iarres, with ſuch as they liue among, wiſhing them to conſider, how weariſome they make their liues and diſpleaſing, and therefore to ſtudie to liue quietly, and not to be companions in euill with them, to thinke thus, that if Gods deare ſeruants ſometime diſagree, and liue vnkindly, for that they haue no more grace; (though they haue ſome;) then much more they ſhould begin to auoid and miſlike all ſuch their vncharitableneſſe, and other ill parts of their liues who haue no grace; and that ſpeedily; leſt if they bite one another, they be conſumed one of another. I Galath. 5. 15. deny not, but they haue ſhew of neighbourly fellowſhip, among them, but it is moſt chiefly in wickedneſſe, wherein many ioyne eaſily together; but as concerning friendſhip, they are inconſtant and hollow, and are onely friends while they haue that which they would haue, and no longer, nor no further. And this of them briefly and by the way. And now ſeeing I haue ſaid; I will adde a word to another ſort, and that is this: that if the neereſt in place and kindred, ſhould bee moſt neere in affection, (as the very law of nature teacheth, and all will acknowledge) how much more then the married couples? In whom to ſee this band of loue broken, it is not only ſtrange, but monſtrous. And let this ſhame all ſuch to heare this, ſeeing that which hath before been ſpoken in reproofe of others, who offend this way, ſhall moſt of all condemne them. It followeth in the next verſe.
            Verſ. 4. And Iuda went vp, and the Lord deliuered the Canaanites, and the Perezites into their hands, and they ſlew of them in Bezek ten thouſand men.
            
            
               Iudah, as he was commanded of God, ſo he did: for ſo it is ſaid here, hee went vp, &c. ſo that as he counſelled with the Lord, what he ſhould doe; euen ſo, when hee knew his mind, he was as ready to obey. This condemneth the raſh zeale of many, who are as readie to aske and goe to the word, and pray in the congregation after their manner, as the beſt: but they conſider not why they doe ſo; as though they thought God were pleaſed with ſuch halfe ſeruice as they vſe, much like to Saul who was forward to ſacrifice, thinking God to be highly pleaſed therewith: but as for the obeying the commandement of God in deſtroying the Amalekites, he was farre from it, he did it by halues, ſo that the Prophet Samuel was faine to ſay to him, Hath God as great 
               1. Sam. 15. 22. 
               pleaſure in burnt ſacrifice, as that his voice ſhould be obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then ſacrifice; and to hearken is better then the fat of rams. So to make a ſhew of much forwardneſſe, and to haue no heart nor readineſſe to doe as men pretend; and to ſay, Lord, Lord, and not to bee willing to doe his will, is abomination Matth. 7. 21. Pſalm. 50. 16. Pſalm. 51. 6. Deut. 5. 29. to the Lord. For he loueth truth in the inward parts: he ſaith, Oh that there were an hart in this people, to keepe all my commandements alwaies, that it might goe well with them. God cannot abide that men ſhould ſhew more then is in them; which alſo his ſeruant Paul abhorred to doe, as we reade in that

place to the Corinthians, ſaying: I would haue none thinke otherwiſe of me 2. Cor. 10. 6. then they ſee in me. Thus we ſee, what vſe we ought to make of this example of Iudah, that is, to giue God this honour, that as wee pray and reſort to him to know his will, ſo we be as ready to indeuour to doe it; and to ſeeke to be faithfull and true ſeruants vnto him, rather then to be ſo accounted, for it ſhall otherwiſe be little to our comfort. This of Iudahs obeying, now let vs ſee what the Lord did to him.
            We haue heard of the promiſe made to thē by God of ſubduing the Canaanites; now it is ſhewed how he performed it, in this, that the men of Iudah 
               
                  Doct. 2. ſlew 10000. men of them, & of another people that ioyned with them, namely, the Perezites, which were alſo of the 7. curſed nations. (And heere this victorie is briefly ſet down, but the maner how it was gotten, is more at large laid forth in the verſes following). The reſt of them (ſeeing their armie was very great) it is to be thought, fled away, out of whom their King was taken and caught. By this the Lords keeping of promiſe with Iudah, we ſee it prooued, which was before affirmed, that God hauing ſpoke the word once, it is as much as if hee had done the deed, his word and deed are both one. Which, in ſo great matters eſpecially as he promiſeth, is worthie to be regarded. For we may ſay now of our ſelues, as the Prophet ſaid of former times; Our fathers hoped in him, and were not diſappointed: they put their truſt in 
               Pſalm. 22. 5. 
               him, and were not confounded. This, when wee ſee how hardly it is found in men to keepe their promiſe, and that they cannot bee truſted of their word, though they promiſe; yea, and bind it with an oath, no, though they be depended on in waightie caſes; this (I ſay) ſhould make vs to thinke our eſtate twice happie, who may be allowed to reſt and put our affiance in God, without feare of being diſappointed in the greateſt matters.
            For if wee can but wait patiently, wee may bee ſure it ſhall come to paſſe which he hath promiſed; yea, till heauen and earth periſh, one iot or tittle Matth. 5. 17. of that which he hath ſpoken, ſhall not faile, but be fulfilled. What comfort ought this to bring to all beleeuing Chriſtians, who haue promiſes made them by him of temporary deliuerances, and benefits, and of eternall happineſſe? Oh what were wanting here, if there were faith to beleeue them? Note. Beſides, whereas it is one of the greateſt griefes of Gods people to ſee vile Pſal. 73. 13. men proſper in their wickedneſſe, and to flouriſh as the greene bay tree, and to haue more pleaſure, honor, and wealth, then they could looke for, whereby they ſeeme to men, to be here placed in an immortalitie; yet ſeeing it is Pſal. 1. laſt. certaine they ſhall come to naught, and to deſtruction, who abide in that eſtate, 2. Pet. 3. 9. Heb. 10. for the mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken it, what patience and contentment ſhould this bee to the faithfull, to remaine conſtant in their hope and well doing, though they haue many diſcouragements? and to wait with patience a little while, ſeeing he that will come, will come, and not tarrie. But this point is often taught, therefore it ſhall ſuffice to haue ſaid this of it: only applie wee this truth to the bad in Gods threatnings, as the promiſe hath been applied to the beleeuers, that if he threaten them, and they ſtand it out with him, he will ſurely pay them home, as he dealt with Nebuchadnezzar 
               Dan. 4. 31. 32. and others.
            Now for Gods deliuering the Canaanites into their hands, wee muſt 
                  Doct. 3. know, that this was done without all iniuſtice and ſeuerity, (which ſome wil

be ready enough to thinke otherwiſe of) though there be no mention here made of their deſertes and tranſgreſſions: but it is manifeſt in the Scriptures, that they were moſt grieuous. And that appeares by the Lords owne words in the booke of Geneſis: where, when hee would ſhew a reaſon, why hee would hold the poſteritie of Abraham ſo long a ſeaſon in Egypt, before they came into the land of promiſe, he makes it to be this, namely, for that the ſins of the Canaanites were not then come to the ful, which time then was not, but now Geneſ. 25. 16. was fulfilled and come to paſſe, and therefore they were now iuſtly puniſhed; Abrahams ſeed being long before this, brought out of the Egyptian bondage. Now as the ſinne of the Canaanites was growne ripe and knowne to God to be come a great height, though it be not here ſet downe; (yea, though it be not manifeſt to all that read the ſtorie) and yet cleare enough, as I haue ſaid, and therefore they ſuffered and were puniſhed moſt iuſtly: ſo we that heare this muſt be perſwaded, that God dealeth moſt righteouſly in all his viſitations and iudgements, though men do not alwaies ſee the cauſe. Which we haue great need well to learne; ſeeing we are readie with Cain to Geneſ. 4. 13. to charge God with rigour and hard dealing, by the ſmalleſt occaſion, when (yet) we neither haue argument to vphold vs, and we might haue learned of Iob, that there is no diſputing with God; (and if he gaue vs nothing at all, yet he Iob 9. 3. ſhould owe vs nothing, we are indebted to him for all that we haue.)
            This Dauid confeſſed, when the Lord corrected him: and whereas he Pſalm. 51. 6. might haue been thought to haue dealt too hardly with him, reproouing him ſo ſharpely, and ſending ſo heauie a meſſage to him, as he did by the Prophet Nathan, yet Dauid himſelfe confeſſeth his fault to haue been ſo heinous, 2. Sam. 12. 7. &c. and his ſinne ſo great, that God did ſhew mercie in correcting him, rather then ſeueritie; and added this, that hee ſhould alwaies be iuſtified, and Pſalm. 51. 4. found righteous, howſoeuer men ſhould iudge of him. This, though men dare not in words denie, if they ſhould be aſked what their opinion is, concerning it: yet when God taketh them ſeuerally in hand, and that his rods be vpon themſelues, rare are they, that ſhall then be of that mind, and ſo confeſſe Note. to him, or before men, eſpecially if their afflictions bee long, or ſmarty, that yet the Lord is iuſt, & his dealings are righteous: but rather they crie out impatiently, that they are handled as no other men be, and that they would they had any other afflictiō vpon thē in ſtead of that which they ſuffer. And if they be exhorted to patience, they ask with the wicked king Iehoram, how can they attend on God any longer, in their ſo great calamities; whereas he hauing 2. King. 6. 33. a mercifull reſpect of vs, regardeth, what wee are fit to beare, and moderateth his chaſtiſements accordingly, and promiſing that he will lay no more 
               1. Cor. 10. 13. 
               on vs then he will make vs able to goe vnder; it is (moſt certainly) our great ſin, when we labor not to containe our ſelues meekly, and to ſee ſo much amiſſe (as ful eaſily we may) in our euill hearts and liues, as that we may ſay alwaies in his ſoreſt correcting of vs, the Lord is righteous, and euer to bee praiſed.
            Secondly, this ſhould teach vs, not to take part with the wicked, in moning and pitying them for that he ſo purſueth them, when wee ſee the hand of God vpon them, but rather iuſtifie God, nay, giue thanks vnto him for his iuſt dealing with them: and although we wiſh their ſaluation, yet wee may reioyce in their puniſhment, euen as mourne for their impunity, when they prouoke them. Eſpecially if we know them enemies to the Church, ſeeing

then we iudge not before the time, and wee know it is iuſt with God to render 
               2. Theſ. 1. 6. 
               tribulation to all that haue troubled his: but when the eſtate of the afflicted is vnknowne to vs, although we may be aſſured that God is iuſt, yet wee muſt not condemne them, but leaue him to God.
            Now to ſpeake a little of the Canaanites, becauſe they eſcaped long, being 
                  Doct. 4. ſo great offenders, yet in that they were met withall at laſt, it teacheth vs; that as God will not alwaies ſuffer his rods to lie on the backe of the righteous, ſo neither Pſal. 125. 3. will he ſuffer the wicked to eſcape and goe vnpuniſhed, but he will bee reuenged on them in his due time, yea and that quickly, whereas they (yet) Luk. 18. 8. thinke the cleane contrary, and imagine, that if they bee not puniſhed as ſoone as they haue treſpaſſed, they ſhall neuer come to any reckoning; and therefore they merrily promiſe themſelues, and ſay, Doubtleſſe the bitterneſse 
               1. Sam. 15. 32. 
               of death is paſſed, and thinke that God will neither doe euill nor good: Nay, they begin to applaud themſelues in their wicked doings, as wee may ſee in the Pſalme: where the Lord himſelfe chargeth them for it. Pſal. 50. 21.
            
            Therefore this and the like Scripture commeth in fit ſeaſon to be vrged vpon all ſuch, that though they cry, peace, peace, and caſt the remembrance of 1. Theſ. 5. 3. puniſhment behind their backes, yet God will ſet it before their faces, yea and make them ſmart, as if they were ſtung with adders and hornets; their ſinne will moſt certainely finde them out. Haman, after all his cruelty and Eſter. 7. 10. malice, was powred out againſt Gods people with great ioy, notwithſtanding alſo the Kings countenancing and backing of him therein, had yet a ſnare ſet for him at a ſumptuous banquet, and by the prayers of the faithfull, receiued iuſt puniſhment for his doings, when he little looked for any ſuch matter. Iezabell being ſuffered to goe forward in her murthers, and ſpirituall whoredomes along time, not ſparing the Lords faithfull Prophet Elias, but 2. King. 9. 30. 31. &c. threatned death to him alſo, when ſhe was in the middeſt of her pride, braying boldly againſt the Lords auenger Iehu, comming to doe execution vpon her, was caſt downe out at the window by her owne Eunuches in great diſgrace; her braines being ſquaſhed againſt the ſtones, till ſhe was made dogges meate and doung, for all her former glory.
            The ſame I might ſay of infinite other who ſcorned to heare of any thing, or iudgement to be comming againſt them; who yet were made as vnlike Luk. 12. 20. to the perſons they were before in their iollitie, as if they had neuer bin they, (as the rich man in the Goſpell, and the Epicure) euen as if one ſhould ſee a Luk. 16. 22. 23. goodly palace with all the rich furniture thereof, to be burned vnto aſhes. A Simile. But alas, what is our ſpeaking of ſuch things to a new generation, riſen vp after them, as farre gone as they in their iniquities, yea adding to them alſo other ſinnes both ſtrange and fearefull: Are any made wiſe by former examples, though they come not ſhort of them in their abominations? (that I ſay no more) but they haue one thing or other to waſh away the remembrance of ſuch workes of God, or to tuſh at them who tell them that they ſhall be like them in their puniſhments. And if they bee ſcared at any time with feare of Gods iudgements it is with them, but as it is with theeues, when there is hue and crie after them, then they giue in, but if it bee paſt, they peepe out of their holes, and fall to their trade a freſh, til they be found out and taken: and ſo doe theſe.
            But I will turne away from this kinde of people, as fearing that I doe but

loſe my labour about them, I will beſtow my words where I haue more hope to preuaile, and doe good by them. I am not ignorant that right worthy and good Chriſtians doe ſometime fall into this diſeaſe; and are rocked a ſleepe with them before mentioned, in ſome particular falles: that when they haue found ſweetnes in ſome baites of ſinne, and haue ſo farre forgot themſelues, that they are ſnared by the deceitfulnes thereof, they haue begun to thinke that it is good being for them there, and to continue ſtill in ſo doing, and they are loath to be diſeaſed, they loue not to thinke for the time (behold to what point the beſt may eaſily be brought) that God will come againſt them for their ſo being diſguiſed. This is more then with the fiue Matth. 25. 5. wiſe virgins to begin to nodde; nay it is with the Church in the Canticles, Cant. 5. 1. 
               to fall a ſleepe: doubtleſſe, this is as dangerous an eſtate for godly Chriſtians, as it is vnbeſeeming them.
            But what of this ſome (perhaps) will ſay? what doth the puniſhment of the Canaanites concerne theſe? I anſwere, it concernes them very much. For though they are not ſeated nor ſaped in ſinne as they, and their like, of whom I haue ſpoken already: and therefore are not in danger to be puniſhed like to them, yet is their ſinne great, for that they haue bin tenderly regarded of the Lord, and haue ſet this loue more ſweet then the hony combe; and haue been aduanced to honour, (greater then Princes) to be ſonnes and daughters, to the Lord almighty, yea and they haue ſworne with Dauid, and Pſal. 109. 106. therefore ſhould performe it, to keepe his righteous iudgements: now then, for them to looke backe onely to Sodome, and to giue place to their euill luſts, but ſo farre, as to take liking of, and pleaſe themſelues in any vnfruitfull workes of darkenes, ſo as they could be content ſtill to ſolace themſelues therein, it is in them periury; againſt God treachery, and in itſelfe, ſinne, for ſuch perſons to commit, moſt fearefull and horrible.
            And if they eſpie it not betimes, which they ought to haue preuented and ſhunned at the firſt entrance into it, God will rouſe them out of it to their Note. coſt, with terror and abaſhment, eſpecially if they haue fallen ſo oftentimes, and haue experience, what woe it hath brought them in times paſt before they could riſe vp againe: and in what a torment and hell they lay, before they could returne. And yet I would haue no man take me thus, as though I thought, that a man truly conuerted to God, can alwaies be in one, and the ſame ſtate of libertie to ſerue God, or holde the ſame meaſure of grace at all times, or as though he might not poſſibly, yea eaſily, through his euill Note. Rom. 7. 19. heart, (which in great part remaineth luſting after euill, and rebellious againſt God) as though he might not (I ſay) be eaſily carried after the euill, Pſal. 30. 6. 7. which at an other time he wholly abhorreth, and hath victory ouer. I doe not deny but this may be, and is with the beſt; but to nouriſh theſe ill deſires, and to delight in them, and ſo to be in danger to commit the ſinne, which hath drawen the heart to bee made drunken with it, whether it be whoredome, reuenge; vniuſt dealing, &c. (for ſo it may come to paſſe) this I ſay, changeth his ſweet life into ſowernes, and (to ſhew the danger of ſuch boldnes further) it doth vtterly diſguiſe him; and make him and his profeſſion rediculus.
            And to let him ſee what this will grow to, hee may further vnderſtand that God dealeth with ſuch, after this manner; that firſt, he ſuffereth them

to be vnſetled in their courſe, ſo that they ſerue God awkly and vntowardly, (as he goeth to worke, that vſeth dull edged inſtruments) they cannot pray, nor walke roundly and cheerefully in their calling, but are full of vnquietnes, with much grudge of conſcience, and a very taſt of hell, which to continue many houres, or dayes, is yet an heauier burden, and greater bondage. Note. And yet if they relent not, when they be vnſetled, and when they ſee themſelues thus far out of the way of godlines; a greater danger is like to follow, that is, that they ſhall be hardened, and ſo, farre from repentance, and then they fall from euill to worſe, till they breaking into other open offences bee met withall and requited, with ſundry open and ſhamefull puniſhments. This is the Lords manner of dealing with his owne, euen as he dealeth with the vngodly, firſt to warne them ſecretly by the accuſation of their conſcience: and if that doe them no good to call them backe; then he caſteth them into bodily or viſible iudgement. And ſo the beſtende they haue of Rom. 6. 21. their bad doings, is to goe backe with ſhame and ſorrow, whereas they might haue ſhunned both, and haue liued in peace and with comfort.
            Which being duly conſidered, hath made mee oft to maruell, that men Ier. 31. 18. 19. whom I know to be very careleſſe, can yet bee ſo quiet. Me thinks where much ſinne is committed, and ſuch as the perſons cannot be ignorant of it, when they haue done it, they ſhould not put it vp ſo cleanely, and ſleepe vpon it ſo eaſily, but that it ought to trouble them, euen as the ſtomacke ouercharged, ſeeketh to be vnburdened. So (I ſay) I thinke they ſhould haue but Note. ſmall peace within, when ſo much may bee ſeene to bee amiſſe without; for let them ſet as faire a face on their bad doings, as they can; yet can they not be the whole men that they goe for, and God wil not be mocked, they muſt caſt vp their vnſauorie gorge, and clenſe their harts and hands from euill before Iames 4. 8. God will accept, and take knowledge of them for his. For if the conſcience, being tender, and like the apple of the eie, can ſuffer no violence; how can they loade it with ſo great a burden of knowne ſinnes, but they muſt needs cauſe it to cry out, if they doe not with true repentance ſeeke to God for mercie to eaſe it? For a penitent ſoule cannot feele the leaſt violence to be offered to the conſcience by ſinne committed, but it crieth out to be cured; and therefore, they who giue greater cauſe, cannot bee in good caſe, when they ſet it light, hauing ſo ſore offended. And thus much by occaſion of the Canaanites ſinne: It followeth.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               VERS. 5. And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought againſt him, and ſlew the Canaanites and the Perezites.
               
               VERS. 6. And Adonibezek fled, and they purſued after him, and and caught him, cut off the thumbes of his hands and of his feet.
               
               VERS. 7. And Adonibezek ſaid, Seuenty Kings hauing the thumbes of their hands, and of their feete cut off, gathered [bread] vnder my table: as I haue done, ſo God hath rewarded me. So they brought him to Ieruſalem, and there he died.
               
            
            
               TO make entrance into theſe verſes which I haue read, yee haue The ſenſe. heard how God gaue victorie: now it is ſhewed more particularly, how the victorie before mentioned, was gotten, the place being ſet downe where the battel was fought, that is, in Bezek: and the King of the people is mentioned, who was Adonibezek, who fled in the battell, as being too weake, but was taken, and handled, as is ſet downe in the text, to wit, hee had the thumbes of his hands and feete cut off. Whether the men of Iuda knew that he had ſo dealt with other, or no, or whether the Lord directed them ſo to doe, without knowing any ſuch thing, it is not expreſſed, but he himſelfe confeſſed that hee had done ſo to others, and that God had requited him with the like. That which was ſaid of the Canaanites puniſhment, that it was inflicted vpon them when their ſin was growne ripe, may as truly be ſaid of their King, as by his owne confeſſion may be gathered: but hauing ſpoken of that point alreadie, I omit to ſay any more of it.
            But ſeeing this Adonibezek, being taken as he fled, had his thumbs cut off, Verſ. 5. Doct.
                as he had cut off others before; out of theſe verſes let vs firſt note this, that God meaſures out to men, euen as they meaſure and mete to others: according to the words of our Sauiour, With what meaſure ye mete, ſhall bee meaſured 
               Matth. 7. 1. 
               out to you againe. So that, as we haue done to other, ſo ſhall we be dealt with. The Lord confirmes this truth, where he ſaith, He that ſheddeth mans blood, by 
               Geneſ. 9. 6. 
               man ſhall his blood be ſhed. Which was rightly verified in Haman, and that in many points: For firſt, as he accuſed Gods people vniuſtly, ſo he was charged, and that by the King himſelfe, where yet he was not guilty: and he was Note. condemned without ſolemne iudgement, ſeeing he had done ſo to others; and when he was handled moſt reprochfully and adiudged to moſt ſhamefull puniſhment, yet there was none that pitied him: (a wonderfull thing to be ſpoken of one, that had been in ſo great fauor with the King) and why this? euen becauſe he had been pitileſſe towards other, that it might be verified which was then true, and afterward written, Iudgement ſhall bee mercileſſe 
               Iames 2. 13.
               
               to him that ſheweth no mercy. Why was he hanged, and that vpon the gallows, that he had ſet vp for godly Mordecay? I ſay ſtil, euen that the ſcripture might be fulfilled euery way, that as he had done, ſo it might be done to him again: Eſter. 7. 10. for in that hee purpoſed to doe it, it was done alreadie in Gods account.
            Now that wee may bring this neerer to our ſelues; many among vs complaine, how they be wronged in their dealings with men; they are euill ſpoken of, ſlandred, railed vpon, (they ſay) and many other waies abuſed. And they thinke they receiue very hard meaſure at mens hands hereby; they maruell at it, and complaine, that none are vſed as they be: but what blindnes Note. is it, that couereth there eies? For doe not all that liue with them, know, at leaſt, their owne conſciences can tell them, that they haue dealt euen ſo with other, and thereby haue giuen cauſe to be ſo dealt withall, againe? But oh blind ſelfe-loue, that cannot ſee that, which all other doe ſee I meane, which thinkes that tolerable in ones ſelfe, which yet hee accuſeth and condemneth in another, and ſeeth not the iuſt iudgement of God vpon himſelfe by other mens wronging him, which hee himſelfe by his iuſt deſ
                  ••
               ts, hath brought vpon his owne head.
            Hereof it is, that if we thus tell them, (which is the very truth) that their ſinne hath found them out, they haue no eares to heare vs: and if we waroe the like offenders, before their puniſhment commeth, that God wil after the ſame manner be auenged of them, yet they will not beleeue vs, till hee viſit them in ſome ſuch heauie manner indeed, and then (with Ioſephs brethren) they begin to ſay: We remember our ſinne this day, that euen as other haue done Geneſ. 42. 21. to vs, ſo wee haue done to other before: and as this cruell King Adonibezek ſayd here, Seuentie Kings thumbs, haue I cut off, &c: as I haue done; ſo God hath 
               Note. 
               rewarded me. And this men ſhall come to either in Gods fauour, to their amendment, or in his diſpleaſure to their hardning, and confuſion. And therfore it were wiſedome to confeſſe it in time, while wee may bee taught and told of it: for all mens conſciences will crie out to them that it is true, that they haue by word or deed iniuried other, before they haue receiued ſuch meaſure themſelues: but if they had not in that kind, and particular manner offended, yet they are ſure, they haue done it, ſome other way; ſo that they haue iuſt cauſe, if they wel waigh it, and looke to Gods hand therein to beare all ſuch indignities (as they count them) as are offered them, both with meekeneſſe and contentedly. And were it not that God dealt thus with men, they would neuer acknowledge nor diſlike the ſinne which they are guiltie of: but ſuffer it to lie ſecret in them, and worke them a miſchiefe. Whereas yet it being ferreted out by ſuch iudgements of God, they cannot but confeſſe it, eſpecially when they bee in any great feare, and danger of death. And for vs who are now warned, if wee haue had our part in this ſin, that with the common ſort wee haue ſmitten others with our tongue, or wronged, or intended euill any way againſt them, learne wee with great regard, to put a ſpeedy end thereto by repentance; leſt God awake and preuent vs by ſome ſuch like iudgement againe, as we haue cauſed to other, and to this end put wee theſe two leſſons in practiſe, neither in heart, word or deed, offer we any hard or vnequall meaſure to any man: and if any offer it Rom. 12. 21▪
                to vs, if it be poſſible, that it may be without our great hurt, let vs quietly and meekely paſſe by it, and make no great matter of it, for the time ſhall come

wherein we ſhall wiſh wee had done ſo, and not haue laid that ſo neere our heart, which might more eaſily haue been paſſed by of vs.
            But in ſaying, God hath rewarded him, it is to be noted, that he an heathen Verſ. 7. Doct. Idolater, could ſee ſo farre, as to aſcribe to God his affliction. Whereby we may ſee, that very bad men doe acknowledge God to be the ſtriker and puniſher of them. But where ſhould he learne it? for though it did him no good, to acknowledge it, yet it is that, which many who haue been baptized, doe not come to, but curſe and ban, rage and fret in their afflictions, crying out of their ill fortune, as they call it, ſo farre are they from reſting in the iuſtice of God, and to ſay, hee hath done righteouſly. Alſo as they aſcribe to chance and fortune their calamities, ſo doe they runne for helpe to Witches and Sorcerers, when they be oppreſſed with them, which is greatly to the conuicting of them. For why ſhould not they much more ſee the hand of God when they are viſited: if Heathens haue ſeene ſo farre, as to aſcribe to God their troubles, and to confeſſe their ſinne, as this Adonibezek did here. This not onely checketh ſuch as I haue mentioned, but laieth hard to their Pſalm. 95. 20. charge alſo, that make ſome ſhew of goodneſſe, who yet doe harden their hearts vnder their afflictions, and will not know Gods waies, though they ſee well enough that they ſuffer for their euill deeds, neither will relent, nor feare his iudgements, though they cannot deny, that they are due to them for their deierts. More particularly, ſuch as this Heathen King was, ſhall riſe in iudgement againſt ſuch profeſſors, as will not ſee their crueltie, vnmercifulneſſe, their vncleanneſſe, which they nouriſh in themſelues; their oppreſſions alſo and iniuries they doe to their neighbours, though they bee moſt clearely laid before them.
            When yet Pharaoh and other ſuch, haue (eſpecially when Gods hand was heauie vpon them) acknowledged that the Lord had done it. For euen the Exod. 9. 27. wickedeſt mans owne conſcience ſometimes accuſeth him, that hee doth euil: and ought not theſe much more, we haue farre greater light; to tremble when they haue ſo groſſely offended, & ſay, Againſt thee, againſt thee (O Lord) we haue done this euill? And eſpecially; when they know what danger they be in thereby, and what heauie plagues hang ouer their heads for the ſame. Although ſuch muſt goe further then ſo, euen to tell it to themſelues, that God will not be at one with them, vnleſſe they acknowledge their faults alſo, and ſubmit themſelues to him, as his word teacheth, howſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe him to correct them; and withall, to reſolue, in all conditions of their liues whatſoeuer, to indeuour, and be readie to obey him.
            Alſo this ſhould teach vs, when we receiue indignities at mens hands, yet 
                  Doct. 2. 2. Sam. 16. 10. to looke to God, who ſet them a work againſt vs, as Dauid ſaid of Shemei, and not as the dog doth, to catch the ſtone, and leaue the ſmiter. And though they haue wronged vs willingly, yet if wee conſidered, that the Lord did it, we ſhould the leſſe be mooued or offended with the inſtrument: whereas we on the other ſide, beate our braines, and ſtraine our ſelues, al that we can, to purſue them, and ſeeke to be reuenged on them, whom yet the Lord will ſufficiently puniſh for the wrong they haue done. For example, wee are ſo out of quiet for a word ſpoken againſt vs, as if it were treaſon. when in the meane while, we doe not once thinke, how we haue prouoked the Lord, to ſtirre vp ſuch ill perſons againſt vs. Adonibezek (we ſee here) would not aſſcribe

it to the Iſraelites, but ſaith, it was God that did thus vnto him.
            Furthermore here, by this that we heare his crueltie, thus laid out by his 
                  Doct. 3. owne mouth, that he had played the tyrant againſt many, and thoſe no meaner perſons then Kings, to cut off the thumbs of their hands and feete, and not to ſome few of them, but euen ſeuentie perſons; wee ſee what a raging furie this vice of crueltie is, and to what depth of euil it carrieth men, that do not wiſely conſider the fouleneſſe and ſhamefulneſſe of it. For whereas one man ſhould be ſociable with another, yea with ſtrangers, if occaſion be offered, (ſeeing euery one is our neighbour,) this crueltie cutteth of all fellowſhip, Luk. 10. 37. nay all libertie of inioying ſuch benefits of peace, goods, or the like. So that the cruel man is farre worſe then the thiefe, who (yet) is odious, and driuen frō habitation with men in their free dwelling houſes, into a loathſome priſon among brutiſh companions. For he, vnleſſe he be cruell alſo, is content to take a ſhare in his goods, whom he robbeth; but the cruell man is not content with a ſhare, but if his might be ſutable to his mind, he will haue all, at one time or other, that is his whom he purſueth, yea he wil thruſt him out of houſe and home, yea, and out of the world alſo, before he can be ſatiſfied. Caine, a little after the corrupt eſtate of things entred into the world, was a Geneſ. 4. 8. patterne of cruel ones, who when he had no cauſe giuen him by Abel his innocent brother, of hard handling him; yet becauſe he was accepted of God, and himſelf not, did not hate him only without a cauſe, but which was moſt vnnatural and monſtrous in him, roſevp againſt him, and ſlue him. Pharaoh, 
               Exod. 5. 9. when he had almoſt tyred the poore people of God, who were ſtrangers in his land, with burdens and toile aſmuch as they could beare; yet was not ſatisfied therewith, but made their burthen farre greater, til their life was more vnwelcome then death itſelfe, that his crueltie might be manifeſt to all. Haman ſo exceeded herein, that it was too little to take the goods of Gods people Eſter. 7. 4. from them, and to hold them bondmen, vnleſſe hee might haue their liues alſo. And what ſhould I ſpeake of Iezabel, who being a woman, exceeded men who were cruell alſo? And of Rehoboams cruell handling his ſubiects, as his ſtorie declareth, and of Ioſephs brethren, who conſented to ſell him into a far countrey, whence he might neuer returne to trouble them, as they hoped, but further, the moſt of them agreed to take away his life alſo, and yet if they had killed him, euen they themſelues had loſt their liues alſo in the famine that God ſent afterwards, they being preſerued by Ioſeph among all other men.
            Theſe might make crueltie odious to vs. But many that heare this of it, deſire to know what manner of thing it is, that rageth after this ſort, and like the flaming fire, deuoureth and deſtroyeth, where it commeth. Their demand is godly, and I will briefly ſatisfie it. That they may therefore ceaſe maruelling, that this fury, crueltie I meane, bringeth ſuch ſtrange effects forth, they may know, that it is a vile and vitious habit or cuſtome, whereby men are carried to do things both harſh and hard, and that beyond all courſe and compaſſe of reaſon. Now where men are thus ſet vpon their will, to deale with other, and are led to it without reaſon, much more without religion, there how can they chuſe, but to bee rigorouſly handled, and cruellie delt with, who fall into their hands? Which maketh the cruell man to bee hated of all: For ſuch are barbarous and vnciuell, as if they had ſucked the

Dragons in the deſert, and their hearts ſo bound with the ſinewes of iron, that they ſpoile them whom they purſue, as raging raine and tempeſt rendeth the trees, and deſtroyeth the fruites, and they are no more mooued with the life of a man, then if a dogge had fallen before them. And therefore no maruell, that Dauid hauing his choice of plagues preſented to him, made a preſent exception to his owne nature and kind, fearing and knowing the crueltie of men; ſaying: let me not fall into the hands of man. This the Heathen Seneca ſaw, when he ſaid; Thou art deceiued, if thou giueſt credit to the lookes of thoſe that meet thee. They haue the faces of men, the minds of wild beaſts. If he ſpake this of man in generall, what would he haue ſaid particularly of the cruell man? with whom this ſpeech is as common; [burne, kill, cut, Poiſon young, old, men, women, brethren, kindred,] as to eate their meate. Whoſoeuer doe but croſſe them with a miſtaken word, or wrie countenance, it is but a word and a blow with them, and though they murther vpon light occaſions, and haue no gaine by their death, they haue inough in that they take pleaſure in it. But whither might a man goe in this argument? I will giue an inſtance in lower matters of this kind.
            Hereof it is, that if one neighbour bee treſpaſſed by another, in his corne or other commodities, by cattell, or any other way, though it bee without any fault of him that hath done the treſpaſſe, the other is readie in rage and furie to ſeeke reuenge, by laming and hurting the cattell; which hee would doe to the owner, (like Lamech) if he durſt, or will with ſpite and railing and exacting at his hands ſixe times the valew of the damage and detriment that he ſuſtained, though if he annoy the other in a worſe manner, he yet maketh nothing of it, but will ſhift it of. This is a cruell part, in things of ſo little valew vnto a neighbour: What would hee doe (thinke wee) or he that is like minded to him, in matters of waight, and to a ſtranger? and ſo much the more, I may call ſuch dealing crueltie, ſeeing it is offered by ſuch an one as treſpaſſeth another time in a farre worſe manner himſelfe. The like may be ſaid of cruell Landlords, Maſters, Guardians, Stepmothers, &c. which meaſure not them whom they offend againſt, by themſelues. For though there be diuers degrees in the many kinds of this foule vice of crueltie, yet we muſt know, that the leaſt and loweſt is vnſeemely in a man and odious.
            Indeed it is more noiſome and furious, if it bee accompanied with enuy, therefore Salomon ſaith, Who can ſtand before enuy? for the enuious Prou. 27. 4. are obſtinate, and cannot bee reconciled. Therefore whatſoeuer meaſure be offered by ſuch, it is certaine, that it ſhall be hard inough, ſeeing Prou. 12. 10. 
               their very mercies are crueltie. What remaineth then for ſuch perſons to doe, to the end they may (if it be poſſible) caſt of this crueltie, as a moſt filthie and loathſome garment, but this? that they giue themſelues no reſt, til it become as odious and loathſome to them, as it is to other, which is not hard for him to obtaine, that will be perſwaded to looke into the odiouſneſſe of it: that when he hath found it, he may fall downe at the Lords feete for mercie to couer the fouleneſſe of it, and forgiue it; and that being beleeued, imbrace gentleneſſe and mercie, and kindneſſe toward others, in ſtead of rigor. Like Act. 16. 30. the Iaylor in the Actes: who, though he had vſedg reat crueltie againſt Paul and Silas, yet when hee repented, did waſh their wounds moſt louingly, which before ſcourging of them, he had made in their bodies, and ſet meate

before them in his houſe moſt chearefully, whom he had before thruſt hungry into the inward priſon moſt cruelly. Alſo let it teach vs, both to pray that wee bee not giuen ouer into the hands of vnreaſonable and vnconſcionable men, who are as abſurd as cruell in their malice. As the Apoſtle willeth the people to pray, 2. Theſ. 3. and to giue thanks that wee haue 2. Theſ 3. 2. been either kept from being a pray to ſuch deuourers, or mercifully ſnatcht out of their iawes, as a coſtly garment out of the fire.
            But to paſſe from this, let vs weigh that he had vſed this crueltie vpon ſeuentie 
                  Doct. 4. Kings: ſo that he was not ſatiſfied, by ten or twentie times continuing his cruelty toward ſo many, no nor three times twentie and more; and would haue done the ſame many hundred times more, if hee had not been cut off, and ſo hindred, as God in much mercie prouideth that ſuch doings ſhall haue an end. And by it we may learne, that when men haue entred into a bad courſe, it is neuer time for them to leaue and come out of it, eſpecially, if they haue benefit thereby, and take liking and delight therein; and moſt of all, if with profit and delight it be growne into a cuſtome with them. Simon Magus had a long time bewitched Samaria with his ſorceries, euen Acts 8. 9. &c. almoſt the whole citie: and neuer went about to deſiſt from that practiſe, till he was, againſt his will, broken off by the preaching of Phillip. Demeirius 
               Actes 19. 24. the Siluer-Smith had done the like in another kind, in the citie of the Epheſians, deceiuing the people along time for his owne gaine, in making ſiluer ſhrines or temples for the Idol Diana.
            
            And this is ſo true, that if a man do but fall into any particular ſinne, once or twice, he is readier to commit it twenty times, then once to be think himſelfe Note. about breaking it off. As if it be by making of a lie, and falſe ſwearing, deceiuing, breaking the Sabbath, picking and ſtealing, or the like bad tempering and needleſſe medling any other way. In Peter this may bee ſeene, who neuer went ſo farre, as to intend and purpoſe any euill, but being demanded a queſtion only on the ſudden, which hee looked not for, whither he were Chriſts diſciple, denied the truth, but through feare, againſt his Mark. 14. 17. conſcience, and hauing once ſo done, being asked the ſame the ſecond time, did ſo againe; and the third time being prouoked ſo, denied it with an oath and a curſing of himſelfe, if he knew the man. Iehoſophat could not be warned to forbeare fellowſhip with Ahab and his ſonne Iehoram, hauing once ſuffered himſelfe to take pleaſure therein, though he had a ſharpe warning of it, and ſmarted alſo for the ſame. And Sampſon for the loue of a Philiſtine woman, ſuffering her vnlawfully to moue queſtion to him about that which tended to the looſing of his life, and the graces of God in him, which were moſt precious; becauſe he cut her not off, neither ſtaied her at the firſt, but anſwered her, which he ſhould not haue done, though he ment not to tell her the ſecret that ſhe asked, yet he anſwered and trifled with her ſo long in needleſſe and dangerous talke, that at laſt, through importunitie ſhe got that which ſhe ſought, and which hee neuer ment ſhee ſhould obtaine, till hee found, when it was to late) what it is to yeeld and giue place to euill, though but once or twice.
            For as the breaking out of waters by cutting the banck that holdeth A ſimile. them in, is the ouerflowing of much ground, and ſpoileth it: ſo the making of a breach in the conſcience, and the yeelding and giuing place to euill but Note.
               
a little, layeth open a man to much bondage and anoyance thereby, ſo that he goeth on, as on that runneth a pace from the top of an high and ſteepe downe hill, who is not able to ſtay till he come to the bottome. This truth which is verified in ſo many things, Salomon hath moſt liuely exemplified in Prou. 23. 27. one: ſaying, An harlot is a deepe graue, and a narrow pit: which he that falleth into, can hardly get out of to eſcape? And therefore to come to make vſe of this which hath been ſaid, wee are to know, that the counſell and rule that the Phyſition giueth for the preſeruing of health, namely, that wee ſhould reſiſt the beginnings of danger; and ſo we ſhall be free from the euill that would follow, the ſame is meete for all ſuch to bee followed, as deſire to inioy their ſpirituall health, and that their ſoules may feare well, and that is, that they take great heed, when they be firſt inticed by the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne, that they reſiſt ſtrongly before delight be kindled, and dally not with that which they are tempted with; leſt they bee alſo hardned: which if they doe, they ſhall, by purging out that corruption, finde the fruit of that holy counſell and promiſe in the Goſpell, Watch and pray, ſo ſhall yee not fall into 
               Matth. 26. 41. 
               temptation. Oh, if ſome could haue done it, when with Ioſeph they haue been Gen. 39. 12. Note. inticed, and could haue ſhaken of the leaudneſſe of their euil hearts; at what eaſe, and in what freedome might they haue walked, who haue, by giuing place to their luſts, and not kurbing them vp in due time; brought themſelues into a loathſome ſtate of life, and to a continuall bondage? And this confutes them, who being reprooued for ſinne, excuſe themſelues like children, that it was the firſt time: or, that they went not ſo farre, but they could eaſily deſiſt. As they that dally with, women or maydens by vnchaſe ſpeech, Pſalm. 51. 5. behauiour, or euill thoughts, of whom many fall by degrees to commit folly, nay filthineſſe, becauſe they reſiſted not dalliance, and nipt not that curſed fruit in the bloſſome.
            Now that which remaineth in this verſe is a queſtion to good purpoſe: and that is, why the Iſraelites did not kill this tyrant Adonibezek out of hand, but reſerue him to this bondage, and to die ſo? The anſwere is, God giuing them commandement, not to ſpare the Canaanites, and hee hauing been more cruell then ſome other; God (to bee ſure) inclined their hearts to doe ſo, both that he might haue the meaſure that hee had offered other, and alſo that it might be knowne, that hee died not in warre, which had been ſome glory to him; it being vnmeet, that ſo cruell a perſon ſhould haue ſo honeſt a death. Another queſtion may bee this concerning himſelfe why this tyrant, when he had ſo ſhamefully defaced and diſmembred ſo many Kings, yet why he would haue them to feed vnder his table. There is no doubt, but that he did it, to remember and ſhew the glory of his victories, and while they were made to feede ſo baſely vnder his feet, as dogges to gather that which fel from his board, it was to ſatisfie his proud and vaine-glorious humor therewith, as well pleaſing to him, as if his eares had been filled with muſicke. By the firſt, namely, that fact of the Iſraelites; we may learne that it is meet that monſtrous doings & vilanies, with the perſons who wrought them, ſhould be made odious according to the deſert of them. As murtherers of Princes, the Lords annointed, to bee put to the extreameſt torments before their fearefull death. As we haue been certified of the exquiſit tortures that were lately executed in France vpon a popiſh and baſe fellow,

which imbrued his hands in the blood of his Soueraigne. So wilfull and common murtherers to be hanged vp in chaines to the view of all, for the vnnaturall killing of their neighbour or companion. And ſo it is meete, that other malefactors ſhould be dealt withall according to their wicked waies, and according to the commandement of God, that euil may be taken away from the land, as it was ſaid of Ioab. Our lawes haue well prouided for many 1. King. 2. 31. ſuch: and if it pleaſed our Gouernours to thinke well of it, that Atheiſts, Blaſphemers and Adulterers might haue their ſhare among the reſt according to their deſerts, the caſe would bee much better with vs by many degrees at this day. And this be ſaid by occaſion of the firſt queſtion.
            From the ſecond, and the anſwer of Adonibezek glorying in his crueltie and ſubduing ſo many Kings vnder him for his pleaſure, (as the Philiſtines when they liſted, called in Sampſon out of the priſon, his eies being put out, to make them paſſe time;) it giues occaſion to vs to conſider the exceſſiue pride, luſt and other badneſſe of people, (this preſent age not being behind any of the former therein) that when God hath brought them out of their ſwadling cloutes, after they came naked into the world, wherein they were like to haue miſcarried a thouſand times before they were able to runne about, being ſo ſhiftleſſe and vnable to helpe themſelues, (that I ſay no more in this place of their miſery beſides) yet they are no ſooner out of the ſhell (as we vſe to ſay) nor come to man; eſtate, but they ſhew themſelues to the world as plaiers on the ſtage, no leſſe diſguiſed in their ſtomacks, behauiour, and qualities, then many of them be in their apparell. And eſpecially if they be great and borne to any thing, it is admirable to ſee, what profaneneſſe, licentiouſneſſe, riot, gaming, and ſuch like intemperance is euery where to be ſeene in them: who for their owne pleaſure, care not how they dominere ouer their inferiours who are vnder them, and ripen them a pace who are about them, in all kinde of euill. For what elſe, (for the moſt part,) is to bee learned in ſuch ſeruice? and how they ſeeke to match their equals in any Italienate faſhions and diſguiſed carriage of themſelues, and to deſire to riſe vp to the higher places of their betters, chiefly to this end, that they may haue more libertie to doe euill: that as this tyrant tooke pleaſure in his kind, in the ſins which he liked, (which yet was no admirable thing in him who was an Heathen Idolater) euen ſo doe men in this age, (who liuing vnder the Goſpel, ſhould bluſh to heare it) not ſeeke what pleaſeth God, who hath ſet them vp, but their owne pleaſure. And it is ſo vſuall and common among many of the greater ſort, that it is taken vp among the meaner alſo; in ſo much, that many of them degenerate from their profeſſion thereby, and become little better then brutiſh: but a greater number of them (to bee ſure) doe little honour it in their liues, which I ſay rather to comfort and incourage them, who haue no fellowſhip with them in their vnfruitefull works of darkeneſſe, then in hope to doe good to many of the other offenders.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               VERS. 8. Now the children of Iudah had fought againſt Ieruſalem, and had taken it, and ſmitten it with the edge of the ſword, and had ſet the citie on fire.
               
               VERS. 9. Afterward alſo the children of Iudah went downe to fight againſt the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountaine, and toward the South, and in the low countrie.
               
               VERS. 10. And Iudah went againſt the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron, which Hebron before time was called Kiriath-Arbah: and they ſlew Sheſhai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.
               
               VERS. 11. And from thence hee went to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir in old time was Kiriath-Sepher.
               
            
            
               THeſe verſes and the other that follow to the 17. verſe, are repeated The ſenſe. out of the book of Ioſhua, chiefly out of the 15. chapter, and are brought hither to this end, that we may vnderſtand that the Tribe of Iudah poſſeſſed Ieruſalem, while Ioſhua was yet aliue, and therefore they might the eaſilier and better bring Adonibezek thither priſoner. And the things that are here repeated out of Ioſhua, are partly theſe, in the foure verſes which I haue now read, namely, the taking of Ieruſalem, Hebron and Debir, and their fighting againſt the Canaanits that dwelt in the mountaines; and partly thoſe things following afterward to the 16. verſe, as ſhall be ſhewed when I come vnto them. And that they are here repeated, is manifeſt hereby, for that it is declared in that Chapter of Ioſhua, that the King of Ieruſalem was then taken, and was brought into the hands of the people of God, and that the children of Iudah dwelt there with the Iebuſites. In the 17. verſe, the holy ſtorie returneth to ſet downe what Iudah and Simeon did further at this time, as he began to declare before from verſe 4. to the 8. That which concerneth Hebron and Debir ſhall be ſet downe in their place.
            Now this repetition out of the booke of Ioſhua here brought in, vnto the Doct. generally out of all theſe verſes. 17. verſe, (for the 16. is a ſhort interlaced ſtory of the Kenites) this repetition (I ſay) is here brought in, leſt the Reader ſhould be troubled, as though the ſame things which are mentioned here, had been now done after the death of Ioſhua, which are ſet downe there to haue been in his lifetime. And this is done that there might be no ſtumbling nor offence thereat, we may therfore note out of all theſe verſes in generall, the great care that the holy Ghoſt had in ſetting downe the Scriptures, freeing them from errour, and making one to agree with the other: ſo that if men were able to diſcerne, they might euer ſee it to be ſo. It is true indeed, that many things in them are hard to be

vnderſtood, which the wicked peruert, as S. Peter ſaith, to their owne deſtruction: 
               2. Pet. 3. 16. but where care is ioyned with gifts of knowledge, (which gifts ſome attaine See Pro 30. 5. Pſalm. 12. 6. to,) there may bee ſeene a moſt ſweet agreement betwixt them, and no one either to iarre with another, or any one to be friuelous, or abſurd, as ſome are bold to affirme, but ſeuen times tried in the fire, and, pure and holy, as the Pſalmiſt Pſalm. 19. 8. 2. Tim. 3. 16. Rom. 15. 4. ſaith: and therefore to all good vſes of knowledge, and confuting of error, or practiſe in life, and comfort, profitable. For though all Scripture is not alike, but ſome plaine and ſome obſcure; yet, firſt, they are plaineſt which are more neceſſarie for faith and life; and, they that haue obſcuritie in them, ſerue to exerciſe and ſharpen our vnderſtanding rather, and to prouoke an appetie, in vs to diligence and care for attaining the true meaning of them, then to driue vs from in reading them. To the ſhame of Popery, this that I haue ſaid is to be marked, for the profeſſors thereof doe challenge them for their difficultie and hardneſſe, ſo as they are not to be ſuffered in the hands of the common people, whom if they withheld not from the true vnfolding of them, they might reape great profit by reading them.
            Alſo to the iuſt reproofe of many, both Atheiſts, and other not much differing from them, this is to be noted; for they, that is the Atheiſts, ſcoffe at the Scriptures, and bouldly iuſtle againſt Moſes and Chriſt: theſe, who are the prophane, as bouldly, and yet blindly, reaſon, diſpute, and quarrell againſt ſome particular Scriptures, which they vnderſtand not, as if they were competent iudges, as that in the Pſalme, Moab is my waſhpot, ouer Edome will I 
               Pſalm. 108. 9. 
               caſt my ſhooe, which yet is (as they would ſee and acknowledge, if they were not more bold and raſh then wiſe and skilfull) to very good purpoſes, as ſetting downe Gods threatning of iudgements againſt his enemies; as alſo that of Samſons tying foxes tailes together with firebrands, to ſpoile the Philiſtimes corne; with ſuch like alſo they raile againſt the doctrine of predeſtination, and the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. But not counting them worth the anſwering, I conclude: ſeeing the Lord hath left the Scriptures ſo pure and free from all error, (the matters in them being ſo profitable and heauenly,) I conclude (I ſay) that if we deſire to liue comfortably by the benefit of them; let them bee our treaſure, while the world trample them vnderfoot, yea, and let our meditation and delight bee ſo much the more in Pſalm. 1. 2. them, and that continually. And this bee noted out of all theſe verſes generally, to the 17. in that they are a repetition out of Ioſhua.
            
            Now more particularly, in that ſo worthy things were done by this Tribe Doct. verſ. 8. before, and that therefore they were choſen now, rather then any of the other Tribes to guide the reſt, ſeeing that they were wiſeſt and faithfulleſt in Gods matters, as appeareth by the mentioning of theſe great actes, done by them; let it teach vs this; that ſuch as are wiſeſt and faithfulleſt, ought to bee vſed and placed in the chiefe roomes of the ſeruice of God, aboue the reſt. So Paul was endued with excellent gifts, and counted faithfull, before God put him 
               1. Tim. 1. 12. 
               in his ſeruice, and then he imployed him in the moſt waightie buſineſſe. So Ioſh. 2. 14. 
               Ioſhua ſent faithfull ſpies, to view the land of Canaan. This thing had ſuch force in the heathen Kings, as in Pharaoh, that hee preferred Ioſeph aboue all Geneſ. 41. 40. the chiefe Nobles of the land, though he was but a ſtranger? ſaying, where ſhall we find a man like this man fitted for this worke? and in the Kings of Babylon, that they committed the great and waighty matters of the Kingdome Geneſ. 41.
               
to Daniel, and the three Children, becauſe they ſaw, that the ſpirit of Dan. 3. 30. & 6. 2. God was in them to doe well aboue others. So Abraham truſted Eliezer his ſeruant, in that waighty matter of the marriage of his ſonne Iſaac, hauing none like him: yea, Ahab himſelfe made Obadiah (a worthy man) Steward of his houſhold, though hee had inough of other beſide. The holy Ghoſt makes mention at large, of thoſe Worthies which Dauid (for their good ſeruice 2. Sam. 23. in the warres againſt the enemies of the Lord) exalted to the higheſt roomes next him. So did Iehoiada. Hence it is, that the Wiſe man ſaith, Wo to that land, whoſe Princes are chilaren, and being not fit for any gouernment, riſe Eccleſ. 10. 16. &c. vp earely to drink ſtrong drink. Yea Salomon being put to his choice, deſired an vnderſtanding heart, wiſely to goe in and out before the people. And ſuch ought 1. King. 3. 9. Maſters of families, Magiſtrates and Gouernours in Townes to be, as well as Miniſters. And this order God hath ſet and taught vs, in commending and commanding faithfulnes and diligence (which are excellent vertues,) in ſeruāts, who yet are the meaneſt perſons, therby teaching vs, much more to prefer theſe gifts in them who are vſed and imploied in higher callings and places, and ſo much the more, if wiſdome be ioyned with them. And theſe qualities Iethro required in ſuch magiſtrates as ſhould be choſen; and the like Paul required in ſuch as are called to the miniſtry, beſides other like furniture: Exod 18. 21. 1. Tim. 3. 2. which giueth vs great cauſe of mourning, when wee ſee the contrary: and of reioycing, where theſe vertues are to bee ſeene and found in them, who are put in truſt. And ſuch ſhould executors of willes, and ſchoolemaſters be, into whoſe hands men are conſtrained to put their children, and goods; and comprimitters of caſes betwixt neighbours, ſhould be like vnto them, who are truſted with much oftentimes. And this honour, honeſt and 1. Sam. 26. 21. faithfull men haue with many, that in iudging of matters, they will, if their caſe be good, deſire to haue ſuch to giue their ſentence, and iudgement for them in their doubtfull cauſes rather then others, though they ſet not greatly by religion themſelues. And this ought to incourage vs all, to labour for Gods graces, ſeeing they make a man ſtand before the honorable: though money, fauour, or other reſpects are the chiefe gifts which moſt obtaine great places by.
            Now whereas a doubt may ariſe here, where it is ſaid, that Iudah had taken Ieruſalem, how it appeares to haue been ſo, ſeeing it is not expreſly ſet downe in Ioſhua, chap. 10. To that I anſwere, though it bee not plainely ſo Obiection. Anſwere. ſaid, yet it may well be vnderſtood, by the things that are written there: namely, that the King of Ieruſalem was taken and put to death, and that Iudah dwelt in the citie, and could not caſt out the Iebuſits that dwelt therein. By which, I ſay, it appeareth, that the citie was then taken, although it was not as yet wholly poſſeſſed, and ſo did they ſlay the inhabitants, and ſet the city on fire. Here by the occaſion of the deſtroying of theſe cities, Ieruſalem, Doct. out of ver. 8. 9. 10. Hebron, Debir, and others many, let vs conſider the deſolation that God ſendeth vpon goodly places, and the inhabitants thereof, when his hand is againſt them, and when hee is purpoſed to blow vpon them, and to ſet them, as it were, on the ſtage to the view of the world. Yea doubtleſſe, when he pleaſeth to take the iudgement into his hand, all the beautie and glorie of the world muſt vaniſh at his preſence, and the gloriouſeſt ſolemnities and monuments come to vtter decay. And to put vs in mind hereof,

is this written and ſet downe, to ſhew vs the changeable eſtate of the flouriſhingeſt proſperitie of fleſh. The which a man would thinke, that ſhould behold them in their beauty and time of their glory, that the enioyers thereof, did liue in a paradice and petty heauen, euen here vpon earth: whereas, when God hath blowne vpon them, they are more deſolate then the winter, and like to an houſe waſte and ruinous. When Nabuchadnezzar and the fooler in the Goſpell prided themſelues, the one in his great Babell, the other in his abundance, ſuddenly comes a voice to both of them: to the one, Thy Kingdome is departed from thee: and to the other, O foole, this night 
               Dan. 4. 28. Luke 12. 20. 
               shall they take thy ſoule from thee. For wee muſt know, that as there is a time to flouriſh, ſo is there a time to fade, a time to bee borne, and ſo to grow vp, and a time alſo to die. Therefore when the diſciples, much like the fooliſh people of the world, looking vpon the goodly buildings of the Temple, began to haue them in admiration, ſaying: Behold, Maſter, what goodly buildings are 
               Mark. 13. 1. 
               here; he making ſmall account of their ſpeeches, anſwered them fitly in this manner: I ſay vnto you, there ſhall not a ſtone remaine on a ſtone of all that yee ſee ſo coſtly and beautifull. Where are all the great perſons become, that poſſeſſed the earth not long agone, with all the glory thereof? They that made others afraid with their very countenance and looke, behold, they may bee troad vpon by the meaneſt, that were abuſed by them? As Dauid ſaith, I 
               Pſalm. 119. 96. Eccleſ. 1. 1. 
               haue ſeene an end of all perfection: which Salomon his ſonne prooued by clearer experience, ſaying of all; Vanitie of vanities. Of feaſting and banqueting, to ſpeake a word, how well pleaſing and welcome ſo euer it bee, yet how harſhly and fearefully it endeth many times, let Balſhazzars example teach Dan. 5. 6. vs. As for fauour and beautie, another of the precious things of this world, whatſoeuer it promiſeth in outward ſhew, how can the glory thereofbee more baſely ſpoken of, then we ſee, and in few yeeres find it to be, and in the Prouerbs, it is ſaid to be in theſe words: Fauour is deceitfull, and beauty is a vaine 
               Prou. 31. 30. 
               thing.
            
            The ſame may be ſaid of al other things, that are precious vnder the ſun, Note. as ſolemne marriages, inheritances, aduancements, with ſuch like, they all fade, as doth the flower. Now was their time come here mentioned, to bee brought to deſtruction, and the time of thoſe that remaine is comming apace, euen as the fall of the leafe in due ſeaſon. And they that carrie their hearts moſt high, muſt remember that this day is not farre off, though it ſhal be a day of lamentation and woe, to them that haue their delight here. For oh death how vnwelcome art thou to a man that hath laid vp no better treaſure then tranſitory? And yet what is leſſe thought on? but as the Pſalmiſt Pſalm. 49. 14. ſaith, the children that ſee all this, approoue of their fathers courſe, and follow it. The twelue daies, as the time of the natiuitie, commonly paſſed in reuell rout, a liuely picture of this ſhort and painted Paradiſe, as they count it, in many great houſes, where their play and belly-cheere is ſoone and ſodainly at an end, with more ſorrow then their pleaſure was in the middeſt of their enioying of it.
            And therefore, who can thinke of the madneſſe of the world without mourning? but oh that there were many to bewaile it. To ſee the carking and caring, the deceiuing, the couſonage that is almoſt euery where, and all to clime vp to this hill of promotion and libertie ſeeking, to liue as

men liſt, in whoring, in drunkenneſſe, in play, and ſuch like paſſing the time, Note. and yet when they are come to the top, they muſt by and by bee throwne downe againe with greater violence and ſhame. But if the change itſelfe be ſo vnwelcome, then much more, whē it cōmeth vpon them both ſuddenly and fearefully. So that the vileſt would not change their eſtate for theirs, See Pſal. 73. 19. whom erſt they admired. But, ſay ſome, ye trouble vs with telling vs theſe things, ſhew vs as well, how we may remedy them. I anſwere to ſuch as feare the changes, that I haue ſpoken of, and are troubled to heare of them; feare God, and ye ſhall not need to feare the comming of theſe, whenſoeuer they Pſalm. 112. Note. ſhall befall you; elſe that which you feare, ſhal come vpon you euen to vtter deſolation. And whereas many demand, if we, who ſo diſgrace the vngodly practiſe of the world, and are out of loue with it, are not ſubiect to changes alſo, as well as others; as from wealthy to want, from health to ſickneſſe, till death doe follow. I ſay this to them who haue laid vp their treaſure in heauen, it is the welcomeſt day to thinke of going hence, whatſoeuer they leaue behind them, and they haue ſo valued the tranſitorie and momentany pleaſures of this life, that they are willing and deſirous to forſake them all, if they were all theirs, for that which there they hope to enioy. In which reſpect, is that ſpoken by the Preacher, The day of death is better then the day of birth. But to proceed. Eccleſ. 7. 3.
            
            The holy ſtory mentioneth further both generally in this verſe, how Iudah had fought againſt the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountaine, and toward Verſ. 9. 10. the South, and in the low country, and more particularly againſt them that dwelt in Hebron, and ſo, diſcribeth that citie by another name that was giuen it in former times, that is, Kiriath-arba, or the citie of one Arba, who Ioſh. 15. 13. was a Giant, and the father of Anak, which Anak hauing three ſonnes, Sheſhai, Ahiman, and Talmai, Iudah ſlew them there. Theſe Anakims ſo called of their father, were mighty, tall and ſtrong, as appeareth by many other Scriptures, ſo by that which deſcribeth Goliah of Gath, by the ſhaft of his 1. Sam. 17. 7. ſpeare, that it was like a weauers beame, and that, which ſpeaketh of the ſpies that went to view the land of Canaan; who returning, feared the people with the report of their ſtature, ſaying, that they themſelues were but as graſſehoppers to them. 
               Num. 13. 34. Theſe giantlike men therefore, and thoſe which were about and vnder them, being taken away, what a benefit muſt it needes bee to the children of Iſrael? Now though theſe were properly called Anakims and Giants, and that their kind and poſteritie remaine not now to vexe faithfull Chriſtians, as they did then Gods Church, yet as there haue been many kinds of enemies, ſo there are, and alwaies ſhall be, which ſhall doe the ſame to the people of God, being cruell and ſcorneful contemners of the humble and innocent, that they did to the Iſraelites: who make their liues vnpleaſant, with grieuous burdens, which they lay vpon them, and deadly feare that they hold them in, and if they take not their life away from them alſo, yet they make it weariſome to them, ſo that many of them deuoure themſelues, theſe therefore may well be called Giants.
            When therefore God ſhal weaken ſuch Anakims, and abate their power, or take them away, when they cannot bee reclaimed and brought to repentance, Eſter. 8. 16. it muſt be counted the ſingular mercy of God. For the world is full of ſuch, in whom the prouerb is verified, that might ouercommeth right.

When men who haue power, authoritie, and wealth, ſo deale and liue with others, that they hold them in continuall ſlauery and feare. Thus Pharaoh was a Giant, and as the ſonne of Anak to Ioſepbs poſteritie, laying burthens vpon them, which they could not beare, and not thinking he had oppreſſed them enough by doing ſo, added yet more vnto them alſo. And thus they play the parts of giants, which grind the faces of the poore, to whom ſound reaſon, euen the commandement of God, diſwading them from it, is vtterly vnſauorie, and crauing of pity at their hands, is in vaine.
            This is apparent in ſutes and controuerſies, betwixt the mightie and the meane, the one eating vp the other, as if they were bread. So ſuch as are ſet in place to chaſe away wickedneſſe, receiuing and deuouring gifts out of the hands of the guilty, and lion-like roaring againſt the innocent, and ſo ſucking aduantage out of them, and liuing by the ſinnes of the people, are very Giants, and no better then Anakims. All ſuch and the like aggricuances, are to be groned vnder, by the godly in the eares of the Lord. And they who are deliuered from ſuch burdens, haue great cauſe with reioycing, to praiſe God, as the people did, when they were brought back out of the captiuitie, ſaying: Our mouth was full of laughter, and our tongue filled with ioy. But of this Pſalm. 126. 2. enough, becauſe I haue ſpoken of the like point before, in verſ. 7.
            Now to goe forward in the ſtory, it is ſaid, that Iudah had not reſted in Verſ. 7. Ioſh. 10. 26. theſe deſtructions of the Canaanites, and of many other mentioned in the booke of Ioſhua, but proceeded further to take Debir, another citie ſcituated by Hebron, but more of this in the next verſe. And in the meane ſeaſon, here it is to be conſidered, how vnwearied Iudah is ſaid to haue been in the worke of the Lord, euen in procuring the deſtruction of his enemies, the Canaanites, with Ioſhua while hee liued, who was the chiefe guide of the reſt. For this diligence of theirs, in going from one peece of this worke to another, ſhould be a notable incouragement to all that are ſeruants to God in any worke that he ſets them about, that they ſhould not doe it negligently, nor ſtand at a ſtay after good beginnings, as though they had done ſufficiently alreadie. They muſt not repeat their labours and cumbats which are paſt, as though they had done enough, but looke to thoſe which are to come: as the Apoſtle teacheth in the Epiſtle to the Philippians. And this is carefully Philip. 3. 13. to be regarded, whether it be in performing outward duties, as theſe men of Iuda did, or inward, as in reſiſting temptations, patient bearing of afflictions, and the like; they ſhould alwaies be vnwearied in the worke of the Lord. For to this end God hath promiſed ſtrength by the armour of a Chriſtian.
            And thus it is meet for al ſuch to grow from ſtrength to ſtrength, and from faith to faith, (as God hath giuen commandement,) and to verifie that which is written by Salomon; the righteous ſhineth as the light vnto the perfit day. 
               Rom. 1. 17. Prou. 4. 18. As plants when the be rooted in good ground doe burniſh and ſpread their branches, and bring foorth fruite plentifully. And ſuch muſt know, that it is Note. a ſore diſcouragement to the weaker Chriſtians, when they ſhall ſee dampes and deadneſſe in the ancienter profeſſors, who haue been ſometimes prouokers and ſtirrers vp of others to the duties of godlineſſe. A great blemiſh, doubtleſſe, it is in them who may iuſtly be charged to doe ſo. For beſide other inconueniences, this is one, that it beateth a ſtrong conceit into the

hearts of the weake, that they find not that liking in Gods ſeruice that they are told of, and promiſed in the word of God which they heare. As if God were not to be truſted in ſetting forth ſo large offers and priuiledges therein: or as though he were wearie of weldoing to his: the which to affirme is rancke blaſphemie. They ſhould all ſo know, ſuch I meane, as God hath put in his ſervice, that they ought now after long continuance therein, and in his houſe, to bee as fathers to procure and ſeeke the good of the weaker ſort of their brethren, and to haue great care that none become faint by their example; but therefore to ſhine as lights, and grow daily in grace, and in the 
               2. Pot. 3. 17. 
               knowledge of our Lord Ieſus. Oh it is comely for others to behold, and their owne glory, to ſee that they follow the Lord ſtil directing and going before them, as they did at any time paſt. Like Caleb, who fortie and fiue yeere after Ioſh. 14. 8. the Lord had ſet him about his work, as one of the two, who were counted more faithfull then the reſt, was as ſtrong and fit for it, as hee had been ſo many yeeres before. I know it is a rare thing, partly ſeeing few liue ſo long; partly ſeeing many waxe ſoone wearie of well doing, and either haue not meanes to ſet them forward, or elſe haue no deſire to vſe them with that delight which once they did; beſide their many diſcouragements; it is therefore (I ſay) a rare thing to ſee men faithfull and conſtant for any long time, Note. in goodneſſe. But ſo much the more commendable it is, where it may bee found: oh, it is a good thing alwaies to be conſtant in a good matter I deny Gal. 4. 18. not but the beſt may eaſily, and doe, with the wiſe virgins begin to nod, and Matth. 25. 5. with the Church in the Canticles fall a ſleepe; but therefore is it the needfuller for them to be quickned vp by Gods promiſes, and other incouragements, Cant. 5. 2. as where he ſaith, To him that ouercommeth will I giue the tree of life, that Reu. 2. 7. is, euerlaſting life, and ſuch like. And alſo to quicken vp themſelues, as I haue Matth. 26. 41. ſaid, by diligent, watching and feruent prayer, &c. that they periſh not with the wicked of the world, while they liue among them.
            For they know that by faithfulneſſe and conſtancie therein. they grow at laſt to perſeuerance, and to a good end of their conflicting daies: and that they muſt depart from many ill actions and bad companies, which other make themſelues merry with all. But if ſuch ſhal begin to think that their reward here, and in the life to come, wil not be anſwerable to the loſſe of their pleaſure that they forgoe, (which reward (yet) is an hundreth fold more euen 
               Matth. 19. 29. 
               in this life, beſide happineſſe afterwards) let them caſt their account before they begin: but if they feare nothing but their owne weakeneſſe, let them not be diſcouraged, God will be their ſtrength; let them caſt their care on him, 
               Pſalm. 27. 1. 
               and he will care for them. Thus by this which I haue ſaid of this matter, it may eaſily be ſeene, that they take the right courſe to happineſſe, who with theſe 1. Pet. 5. 7. men of Iuda, hold out conſtantly and vnwearied in well doing, notwithſtanding all diſcouragements, temptations and oppoſition to the contrary.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTH SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               VERS. 12. And Caleb ſaid, he that ſmiteth Kirlah. Sepher, and taketh it, euen to him will I giue Acſah my daughter to wife.
               
               VERS. 13. And Othniel, the ſonne of Kenaz, Calebs younger brother tooke it, to whom he gaue Acſah his daughter to wife.
               
               VERS. 14. And when ſhe came to him to aske of her father a field, and ſhe lighted off her aſſe, and Caleb ſaid vnto her, What wilt thou?
               
               VERS. 15. And ſhe anſwered him, Giue me a bleſsing, for thou haſt giuen me a South country, giue me alſo ſprings of water. And Caleb gaue her the ſprings aboue, and the ſprings beneath.
               
            
            
               THis citie Debir, it is ſaid, was in times paſt called Kiriah-ſepher: 
                  The ſenſe of the verſ. 12. 23. that is, the citie of one Sepher, to put a difference betwixt that and ſome other of that name. And it is ſaid here, that Caleb ſeeing more difficultie to winne this city, offered a reward to him that would ſet vpon it. But I muſt againe put the Reader in mind, that theſe things mentioned from the 8. verſe to the 17. were done in the daies of Ioſhua, and are but repeated here, to commend the faithfulnes, and care of this Tribe of Iuda: and as they were done then, ſo the ſubduing of this city is aſcribed to Ioſhua, in Ioſh. 10. becauſe he was their chiefe guide, and gouernour in all theſe warres, though Caleb offered a reward to him that Ioſhua 10. 38. winne it, becauſe it was his inheritance, and Othniel here mentioned was the perſon that tooke it, and enioyed the reward. This be ſaid for the meaning of theſe two verſes, and for reconciling this place with that which I cited out of Ioſhua.
            
            Now for the benefit which wee are to reape from hence, it is manifold; firſt by this, that there was more difficultie and danger in the winning of this 
                  Doct. 1. citie then other; it giueth vs to learne and to marke, that in going about the duties of our particular callings, (as this warring againſt theſe cities of the Canaanites was theirs) we muſt not thinke it ſtrange, if ſome part of our life, and at ſometime, be more incumbred then other parts, and at other times: and that we ſhould not be diſcouraged, nor diſquieted, when we ſee it to be Pſalm. 30. 6. Pſal. 42. 4. 5. ſo, euen theſe good ſeruants of God did find it ſo in ſome part of their work, more then in ſome other: and yet they did not for all that breake it off, but wiſely bethinke themſelues, how to ouercome the difficultie of it, by more then ordinarie paines, and care, when the buſineſſe required it. The like may be ſaid of the religious duties of our generall callings, both concerning the firſt, and ſecond Table, there is not alwaies that confidence, ioy, cheerefulneſſe, diligence, and feruency in the vſe of priuate meanes, or fruitfulneſſe Note.
               
in doing good to others: we find theſe come off with much difficultie ſometime, in reſpect of others. And this commeth not to paſſe by chance, as neither it did to them, (as men vſe to ſay) but by the prouidence of God, who moſt iſely diſpoſeth ſo of it, that it may not oftentimes be ſo with vs, that we haue hard ſucceſſe, leſt we ſhould be diſcouraged, and alſo leſt we ſhould not bring our worke to any good point, but (as they ſay) our labour ſhould be loſt, and in vaine, and nothing ſhould goe forward; as if in husbanding the ground by ſowing, reaping, and all other worke belonging to it, the weather ſhould alwaies be dropping.
            And although it be not often ſo, yet hee ſeeth it conuenient that ſometime men ſhould find it ſo, I meane hardneſſe, to bring their worke to paſſe, and ſome difficultie about it, though they haue skill in it, to the end they may haue proofe of their patience at ſuch times, and bee thankfull to God when it falleth not out ſo oftentimes, but that they haue good ſucceſſe for the moſt part. And alſo that they may learne experience againſt other like times, to be contented, when it ſhall ſo fall out againe, that ſo they may ſhew one euen tener in their life (as much as may bee) and in euery part of it, Note. ſome equalitie, in care, contentment, cheerefulneſſe, hope, and patience, and not to to bee carried into extremities, as many are, by the occaſions that are offered, and that come to paſſe daily. And this ought to guide all men in their callings, and in the actions of their liues, that, as well when things go againſt them, as when they goe with them, they may in al eſtates be thankful, (as we reade holy Iob was) eſpecially, ſeeing they know, that God ordereth Iob. 1. 21. both good ſucceſſe, and alſo the contrary to the good of his.
            The husbandman is hindred ſometime by the rainy weather: but yet ſo, as he hath his ſeaſons free from it, to doe his buſineſſe in. The Artificer is troubled about putting away his wares, and the falling of the price, ſo that he cannot alwaies make his aduantage of them, as ordinarily he doth, for the maintaining of himſelfe, and his charge. But God changeth thoſe times, ſo that they doe not alwaies keepe at one ſtay. The good miniſter is ſometime troubled about the careleſneſſe, and prophaneneſſe of his people, and is grieued for the ill ſucceſſe that he ſeeth on his labours, but God giueth him incouragement againe, that ſome doe regard his miniſtery, and receiue the Goſpell to their amendment, and ſaluation. Beſides the diligenteſt labourers in preaching are oft to ſeeke of neceſſarie helpes for this life; and more then their due they rarely find and ſeldome meet with, (what need ſoeuer they haue) if they get that truly paid them; the miniſtery being in ſo little account with men of the world, of which ſort the greateſt number is. So women in their places haue many croſſings of them by their husbands, ſeruants, and about children and matters of familie, beſide other vnlooked for accidents and troubles, which we ſee doe cauſe many of them, who are not 2. King 6. 33. ſeaſoned with grace, and ſauing knowledge, to bee exceedingly impatient, diſquiet, and out of order. Therefore if they, who are religious ſhould not vnder the like croſſes be better gouerned, though they enioy many comforts in the married eſtate, they ſhould euer, and anon bee out of frame, and vnquiet, and in no ſort enioy the benefit of that eſtate, as God hath allowed them to doe, as too many can teſtifie.
            In more particular manner I might ſhew the diſapointments that al ſorts

of people meet with and haue. As the labouring man for his part, is not behind the reſt, in finding much hardneſſe, by meanes of his poore eſtate, and the great prices of neceſſarie things at ſometimes eſpecially: but I ſhould be too long, if I ſhould ſtand vpon particulars. To theſe when wee adde other diſapointments and croſſes, as ill debters, ſutes in the law, loſſe of friends, who were vpholders of them, while they liued, diſeaſes and ſicknes, with a thouſand more, which cannot be remembred: all may ſee there ariſe many things in all conditions and dealings, to make ſome part of mens liues hardlier paſſed in peace and quietnes to their good liking, though they haue, for the moſt part, good ſucceſſe, and do vſually labour with ſome eaſe, as I haue ſaid. And why doe I ſet downe all this about the matter in hand? but that we may ſee the wiſdome and mercy of God herein, who mixeth both together, becauſe if all our life ſhould be ſmoothly carried, and eaſily paſſed, we ſhould be made thereby vnfit for our change, eſpecially for great trials, when they come; and ſo likewiſe, if it ſhould be for the moſt part tedious and troubleſome, there ſhould be nothing (in a manner) but wearineſſe and diſcomfort. And therefore all ſorts ſhould ſeeke to be in Gods fauour, that ſo they may alſo bee vnder his gouernment in both eſtates, and that while they are ſo, they may daily keepe ſo; and that aboue all other things, which eſtate of life onely hath the promiſe of bleſſing in euery calling and condition, and where it is wanting, all confuſion (for the moſt part) breaketh in amongſt men, that they be not only vnquiet in their troubles, and doe moſt vncomfortably, go vnder difficulties; but alſo when they enioy any more freedome and proſperitie, they be euen in their beſt eſtate, vnprofitable, if not offenſiue and troubleſome. And if it ſeeme ſtrange to any, that God thus diſpoſeth of mens trauels and dealings, that the ſucceſſe be vncertaine, let them looke to the end why he doth ſo, before ſet downe; and namely, if they be much troubled, for that many caſualities fall out in their liues, they muſt know, that if it were otherwiſe, they would keepe no compaſſe, and therefore God ſeeth 1. Pet. 1. 7. it meet ſometime that it ſhould be ſo.
            But another thing to be noted here in Caleb, is this: that when hee ſaw it required courage, as well as skill, to aduenture and ſet vpon this citie, for the 
                  Doct. 2. deſtroying of Gods enemies that were in it, as hee was commanded, promiſeth his daughter to him that would ſet vpon it. This was no ſmall matter that he offered, but marke why? as I haue ſhewed, all may ſee hee did ſhew this forwardneſſe to the rooting out of Gods enemies. And it teacheth, that Matth. 5. 12. 13. for the Lords ſake, we ought to doe much, and yet count it no great matter that we doe. To aduance his name, and helpe to ſetvp his true worſhip, and the ſincere preaching of the Goſpell, the ouerthrowing of his enemies, and for ſuch like ſeruice of his, euery man ought to be ready and willing to be abaſed Heb. 10 33. Note. in his countenance, weakened in his wealth, and ſuſtaine much hardſhip, if need be. Dauid may be brought in here, and ſet in none of the meaneſt roomes, for that which he did in this behalfe. For beſide that there was none in his time, that honoured God more then hee did in the louing, frequenting, and longing after his being in the Lords houſe, and the place where his honour dwelleth: ſo hee bare reproch as mighty as hee was, and that willingly for his zeale toward God: for when he brought the Arke of God with ſhouting, and ſound of trumpet into the citie of Dauid, dancing

before it, Michael, Sauls daughter, looked out at the window, and diſpiſed 2. Sam. 6. 16. him, as thinking it too baſe a thing for a King to doe ſo: but he anſwered, it was before the Lord, and that he would yet, for his ſake, be more vile. So Eſter, 
               Eſter. 4. 16. for bringing the people of God out of deſolation, and vtter rooting out, put her life in danger, ſaying, If I periſh, I periſh. So Moſes and Paul deſired Exod. 32. 32. Rom. 9. 3. rather to periſh, then the people of God ſhould be forſaken, and ſo God his glory be empeached.
            And why ſhould they not, all theſe, (I meane) and other ſuch, as well as they, euen Kings and Queenes lay downe their Crownes at his feet, and aduance him, who hath honoured them aboue others? And much more wee, how are meane and inferiours, ſhould think our ſelues happie if we may bee imployed by him, or if any thing that we haue might doe him ſeruice. According to that which is written, Mark. 1. He that loueth father or mother, more 
               Marke 1. 31. 
               then me? is not worthie of me. And it is true indeed, that wee ſhould loue nothing ſo well, but we ſhould forgoe it for the Lords cauſe; therefore when he ſaith, Giue me thine heart (my ſonne,) we ſhould reioyce that he will aske and Prou. 23. 26. take any thing that we haue, and yeeld it him with all readineſſe. But for ought I ſee, I may iuſtly complaine, and ſay: wee are like thoſe children, which hauing gotten what they can at their fathers hand, caſt him off, and flouriſh boldly with that which they haue gotten of him. So to ſpeake what I thinke, as I ſee with mine owne eies, when God hath inriched men with his manifold bleſſings, there is not one of many that conſidereth it, of whom he hath receiued all that he inioyeth; but glorieth of that which is 1. Cor. 4. 7. not his owne, and ſetteth out himſelfe with anothers goods, as though hee owed nothing to him, of whom he receiued him.
            And yet, to aggrauate our ſin, I muſt needs adde one thing, I am perſwaded, (greatly to our ſhame and conuiction) that many in the Papacie, who ſhal neuer haue reward for it, are brought (through error) to do many things and giue much, in a ſuperſtitious zeale to this end, that they may bee ſaued. But if they doe that which God neuer required at their hands, and therfore amiſſe; ought not we, who haue learned better, to do readily that which we are commanded, eſpecially our reward being certaine? If they doe it to merit that which they ſhall neuer attaine; ought not we much more, to doe the duties which we are commanded, who belieue that we haue the beſt things freely promiſed, I meane eternall life, which alſo in due time ſhall bee giuen vs of God, and that of his meere mercie; and bountie? And if Caleb would giue his daughter, ſhould not wee much more giue ſome part of our ſubſtance to feede the hungry, and to helpe cloath the naked, when we may yet reſerue ſufficient for our ſelues beſides? Whereas the truth is, that all is too little that wee can doe to good vſes, that wee might honour God: (as Caleb here could affoord him the beſt thing that they had) and yet all is of vs thought to much (when it is but little) that we doe this way, leſt wee ſhould hinder our ſelues.
            And to end this verſe, this Caleb being a godly man, and as well renowned 
                  Doct. 3. and approoued for his grace, as for his greatneſſe; in ſaving, that hee would giue his daughter to wife, ſheweth, that hee had well learned Moſes 
               Deut. 7. 3. doctrine, in whoſe daies he liued, and namely in this point, (as he had in many other) that children are not to diſpoſe of their owne marriage, but the father.

To whom, though many haue loſt their honour that way, as being vnfitter to make choice, then their children themſelues; yet God hath giuen them this libertie, that if they do no good with it, they may be conuicted by it, who for their place and yeeres, ſhould be fitter to make the match in good ſort, then the children, who for the moſt part are caried, not ſo much by religion, and good aduiſedneſſe, as by will, and raſh beate to make their owne choice: and therefore it is ofttimes iuſtly requited by God, who ought chiefly to be obeyed in that action, that to make their ſinne the better appeare, their match is as ſoone repented of, many times, as it is inioyed.
            
               Moſes therfore, who was Gods mouth to the people, was commanded by him to teach this, that the parents had authoritie in prouiding marriages for their children: for thus he ſaith, Thou ſhalt not giue thy daughter to the ſonne of the Canaanite, nor take his daughter to thy ſonne. And therefore we reade that Sampſon gaue this honour to his father and mother, for the granting of their conſent in his marriage, (as many other did the like) for thus he ſaith: I ſaw a 
               Iudges 14. 2. 
               woman, and ſhe pleaſeth me well, now therefore giue me her to wife. And Paul comming long after Moſes, agreed with him, as being both faithfull ſeruants to their Maſter; he teacheth that this dutie belongeth to the father, ſaying: He 
               1. Cor. 7. 38. 
               that giueth his daughter in marriage, doth well, ſignifying who ſhould giue her. Although I ſpeake not this, as though they might force their children to what marriages they liſt, but to giue their conſent, and aduice muſt bee had, with ſome ſpeciall and iuſt cauſe ſhewed (if it be expedient,) when, and why they may not. So that this being cleare, it doth the more bewray the boldneſſe, wilfulnes, and diſobedience of many children, who would be thought wiſe enough to know their duties, who yet doe not meanely grieue their parents, but alſo prouide ill for themſelues, in making their matches at their own pleaſures: who, beſide, that they bring in one little better, then a Canaanite ofttimes at leaſt, a waſpe, an hagge, or otherwiſe, badly qualified into, and amongſt a good kindred, ſo they themſelues ſeldome agree, and eſpecially if the one partie draw any thing neerer to God, then the other.
            Hereof it commeth to paſſe, I will not ſay onely, but doubtleſſe in great part, that there are ſo many diſordered, and offenſiue, matches and marriages, and the perſons ſo weariſome one to the other, that they muſt either be parted by other, or they will part themſelues; or if they cannot, yet they doe little better: for dwelling both in one houſe, yet, they may not (many times) meete, but be parted at bed and board, and they muſt haue them that are of another houſe, to ſet them together; whereby, it may bee eaſily gathered, what manner of Chriſtian and ſociable life they enioy together; and what fruite they reape of iuſtling a ſide the commandement of God about their comming together. But it is not my purpoſe to ſhew the annoiances that be in all vnlawfull marriages, I doe but poynt at ſome, which fall out, yea, and come oft, and ordinarily, where Gods ordinance and commandement is reiected, as when the children make their owne marriages without their parents, or againſt them.
            But ſeeing occaſion may be taken here, of mouing a queſtion or two, I Verſ. 12. 13. will ſtand a little vpon theſe two verſes for the ſatiſfying the doubts that are raiſed: and make vſe thereof afterward. It is therefore obiected here, whither 
                  Obiection 1. 
               Caleb did aduiſedly, and whither he was to be commended for this offering

of his daughter to him that ſhould winne Debit: for what knew he, whether he might lawfully keepe promiſe with the partie, ſuch an one, as he might haue been? Alſo it is obiected, that he who did winne it, was thought 2 to be too neare a kinde to him, Othniel by name, being ſaid to be his younger brother, ſo that he might not lawfully take her to wife. Theſe things therefore require an anſwere. To the firſt, that wee are chiefely to looke to this, 
                  Anſwere 1. namely, the commendation of Caleb, that he would offer ſo largely for the deſtroying of Gods enemies, according to Gods commandement, and this the holy Ghoſt intended to declare, and not that we ſhould make queſtion, whether he did it rightly and lawfully, or no. For as charitie is not ſuſpitious, 
               1. Cor. 13. 5. Ioſh. 14. 11. ſo he being ſo rarely commended for his pietie, and obedience to God, it becommeth not vs to iudge him for that, which we cannot accuſe him of, neither can any ſuch thing be gathered againſt him out of the text. It is true, he offered his daughter vpon the condition mentioned, and there is no more ſet downe in what manner, or with what reſpects; but he did it ſo, as he was commended for it, neither is he charged to haue done it raſhly: what hath any man therefore to doe to challenge him for it? But if they can proue him to haue done raſhly (which they ſhall neuer be able to doe, ſeeing the holy Ghoſt commendeth him for it) then it is not denied, but that it was his ſinne.
            Now, if any vrge this againſt him, to take libertie thereby for dealing The vſe of this anſwer. raſhly, and without due conſideration in waightie caſes, or in the caſe of marriage, particularly, affirming that they doe but as Caleb did, and they aduenture it, either in their owne, or in making of their childrens marriages, with ſuch perſons whoſe conuerſation they doe not know; Let them ſeeke a better defence for their doings, then the example of Caleb; for beſides, that we muſt liue by rules, and not by examples; ſo neither can they draw any ſuch liberty from his practiſe. But whatſoeuer may bee ſaid to haue been done by any good man concerning this matter, it skilleth not, we haue a commandement to marry in the Lord. And as for them, that ſeek to defend 1. Cor. 7. 39. their matches, which haue ſlightly bin made, wherein God hath had either ſmall or no hand: he hath ſufficiently branded, and ſet his marke vpon them, that as they haue not been gone about, nor finiſhed by his allowance and direction, ſo they are not by him alowed, (though mariage otherwiſe bee honourable,) and therefore not beautified with the ſweete ſociableneſſe and other commodities, which he hath annexed to thoſe marriages, which he approueth. But I will ſpeake more at large of this matter, when I ſhall haue more direct occaſion offered. That which I haue ſaid of raſh marriages, I may ſay, and ſo take me) of all vnaduiſed and inconſiderate actions and attempts whatſoeuer, that as men can haue no authoritie for the taking them in hand, from Calebs example, no neither haue from the Scriptures in any place; euen ſo, and thereafter ſhall their gaineſayings be by them, who will needs goe to worke in that manner.
            To the next obiection, that he gaue his daughter through his raſh offer to 
                  Anſwere 2. one of his owne fleſh, who could not marrie her by the law of God, being his brother, and therfore vncle to her: to this I ſay that, he was not his younger brother, to whom hee gaue her, I meane Othniel, but his kinſeman, and the leaſt euery way among his brethren, the children of his father, both in

yeeres, authority, and wealth. But yee will obiect, that the text calleth him his brother: I anſwer, that Chriſts kinſmen were called his brethren, and yet were not ſo; and all Diuines almoſt grant, that Marie, the mother of our Sauiour had no more children then Chriſt only; and therfore they expound thoſe places, Mat. 13. & 12. of his kinſmen and kinſwomen. And that this the Matth. 13. 55. and 12. 46. Hebrew word, here vſed, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                which properly ſignifieth a naturall brother, is put as vſually for a kinſeman alſo, and the poſteritie of brethren, the Scripture is cleare, and plentifull in ſhewing it. Reade for Example, Leuit. 25. Leuit. 25. 46. where the word brethren ſignifieth the children of brethren: Ouer your brethren, 
               Numb. 32. 6. 
               the children of Iſrael, ye ſhall not rule one ouer another with crueltie. And numb. 32. ſhall your brethren the children of Iſrael goe to warre, and ye tarrie here? In both places, by brethren, the Scripture meaneth the poſteritie and children of the 12. ſonnes of Iacob, and ſo many other Scriptures doe. And ſo to returne, if this Othniel and Achſah had been within the degrees forbidden, that he might not haue married her, but it had been againſt the commandement of God, who doubteth, but that hee would haue been better aduiſed, and that hee meant not in offering her to doe any thing that ſhould offend God? I ſay therefore if either Othniel, or any other winning the citie, could not lawfully haue married her, Caleb would haue ſupplied his offer ſome other way to the contentment of the partie.
            And vpon the anſwer to the queſtion, I ſay much like as vpon the anſwer of the former queſtion, as the matter requireth, and giueth occaſion. Let none gather from this ſpeech of Caleb, that it is lawfull to marrie within degrees forbidden, as though Caleb had made ſuch a marriage for his daughter. And although he were called his kinſman, yet ſeeing it is not ſaid, he was his brothers, or ſiſters ſonne, therefore I haue no neceſſarie occaſion offered to anſwere the queſtion, whether Coſin Germans may marrie together: but yet ſeeing I haue thus ſpoken of it, I therefore ſignifie my iudgement agreeing with ſuch as I haue read and conferred with, and that is this, that although the word of God doe not expreſſely forbid it, yet ſeeing it prohibiteth thoſe degrees that be further off, it is of great probabilitie, that Chriſtiſhould more then in a common manner conſider and examine for what weightie and ſpeciall cauſes they doe imbrace, and not abſtaine from ſuch marriages. And me thinkes he hath giuen ſome watchword thereof vnto vs in this, that the life of many couples ſo marrying together, hath been found tedious, and accompanied with mutual diſlikes betwixt the parties, when no reaſon could be ſeene thereof beſide that, and for proofe hereof, it hath been acknowledged, that to haue been the cauſe thereof. For my part, when the queſtion hath been propounded to mee about ſuch marriages, I haue (as I know the practiſe of many my betters to haue been) I haue (I ſay) diſſwaded from them for inconueniences, not as vnlawfull: and ſo I leaue this point. But to returne to Caleb, although he had maried his daughter within degrees forbidden, yet it had giuen no libertie to vs to doe ſo, neither to doe any thing elſe, that is vnlawfull, or forbidden by the word of God, foraſmuch as we haue our direction there, what we may do, either in matters of marriage, or in any thing elſe whatſoeuer. And therefore wee ought little to regard examples, that leade any other way. And thus theſe obiections being anſwered, I will proceed in th ſtory.
            
               
And firſt that it is ſaid here that Othniel, being a valiant man, took the citie Verſ 13. Doct. 1. Debir, notwithſtanding that the difficulties to win it were very great, by this wee ſee, that beſides this verifieth the prouerb which is heere ſpoken of him, that a mans gift preferreth him, (as the like may be ſaid of Ioſeph, Daniel, and others) and that all men ſhould ſeeke for the gifts of God, which they may attaine, to honour the giuer, who preferreth them thereby: I ſay, beſides that, we may learne that Othniel being religious, and his prayers being moſt faithfully 1. Cron. 4. 10. made to God, as we reade in the Chronacles, ſo that God heard them, and yet he tooke incouragement by the offer of Caleb to ſet vpon that great worke; we may (I ſay) learne, that euen godly men may take, and vſe the benefit of ſuch incouragements, as are lawfully offered them to the going about any worke that God commandeth them. It is true indeed, that euen his bare word alone ought to put life into vs, and quicken vs to our duties, and much more, becauſe there is a promiſe of bleſſing annexed to the obeying of euery commandement of his, yea a great promiſe of reward: but yet, Pſalm. 19. 11. ſeeing we are weake, becauſe of the fleſh that ſtriueth againſt the ſpirit in vs, Gal. 5. 17. therefore we haue need of all helpes and furtherance that may whet vs on. And therefore, though it was the dutie of Othniel to ſet againſt the enemies of God, as the reſt of the Iſraelites were bound to doe, yet there is no doubt, but he was much more earneſtly ſet on by this incouragement. So, it is the dutie of euery faithfull miniſter of God to preach the Goſpel diligently and willingly, euen for the commandement of Chriſt, If thou loueſt mee, feede my 
               Iohn. 21. 16. 
               lambes, and my ſheepe: yet if the Lord bleſſe his labours plentifully, and the people miniſter to him, readily, ſo that hee bee ſufficiently prouided for, no man doubteth, but that hee ſhall doe his dutie much better, as ſeeing thereby that hee is (as good reaſon why hee ſhould ſo bee) highly and well regarded. So a Chriſtian man that laboureth with his hands in the calling God hath ſet him, ought to bee occupied therein willingly, and for conſcience ſake; but if God bleſſe him with good ſucceſſe, he ſhall goe about the duties of it farre more chearefully, and in better ſort. In all things we find it thus. If the Goſpell be ſoundly and diligently preached, all ought to be ready to heare it, but if magiſtrates themſelues bee forward that way, and cauſe others by their authoritie to doe the ſame, ſo that they ſee the Goſpel be had in good account, ſhall it not (thinke we) quicken euen the beſt much more then they ſhould otherwiſe be? not that theſe meaner incouragemēts ſhould moſt preuaile with men, but the Lords commandement; yet that ſhall the better doe it, when theſe alſo be added, to helpe our weakenes. But to looke to theſe principally, while the chiefe is neglected, that is a thing meerely prepoſterous, and the next way to pul downe al right maner of going about our duties, what ſhewes thereof ſoeuer men wil make, and how commonly ſo euer the the greateſt part offend this way. And yet God ſeeing the infirmitie of his people, and their vnto wardneſſe to godly duties, and how hardly they are brought to the well diſcharging of them by his bare commandement, hath drawne them on by fit rewards, promiſes, and incouragements. For who doubteth, that the deare ſeruants of God are much heartned and helped forward thereby? and yet Gods charge (as I haue ſaid) ought moſt to preuaile with them, though hypocrites and time-ſeruers doe make their greateſt account of them, other, little ſetting by this in the meane

while, till God open their eies to repent, or till they bee hardned. For what one of a thouſand in any calling or condition would labour and trauell euen for the neceſſarie helpes to this life, by the vertue of the bare commandement [thou ſhalt labour] if gaine and profit came not in thereby?
            To proceed, Othniel being the meaneſt in his fathers houſe, and yet Caleb 
               
                  Doct. 2. keeping promiſe with him, in giuing his daughter to him; it commendeth his faithfulnes in that he did not winde out diſhoneſtly from making good his word, as men vſe to doe; euen as hee is ſet forth, and praiſed in many other reſpects before. To be praiſed of men, or to praiſe a mans ſelfe is matter of ſmall reiovcing, but he, whom the Lord praiſeth is bleſſed; as Iob was, ſeeing 2. Cor. 10. 18. God himſelfe ſpake of him thus to Satan, Haſt thou not conſidered my ſervant Iob, that he feareth God, and departeth from euill. And ſo he commended Zacharie 
               Iob. 1. 8. Luke 1. 6. and Elizabeth, and Cornelius. But to come more particularly to that which Actes 10. 2. he is commended for here, I meane his faithfulneſſe in keeping his promiſe, and that in ſo great a matter; and when he had that which he would at Othniels hands; how many (thinke we) ſhall be found that wil doe ſo? but winde out from ſtanding to their word, diſhoneſtly, and with ſubtill diſtinctions, wranglings, and wreſtings of the matter, and other ſetting downe their meanings then they had, when they promiſed, eſpecially if it bee for their owne benefit and aduantages? Oh, it is lamentable euery where to behold it, ſo that the innocent (who are for the moſt part of the poorer ſort) goe commonly by the hardeſt; and yet, let vs know in the meane while, that God will take part with the wronged and oppreſſed, and therefore let vs beware of it. But the world is come to this, that there is no hold of the moſt mens word: no, nor of their wrighting neither, if by any meanes, it may be ſhifted off, and denied. Which cauſed Salomon to cry out, ſaying: Euery man will 
               Prou. 20. 7. 
               boaſt of his owne goodneſſe, but where ſhall wee find a faithfull man? It is a vertue that God requireth to be in him, whom hee will put in his ſeruice, I meane faithfulneſſe, as Paul ſheweth of himſelfe, that he was counted faithfull, and 1. Tim. 1. 12. then put in his ſeruice. And wee in our earthly dealings, what other good parts ſoeuer we find in our ſeruants, yet we are glad to forgoe them all, if we cannot haue them faithfull, and truſtie to vs. And ſo vnfaithfulneſſe on the contrarv, is ſo diſhked and hated euen of thoſe who are faultie in it themſelues, though blind through ſelfeloue in ſeeing it, that they who can no way hide it, but that it breaketh forth in thē to be ſeene openly, are brought into vtter diſcredit by it. And euen ſo, if others, who as commonly offend in Note. it, but can more cleanely conuay, and hide it with ſetting a faire face on it, were brought to light, as they are, who cannot ſo eaſily couer it, they ſhould (doubtleſſe) be in little account, how many ſo euer they be who are tainted with it. Gehezay, Iudas, Ananias, with Saphira his wife, and Simon Magus, who Iohn 1. 47. gaue ſhew of faithfulneſſe, after hee heard Philip preach, theſe with many ſuch do teſtifie, how this faithfulnes is iuſtled aſide, and reiected. But happie was Nathaniel, a true Iſraelite, in whom there was no guide, who then did reioyce for it, and now doth inioy the fruit of it in heauen, while the ſtaine, and reproch of the other mentioned, will neuer be put out. And ſo (to conclude) muſt they all ſhew this faithfulneſſe, who deſire to enter into the Lords Tabernacle, Pſalm. 15. 4. and conſequently truly performe that which they haue lawfully promiſed, as in the Pſalme is plainely ſhewed. And but for the auoiding of

tediouſnes, it might further be laid out more at large. For, as I haue ſaid ſomwhat to the diſgracing of this ſin of vnfaithfulnes in general, & in deceiuing one another by breaking promiſe, ſo it is much more odious when it is practized vnder pretence of religion: I meane, while men ſhall profeſſe with their mouthes to feare God, and yet denie the power thereof in their liues, as ſome of them did, of whom I haue ſpoke before.
            Now to ſhew Calebs liberality to Othniel, it is ſhewed, that as he had giuen Verſe 14. 15. his daughter to him; ſo hee gaue him a liberall and rich dowry with her, which we vnderſtand to haue been ſo by her owne words; when ſhe ſaid to her father, thou haſt giuen me a countrey: and this he did, that it might bee ſeene that he gaue her freely to him, as he had promiſed to doe: for hee was a great Prince, and Othniel was of the ſame Tribe. Moreouer, (to ſhew the the libertie that children haue allowed them of God,) it is ſaid here, that ſhe deſired other ground of her father, (as ſhe had mooued her husband before to doe, with ſprings of water fit for their vſe, ſeeing that was dry ground, which he had giuen her. And ſhe tooke the fitteſt oppertunitie to requeſt it, when ſhe hauing gone to abide and dwell with her husband, and they both had (in all likelihood) viewed the ground, after that, ſhe returning to her father, who came to meet her, ſhe caſt herſelfe from her aſſe, that ſhe might do reuerence, and her dutie to her father, and then ſhee made this petition to him. This be ſaid for the clearing and better vnderſtanding of theſe two verſes. This ſtory, though briefe, doth giue good light to vs both about one dutie of parents in marrying their children, to wit, to prouide for them, and as they may conueniently alſo of and about the liberties of the children againe, when they are beſtowed in marriage, namely, that they may make requeſt for neceſſaries, if there haue been neglect thereof before.
            And firſt, concerning parents, ſeeing Caleb gaue poſſeſſions with his daughter at her marriage, according to his greatneſſe; euen poſſeſſions of ground, which had not bin lawfull for him to haue done, but that the young couple were both of the ſame Tribe, it teacheth that parents at the putting of their children (which haue been obedient to them) from their charge, at their marriage, ſhould as ſufficiently prouide for them as they may, and as it may ſtand with other conueniences. They ſhould not ſeeke and deſire to pleaſe them in marriage without their charge, for many inconueniences goe therewith: as Abraham gaue portions to Iſaac, and Iſhmael, and the Lord declared Geneſ. 25. 5. 6. Ioſhua 14. & 15. 16. & 17. to vs in the ſtory of diuiding the land of Canaan, that hee was well pleaſed with this, that prouiſion ſhould be made for poſteritie, one generation after another. Neither could ſocieties be otherwiſe maintained among men in good ſort, nor children be beſtowed in fit and due time in marriage, whereby very great hurt and detriment muſt needs fall out, both to Church and commonwealth.
            But herein I meane in parents prouiding for their children, (as farre as my knowledge reacheth) there is for the moſt part, no great fault to bee found: although indeed, there are ſome vnnaturall and hard harted men, from whom little or nothing can be wrong, (though ability faile them not) till they muſt leaue their goods to bee ſcrambled for by their children with much ſtrife and contention ſeeing they could neuer bee brought to diſpoſe of them in any reaſonable ſort while they liued. But to leaue theſe, and

come againe to the other, their fault is twofold otherwiſe, though the moſt of them be not to be charged this way, as I haue ſaid. The one is, that they get much of their wealth by ill meanes, which they leaue richly to their children at their death, or beſtow it as they pleaſe vpon them in their life. The other is, that they oft put all out of their owne hands into their childrens, to preferre them in marriage, and ſetting them vp ſo high, they bring themſelues as low. Theſe two euils are very common, and require good looking to, for the amending of them. For the firſt, it is a ſweet comming in of their goods to them which they wring from others by oppreſſion, extorſion, violence, or fraud; it is (I ſay) ſweet in the comming in, but as bitter it ſhall bee, (to the full) at the going out.
            The Lord hath ſet vs our bounds, that wee ſhould in no wiſe offer others Matth. 7. 1. 12. that meaſure, which we are vnwilling ſhould be offered to vs againe, which rule, though I am perſwaded that Preachers may teare their tongues to the ſtumpes, before they ſhall bring many to be guided by, yet ſome (I hope) wil ſubmit themſelues vnto it. But in all dealings, there are ſo many waies found out to vphold mens eſtates, or to augment them, and the greateſt pretence is for their children, that they will heare nothing, if it be ſpoken to perſwade to equitie, and innocency which make the practiſers thereof bold as a Lion, Prou. 28. 1. and to the trying of their doings, whither they be good or no.
            Such, and ſo many kinds of deceiuings, and cruell dealings there are practiſed, as by Executors in detaining the goods committed to their fidelity, to be put to good vſes; ſuch rackings of mens rents, that they neuer regard how the tenant with all his toile may, in any poore ſort, be maintained; but they are forced by neceſſitie to leaue their farmes, and ſome to run cleane away. Such exactions in their loanes, till they fill the priſons with them, who cannot pay their vnreaſonable demands, whereas they ſhould looke for no benefit thereby, but that only which might ſtand with the benefit of them that vſe and imploy the ſtocke. And to giue a taſte of the reſt by theſe, who are occupied in greater dealings, (for who can recken vp all) to come to ſmaller matters, who almoſt deales iuſtly in them? But ioynting there is one of another in two penny dealings (as pinching in meaſures and waights to get a groat or a ſhilling or in the whole bargaine, with the like, ſo that ſuch gaine is more ſweete to them, then all the reſt, which they may lawfully take for their commodities, as it is in the Prouerb, ſtollen things, though they be but Prou. 9. 17. 
               waters are ſweet. But by this, conceiue of the reſt. This ſhal ſuffice to ſay of the firſt ſinne of parents about prouiding for their children; that I ſay nothing of the great hurt they doe themſelues hereby: for while they are thus greedily ſet to ſeeke commoditie for their children, they bereaue themſelues of knowledge and grace: yea, and they waxe very ſloathfull and negligent in vſing the meanes to increaſe both; and that alſo beſide the omitting the doing of good to others. By this meanes leauing no bleſſing, (as Caleb did) but a curſe to their poſteritie, who muſt pay the ſhot full dearely, for all thoſe commings in of vnrighteous Mammon. Better it is to be the beaſt, then the child of ſuch parents.
            The ſecond fault of parents followeth, that is, to put themſelues out of all, euen houſe and home, (as they ſay) and that for the preferring of their children to great mariages, (little elſe being reſpected of them) wherein, though

they deale ill in the former to the loading and burdening of their conſciences, yet in this latter, they prouide moſt vnwiſely for themſelues, and their bodily eſtate and maintainance, and thereby it muſt needs goe the worſe with their ſoules. True it is indeed, their children gaine wel by the bargaine, (if all other things be ſutable in their match, as religion in both parties, and good liking betwixt them, for that very cauſe, that they be both heires of the promiſe) but what wiſdome is that in the parents, to depriue themſelues and many poore neighbours, of the benefit, which they might, and by good right ought to haue inioyed by keeping their eſtate, eſpecially the greateſt part of it in their owne hands, and to thruſt their heads vnder their childrens wings; to lift vp them, and pluck downe themſelues, when yet, for the moſt part, their children are very vnfit for it? But be they as they may be, I meane fit enough to vſe that eſtate, yet they hauing once obtained a right in al, and being put into poſſeſſion thereof, how vnmeet is it that the parents muſt be beholding to them for that which they haue to liue with all? And yet, that ſhall be with grudging enough yeelded vnto them, eſpecially after a while. For they deale with them as flatterers do with their benefactors, when they haue ſucked what they can, then vnthankfully they caſt them off, and turne them ouer perke, nay, more then that, if their parents haue kept any thing in their owne hands to relieue themſelues, ſome children are neuer well, till they haue, vnder ſome colourable ſhew of reaſon, wound euen that from them into their owne hands: or if they cannot, then their death is longed for, that ſo they may haue all. So that their old age is tedious, and irkſome to them, wherein they ſhould looke for moſt kindneſſe and quietnes at their childrens hands, and the greateſt reſpect and regard to be had of them.
            For their occupyings; I deny not, but when age hath made them vnfit for labour, or ouerſeeing their commodities, it may be conuenient to yeeld them into their childrens hands, thoſe I meane, which in all reſpects ſhall be thought meeteſt for the ſame; but vpon good conditions, yet, that their parents may be well dealt with by them, and keepe the chiefe hold in their owne hands for the time. And theſe two dangers being wiſely auoided by parents, I freely affirme, that they ought to prouide for their children, as I 1. Tim. 5. 8. haue ſaid, when they beſtow them in marriage, wherein (yet) this muſt bee obſerued of them, that they ſtraine themſelues the further to do them good, and more good, as they haue ſhewed themſelues moſt obedient to them in the Lord, and moſt humble, and are qualified with other good fruites of religion. And this be ſaid of the parents prouiding for their children, at the putting of them forth to marriage, by occaſion of Calebs ſo doing to his daughter. Now followeth the other point in this ſhort ſtory, that is, the libertie, which the children haue at that time, to make requeſt for themſelues to their parents: But I will here cut off, as hauing been ouer long.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTH SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to goe forward in the ſtory where I left concerning Caleb 
               Verſ. 14. 15. The opening of them.
                and Acſah his daughter, wee are here to conſider what Acſah, Calebs daughter ſaid to her father when he met her, as we haue heard what he himſelfe her father did to her, when he gaue her to Othniel in marriage. She (it is ſaid here) when ſhe came firſt to her husband, moued him to aske of her father a field; but whither he was loath and refuſed, or whither he tarried too long, ſhe lighted off her aſſe and made the requeſt to her father herſelfe, he giuing her oportunitie by asking of her, what ſhe deſired; for it ſeemes, hee ſaw, ſhee came to ſome ſuch end, then ſhe beſought him, that as he had giuen her drie ground without water, ſo he would giue her ſprings of water to it, for her bounds were great and large; and ſhe requeſting this of him, he gaue them vnto her contentation. Now from hence we may learne (as I ſaid,) beſides the reuerence ſhe ſhewed to her father in lighting from her beaſt, what the libertie of children is Doct. when they are beſtowed in marriage, and that is this:
            They may deſire of their parents, as their abilitie will giue leaue, ſuch things as they ſee to be needful for them in their place, to the honeſt ſupply of their wants, if their parents haue neglected, or not ſeene, and remembred it; ſeeing they are to looke to it, and none are fitter nor meeter to helpe them. For through want of neceſſaries, there is much diſcouragement ofttimes to young beginners, and the parents are to prouide and lay vp for the children. But whileſt it is allowed them to deſire things needfull and meet 2. Cor. 12. 14. of them, it is not fit for them in a ſtout and ſtately maner to require it, and ſo to forget themſelues, but in humilitie to requeſt it. Neither is it fit for them to ſerue their owne turne in what they liſt, for the ſetting vp their owne countenance, or to pluck from others, who are as wel to be regarded as they; (which yet is too common,) that euery one is for himſelfe, and doth not conſider another by himſelfe. This, I ſay, muſt be taken heed off, leſt it raiſe diſagreement and hard thoughts betwixt them and their brethren. As for her demand, the text plainly ſheweth, that it was very needful that ſhe asked, though her father had granted out her portion before; for wee know in thoſe drie and South Countries what need there was of water. And we ſee that her requeſt being ſo reaſonable, her father neuer ſtood about it, but yeelded to her freely and liberally, euen ſprings in the vpper and nether grounds. In like manner parents ſhould doe to their children according to their abilitie, as I haue ſaid before.
            It followeth.
            VERS. 16. And the children of Keny, Moſes father in law, went vp out of
               
               the city of Palme trees with the children of Iuda, into the wilderneſſe of Iuda, that lyeth in the South of Arad, and went and dwelt among the people.
            
            WE haue heard of Caleb, Othniel and Acſah. Now to proceed in the The ſenſe. Chapter, there is added here in this next verſe interlaced betwixt the former, and the next following a briefe mention of the Kenites, the poſteritie of Keni Moſes father in law, how they came downe with the Tribe of Iuda, at the time when they deſtroyed Hebron and Debir, and they dwelt by them in tents. For Hobab, the ſonne of Keni and his retinue, being perſwaded by Moſes (when the children of Iſrael were in the wilderneſſe going toward Numb. 10. 29. the land of Canaan) to goe with them hee promiſing them, that as the Lord had ſaid to him, he would doe them good; ſo he (I meane Moſes) would likewiſe make them partakers thereof. Hereupon ſome of theſe Kenites went with him and the children of Iſrael, and were guides to them in the wilderneſſe, the way that they went; and theſe Kenites came ouer Iordan with Iſrael, and abode with the Tribe of Beniamin at Iericho, the citie of Palm-trees, and from thence they came and abode with the men of Iuda, after they had woon the forementioned citie, and other thereby. And the ſtory recordeth that theſe went and liued with the people of Iſrael, to be better inſtructed in the right manner of worſhipping God, as they had by their predeceſſors made beginnings therin before. This dwelling of the Kenites with the people Doct. of God, and in leauing their owne countrey, for the ioyning thēſelues to them, as it highly commendeth them, ſo it teacheth, that it is behouefull for vs, and our dutie, and much to our benefit, to ioyne our ſelues, (as wee may haue oportunitie,) to the godly and their fellowſhip. Theſe Kenites, if they had done as the moſt doe, they had been ignorant of the law of God, and ſo had lyen in darkneſſe, and had not knowne the Lord, their hope and happineſſe, but they more regarding to ſeeke true knowledge, and therefore leauing their owne countrie, and being much kindled and incouraged thereby with the loue of Gods promiſes, they proſpered among the people of God. And ſo, I ſay, wee ought to ſeeke and ioyne our ſelues in acquaintance with Note. the religious and godly, who liue by faith and hope, ſuch as maketh not aſhamed. For though wee liue not among the Heathen, yet wee liue for the moſt part among Papiſts, Atheiſts, blind and prophane Worldings: whoſe conuerſation and example wee are eaſily infected by, and made like vnto them. I wrote to you (ſaith Saint Paul) that ye company not, that is, that ye haue 1. Cor. 6. 11. no fellowſhip with fornicators, drunckards, extorſioners, Idolaters, railers, and ſuch like, for we know, that euill words corrupt good manners. So that, although 1. Cor. 15. 33. we cannot but liue where ſuch be, as Iſrael did with the Egyptians: yet we are bound, euen in our ciuill contracts and dealings with them, (which wee cannot chuſe but haue, and vſe with them ſometime;) to beware, that wee be not drawne to neere ſocietie with them, leſt we learne their manners, or at leaſt wincke at them, and beare with them, of the which wee ſhould ſhew our vtter diſlike; ſeeing we know, that two cannot walke together, but they muſt be of one mind, and yet wee muſt not ſcorne or diſdaine the worſt or meaneſt of them, but liue among them in al innocencie, humility, and good Note. carriage of our ſelues, leſt we harden them; but rather that wee may wait patiently, to ſee if God at any time will giue them repentance.
            
               
And if the company and neere acquaintance with the godly be ſo precious, then beware leſt we forſake our fellowſhip, as the manner of ſome is, but make Heb. 10. 25. we much of ſuch, and let our delight be, (as Dauid ſaid his was,) in the Saints 
               Pſalm. 16. 3. 
               that are on the earth, and in ſuch as excell in vertue. And ſuch as dwell among them, and haue dealings with them, as neighbours that are neere ſeated together, muſt needs in ſome ſort haue; let them take heed, that through commonneſſe of liuing with them, they waxe not wearie of this bleſſing, as wee eaſily are brought to be, and ſo we be eaſily alienated from them by teſtineſſe and conceits, as too many are) euen by ſmall occaſions, and for very trifles; when we haue yet learned, one to beare anothers burthen: and religion teacheth vs to make eſpeciall account of, and in any wiſe to ſeeke peace with them, and inſue and follow after it, though it flie from vs, that by ſo doing, Heb 12. 14. Iohn 3. 35. all may ſay, we be the very diſciples of Chriſt indeed, for that we ſo loue one another. Thus let them doe good and take good mutually together euery way as they can. But to whom are good people commonly daintieſt? euen to ſuch as dwel a farre off from them: God declaring thereby, that they who dwell by them, are blind in not diſcerning and ſeeing what ſuch a benefit is worth, and therefore that they prouoke God to giue them their habitation, and to ſend them among ſuch as they themſelues be, that is, vnquiet, and froward people, yea and worſe then ſo, I meane prophane & skorners, that they may thereby the better know what godly friendſhip is worth, who, if they had been wiſe, would haue kept themſelues well, while they were well, that is, in better company. I haue ſeene in my time, ſome that tooke a pritch againſt Note. ſuch as feared God, and were truly religious, and in their diſtempered heate, and ouerhaſtie diſlike and wearineſſe of their fellowſhip, though they were farre better then themſelues, (thus are men caried of their ſections raſhly, wilfully, and in paſſion:) in this their heate (I ſay) they would needs reſolue to remoue their dwelling, and when they had made choice of it to their owne liking, when no perſwaſions might ſtay them from it, they were ſo handled by ſtrangers that knew not God nor their duties, and ſo vexed and croſſed among them, that they cried out one to another, Wo is me that I am 
               Pſalm. 120. 5. 
               conſtrained to dwell in Meſhec, meaning, that they were then ſo troubled with them that had no pitty nor regard of them, that they with ſhame confeſſe then, and cry out, that godly neighbours are a treaſure, and wiſhed with much loſſe to dwell by them againe.
            This example of the Kenites ſhould further teach vs, that though it is both lawfull and meete to regard maintenance, yet we ought to reſpect chiefly in 
                  Doct. 2. remoouing our dwellings, the true knowledge of God, which now is to be attained of vs by a ſound miniſtery, and that is ſeldome without ſome whoſe companie is to bee deſired, and whoſe acquaintance may make our liues ſweet and ioyfull. As Ruth the Moabiteſſe did therefore follow her mother Ruth. 1. 16. in law Naomi into the holy land, out of her owne country, and could not be plucked from her by all the prerogatiues thereof, her kindred, acquaintance and ſuch like. It was the commendation of ſtrangers, as we oft reade in the Eſter 8. 17. Zach. 8. 23. Scriptures, that when they ſaw Gods bleſſing vpon the Iewes, they turned to their religion, and ſaid with Ruth to Naomi, thy God ſhall be our God: whereas we ſee that the moſt ſort are rather content to part with ſome good commoditie, then they would dwell among Gods people, thinking it a bondage

to liue with ſuch as will not run to the ſame exceſſe of riot with them. Commonly 1. Peter 4. 4. when men change their dwellings they reſpect ſome ſiniſter end thereof, as profit, or the fulfilling of their luſts, and let religion goe where it will. But, to paſſe from theſe, ſuch a mind ſhould they haue, as Ruth and the like had, that trauell into farre countries to ſee them, that they might with the Queene of the South, ſeeke the wiſdome of God to guide them, as well 1. King. 101. Matth. 12. 42. as to ſee the countries, or reape commodities and pleaſures there, or elſe it is out of queſtion, that they ſhall bring home the vaine faſhion, with the rude and heatheniſh manners thereof, to the tainting of other, and their owne vtter vndoing, as by too wofull experience we ſee at this day. To returne from trauellers to the other, and though I confeſſe that men in their remoouing their dwelling may, yea, and muſt regard their commoditie; yet not that only, but withall they ſhould with Abraham, ſet vp an alter, that is, retaine Gods true worſhip, and ſee how it may be vpholden where they ſhall become.
            
               VERS. 17. But Iuda went with Simeon his brother, and they ſhew the Canaanites, that inhabited Zephath, and vtterly deſtroyed it, and called the name of the city Hormah.
               
               18. Alſo Iuda tooke Azzah with the coaſtes thereof, and Aſhkelon with the coaſtes thereof, and Ekron with the coaſtes thereof.
               
               19. And the Lord was with Iudah, and he poſſeſſed the mountaines: for hee could not driue out the Inhabitants of the valleyes, becauſe they had chariots of iron.
               
            
            NOw this 16. verſe of the Kenites being ſpoken of, we are come to an end The ſenſe. of the long repetition of the actes of Iudah, done in the time Ioſhua, mentioned frō the 8. verſe to this 16. which was, as we heard interlaced, and here the holy Ghoſt returneth to Simeon and Iudah, and proceedeth in theſe two verſes, to ſet downe other actes of theirs after Ioſhuahs death, as he began to doe in the beginning of this chapter vnto the 8. verſe, and ſheweth how they deſtroyed another city of the Canaanites Zephath by name: and that they tooke more cityes beſides which were after, as by their names here ſett downe, we know, poſſeſſed of the Philiſtines. Now it is to be noted, that they waſted ſome of the cityes vtterly by fire, as Hazor and Iericho, and ſo they delt with this here mentioned. Zephath: whereas they inhabited others of them. Why they delt ſo with this, it is not ſett downe, but they did as they were commanded. We are ſure it was, that God might ſhew his kindneſſe to Iſrael, when ſome of them were vtterly ſubuerted, where greateſt danger was to be feared: and to teſtifie his ſeueritie and his iuſtice to ſuch of his enemies; and therefore it is not for any to crie out of it as crueltie, which the righteous God ſaw meet to be done.
            And by this we muſt learne, that though wee bee forbidden to hate the Doct. verſ. 17. perſons of our enemies, yet when wee bee ſet by the Lord to execute iudgement vpon them, our eie muſt not ſpare them, vnder the colour of charitie or compaſſion, for their properneſſe, manhood, or any other fooliſh reſpect; Neither may we do the worke of the Lord negligently. Thus Ioſhua, though he pitied the ſtate of Achan, yet plainely tels him, In as much as thou haſt troubled 
               Ioſhua 7. 25. 
               vs, the Lord ſhall trouble thee this, &c. Thus the Lord puniſhed Saul ſeuerely

for ſparing Agag, and Ahab for ſo dealing with Benhadad, ſaying Thy life 
               1. Sam. 15 23. 1. King. 20. 42. 
               ſhall goe for his. And therefore we muſt be well aſſured of Gods commandement, when we goe about any ſuch thing, againſt ſuch perſons as beeleaud, ſtubburne and willfull. This commandement of God is to be extended not onely againſt all traiterous enemies of the Church, but alſo againſt that rauening and roguiſh progeny of ſpoilers of the peace and gouernment, and hauocke makers of the commonwealth, as murtherers, &c. And therefore confuteth the curſed practiſe of Ieſuites, who, if they be not as yet practizers in that kind themſelues, doe yet by all meanes labour to extenuate the odious facts and treacheries of their complices by falſe reports: and treducing the iuſt proceedings of Chriſtian Princes, and the execution of their lawes for the reſtraining of ſuch monſters, by infamous libels, and the like. But we muſt here take great heed alſo, that we colour not our cruell and vncharitable actions with a pretence of zeale to God, and yet giue place to our affections, vnder a colour of ſeeking the glory of God: which may eaſily be done, as the Apoſtles did, calling for fire from heauen vpon the Sam
                  ••
               itans, when Luke 9. 54. they would not receiue Chriſt into their ciue: but wee muſt know, that all men being our neighbours, wee muſt bee enemies to none. For the which cauſe Dauid praved for his owne enemies as namely for Saul, when yet hee Luk 10 20. 30. &c. prayed againſt Gods enemies, hauing alſo good warrant to doe ſo. And Moſes being the meekeſt of other in his owne caſe; yet againſt Corah and his Pſal 69 22 &c. Numb. 16. 30. companie who were the enemies of God, how earneſtly did hee deale, pronouncing that the earth ſhould open, and ſwallow them vp aliue for their rebellion. And Paul, who teacheth vs to ouercome euill with good doe yet pray Rom 12 laſt. feruently againſt the falſe teachers, ſaying to the Galarhians, in great compaſſion towards them, I would to God, that they were cut off, which doe diſquiet 
               Gal. 5. 12. 
               you. So that as we heare they did, it behoueth vs to beare our owne iniuries and indignities committed againſt vs withall meekneſſe, and to deale mildly in our owne matters, but in the Lords farre otherwiſe.
            And where it is demanded, whether may the godly pray againſt Tyrants, by whom the true worſhip of God is hindred; I anſwere, that againſt their tyrannie and cruell doings we ought to pray, but not againſt their perſons, who may poſſibly repent. For the Lord not hauing reuealed to vs, that for all their wickedneſſe, they haue yet committed the vnpardonable ſin, therefore what good meaning ſo euer wee haue therein, wee are not allowed to pray for their confuſion. But if God once make knowne his mind to be ſuch as he will haue them deſtroyed, or not to be prayed for, then we muſt both approoue of it, and execute it accordingly: and yet ſo, that as they are men we pitie them, as our Sauiour denouncing againſt the people of Ieruſalem, Luke 19. 42. ſhortly after to bee deſtroyed, yet wept in beholding the miſerie that was comming vpon them.
            In this next verſe, it is ſhewed that Iuda yet preuailed further, and woon 
                  The ſenſe verſe 18. 19. other cities named in the text, which yet, in the 3. chapter of this booke, are ſaid to haue been in the hands of the Philiſtines, as they were alſo long after. For the people of Iſrael oft prouoked the Lord, and ſo loſt againe ſome part of that which they had won, euen as it was like now to bee, that for their ſin they loſt theſe cities which they had before inioyed. In the 19. verſe it is ſaid, that Iuda poſſeſſed the mountaines alſo; and to the end that nothing might

be aſcribed to the men, namely, to them of Iudah, and to Simeon, for Simeon had entred into couenant to ioyne with them their brethren in theſe warres, and ſo did here (though Iuda, who was appointed thereto, be onely named) to the end (I ſay) that nothing may be aſcribed to them, it is expreſſly added, that the Lord was with them in thoſe their great enterprizes. To teach vs by Doct. ver. 18. 19 whoſe might they preuailed, and what was the cauſe that they did ſo, euen this, ſeeing God was with them. And all men wil grant as much, that if God be with a man he ſhall proſper, and none ſhall be againſt him, to do him hurt, as the Apoſtle writeth. And there is ſufficient reaſon of it. For who ſhall reſiſt him? or if he ſay the word, who ſhall call it backe? Now we are to know, Rom. 8. 31. that God is not with any man idle or weake, but mighty, as he ſaith himſelfe to Aſa by the Prophet: The Lord looketh downe from heauen to ſee who is weake, 
               2. Cron. 16. 9. 
               that he may be ſtrong with him. But to the end ſo worthie a point as this is, may throughly doe vs good, we muſt vnderſtand that to haue God with vs, ſo as we may reſt ſurely perſwaded that he is ſo, and inioy his preſence conſtantly while we liue, (which is a treaſure vnualuable and vnknowne to the world, it is required of vs by God, that we firſt haue him for our God; and be truly reconciled to him by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: for then he will neuer leaue vs, neither forſake vs, but ſafely keepe vs to the reſurrection day: but otherwiſe, Ioſh. 1. 8. except God be thus made ours, and we vnited to him by faith, which howſoeuer it ſhould be done, cannot here be more ſet downe, what portion of wealth, wiſdome, &c. we haue out of that communion with him, it is accurſed. And further we are to know, that God may bee with men in ſome ſort, as by his power and bodily helpe, and at ſome time, and yet not be with them to their effectuall comfort and alwaies. Theſe are great matters, and duly to be conſidered of vs, for he may be with the wicked, ſo as he was with Ahab, when he gaue the great hoaſtes of Benhadad into his hands: yea, and that which is more, hee may bee, and is preſent with the vnbeleeuers in the congregation, when he inlightneth them to vnderſtand that which is ſoundly taught, and to take liking of the ſame. But this is by his power onely, but not by his effectuall grace and fauour; as he was with Mary, who being freely Luke 1. 28. beloued of God, he was alſo with her: and his being with her, made her bleſſed and ioyful: and if he be thus with vs, he wil both ſpiritually grace vs, and alſo bodily bleſſe vs, as ſhall be expedient for vs, euen as hee did Gedeon, 
               Iudges 6. 12. when he was ſaid to be with him. And this, to the end we may not deceiue our ſelues, it behoueth vs to marke, for our ſingular and continuall comfort: and therefore let men giue all their diligence to make their ſaluation ſure, and to come into the fauour of God, that ſo they may abide therein, then will he be with them to guide, keepe and comfort them: and otherwiſe, they 2. Pet. 1. 5. Iohn 15. 
                     •
                  0. may haue God with them (I deny not) ſometime, as I haue ſaid, though hee owe not euen that to them, but ſo (yet) they may be miſerable and vnhappie ſtill, but in a better manner hee was here with Iuda, both before and at the time here mentioned; alſo he declared the ſame by giuing their enemies into their hands. This confuteth the conceit of ſuch as meaſure Gods being with them by his raiſing them in wealth, or giuing them their deſires. As Micah an Idolator applauded himſelfe as beloued by God, becauſe hee gaue Iudges 17. laſt. him a Leuite to be his prieſt, whereas he giueth many wicked men their deſires in wrath, when yet he denieth to his owne, theirs in fauour. And this is

that, which we haue to make profit of, out of the words before mentioned, that Iudah proſpered, ſeeing God was with him.
            We haue heard that they ouercame the inhabitants of the hill countrey, Verſ. 19. The ſenſe.
                ſeeing God was with them. Now in the ſame verſe it is added, that they did not ouercome the inhabitants of the valleies, ſeeing they had charriots of iron. And hereby this vnbeliefe of theirs began their ſorrow and miſeries, which the other tribes followed them in, to the end of the Chapter. The common tranſlation is, they could not driue them out: but it is not ſo in the Hebrew: the better tranſlation addeth another word, namely, that they went not about it. Neither of both is out of the originall, but that ſeemeth to bee the ſenſe, for it is otherwiſe vnperfit. For it is thus there, they did not to driue them out, which is to be ſupplied, they went not about to doe it. Whither of both ſoeuer it was, that they did not either go about it, it was their fault: or whither we take it thus, that they could not, euen that was their fault alſo. For God promiſed, that although they had chariots of iron, yet hee would deliuer them into their hands, then they failed in beleeuing Gods promiſe; Ioſhua 17. 18. and ſo they going from God by vnbeliefe; God likewiſe went from them: ſo that God being with them, and they beleeuing him, they ouercame them them that dwelt on the mountaines; but they not beleeuing God, as he had promiſed in Ioſhua 17. ſeeing they had iron chariots, therfore they did not ouercome them in the vallyes. Therefore, howſoeuer we take it, there was a fault in the men of Iuda. For though it may be obiected, that God would not giue them victory ouer the one as well as ouer the other; I anſwere, that is true, but that was through their fault, that they beleeue not that his word, as he had promiſed.
            So that the doctrine which we are taught from hence, is this, that though 
                  Doct. 1. God beſtow many good bleſſings vpon vs, while we beleeue in him, hauing promiſed it, euen as he did here on Iuda, and ſo long, hee ſhewes himſelfe to be with vs: yet if wee giue in, and withdraw our ſelues through vnbeliefe, and belieued not his promiſes, he will faile vs in other bleſſings, and deny vs them. A moſt worthy truth, and much to be regarded of vs. For ſo it is now with vs, as it was then with the men of Iuda. So ſaith our Sauiour to the man that brought his ſon to be healed that had a dumbe ſpirit, If thou canſt beleeue, 
               Marke 9. 23. 
               all things are poſsible to him that belieueth, meaning thereby, that all things that are agreeable to the will of God ſhall be granted to him that beleeueth: for faith ſeeketh nothing that is contrary to his will, or not reueiled in his word. So ſaith Saint Iames; If any man want wiſdome, let him aske of God, who giueth to 
               Iames 1. 6. 
               all plentifully, and caſteth no man in the teeth: but let him aske in faith, and wauer not: and ſo ſpeaketh the Scripture throughout. And to bind this more ſure, the Lord himſelfe ſaith to the Hebrewes; If any man withdraw himſelfe, my 
               Heb. 10. 38. 
               ſoule ſhall haue no pleaſure in him: that is, if he beleeue not.
            Excellent is that ſaying of the Lord to this purpoſe in the Chronicles: 2. Chro. 16. 7. 9. The Aethiopians and the Lubims, were they not a great people? yet becauſe thou diddeſt reſt vpon me, I deliuered them into thy hands: but now thou haſt done fooliſhly in relying on the King of Syria, and not on the Lord, therefore hee leaueth thee to thyſelfe to beleeue, and ſo driuen and diſſwaded from the contrary. Yet this cauſeth mee oft to maruell, that wee being ſo incouraged, neither the vnbeleeuers

doe haſt or long and thirſt for faith, as though it were little worth, neither can other who yet ſhould bee moſt readie, bee brought to waite daily and conſtantly to grow in this grace of beleeuing: neither doe, although they haue obtained alreadie to belieue; for al that, nouriſh faith as they are taught, that ſo they may abound therein with thankſ-giuing. And much it is to be lamented, that ſeeing God is not with vs, to bleſſe and beautifie vs otherwiſe; we ſhould for all that neglect ſo great good, as we might get thereby, and rather with others, follow fancie and reaſon, ſloath and example, and that is, to beleeue no more then we ſee. Oh wofull vnbeleefe, that filleſt our liues with ſo many fretting ſorrowes and deadly diſcomforts! True it is, that many to make their fault ſmall, doe anſwer, that the people that liued before the comming of Chriſt, might much eaſier beleeue then wee now, becauſe they reade in the ſtories ſuch examples, not onely of Abraham, but alſo of Ioſhua 
               Ioſhua 6. and many of the people in the deſtroying of Iericho to haue done ſo. And the Prieſts aduenturing to ſet their feet on the waters, beleeuing that they Ioſhua 3. 15. ſhould giue place to them to go ouer them on dry foot, as God had promiſed; with many other like. But they are groſſely deceiued who thinke ſo, euen as much as they, who will ſay that in the dawning morning light a man may ſee as clearely, as at noonetide. For who is ignorant of this, that the myſtery of faith is nothing ſo clearely reuealed in the old Teſtament, no, not by many degrees, as it is in the new? So that although ſome of the chiefe fathers, (who were to goe before the people, and bee lights to them, as Moſes, Noah, Abraham, and others, receiued inlightning of God, more and in greater meaſure then we doe in theſe daies; yet the Church conſiſting of the common people at this time, hath cauſe a great deale more to beleeue, and farre more eaſily may imbrace the promiſes,) by the ordinary meanes they they haue, (I ſay not what God may do,) and ſo liue by faith more eaſily, I ſay, then they did or could doe. But this is our ſinne, that we ſearch not into our ſelues ſo much, as to ſee whither it be ſo; neither if we find it to be otherwiſe, are we grieued for it, or ſeeke to amend it. But there will be occaſion offered to ſpeake more largely of this matter in many places of this booke, therefore I will here containe my ſelfe.
            But one thing more here, by ſo good occaſion, I will note about faith, worthy our remembrance and regard, and that is this: that though the Tribe of Iuda beleeued the Lord and his promiſes in one thing, and did therfore valiantly; I meane in expelling the Canaanites that dwelt in the hill countries, and the Lord was with them accordingly: yet in another thing they did not beleeue, namely, that God would expel the enemies that dwelt in the valleyes, becauſe they had iron chariots, and therefore they went not about it, neither did they obtaine any ſuch thing of God. Whereby we ſee, that we may poſſibly beleeue one promiſe, and yet not another: and (which 
                  Doct. 2. is no great maruell) wee may beleeue when the caſe is more eaſie, and the thing which is promiſed is of leſſe difficultie to obtaine, (as here it was with Note. them) then when it is otherwiſe. Euen ſo, we may beleeue at one time, and yet not at another. The reaſon of both is, ſeeing wee are fickle and inconſtant, therefore wee fleet and change in time, and wee are alſo timerous by meanes whereof it commeth to paſſe, that although we may be brought to belieue a thing of leſſe moment, or which in former time we haue belieued;

yet at ſome other time, and in another thing, where in we haue no experience, and which ſtriketh vs with greater feare, there we faint and giue ouer. The vſe of this is: that we accuſtome aquaint, and bend our ſelues, when we Note. haue giuen credit in ſome things to God, that we may do the ſame in other; and if we find it otherwiſe, then that we take knowledge of our weakeneſſe, and thinke our ſtrength in beleeuing not to be very great. And therefore we thus ſeeing our wants therein, are not to pleaſe our ſelues and reſt in that which we haue done, but looke to that which is yet to be done of vs: and as Saint Iames ſpeaketh of patience, that it ſhould haue her perfit worke, ſo faith Iames 1. 4. muſt haue her perfit worke alſo. That thus wee may goe a degree further, as the Apoſtle willeth the Coloſſians, namely, to abound in faith. 
               Coloſ. 2. 7. Rom. 15. 13. Which cannot bee without thankes giuing to God, and much ioy to our ſelues.
            VERS. 20. And they gaue Hebron to Caleb, as Moſes had ſaid, and he expelled thence the three ſonnes of Anake. 
               Verſe 20.
            
            THis giuing Hebron to Caleb is repeated, for it had been giuen to Caleb by Moſes before; (as it is ſaid in the booke of Ioſhua) and now the warres of the Tribe of Iuda being ſet downe, the chiefe captaine whereof, Caleb was, Ioſh. 14. 13. this is againe ſpoken of. And it is ſaid, that to him this citie, with the coaſts thereof was giuen, namely, by Ioſhua, as God had appointed in Deutronomie. Deut. 1. 36. That which is the chiefe matter here of giuing Hebron to Caleb, as it was before promiſed, and he was not holden backe, no, nor deferred, nor defeated of it; teacheth, that wee ought in no wiſe to detaine any mans due 
                  Doct. 1. from him, though it bee in our power to doe it; nor to withhold reward from him that hath deſerued it. Gods will is, that euery man inioy his owne (as wee would ours) which he hath beſtowed vpon him. And this being ſo ſharpely reprooued by Saint Iames, in maſters towards their ſeruants, withholding their due from them, doth much more challenge them, who in waightier caſes haue wrought vnrighteouſneſſe againſt any. Thus hee writeth, Behold the hire of the labourers which haue reaped your fields 
               Iames 5. 4. 
               (which is of you kept backe by fraud) crieth, and the cries of them that haue reaped, are entred into the eares of the Lord of hoſtes. It hath been a pollicie vſed by gouernors, to promiſe great rewards to ſuch as ſhall bewray dangerous practiſes of traitors, or find out open malefactors, or performe good ſeruice againſt the enemies of the Church and their countrey, which if they be not regarded and rewarded accordingly, how ſhall the hands of men be ſtrengthened and they incouraged to doe theſe duties?
            
               Ahaſhueroſh an Heathen King, when he had been deliuered from the treaſon Eſter 6. 10. that two of his ſeruants intended againſt him, and that by Mordecay, who detected it, as ſoone as he vnderſtood (after it had been forgotten a time) that he had not been rewarded for his faithfull ſeruice, he did in moſt ample maner command, and ſaw it effected, that he ſhould be rewarded. So Belſhazzar did to Daniel, for his faithfull ſeruice, and Pharaoh to Ioſeph in an admirable 
                  Compare Dan. 5. 7. with 2
                     •
                  . manner. Much more that which is a mans owne is to be reſtored, or pay him at the due time; as by the executor, the borrower, or any other who by right ought to doe it. But euen among Chriſtians the neglect hereof, and the

ſhifting of many, contrary to couenant, oath, promiſe and bond, calleth their profeſſion into queſtion among ſuch as would gladly conceiue better of Pſalm. 15. 4. them. But God meetes with ſuch iuſtly: for neither are they truſted in their health, nor yet pitied in their diſtreſſe, but beare a marke of their vntruſtines, and vnfaithfull dealing vnto the day of their repentance, or to their graue. And therfore they who are put in truſt, and defeate the orphan, or other to whō it is due; as alſo thoſe banckrupts, who inrich themſelues with the goods of other men, and then giue it out, that they are not able to pay, though they haue it in their power to do it, or diſable thēſelues by their vnthriftines & careleſnes; and all ſuch as hold from men that due that belongs to them, ſhal feele Gods anger as bitter, as maſters ſhal, who detaine & hold backe their ſeruants wages. But they doe no better who will claime it before it is due, or elſe will bee diſpleaſed, and will prouoke to ſute, although they know no iuſt cauſe: for that which is ſought in ſuch a caſe, I meane before it be due, is to be obtained either by intreaty (if it may bee yeelded) or by agreement and compoſition: but the rule before mentioned, bindeth only to lawfull, not irreligious promiſes.
            As for that which is here ſaid in this 20. verſe, that Caleb expelled out of Hebron the three ſonnes of Anak, vnderſtand, that they are thoſe three who 
                  Doct. 2. are mentioned in the 10. verſe, Sheſhai, Ahiman and Talmai: where the driuing of them out is aſcribed to Iuda in the general, which in this verſe is particularly ſaid to haue been done by Caleb, who was chiefe in the worke. For the doctrine to be gathered hence, reade verſe. 10.
         
         
            THE SEVENTH SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     VERS. 21. But the children of Beniamin did not caſt out the Iebuzites, that inhabited Ieruſalem; therefore the Iebuzites dwell with the children of Beniamin in Ieruſalem vnto this day.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOw followeth the ſecond part of the chapter, which laieth 
                        The ſenſe of verſ. 21. out the beginning of the calamities of the people of Iſrael, as to the end of the chapter may bee ſeene, namely, that all the Tribes ſuffered the nations, who were their enemies, to remaine among them, contrary to the commandement of God in the booke of Numbers: for thus he ſaith, When ye are come ouer Iordan, into the land of Canaan, 
                     Num. 33. 52. 55. 
                     ye ſhall driue out all the inhabitants of the land before you. And a little after; If
                     
                     ye will not driue out the inhabitants of the land before you, then thoſe whom ye let remaine of them, ſhall be prickes in your eies, and thornes in your ſides, and ſhall vex you in the land wherein you dwell. The firſt of the Tribes that is ſaid to haue ſuffered the Canaanites to remaine in their coaſts (that excepted that wee heard of Iuda in verſ. 19.) and did not caſt them out, was Beniamin, which was neere Ioſhua 15. 63. to Iuda. And although it be ſaid in Ioſhua, that the Tribe of Iuda could not caſt out the Iebuzites that inhabited Ieruſalem, but burnt ſome peece of the citie; yet there it is ſaid they dwelt with them therein: ſo it is ſaid here of Beniamin, ſeeing that citie of the Iebuſites was a part of it in the lot of them, and part in the lot of Iuda, that they dwelt alſo with Beniamin ſtill, and were 2. Sam. 5. 8. not caſt out till the time of Dauid; but they of Beniamin built it againe, after Iuda had burnt it.
                  Now ſeeing they had a preciſe commandement from God to expell the Doct. verſ. 21. Iebuſites, thence it was their ſinne that they did it not: the leaſt that they may be charged with, was ſlouth and negligence, and the ſeeking of their owne eaſe, which to doe in things forbiden, is moſt dangerous.
                  By this then we ſee the euil that ſloathfulneſſe and eaſe ſeeking bringeth, to wit this: that itſelfe holdeth a man from obeying God, though there ſhould be nothing elſe to doe it. And that is when, for the eaſe and pleaſure which is taken therein, men dull the edge of courage and forewardneſſe to good duties, which was in them before: ſuch an one is the ſlouthfull, whoſe words are theſe; A lion is in the way, meaning thereby, that hee cannot labour, Prou. 22. 13. euen as a man in a ſweet ſlumber is moſt vnwilling to be awaked. This ſlouth is a ſweet poyſon: keepe from it he that can, but he that doth not, it will ſlea him, as Salomon ſaith; As the common ſluggard doth loath and ſhun Prou. 1. laſt. labour, and therefore loueth to bee doing any trifling thing, rather then to worke, and be well occupied, ſo doth hee that is ſlow in the duties of Gods ſeruice; he lets them paſſe and omits the opportunity of doing them, which ought much to be regarded. For as a word ſpoken in ſeaſon, is much worth, euen like apples of gold and pictures of ſiluer, euen ſo is an act or deed done in due Prou. 25. 11. time, as namely among other, that wiſe and godly courage of Eſter ſhewed in due ſeaſon in going to the King, for the preſeruing and ſauing her owne life and her peoples from the traine that Hamon had laid for them in ſeaſon. Oh, euen ſo is forewardnes and readineſſe to goe about the worke and buſineſſe that God inioyneth vs in euery condition of life. But there are extremities on both ſides: There are ſome that fall to their worke, but looke after nothing elſe, whereas all ſhould be firſt ſanctified to God themſelues firſt, that then their workes may be accepted of him. Others would ſeeme, and be taken for godly; but they are careleſſe and ſlacke in following the works of their callings, nay they condemne the prouident and diligent, as worldly and miſerable muckwormes. Both theſe are extreames to bee auoided of Chriſtians, by ioyning both callings together, I meane religion and labour. But for this ſloath (to ſay a little more of it) if wee take not great heed, the beſt of Gods ſeruants may ſoone be drawne to it, and no way ſooner, then if we begin to waxe wearie of well doing in our generall or particular calling, 2. Peter 3. 17. and ſuffer our ſelues to be plucked from our ſtedfaſtneſſe therein, by the error of the wicked, and to be caught and ſnared with the deceitfulnes of ſin: for ſo we are rocked a ſleepe ere we be aware, in which caſe it ſhall be no eaſie Heb. 3. 13.
                     
matter to awake, or bring our ſelues backe againe into our former good courſe. And ſo ſhall we liue vnprofitable, fit onely to conſume and waſt the good benefits of God. Oh! what a death it is to a ſloathfull perſon to be vrged to the duty that he hath caſt off, and hath now no pleaſure in, nor ability vnto? (as to a Miniſter to preach in his old age, who looked not after it in his youth?) to the which eſtate he hath brought himſelf; euē as a ruinous houſe falleth downe altogether; when it is let go to decay for want of repairing in time. For the remedying of the which miſchiefe, in al that are annoyed with it, I ſee no better direction, then that which our Sauior hath giuen vs in theſe words, when he ſaith; occupie till I come. Whereby he meaneth not only the Luk. 19. 13. worke of our calling, but alſo that euery one that will proſper, ſhould vſe his talent, euen ſuch gifts as God hath beſtowed vpon him; as knowledge, wealth, time, grace, and ſuch like, to the doing of good with them, and not to bury them vnprofitably in the earth. For beſide that the fruit of idleneſſe is pouertie, theft, beggery, &c. God alſo loueth and bleſſeth the painefull and diligent; and thus if we be carefull, after Gods direction, to bee well occupied, wee ſhall bee free as from other euils, ſo from this danger of ſloath. The like counſell to that which our Sauiour giueth, is that of Saint Paul to the Epheſians, that they redeeme the time: that is, buy it out of the hands of Epheſ. 5. 16. idleneſſe, vnprofitableneſſe and euill: and then employ it faithfully to neceſſarie vſes and ends. And the rather, becauſe ſo much pretious time is already ſpent in vaine, let that which remaineth be better paſſed to recouer our loſſe. The life of a Chriſtian can leaſt of all other ſtand with idlenes. It is without reſpect of the particular calling, as husbandry, marchandize, or other trading, full of diligent heed taking, that the conſcience may be kept pure and good: but much more (al may ſee) when labour in theſe is adioyned to the other: therefore the puniſhment of the ſloath is not ſmall, but as the Wiſe man teacheth. The idle mans backe ſhall be clothed with ragges, and his belly pinched and ſtarued for want of food, and by this wee may gueſſe what Prou. 23. 21. & 6 11. & 20. 4. his ſoules diet ſhall be. It followeth.
                  
                     VERS. 22. They alſo that were of the houſe of Ioſeph went vp to Bethel, and the Lord was with them.
                     
                     VERS. 23. And the houſe of Ioſeph cauſed to view Bethel (and the name of the citie before time was Luz.)
                     
                     VERS. 24. And the ſpies ſaw a man come out of the citie, and they ſaid vnto him, ſhew vs (we pray thee) the way into the citie, and we will ſhew thee mercy.
                     
                     VERS. 25. And when he had ſhewed them the way into the citie, they ſmote the citie with the edge of the ſword: but they let the man and all houſe depart.
                     
                     VERS. 26. Then the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a citie, and called the name of it Luz, which is the name thereof vnto this day.
                     
                  
                  NOw after the mentioning of the Tribe of Iuda and Beniamin, and what The ſenſe of theſe verſes. they did, it is in order ſet downe what the other Tribes did, to wit, how they ſuffered, and did not expell the Canaanites neither. And yet the houſe of Ioſeph is exempted, which comprehends the Tribe of Ephraim and Manaſſe together. Firſt therefore it is declared what theſe two ioyntly together did, to verſ. 27. in the words of the text here ſet downe, and then, what they did ſeuerally, to verſe 30. That which is ſaid of them ioyntly together, is to

their commendation, that they went againſt Bethel, which fell to their lot, and the Lord with them to incourage and ſtrengthen them, ſo that they feared and tried which way they might moſt eaſily take it. (Now the name of this citie had in times paſt been called Luz, as we reade in Geneſis, but Iacob 
                     Geneſ. 28. 19. as he went to Padan Aram from the wrath of his brother Eſau, reſting there, and the Lord appearing to him, and comforting him, called the place Bethel, that is, the houſe of the mightie God.) But to goe forward, they that were ſent about that buſineſſe, namely, the Tribe of Ioſeph, ſeeing a man to come out of the citie, asked of him in which part of it they might ſet vpon it, and on which ſide was their going out and comming into it, (for thereby it appeareth that they had ſhut it vp for feare of Iſrael, and that they had left but ſome ſecret way for their neceſſarie vſe to goe out and in thereby,) and they promiſing the man largely, hee ſhewed the way to them, and they entred and ſlue the inhabitants, and tooke it, and ſent the man away wel rewarded, or rather (as it was indeed) he baniſhed himſelfe from them into another countrey, and was ſo wealthy, that hee was able to build another city, and called it by that name, Luz.
                  This worke of the houſe of Ioſeph which they went about; namely, to take this citie Bethel, (which was before in the deuiſion of the land of Canaan Ioſhua 16. 2. giuen to them,) as God had inioyned them, doth liuely ſet before our eies, Doct. out of verſ. 22. 23. as in a glaſſe, the dutie of all Gods people, that is to ſay, readily to goe about and ſet vpon the worke that God hath appointed them and laid vpon them, yea and this is to be done, whatſoeuer lets and diſcouragements may ſtand vp in the way to hinder them. For hath not he commanded them? And is not he able to remooue thoſe impediments, rather then they ſhal hinder his worke in the hands of his ſeruants? which they beleeuing, are to go forward, and commit the ſucceſſe to him that hath promiſed to bring them through all difficulties which might hold them backe. For otherwiſe, if wee looke Note. not to God by faith, but what let is in the way, and be hindred thereby; we ſhall caſt the commandement of God behind our backe, and do as they who Eccleſ. 11. 4. obſerue the wind, and therfore ſowe not; and looke too much to the clouds, and therefore reape not; and ſo for feare of inconueniences we ſhal let paſſe neceſſarie duties. Againe, when we thriue and haue good ſucceſſe, we bleſſe God, and are merry; but if we be croſſed, we curſe & diſguiſe our ſelues with impatience. Whereas it ought to be enough to vs, that God hath brought it to paſſe either thus, or otherwiſe. And beſide the authoritie hee hath ouer vs, his bountifull rewarding of vs in his ſeruice, ought to incourage vs to adreſſe our ſelues to all ſuch worke: and not onely ſo, but further, ſeeing he commandeth and would haue vs doe it, as it may be moſt for our owne eaſe, Deut. 28. 47. that is, willingly, readily, chearefully; for the Lord loueth that, in all his ſeruice; as he loueth a chearefull giuer. And we know (for our owne parts) that 2. Cor. 9. 7. men go awkly and vntowardly about that work which they take in hand vnwillingly. And we are all to learne of our Sauiour, who hath giuen vs example Iohn 4. 34. herein, ſaying, that his meate and drinke was to do his Fathers will.
                  Beſides we are made, redeemed & ſet here to that very end, to ſerue the Lord 
                     Luke 1. 75. 75. 
                     in holineſſe and righteouſnes without feare all the daies of our life, and not to pleaſe our ſelues, how hard ſoeuer the worke is, that is to be done of vs. And that is our life, ioy, and comfort, no other courſe of walking is life but death: no

other is ſauory, or ſoundly ioyfull. And this ſhould bee thus in all callings and conditions, as with Magiſtrates, Miniſters, Husbandmen, Artificers, Maſters of families and others, who doe (I denie not) many things required of them by God, but not one worke as another; neither that ioyfully which they doe, and as if it were the worke that God hath ſet them about; for then they ſhould doe it readily, but for their bellies, and in other carnall reſpects. For why? they can indeed do them no otherwiſe, becauſe they do not firſt know themſelues to bee the Lords redeemed ones, that ſo they may eaſily obtaine other things at his hands. But I would that euen they who are ſo, did goe about that which they doe by Gods commandement chearefully, and with delight for the Lords ſake; then ſhould there many excrements be cut off from the infinite actions which are done in our liues, and with ſo much ſinne remooued; many plagues and annoiances ſhould bee auoided from mens liues alſo. But alas, the moſt profeſſors are not acquainted with going to worke in Gods ſeruice after this manner, neither find any ſauour in this Chriſtian courſe: but reſpect onely their owne commoditie, and that they may bee without feare of want and penury, and the moſt doe worſe, that is, ſpend their precious time in idleneſſe, play, and vaine pleaſures at leaſt: and as for ſeeking firſt Gods kingdome to be vnder his gouernment, and to reſt on him for other things by lawfull labour and meanes vſing, it is one of the hardeſt things for them to faſten on: though God hath yet promiſed that ſuch onely ſhall bee bleſſed. But of this ſomewhat hath been ſaid before.
                  It is further added in this verſe, that while the houſe of Ioſeph went vp againſt Bethel, the Lord was with them, which ſeeing it is here added, I will ſay ſomewhat of it, though I haue ſpoken thereof before by another occaſion. Now this houſe of Ioſeph, thus going about the worke that God had commanded them, is ſaid to haue God with them in their worke; for ſo hee had promiſed. Which teacheth, that this aſſurance we haue from him, that if we attempt ought by his commandement, he hath ſet his ſeale to it, that we ſhall haue ſucceſſe and proſper in our worke. So was it ſaid to Ioſhua in his firſt going againſt the Canaanites, I will be with thee, and hee belieued and Ioſh. 1. 5. proſpered euen ſo, theſe and the like promiſes of God being belieued of vs, are our comfort, and thereby wee learne experience how to doe the like for the time to come, in what worke ſoeuer the Lord ſhal imploy vs. This would make men vſe their callings not ſo as they ſhould bee burdens to them, but recreation, going merrily to their work as they may with Gods good allowance, and leauing it of with fitneſſe to other good duties, as prayer, reading, ſinging, meditating, &c. If this were beleeued, men ſhould be free from the plodding and diſtracting cares of the vngodly, who make their liues weariſome by diſtruſt of Gods prouidence, fearing they ſhall begge ere they dye, &c. and from the moyling and toyling labor of ſuch as tire themſelues with their callings. For God giues reſt to his beloued, as Dauid ſaith, Pſalm. 127. 2. Eccleſ. 5. 18. And from this temporary reſt, he will in due time, tranſlate them to eternall reſt. All which I ſay, not onely to the denouncing ſharpely and heauily againſt the common profeſſors of the Goſpell, who will beleeue God no further then they ſee him; but alſo to the iuſt reproouing of thoſe, who haue obtained of him to beleeue in deed, that they ſhall haue eternall life, and yet

their particular trials, in which they are taught to depend vpon him, and to cleaue to his promiſes made and granted out vnto them to that very end, that they ſhould doe ſo, they yet ſtagger and doubt, as if they had neuer had faith. He that deſireth to heare more of Gods being with his, let him reade Note. that which hath been ſaid on verſe 19.
                  This place Bethel being ſo called, that is, the houſe of the mightie God, Verſ. 23. Geneſ. 28. 19. becauſe the Lord appeared to Iacob there, whereas it had in times paſt been called by another name, it very well teacheth (ſeeing nothing is ſet downe in vaine in the Scriptures but to good vſe) that it is commendable, as occaſion is offered, to giue conuenient and meet names, ſuch as may inſtruct in ſome good thing, drawne from ſome good example, or putting vs in mind of duties either to God or men. As God gaue the name by the Angell vnto our Sauiour, calling him Ieſus. Some care not what name they giue to their children, of moſt notorious perſons, as counting it their credit that they may be like them: reſembling herein the Idolatrous King of Babel his Eunuchs, Dan. 27. who purpoſely altered the names of Daniel and his fellowes, in token that they ſhould renounce the true God and his ſeruice, and embrace the contrarie. Some giue ſuch names to them, as the rehearſing of them, cauſeth laughter.
                  Which is vnſeemely, ſeeing the name is giuen in the aſſemblie of the faithfull, and in the preſence of God, and when they are to bee entred into the Church of God. We doe not place religion in names or titles: yet neuertheleſſe a wiſe and godly choice in this matter may be had, that the names giuen, may be in ſtead of inſtructions to the parties named. In the apparrelling of our bodies in comely maner, we will haue care that the very ſhoe, which is the leaſt matter, be decently put on, and ſutable to other partes of our attire: ſo there being required a proportion in all our actions, this one is not to be neglected. Therefore in the old Teſtament, the names were giuen either according to the euent of things, about the time of the birth of the child, as Moſes called one of his ſonnes Gerſhom, that is, ſtranger, becauſe hee Exod. 2. 22. was then a ſtranger in another land: or their names were borrowed from their holy predeceſſors, to put them in mind to follow their ſteppes, or ſome ſuch like reſpects they had in giuing them. Now let vs heare of the ſpies.
                  In this verſe, where it is ſaid that the ſpies met this man comming out of Verſ. 24. 25. the citie (for what cauſe he went it is not expreſſed; ſomewhat is to be noted by occaſion of the man, and ſomewhat from the ſpies. By the man firſt, 
                        Doct. 1. going in his ſimplicity, out of the city, (whither to ſaue his life, or vpon ſome other neceſſarie occaſion,) meeting with theſe ſpies, and falling into ſuch a ſtreight thereby, that either he muſt looſe his life, or betray the citie, (for the ſpies ſaid to him, ſhew vs the way into the citie, and we will ſhew thee mercie.) We may ſee what ſtreights and difficulties we meet with, be ſubiect to, and in danger of, in this life: for that perill which we neither feare nor once thinke of, may befall vs, euen to the hazarding of our liues, much more of our vndoing, or the loſſe of the beſt of Gods bleſſings that we inioy, as wife, children, goods, &c. In the ſtory of the French Maſſacres we reade, that by the popiſh faction, a whole aſſemblie of Proteſtants were ſlaine at the Sermon. The Shunamites child went into the field in the morning well, but 2. King. 4. 20.
                     
died at noone. The widow of one of the children of the Prophets, who liued 2. King. 4. 1. in good eſtate for a great part of her husbands time, yet through the debt he was in at his death, ſhee was brought into that ſtreight, that her two ſons muſt bee ſold to pay the debt, and carried away from her, perhaps to bee brought vp by Idolators in an idolatrous land; and ſhe knew no other for a time, though God prouided better for her. Iob his children in the middeſt of their merry makings, were deſtroyed by the fall of the houſe, and he himſelfe Iob 1. 18. 19. & 27. loſt all at once, and his bodie was filled with ſcabbes and ſores. Samaria was beſieged, and the danger ſo great, that the king therof was reſolued, and 2. King. 6. 25. looked for no other, but that he and all that hee had, muſt be at the pleaſure of another man. And Ieruſalem was ſo ouerwhelmed with griefes, that ſhe Lam. 1. 12. was driuen to complaine, that no ſorrow was like her ſorrow: when yet before ſhe had been the beauty of the whole world. Theſe difficulties, as I haue ſaid, with many other both mentioned in Scripture, and ſeene in experience, may fall out in our liues, ſo that we ſhall be driuen to crie out euery one of his owne burdens, what ſhall I doe? yea, and it may bee an innocent mans caſe, to be brought into ſuch ſtraits, and his, who is godly, and he ſhal not be able to auoid it till God ſend helpe. As for the wicked, ſuch ſtreights come vpon them, as an armed man vpon a naked.
                  Now ſeeing God hath ſuch vantage of vs thereby, and that throughout this preſent life, & may moſt iuſtly inflict them vpon vs, (that I ſay no more) oh what cauſe haue we to make precious vſe hereof? for the which cauſe in ſo neceſſary a matter, I thinke good to ſet downe ſome vſes thereof to the 
                        Vſe 1. Reader: And firſt this is one, that we ſhould euery day (which is a part of our iourney home) as oft as wee find it ſo, acknowledge with admiration, Gods goodneſſe in that he ſpareth and freeth vs from ſuch ſtreights, and not only ſo, but alſo from ſo many great calamities and caſualties as we are kept from, and much more, if our life bee freed from ſmaller afflictions alſo, but moſt of all if we be loaden with his benefits. Which I ſpeake to the iuſt reproofe of ſuch as hauing their part in all theſe, yet paſſe ouer all blockiſhlie Pſalme 68. 19. and vnthankfully, but if ſome croſſe befals them, then they break out againſt God impatiently and brutiſhly. Secondly, make we this vſe of it, that ſeeing 
                        Vſe 2. we are all ſubiect hereto, and by our iuſt deſerts bee alwaies in danger and feare to be thus abaſed; therfore to be humbled, and prepare our ſelues daily for them, and as Iob did, to looke for our change. Thirdly, we haue little need 
                        Vſe 3. Note. Luke 9. 23. to trouble our ſelues with an ill conſcience any manner of way, and ſo to procure needles ſorrow, if wee be daily in danger of ſo great vexations. And laſtly, ſet we little by the beſt things here, they being ſubiect to a thouſand 
                        Vſe 4. changes, but lay we vp treaſure for our ſelues, that ſhall neuer fade nor be taken from vs. And to them that obiect vpon this, that ſeeing we may fall into ſo many and great ſtreights, what prerogatiue haue the righteous, and what ſhall they doe, liuing in ſuch an eſtate as well as other? I ſay, let them truſt in God and feare him, that ſo it may be well with them, as he hath promiſed Deut. 5. 29. it ſhall, and ſo doing, he will keepe many ſuch calamities from them, and giue them deliuerance out of many ſuch difficulties; and turne thoſe that abide vpon them, to their ſingular benefit and good, or receiue them vnto glory, when others in the meane while ſhall be at their wits end with Pſalm. 3. 25. the ſtrangeneſſe of their plagues, or, which is much worſe, bee caſt into hell.

This we haue to learne by occaſion of the man: Now of the ſpies.
                  The ſpies offered him kindneſſe, if he would ſhew them the way into the citie: in that they dealt kindly with him, rather then roughly and cruelly, 
                        Doct. 2. ſeeking ſuch a matter at his hands, they did as became them. But hee being one of the curſed nations, how could they (ye wil aske) promiſe him mercy? Obiection. for though they did ſo to Rahab before, yet ſhe turned to their religion: and ſo did the Gibeonites ſerue them as bondmen, and imbraced their religion alſo. But no ſuch thing can be ſaid of this man, for hee went vnto the Hittites, out of the ſeuen curſed nations, and dwelt there. I anſwere: we muſt Anſwere. interpret the lawes of God againſt the Canaanites, and concerning the rooting them out, by mitigating them with this equity, that if they made peace with Iſrael, they ſhould not roote them out. And this appeares by that which is written in Ioſhua, that theſe nations were rooted out, ſeeing none of Ioſh. 11. 19. them ſaue the Gibeonites, made peace with the Hebrewes.
                  And this being ſo, teacheth all men to deale euen with the bad kindly, and to be harmeleſſe toward them. And though they be of them who haue deſerued puniſhment (as this man of the citie Bethel might by as good right haue been put to the ſword as the reſt in the citie, vntil he yeelded himſelfe) yet for as much as they be in miſery they are to bee pitied, vnleſſe their facts be horrible and beyond the courſe of common treſpaſſes, in which caſe they muſt be puniſhed by authoritie accordingly: for in ſo dealing with them, there is hope that their harts may be mollified, and they in time be brought to repentance: whereas by rigor and rough handling of them they will (queſtionleſſe) be hardened. And if they fall into the Magiſtrates hand, and muſt needs for their fault bee put to death; it is enough that they haue that inflicted vpon them which is their due, though they bee not purſued with crueltie alſo. Ioſhuas dealing with Achan, who yet for his treſpaſſe muſt bee put to death, may be a paterne for all men, to teach them to auoid crueltie, Ioſh. 7. 19. and to ſhew kindneſſe and mercie to ſuch as bee in miſerie. Thus hee ſaith, when his ſinne was found out againſt him, My ſonne giue glory to the God of Iſrael, and make thy confeſsion to him, and ſhew me now what thou haſt done. And as Ioſhuas example, for his louing dealing toward the offender: Achan, is to be highly commended: ſo the contrary is as odious in the Preiſts and Iewes: for when they had gotten that which they ſought at Pilats hands, to haue our Sauiour, againſt all law, to be condemned, they were not content with that, but moſt cruelly and deſpitefully handled him with mocks, and taunts, and all diſgrace that might be: But it was as good as might be looked for at their hands.
                  But while I am minding this matter of dealing kindly and mercifully with the afflicted, it commeth to my remembrance, among many other things iuſtly to be wailed, how lamentable the eſtate of malefactors is in ſome places at leaſt in this land: as they are miſerable throughout their whole life, ſo eſpecially at their death they are moſt of all, ſeeing that, after they be condemned, that they goe to execution without any meanes to bring them to conſcience of their wicked liues, feare of the iudgement to come, and to ſome knowledge and hope of eternall life: whereas, if it pleaſed thoſe which are in authoritie, ſome fit Miniſter of God might be appointed to take them in hand after they be adiudged to die. I will not ſay what

good might be done to the poore priſoners thereby. But for mine owne part, when I was young, and able to trauell, I did that dutie myſelfe ofttimes in compaſſion of their miſery, and ſaw bleſſing on my labours; and the word which I preached to them, in that little time which they had to prepare themſelues, I ſaw it (I ſay) to be apparantly bleſſed of God, to my great contentment and comfort, and good hope of them. I remember well, that at ſundry times, that though I was but a ſtranger to them, yet after that I had through Gods bleſſing brought them to ſee their damnable and miſerable eſtate by means of their ſin, and had ſhewed them, that euen then they were neareſt mercie, I was receiued of them with great liking, eſpecially after they had taſted of the glad tidings of the Goſpell to quiet and comfort their heauie hearts. Yea, I may truly ſay, as I did clearely ſee, I was to them more then their owne father could haue been vnto them, for the meſſage brought vnto them.
                  And beſide this that I haue ſaid of them, the like meditation vnto this, I had of the eſtate of many people in the land, who run as ſwiftly to hell as the other; through ignorance (moſt falſely called the mother of deuotion, but rather the mother of all miſchiefe and confuſion) alſo prophaneneſſe, and other groſſe ſinnes, though not ſo lyable to the law of man to bee puniſhed as the other. Theſe are alſo without a Miniſter that is able and willing to leade them a better way: who, if they had ſuch meanes as might conuert them to God, and that they who are ſuch good inſtruments, might bee incouraged and backed in their labouring to reclaime them, they ſhould haue cauſe to giue God great thanks, and the perſons alſo, by whom they be ſo well inſtructed and comforted. But if I ſhould here bewaile all ſuch alſo, as being taught yet are little the better; as I cannot chuſe but pittie them, ſeeing the Goſpell is hidden from them, and therfore they dying ſo, ſhal moſt certainely periſh; I ſay, if I ſhould bewaile theſe, how far ſhould my complaint reach? I ſhut vp this point therfore, cōcluding thus, Oh that there were not ſo much hardnes of heart in many Miniſters and others, who might helpe this, wiſhing that they had a little of the compaſſion that was in our Sauiour, as the Euangeliſt recordeth, when he ſaw the people diſperſed, as ſheep without a ſhepheard. Matth. 9. laſt. And againe, Oh that we could deale pitifully, kindly, and louingly with the miſerable and the afflicted; and that all the gentleſt meanes were vſed to reclaime offenders, of whom there is hope, ſuch as are as this man of Bethel was, in great diſtreſſe, which is not done but very rarely, and therfore is there much hardneſſe of heart, in thoſe to whom it is neglected, and wilfulneſſe, that carrieth them to all profaneneſſe and impenitencie.
                  And thus (to returne to the ſpies againe) ſeeing it hath been proued that Doct. 3. ver. 24. they did not vnlawfully in ſauing this Bethelite aliue, the moſt that can bee ſaid of their ſo doing, could be but an inconuenience (ſeeing he gaue no token that he turned to their religion,) for ought that we can ſee) and yet this was a ſmaller inconuenience then if they had killed him, and ſo to haue been put to their ſhifts how to haue found the ſecret way that led into the citie: this alſo teacheth vs a good point, that when wee ſee in attempting of our lawfull buſineſſe and labors, that ſome inconuenience muſt needs be borne, that which is leſſer of two, if it be without ſinne, is to be gone vnder: that ſo we may auoid that which is greater. For want of which conſideration, and

due regard of that which I ſay, while men ſtand at the ſmaller, to auoid that, they runne into a greater, if not into ſinne itſelfe. As in many inſtances it may be ſhewed; and this among other, may bee one. Many a man will not make others priuie to ſome of his dealings, being ſuch as may bring him in good commodie: and this he forbeares to doe, onely for that he would not haue the commoditie and benefit that he reapeth thereby, to be knowne to any other, which were not ſo great an inconuenience, if it were knowne to ſome faithfull friend. And what falles out in the meane while thereby? euen this, which is much greater: that for want of skill how to vſe that dealing or trafficke aright, and in the beſt manner (which by the helpe of ſome wiſe friend he might haue learned) hee loſeth a great part of his commoditie, which he might haue inioyed; yea, and thereby falles to offend God by impatience and murmuring, when he ſeeth that he commeth ſhort of his expectation and hope. So many a man falling vpon theeues, in a deſperate mood, refuſeth to yeeld his money, though he be vnable to reſiſt, and ſo loſeth both money and life too. And ſo doe many refuſe, through ſtomacke, to agree with their obſtinate aduerſary, becauſe they are loth to loſe and forgoe any thing. Whereas by ſtanding out with him to the vtmoſt, they forgoe not a little, but ten times the value.
                  Much like to that which many do about their bodily health. They doubt at leaſt, if they know not alſo, that ſome ſore diſeaſe is breeding in them, yet will they not conſult with ſome experienced Phyſition. And why? I ſay, to auoid ſome inconuenience, as the taking of phiſick, which is nothing pleaſant to them, or to ſaue charges, or becauſe they would not loſe any time in following their profits. And what falles out thereby in the meane while? euen this, that a greater inconuenience meeteth them: ſo that for the auoiding of that which was but ſmall, they loſe both profit, and life alſo. This thing is the more to bee regarded, becauſe wee ſee by experience that commodities are ſo mixed with diſcommodities, that in things indifferent, the one goeth not without the other. This is true, as in all comforts of this life, ſo particularly in marriage: and that as well in going about it, as liuing in it. For the firſt, many to auoid the troubles of the married eſtate, which is the ſmaller; are put to many inconueniences; as to liue in vnquietneſſe and diſcontentment, and by vnſetledneſſe in a ſingle eſtate to fall to fornication, (that I ſay no more) which will prooue to be farre greater. Many againe reſolues by marrying, (if they can make themſelues great thereby) to ſhunne a meane and low eſtate in pouertie, and thinke, if they can doe ſo, they ſhall be void of trouble, and yet while they looke no further, they weary themſelues with many more ſore and dangerouſer troubles; though mariage be lawful, yet ſuch an attempting of it, is not good. Againe, by this rule among married couples, the one partie ſhould yeeld to the other without too much rigor and auſtcritie, or contending in a thing indifferent: the husband in giuing libertie to the wife to ſpeak when there is cauſe; to viſit friends; to take vſe of ſome commodities to her owne behoofe and benefit, rather then to denie them, becauſe they feare ſome inconuenience may come thereby; when yet it is certaine, there ſhall farre greater be ſeene to fall out by doing otherwiſe. And ſo in all other dealings: if all inconueniences cannot bee ſhunned, yet let vs be ſure, by labour, prayer and godly wiſdome, to auoide the hardeſt.

And one ſpeciall good vſe of this doctrine, is, that we take heed, we bee not too ready to iudge our neighbour for bearing with ſome inconueniences, (as we are too forward and too ready to doe) when they muſt doe it to free themſelues of greater; and in ſo doing we condemne our ſelues, ſeeing wee our ſelues are ſubiect to the ſame doctrine alſo. For what haue wee to doe to iudge our brother in ſuch a caſe; who if he haue ſuſtained an inconuenience, wee may well thinke, he hath done it, to him a greater. This alſo condemneth them, who, if they bee a little croſſed with ſome hard accident, do by and by grow deſperate, and make the rent greater by their raſhneſſe and impatience, &c. ſcorning to ſtoope to the neceſſity which God hath laid vpon them, and not wiſely declining extremity. Though they cannot auoide the inconuenience befalne them, yet they ſhould ſhunne the ſinne of murmuring which is greater, for elſe they beare the burthen of both. But I cannot goe through this ſtorie at this time; I will therefore here cut off.
               
            
         
         
            THE EIGHTH SERMON VPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               IT followeth further about this Bethlite, (for it is to good Verſ. 25. A queſtion.
                purpoſe) to enquire heere, whether this man did well in betraying the city, and what is lawfull in the like caſe. For as concerning the ſpies, no queſtion is to be made of their drawing the man to it, whether they did well or no; for it was their worke aſſigned them of God to deſtroy Anſwere thoſe nations, and therefore to vſe the meanes in going about it. So was it alſo lawfull for him to do it, they ſignifying to him what Gods wil was in that behalfe. But whether the man beleeued that, and therfore whether he did it in faith, or to ſaue his life, and his friends and goods, it is vncertaine. The firſt is more poſſible, then probable, to haue been the cauſe that drew him to doe it; but the laſt is moſt likely; yet wee may not determine which, except the Lord went before vs: therefore according thereto was his act good and commendable in him, or otherwiſe. Now for vs, the caſe ſtandeth farre otherwiſe, then it did with him. For it is Doct. ve. ſ. 25. not lawfull for vs to yeeld to any ſuch thing as he did, in betraying the city, but odious and horrible. The Lord Ieſus ſpeaking of the like matter, as a thing moſt monſtrous to attempt or goe about. He ſaith, many ſhall hate and betray one another: a fearefull thing to heare, much more for one to doe it to Matth. 24. 10. a whole City.
            Nay all bitter violence and cruelty is odious in vs one towards another, ſimply, and without all reſpects; much more when it ſhal be done for gaine

or preferment. No, neither is it any way tolerable for the ſauing of ones owne life. We muſt in all theſe caſes, haue our diſcharges and warrant from God, for that which we doe; as Rahab had for hiding the ſpies: which wee Ioſh. 6. 25. hauing Scriptures moſt clearely to direct vs in all our actions, no ſuch thing, from what example ſoeuer, is to be followed of vs in theſe daies. Neither is the fact of Ioel in killing Siſera, nor the Iſraelites borrowing and carrying away Iudg. 5. 24. Exod. 12. 35. of the Egyptians treaſures, any thing to imbolden vs to doe the like: ſhe doing it againſt Gods enemies the Canaanites; they doing that which they did by the Lords appointment. In a word, to doe any euill that good may come of it, is odious.
            Laſtly, out of theſe two verſes it is good for vs to marke, in that this poore 
                  Doct. 2. Bethlite was the inſtrument of taking the city; what poore meanes and helpes God oftentimes miniſtreth, for the effecting of that which hee commandeth to be done; yea though the worke be great, and the means weake and vnlikely to bring ſuch a matter to paſſe, it skilleth not. Both theſe things may be ſeene, both in ſtirring vp and preparing that ſillie woman in Ioſhuas time, to receiue & lodge the ſpies, whom he ſent to view Iericho before they tooke it, as alſo by blowing trumpets of Rammes hornes, and Ioſh 6. 16. &c. by compaſſing of the city Iericho ſeuen times, to make the walles of it to fall downe. Who ſeeth not that theſe were poore engins to batter walles? and alſo to giue this Bethlite into the hands of theſe ſpies, that they might by his helpe eaſily take the city? For when God will haue a worke to be brought to paſſe, he appointeth the meanes alſo for the ſame purpoſe; which being alwaies knowne to him, but ſeldome to vs ordinarily, till we meet with them (not by chance, but by his will and appointment) it doth often take heart from vs, and much diſmay vs from cheerefull going about that which wee are commanded, ſo weake is our faith, when with vnbeleeuing Thomas wee doe not ſee and behold with bodily eyes the meanes which are yet ſufficient and at hand through Gods promiſe.
            So much the more it behoueth vs to be well acquainted with that which is taught vs heere: for it is a ſingular encouragement to vs, (wee being ſo weake) when we haue an hard labour laid vpon vs, and we ſee no meanes to bring it to paſſe, to know (yet) that God will prouide helpe, though wee ſee not how; as he did prouide a ſacrifice for Abraham to offer in ſtead of Iſaac. Indeed, if he ſhould deale with vs as Pharaoh did with the Iſraelites Gen. 22. 8. (who enioyned them an hard taske, and great worke, but yet they muſt make ſhift how to effect it, (which was impoſſible for them to doe) then it were no maruell if we were penſiue, and at our wits end what to doe. But (God be thanked) if we can beleeue him, that he will make it eaſie, and prouide accordingly; moſt cheerefully may we be occupied, from day to day, in all that by Gods Commandement we ſet our hand vnto. This cauſed the Apoſtle Paul to be ſo diligent and vnwearied in bringing ſo many nations 
                  Act. from 13. 10 21. chap.
                by his preaching, to embrace the Goſpell, and ſaluation thereby; when yet there were ſo many and great diſcouragements in his way.
            This cauſed thoſe worthy ſeruants of God, Zorobabell, Ezra, and Nehemiah, 
               Nehem. 2. 17. not onely to returne into Iudea; but to build both the city vp againe, being greatly ruinated; and euen the walles thereof, and alſo the Temple; when hauing commandement from God ſo to doe, they beleeued that hee

would ſhew them how, and bee with them, to inable them, though wee are not ignorant, how many blocks and maine enemies there were in their way to hinder them. And wee haue no other ſtay to looke for the promiſed ſaluation, but this, that hee that hath commanded vs to liue by faith, and waite by hope, will finde meanes to bring it to paſſe, although we ſee little how, many times; in ſo much that we oft feare and doubt, it being the waightieſt caſe of all other; euen as Saint Peter alſo ſaith, that the righteous are ſcarcely ſaued. And euen ſo, the labouring man, and the Artificer could neuer bee vpholden 1. Pet. 4. 18. to follow their calling with any peace, if they ſhould looke onely how hardly they are like to bee maintaine, and ſhould not ſtay themſelues by faith, that God will prouide for them, they themſelues not being negligent. And be this the ſtay of vs all, in our hardeſt condition wherein wee be ſet by God, that hee will bring vs through, though wee ſee not how, and that alſo in good ſort, becauſe he hath promiſed.
            Now it remaineth, that we ſee how well this man was rewarded that did Verſ. 26. helpe forward Gods people in their worke, to the deſtroying of his enemies, by ſhewing them the way into the city, though it bee not ſet downe with what mind he did it. Thus they dealt with him: they did not onely ſet him free, and his whole family, from the deſtruction that lighted vpon the other citizens, but they did alſo ſuffer him to carrie away his wealth: yea and ſo greatly enriched him, that he was able to goe build a citie. And by this wee ſee, that ſuch as bee helpers and friends to Gods people, neuer looſe their reward: as Rahabs example and the Kenites doe moſt cleerely Ioſh 6 24. proue & declare. A notable encouragement both to Gods people, to know that the Lord ſo careth for them, that hee will cauſe many, euen of the wicked, 1. Sam. 15 6. to be friends to them, and helpefull: and it is no leſſe comfort to them Prou. 16. 7. that are ſo affected to them, they may bee ſure they ſhall not loſe their labour, but be well rewarded. And ſo much the more wee ought to bee quickened by this doctrine, ſeeing Gods people haue many and ſtrong enemies in this world, and they themſelues are weake and ſoone diſcouraged. And this is a great refreſhing to them, when they haue promiſe of ſuch helpes, as whereby their but then is made eaſie. And the Lord hath ſaid much in his word to the encouragement of both; and therefore the Pſalmiſt ſpeaking of Ieruſalem Gods people, ſaith. Let them proſper that loue thee. Pſal. 122. 6. And to Abraham the father of beleeuers (which alike is ſpoken to all that are beleeuers, as Abraham was) thus he ſaith; I will bleſſe them that bleſſe thee, and curſe them that curſe thee. So that as Ahab was ſpared, inſomuch that the Gen. 11. 35. plague threatned came not in his daies, but in his ſonnes, becauſe he repented, and yet it was but outwardly, wherein hee gaue but a bare ſhew of it, euen ſo, they that doe to his people any good, though it bee but in an outward action, as this Bethlite did heere to the Lords people, ſhall not loſe their reward.
            It is true indeed, that this but temporary for the moſt part, which they receiue, as the helpe that they miniſter to them is ſo: but beſides that it is much that God will regard them at all, who are not faithfull to him (for they might feare rather the contrary, that he would purſue them as his enemies) becauſe they be not repentant: beſides this (I ſay) they get acquaintance with the godly hereby ofttimes, whereby they be in hope, that they Note.
               
ſhall learne their religion, and follow their conuerſation, which if they ſo like and approue of, that they loue them the better for it, then do they gaine exceedingly by it indeed, I meane by that friendſhip that they ſhew them. For then they come within the compaſſe of a better bleſſing, and are partakers of a greater promiſe, euen that in the Goſpell; Whoſoeuer receiueth a Prophet, 
               Matth. 10. 41. 
               in the name of a Prophet, ſhall receiue a Prophets reward: and he that receiueth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, (that is, for his goodneſſe, and becauſe he is a good man) ſhall haue the reward of a righteous man alſo.
            
            This ought for iuſt cauſe to aſtoniſh and terrifie them who are profeſſed enemies to them becauſe they walke vprightly, and hate none more deadly; 1 Ioh 2. 12. Prou. 29 27. according to the prouer be; The righteous is an abomination to the wicked.
            This ought alſo to draw the hearts of the common ſort who profeſſe religion, better to regard Gods people, and not to bee more brutiſh then the Heſt. 8. 17. heathen nations who feared Iſrael, ſeeing they ſaw God was with them, yea and let them while they liue among them obſerue their example, and profit by them, as they in the Acts. 9. 31. If they will ſay they know not Act. 9. 31. who they are; I anſwere, that they ſpeake vntruly; for in the time of their owne affliction and miſery, they can diſcerne and doe know them, and will aske for them; although at other times they are thought of them to bee too preciſe and deuout, and call them Scripture-men in contempt; yea euen ſuch as againſt whom they will ſet themſelues: to theſe therefore, if they will ſhew that they be wiſe indeed, let them adioyne themſelues, and make much of them, till they verifie the Scripture; the Lambe and the Lion ſhall feed together: for if God in their trouble and abaſement haue giuen them Eſa. 11. vnderſtanding and diſcretion to know them, and afterward they make no more reckoning nor account of them; they cannot bee ignorant that they haue done wickedly, and are able to ſee what they doe in caſting them off. And let them be ſure, that their ſin will find them out in time, and the Lord Numb. 30. will caſt off them, for that they haue dealt ſo with them. But much more if they or others begin to ſmite them with their tongue, and to kicke at them, and diſgrace them. This bee ſaid of the houſe of Ioſeph ioyntly. It followeth in the text.
            
               VERS. 27. Neither did Manaſſes deſtroy Bethſhean with her townes, nor Taanach with her townes, nor the inhabitants of Dor with her townes, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam with her townes, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo with her townes, but the Canaanites dwelt ſtill in that land.
               
               28. Neuertheleſſe when Iſrael was ſtrong, they put the Caananites to tribute, and expelled them not wholly.
               
               29. Likewiſe Ephraim expelled not the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.
               
               30. Neither did Zebulon expell the Canaanites that dwelt in Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol, but the Canaanites dwelt among them and became tributaries.
               
               31. Neither did Aſher caſt out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Ach zib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob.
               
               32. But the Aſherites dwelt among the Canaanites the inhabitants of the land: for they did not driue them out.
               
               
                  
33. Neither did Napthali driue out the inhabitants of Beth-ſhemeſh, nor the inhabitants of Bethanath, but dwelt among the Canaanites the inhabitants of the land: neuertheleſſe the inhabitants of Beth-ſhemeſh and Bethanah became tributaries vnto them.
               
            
            IN theſe verſes the holy ſtory layeth out the ſinne of the other Iſraelites The ſenſe. beſide Beniamin, for that they caſt not out, nor deſtroyed not thoſe Canaanites which dwelt in their ſeuerall lots, according to the commandement of God, but onely made them tributaries to them. And before all the reſt the tribe of Manaſſe is reckoned to haue done ſo. But whereas it is ſaid in Ioſhua, that this tribe did then ſo, that is, make them tributaries then: it is not Ioſh. 17. 12. ſo to be vnderſtood, but that is ſaid there by an anticipation; that is, by ſetting downe that before, which came to paſſe afterward. For that was afterward to come to paſſe, that is, at this time heere mentioned, which was after Ioſhuas death. For in the daies of Ioſhua, and of the Elders that liued with Ioſh. 24. 31. him, the people contained themſelues, and did their duties in reſiſting their enemies, by his worthy conducting and going before them. And by this their departing from the commandement of the Lord, which for a time they obeyed, we ſee how they declined in a ſhort time and waxed weary of obeying.
            The which, and namely in ſo many of them, teacheth, how ready men Doct. Out of all theſe verſes in generall. are to leaue and forſake a good courſe, although they haue hardly, and with much adoe, been brought to embrace and faſten vpon it; which much concerneth vs to marke. For we are eaſily deceiued about this, and thinke both of our ſelues and others, that if we beginne to diſlike, and turne away from ſome groſſe and common faults that wee were wont to commit; then the worſt is paſt with vs, and that wee ought iuſtly to bee reckoned among the godly; whereas it is nothing ſo, but we be yet, for all that, farre off. For a Note. farre greater matter is required to the endeuour effectuall calling to repentance may be approued of God, and be ſound indeed, as in other places I haue ſhewed, how we ought to try and ſearch into our ſelues, and cannot Luk. 14. 31. Lam. 3. 40. now ſtand about it.
            But although wee were truly turned to God, and had, as theſe, obeyed God for a time with a good heart, yet ought we to feare danger, in reſpect of our owne frailty, and according to the preſent occaſion, when wee ſee to what point theſe tribes came, for all they had followed the Lord commendably for a time, in beginning to caſt out the nations as they were commanded. And the reaſon of this, to wit that wee ſhould thus carefully looke to our ſelues, is this, that we are reformed but in part, and that in ſmall part: in which reſpect yet, becauſe we haue receiued ſome grace, we are able thereby to deſire and goe about to doe God ſome ſeruice, and ſpecially at ſome time; namely, while we be watchfull to hold vnder our rebellious paſſions, aſſiſted by grace: but what then? For wee hauing a ſea of corruption euer flowing in vs, and our owne concupiſcence beſide outward obiects enticing vs a contrary way; it muſt be drained and purged out daily, by little and little, Note. and not bee let alone in vs, leſt it ſhould choake and drowne the grace that we haue receiued; which if it be, wee become impotent by and by, ſo that wee doe not onely ceaſe to obey, but wee are carried rather as with a

ſtreame to any euill that we be tempted to; and namely, to this one heere mentioned that ouertooke theſe tribes; that is, to be wearie of well doing: and ſo much the rather, ſeeing there are ſo many allurements and occaſions in euery place to prouoke vs and ſet vs forward.
            And although we are not without helpe, nor naked in the middeſt of all theſe ſtormes, yet if wee know not theſe things; yea and if alſo wee doe not reſiſt carefully ſuch euill as I haue mentioned; neither ſtriue to nouriſh ſuch ſparkles of grace as are kindled in vs, our hearts being ſet wholly hereupon, as the waightieſt thing that we haue to deale in; what maruell is it, though wee fall from the goodneſſe that was wrought and begun in vs, and ſo become Note. others then we were before? Which I ſpeake not as though we muſt do nothing but watch and reſiſt ſome one or few inticements which would (I grant) ſoone waxe tedious to vs; neither is that impoſed vpon vs by God, but we are to know, that while we bee aiming at one good thing or other, our worke goeth well forward, ſo as wee doe wiſely labour to diſcerne among good things, what the beſt is, and moſt neceſſary to bee done for the time, and what ſinne and corruption is moſt to bee reſiſted. Thus I haue ſtood ſomewhat long in this point, to ſhew how eaſily we may poſſibly fall from our ſtedfaſtneſſe in a good courſe, and what care ſhould bee in vs againſt the contrary; which I entred into (as ye may remember) by ſo good an occaſion of the coldneſſe and declining of the tribes from the knowne commandement.
            Now I will goe forward, as my purpoſe was, to ſhew ſomewhat more particularly, how we vſe to decline, and breake off good beginnings; euen as theſe tribes did, who began well to execute Gods commandement for a ſeaſon, in rooting out his enemies, but went not forward. And this let vs ſee in ſome ſort, both in our ſelues and alſo toward others. For the firſt, we cannot bee ignorant that many of vs of good hope haue ſometimes carefully ſearched into our ſelues, to finde out ſuch corruptions of our hearts as haue Lam. 3. 40. brought our whole liues out of frame: and therein wee haue done God good ſeruice; and when wee haue found them out, as careleſneſſe, ſlothfulneſſe, vncleane deſires, and worldlineſſe, &c. we haue had them in the chaſe, Note. and hunted them, with diſgracing them, watching and praying heartily againſt Matth. 26. 41. them for a time. This alſo hath been another peece of good ſeruice done vnto the Lord: but our not being alwaies alike forward, but neglecting care (as through corruption and vntowardneſſe it will ſoone come to paſſe) and the vſe of good meanes, or our feruency therein. Oh how haue wee drooped and hanged the wing; yea and if more ſpeedy heed hath not been taken, how neare haue we been brought to this bondage, to bee well content to let theſe and ſuch like our ſinnes to be quiet in vs, without any great purſuit, or offering of any great violence to them, till they haue recouered ſome ſtrength in vs againe, and preuailed, and begun in moſt vnſeemely manner to maſter vs, and bring forth noiſome fruit, euen like themſelues; as the Canaanites did grow ſtrong and mighty againſt Iſrael, when they were not held downe as God required, but ſuffered to liue and be let alone?
            But to proceed no further in this, if theſe noiſome weeds be not plucked vp, how can good ſeed bring forth her fruit, (for all may eaſily ſee what followeth, ſeeing the roofe muſt needs totter if the ground-ſels bee pluckt

away) therefore if we ſlothfully ſuffer ourſelues to grow to this point, who ſeeth not that we offend God as ſore, and as grieuouſly prouoke him to diſpleaſure by ſuch diſobedience, as theſe tribes did by making a league with the Canaanites, and not expelling them as they began, and ſhould ſtill haue done? For the tranſgreſſion is alike in both, and that of one and the ſame commandements, while they ought to haue rooted out perſons out of the land, and we ſinnes out of our hearts and liues. Thus I haue ſhewed how like we are to the Canaanites in ſuffering ſinnes in ourſelues, which ſhould haue been rooted out rather: now let vs alſo ſee it in ſome particular manner how we be too like them in our dealings toward others.
            For euen as they failed in ſuffering the Canaanites to remaine amongſt them, and did not expell them; ſo doe wee ſuffer them who are little better then Canaanites in their behauiour and manners to abide therein, till they A ſimile. corrupt and taint them that dwell among them; as if an infection were diſperſed round about to poyſon mens bodies. The people of Iſrael ſet themſelues to ſeeke their owne quietneſſe and eaſe (though they broke the commandement of God) in letting the Canaanites liue ſtill, and abide in the land. And to this point things are come in our daies, that whatſoeuer God command to bee done, and good and wholeſome lawes enioyne againſt many fowle ſinnes, yet if the executing of them require labour and any coſt, and it bring any toyle and trouble, and hinder mens eaſe and profit; behold, a Lion is in the way; they will not at all take them in hand; or if they Prou. 22. 13. haue begun, they ſoone waxe wearie of the worke, and giue it ouer (neuer enioying Gods promiſe to harten them to the obeying of his commandements, but yeelding to their owne corrupt reaſon) ſo that there is little rooting out of grieuous diſorders and lewdneſſe of life, in towne, countrie, or familie: as whoring, drunkenneſſe, gaming, ill companies, and ſuch like: and as little purſuing of the perſons that diſguiſe themſelues therewith, either in Church or Common-wealth. And this was a greater fault in theſe tribes to let the Canaanites remaine, and not expell them; becauſe they were ſtrong enough to haue done it; and ſtronger by much then they on whom they ſhould haue executed Gods charge: for ſo it is ſaid, verſe 28. When Iſrael waxed ſtrong, yet did they not expell them wholly, but onely put them to tribute. So this aggrauateth the ſinne of our time, foraſmuch as Note. God hath giuen authority into mens hands to remoue ſuch diſorders, and greater gifts of knowledge and ability to ouermatch ſuch euils as he would haue to bee rooted out, and yet there wanteth zeale, and courage to goe about it. And though things ſhall neuer bee brought to that perfection that were to be wiſhed, yet much might be done that is vtterly neglected. This be ſaid and noted out of all the verſes in generall, and of all the tribes mentioned therein.
            Now more particularly, ſomewhat is to bee ſaid of Manaſſe and Ephraim: who did not alike behaue themſelues when they were ſeuered, as when Verſ. 27. 28. 39. they were ioyned together: then they went the one with the other roundly to the worke, and proſpered: but now they being diuided, they were 
                  Doct. out of verſ. 27. 28. compared with the former, from verſ. 22. to 27. backward and ſlothfull, and ſo let the Canaanites grow and multiply. That which I will obſerue heere is this: That we looke heedfully to this, that we make much of godly ſociety, and labour to enioy it therefore, and to take all

the good that we may by it. For wee haue much encouragement thereby, whatſoeuer good wee goe about, wherein it may bee vſed. For as the Wiſe man ſaith; Two are better then one; if one lie alone, how ſhould he be warme? And Eccleſ. 4. 11. ſo many good perſons being ioyned together in a good worke, (like firebrands in a chimney, that giue a glowing heate when they are laid together, when one alone ſoone goeth out) one is refreſhed, helped, hartened, A ſimile. and comforted by the other; according to the kind of worke which they take in hand: and ſo one alone is much weakened, made heauie, and ſoone diſcouraged. As Moſes his hands failed againſt Amalek, till Aaron and Hur propped them vp. But Moſes and Aanon, Caleb and Ioſhuah; Dauid and Ionathan, and ſo much more many together, as their employment required, who doubteth but that they did much more roundly and readily diſpatch the worke appointed them of God, then if they had been diſioyned and aſunder? Therefore doubtleſſe, where both, if there bee no more, or many are ſound hearted in ſeuerall to God and his worſhip, and like minded and vpright hearted each to other, the Lord is doubly honoured, the Goſpell graced, euen in the eyes of the wicked; the aduerſarie ſtronglier reſiſted by their vnited force; beſides the ſtrengthening one the others hands in the way to happineſſe.
            And therefore the publike aſſemblies of the faithfull haue great force to quicken and to comfort the people of God, in the ſeeing the faces of one another, all being preſent together to meet the Lord there; farre otherwiſe then one alone can finde it, though he be well minded alſo, and enioyeth no ſuch benefit of the miniſtry at all, vnleſſe it can be no otherwiſe. Euen ſo Chriſtian fellowſhip in priuate betwixt the people of God, for their mutuall edifying and comfort, as they haue opportunity to enioy it, is many waies gainefull. And though ſolitarineſſe hath alſo her kinde and ſweet vſe; and though there is a time to be alone, when a man deſireth it, who is fit to vſe it; yet to be tied to it, or (which is worſe) to bee in bad company euery while, it is ſuch an vncomfortable eſtate, that if it were not for imployment in their particular calling, wherein they may beſtow their chiefe time, they Note. ſhould make their life meerely tedious and weariſome. Therfore I maruell, that godly fellowſhip and acquaintance is no more ſought and made account of; nor the communion of Saints (which is but one fruit of the Goſpell) in no heartier and greater requeſt, nor no better vſe made of it where it is enioyned; but broken off among ſome, by euery light and ſmall conceit, teatch, or ſiniſter report and ſlander, and by ſuch like occaſions. And ſeeing I haue ſpoken this of fellowſhip, one thing I haue thought good to adde, and that is: if it bee poſſible let a wiſe Chriſtian bee neuer to ſeeke of ſome one faithfull friend at the leaſt, to whom he may breake his minde in Note. all doubtfull caſes, and communicate with him about neceſſary matters, and who may be to him as an eye to watch ouer him, and as another him-ſelfe to comfort him.
            Let this ſuffice to ſhew what a benefit Chriſtian ſociety and godly fellowſhip is many waies, to them that can rightly vſe it; according to the words of the Pſalmiſt, Behold how good and pleaſant a thing it is, brethren to dwel 
               Pſal. 133. 
               together in vnity: and what danger and diſcouragements there ariſe in the priuate condition; where no helpe by Chriſtian communion of neighbors

is enioyned; and therfore what heed is to be taken therin that ſuch a band be not broken where it is, and where none is, that it be ſpeedily (as may be) ſought and procured: that for want of aduice, fellowſhip and good company, ſo many waies requiſite, men be not plunged into depth of troubles, both in matters of ſoule, and in things of this life; many of the which might eaſily haue been auoided.
            Now it followeth, which I will deferre to the next Sermon.
         
         
            THE NINTH SERMON VPON THE FIRST AND SECOND CHAPTERS OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  VERS. 30. Neither did Zebulon expell, &c. as before to verſ. 34.
                  VERS. 34. And the Ammorites draue the children of Dan into the mountaine, ſo that they ſuffered them not to come downe to the valley.
                  
                  VERS. 35. And the Ammorites dwelt ſtill in Mount Heres in Aijlon, and in Shaalbim, and when the hand of Ioſephs family preuailed, they became tributaries.
                  
                  VERS. 36. And the coaſt of the Amorites was from Maaleh-akeabim, euen from Selah, and vpward.
                  
               
               
                  NOw it followeth. From this 30. verſe, to the 34. the holy Verſ. 30. Story ſetteth downe particularly, how the tribes of Zebulon, Aſhur and Naphtali, did euen as the other tribes before mentioned, of Beniamin, Manaſſe, and Ephraim; that they let thoſe Canaanites liue ſtill among them, and did only put them to tribute. Wherein to ſee the agreement that was in this ſinne betwixt them and the other, it is worthy the noting, and may bee of ſingular vſe vnto vs. For they did as if they had conſented together, one to doe as the other did, (whereas they could (yet) but heare one of an others doing) they did (I ſay) euen as the other before mentioned, for their eaſe and quiet, make leagues with the Canaanites, contrary to that which God commanded them. Which ſheweth vs, that it is the leſſe maruell that we ſee it ſo in our age, and that it hath been 
                     Doct. 1. ſo from age to age, that there is agreement in finne among all eſtates, yea in the ſame ſinne, as if they did mutually reſolue to ioyne therein. For Paul 
                  2. Tim. 3. 1. ſpeaking of groſſe ſinnes which ſhould raigne in the world, in the latter age after Chriſt, tels vs, that the times, that is, the people in the ſeuerall ages, ſhould be tainted therewith. And as it was in the daies of Lot, ſo ſhall it bee in the ages following; they did eate and drinke, and marrie; that is, they made them their paradiſe. And as they haue done, and liued in former times, ſo they doe, and will doe, ſtill. And as they ſought their Matth. 24. 37.
                  
felicity and hearts deſire heere in ſome tranſitorie things; as in gathering wealth, hunting after vaine pleaſures, and ſeeking of promotion: euen ſo, this doe many at this day, who profeſſe the Goſpell, and yet this is the eſtate of the ciuiler ſort; there are greater abominations then theſe: the way of truth they haue not knowne; the feare of God hath not been before their eyes; but is this done in one place as in another, yee will aske, as the ſinne heere ſpoken of, was alike ſpread throughout the tribes? I anſwere; neuer more then at this day. Therefore when the meaner ſort receiued not the word with fruit, I turned (ſaith the Ppophet Ieremy) to the mighty, to the learned, to the Prieſt, &c. as declaring that hee looked to finde it otherwiſe Ier. 4. there; but behold, all were alike.
               So is it ſaid by our Sauiour, as it was in the daies of Noah, ſo ſhall it bee at the comming of the ſonne of man, and (as he ſaith) in the latter age, whereof this in which we liue is a part, they did then eat and drink, marrie, and giue in marriage, (theſe were things what they did then moſt minde and ſet their hearts on, and knew nothing of any danger) till the flood came and tooke them all away. And what doe men now, or haue done in our remembrance in the former daies, but euen ſo, and the ſame things? What pleaſure haue men, ſaue in eating and drinking, and following after their delights? and as the tribes did, for their eaſe and pleaſure commit ſinne, euery one his owne way: ſo what doe men, but euery one that which doth beſt ſerue his owne turne. What effectuall and ſauing knowledge of God is there to be found, ſaue only heere and therein a few perſons? and generally the Goſpell is a myſterie, Note. and the pearle in it is hidden from one, as from another, though it bee hidden from none but from them that ſhall periſh. What exceſſiue and vnſatiable ſeeking 2. Cor. 4. 3. after the worlds good is there, as in other ages? what bold prophaning of the Lords Sabbaths, when yet he hath plainely charged vs the contrary, ſaying: Remember yee keepe them holy? And what ſhould I further ſet downe other agreements betwixt men in their liues and practiſe, whether we compare our daies with the former, or in the ſame daies one man with another? And yet one would thinke that the examples of former times ſhould teach the latter wiſedome. That ſeeing they who now liue may behold, how they haue been taken away, and that oft times in the middeſt of their delights, and could keepe themſelues from death no more then others; therefore it ought worthily to cauſe them to looke further, and to prepare a better, and a more enduring inheritance againſt they muſt goe hence. But to grow to an end; ſeeing it is ſo that the world is like itſelfe, and the ſinnes of it haue entertainment alike for the moſt part, with one as with another, I will ſhew the cauſe of it why it is ſo, and teach the vſe of it before I end. (For beſides the diuels malice, who ruleth alike in the hearts of the children of darknes, & draweth them to the ſame euils, in the moſt places) beſides this, I ſay, all men are corrupted in their harts, imaginations, and deſires: Gal. 5. 19. Gen. 6. 5. they all loue euill, and loath that which I good. Wherby it commeth to paſſe, that the ſins that one embraceth, an other delighteth in alſo; hauing no ability nor will to reſiſt or turne from them, but drinketh them vp, as the fiſh doth water. And there is nothing able to make it otherwiſe but one: and that is the grace of regeneration & new birth, which changeth a man, & giues him a new hart and will, whereby he diſliketh the former inclination

and diſpoſition that led and caried him amiſſe before. And hereby the deceitfulneſſe of his ſinfull heart being found out, he groweth to be out of loue and liking with the deſires which came from it, and conſequently from the uill words and actions that proceeded from it; and both mindeth and doth the contrary things. Thus hee is, as wee ſee, turned into an other courſe of life, different from the men of the world. But becauſe few light on this change, and this grace entreth not into many; but is reſiſted rather, and that in a deadly manner, euen when by ſound preaching it is offered vnto them; Note. therefore they abide in the ſame eſtate wherein they were before, ſo that they are not ſubiect to the grace that ſhould guide them, neither indeed can be. Thus it commeth to paſſe, that few being new borne, the moſt agree in the ſame euill, to the which (the heart being alike diſpoſed vnto it) they are carried.
               And whereas it will (perhaps) be obiected, that the good nature that is in many, more then in ſome others, and good education doe put difference betwixt men, as well as ſanctification, and the changing of the nature of man; be it knowne vnto them, that the beſt nature is poyſoned, and enclined Note. to all ſinne, and hath the ſeede thereof: and the beſt education, being not ſeaſoned with religion, can but worke ciuility in a man; or (at the moſt) reſtraine him from ſome outward and open wickedneſſe; it cannot giue him a new heart, neither therefore make him a new creature. And I conclude with the vſe of this doctrine, that all ſuch as deſire to be better guided then naturall men can be, muſt ſeriouſly labour to be acquainted with their hearts, ſearching out by the Law of God, the depth of falſhood and euill that is in them, which is great and much: and (as they are taught) bewaile Ier. 17. 9. it, as that which bringeth forth fruit vnto death, till they obtaine pardon thereof, and of their other ſinnes: with the which grace they receiue will and ſtrength, though weakely, to liue well, and to pleaſe God; yea and for the obtaining of all theſe, let them attend to ſincere preaching, not by fits, but ordinarily and conſtantly as they may, and ſo God will draw them out of the puddle in which other lie ſtill, and worke that grace in them, whereby they ſhall be reformed to the image of Chriſt their head, and to the ſimilitude of the members of his body, which are all vniformely gouerned by the ſame ſpirit, which worketh alike fruits in all. And this is the onely way to come by it. Gal. 5. 22. Iam. 3. 17.
               
               But another thing is to be noted by theſe tribes beſide, (which I haue ſaid already, and that is, ſeeing they could not chuſe but heare one of another 
                     Doct. 2. what they did) how one was led by the example of the other. For though one eaſily agree with another in euill (as I haue ſaid before) yet I cannot tell how it commeth to paſſe, that when wee haue example alſo from others of any bad courſe, we are much more eaſily riueted into it thereby. Nay this example ſo much preuaileth, that although wee haue Gods commandement neuer ſo plaine to the contrary, with threates annexed thereto, wee boldly breake through it, and not onely affect and commit the ſame, as in the former doctrine I ſaid wee doe; but wee beare it downe before vs as it were a ſtreame. It could not eaſily haue been thought that this people of Iſrael, one tribe after another, could (there being ſo many of them) haue ſought their owne eaſe, in making peace with the other nations, hauing receiued

ſo ſtraite a commandement that they ſhould expell them: and yet they did ſo handle the matter among them, that it was as it were vtterly forgotten among them, and they grew to bee confirmed in a contrary courſe. But when one tribe had broke the ice to another in breaking through the commandement, it became as a matter that lay dead, few looked after it. So it would hardly haue been thought, that Saphira could haue been brought to conſent to the holding backe of that ſumme of money which was conſecrated to ſo good and holy an vſe; which was by making a lye, and ſtanding ſtifly in it; but when ſhe knew her husbands mind, and had him to goe before her therein, ſo that he made no matter to commit ſuch a treſpaſſe, ſhee was emboldened to doe it alſo by his example.
               Likewiſe, who would haue ſaid that well nigh the whole city of Samaria ſhould haue been drawne to receiue Simon Magus his ſorceries? but after that ſome had begun, and there was none to reproue and ſhame them for it, the reſt fell to it, hauing ſuch examples before them. And a man would wonder to ſee how ſuch cleare & ſtreight charges as God hath giuen to men, of departing from iniquitie, and of not following the multitude to doe euill, ſhould Exod. 23. 2. be ſo troden vnder foot, and caſt behinde mens backs. Miniſters are commanded Ioh. 21. 15. as they loue Chriſt, they ſhould feed his ſheepe, and his lambes: the people, that they ſhould giue all diligence to make their calling and election 2. Pet. 1. 10. Eccleſ. 11. 9. ſure: young men not boldly take their pleaſure, and ſpend their youth licentiouſly: old men, that they ſhould be patternes to the young in good life, &c. But as if God might be mocked, hell agreed withall, and as if the Scriptures that ſtraitely vrge theſe things, were an old wiues fable, ſo they are regarded. For what one of many, either Miniſter maketh euer the more conſcience of zealous and diligent preaching; or how many of the other ſorts feare the commandement to depart from euill? It is enough to them that they haue others to goe before them in the euils which they doe. For euen as ſheepe and beaſts follow the formoſt ranke, whitherſoeuer it leade them, euen ſo theſe like beaſts doe. Thus by the ſeede of ill example ſinne encreaſeth, and iniquitie aboundeth in all places, till at length a confuſion of all things follow, in offices, duties, and eſtates both in Church and Common-wealth. And the rather, if men ſee ſuch goe before them in euill as ſeeme to haue excellency in any gifts, whereby they can maintaine their ſinnes; as by wealth, learning, authority, or any ſuch like. In which reſpect the ſinne of the tribe of Iudah was the greater, in that they beleeued not that God would enable them to caſt out the inhabitants of the valleyes, ſeeing they had chariots of iron, and ſo they becomming examples to their brethren therein; and being the chiefeſt, though they had done commendably in expelling many other of them; therfore the reſt of the tribes thought their ſinne more tolerable, and made the leſſe of it, though they yet had not ſo good a pretence for their doings as Iudah had. But to returne to our ſelues, we are to know, that it is great boldneſſe to follow bad examples, the damnation of ſuch ſleepeth not. Let not men bee deceiued, God hath all theſe things and ſuch like regiſtred and writen, not with inke and paper, (for then there were hope that in time they might bee worne out) but in his remembrance, which neuer faileth. If Paul wiſh that men follow not his example (ſo rare a patterne of piety) further then hee followes Chriſt; what

ſhall they haue to anſwere, who looke no further then to this, that they ſee others doe ſo, how odious ſoeuer their doings are? Let that ſerue vs for doctrine concerning examples, foraſmuch as they that leade and towle vs on by their example, cannot helpe vs to beare our puniſhment, when their own ſhall be intolerable to them, ſeeing company ſhall not eaſe the torments of the damned in hell; howſoeuer heere they could ioyne hand in hand to commit their ſinne with pleaſure and conſent. And let vs bee ſo farre from following others in their doings, further then they follow the rule that ſhould guide vs all, that our owne light may ſo ſhine before men, that they may bleſſe God for vs, and learne of vs. So ſhall wee ſhew our ſelues wiſer then theſe tribes, whoſe ſinne we haue ſeene laid open vnto vs, and bee well fenced againſt all danger by ill examples. The laſt verſes in this chapter now follow
               
                  VERS. 34. And the Amorites droue the children of Dan into the mountaine; ſo that they ſuffered them not to come downe to the valley.
                  
                  35. And the Amorites dwelt ſtill in mount Heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim, and when the hand of Ioſephs familie preuailed, they became tributaries.
                  
                  36. And the coaſt of the Amorites was from Maale-Akrabbim, euen from Selah and vpward.
                  
               
               NOw in the ſhutting vp of the chapter, the holy ſtory bringeth in the The ſumme. tribe of Dan, ſhewing that theſe Danites had not the liberty that the other tribes had: for they yet had ſtrength to expell the Canaanites that were in their lot, and did not: theſe were couped vp in a narrow roome vnto the mountaines, and yet were not ſuffered to poſſeſſe them neither: but they were not permitted at all to dwell in the vallies, but their enemies had them out, and kept a great part of their poſſeſſions in their hands by force. So that we ſee that the negligence of the other tribes in ſuffering the forbidden nations to remaine and waxe ſtrong; cauſed theſe their brethren to be wronged, and to go without their due which God had allotted them: For if they had kept their enemies out, they might haue been able now to helpe this tribe of Dan: who if the houſe of Ioſeph had not done more then the reſt, they had been left almoſt without habitation.
               And by this we may ſee, that mens ſinnes doe not only redound to their Doct. owne hurt, but alſo to the hurt of others. Whereas none are hurt, neither themſelues, by thoſe that feare to offend God, and be carefull to do their duties, but they may receiue great benefit thereby. But the other hurt many, as well as themſelues. As wee ſee bad parents, what woe they hoard vp for their vnhappy children, as Ahab, and the like. What they do to themſelues, this place giues no occaſion to ſhew directly, but by conſequent, but how other feare the worſe by them. And the ſame may bee ſeene in many particulars among vs alſo, both touching body and ſoule. As firſt, how many ſoules doth an ignorant, idle or ſcandalous Miniſter deſtroy and cauſe to periſh? How many good people doth an vngodly Magiſtrate grieue, diſcourage, and make faint in good duties, and fleſh the vngodly? as Salomon ſaith; When the righteous are in authority, the people reioyce; but when the 
                  Prou. 29. 2. 
                  wicked beareth rule, the people ſigh. The riotous, ill company keepers, and ſuch

as giue ill counſell, how many doe they ſpoile? as in the Epiſtle to the Corinthians we reade; where it is ſaid, Euill words corrupt good manners. And what diſcredit to the godly, and to the Goſpell it ſelfe, hypocrites who profeſſe 1. Cor. 15. 33. it, doe bring, Saint Paul declareth, ſpeaking thus to the Iewes; Thou that teachest another, and teacheſt not thy ſelfe, cauſeſt the name of God to bee euill Rom. 2. 21. 24. ſpoken of: ſo that both when the Goſpell is truly preached, and alſo practiſed of ſome, yet both are ill ſpoken of by the wicked, becauſe of the offence that hypocrites giue. And generally the wicked are the cauſes of miſchiefe and puniſhment from God, vpon the places where they liue; cauſing the earth to mourne, and be wearie of the inhabitants, yea Gods children are of the worſe for their neighbourhood, not onely while they gather infection by them to their ſoules; but they ſmart bodily alſo with them, and by them oftentimes in a publike calamity which their wicked liues haue cauſed.
               Further to giue briefly ſome inſtances of this alſo, in the hurts that wicked men do to others in things of this life (for it would be too long to ſhew it at large) what doth the gameſter, ſpendthrift, and the ſlothfull perſon, but bring all to naught, and vndoe his familie, as well as bring himſelfe to beggerie? What doth the oppreſſor and the vſurer, in exacting that which is agreed vpon (how hardly ſoeuer it can be yeelded) but fleece the borrower, till he makes his skinne to grow to his bones for want of fleſh? How many cormorant-like rich men doe the like in other kindes, impoſing rents vpon their poore tenants, which conſtraine them to labour for them onely, in prouiding their due againſt their day, and cannot maintaine themſelues ſo well as ſeruants may and ought to be? whereas God alloweth them to liue, and bee well maintained by their labour? And other defraud the labourer of his wages, or pay what they liſt; and yet Saint Iames ſaith, Their cry is entred into the eares of the Lord of hoſts. Oh! it cannot be expreſſed, what are the diſcommodities and annoiances, which the ſinnes of men, and their wicked liues, doe cauſe and bring vpon others as well as themſelues (as the the tribes heere wrought woe to their neighbors theſe Danites) ſeeing all the plagues and miſchiefes which are euery where to be found, are to bee imputed vnto them, to verifie that which is written; Woe be to the world, becauſe of her iniquities. 
                  Iam 5. 4. And this be ſaid of the tribe of Dan and of all the reſt.
               Now there remaineth a queſtion to be anſwered, and ſo I end the whole An Obiect. Out of theſe verſes of the ſecond part. The Anſw. chapter. And the queſtion is this; ſeeing the tribes dwelt with the Canaanites, and tooke tribute of them, whether it bee lawfull for a godly man to dwell and bee conuerſant with the vngodly, as Papiſts, &c? I anſwere, that ſeeing Chriſt kept company with the publicans and great ſinners; and ſeeing Saint Paul would not giue leaue to a beleeuing wife to depart from an Matth. 9. 10. 1. Cor. 7. 13. vnbeleeuing husband, if hee will dwell with her; therefore it is not ſimply vnlawfull to dwell with ſuch: but if the godly be well ſetled in ſound knowledge, Certaine cautions to be obſerued in companying with Papiſts, &c. and ſtrong in faith, ſo as they be not tied to communicate with them in their falſe worſhip of God, they may: but yet with certaine cautions. As firſt this, that in companying with them, they intendand endeauour to perſwade 1 them to ſound religion, and that to this end they ſhew themſelues kinde and gentle, the better to draw them on. But if they be in feare and danger to be drawne themſelues, they ought to cut off ſuch fellowſhip.
               The ſecond thing that they muſt take heede of, is; that they liue vnreproueably 2
                  
and without iuſt blame among them: for otherwiſe they ſhall do them hurt, and harden them, rather then doe them the leaſt good. Thirdly, 3 they may not in the leaſt matter vnder any colour of friendſhip mixe themſelues with them, either in their falſe opinions, or in worſhiping God; no not although they ſhould hope thereby to draw them on the eaſier to embrace Chriſt: as many hypocriticall profeſſors doe, and thereby couer their voluptuouſneſſe, couetouſneſſe, and prophaneneſſe; who ſhould rather remember this, that they may not do euill, that good may come of it. Laſtly, they muſt take heede that they ſeeke not their owne profit at their 4 hands by companying with thē; nor to take their pleaſure in gaming & play with them, whereby they bewraying their weakeneſſe (as impatience, greedieſſe of gaine, wrangling, or being immoderate in ſpending the time therein) they ſhould ſet them further backe from imbracing the Goſpell. Therefore, if theſe cautions be not regarded, and alſo if wee haue no hope to win them, wee muſt craue pardon, and leaue them to God; hauing no more to doe with them in that familiar manner, further then of neceſſity which may poſſibly bee, either on our part, or on theirs; (as if their neede ſhould bee great, and they had no other way to bee relieued by, then by vs, or if our liues ſhould be preſerued by them: In which caſe we ought to be very warie, leſt we be intangled by them. Alſo we may company with them, if we bee linked to them by the bond of nature; as they being our parents, brethren, kinsfolke, or in ciuill reſpect, as being our magiſtrates, maſters, &c. But as for putting children to ſchoole with teachers that be of that religion, it is no way fit nor lawfull, ſeeing by their gifts of learning, they may ſo draw an high conceite of them from the children, that they may the eaſier diſtill and drop poyſon into them by their corrupt religion. And this for anſwere to the queſtion, and withall an end of the whole chapter.
            
            
               THE SECOND CHAPTER.
               
                  VERS. 1. And an Angell of the Lord came vp from Gilgal to Bochim, and ſaid, I made you goe vp out of Egypt, and haue brought you vnto the land which I had ſworne vnto your fathers, and ſaid, I will neuer breake my couenant with you.
                  
                  2. Ye alſo ſhall make no couenant with the inhabitants of this land, but ſhall breake downe their altars: but yee haue not obeyed my voice. Why haue yee done this?
                  
                  3. Wherefore I ſaid alſo, I will not caſt them out before you, but they ſhall bee as thornes vnto your ſides, and their gods ſhall be your deſtruction.
                  
                  4. And when the Angell of the Lord ſpake theſe words vnto all the children of Iſrael, the people lift vp their voice and wept.
                  
                  5. (Therefore they called that place Bochim) and offered ſacrifices there vnto the Lord. 
                     The ſumme of the Chapter.
                  
               
               WE haue heard in the firſt chapter the notable victories of Iſrael ouer the nations, while they obeyed the word of God; and alſo the ſin of many of them in ſuffering the Canaanites to liue. Now it followeth, how the Lord of his goodneſſe reproued them for the ſame, by the meſſenger

that preached to them; and the fruit that followed thereof. And afterward, vnto the end of this chapter, the holy Story ſetteth downe the ſumme of almoſt the whole booke; namely to the 17. chapter; taking occaſion to doe this from the acts of former times: beginning at the things which were Ioſh. 24. done before. Ioſhuas death. The ſumme of all the reſt of this chapter from verſe 6. is thus much: I ſhua a little before his death, hauing called the people together, and giuen them their charge (as appeareth in chapter 23. and 24. of that booke) that they ſhould beware of Idolatry, and feare the Lord, after that, he ſent the people away, and died: in whoſe daies, and in the daies of the elders that liued after him, the people obeyed his charge, as it is to bee ſeene in this chapter, from the 6. to the 11. verſe. But after that, it is ſhewed how the next generation that aroſe after them, declined from that good courſe: and ſo did the ages that followed them, one was like another, throughout this booke vnto the 17. chap. and here with it is declared, how God dealt with them. And that in few words was thus; they fell to prouoke God by Idolatrie and other ſins: then the Lord was diſpleaſed with them for it, and deliuered them into their enemies hands: after that they cryed to the Lord, and he raiſed them vp Iudges or deliuerers of them; yet they obeyed not euen them, which cauſed him to be againe offended with them, and to threaten them as is to be ſeene to the end of this chapter. And this is declared and laid out by the diuers examples of the people, throughout all this booke, vnto the 17. chapter, according to the generall diuiſion made of the whole booke in the beginning.
               According to the meaning now ſet downe, the parts of this chapter follow, The parts two. which are two: The firſt, is a calling of the tribes that had offended, to repentance, to verſ. 6. The other, is the ſetting downe of the eſtate of the people after Ioſhuas death, and Gods dealing with them vnder the Iudges, throughout theſe 15. next chapters, vnto the 17. and this is to the end of this chapter.
               I will leaue the laſt part to the due place, wherein it is to bee conſidered, and examine the firſt as order requireth. And heere in this firſt part we may ſee theſe two things: A reproofe of the people by the Angell, to verſe 4. and the effect that followed thereon; that is, the peoples repentance, to the ſixth verſe: ſo that in the firſt part of this chapter is ſhewed, how the people had prouoked God already by not driuing the nations out, after their firſt entrance, and the death of Ioſhua: as wee haue heard in the former chapter: and that they were brought to repentance. In the ſecond part is declared, how another generation that knew not the Lord did much worſe: for they not onely made couenants with the Canaanites as the other did, who were brought to repentance; but alſo ſerued all manner of Idols, and prouoked the Lord thereby. To begin therefore with the former branch of the firſt part, that is, their reproofe, the meſſenger that was ſent to them, (to make it 
                     The ſumme of the firſt 3. verſes.
                   more forcible to pricke their conſciences) firſt rehearſeth the benefits which God had beſtowed vpon them, which ought rather to haue drawne them to obedience. And this he doth in the firſt verſe, as ye may ſee: then he ſetteth downe the faults for which hee reproueth them. One, that they made leagues with the Canaanites, contrary to Gods commandement; the other, that they had not caſt downe their Alters; and he expoſtulateth with

them for the ſame, ſaying, why haue ye done this, contrary to the charge which the Lord gaue you? in the 2. verſ. And laſtly, he threateneth them, that their diſobedience ſhould be to their great puniſhment, ſaying; I will not driue them out, but they ſhall bee prickes in your ſides, and their gods ſhall bee a ſnare vnto you, and this in the 3. verſe. Now it remaineth to ſpeake more particularly of theſe in order. But before I come to ſpeake of the meſſage, I will ſay a little of the meſſenger.
               The word Meſſenger, or Angel, ſignifieth ſometime a created nature 
                     Of the firſt verſe perticularly. Heb. 1. 14. without a body, (as Hebr. 1. Angels are called miniſtring ſpirits) and theſe aſſumed ſome forme at Gods commandement for the time then being, the better to accompliſh their office, as Geneſ. 18. Sometime this word ſignifieth Gen. 18. 2. any other meſſenger that God ſendeth to execute his will: as Reuel. 2. and 3. where by the Angell, is ment the miniſter that was ſent to them, a meſſenger from God. And whether of theſe ſoeuer is ment heere, it maketh no matter, and it being not particularly expreſſed in the text, it is ſufficient for vs, that wee know it was a miſſenger ſent of God; and therefore ſufficiently authorized: and of thoſe to whom he was ſent, one who ought to be reuerently receiued and beleeued. And let it teach vs, that God alwaies vſed 
                     Doct. 1. Out of verſ. 1. the miniſtry of his ſeruants to reueale, as it hath ſeemed good vnto him, and to declare his will vnto men; either about the generall couenant of Heb. 1. 1. grace and promiſe of ſaluation, or about any other particular thing as hee ſaw cauſe; and this he did whether they were Patriarkes, Angels, Prophets, or Apoſtles, by whom he did it in ages paſt, or (as he doth now) other miniſters of the Goſpell, as Paſtours and Teachers, whom he vſeth at this day to reueale his will vnto the people. The which declaration of his will by them out of his word from time to time, as it highly commendeth his great kindneſſe to theſe to whom he ſent thoſe his meſſengers, (ſeeing wee know hee hath not done it at all people in any age) ſo it teacheth vs (as others that were before vs, it did the like) that wee are bound to heare them, in all that Act. 10. 33. the Lord ſhall ſay to vs by them.
               According to that which our Sauiour himſelfe ſaith, He that heareth you, 
                  Matth. 10. 40. 
                  heareth me, and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. And ſo much more wee are to heare them, and receiue their meſſage with all readineſſe, ſeeing as it hath 1. Theſ. 4. 8. been glorious in all ages, ſo it is moſt of all in this latter age; wherein is reuealed to vs, that all things hath been performed by our Sauiour which appertaine to mans happineſſe, and which were in ages paſt onely foretold; and therefore they may much more fully and clearely bee made knowne to the hearers now, if the meſſenges who ſhould bring the tidings, be faithfull and able to doe their meſſage. In which caſe wee muſt receiue them as the Lord himſelfe, and the word which they preach, not as the word of man, but (as it is in deed) the word of God; that ſo it may worke in vs effectually, as phyſicke Gal. 4. 14. in a corrupt body, both to make vs ſicke, and to recouer and heale vs againe; 1. Theſ. 2. 13. God hauing prouided, that in what eſtate ſoeuer the people be, euery one ſhould receiue his portion, by the right diuiding of the word vnto them. And the ordinarineſſe of their meſſage, ſhould not make either their Eſa. 50. 4. miniſtery the leſſe ſet by: but rather wee ſhould haue them in ſo much the more eſtimation, and admire therein the vnſpeakeable prouidence of God and loue of our Lord Ieſus, who (as hee ſendeth vs not to extraordinary

meanes) ſo yet he hath promiſed the ordinary vnto his Church, euen to the end of the world: as in the Epiſtle to the Epheſians is to be ſeene. Epheſ. 4 11.
               
               Which being duly conſidered, doth bewray the wofull and lamentable eſtate of the moſt hearers (though they are in moſt feareful eſtate that heare not) who euen where the word is preached with power and authority, haue it in ſmall account and reuerence. And what ſhould the Lord doe more vnto Hoſ. 6. 4. Matth. 11. 17. them, hauing thus offered his dainties vnto them? and yet they are ſo ful ſtomacked, that they finde no ſauour nor pleaſure in them. They giue themſelues leaue, ſo to wallow in their ſenſualities, and to take their fill of earthly Note. delights, that they finde no ſauour in his heauenly delicates: yea and yet ſome of them are ſuch, as heretofore haue heard with ioy; yea and a man might haue thought, they would haue pluckt out their eyes for them that brought the glad tidings vnto them, now are waxen full, and count them their enemies for telling them the truth; and ſome thinke themſelues within a few weekes, able to teach their teachers: as other haue turned their zeale into luke-warmeneſſe, their reuerence into contempt, conceitedneſſe, worldlines, and deprauing of the Scriptures. And ſo like fooles, while they loath this wholeſome and ſweete Manna of the word of life, which is the approued truth of God: they reliſh fantaſies, and haue great taſte and delight in dreames and lies: in ſomuch as that if any would faine himſelfe to come from the dead, and affirme, that he brings them newes from thence for any ſound knowledge or faith that they haue, they are ready to receiue them. Oh people infatuated and bewitched (as Paul ſaith to the Galathians) ſeeking, as one that runneth vpon a ſwords point, their owne deſtruction. Gal. 3. 1. But of theſe enough.
            
         
         
            THE TENTH SERMON ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES, on the ſame text. verſ. 1.
            
               NOw further let vs marke, that the Lord ſending his meſſenger to the people heere did (after they had fallen The further laying open of this verſe. from his couenant that hee made with them) to moue them to repentance (as in theſe 3. verſes is to be ſeene.) And heere let vs marke (I ſay) how God is faine to preuent them by this meſſenger, while they lay in their ſins, before they could accuſe themſelues, and complaine, ſaying once among themſelues, What haue we done? and ſo to ſeeke recouery. They were fit to be more and more hardened, and to runne on ſtill, yea to couer their ſinnes as Adam, and flee Gen. 3. 10. Iob 31. 33. Gen. 31. 54. from God as Ionas, and to ſit downe vpon them and hide them, as Rahel vpon Labans Idols; bet to bethinke themſelues, what they ſhould do to come

out of their ſinnes, and ſo to helpe themſelues out of danger thereby, they were vtterly to ſeeke, and altogether vnfit. They may bee likened to Dauid, 
               2. Sam. 12. 7. who hauing lien long in two fearefull ſinnes, was ſo farre from repenting of them, that Nathan was faine to leaue off parables, and to ſpeake plainely before he could conceiue him. And to Peter, who hauing denied his maſter, Mat. 26. 74. 75. had no power to riſe out of his ſinne, till the Lord Ieſus looked backe vpon him, by the which watchword, Peter called to minde, together with the the cocks crowing, the words which Ieſus had ſpoken to him; to wit, that he ſhould denie him, and then he went out and wept bitterly.
            And by this wee may ſee, what a dangerous thing ſinne is; I meane not 
                  Doct. 2. onely the committing of it, which one would thinke were feareful enough, but for that afterward they are not able to riſe out of it, but lie ſtill in it (when yet men thinke they can repent of it at their pleaſure) and when they liſt, though it trouble the conſcience, as raw fleſh doth the ſtomacke: but they are hardened in it for a time, eſpecially ſoone after the committing of it, ſo that they cannot at all humble their hearts, and bewaile their ſinne to God. And if they come to themſelues again after a time, yet it is by Gods preuenting of them, as I haue ſaid; and while he renueth his grace in them, as relenting and remorſe for it, and the renouncing of it, and crauing of pardon. Thereby indeed they are inabled to repent, and ſo to returne to their former workes. But this is not (wee ſee) any power in them, for they are not able to bring their hearts thereto, nor to doe any ſuch thing of themſelues. And yet I ſay more, that many times when they haue fallen, they doe not attaine this grace neither; before God brings them to heare by preaching, or by affliction calleth them to a deeper conſideration, or by ſome ſuch like meanes bringeth their ſinne to light, and into diſgrace with them; as to theſe people hee did heere at Bochim; and then it may bee they ſtay their courſe and returne.
            But now let this be well weighed herein, what a diſtraction and diſquietneſſe it hath been to them all this while, to lie bound as it were with the chaines of their ſins, as they haue been, that they cannot helpe themſelues; and to bee ſo bereaued of the graces of God, as faith, hope, ioy in the holy Ghoſt, feare of offending, and ſuch like; that they lie dead in them, as if they had no part in them, and they hauing no vſe of them to ſtrengthen them to Note. any good doing, although they be in themſelues profitable to all holy vſes; whereas in the meane while, who would loſe his ſweet communion with God, if he bee wiſe enough to conſider what I ſay; though it ſhould neuer be brought againſt them? no though it were but for an houre or a day, with the comforts belonging thereto? which yet theſe whom I haue ſpoken of, when they haue ſinned againſt their knowledge, doe depriue themſelues of, whole moneths and yeeres. And why doe they thus? If they ſuſtained all this, as from their triall from God, their patience were commendable; or if it were poſſible to honour him thereby, it were ſome commendation to them: but when it is for the hauing of their owne will amiſſe, and for the enioying the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſhort ſeaſon, oh how lamentable is it to thinke? So that this wiſedome ſhall well beſeeme the ſeruants of God, to Note. giue all diligence to keepe well, while they are well, and in no wiſe to haue their teeth ſet on edge with the deceiueable baites of ſinne, which the world

ſo greedily runneth after, foraſmuch as they ſhall ſee how deare it ſhall coſt them; and yet let them know this, that ſuch ſhall not bee onely void of the forementioned graces, but they ſhall alſo ſmart through many puniſhments. And now if it be ſo hard for them to come to repentance when they haue fallen, who yet before had enioyed that gift ſoundly: how much further off are they, who neuer haue part in it at all? neither are like to haue; euen as wee ſee by daily experience (how fearefull an eſtate is that to liue in) vnleſſe they wait on God diligently in the ordinance of preaching to attaine it.
            Now wee haue heard how God was faine to prouoke them to repentance, 
                  Doct. 3. Out of verſ. 1. before they could ſet themſelues toward it: It followeth to ſee by what reaſon he vrged them to it, after I haue ſaid a little of the places heere mentioned, Gilgal was a citie in the plain of Iordan, not farre from Iericho, from this Gilgal the meſſenger is ſaid to haue come. And Bochim is a place neare adioyning to it, in which this meſſage was done to the people of Iſrael, who had by their ſins cauſed it. It was not called Bochim before, but had the name giuen by occaſion of that which fell out there, that is, the weeping of the people, when their ſinnes were brought to their remembrance; for ſo the word Bochim ſignifieth, namely, weeping. At this place therefore (to returne to the purpoſe) the Lord told them of their diſobedience, and beginneth to make it odious to them by rehearſing his benefits great and many: as if hee ſhould ſay, what cauſe haue I giuen you to deale thus vnthankefully and diſobediently with me. Hath my kindneſſe been thus requited of you, that you returne me euill for my good will?
            Heere as in ſundry other places wee may ſee what effects the benefits of God doe commonly worke in men; and that is, forgetfulneſſe of them, and vnthankfulneſſe for them, and a meane account making of them; alſo boldneſſe in ſeeking of carnall liberty thereby (vnto the which we are ſo readily caried, and to prouoke God much more then if they had neuer enioyed them; little remembring that the Lord giues them a watchword, that they ſhould rather looke in all things to be thankefull. Iuſtly therefore was this 1. Theſ. 5. people heere chalenged for their vnthankefulneſſe. This was the cauſe why they were warned before, that they ſhould take heed when they were come into the land of promiſe, and ſhould there poſſeſſe great and goodly cities, which they builded not, and houſes full of all manner of goods, which they filled not; 
               Deut 6. 10. 11. 12. 
               and wels which they digged not; vineyards, and Oliue trees, which they planted not; and when they had eaten and ſhould be full, they were warned (I ſay) that they ſhould beware, they forgot not the Lord, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, &c. ſignifying vnto them, that wealth and eaſe would goe nigh to make them to 
                  Deut. 32 compare from v. 9. onward to verſ. 19. forget Gods mercies, by which they were deliuered out of their miſeries. By which wee ſee the peruerſeneſſe of our depraued nature, which turnes the wholeſomeſt food into poyſon, as the corrupt ſtomacke doth the daintieſt meates. We abhorre him who hauing receiued freely good turnes, and benefits, forgetteth his benefactor when hee is promoted, &c. yet it is certaine that men are the worſe for Gods benefits, and are more bold in ſinning againſt him, by the abundance of his earthly and common bleſſings. So Dauid confeſſeth, that before he was afflicted hee went aſtray: ſo that his benefits Pſal. 119. 67. (wee ſee) did him not ſo much good as his chaſetiſements. And ſo

               Ieremy ſaid, that he was as an vntamed calfe, till God corrected him. Wofull experience teacheth, how rare the man is who may truly ſay otherwiſe? to wit, that benefits knit his heart neerely to God, before he bee taught it by affliction. And yet we muſt know, that neither that of it owne nature draweth men to loue and obey God any more then his benefits; but as God worketh that grace,, of his eſpeciall fauour; without which our whole life is meere diſobedience, I ſay, further then his grace guideth vs, and keepeth vs within compaſſe in both eſtates. Common bleſſings and generall we thinke and ſay, belong to others as well as to vs; and as for ſpeciall and priuate, while we reape and feele them, we ſay, [Bleſſed be God] but wee are not for the moſt part, knit to him in dutie euer the more. The tenne leapets being Luk. 17. cleanſed, returned not to giue thankes, ſaue one. And hee to whom tenne thouſand talents were remitted, ſhewes this fruit of his thankefulneſſe, that he caught his fellow by the throat who owed him an hundred pence, bidding Mat. 18. 28. him pay that he owed. And why this? For the heart of man naturally is puffed vp with proſperity, and vaine eſtimation of himſelfe, and hee prideth in that which will be his ouerthrow and waxeth hardened, and is ſo far off from humility, and meane thinking of himſelfe, that all may perceiue (who can rightly iudge) that it maketh him prouder, and more ſcornefull, yea vtterly vnlike him he ſhould be, and diſguiſed: and yet to become great and get much in this vale of miſery, while things of greateſt price are not asked after, how eagerly doe men runne after it, as fiſh follow the baite with greedineſſe: nay they laugh all ſuch to ſcorne that find fault with them for ſo doing, and who doe not follow them in that exceſſe, and let better things paſſe by them as little worth? yea and yet this doe they, who lawfully come by wealth and promotion, and to whom the Lord giueth proſperity without any indirect or vnlawfull meanes: euen ſuch (I ſay) doe offend in the like manner of exceſſe and greedineſſe, and fall into the ſame danger thereby that the others doe, who attaine to it by ſhifting, and againſt conſcience. What then, ſome (perhaps) will ſay, it is lawfull for vs to enioy the earthly Obiect. benefits of God? And againe, are there none that rightly vſe proſperity and plenty? I anſwere, God forbid; for men may, and ſome doe much more good thereby to others eſpecially, then vnder the croſſe, and in aduerſitie. Anſw. But this is rare: for a contrary miſchiefe rather in proſperity befalleth men, and that is, that (for the moſt part) they ſuſpect not, neither feare any danger: What maketh proſperity to be abuſed. no not when they groſly forget themſelues, and abuſe their proſperity, when yet it hangeth ouer their heads, and is moſt hardly auoided. Moreouer, neither 1 doe they obſerue themſelues, leſt they ſhould become drunken with it, 2 neither ſearch into themſelues to finde out how they offend thereby. Both which are neceſſary for a man in proſperity to doe, yea and to vſe to doe ſo daily, for the cutting off the dangers that may otherwiſe enſue therby. And yet as the beſt practiſes againſt this and other ſinnes, yea though they be neuer ſo conſcionably and reuerently put in vre, doe by little and little grow Note. common, and loſe their ſtrength; ſo therefore beſides both theſe, a Chriſtian man muſt oft with Iob, tell it ſeriouſly to himſelfe, that he muſt looke for 3 his change, and ſay, it will not alwaies be ſummer; and thereby cracke the Iob 14. 14. pride of life, and abaſe the exceſſe of carnall delight, which proſperity will otherwiſe ful ſoone raiſe vp in him moſt dangerouſly. And laſt of all, if God 4
               
continue his daies of health and welfare, ſo that ſmartie croſſes be kept from him, let him croſſe his naughty and vnruly affections, and thoſe eſpecially by which he is moſt like to offend, and be in danger, chaſing them away by ſeruent prayer againſt them, and grow in fruitfulneſſe thereby, as he who receiued fiue talents, brought fiue more, which he had gained thereby. And theſe things being duely obſerued, as being thoſe which be moſt neceſſary, Luk. 19. 18. Mat. 25. 20. I will not doubt to affirme, that the man who doth ſo, ſhall vſe proſperity well, and be profitable many waies thereby, which yet of another man that doth not ſo, I cannot warrant: nay, I dare be bold to ſay hee ſhall not. But ſeeing the godly doe rarely thus, by this Iudge, how the world vſeth proſperity, if the godly ſo hardly vſe it well.
            Another thing is worthie to bee marked heere, where the Lord moueth the people to repentance, by rehearſing his benefits beſtowed vpon them, 
                  Doct. 4. Out of verſ. 1. and that is this: that of all reaſons, this ought moſt to preuaile with Gods ſeruants, to diſſwade them from their ſinnes which they haue fallen into, and to raiſe them out of them or to preuent the committing of the like, this (I ſay) ought moſt to preuaile with them, euen the often remembrance and due conſideration of Gods benefits, though with griefe it may bee ſpoken, this aduice preuailes too little. This reaſon God vſed heere, and the people were conuicted thereby, and yeelded, and confeſſed themſelues guilty: For why? the loue of God conſtrained them, which hauing been before ſhead 2. Cor. 5. 14. Rom. 5. 5. plentifully into their hearts. Now when they heard this ſharpe and iuſt reproofe, and that from God himſelfe by his meſſenger, they ſaw clearly their ſinne, and namely their vnthankfulneſſe, how they had forgot Gods benefits, and trod vnder foote his louing kindneſſe, it being the moſt precious of all other things, which went neare them, they knowing that hee had done ſo many & great good things for them; and this, with the remembring of his benefits in ſome perticular manner, as they heard them repeated, cauſed them to caſt vp their vnſauoury gorge, and ſo to returne from their deceiueable and damnable offences, & to imbrace againe the mercies of the Lord, who was their firſt husband. And with this putting the people in remembrance of his many and great benefits, God doth draw them on oft in other places to feare him. As when hee ſaith in Deuteronomie, I thy God haue bleſſed thee in all that thy heart could deſire. Thus in another place alſo hee Deut. 28. calling the people to repentance, whom he compareth to a vine, and labouring Eſa. 5. 2. to draw them from their ingratitude, putteth them in mind, that he had planted them being his Church, in a place moſt plentifull and abundant. This cauſed Dauid euermore to haue Gods mercies in great remembrance, and to ſet his benefits before his eyes, that hee might ſhame himſelfe for his ſinne paſſed, and by all meanes ſeeke to come out of it. And therefore in the pſalme 103. he as though hee had not been thankfull (when yet he excelled all men therein) quickeneth vp himſelfe thereto, ſaying; Praiſe thou 
               Pſal. 103. 2. 
               the Lord, O my ſoule, and all that is within thee praiſe his holy name. And in the 51. Pſalme; to perſwade himſelfe to repentance, hee ſaith, that his mercies Pſal. 51. 1. are great, and that there were in him multitudes of compaſſions. Other reaſons, drawne from the dreadfull feare of Gods iudgements, may (I confeſſe) terrifie for the time the hearts of Gods people and hold them in awe, as it were by violence: but they worke not kindly to bring them to dutie

with cheerefulneſſe, though they may ſtay them from further euill for the time, till forcibler perſwaſions come. But when all is ſaid that can be, it is the loue of God that conſtraineth men that they ſhould liue to God, not to 2. Cor. 5. 14. Note. The firſt benefit beſtowed on them.
                themſelues. And yet I will not ſay that this reaſon ſhall alwaies preuaile with vs, although where it doth not, wee may well conclude, that wee are much out of order, and haue groſly forgot our ſelues.
            Now I come to the particular benefits which hee beſtowed vpon them, 
                  Doct. 5. In verſ. 1. forbearing to repeate them euery one together, ſeeing they may bee read in the text, for times ſake, but one after another as they lie in order. The firſt is, that he had brought them out of Egypt, which was a countrie which was wholly infected with ſuperſtition and idolatry; and therefore moſt dangerous to dwell in. And what a benefit was it then for them to bee deliuered from thence, euen as from Rome; or in another reſpect, from Sodome? For Ezok. 20. 7. 8. there they muſt haue been corrupted with the peſtilent contagion of their idolatrie, beſide the moſt heauie burthens and bondage, with which both they were, and ſtill alſo they muſt haue been preſſed with, if they had remained there. Hence it is, that almoſt euery where in the Scripture, where mention is made of Gods goodneſſe to Iſrael, this their deliuerance out of Egypt is moſt commonly reckoned as the principall, becauſe without it all other bleſſings had been as nothing. Therefore let vs alſo know, that it is a ſinguler mercy of God, to be freed from the falſe worſhip of God, and idolatry, if I ſhould ſay no more; but eſpecially when there is ioyned with that a deliuerance from bodily troubles alſo. A benefit, whereof many thouſands in this land are partakers, which their fellow brethren in other nations, being as Iſrael was in Egypt, Iuda in Babylon oppreſſed with idolatry, would thinke they obtained an vnualuable benefit, if they might haue freedome from it. And ſo they may well thinke: For oh what a liberty is it both to ſoule and body? and yet we may haue it with farre more eaſe then they had it; that is, without trauell or iourney.
            And although they cannot value it in any ſort according to the worth of it, who haue neuer felt the burthen of a troubled conſcience, and bodily vexations; yet wee that haue, though they bee nothing ſo grieuous as they Note. had; we (I ſay) are euery day (that we riſe out of our beds to doe our neceſſarie buſineſſe) to confeſſe this marueilous worke of God for our deliuerance. And yet I deny not, but that other benefits of God are to bee ſought for alſo; as the enioying of the ſincere preaching of the Goſpell to the further welfare of our ſoules, and things neceſſary for this preſent life, that ſo there may want no encouragement to Gods ſeruice. But howſoeuer the Lord ſhould denie vs the one, I meane plentie for our bodies, which yet for many yeers he hath moſt gratiouſly yeelded and granted vs: yet we ſhould contend for the other, I meane ſound and ſauing knowledge by an happie and ſound miniſtery, by all meanes, if poſſibly wee may enioy it. Which I ſpeake to the iuſt reproofe of all ſuch as doe onely regard their outward eſtate in the world, little or nothing looking after the benefit of true happineſſe by their ſoules welfare: forecaſting altogether to plant themſelues ther, whither the hope of earthly commodities doth leade them. And though the townes, families, and kindreds be neuer ſo prophane and ſuperſtitious, to the which they make haſt, yet that they little regard; but ſo as

commodity and honour may be gotten (as their common queſtion is, may we looke for any good there?) they will dwell, there they will liue and dei, Pſal. 4. 7. and there they will match and leaue their children to remaine after them. But as from holding them from the infection of Popery, or labouring to ſhield them vnder a ſetled good miniſtery, and ſo to minde and ſeeke their ſaluation, it is no part of their thought. Nay there bee thouſands in this land that luſt after the ſeruitude of Popiſh Egypt againe; earneſtly deſiring that day (which God turne away) the Lord forgiue it them, (as our Sauiour prayed for them that crucified him) they know not what they do. So farre are they from thankfulneſſe for their freedome, that they are voluntary ſlaues vnder that Pharaoh of Rome, euen in their owne countrey.
            But to returne and ſo to draw to an end, let it be counted of vs a rare and ſingular mercy of God, to be free from great calamities, and extremities both of ſoule and body, as theſe Iſraelites were, who were deliuered out of Egypt, and the bondage thereof. And by occaſion of this which I ſay, this I further adde, that ſuch as liue void of grieuous paines and diſeaſes, (as well as Egyptian bondage) which others, yea and thoſe many of Gods deare children are vnder, as the ſtone, collicke, gowts, vlcers, gripings, and ſuch like; alſo ſuch as be not in vtter penury and want, nor yoked with vnquiet, vnkind and ſupeſtitious companions in marriage, nor with vnmercifull land lords, and cruell ouerſeers and gouernours (which doe make their life Note. weariſome to them, and conſume all their cheerefulneſſe and comfort, as as the moth eateth vp the beauty of a garment) let all ſuch (I ſay) beare their other pettie and ſmall diſcommodities, troubles, and viſitations, patiently and contentedly, and bee highly thankfull for that they are deliuered from farre greater: yea and let them acknowledge, that if with freedome from theſe and the like, they hold ſound peace with God, and bee free from the ſtings of an euill conſcience alſo, that they enioy a peece of a paradiſe, though in a meane condition: and let them pitie thoſe which are in ſuch depths of griefe, that their feruent prayes may moue the Lord to pity them alſo: and let them that be free from them, reſolue with themſelues and endeauour to vſe their liberty and health to all poſſible good doing. And yet let this bee knowne alſo, that where God layeth theſe great burthens vpon ſome of his, hee giueth them the greater grace to goe meekely vnder them. And let vs beware, leſt through our ſecurity and negligence God may iuſtly Note. vpbraid vs with his benefits (as heere he doth Iſrael) that hauing elbowroome and liberty to ſerue God in our places and callings, without any to diſturbe vs, or hold vs vnder, we enbondage our ſelues by an ill conſcience, looſeneſſe, ſecurity, earthlineſſe, and the like euils, by which our life ſhould be as irkſome as in Egypt, or Babell.
            The ſecond benefit heere mentioned, that God beſtowed vpon them, 
                  Doc. 6. in ver. 1 The ſecond benefit.
                was, that he brought them into the fruitful land in which they dwelt, which was a farre greater matter then the former; as ſhewing them plainly that he thought it not enough to deliuer them out of bondage, except hee filled them with good things alſo. He had done much for them if hee had onely deliuered them out of that fearefull bondage, though hee had left them in the wilderneſſe; but to bring them alſo into that fruitfull land, and to giue

it to them, oh admirable kindneſſe! Behold then heere the great bountifulneſſe of God, that hee can as well and willingly giue abundance to his children, as keep them out of great troubles. He is not therby waſted nor diminiſhed in his bleſſings, by giuing them out & liberally beſtowing them; being a fountain of riches neuer drawne dry. So he ſaid to the poſterity of his people: Oh that Iſrael would haue hearkened to me, and haue walked in Pſal. 81. 13. my waies; I would ſoone haue brought downe their enemies: I would haue fed them with the fat of wheat, and with honey out of the rocke. Neither neede we thinke that he ſtandeth at it to giue vs theſe, whoſe honour it is to beſtow great things; and hath already giuen vs the greateſt of all; euen his owne ſonne; and therefore can much more afford vs theſe ſmaller benefits Rom. 8. 32. alſo. As we know that he did giue great riches to Abraham, Iſaac, Iob, and to other his faithfull ſeruants, whom he loued dearely. And wee in this land haue good proofe hereof, in that (with deliuerance from bondage) we haue the Goſpell, peace, gouernment, plentie, and ſuch like. And more particularly, we in this land haue cauſe to admire the goodneſſe of God, in deliuering vs from the curſed practiſes of thoſe Ieſuites & Locuſts, whom that beaſt hath ſent forth to deſtroy vs, Prince, Nobles, Magiſtrates, Miniſters: and to root out Church and policie among vs, and bring in darkeneſſe and confuſion againe. Wee owe (doubtleſſe) as great thankes to God for theſe mercies (and ſpecially in the late Treaſon) as Iſrael did for their freedome out of Egypt, and the ouerthrow of Pharaoh when he purſued them.
            Now then to this common obiection, why God doth not enrich ſo his Obiection. faithfull ones in this latter age? (which obiection many are readier to put forth queſtions, then to take any adſwere to it) for (ſay they) though men of the world haue great ſubſtance, and ſwim in wealth and riches; yet Gods people are ſeldome ſo; but are held downe with pouerty and wants; in ſo much as one is hardly able to relieue another; and thereby alſo (they ſay) they doe the leſſe good in bringing on, and perſwading to religion, ſeeing they whom they goe about to perſwade, doe feare that their God loueth them not whom they ſerue, ſeeing hee beſtoweth not wealth vpon them, as he doth vpon others who are not for the moſt part, eſpecially in ſome places, religious at all: alſo they feare that if they themſelues ſhould bee religious, euen they ſhould become poore alſo. This (I ſay) troubles many, them therefore I anſwere after this manner.
            To doe them good, hee is ready to beſtow riches vpon them, and better 
                  Anſwere 1. things alſo. As he ſaid to Ieroboam, when of a ſeruant he made him a King: If this had not been enough, I would (ſaith hee) haue giuen thee more: If then to 1. King. 14. him a bad man hee would haue giuen more, if hee had vſed that well; then who doubteth but that he would be liberally handed to his deare children, if it were for their good? But otherwiſe (indeed) hee thinketh them better held backe then beſtowed; as he anſwered by Saint Iames, when they asked, Iam. 4. 2. they obtained not, becauſe they asked amiſſe; that is, to beſtow the things they asked, vpon their luſts but if they might haue bettered by them, hee would haue liberally giuen vnto them. And as he anſwered Paul, when hee gaue him not that which hee asked (and yet that which he asked was a better thing then riches) my grace is ſufficient for thee: ſo in denying them to his 2. Cor. 12. 9. faithfull ſeruants, he giueth his grace, which worketh contentment in them,

and thereby though their outward eſtate bee weake, hee yet euen in that, keepes them from the noiſome euils of the dayes they liue in, that I ſay no 
                  Anſw. 2. more. And further to anſwere them, they muſt hold this for a truth, that euery mans eſtate wherein God ſetteth him (I ſay not that which hee by his ſinne hath brought vpon him) is beſt for him, as we in the Lords prayer are Petic. 4. well taught, when wee are directed to aske our daily bread; euen ſuch ſucceſſe in our eſtate, poore or rich, as our heauenly father ſeeth beſt for vs, euen that is our daily bread, with the which we muſt be contented.
            And yet this is further to be added, that hee that hath meate, drinke, and apparell, he is not to bee counted poore, when indeed the wealthieſt hath no more, neither is better ſatisfied with that which he hath then ſuch an one being gratious: and as for the ſuperfluity that he hath, which is counted his glory, how commonly doe we ſee it to become his bane? And where is the man that is not the worſe for his wealth, it being his ſtrong hold, which maketh Pro. 18. 11. him bolder to ſinne, that way that he is moſt carried by his ſenſuality, much more then the poore man dare do. And though God ſetteth vp ſome, it is for their triall, and for the maintaining of all eſtates, & preſeruing of fellowſhip in the Church and Common wealth. And as for the godly, they ſhould not want wealth, but that it is for the moſt part, vſed of many euen of them, to ſnare and entangle them in this deceiueable world; which as the beaſt that is caught by the hornes in the buſhes and briers; and as a man with bolts on his heeles is holden from running: ſo doth it hold them back from running apace to the heauenly life.
            Neither let this trouble any, that while moſt of the godly want, our fathers vnder the law, and before the comming of Chriſt, had great wealth and poſſeſſions; and yet were godly and ſaued; and therefore if God loued vs, he would as well beſtow them vpon vs now: for wee muſt know that his outward ſeruice then was more coſtly then now it is, which required more wealth: and moreouer they had one vſe of their riches, which we haue not that by theſe earthly things, God did figure out to them things heauenly; as by the earthly Canaan, hee did the heauenly Ieruſalem: for when that earthly countrey was promiſed our fathers, they enioyed it not, but liued Heb. 11. 13. ſtrangers in it, but they in thoſe promiſes looked further, that is, for a better, which they enioyed. This that hath been ſaid may fully anſwere the queſtion. I conclude therefore, that God can freely and willingly beſtow liberall portions vpon his faithfull ſeruants, as well as keepe them out of great calamities, if he ſee it to be beſt for them when their eſtate is weake: and ſeeing it were not like to be good for them to enioy, which he thinkes not good to giue them, let them the more contentedly labour to be without it.
            Now followeth the third benefit heere mentioned, and that he had promiſed The third benefit, the laying out of it. Obiect. that hee would neuer breake couenant with them. Heere the Lord may ſeeme to giue them great aduantage: for if hee binde himſelfe thus to them, they being ſuch as did oft times (as they are charged heere to haue done) breake their couenant toward him, it may ſeeme that hee is tied to them, that he ſhall neuer breake his couenant with them, ſeeing he hath promiſed ſo vnto them whatſoeuer they doe, or howſoeuer they breake theirs, or behaue themſelues toward him. Then the which what is more abſurd? For the anſwering of this therefore, and for the vnderſtanding theſe words Anſw.
               
of the verſe, two things are to be conſidered: One is, of what couenant hee ſpeaketh, when he ſaith, he had granted this vnto them, that he would neuer breake it. The other, whether hee ſpake this ſimply; or vpon a condition; namely, if they ſhould obey him. Theſe two being anſwered, will make the matter cleare.
            Now for the firſt, wee are to know, that by the couenant heere mentioned, hee neither meaneth the particular couenant which hee entreth into with the faithfull, to be their God all ſufficient for euer (for that hee will neuer Gen. 17. 1. goe from, but whom he loueth, as he loued them ere they loued him, ſo to the end he loueth them,) neither doth he meane the generall couenant of ſending Ioh 13 1. Chriſt to redeeme the world: for the vnbeleefe of man could not make that Rom. 3. 3. promiſe of God fruſtrate, and of none effect: but he meaneth the couenant of enioying the land peaceably, into which hee brought them, with all the commodities therein. Now that couenant was made with them conditionally, if they ſhould be obedient to him. And this is the other thing, which I ſaid was one of the two, which ſerueth for the better vnderſtanding of this ſpeech; where he ſaith by his meſſenger, that hee had made a couenant with them, which hee would neuer breake; and that was, if they ſhould endeauour to walke with him, hee would continue them in that good land which hee had giuen them, and bleſſe them therein; otherwiſe he would bee free from his promiſe, and hee would caſt them out after long bearing their diſobedience, and puniſh them ſundry waies in the meane ſeaſon. And euen ſo he did to them, ſeeing they kept not couenant with him Deut. 28. as he required of them, and which he bound them to, as in the next verſe is to be ſeene. And this for the clearing of the forementioned doubt.
            This point being thus determined, doth miniſter this heauenly inſtruction 
                  Doct. 7. in ver. 1. to vs, that if we did faithfully, and with a good hart ſet our ſelues to obey the Lord, and yet I meane no otherwiſe, then as may of vs be performed, he would doe great things for vs euen in this world: he would feede vs with good things, euen with the bread of wheat, and that the fineſt, as hee ſaith in the Pſalme; and other earthly bleſſings anſwerable: and would not ſuffer Pſal. 81. 16. the proud to domineere ouer his inheritance, but ſoone bring them down. And yet wee muſt know, that if his owne people ſhall ſinne againſt him, he will correct them with the rod, and often withdraw from them the ſweet fruit of his fauour, and the light of his countenance, which was wont to refreſh Pſal. 89. 31. and comfort their ſoules: ſo that euen the priuiledges which iſſue from this couenant, may in great part, and for a great while lie drowned in them and be to ſeeke, as ioy, peace, confidence in prayer, with ſuch like, and their temporary benefits vtterly loſt. Oh therefore notwithſtanding many 
                  See Doct. on verſ. 5. large and great and worthie promiſes be made to vs, yet when wee doe not labour to be faithfull in our couenant, but take our liberty amiſſe, euery one his way, as he thinkes good: behold, our ſinnes depriue vs of many bleſſings which we might haue enioyed, and hold many good things from vs, as Ieremie 
               Ier. 5. 25. ſaith, and bring many euils vpon vs: and euen ſo the Prophet Eſay witneſſeth, though the Lords hand is not ſhortened that he cannot ſaue, neither is his eare 
               Leuit. 26. 
               heauie, that it cannot heare, yet your iniquities (ſaith he) haue ſeparated betwixt you and your God, and your ſinnes haue hid his face from you, that hee will not heare. So Eſa. 59 1. that if theſe things be rightly weighed, it may truly be ſaid, what we will not Note.
               
ſuffer the Lord to doe vs good, nor to fill vs with his bleſſings, as hee is ready to doe; euen we our ſelues, becauſe wee will not ceaſe to prouoke him. And this is liuely laid out by the Prophet Amos, where he ſaith, that it rained Amos 4. 7. vpon one peece of ground, and not vpon another: and wherefore was it, but for the ſinne of thoſe that poſſeſſe it? contrary to our blind reaſon, who looke (as Sampſon did) that it ſhould alway goe well with vs, howſoeuer we deale with God, or defraud him of his due, breaking couenant with Iudg. 16. him.
            If this be ſo, then our Sauiour agreeth well with it; who ſaith, The meeke 
               Matth. 5. 5. 
               ſhall inherite the earth: for that which they haue, ſhall bee ſweeter to them, then great riches of the vngodly; and it ſhall multiply alſo when God ſeeth good. So that it might make one to maruell to ſee them who are counted Gods people, many times to run ſo greedily after the world, and the vaine allurements of it, in ſuch wiſe, that they go backe in grace as faſt, as though Gods caring for them were nothing like their owne; and as though they had forgotten that he promiſeth ſufficient wealth to a godly life, godlineſſe 1. Tim. 4. 8. hauing the promiſes of things both earthly and heauenly; and yet ſo it is with them, that he who can catch faſteſt, imagines he ſhall ſpeed beſt: when all may ſee that they who ſeeke to be guided by God, haue beſt ſucceſſe and bleſſing, others going without it. But whereas they obiect, that they are richeſt for the moſt part who ſauour no goodneſſe; that ought to trouble no man, for full ſoone ſhall the riches of iniquity, and thoſe riches that cauſe it, right ſoone (I ſay) ſhall they betake them to their wings, and leaue the reconing behinde to bee made, by them who haue ill gotten and ſpent them, which ſhall be little to their liking: for know we this, that they are neuer to be counted bleſſings, without the grace of vſing them aright.
         
         
            THE ELEVENTH SERMON CONTINVED VPON THE SAME TEXT, Verſ. 2. 3.
            
               VERS. 2. Ye ſhall make no couenant with the inhabitants of this land, &c.
            
            
               THe ſecond verſe now followeth, wherein the couenant in the behalfe of the people, is ſet downe, as it is on Gods behalfe Verſ. 2. 3. The ſenſe. The couenant of the people with the Lord.
                in the former verſe. For a couenant is betwixt two parties at the leaſt. The points of their couenant are theſe two; one, that they ſhould make no league with the inhabitants of the land; the other, that they ſhould breake their altars downe. Then hee findeth fault with them, not for Idolatry wee ſee, (which as yet they had not fallen to) but for the not keeping of their couenant. And hauing clearly conuinced them, he expoſtulateth with them, and asketh them why they had done ſo, as if hee had been ready to heare their

excuſe, if they could alleage any; if not, their ſinne muſt needs be the greater. After this hee proceedeth to ſhew the puniſhments that ſhould bee inflicted on them: and they were three. The firſt, that hee would not expell theſe nations for them: and what then? The other two aroſe from that: for it followed then, that they ſhould abide ſtill in the land, to the great hurt and annoyance of the of Iſraelites who dwelt there. And the two waies, as I haue ſaid: firſt, that they ſhould be as thornes to pricke them, and put them to paine: the other, they ſhould be as ſnares, in which they ſhould be taken, and caught with their ſinnes: and when they ſhould afterward fal to their Idolatry, they ſhould moſt grieuouſly be puniſhed.
            Theſe things being thus ſet downe, wee may obſerue theſe foure things in theſe two verſes: firſt their couenant with God: ſecondly, the conuicting them by the Angell, of breaking it: thirdly, the Lords expoſtulating with them for it: fourthly, the puniſhment threatened for it. Concerning 
                  Doct. 1. the firſt, in this that the people was bound to couenant with God, as he did with them, learne all of vs, that if wee will looke for benefit by Gods couenant made with vs, we muſt enter into couenant with him, and looke to bee faithfull in keeping it with him: which I ſpeake not as though wee may claime any thing by due deſert thereby, but that wee may know that God hath ſo appointed, and we ought to performe it accordingly. And though God maketh promiſe here but of earthly benefits, yet in other places he couenanteth with his, to giue them heauenly alſo; as pardon of their ſins, and Ier. 31. 31. life eternall, and he will moſt ſurely keepe promiſe in both. So although the godly are bound heere onely to ſome particular duties, yet in the generall couenant, they are vrged both to beleeue thoſe things which God promiſeth them, and alſo to walke before God continually in their whole courſe, wherein yet their failings are not reckoned againſt them, which by frailty they offend in: but if any will boldly tempt God, being careleſſe in looking to their couenant; let ſuch know that God will not bee mocked, their ſinne will finde them out. And ſo vnderſtand it of particular couenants, ſuch as this was that God made heere with this people. If hee promiſe to bleſſe them in their marriage, earthly affaires and buſineſſe, with ſuch like, if they bee faithfull therein, as they couenant; then if they faile, and bee falſehearted, God is free from his word and promiſe.
            The next thing in the couenant is, that God in forbidding them fellowſhip 
                  Doct. 2. with thoſe nations, and commanding them to pull downe their altars, on which they were wont to offer to their falſe gods, did thereby cut off occaſion from them of committing Idolatry: teaching vs thereby, that if we will auoide the occaſions of euill, we ſhall alſo be kept from the euils themſelues, yea groſſe ſinnes; as idolatry, drunkenneſſe, adultery and the like, though we be very prone to commit them. And yet on the contrary, if we will not ſhunne the occaſions of them, and the meanes that leade to them, we ſhall vndoubtedly fall into them. Take one for example, the moſt common of the reſt. If we bee fooliſhly and vnbeſeeming our profeſſion ſnared with ſome woman, as hauing been caught by her eye lids, and taken with that which is precious in her; we muſt, to auoid the fowle and ſhamefull ſin of adultery; firſt with chaſt Iob, to make a firme couenant not to looke vpon Iob 31. 5. her: ſecondly, neither talke of her, nor with her, whereby wee might eaſily

nouriſh wicked luſt and deſires. And thirdly, come we not in her company if it may be, as godly Ioſeph refuſed to doe, or at leaſt looke wee not after her, Gen 39. 10. neither let our thoughts linger nor carrie vs that way, but by feruent prayer be chaſed away farre from her, and then there is no feare of committing the ſinne, or of falling into any further danger, for the word of the Lord hath ſpoken it. So I might ſay, many a man might haue eſchewed murther, if hee could haue withdrawne his heart from wrath and reuenge; and ſo might many haue auoided oppreſſion, and miſerlineſſe, if they could haue ſnibbed the firſt ſtraying concupiſcence and their vnlawfull deſires after another mans commodity.
            I propound theſe inſtances among the reſt (not hauing time to ſpeake of all, or many,) for that the diuell ſpiteth the ſeruants of God, and ſeeketh more ſpecially theſe waies to bring his malice to paſſe, caſting a blindneſſe vpon them, that they ſhall hardly ſee, no not when they be in great danger, Note. till they be fallen into it, by being taken with the baite that he laid for them. Yea wofull experience hath made vs to ſee this to be too true: and they who haue broken out of this ſnare, know with what difficulty they haue eſcaped; and as for the common ſort, who ſhew no great religion in their liues, there are few of them but are brought to ſhame, if opportunity ſerue, ſome of theſe waies, or be made to hang downe their heads by reaſon of guilty conſciences; and ſuch miſchiefe both the one and the other might haue auoided, Note. and namely vncleanneſſe one of the fouleſt, if they could haue been perſwaded to ſhunne the occaſions thereof, in keeping out of the company of ſuch as by whom they become beſotted and impotent; and alſo if they could walke ſoberly in their particular callings by them, as hauing nothing to doe with them. So that we may ſee what good they get by their dalying, vnſeaſonable companying, and looſe talking which they vſe with women, which yet is one of the chiefe delights that the ciuill ſort of men doe take, and yet they would thinke they ſhould haue great wrong offered them, if they ſhould be warned of it.
            But to come more particulerly to this couenant which the heads of Iſrael 
                  Doct. 3. muſt keepe toward the Lord, of caſting downe their alters, and of hauing no fellowſhip with the Canaanites, they affoord a ſeuerall leſſon. By the firſt that I mentioned, this may bee learned, that Chriſtian Magiſtrates are by their authority to pull downe all Idols, and aboliſh ſuperſtition both Deut 7. 5. of the infidels and heretickes, and the occaſions of Idolatry, and to purge their dominions and iuriſdictions from ſuch droſſe and abominations. (Hezekiah brake downe the braſen ſerpent being abuſed, and called it Nehuſhton, that is, a peece of braſſe.) And ſo much the rather, ſeeing Gods worſhip is 2. King. 18. 4. ſimple and vncompounded, and hee that addeth thereto any ſuperſtitious ceremony, tainteth the ſubſtance as much as lieth in him. And all Chriſtians ought to doe the ſame in their priuate houſes, and places ſubiect to them, as their fields, farmes, Chappels, &c. And yet let them take heed, that they attempt not to doe ſo out of their callings, or in other mens houſes, or other places where they haue no authority to meddle, vpon any deuotion or good intent (as they cal it) either to honor God, or benefit others, or though it were to winne the Idolaters themſelues. For that courſe is not onely not ordained of God, to winne the Idolaters to ſound religion, but alſo forbidden:

and other meanes, as the preaching of the word, conference, &c. are appointed to root the ſame out of mens hearts, and to turn them from ſuch blind deuotion. The other may bee tearmed zeale, but vnaduiſed, corrupt and ſinfull; neither of an wiſe Chriſtian to be vſed. And this bee noted by occaſion of the one part of the peoples couenant: namely, that they muſt pull downe their alters.
            The other, to wit, that they ſhould haue no fellowſhip with them, I haue, ſpoken of before, chap 1. verſ. laſt, ſaue onely that I ſpake not particularly of 
                  Doct. 4. making marriages with Idolaters; which yet followeth by good and neceſſary conſequent. For if a priuate Chriſtian fearing God, may haue no familiar conuerſing with ſuch, then much leſſe in marriage making with them, which is the neareſt fellowſhip of all other. And ſo I briefly conclude with the charge giuen by the Lord in Deuteronomie, Yee ſhall make no marriages 
               Deut. 7 3. 
               with them, neither giue thy daughter to his ſonne, nor take his daughter to thy ſonne.
            
            Now the meſſenger of God hauing told the people of the couenant 
                  Doct. 5. which they were bound to, he ſhewes them their ſinne, that they had broke their couenant; and conuicteth them of it ſaying: ye haue not obeyed. Which being ſo ſpoken to them, they could not deny it. And this Scripture teacheth, that men ought to bee conuinced of their ſinne by the word of God, and to haue them ſo proued to be iuſt prouocations of God, which yet they liue in, as that they may not bee able to denie them; and all to the end they may the eaſilier be brought to repentance, and not onely told in preaching what is ſinne, which I grant muſt be done; but as farre as may bee, they are to bee charged as guilty who are ſo: and to bee vrged as they haue giuen cauſe, ſo farre as that they may be pricked in their conſciences, vnleſſe their hearts be flinty, and ſo to ſay from their hearts, we haue ſinned. And this is one principall point in preaching to be aimed at by Gods commandement to Timothy, where it is ſaid, preach the word, in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, rebuke, 
               2. Tim. 4. 2. 
               conuince, and exhort with all lenity: and this conuincing is moſt auaileable, (through Gods bleſſing) among other meanes to awake the drowſie conſcience, and ſo to quiet and reforme it. This is that which our Sauiour foretelleth vs in Saint Iohns Goſpell, that the ſpirit of God, that is, the power of Act. 2. 37. Ioh. 16. 8. the word inſpired by the holy Ghoſt, and preached by his Apoſtles and Miniſters after his reſurrection, ſhould conuince the world of ſinne. So we reade in the ſecond of the Acts, that Peter proued againſt the Iewes, and conuicted them in their conſciences that they had crucified the Lord of glory who conſented thereto. And it is ſaid immediately following there, when they heard it, they were pricked in their hearts. Thus when Dauid could eaſily yeeld to the truth generally ſet downe to him by Nathan, but 2. Sam. 12. could goe no further; namely, to ſee himſelfe faulty, whoſe ſinne reached to the heauens, the Prophet Nathan conuinced him, and told him, ſaying; thou art the man that hath dealt ſo cruelly and wickedly; and then hee could ſay, I haue ſinned. So in Sam. 24. when God had ſhewed Dauid his ſinnes, in 2. Sam. 24. 16. 17. numbring the people, he repented and yeelded. verſ. 17.
            Thus Paul dealt with the Romans, when he ſought throughly to make odious to them their former ill courſe, What fruit had yee (ſaith hee) in thoſe things whereof ye are now aſhamed? their conſciences bare them witneſſe that

that they had none. And as this kind of dealing with the people in our preaching is moſt profitable, and like to doe moſt good, ſo it is one of the hardeſt matters, namely, to rouze vp the conſcience, and to conuince it. Profitable I ſay it is, for that if it be awaked and pricked, it cannot but acknowledge Note. the ſinne in all likelihood, and bleed and ſo relent for it, and craue pardon, and abandon it, which is the direct way whereby the holy Ghoſt guideth men to ſaluation: but if any be drowſie and ſleepy conſcienced, ſo that they be not moued by hearing any reproofes, or doe ſtriue againſt the light of their owne conſcience, being conuinced which is more, or wax hardened, which is worſt of all, and a moſt vnkind abuſing of that gratious worke of God in them: I bewaile their caſe, for they not onely receiue not any benefit thereby, but doe waxe worſe, and ſo depart from God, ſo as they ſeldome returne to him againe (for the moſt of them) of which ſort Iudas was, and ſome others. And yet theſe ſhifts men will vſe when they are conuicted: for either they are not pricked, or ſtruggle againſt it and ſeeke to ſhift it off; or elſe they are hardened by the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne; all which ought Heb. 3. 12. moſt carefully to be taken heed of.
            To returne therfore, it is profitable for the hearers to be oftentimes conuinced, and otherwiſe our miniſtery doth them little good, but ſo it is alſo hard to winde in with them, and to pierce their hearts, as I ſaid; I meane to bring the hearers to this point, that they ſhall cry out and ſay, euery one for his owne part, I haue ſinned. For concerning the miniſters, who ſhould bee one ſpeciall meanes to doe it: they, for the moſt part abſtaine from this worke altogether; either winding vp all in obſcurity, that they are not vnderſtood, or at leaſt contenting themſelues with the bare propounding of the truth, without applying it to the conſcience, or diſcouering the corruption of the heart, that ſo the hearer may not eſcape. This worke they leaue to the peoples diſcretion. And alas they are ſo farre from working the word vpon themſelues, that they haue many ſtarting holes and excuſes for their ſinnes, and extenuate them, and alleage their owne infirmities, and other Note. mens examples, ſo that though they be ſtricken by our preaching as with an arrow, yet they be harneſſed and bumbaced in ſuch wiſe, that they will ſhift off the blow, and not bee wounded thereby, but rather will follow their owne euill courſes the more, and harden their hearts ſtill, who may well ſet the beſt ſide outward (I denie not) and for a while carrie a faire ſhew, as though all were well with them, but God knoweth their harts, and let them be ſure that their ſinne ſhall find them out, and it ſhall not goe well with them in the end. The vſe of this is, that we ſo looke to our ſelues in the whole Numb. 32. 23. carriage of our liues, that we feare not what may be ſaid to vs, or brought againſt vs (ſo verifying the prouerbe, the righteous is bold as a Lion) and Prou. 28. 1. the rather ſeeing wee haue iudged our ſelues, that wee may not bee iudged of the 
               1. Cor. 11. 31. 
               Lord; and haue kept our conſciences pure and good, to the end we may not feare conuincing of them, (for the word of God can offer no violence to Note. them who offer it firſt to themſelues) eſpecially for any wilfull offending: but yet if for all this we be found too light, and in ſomethings worthy to be blamed, (as who can looke ſo narrowly about himſelfe but he may be iuſtly charged) or if wee breake out amiſſe, then our dutie is to deſire that the word may challenge vs euen for that: and being conuinced of it, let vs willingly

and readily yeeld, wherby we ſhall free our ſelues from the iuſt blame of blockiſh, ſleepy, of ſecure and obſtinate hearers.
            But now I paſſe from this conuincing of them by the meſſenger of God, 
                  Doct. 6. to the expoſtulating with them for the breach of their couenant, ſaying: Why haue ye done this? As if he ſhould ſay in the perſon of God to them, if ye can ſhew any reaſon why yeemay doe thus, I giue you leaue, come forth, and make your anſwere: but the people anſwered not a word, in token that they held themſelues guilty. This teacheth that God is equall and righteous in his proceedings, yea euen toward thoſe who haue prouoked him: as he ſaith in the like caſe by his Prophet, to thoſe that were the poſterity of this people heere mentioned, come and let vs reaſon together, &c. Hee Eſa. 1. 18. doth not as men do, who will ſmite them who haue done them wrong before Note. they ſhall know why; and are neuer willing to come to good conditions with them, how tractable ſoeuer they might finde them. Theſe are indeed cruell and vnmercifull men, who will not offer any indifferency; the Lord (I ſay) dealeth not ſo; but offers to them who haue dealt trecherouſly and broken couenant with them; that if they can alleage any ſound reaſon for their doings, yea euen from himſelfe, as that hee hath dealt hardly with them, and hath been void of compaſſion to them, hee will heare them, and giue them leaue to plead their owne cauſe. Which aduantage hee giuing them, he doth ſtop all mouthes and is iuſtified himſelfe, in all his words and Ier. 12 1. Pſal. 51. workes.
            Which makes greatly for the conuicting of all ſuch as ſay like them in Ezechiel, the Lords waies are vnequall, and that he could haue kept them from Ezek. 18. 25. ſuch falles and dangerous eſtates thereby, as come vpon them. Where yet who ſeeth not, that hee hath ſet double hedge and ditch betwixt them and their ſinnes; nay rather brazen wals, to the end they might not come neere nor commit them. Hee hath (to ſpeake plainely) ſent his Prophets among Note. Gen. 2. 17. them, to forbid and threaten them, euen as hee did to Adam, if hee ſhould reach out his hand, and eate of the forbidden tree. Hee allureth and ſeeketh to win them, and perſwadeth them to imbrace the good way, and not to Luk. 15. come neare the way of death and puniſhment; euen as hee ſeeketh them who are loſt, but few of them will heare and come: ſo that he may ſay, what ſhall I doe more for this people: yea he may as well ſay to them, as hee did to the people by Hoſea the Prophet, when he ſaid; O Ephraim, what ſhall I doe vnto thee? O Iuda, how ſhall I entreate thee? So that if any harden their hearts Hoſ 6. 4. See Iob 39. 37. 38. in ſuch manner, to charge God for their ſinnes, from which yet by no perſwaſions nor reaſons they could bee reclaimed: nay for the maintaining wherof they haue ſhewed themſelues rebellious and obſtinate: know they, that while this Scripture and ſuch other ſhall remaine to witneſſe againſt them, they ſhall neuer bee able to finde the ſmalleſt eaſe by ſuch cauiling, whereby they doe but as it were by patching new with old, make the rent worſe.
            And by this we may ſee, that we were not beſt to truſt to our owne imaginations, nor to follow our owne waies: neither to deale as Adam, to excuſe Iob 31. 33. our ſelues; nor to be like to them in the Goſpell, who when they were bidden to the marriage, ſent their anſwere as it pleaſed them, but ſo as it little became them; for thereby wee wade but the deeper into danger, and Luk. 14. 18.
               
beare away more blowes, as it may bee ſaid of them that ſtriue againſt his Eſa. 54. 17. chaſtiſements. For euery tongue that ſhal contend with him in iudgement he ſhall condemne. And this we may ſee if wee liſt, in that fearefull example of him that hid his talent in the earth, which he was commanded to put to vſe, and occupie it. Hee thought hee had reaſon enough to ſay for his defence, that hee knew him to bee an hard man of whom hee receiued it; and therefore would be ſure to returne him his owne againe. But what anſwere heard he? euen this, Take the vnprofitable ſeruant and caſt him into vtter darkeneſſe, 
               Mat. 25. 30. 
               there ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. Therefore we ſee by this, as alſo by our text, in that the people had nothing to anſwere, when a reaſon was demanded of them why they had done ſo; that when men haue followed their owne ſwinge, in ſinning as they haue deſired, they ſhall neuer bee able to anſwere any thing in their owne defence ſoundly, nor iuſtly; but to the further encreaſe of their ſinne, as I haue ſaid already, but ſhall bee tongue tied: wherupon it followeth, that which I haue proued, that the Lord hath ſo good right when he dealeth againſt ſinners, that entring into iudgement with them, hee feareth not to giue them all vantages that they thinke will ſerue their turnes: but in the end they ſhall ſee that they do but make themſelues thereby the more guilty. For by theſe meanes in giuing this people liberty to anſwere what they could, their ſinne was the more aggrauated againſt them, they hauing not ſo much as any colour to defend themſelues. And this being ſo, let vs learne hereby not to yeeld onely by ſilence, but to be humbled alſo and relent; and proceed on to true repentance: yea, let vs beware that wee haue no controuerſies with the Lord, by being bold to offend and prouoke him; thinking (though fooliſhly and falſly) to make a good end: for be we ſure we ſhall neuer make our part good againſt him: neither let vs ſinne in hope; for when wee are threatened puniſhment for the ſame, or when we ſhall be arraigned, we ſhall eaſily be found guilty, and the Lord ſhall be iuſtified, and then all our faire ſhewes muſt vaniſh, leauing vs in the briers.
            Thus we haue heard the people reproued for their ſin: now the threatning Verſ 3. The ſenſe.
                of the puniſhment followeth, which is ſharpe and ſore; and is ſet down in three points. The firſt is, that God would not expell their enemies, as hee had vpon condition promiſed: the ſecond, that their remaining ſtill in the land ſhould be as thornes in their ſides: the third, their gods ſhould bee as a ſnare to catch them in, to their deſtruction.
            And for the firſt of theſe puniſhments, namely, that God ſhould not expell The firſt puniſhment. the Canaanites, it is well to bee weighed what he meant by it, that wee may the better ſee what a puniſhment it was: Now his meaning in thus ſpeaking was this: for as much as yee haue not ſtood to your couenant to driue the nations out, but haue ſuffered them to remaine there ſtill; neither will I ſtand to mine, which was but conditionally made with you: ſo that wheras I promiſed to be with you, and ſtrengthen you, and to expell them for you as I haue begun to doe, now I will doe ſo no more. And what will follow of that? euen this, that if I doe it not, you ſhall not be able to doe it of your ſelues; for ye are too weake, as ye haue good proofe. And yet if they be not caſt out, they ſhall remaine to your deſtruction. This the Lord meant by ſaying that he would not caſt them out.
            
               
This firſt puniſhment teacheth vs this; that when we remoue not annoiances 
                  Doct. 1. while we may, we ſhall not be able afterward, when we would. Now our greateſt annoiances are euery mans ſpeciall ſinnes, euen as this one, Note. their breaking off couenant with the Lord, was theirs. And when wee ſee ſome of the ſpecialleſt of theſe our ſinnes, and what eye ſores they be to vs, while our hearts goe after them, and what trouble and ſorrow they bring with them to vs; and yet wee caſt them not from vs, but ſtill retaine them; it ſhall come to paſſe afterwards, that they ſhall get ſuch ſtrength in vs, that we ſhall not be able to depart and come out from them, no not then when wee would. For they ſhall ſo winde themſelues into vs, and ſo draw our delights after them, eſpecially through long lying in them vncontrolled, that wee ſhall become drunken with them, and beſotted, ſo as wee ſhall be vtterly impotent, and not by our prayers or other meanes (if we vſe any) be able to preuaile againſt them.
            Nay I ſay more, when God ſhall viſit vs with ſickneſſe or otherwiſe, or when his word hath in ſpeciall manner wounded our conſciences, and feared Note. vs with his diſpleaſure for them; yet euen then wee ſhall not be able to breake off from them, and come out of loue with them; they haue ſo ſtrongly and forcibly drawne vs after them, euen as an husband, a naturall man vpon his death bed can hardly depart from the wife of his youth, whom he hath dearely loued. And if (as in that caſe it comes ſometimes to paſſe) if, I ſay wee doe crie out of ſuch ſinnes in the anguiſh of our conſciences, or when we thinke we ſhall die, (as ſuch afflictions will ſearch deepe, and (perhaps) conſtraine vs to vtter in our extremity and paine, ſome confeſſions of them, and diſlikings, and to make purpoſes, while God holds vs (as it were) on the racke with promiſe and proteſtation, neuer to returne to them Note. any more; yet it ſhall appeare, that euen thoſe promiſes are but wrung from vs by force and feare, as Sauls confeſſion was, when hee heard hee ſhould loſe his kingdome. For when Gods heauie hand ſhall once bee off, from wringing and paining either our minds or bodies, wee ſhall bee ready to runne to our old byas againe, as Ahab did after his raſh and haſty putting on ſackcloth, and to imbrace thoſe and the like ſins, with as great liking (that I ſay no more) as we did before.
            Behold therefore what a bondage it is to bee deluded by, and ouercome of ſuch baſe commanders, and what iniurie we doe our ſelues, when we fall into league with any ſpeciall ſinnes; and why doe wee not throughly and hartily diſlike and ſet againſt them while they be as it were in the bud, and as yet but newly ſprung vp in vs, and in their firſt alluring of vs? yea rather why did we not rather keep thē out at the firſt, ſo that they might haue had no ſuch power ouer vs? For there is hope in the beginning of our acquaintance with them, to withſtand and ſhake them off, if wee would ſet our ſelues to the purpoſe to doe it; namely, as the word of God teacheth vs, that is, with diligence and vprightneſſe, knowing that wee ſhould not loſe our labour. Whereas if wee giue place to tentations, and fooliſh allurements, and doe not wiſely and ſeriouſly withſtand the beginnings thereof, wee bee not only in danger to become ſlaues to them afterward, and vnable to chaſe them away when we would, as I haue ſaid; but alſo to proſtitute our ſelues to many other which are their companions, till wee finde that which this Rom. 13. 13.
               
people found heere in expelling the Canaanites, that we cannot poſſibly be rid of them; or if ſome few doe, yet it is with exceeding difficulty. So that they are wiſe who giue not vp their members as weapons of ſinne, but by Rom. 6. 13. faith ſet themſelues to mortifie it betimes, after they haue attained ſound hope to be ſaned: knowing that otherwiſe the ſtrong man Satan will hold and keepe poſſeſſion, if a ſtronger then hee come not, euen the Lord himſelfe by his power to driue him out.
            And yet if this bee well begun and attempted of vs, I thinke this caueat or watch word not vnprofitable, but neceſſary, that although wee haue got the vpper hand, and caſt out the vncleane ſpirit, yet if we ſhall ſuffer (by our careleſneſſe and ſloth) this good worke to ſlake and to bee broken off, our enemie will make another aſſault vpon vs, and gather ſtrength to recouer his poſſeſſion againe. For though he be once driuen out, yet hee imbarkes himſelfe (if he can get in againe, as he laboureth to doe) and ſtronglier keepeth the hold with double force and courage; nay ſeuen fold more then at the firſt he did, and then what will the end bee, all may ſee; to wit, though not worſe then in the beginning, as it is with him, who did but goe about it, but did it not in deed, yet with exceeding difficulty and perill, though hee had expelled him before.
            From hence it is, that many at this day, and thoſe alſo of the forwarder ſort, haue no courage in them to roote out ſinne in their townes and families, ſeeing they entertaine the ſame in themſelues. And if they attempt any ſuch thing, yet they doe it but faintly, and ſoone leaue it off. And hereof it is, that numbers neuer grow to any great ripeneſſe in religion, I meane the practiſe of it, neither doe euer come to ſee the tenth part of the fruit of it in Note. the comfort that it bringeth, becauſe they are not wiſe to chaſe away thoſe common ſinnes, to the which they doe moſt lie open, nor doe but dallie with them, and neuer oppoſe themſelues againſt them any thing hartily, eſpecially any long time together. So that many liue in whoredome, in malice, in oppreſſion, deceiuing, and the reſt (for the moſt part) who are kept from reprochfull euils, yet liue but a dead and vncomfortable life, ſeeing they doe not reſiſt offers to ſinne, when they haue any made to them, as Gedeon did the kingdome, but ſeeke and hunt after them rather: and ſuch a life hath ſmall force in it to perſwade others to repentance. And this of the firſt puniſhment.
         
         
            
            THE TWELFTH SERMON ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to proceed. The ſecond puniſhment threatned, to wit, that they ſhould bee thornes in their ſides, is The ſecond puniſhment. next to bee weighed. Oh how fearefull is this? For what is more irkeſome, then continually, night and day, lying or going, to haue thornes pricking our fleſh? which muſt needs breed griefe vpon griefe, and ſorrow vpon ſorrow. And this came to paſſe afterward vnto this people of Iſrael, who were oft brought, as is manifeſt in this booke, and in the Scriptures following, to ſin after ſinne, and puniſhment vpon puniſhment, for ſuffering the Canaanites and Idolaters to liue amongſt them, and the Lord to bee prouoked, and the land defiled thereby. And in the large laying out of this puniſhment vpon the people of Iſrael, let it teach vs, that fellowſhip and familiarity with ſuch, 
                  Doct. 2. and with prophane perſons will pricke our conſciences, as thornes our fleſh, when wee muſt oft remember, that wee haue thereby not onely allowed them in their bad ſpeeches and examples, againſt our knowledge and conſcience, Note. which will pricke and vexe vs afterwards if there bee any true feare of God in vs: but alſo, that we our ſelues be tainted by their fellowſhip, and not dulled onely in grace and gifts. But of this before.
            This doctrine may alſo more generally be applied to all ſinnes which we ſhall ſuffer to lurke and lie in vs, they are as thornes in our fleſh afterwards. Howſoeuer in the committing of them, they be as ſweet and pleaſant baits, yet after, they become as choakes and bitter vomiting vnto vs. We may not thinke that their ending will bee as their beginning at the committing of them: when Adam ſhould eate the fruit forbidden, oh how the Serpent baited it with pleaſantneſſe to the taſt, beautifulnes to the eye, but vnſpeakeable Note. Gen. 3. 6. benefit to his fond perſwaſion, for that it ſhould bring with it the knowledge of good and euill, to make them like vnto God himſelfe. But when it was taſted of them, what gall or wormewood was euer like bitter vnto it? what thornes, did pricke the heart of Dauid, after that hee had been deceiued 2. Sam. 11. 2. and ouercome with the bait that the diuell had laid to catch him withall? what thornes, I ſay, did pricke him after, as in that Pſalme made by him Pſal. 51. 2. doth liuely and plentifully appeare, and in ſome other which lay out his ſorrow, ſhame, anguiſh, doubting, and fearing that hee had loſt all grace, by hauing his deſire in committing of that ſinne. And it is the beſt that can bee ſaid of thoſe, who (hauing hauing had warnings and charges giuen them, to tie vp their vnruly affections, and outragious luſts, and not to dallie with

the ſinnes that they haue been allured by) haue yet been ſo farre from regarding ſuch inſtructions, that they haue giuen ouer themſelues vnto theſe defilements. They haue, I ſay, found them thornes, as Dauid did, though few of them haue euer had the thorne plucked out of their fleſh, to diſquiet them no more, as he had; I meane to bee brought to ſound and kind repentance, as he was.
            The third puniſhment was, that their gods ſhould bee ſnares vnto them. 3 A ſnare we know is ſet to take and catch the bird or conie vnawares, that ſo it may be killed at the pleaſure of him that ſet it. And ſo hee ſhewes them, that they not foreſeeing wiſely, that their not rooting theſe nations out, would proue a ioyning with them in the worſhipping of their gods, and ſo would become their deſtruction; for their ſo foolithly running into the ſnare, he ſhewes them, I ſay, that they ſhould be taken therein, and fall thereby, and by other noiſome ſinnes, into the hands of the Lord, who would ſcourge them grieuouſly, one generation after another, till they ſhould periſh out of that good land. And euen ſo it came to paſſe, and they found all true that was told them: for to thoſe enemies to whom they had moſt wickedly ioyned themſelues in league; they were often in ſubiection and bondage, and thereby ſpoiled of all their goods, liberties, and bleſſings, and afterward caſt out of the land among the Babylonians and Aſſyrians.
            And by this wee may ſee, that by idolatrous and wicked company keeping wee haue ſnares ſet for vs, to bring vs in fellowſhip with them in their fowleſt ſinnes. For ſo the Lord hath ſaid, if wee will conuerſe and haue fellowſhip Exod. 23. 32. with them, by making of marriages, and eating with them, wee ſhall alſo fall to their faſhions, and partake with them in their ſinnes as this people did. For great is the force of friendſhip, to draw vs to that which wee neuer intended; nay againſt which we reſolued to keepe our ſelues. And who is ſtrong enough among vs to withſtand all the allurements & perſwaſions Note. of carnall friends (wee being oft in their company) who haue ſo many waies to draw and allure vs, but that one time or other he ſhall bee conſtrained to yeeld, or if he ſhould not, how can he beare al the diſlikes, frownings, diſpleaſures, and hard handlings, with the which hee ſhall bee ſet vpon and purſued? And we ſee as much: and theremedie is, to refraine their companies 2. Tim. 3. 5. and neare fellowſhip with them altogether; and yet although we do ſo, and thereby bee free from danger on that ſide, yet wee muſt know, that without as great care had to keepe our liues free from all other offences, wee ſhall ſome other way lie open to ſome of them, whereby as great danger is like to enſue. And by this gather, that wee ſhould neither bee idle nor vnprofitable in the acknowledgement of Chriſt, if wee ſeeke to proſper. But ſeeing we behold the practiſe and vnwearied labour of the bad and popiſh ſort, to winne men to their vngodly courſe, this one thing I muſt adde more particularly: Let vs that profeſſe our ſelues Chriſtians, be aſhamed to bee ſo careleſſe and ſlothfull in the companies where we come, to draw and moue men to faith and repentance, and to ſtirre vp better perſons to loue and to 1. Theſ. 5. 11. good workes, and through ſelfe loue ſo to pleaſe our ſelues in rotten talke as Heb. 10. 24. we doe. And this be ſaid of the puniſhments.
            Now I haue ſet downe the words of Gods meſſenger, whereby hee Obiect. ſought to turne the people from their ſinnes, vnto God by repeating his benefits,

and by reproofes and threats. I ſhould heere haue ended with his ſpeech, but that I ſeē an occaſion of propounding an obiection and doubt, will be taken from hence. For which cauſe I will ſet it downe and anſwere it, before I goe to any new matter. The obiection is this, ſeeing the meſſenger of God mouing them to repentance, doth with his reprouing and conuicting them, make no mention of faith, it may ſeeme that faith was not of ſuch price then as it is now, no mention being made of it, or if it were, that the people might be driuen to deſperation rather, then brought to repentance, being not encouraged to beleeue the pardon of their ſin, as well as to forſake it. To the which I anſwere; firſt, that they could not be moued Anſw. to repentance, if they had not had with all encouragement & perſwaſion to beleeue: for though hee name not faith expreſly, yet ſeeing repentance and that cannot be ſeparated, neither could repentance therefore be vrged vpon them without it. Secondly, I ſay, this people did repent, as it is cleere by the text; therefore they alſo beleeued. And thirdly, the meſſenger repeating Gods promiſes to them; what doth he but finde fault with them for not beleeuing the ſame before? I conclude therefore, that hee moued them to beleeue, which is the chiefe thing in our turning to God. And ſo let all bee perſwaded, though it bee not alwaies expreſſed, euen as it was ſaid to the Iaylor, when hee asked what hee ſhould doe to bee ſaued; beleeue in the Lord Ieſus. And as without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God; ſo let it bee Act. 16. 31. 34. Heb. 11. 6. looked vnto principally, that we riſe vp, and lie downe, and walke accompanied with that, for ſo we ſhall reſiſt the tentations, allurements, and diſcouragements, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. Verſ. 4. 5. with other difficulties of this life.
            This being thus anſwered, now I proceed to the ſecond point in this firſt The ſenſe. part of the chapter, and that is the fruit of the ſermon that the people reaped by it, which was repentance, and that is ſet downe in theſe two verſes, not in expreſſe words, but by ſignes thereof, and thoſe are ſet downe to bee three. The firſt was, that they lifted vp their voice; the ſecond, they wept; the third, they offered ſacrifice. By the lifting vp of their voice, wee can conceiue no other thing, but that they heartily confeſſed their ſinnes, and cried out of them, which they heard to haue been reproued by Gods meſſenger, and craued pardon of them, accuſing themſelues. They being guided therein by God, as the Prophet Hoſea in his time taught the people, that in repenting they ſhould take to them words, as well as to haue a good heart. By their weeping, they ſignified deepe griefe conceiued for diſpleaſing God, and prouoking his wrath againſt them. And their weeping was ſo great, that the place took the name thereof, and was called Bochim, that is, a place of weepers, and by their ſacrifice they declared their faith, that their ſinne was pardoned. For the ſacrifices were ſhadowes of Chriſts death; and they in offering them, beleeued as the fathers of thoſe times did, they conſtantly beleeued (I ſay) that all their ſinnes were forgiuen by the death of Chriſt, reſembled by the offering of them. To the which alſo there is no doubt, but that they added thankes, as the Lord directed the people in Hoſea to doe in Hoſ. 14. 3. the repentance which hee required of them; which alſo was reſembled by their peace offerings.
            Now to examine theſe things more perticularly, this doctrine of repentance which heere occaſion is offered to ſpeake of, I will the brieflier paſſe

ouer, ſeeing I haue ſpoken largely of it in other Sermons, though not in this booke, ſaue onely ſo farre as the words require ſomewhat to bee ſaid. And firſt, ſeeing the hearing of that ſermon did worke ſo good things in the people, I meane many of them, and bring forth ſuch fruit, wee are taught Doc verſ. 4. and 5. not onely to pray the Lord of the harueſt to ſend ſuch labourers into the harueſt, as may bee able and fit to bring home the Lords harueſt; but alſo what we ſhould doe when wee heare ſuch diuine ſermons, and doctrine as this was which the meſſenger of God heere preached vnto them which do vrge our conſciences by laying out our ſinnes: for all doctrine is not of that argument. I grant we ought by all doctrine to be moued, according to that which wee heare, and as occaſion is offered, either to griefe or to comfort: but when wee are more ſpecially taught the doctrine of repentance, wee ſhould follow the example of theſe heere mentioned, who cried out of their ſinnes, and mourned deepely, and craued pardon. And likewiſe of other that did the ſame; as the people that came after theſe, when they heard Samuel reprouing them, lamented after God; and they who are mentioned 1. Sam. 12. 1. in the booke of the Acts, at Peters ſermon, were pricked in their hearts, and Act. 2. 37. ſought comfort. So (I ſay) ſhould wee doe, I meane, both ſuch as haue repented already, to renue it, and ſuch alſo as are yet to enter vpon it. And it is fearefull when theſe fruits may be ſeene in them and others, that ſo many among vs, hearing the like ſermons, can goe vntouched in their conſciences. and with drie eyes or harts: for though theſe be not ſufficient, yet with faith they are commendable.
            Secondly, and more principally heere, as this people lifted vp their voice 
                  Doct. 2. and wept, when they were reproued for the abſe of Gods benefits, and for breaking of their couenant, by Gods meſſenger: ſo among all other good inſtructions (which are infinite) we ſhould be greatly moued and ſore grieued, when wee ſhall heare that wee are iuſtly charged by preaching, for the like faults; as for the ill vſing of the bleſſings which God hath beſtowed vpon vs, and for breaking the couenant which wee haue made with him, becauſe theſe two ought to be ſo thorowly minded of vs daily, that wee ſhould giue no iuſt cauſe to be rebuked for the neglecting of either of them. For what Note. doe we in our liues commendably, if theſe two bee wanting, and neglected of vs, I meane if we doe not bind our ſelues by couenant, to bee more fruitfull in dutie, and more cheerefully to go about the ſame, while we ſee Gods benefits continued to vs, whereby he doth (as it were) hire vs thereunto? And ſecondly, if we make not new couenants with him from time to time to walke conſtantly in our vprightneſſe, rather then to deſerue iuſt rebuke for breaking and looking looſely to the old? But if wee haue due regard of both theſe, from time to time, wee ſhall both keepe all other parts of our liues within compaſſe the better, and alſo we ſhall not need to feare that we can ſuſtaine any ſharpe reproofe iuſtly, (which is euer vnwelcome to fleſh) for the ſame.
            But yet further, to ſay ſomewhat more perticularly of theſe three ſignes of their repentance; we muſt know, that the inward graces which are teſtified by the outward ſignes thereof heere ſet downe, are rather to be ſought of vs in our repentance, as relenting and melting of the heart for offending God, humiliation, faith, and the like; then the outward ſignes themſelues;

the laſt eſpecially, as the offering of ſacrifice, both expiatorie, to ſeeke forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and euchariſticall, repreſenting their thankes, which were meerely ceremoniall, and proper to the Iewes; therefore not now to be vſed of vs; and yet in them laudable, this ceremony being then in vſe to expreſſe their faith and beleeuing in Chriſt, and their thankeſgiuing, as we doe ſimply offer to God both, and without them. This be ſaid of their offering ſacrifice firſt, though mentioned laſt. The other two, of lifting vp their voice, and weeping, are alwaies to bee aimed at in our repentance, but cannot alwaies be attained, neither are therefore of neceſſity to bee vrged, neither Note. to be reſted in if we haue them. For the firſt of them; namely, the lifting 
                  Doct. 3. vp the voice in prayer and confeſſion of ſin, and accuſing of our ſelues, it is required by the Prophet Oſea, of ſuch as could ſhew it: for in vrging the people at that time to repent, ſaying, O Iſrael, returne to the Lord thy God, hee addeth: take vnto you words, and ſay vnto him, take away all iniquity and receiue 
               Hoſ. 14. 2. 
               vs graciouſly, and we will offer the calues of our lips, &c. But all cannot expreſſe their minds in words; as namely, the ignorant, eſpecially ſome of them, and ſome in the bitternes of their hearts powre out their prayers without words at ſome time, as Anna did. Therefore if it may be, and that alſo it be moſt expedient (as if it may be an helpe to quicken vs in feruency) the voice is to be 1. Sam. 1. 13. lifted vp, but not alwaies of neceſſity to be inioyned.
            Now concerning weeping, which they alſo heere are ſaid to haue adioyned, 
                  Doct. 4. it being a further degree of ſorrow then many can attaine vnto, it is not of neceſſity to bee impoſed vpon vs, (as I haue ſaid) as though repentance could not be without it: though where it can be, and accompanieth repentance, it doth more deepely ſearch into the heart, ſatisfie the party ſo moued, and quiet the mind, which was before troubled and vnſetled. This I haue thought good to ſay of their outward ſignes of repentance. And ſeeing they were ſet downe to teſtifie the ſame in the people, therefore all may ſee that this repentance muſt be euer found in vs, whether any of the ſignes bee preſent or no. And the points thereof are theſe; that the heart bee deepely The ſumme of repentance briefly. pricked for ſinne, that it bewaile the ſame, as purpoſing neuer to turne to it or the like againe: which is all that can bee for the preſent time, and that there bee yet for all this aggrauating of the ſinne, a beleeuing according to the promiſe of God, that it is all freely remitted by God through Chriſt, 
                  Doct. 5. which more or leſſe quiteth the heart: and if that beleeuing be there, it wil purge it from dead workes alſo afterward, and keepe it from ſinning any more, in ſuch manner as it did in former times, the heart and whole man being ſanctified already through beleeuing. And this is the ſubſtance of repentance, which we are to practiſe by the example of this people, as alſo of many other in the Scripture; as in Ieremy, Hoſea, and diuers other. Ier. 31. 18. Hoſ. 14. 2 3. Obiect.
               
            
            But heere may a doubt ariſe about the repentance of the people, that it may ſeeme not to haue been ſuch as it hath bin ſet downe to be. For if they repented at this time, why did they not bring forth fruits of amendment? whereof this was one, yea a chiefe one; to wit, that they ſhould after this, haue rooted out the idolatrous Canaanites, they being now ſo ſharpely reproued for that they had not done it before, but rather made leagues with them, when yet that making of peace with them, was one of the chiefe ſins that was laid to their charge? and in all ſound repentance, the ſins bewailed,

acknowledged, and repented of, muſt needs be amended (wee know) in the perſons. For anſwere hereto, it is to bee thought, that the Lord held backe Anſw. ſtrength and courage from them, ſo that they could not fight againſt them, proſperouſly, as they had done in the daies of Ioſhua. And this he did, to the end they might beare that as a mark of their ſin and diſobedience. For God, according to his accuſtomed maner, did receiue them into his fauor, when they repented: but hee did not by and by reſtore againe to them the other particular gifts, which for their iuſt deſerts hee had taken from them; as ſtrength of body, and courage of minde, they hauing both been abuſed of them before, neither neceſſary to ſaluation.
            Which thing is moſt needfull for vs to marke for our great benefit: For euen ſo he dealeth at this day, as he did in former times, and with that people. Note. So hee dealt with our firſt parents after their fall: for though they repented, and were receiued againe into fauour, yet the euils and diſcommodities which they brought vpon themſelues and mankind, did not the Lord take away; neither was that quiet and ſweet abode of theirs in Paradiſe, enioyed of them at any time after. So Sampſon loſt the gift of his bodily ſtrength for a time, after hee had ſo greatly diſpleaſed God; which I might ſay of many other, to wit, that they loſt the vſe of ſuch graces as before they enioyed. And ſo doubtleſſe, ſuch as after a commendable profeſſion of the Goſpell, when they had before been truly conuerted to God by faith and repentance, did fall againe to their old ſinnes, or to drowſineſſe and coldnes in his ſeruice; ſuch, I ſay, haue found and receiued the like meaſure at his hands, as moſt cleare experience hath been hereof in this late deceaſed generation, and in ſome who ſtill remaine of them; whoſe firſt zeale and loue which they had at their firſt receiuing the Goſpell, being after ſlaked, hath neuer after been as it was, recouered. For though they haue ſeene their falles, and repented, and obtained mercy, yet the Lord hath left a marke of Note. that their ſinne behind, both to miniſter and people, ſo that they haue rarely recouered their former zeale, the one in feruent preaching, and care taking ouer the people, the other in cheerefull profeſſion, vprightneſſe of heart, and holy walking; but haue limped in ſome ſort afterwards, and they doe come ſhort of the grace they had before; the which the Lord hath ſuffered to put them in remembrance of that their ſin; euen as a man hauing fallen from an high beame or tree, and broken his bones, though hee get A ſimile. them ſet together againe, ſo that they may ſerue the turne in ſome ſort, yet he neuer feeles them perfectly cured, but euer painfull and lame afterward, or much impaired.
            And to adde one inſtance more; ſuch as after they truly repented haue fallen into adultery, or any ſuch hainous crime, though they haue riſen againe out of it, and giuen good teſtimony thereof, although they come to be truly perſwaded, that it is forgiuen them, yet what vnquietneſſe doe they oft finde within themſelues, what ſhame and holding downe of the head Note. doth it cauſe outwardly before men, whereby they are much appalled and held backe, in reſpect of that they might haue been, from good doing? beſides, how many of the louers of the truth are ſtrong enough to receiue them as they did before, (though it be their ſinne that they doe not) and as freely to communicate with them euery way; but are much eſtranged from them,

and hardly conceiue of them, whereby it may bee ſeene, that their credit is much impaired thereby among men, although they bee ſtill in fauour with God, as Dauid and others were. The which the Lord in his prouidence doth to them, and ſuch like, to keepe them in awe, who are ſo ready to breake out againe, and that all may ſee how God deteſteth ſinne, euen in his owne, and alſo that hee may thereby ſtir vp more ſerious repentance, and conſtant holding on in that courſe, and that they bee notled away from it by the errour of the wicked, in ſuch as are brought into the right way already.
            That which hath been ſaid of this point, (that I may teach a further vſe of it) ought to prouoke al ſuch as by the grace of God are kept from ſuch reprochfull ſinnes, to yeeld continuall thankes to God for it, (which it is to be feared, is much neglected) as well as for other benefits, which giue them iuſt cauſe to doe the ſame. But if any lie in knowne and offenſiue crimes, and yet can cunningly keepe them from mens eyes, and looke no further; let ſuch Note. know they are worſe then the worſt I haue ſpoken of, whoſe ſins yet haue broken out before men. And ſeeing the beſt may fall poſſibly, and that dangerouſly, and ſo doing are ſure that their ſinne will finde them out, and that they ſhall ſmart accordingly; let the other much more thinke that God will vnskirt and vnuizor them to their ſhame, in his good time, and let the beſt count it no loſt nor needleſſe care to keepe themſelues well while they are well, I meane, free from notorious and knowne ſinnes, and let them endeauour to giue good example without wearineſſe, that ſo they may bee free from ſuch fearefull offences. And this be ſaid of the peoples repentance.
            To all the former inſtructions out of theſe two verſes, this I adde, that if the 
                  Doct. 6. bitter weeping of the people there, cauſed the place to take the name from thence, ſo that to this day it is retained, and is called a place of weeping: and further, we ſee how long the remembrance of it is kept for many yeeres after: then it doth ſtrongly commend to vs, what care we ſhould haue while we liue, to poſſeſſe the generations comming after vs, of good examples giuen by vs among them that liue with vs, which may doe good when we are gone: either Miniſters by their diligent and feruent preaching, and godly liuing; or the people in more then ordinary receiuing the meſſage of the Goſpell with thankſgiuing, and other commendable fruits following. The place of ſuch inhabitants, whether it receiue a name from ſuch things done there, as this Bochim did heere, or no, it is not ſo materiall. But this is to bee thought, that the remembrance of ſuch good things done them, might harten and encourage many that ſhall come after them, not in that place onely, but alſo in many other, to follow ſuch examples. But whether they doe or no, this is too true; that no vile actions ſhall bee done to leade the people from God and goodnes, no diſorder, I meane vnruly behauiour, and reuell rout keeping; but their example ſhall bee taken vp (to be ſure) not onely of them that haue ſeene them; but alſo of them who ſhall come after them, hauing heard of them, and be made cuſtomes, if not petty lawes among themſelues, as the cuſtome of ſpending the twelue daies at the Natiuity, &c. doth too truly teſtifie. And thus I end.
         
         
            
            THE THIRTEENTH SERMON ON THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     VERS. 6. Now when Ioſhus had ſent the people away, the children of Iſrael went euery man into his inheritance to poſſeſſe the land.
                     
                     7. And the people had ſerued the Lord all the daies of Ioſhua, and all the daies of the elders that outliued Ioſhua; which had ſeene all the great workes of the Lord that he had done for Iſrael.
                     
                     8. But Ioſhua the ſonne of Nun, the ſeruant of the Lord died, when hee was an hundred and tenne yeeres old.
                     
                     9. And they buried him in the coaſts of his inheritance, in Timnah-heres in mount Ephraim, on the north ſide of mount Gaaſh.
                     
                     10. And ſo all that generation was gathered vnto their fathers, and another generation aroſe after them which neither knew the Lord, nor yet his workes which he had done for Iſrael.
                     
                     11. Then the children of Iſrael did wickedly in the ſight of the Lord, & ſerued Baalim.
                     
                     12. And forſooke the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other Gods, euen the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed vnto them, and prouoked the Lord to anger.
                     
                     13. So they forſooke the Lord and ſerued Baal and Aſhteroth.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOw followeth the ſecond part of the chapter to the The ſenſe. end; which alſo containeth the ſumme of the reſt of the ſecond part of the booke vnto the 17. chapter, and ſetteth downe the eſtate of the children of Iſrael vnto the death of Sampſon, and that was after this manner. 1. The people prouoked God by their ſinnes. 2. God puniſhed them for them, and that by other nations. 3. He raiſed vp Iudges to them: and 4. When they cried vnto him deliuered them. 5. After that they brake forth and fell to Idolatry againe. And this was their eſtate all the time that paſſed till the acts mentioned in the 17. chapter, as is ſhewed by perticular examples through all the chapters before that, beginning in the third. But if any ſee reaſon not to conſent that theſe verſes in this ſecond part of this chapter doe lay forth the ſumme of the ſecond part of the booke in generall, it maketh no great matter. He muſt yet grant, that in them is ſet downe the eſtate of the people generally at the time after Ioſhuas death, who knew not the Lord: and in the chapters following, more perticularly; vnto the

ſeuenteenth chapter. The diſtinct matters in this ſecond part of the chapter are theſe fiue now mentioned. 1. Their ſinne. 2. Their puniſhment. 3. Their crying to God. 4. Deliuerance. 5. Their reuolting. The firſt of them was their ſinne, the which is ſet downe from the eleuenth verſe to the fourteenth, with the occaſion that they tooke to fall in that manner, and that is from the ſixth verſe to the eleuenth. And the occaſion was the death of Ioſhua, and other good gouernours heere mentioned, that outliued him: for though in their time the people ſerued the Lord, as heere it is ſaid, yet after them aroſe another generation that knew not the Lord, and then they forſooke him. Of theſe now as it followes in order.
                  And firſt let vs conſider what is ſaid of Ioſhua, then of the people, and laſtly of them both. Of Ioſhua firſt in his life, and ſo come to his death; then of the people after his death. In that it is ſaid of him that he had ſent the people away to their inheritance, before he died; as it is recorded, Ioſh. 24. it cauſeth a queſtion to bee moued, why hee had called them together before his death; that appeareth in the chapter mentioned now, throughout vnto the 28. verſe: and it was to this end, to rehearſe Gods benefits to them, and to Ioſh. 24. 28. exhort them to ſerue the Lord, and this was a little before his death, at which time alſo he renewed a couenant betwixt the Lord and the people: the like to which we reade that Iehoida did betwixt the Lord, and Ioaſh the King. And ſo did Nehemiah, Ioſiah and other, whoſe rare & godly example is 2. King. 11. 17. ſet forth moſt clearly and liuely, to be a patterne to all Chriſtian magiſtrates, euen the higheſt, how they ſhould count it their greateſt honour to honour 
                        Doct. 1. In verſ. 6. the Lord among the people, and cauſe them to doe ſo likewiſe; to aduance his true worſhip alſo, and therefore to ſee true and ſound doctrine taught and not to ſuffer ſuperſtition, nor falſe opinions to bee thruſt vpon the Church: and to prouide, as neare as may be, that the people may know, that they doe not require theſe things of them for faſhion, but in ſincerity; and that ſeeing the Lord is a plentifull rewarder of them that ſeeke him: therefore Heb. 11. 6. they muſt not thinke themſelues diſcharged, in that they prouide for the outward peace of the people only (wherein yet they doe very commendably) but that they may liue godly alſo; becauſe vnder God they are the maintainers and preſeruers of both tables. And the beſt that they can yeeld 
                        Cuſtodes vtriuſque tabulae. Pſal. 2. 11. the Lord for aduancing them is, to ſerue him in feare themſelues, and kiſſe the ſonne, and prouide that others may doe ſo, and that without diſturbance, by them that are corrupt in their religion, and profane. And thus they are to goe before them zealouſly, and faithfully in their owne practiſe, as this noble man Ioſhua heere did, profeſſing it openly that hee would doe ſo, ſaying, Ioſh. 24. 15. Deut. 17. 19. whatſoeuer other doe, I and my houſe will ſerue the Lord. And that then and now theſe things might the better bee done, the Lord commandeth in Deuteronomie, that the higheſt in authority ſhould be ſtudious in the book Deut. 34. 11. of God. All the forementioned things did Moſes, who gonerned the people before Ioſhua: who both are to bee followed in their religious courſe; becauſe experience hath alwaies taught vs, that if the chiefe rulers bee zealous and religious, the inferiours will embrace piety and godlineſſe likewiſe; at leaſt, not be againſt it. And contrariwiſe: but if they ſhould not, yet the people muſt themſelues walke with God.
                  And thus did Ioſhua ſend the people away, as it is ſaid in the text, and with 
                        Doct. 2.
                     
gracious words exhorted them, and ſpake to them when hee was readie to die; as in the forementioned chapter of Ioſhua appeareth, that hee might leaue his laſt words ſo fruitfull among them, that their print might remaine in them after his death, euen as it did. And ſeeing he ſent them away in this manner, wee ſhould know, that it becommeth meaner perſons much more to do ſo; I meane, to giue exhortation to their children, ſeruants, and neighbours, if they haue freedome from paine, which often times hindreth right good men, and this is the beſt memoriall that they can leaue behinde them at their death. There ſhould be a wiſe putting of the houſe in order, & a ſetting of mens eſtates at a ſtay before death come, as Hezechiah was willed by 2. King. 20. 1. the Lord to doe; a chiefe part whereof is this giuing of exhortation: and this ſhould be; both that the minde of the viſited partie may bee eaſed and at quiet, and to preuent all trouble among thoſe that remaine behinde. For if this be not done before ſickneſſe) as commonly it is neglected, it had need to be then gone about with all ſpeed. But whiles this dutie ought to bee performed, of vſing good ſpeech to the ſtanders by, how many are there who are ſcarce able or willing to take direction themſelues, when they lie vpon their death bed? ſo farre are they from bequeathing gracious counſell and exhortation to others, and all becauſe they ſought no ſuch matter in the daies of their peace, health, and liberty, nor deſired that their family ſhould. And this bee ſaid of Ioſhua; now of the people, according to the diuiſion made before, in the entring into this verſe. They being now ſent away, went 
                        Doct. 3. euery man to his inheritance, as it had been before diuided to them by Ioſhua, and ſo reſted at home in peace, after their many hard battailes and troubles. Thus the Lord dealeth with his people, that for a time they finde hardneſſe, and afterward deliuerance and peace; as after a ſtorme commeth faire weather. Thus heauineſſe endures for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning. 
                     Pſal. 30. 5. We all ſhunne trouble, and it is of it ſelfe grieuous and vnwelcome; but herein we are much faulty, that as tedious as it is, few of vs lay to auoide it aright, by eſchewing the ſinnes that cauſe it: but rather bring it vpon our ſelues by our raſh attempts, and other wilfull, careleſſe, and bad doings; whereas we might be free from many troubles, if wee could take counſell of God in our matters, and ſtoope to his gouernment. And for example, it may be ſaid, wee prize not outward peace (to liue ſafely and quietly in our houſes) at any high reckoning, in which eſtate yet wee might doe much good; but we trifle out our precious time at leaſt, if we bee not worſe occupied; whereby, when wee raiſe trouble againſt our ſelues, wee take not the beſt way commonly to goe through it cheerefully, and meekely committing Pſal. 37. 3. our way to God wholly, by doing all the good we can, and ſo waite vpon him patiently, for a good iſſue.
                  Now after the people were ſaid to bee ſent away, it is further ſaid, that Verſ. 7. Doct. 1. they ſerued God while Ioſhua and other godly gouernours liued. Oh therefore how happy a thing it is to enioy ſuch? For much helpe, encouragement 
                        See more of this in chap. 1. ver. 1. Doct. 1. and eaſe the inferiours haue by them (they bearing the burthen off from the ſholders of the other being more weake and vnfit thereto) who if they were not they muſt beare it themſelues. For when the people haue by their meanes the Goſpell purely preached, and liue ſafely vnder their vine 1. King. 9. and figge tree, as they did in the daies of Salomon, with the liberty to exchange

and vtter their commodities and wares, little doe they weigh it, for the moſt part, what a benefit it is, who doe commonly enioy theſe bleſſings by the kinde, wiſe, and religious care of their gouernours. So to come lower euen among our ſelues, they who liue vnder inferiour guides, as people of the meaner ſort vnder godly headburrowes and guides in their townes, who haue great encouragement to Chriſtian duty by them, together with Note. good example, rather then checkes taunts, and diſcouragement (which many feele in bad townes) oh how ſweet a liberty doe they enioy that can prize it aright? what a furtherance to godlineſſe? So to be in a religious and well ordered familie, where God and his true ſeruice is chiefly regarded, it is a corner of heauen in reſpect of other houſes, though there want not in them many bodily comforts.
                  And if ſuch a thing bee ſet downe heere of the people to their commendation and their gouernours alſo, and for vs to behold and thinke vpon, that while ſuch liued together, the one was well guided by the other, and God religiouſly ſerued of both; then let all ſuch as enioy the benefit of good and Chriſtian gouernment, in houſe, or out of houſe, eſpecially in both, fall downe before the Lord, and acknowledge it to his great praiſe, and the binding of themſelues vnto him, and pray earneſtly that they may giue good teſtimonie of it, by ſeeking to be ſetled in the feare of God, and to grow vp in faith, knowledge, and grace thereby. I know it is no common thing either to finde the one or the other, but where any are vnder the authority and wing of godly guides, let them make account that it is their ſummer ſeaſon, not like the winter ſnuffes and brunts. And as for ſuch as fauour not good Note. dwellings, but rather ſhunne them, as Eſau did good marriages, I deny not but they may hold vp their head with the higheſt, and beare out matters with the bigeſt, and ſhift to get a ſhare in the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon; but they are as farre from true happines as they are from ſpirituall and ſound comfort, though few haue eares to heare it, till they ſmart by it. Now further, for people that liue vnder a good miniſtry, (to ſay a little of them, Moſes his being among the people, doth wofully prognoſticate, vnto what a paſſe they are like to grow, if they had elbow roome. For though none might liue happilier then they, yet who (for the moſt part) doe leſſe looke after it? for as they in Moſes abſence from them but fortie daies, made themſelues a calfe to worſhip: euen ſo the people are ſo brutiſh in theſe daies, and diſordered, euen while their faithfull paſtors liue with them, that the greateſt part of them, take no good by them: what did I ſay? nay they liue moſt offenſiuely vnder them. A ſigne of a wofull condemnation ready to come vpon them, all may ſee it is in their ſo doing, for louing darkeneſſe, in the cleare light of the Goſpell more then it. And though ſome of them Ioh. 3. 19. who are more ſubtill doe carrie the matter more cloſely, yet they are reſtrained by neceſſity or ſhame, not reformed by grace, and the power of the word. And let others who are not ſo bad, and yet not brought to true repentance, let them (I ſay) make better vſe of ſuch helpes while they enioy them, as they did in the Acts of the Apoſtles, and eſpecially let them ſee that all bee well betwixt God and them; yea and let them get furniture of grace to vphold them afterward alſo, leſt too late they lament, that they tooke no good by them, and bewaile the want of them (as Saul did Samuel) 
                     1. Sam. 28. 11.
                     
when there is no helpe.
                  But heere in as much as we ſee theſe people held out in Gods ſeruice but 
                        Doct. 2. for a time, and that was, while they had good gouernours and ouerſeers liuing with them: it auaileth much therefore to obſerue in our ſelues what it is that maketh vs embrace religion, and what is the chiefeſt thing that cauſeth vs to hold on the ſame. (A worthie point for all to learne, and namely ſuch as pretend they loue the Goſpell) it much concerneth vs (I ſay) to know and be aſſured whether it be fauour of men, commodity, credit, example, or other outward reſpect, which moueth vs to profeſſe any thing more zealouſly then ſome other doe, or whether for conſcience ſake, in that God commandeth vs ſo to doe, and for the ſauour and ſweetneſſe that wee finde therein and in the Goſpell which wee heare. For euen thereafter ſhal our welfare, proſperity, and perſeuerance be. For if wee haue taſted how good Mat. 19. 29. the Lord is, and haue found that hundred fold that is promiſed, and verefied in vs which is written in the Pſalme, that a day in Gods houſe is better to vs 
                     Pſal. 84. 11. 
                     then a thouſand elſe where; then we may know that wee haue builded vpon a Matth. 7. 24. rocke, and our building ſhall ſtand, and till we meet with a better booty then that, and may ſerue a better maſter then the Lord is (which ſhall neuer be) wee will keepe cloſe to him, and count his ſeruice to bee perfect freedome. And to ſuch as demand of vs whether wee will continue and hold on in a godly courſe, or goe backe, as Chriſt demanded of his Diſciples, we ſhall be Ioh. 6. 68. able to anſwere with Peter: whither ſhall wee goe? wee are in the way to eternall life, and we will not change our Chriſtian courſe for any other. Otherwiſe it is not enough to boaſt of our loue to God, and to ſay [Lord, Lord] when yet we will take no paines throughly to gage our harts and to ſee our affection well ordered, that ſo good life may follow.
                  Now while the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh of the people, how they followed 
                        Doct. 3. the Lord all the daies of Ioſhua, and the godly elders; hee ſtayeth a while about them, giuing them this teſtimony, that they had ſeene the workes of God which he had done among them: meaning that they had not barely looked Luk. 1. 38. vpon them but obſerued, and (as Mary did the words of the Angell) had laid Luk. 2. 51. them vp in their hearts to conſider them. For what profited it then otherwiſe to ſee them? For there is no doubt, but that there were many more aliue at that time, who had ſeene the miracles and great workes which the Lord had wrought in placing them in Canaan; but they were not worth the naming, ſeeing they had not alſo made vſe of them; but theſe had ſeen them in another manner, ſo that they acknowledged the Lords power and goodneſſe toward them thereby; declaring that to be the cauſe of their conſtant ſeruing of God, and cleaning to him, euen becauſe they had ſeene them. And it is no leſſe (doubtleſſe) then a great cauſe of the godlineſſe of them that haue any in them; namely, that they are ſuch as haue ſeene and weighed Gods wonderfull acts, as his mercy and gracious working by the power of the Goſpell in themſelues or other; as alſo for that they haue had proofe of his mighty vpholding of thē in a good courſe againſt all aduerſary power of the prince of darkenes, and his band. In like manner this hath hartened them to duty not a little, for that as they haue ſeen it alwaies to go well with them while they feared the Lord, and departed from euill; ſo they 
                        ••
                     ue ſeene the heauie hand of God to haue been againſt others, that Note.
                     
haue peruerted their waies, & followed a bad courſe; ſo that although they haue proſpered heere for a ſeaſon, yet when God in his due time hath blowne vpon their viſored felicity, they haue wanzed away in his diſpleaſure. This Salomon commendeth to vs in his example, who profeſſeth that it Eccles. 7. 15. 17. was his practiſe to behold and conſider all things (not impertinent matters as a buſie bodie, but profitable) and eſpecially the courſes and iſſues of the righteous and wicked. By which meanes hee attained to great experience and wiſedome, both to guide himſelfe and others. Euen as his father Dauid did alſo; ſaying, that he was made wiſer then the ancient, becauſe he conſidered ſuch things. But this meditating of Gods wonderfull workes; and namely this one, the greateſt of other, how he hath appointed to ſaue ſome from vtter perdition, and letteth others goe on in their ſinnes, though it be a ſtrong motiue to draw men to God, yet (with griefe it may be ſpoken) it is vtterly wanting among moſt men. Their hearts are ſet on follie and vanity. He that hath liued to ſee many laid in graue, hath ſcarce a thought that hee ſhall follow, and goe the way that all haue gone before him in. As for that they heare, that except they repent they ſhall all periſh, although they know their Luk. 13. 3. hearts are hardened, ſo that they neither can repent nor haue the leaſt deſire after it; yet they crie peace, peace, as though all were ſafe. So that it may now iuſtly be complained of, which Salomon hath long agoe bewrayed, that the fooles eyes are in euery corner of the world; meaning that they are buſying Prou. 17. 24. themſelues any way needleſly, and amiſſe; but as for things out of the world or aboue it, that is (as Saint Peter ſpeaketh) a farre off, their eyes are 2. Pet. 1. 9. ſore and pur-blind, they cannot looke after them; and as the Prophet ſpeaketh, they are wiſe to doe euill; but to doe well, they haue no knowledge. Ier. 4. 22. The Lord himſelfe bewaileth this brutiſhnes in men, that like vnreaſonable creatures they minde onely that which is preſent, and before their eyes; but oh (ſaith hee) that my people were wiſe, and did conſider their end. For that is Deut. 32. 29. wiſdome indeed, which ſeeing the moſt doe want, therefore they neuer enioy the thouſand part of ſweet liuing heere, as they might doe.
                  Now the holy ſtory hauing ſpoken of the workes which Ioſhua and the Verſ. 8. people did in his life, maketh mention of his death, as that which followeth, when all the actions of life are ended. And therefore Dauid, when hee was departing hence, ſaid; I goe the way of all the world. As wee haue therefore 1. King. 22. heard much of the actions of our life; ſo let vs heare ſome what of death, as the text giueth vs leaue and occaſion. And in that we heare that he died the 
                        Doct. 1. ſeruant of the Lord, as hee had long liued, and had done ſo many worthie things in his life (death and departure hence being ſo ſolemne a thing as it is) we ſhould bee much moued, not onely to thinke vpon the end of all fleſh, but eſpecially of our owne death, and to prepare for it aboue all things, Pſal. 37. 37. and to learne to die; that ſo wee might with him, die the ſeruants of God. Which though to a naturall man it be impoſible, yet the Lord maketh it tolerable, yea eaſie, and a welcome thing, to all ſuch as haue firſt learned to liue well heere, or at leaſt are fit to die. For perſeuerance in good life, meeteth with a good death, and ioyfully embraceth it: in which reſpect Salomon ſaith, that the day of death is better then the day of birth, as being the entrance Eccleſ. 7. 2. into life. And therefore the text ſaith, Ioſhua the ſeruant of the Lord died: noting that his death was not as the death of euery common man, but a

bleſſed death, and a reſt from the worke of the Lord, in which hee had been faithfull in his life; and therfore now looking for his reward, from the Lord Heb. 11. 6. a bountifull paymaiſter, death was welcome to him. As it is reported of an ancient Father of the Church, that being 80. yeeres old, and being then to bid farewell to his friends, ſaid; Thus long haue I ſerued the Lord, and now it grieueth mee not to die; for I haue a good maſter, thereby meaning that death was far more welcome to him then life; euen as that day is to a faithfull ſeruant, wherein he is to receiue liberall wages for his long ſeruice, then all the daies are that went before. And thus S. Paul ſpeaketh of Dauid, that when he had ſerued his time, he ſlept: meaning that hee reſted from his labours Eccleſ. 12. 7. Act. 13. 36. in body, while his ſoule returned to God who gaue it. And when we haue learned, and fitted our ſelues to die, then the hearing of death, and the beholding it in other, is a fit meane to quicken vs to the looking after it our ſelues, and to further and confirme vs in readineſſe to die well; conſidering deepely of it and of our owne mortality with it. And it much helpeth to thinke vpon the infinite thouſands mentioned in the Scriptures (who haue been taken hence by death) and namely, the rolles of Kings, ſuch as haue been more noble and memorable perſons, who ſeemed to haue an eternity heere, by their dignity, pompe, and prerogatiues aboue other men, as alſo among our ſelues more neerely to hearken after, and thinke vpon the death of ſuch as wee haue knowne or liued with; oh it doth not a little helpe to cracke the pride of life in vs, and to prepare for death. All which in fit ſeaſons and vpon good conſideration, being ſet before our eyes, are ſinguler meanes to faſten this meditation vpon vs, that wee alſo may willingly and readily giue place to death: and this ſhall much eaſilier and the better bee, while by our reioycing that we haue in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord wee die daily 1. Cor. 15. 33. before death doe come. By meanes whereof, as it is vncertaine, when we ſee any to die among vs, who ſhall bee next; ſo euery one ſhould put forward himſelfe, as the Apoſtle did in a caſe not vnlike, being told by their maſter that one of them ſhould betray him; euery one asked for himſelfe, ſaying, is it I 
                     Matth. 26. 22. 
                     maſter? Euen ſo (I ſay) we ought to reſolue, euery one for himſelfe, that he may be the next, that ſo death may the better be prouided for. And let this ſerue by this occaſion, for a meditation of death.
                  His old age being an hundred and ten yeeres, are reckoned as an honour to him, that being ſo commended for his godlineſſe, hee liued ſo long. To 
                        Doct. 2. whom Moſes and Caleb may bee added, full of yeeres and grace. Doubtleſſe it is no leſſe to a man ſeruing God ſo religiouſly, ſo long a time. For it is not an honour beſtowed vpon all, to become fathers and worthies, in the Church for their long continuance in grace, when we ſee the loue of ſo many to waxe cold, and a farre greater number to bee reprochfull in their age. But gray haires are a comely ornament, when they are found in the way of righteouſneſſe. 
                     Prou. 16. 31. For although it bee happineſſe for the people of God to die betimes ſeeing to bee with Chriſt is beſt of all, yet to liue long heere, (if God Phil. 1. 23. may be honoured by vs in our life, is an high honour alſo another way, euen by doing much good. And ſo Dauid confeſſed, ſaying, If I may liue to keepe thy word (for thereby God is glorified) I ſhall count it a great bountie Pſal. 119. 17. vnto me. Which reaſon Dauid and Hezekiah vſed, deſiring life to this end, ſaying; The liuing, the liuing ſhall praiſe thee, Eſa. 38. 19. And in the Pſal. Eſa 38. 19.
                     
None can worſhip thee in the graue. This, a man would thinke, ſhould ſtir Pſal. 6. 5. vp all that haue made good beginnings in Chriſtian life, to long after perſeuerance therein, yea though they liue vnto old age, and that they may bee experienced and well ſeene in the waies of God, that ſo they may declare them to others. Which as it is rare, and few mens caſes to doe; ſo it is their 1. Iob. 2. 14. honour that doe it, and their benefit who enioy it. I ſpeake this to the ſhame of ſuch as doe by ſmall occaſions depart from good beginnings, and in the pride of their hearts, and contempt of other, take conceits againſt their brethren, who hold conſtantly the profeſſion of their hope, and breake off their fellowſhip with them, directly contrary to the word of God, or ſome other way depart from a good courſe; ſo that few ſuch doe hold out to the end in their good beginnings, but loſe that honour that Ioſhua had, who in his Heb. 10. 25. old age died as he had long liued; to wit, the ſeruant of the Almighty, then the which title, the Angels had no greater honour. Heb. 1. 7.
                  
                  It is further added of Ioſhua, that he was buried in his owne inheritance, Verſ. 9. which was in mount Ephraim, in the place mentioned in the text, and that without ſuperſtition. Now concerning buriall wee are to know, that God hath appointed that it ſhould bee for the honeſt and decent couering of the body, vntill the reſurrection day; and that the bodies of the faithfull ſhould bee as it were, laid vp in the earth, in hope of their honour at the laſt day; though many righteous perſons haue by the cruelty of their enemies eſpecially, been denied this liberty of buriall, which is the comlieſt manner of beſtowing them, but it hindred not their happineſſe. Beſide, the bodies of God children, for that they bee the temples of the holy Ghoſt, ought (if it may be) decently to be buried, and not to be caſt forth into the fields. And it was a kind of a curſe to Iehoiakim, to be buried like an aſſe. But to ſay no more of this, yet about buriall I adde one thing that whereas it goeth againſt the Ier. 22. 19. edge with men and women, that their bodies ſhould ſo bee abaſed at that time, as to be wrapped and wound vp, and laid in graue, ſome of them hauing liued ſumptuouſly, and daintily heere before, and therefore coſtly cloathed, and in fine apparell; they muſt know, that this mortality and corruption muſt, by Gods ordinance bee put off, before immortality and glory can be put on, and that this abaſement, together with the laying of them by the walles, in the vtmoſt and meaneſt roomes, which were wont to haue their abode in the coſtlieſt and ſeemelieſt places, as alſo the homely laying forth of them by meane people, they themſelues in their life time hauing had company with the wealthier and better ſort: this I ſay, with all other abaſements Note. and diſgrace, ſerueth to this end, euen to abate and pull downe the pride of men that is in them, and to cauſe them to eſteeme meanely of their bodies, in their flouriſhingeſt eſtate, which they haue too much pampered, and gloried in, by ſetting out of them ſo vainely. It is a fit cooling and check for ſuch as haue ſo abuſed them, to ſee in the vſage of other mens, what ſhall be done to their owne. As for other who haue glorified God in their bodies, and vſed them as meet inſtruments of their ſoules to make them fitter to ſerue God, they knowing that their graue is made (by the graue of Chriſt) a ſweet bed for their bodies to ſleepe in, till by the power of his reſurection, they ſhall riſe to partake eternall life with their ſoules; and that it is not as a priſon or dungeon to locke them vp in, till the reſurrection of condemnation,

as whereto the wicked are reſerued: they (I ſay) knowing this, are not diſmaied but comforted in thinking of this. And further, they hauing Heb. 9 Iaſt. 1. Cor 15. Note. learned that it is appointed that all ſhall once die, and that ſuch abaſement of their bodies muſt bee, before they enioy immortality and glory, they I ſay, doe both ſubmit themſelues willingly thereunto while they liue heere, rather then take a pride in their bodies, as too many doe (yea euen in their haire) and they bewaile the ſinne rather which hath brought ſuch reproch, and farre greater miſery then that vpon men, and with our Sauiour, deſpiſe the ſhame that is ſet before them, and beare contentedly ſuch reproch, Heb. 12. 2. in certaine hope of the glory which they are going to.
                  To this which I haue ſaid of burial, one thing more let vs conſider: that 
                        Doct. 2. ſeeing Ioſhuas buriall is onely ſpoken of ſimply and barely (without any addition) which alſo yee ſhall reade of the Kings and great perſons burials in their hiſtories: it is worth the conſidering, what ſuperſtition the Prelates of Rome haue brought into this ceremonie of buriall, as they haue done about all other pieces of their religion; partly to blind fold poore ſoules, in making them to thinke, that their dead ſhall fare the better for their trumperv (when yet they doe but deceiue and feed them with falſe comforts) and partly while they ſeeke their owne, and their ſhauelings gaine thereby; but both for the aduancing of their ſuperſtitious religion. In perticular, ſome of theſe abuſes are, that there muſt bee prayers made for their ſoules, ringing, to helpe them the ſooner out of Purgatorie, burying them neere the high alter, with candles burning vpon their toombes; and diuers other ſuch ſuperſtitious orders whereby they perſwade the ignorant, that God is as buſie in making prouiſion for them in heauen, as they are in heaping and Note. vſing much trumperie about their buriall heere on earth. And this of buriall, and ſo of the reſt for this time.
               
            
         
         
            THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               AFter the holy ſtory hath ſpoken of the life and death of Ioſhua, it proceedeth to ſhew what the people did after his death, Verſ. 10. The ſenſe.
                and makes two ſorts of them. The one were they, who about that time died: the other they who being another and new generation liued after them, when the good elders were dead and thereby tooke occaſion to fall to wickedneſſe. Of the firſt it is ſaid, that they were gathered to their fathers, meaning they died: and thoſe were they that were left aliue, a young ſeminarie in the wilderneſſe, and came into the land of Canaan, with Caleb and Ioſhua; theſe I ſay, who then came luſtie and young into the land, were now full of yeers, and died. The phraſe

of ſpeech heere vſed, that they were gathered to their fathers, is oft vſed in the Scriptures, to ſignifie thereby that they died; and the reaſon why they that died were ſaid to be gathered to their fathers was this: ſeeing both their bodies were buried in the earth with theirs, and their ſoules were ioyned to theirs, according as they were good or bad.
            And in that theſe were gathered to their fathers, now that they had liued Doct. out the age of men, which euen then was threeſcore and tenne; or at the moſt foureſcore, and that with much wearineſſe, wee ſee that they who liue to the vtmoſt of their yeeres cannot paſſe threeſcore, or a few more, with any fitneſſe to be imployed profitably in any calling (without which, life is but burthemſome) and ſo Moſes ſaith in his time; therefore how neceſſary Pſal. 90. 10. is it that the precious time which is allotted vs to liue heere ſhould bee employed to the beſt vſes by vs, who profeſſe that wee liue to that very end eſpecially, conſidering how few attaine euen to theſe yeeres; and how much time is of neceſſity to bee beſtowed in eating, and reſt taking, that I ſay nothing of many other anokements, and beſide both how faſt & ſuddenly our end commeth. The which I ſay, not onely for that I ſee how men lengthen out their liues endleſly, in their owne fooliſh reckoning; ſtretching them on the tenters, and ſaying, they may liue yet 30. 40. 50. yeeres longer: and therupon, how vainely & badly the cōmon ſort do ſpend their time (whom I haue little hope to perſwade to do better) but for that many of good report doe nothing carefully redeeme their precious time from either endleſſe and needleſſe buſying their mindes about the commodities of this life, or trifling it out little better then idly (if not as the other doe) ſo that they can giue ſmall good account of the well paſſing of it; as that good man Hezekiah did. 2. King. 20. 3. and as the Apoſtle commandeth to the Epheſians, 2 King. 20. 3. Epheſ. 5. 16. Luk. 19. 24. without which the ſo paſſing of it ſhall bee reckoned among their other ſinnes.
            This be ſaid of that generation that died; now of that which liued, and 
                  Doct. 2. tooke occaſion to doe wickedly when their forefathers were dead. This people it is ſaid heere, knew not the Lord; that is, effectually; neither therefore acknowledged him, nor they knew not his workes; that is, as we heard before, made no vſe of them, neither profited by them, without which the bare knowledge of them was nothing. A deſcription therefore ye ſee heere ſet downe of an euill people, to wit, that they were ſuch as neither knew God, nor his workes. And no maruell; for if they who did both, I meane the former generation, of whom I haue ſpoken, did ſee that which they did by the meanes of good teaching and example, it is no ſtrange thing, that theſe did neither of both, who had not theſe good helpes which the other had: It is not poſſible for ſuch comming out of darkeneſſe, to walke before God in reuerence and cheerefulneſſe. For how ſhould men come to vnderſtand myſteries, as the ſauing knowledge of God in Chriſt is, and the effectuall knowledge of his great workes, to bee brought to his feare by them, and ſo to doe more then they that only ſay, Lord, Lord, and do not the will of the Lord; how (I ſay) ſhould they come to ſuch knowledge, vnleſſe they ſhould be plainely taught, and haue ſome to breake the ice to them, in following and practiſing it, and ſo in giuing good example to them? Therefore in places where both are wanting, ſuch perſons as I ſpeake of, are not to bee

ſought, vnleſſe they enioy both, by the benefit of other places, being deſtitute of them in their owne habitation: which is ſufficient to moue all ſuch of vs as enioy better helpes, to mourne for the deſolation of thoſe that want them: as we cannot chuſe, if we haue the ſpirit of our Sauiour, who pitied Mat. 9. 36. ſuch as they were; and to entreat the Lord to ſupply their wants. And further, this bewraies the vnhappineſſe of all ſuch as doe not heartily ſeeke after both, but are content to liue without them; I meane the getting of the knowledge of God, and Chriſt, to the certainty of ſaluation, Ioh. 17. and alſo Ioh. 17. 3. to liue with ſuch, as neere as may bee, who may bee ſhining lights to them, vnto ſanctification of life.
            This laſt ſort of the people affordeth alſo an other leſſon vnto vs, that the 
                  Doct. 3. latter generations are for the moſt part backwardeſt in goodneſſe, and more declining from it, then the former. It was no wonder if it were ſo in theſe that wanted the meanes, for it is ſo, euen where they are enioyed. Wee ſee how thoſe plants and flowers that were rare a few yeeres agoe, grow now A ſimile. in euery garden; for one getteth them of another; ſo ſinne growes by tradition and example, and daily encreaſeth, each age adding ſome new, till they come to the full meaſure. And though commonly old things decay and waxe worſe, yet old Adam the older, the ſtronger. Sinne hath his ages of growth for as the world growes older, ſo ſinners multiply who trading in Note. ſinne, doe ſtill exceed the former age in all kind of leaudneſſe; and one conſenting with the other in exalting follie, whether wee conſider number of perſons (equall compariſon being made) or the fouleneſſe, or boldneſſe in ſinne, wee muſt looke that the latter daies will bee worſer. The pride, couetouſneſſe, and drunkenneſſe of our preſentage was not ſeene in our forefathers dayes as now: nay (which is monſtrous) not in the middeſt of Poperie, although this extenuateth not their other ſinne, for euen they in ſubtilty and ill conſcience exceed their former ages alſo. There is now more knowledge indeed where long teaching hath been, but becauſe men receiue not the truth in loue and ſincerity, God accurſeth it with barrenneſſe. Honeſt ſimplicity, which is not tainted with craft and ſubtilty, and therefore fitter to receiue the print of the Goſpell, is iuſled out, by ſuch as are (for the moſt part) riſen vp more prophane and filthie; more ſcornfull alſo and hardlier perſwaded to goodneſſe then the former generations. And though this may bee found true in the generall eſtate of all (as toward the end of the Mat. 24. 12. world, and in the latter daies our Sauiour foretold it ſhould be ſo) that iniquitie ſhould abound, and haue the vpper hand: yet in perticular generations one after another, it may alſo be ſeene to bee ſo; that if the Goſpell bee planted in a nation countrey, or towne, and bee continued from one age to another, though the meanes be like, yet the latter generation ſhall come behinde the forme, in feruencie, diligence, and euery way in yeelding fruit of the Goſpell commendably in reſpect of it; they will verifie the prouerbe, New things are dainty, and old loathſome.
            For I cannot tell how it commeth to paſſe, that yee muſt grow glutted with the word, and wearie and aſhamed in ſome ſort of the godly zeale and forwardneſſe that they haue ſeene in others of former times. They will receiue the Goſpell, as other haue done, but they thinke it more then needeth, to ſtoope to the ſimplicity of it, and to bee zealous patternes to other in

practiſing the perticular doctrine of it, in one point, as well as in another; but ſeeke to take more liberty then they are willing to examine vpon what good grounds they doe it: neither will they bee forward in going one before another in mercifulneſſe, in iuſtice, and in ſeeking to puniſh notorious faults in their families and townes, and in the like good example giuing, and thereby diſcourage them, who elſe were like to come forward, if there were not laid ſuch blocks in their way. So that we had need to ſtirre vp our ſelues by the examples of them that haue gone before vs commendably, rather then to pleaſe our ſelues in that which we doe, and to reſt therein without contending, and ſtriuing to doe better. For who is ignorant that ſuch an eſtate cannot be good? And if wee will bee aduiſed, let vs know that our reward ſhall bee great, if wee honour the Lord with greateſt forwardneſſe in religious duties, when iniquitie aboundeth in the world, and when the Pſal. 19. loue of many ſhall waxe cold.
            Now I haue ſhewed the occaſion of this peoples ſinne, namely, that their good gouernours were dead; their ſinne it ſelfe now followeth in theſe 3. Verſ. 11. The ſenſe.
                next verſes: and that in this manner: firſt generally, then perticularly. In this verſe thus; that they did euill in the ſight of the Lord, and that they fell to Idolatry. Heere to ſtay a little, till I paſſe to the other two verſes: the euill which they did (moſt certainly) diſpleaſed the Lord in a moſt grieuous manner. As by the ſame word heere vſed, the like is meant in other places, where it is ſaid, that the Kings of Iſrael did that which was euill in the ſight of the Lord. And ſo on the contrary, thoſe things which were good in the eyes of the Lord, as the acts of many of the Kings of Iuda were; they were 1. King. 16. 2. 27. ſaid to pleaſe him highly. But when God hath giuen vs many encouragements 2. King. 18. 3. to his ſeruice, and yet we regard not to bee the better by them, what maruell if hee abhorre ſuch doings, and make open exclamation againſt them, as he doth heere, when both hee hath ſet hedge and ditch to hold vs Doct. from committing them, and alſo hath giuen vs many cauſes of doing better, both by teaching vs, and by other his manifold benefits, and alſo looketh for it at our hands that we ſhould doe ſo?
            So that although the ſinne of this people was manifeſt to the view of the world, as well as before God; yet if it had been ſecret and hid from men, it had been euill in the ſight of the Lord: euen ſo I ſay of our ſelues, if wee minde not Gods matters and ſeruice chiefly, but walke looſely, and hollowly, we ſhall iuſtly be challenged to doe that which he cannot abide, howſoeuer men find no fault in vs. For though there be degrees in ſinne, and one is more grieuous then another, yet they that ſet not their hearts wholly to ſeeke the Lord, with a great care to pleaſe him in all things, euen they doe that which is euill in his eyes, ſeeing the eyes of the Lord ſearch narrowly, and ſpie that which men ſee not; Therefore what may be ſaid to the liues of the greateſt number, and yet ſome of them, ſuch as reproue others, and are not in many of their doings to be charged iuſtly by any, yet when they bee not vpright in heart, and faithfull to God in one thing as well as in another, yet (while they be not ſo bad as other) they doe euill in his ſight. For ſeeing not they whom man, but whom God approueth are praiſeworthy; they therfore ſhall haue this ſtill and euer againſt them, that they did euill in the Rom. 2. laſt. Luk. 1. 6. eyes of the Lord if he commend them not, as he did Iob, ſaying thus, they

are vpright, feare God, and depart from euill; which if it were well thought on, there ſhould ſmal cauſe be found, why they who are tender conſcienced, Iob 2. 3. and feare to doe euill, ſhould be ſo ſcornfully and ſpitefully railed vpon, and diſgraced by the men of the world, for that they dare not be ſo looſe in their liues as other are, ſhewing thereby that they can abide none but ſuch as do euill in the ſight of the Lord. And this of the eleuenth verſe.
            For of the word [Baal] I will ſpeake in the next verſe together, with other Verſ 12. The ſenſe.
                of like ſort. But firſt in this twelfth verſe the holy ſtory ſaith, that they forſooke the Lord, who yet was the God of their fathers, and had brought them out of the bondage of Egypt. This as it was more then to diſpleaſe God in ſome particular actions (for it was a leauing of the true worſhiping of God, which is the fountaine of well doing dutie in our life:) ſo it is aggrauated by the fauour and benefits heere mentioned; to wit, what God had done for them: and further, the greatneſſe of their ſinne may bee laid out more fully by comparing it with Peters anſwere to our Sauiour. For when he ſaw ſome of his hearers to depart from him, vpon no iuſt cauſe, but onely a bare conceit; and he asked Peter, if they and the reſt of his fellow Apoſtles alſo would depart from him; hee anſwered, ſaying, Lord whither ſhould we goe? thou haſt the words of eternall life. As if hee ſhould ſay, that they Ioh. 6. 68. hauing found them ſo good and bountifull to them already, and hauing ſuch hope ſtill of greater good from him hereafter, as they knew not where to finde the like, it ſhould haue been abſurd for them to depart from him as the other Diſciples did.
            And to ſpeake the truth, who can ſay any leſſe? And ſo might this people well haue anſwered, and ſo they ought to haue ſaid alſo, euen as Peter did. But it was farre from them, becauſe ſome of them had neuer cleaued to the Lord in truth before, nor truſted in him, but walked hollowly and vnfaithfully towards him, though now they did much worſe. And by them Doct. we may ſee to what a fearefull eſtate they may grow, to what depth of ſinne they may fall, who embrace not religion conſcionably, euen for the worthineſſe and excellency thereof, and for the good they haue, or ought to haue gotten by it, and for the loue they ſhould beare to God, who hath loued them firſt; but rather began to profeſſe in a paſſion, or in ſome other outward and mutable reſpects; ſuch (I ſay) may be like in time to depart from God altogether, and then in what other ſtate are they, but without God in the world? For when mens hearts become hardened once by the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne, they doe next after that grow worſe, and ſo depart from the liuing God, as it is written in the Epiſtle to the Hebrues. Now as I haue Heb. 3. 12. ſpoke of theſe who were but outward profeſſors, when they were at the beſt, how they did wickedly in the ſight of the Lord; ſo there being ſome better among them who did ſo likewiſe. We may further note hereby, that though we beginne wel as ſome of theſe did, in the true renouncing of euil, yet we not holding on faithfully and carefully, by conſidering duely Gods goodneſſe toward vs, and zealouſly embracing good meanes, we may eaſily, and by little and little, yea and ſhall alſo together goe backe, euen as theſe did: but of the reuolting of ſuch I haue ſpoken a little before.
            Now therefore it followeth. I will ſhew how this people fell to Idolatry, Verſ. 11. 12 13. The ſenſe.
                euen to worſhip Baal and Aſhtaroth, and ſuch other Idols as the people and

nations ſerued, who dwelt about them: but firſt what is ment by theſe names of the Idols heere named. Baal ſignifieth a patrone or helper, as they tooke the Idoll Baal to be. Aſhteroth was the God of the Sidonians, an Idoll which in the forme of a ſheepe was worſhipped. And by the word Baalim heere, is meant all manner of Idols, ſuch as were worſhipped among them. To this point the people of Iſrael were now come, that ſeeing they would not expell thoſe idolatrous nations while they might; neither continued to ſerue the Lord, as they ought to haue done; behold, they themſelues now departed from him alſo, and fell to idolatrie with them. Where, beſides that we may learne, that when we auoide not the occaſions of ſinne, we cannot looke to auoide the committing of the ſinne it ſelfe, of the which Doct. verſ. 11. 12. 13. 14. I haue ſpoke in the former chapter; we may further ſee, that after men once forſake the Lord, and his waies that haue been made knowne vnto them, they fall to moſt lothſome ſinnes, euen to moſt groſſe and fowle Idolatry: yea and there is no end of ſuch abominations with them, if God reſtraine them not.
            Euen ſo the Lord complaineth in Ieremie, ſaying: My people haue committed two euils, for they haue forſaken me the fountaine of liuing waters, and haue diged 
               Ier. 2. 13. 
               to themſelues pits that will hold no water. It would neuer haue been thought, that people ſo well prouided to liue happily, as theſe were by their manifold encouragements (euen as wee haue ſeene our ſelues in our time many to haue been among vs) it would neuer (I ſay) haue been thought that ſuch could grow to be ſo monſtrous and prophane, that none might ſeeme to goe beyond them therein: Euen ſo it may bee ſaid; and to apply this to our ſelues, oh, if men could ſee what God hath done for them in theſe daies, when hee hath granted them to liue in the daies wherein the Goſpell hath ſhewed moſt cleare light, and made manifeſt the way to eternall life, to them who ſat in darkeneſſe, and when heerewith he hath giuen peace and abundance of earthly commodities alſo, &c. Oh (I ſay) that they could in this their time ſee theſe things? how happy might they haue been thereby? but they are hidden from them. Now therefore when for all theſe they haue yet followed their owne hearts deſire, and the courſe of ſuch as know not God; we may ſay on the other ſide, oh how iuſtly may it bee complained of, to their no leſſe ſhame then miſery?
            Now if any deſire to know what Idolatry is, and what is meant by that they were ſaid to commit it; let them know this for anſwere to both: 
                  Doct. 2. Idolatrie is a worſhipping of Idols; and hath two parts, outward and and when wee giue that to them which is proper to God, in either of theſe inward: wee commit idolatry. The inward, when wee truſt in, pray, giue thankes, or ſubiect our ſelues vnto them, whatſoeuer in heauen or earth, or in the water vnder it. The externall is; when wee manifeſt our affections to them by any outward things, as bowing the knee, vailing the cap, proſtrating our ſelues to them, or in vſing any other ceremony appointed by God for his owne ſeruice. Now whereas this being vrged to the Idolaters of our time, I meane the Popes votaries: their anſwere is, that they giue not honour or worſhip to the Image, or that which they giue reuerence to; be it ſtocke, or whatſoeuer, but onely to God and Chriſt himſelfe in the Image; let them heare to their ſhame what Saint Paul ſaith

to the Corinths, the Image or Idoll is nothing ſaith hee: that is to ſay, God 1. Cor. 8. 4. is not in it, or vnder it, whom they ſay they ſerue in them, and that hee is repreſented in ſuch images: and what do they worſhip then but the creature? Whereby wee may truly gather, and all that liſt, may cleerely ſee that their bowing to them, and proſtrating themſelues before them, is groſſe Idolatry, whatſoeuer they pretend, as they haue been oft and learnedly anſwered. The ſame may be ſaid of their offerings, burning of lights, their going on pilgrimage to the Saints departed, and ſuch like. Now as for their miracles, 2. Theſ. 2. 9. they are falſe and wrought by Satan, which God doth ſuffer for two cauſes: one to try his, whether they will goe from God thereby; the other to puniſh themſelues and other wicked ones, by beleeuing lies. And as for Cornelius bowing to Peter, and Iohn to the Angell, they did not take them for God, and yet becauſe they went too farre, they were forbidden by them.
            But yet in theſe verſes, let vs note a thing or two more. For ſeeing this 
                  Doct. 3. people ſaw and heard that God allowed their fathers worſhipping of him; as Abrahams, Iacobs, Moſes and others, and yet they followed nor their example, it made their ſinne greater: For our fathers, ſuch as the holy Ghoſt heere meaneth, are to be followed; namely, Moſes and the Prophets; as Paul 
               Act. 24. in the 24. of the Acts affirmed, that he in ſeruing God, worſhipped the God of 
               Act. 24. 14. 
               his fathers, and followed them therein. Such fathers if the Papiſts would follow, when they boaſt that they haue the fathers on their ſide, all controuerſies about matters in queſtion betwixt them and vs: as tranſubſtantiation, reall preſence, adoration of Sacraments, and ſuch like; would ſoone be at an end. And let vs ſee that we retaine the true ſeruing of God, that thoſe our holy fathers did, ſeeing with ſuch ſeruice we haue heard God to be pleaſed. And further note, in that the miracles of Egypt are repeated, and applyed heere to this generation, which yet were done long before, as though they 
                  Doct. 4. had been brought out of Egypt themſelues, being not yet borne: and this was to the end that they ſhould profit and be moued by them as wel as their fathers; note (I ſay) that the miracles and workes of God in times paſt wrought by the Prophets, our Sauiour, and the Apoſtles, ought to ſerue for our benefit, and we ought to haue vſe of them, as well as they before vs, in whoſe daies they were wrought, although we ſaw them not done: whereupon this is ſet downe, that whatſoouer things are written, are written for our learning, both that we ſhould, among all other vſes of them, bee confirmed Rom. 15. 4. in the doctrine of the word, and alſo looke for no more proofe of it by other miracles to be wrought in euery age following. And if we be reſolued of the truth of this, let vs ſee that we be guided by it alſo. And this be ſaid of the ſinne of the generation that roſe after the death of the good elders: now of their puniſhment.
            
               And the wrath of the Lord was hot againſt Iſrael, and hee deliuered them into the hands of ſpoilers, that ſpoiled them: and he ſold them into the hands of their enemies 
               Verſ. 14. 
               round about them, ſo that they could no longer ſtand before their enemies:
            
            
               Whitherſoeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was ſore againſt them, as the 
               Verſ. 15. 
               Lord had ſaid, and as the Lord had ſworne vnto them; ſo he puniſhed them ſore.
            
            We haue heard of the firſt point of the foure, in this ſecond part of the The ſenſe. chapter; namely, of the ſinne of the people. The next point followeth (as I ſaid before,) of the puniſhment, with the which the Lord purſued them

for it, which was two fold: the firſt was, the anger of God conceiued againſt them for it, the ſecond the fruit of it. And that is ſet downe heere to be partly the ſpoiling them of their goods, and partly bondage to their enemies; and more generally, that Gods hand was againſt them, ſo that they were not able to ſtand before them; by meanes wherof they were in anguiſh and ſtraits, not knowing what to do. Behold how their eſtate was changed, yea and that ſo ſoone, after they turned away from the Lord: euen ſo ſhall all finde it. But come we to the particulars.
            When therefore it is ſaid heere, that God was angry with them, we muſt not ſo take it, as though God were ſubiect to paſſions as men are, as either anger or repentance, &c. but ſuch ſpeeches are vſed, and now this one, of 1. Sam. 15. 30. Gods anger, to the end our faults may appeare the more grieuous, in that they are ſaid to prouoke him who is ſo hardly moued. Againe, to our capacity they are vttered, to giue vs to vnderſtand, that God doth and will doe the ſame things that men, being angry for faults committed againſt them, will doe; that is, be reuenged vpon the offenders: and yet hee is free from paſſion. What are we then to think, when we heare that God is angry? to ſet light by it, as the moſt do; when yet we heare that he is not led by paſſions? no, but to be troubled for it, becauſe we cannot but feare that God will doe the ſame to vs, that an angry man, being offended, will doe to ſuch as prouoke Doct. verſ. 14. him. For why? are we ſtronger then he? or thinke we that we ſhall eſchew and decline danger? when yet in his anger he is compared to a Lion, who ſeeketh his prey? No doubtleſſe; for his wrath is aſſiſted with power, and with preſence. And therefore it is ſaid in the Pſalme, If his anger bee kindled, the earth is moued, and the foundations, of the hils are ſhaken. And againe, If 
               Pſal. 18. 8. 
               his anger be kindled but a little, happie are they that truſt in him. Which places, Pſal. 2. laſt. with many other ſuch, doe liuely ſhew the danger of them that prouoke him; and that as he is angry iuſtly, ſo his anger is (without reſpect of perſons) or parciality declared againſt all ſorts without exception, that prouoke him: the greateſt ſhall as well ſmart as the meaneſt, as the text there importeth.
            But the vſe of this is, ſeeing God is prouoked by our ſins, that we ſhould beware that we offend him not in the common manner as men doe, in the prophaning of his Sabbaths, his word and Sacraments, in ſlander, lying, diſſembling, incontinency, and vnchaſtneſſe of body and minde, in deceiuing, oppreſſing, and a thouſand waies more: and eſpecially we muſt looke that we liue not in vnbeleefe, which is diſobedience in an high degree, euen to the Goſpell; for which Paul ſaith, the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen. 1. Theſ. 1. 8. Ioh. 3. laſt. But if wee haue fallen into any ſuch, the next heed to bee taken of vs is, not to ſleepe vpon them, but tremble, for that we know Gods wrath is kindled againſt vs, and who knoweth whether vengeance may come forth Epheſ. 5. 6. and take hold of vs, before our hearts relent, and before wee meet him with repentance? When the Lion roreth all the beaſts of the forreſt quake; and is it not time for vs to doe the like, when the mighty Lion of the tribe of Iudah is moued? And if it be meet that euen the children of God be held in awe, by conſidering that he their God is a iealous God, yea a conſuming fire; and againe, if they cannot but tremble to behold him in diſpleaſure ſometime, with his enemies, as well as they ſee him in his ſmiling countenance toward

his owne people; how much more ſhould they tremble, when it is their owne caſe, and when they themſelues are the perſons vpon whom hee frowneth? And if the Princes wrath be death, as we ſee it is by Ahaſhueroſh, 
               Heſt. 7. 7. when he was inflamed againſt Haman; how dangerous is the eſtate of them who moſt iuſtly haue ſtirred vp the Lord againſt them? For which cauſe our Sauiour ſaith; Feare not him who can but deſtroy the body: but feare him that 
               Mat. 10. 28. 
               can caſt body and ſoule into hell: I ſay feare him? So that the man lying in known ſinne, not repenting, is the man of miſery, if hee could ſee it, howſoeuer hee ſooth vp himſelfe, or be ſoothed by other, for the mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken it. And I haue wondred oft, that ſo many offending, as are knowne daily to doe, and that willingly and looſely, yea and with boldneſſe; and that they being in ſo great danger thereby of ſundry puniſhments euery Note. day; I haue wondred (ſay) that ſo few make haſt to rid themſelues out of that fearefull condition; and eſpecially they ſeeing ſo many to ſmart from time to time for the ſame and the like ſinnes that ſwarme in them: and yet further, to giue too apparant tokens by their impenitency, that it will be infinitely worſe with them, when they bee gone hence. Thus much for this time.
         
         
            THE FIFTEENTH SERMON VPON THE BOOKE OF IVDGES, THE REST OF THE fourteenth and the fifteenth verſes, a part of the former text, and on theſe verſes following.
            
            
               VERS. 15. Whitherſoeuer they went out, &c.
               16. Notwithſtanding the Lord raiſed vp Iudges, which deliuered them out of the hands of their oppreſſors.
               
               17. But yet they would not obey their Iudges; for they went a whoring after other gods, and worſhipped them, and turned quickly out of the way wherein their fathers walked, obeying the Commandements of the Lord, they did not ſo.
               
               18. And when the Lord raiſed them vp Iudges, the Lord was with the Iudge, and deliuered them out of the hand of their enemies all the daies of the Iudge (for the Lord had compaſsion of their gronings, becauſe of them that oppreſſed them and tormented them.)
               
            
            
               OF Gods anger and the feare therof, being the firſt puniſhment, we haue heard. Now followeth the next, which is the effect of it. For they who are angry, conſult and deuiſe, how they may reuenge themſelues vpon ſuch as haue offended them: the 
                  〈…〉
                out 
                  •
               ffect: the effect of whoſe anger is ſet downe, firſt to be the ſpoiling 
                  〈…〉
                good, and then the bondage

they came in to their enemies, which was farre greater. And theſe are the ſorer becauſe God dealt not with them himſelfe, but gaue them ouer to men, yea cruell men, ſuch as Dauid deſired he might not fall into their hands, becauſe there was no mercy with them. But to ſay ſome what of the former of theſe two; to ſuch as be in proſperity, we know that the loſſe of wealth is found by experience, and taken of men to bee one of the hardeſt iudgements that doe befall them; the reaſon is, for that they loue their money and goods almoſt if not altogether as well as their liues. And yet a great puniſhment is this which they ſuſtaine by them, that when the Lord hath giuen them as bleſſings, they loſe the right vſe of the, for and through their fooliſhneſſe and ſinne, and cauſe that for the moſt part they become curſes to them. And God in his wiſedome doth ſend ſuch penalties oft times among many other vnto them, as it is ſaid heere, hee gaue them into the hands of ſpoilers. But this was yet farre worſe, when they muſt goe vnder it, and yet neuer conſider by whom, and why they were thus puniſhed. Behold in this people, the extreame follie of ſinners at this day; who though their hearts are ſet vpon their wealth and commodities, yet neuer bethinke themſelues to be freed from the danger of Gods wrath, which often waſteth them to nothing. Know we therfore, that if we decay in our goods, by barrenneſſe Note. of the ground, or vnſeaſonableneſſe of the weather, by debt, ſuretiſhip, Pennie-wiſe. Pound-fooliſh. or by any other ſuch like, and eſpecially by miſpending them; know we (I ſay) we haue a warning thereby, ſent vs of God, for ſome ill parts of life, as it is ſaid in Deuteronomie, If thou wilt not obey the voice of the Deut. 28. 15. 33 Lord thy God, then the fruit of thy land, and all thy labour ſhall a people that thou knoweſt not, eate: and the heauen that is ouer thee ſhall be braſſe, and the earth vnder thee, iron.
            And againe, A nation that is of a fierce countenance ſhall eate the fruit of thy cattell, 
               Deut. 28. 51. 
               and he ſhall leaue thee neither wheate, wine, nor oyle, neither ſhalt thou proſper in thy waies. By all which, and this which is in the text, that they heere were ſpoiled of their goods, as it ſhould make vs carefull to preuent euen his Verſ. 29. iudgement among many other, by vpright walking with God, and harmeleſſe liuing among men, how fooliſh and preciſe ſoeuer that courſe of life ſeeme to many: ſo when wee haue gone out of the good way, and fallen Gen. 17. 1. from that obedience which we haue couenanted to yeeld vnto God, and ſuſtaine ſuch loſſe thereby, aboue all things let vs ſeeke to finde out the cauſe thereof, and that ſpeedily, as Ieremy requireth, and beare our loſſe becauſe Ier 8. 4. Mich. 77. Ioh. 5. 14. we haue ſinned; and ſinne no more leſt a worſe thing befall vs. And let vs not count it our hard fortune, (as fooliſh men tearme it, for there is none) when wee are ſo waſted in our goods, neither pleaſe wee our ſelues in condemning and charging the ſecond cauſe thereof, whereby we are 
                  〈…〉
                of them; for whatſoeuer be the inſtrument of our loſſe or vndoing, ſure it is, that the Lord is the effecter and worker of it. And therof 
                  〈…〉
                Deuteronomie, of this and all other his fearfull iudgements, after that 
                  〈…〉
                ſent them, when it ſhall be demanded wherefore hath the Lord done this? how fierce is his great wrath? they ſhall anſwere, becauſe they haue forſaken the couenant of the Lord God of their fathers, therfore hath the Lords Deut. 29. 25. wrath waxed hot againſt this people, to bring vpon it euery curſe that is written in this booke.
            
               
And the ſame doctrine that I haue taught of the ſpoiling of mens goods, that it is a fruit of the wrath of God for their ſin, (this being excepted, that the Lord may impoueriſh his people (who feare him) in fauour and mercy) The ſame I may as fitly and truly ſay of the bringing or them into ſeruitude and bondage vnto vile and cruell perſons: but let the one bee vnderſtood by the other, ſeeing I ſpeake of this in another place. But I will further obſerue 
                  Doct. 3. another thing heere, that ſeeing it is ſaid that they were led into bondage after they were ſpoiled of their goods, and ſo ſmarted by both, we may note how God ſo dealeth with the diſobedient out times, euen as hee did heere with theſe, that as their ſins go not alone, ſo neither doe their puniſhments. So that God dealeth with ſuch as offend him not one way, but many; as he did puinſh Achan, both with ſhame, and with paine: ſo Pharaoh was viſited with terrours, and with bodily plagues alſo: euen ſo now many are Note. purſued with croſſes in their goods, reproch in their name, and in their body with paine and diſeaſes. And this he doth, that men may know they ſhall pay deare for their ſtolne pleaſures, how ſweet ſoeuer they bee to them in their fond account, and that ſo both together may hold them backe from prouoking him. For as Eſay ſaith, one iudgement ſhall not ſerue the turne, if Eſa. 9. laſt ver. Ioel 1. 3. men ſtruggle and fight againſt it, and ſtand out with God, when hee ſmiteth gently, his hand will bee ſtretcht out ſtill; and looke what the former hath not done, the latter ſhall make good. As wee reade in Ioel, that fruit which one plague conſumed not, another did, till an vtter riddance follow of all. But men bite vpon the bridle, and curſe their lucke, but look not into themſelues: ſo when God ſtrippeth men of their goods, and then caſteth them into bondage, as hee did deale with them heere; or when hee doth the like to vs, that one iudgement come in the necke of another to vs, I thinke it may bee ſaid truly without reſpect of damnation, that wee haue paid deare for ſtolne pleaſures, and our bold taking of our liberties amiſſe. And ſeeing I haue not ſpoken particularly of going into ſeruitude, and our nation hath not knowne what it meaneth, nor how ſharpe a ſcourge it is; yet ſeeing many fall into it by Turke and Spanyard, who haue little feared it; therefore I wiſh them to reade of it in Deuteronomie: ſecondly, to conſider of it by the eſtate of the people of Iſrael in Egypt: and laſtly, to lay it out, and ſet a Deut. 28. 48. 49. 50. view of it before their eyes, by the Popiſh and cruell tyrannizing ouer our ſoules heere in our owne land in the daies of Queene Mary, when we could enioy no liberty of the word and Sacraments, but our brethren who refuſed their Idoll-ſeruice and falſe worſhip, were tortured and tormented by the bloody perſecutors: and what may men looke for then at the hands of ſtrangers? And this to be ſaid of bondage.
            Now further, in that it is added in generall in the text, that they could not ſtand before their enemies; for being ſo weakened by them in goods, number, and ſtrength, what maruell? Let this be obſerued, that God vſeth his 
                  Doct. 4. and our enemies againſt vs his children, when we prouoke him by our ſins: as hee vſed Nabuchadnezzar againſt Ieruſalem, and Senacherib and others. Not that God putteth new poiſon and malice into them, who had nothing elſe in them before; but that hee iuſtly ſuffereth and letteth them alone (without any bridling or reſtraining them) to vomit vp their venome, and Note. their cankered hatred, and letteth them looſe to Satan. Whereby this among

many other things may bee learned, how vncertaine the comfort is that ſome take in this, that the Papiſts (they hope) ſhall neuer preuaile againſt the Proteſtants, nor Popery euer yoke them any more. Yes, if God be diſpleaſed with them, he may plague them that way, by raiſing them vp as enemies againſt them, as eaſily as hee did heere the Canaanites againſt Iſrael; and if they were without feare that way, hee may and can meet with them after ſundry other ſorts, little to their comfort, as they may ſee daily if their ſinnes be not remoued out of his ſight: ſo that as the Prophet ſpeaketh, it ſhall be with them, as if though they eſcape the Lion, a Beare ſhould Amos 5. 19. meet them: or went into the houſe, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a ſerpent bite him.
            By this which wee haue heard of the puniſhment of this people, it appeares 
                  Doct. 5. that they had load enough vpon them, as one would thinke, and yet, as though there had not bin enough ſaid of the hand of God againſt them, the holy Ghoſt addeth heere, that whitherſoeuer they went forth, the hand of the Lord was againſt them; as if it ſhould bee ſaid, whatſoeuer they tooke in hand or went about, it proſpered not, but they were croſſed therein; whereas of the godly, we reade in the firſt Pſalme, the contrary to be ſaid and ſet down. Pſal. 1. 3. The like is ſpoken by the Prophet Azaria to the people of Iuda, in the ſecōd booke of Chronicles. This though it be not ſeene of many, nor marked of 2. Chron. 15. 6. the diſobedient, and therefore not complained of, yet their miſery therefore is the greater, ſeeing they goe on brutiſhly, as the foole to the ſtocks, and the oxe to the ſlaughter, till a dart pierce through their liuer. But ſome feele and perceiue Pro. 7. 23. it, when God being angry with them, his hand is againſt them, as experience witneſſeth (though he deale not now ſo much nor apparantly againſt his enemies in bodily as ſpirituall plagues) for doe not many loden with ſorrow and miſery crieout, that God fighteth againſt them, though there be no outward puniſhments to bee ſeene vpon them? and that they neither proſper nor enioy any inward peace, but are weariſome to themſelues, curſing their lot, and wiſhing themſelues out of the world; nay laying violent hands vpon themſelues, for very anguiſh of heart and madneſſe: thinking (falſely) ſo to eſcape their miſery. And how heauie a thing is that, (thinke wee) eſpecially when they know not how to remedy it? And as it is thus with them, euen ſo Gods hand is euer with his faithfull ſeruants in all their waies which God hath ſet them in. They are like the tree planted by the riuers 
               Pſal 91. 11. Pſal. 1 3. 
               of waters, that bringeth forth fruit in due ſeaſon: and whatſoeuer they do it ſhall proſper. Indeed this is the leſſe ſeene to be, becauſe they finde it ſo hard a thing for them, in the middeſt of ſo many diſcouragements, to continue in their vprightneſſe as we may ſee who marke it; but they are oft vnſetled and broken off by the burthen of the fleſh from their innocency, or elſe are forced with much adoe to recouer themſelues being fallen, and are in great heauineſſe thereby. But while God vpholdeth them by his grace, hee doth alſo make them well liking, and to proſper, yea in their weakeſt eſtate, in reſpect of other, and to recouer.
            And whereas it is added, that this purſuing of them by the Lord in all 
                  Doct. 6. that they ſet their hand vnto, was as he had ſworne to them, it is to teach vs, that it could be no otherwiſe: ſeeing God ſpeaketh nothing in vaine, much leſſe if he ſweare to it, according to Samuels words, the ſtrength of Iſrael will 1. Sam. 15. 29.
               
not lie. One iot or tittle of his word cannot faile. It is farre more firme then Mat. 5. 17. the law of the Medes and Perfians, which yet altered not. So that if the Lord ſpeake the word or ſweare (except it be conditionally) whether it be a threatening to ſuch as prouoke him, or a promiſe of any good things to ſuch as truſt in him, it ſhall moſt certainiy come to paſſe, what attempts ſoeuer there be to the contrary, as is daily to be ſeene. And therefore it is to be wondred at, that men are ſo little moued thereby; but for all his threats, go forward in their bad courſe, till the euill threatened doe come vpon them, and cauſe them to crie out; euen as Gods ſeruants alſo doe ſmart, when his promiſes being certaine, are for all that, not beleeued of them: But this matter is oft occaſioned. And this bee ſaid of the peoples ſinne, and of their puniſhment. It followeth now in the text.
            
               VERS. 16. Notwithſtanding the Lord raiſed vp Iudges, which deliuered them out of the hands of their oppreſſors.
               
               17 But yet they would not obey their Iudges; for they went a whering after other gods and worſhipped them, and turned quickly out of the way wherein their fathers walked, obeying the Commandements of the Lord, they did not ſo.
               
               18. And when the Lord had raiſed them vp Iudges, the Lord was with the Iudges, and deliuered them out of the hand of their enemies, all the daies of the Iudge: for the Lord had compaſsion of their gronings, becauſe of them that oppreſſed them and tormented them.
               
            
            NOw follow the other things which I mentioned before in the ſixth The ſenſe. verſe in laying out the points of this ſecond part of the chapter, and that is, how the Lord raiſed them vp deliuerers in their oppreſſions when they cried vnto him, who were called Iudges. This cannot bee vnderſtood of any one time, ſeeing he ſent not many Iudges at once among them, in any time of their affliction. Therefore hee ſheweth heere to the end of the chapter, what was the condition of the people of Iſrael, and the changes and diuerſe courſes that they were, in the time of the Iudges. In few words it was thus: when they cried to the Lord in their oppreſſions, he pitied their grones, and raiſed them vp Iudges, which were deliuerers of them, as I ſaid, and he was with them to bleſſe them, and yet they turned away from him againe for all that, and ſo he was prouoked to go againſt them afreſh as is ſet downe in the latter end of this chapter, & in ſome of the verſes that follow.
            And firſt, in that it is ſaid in the eighteenth verſe (for theſe three verſes are Verſ 18. to bee ioyned and read together) that they groned to the Lord vnder their oppreſſions, who ſaw nothing amiffe in themſelues before; it muſt teach vs, Doct. that calamities will ſearch and ſtirre vs vp to griefe, and to make our mone Note. to God for very anguiſh of heart, how careleſſe and iollie ſoeuer wee haue been before, when wee boldly prouoked him, and when wee haue been ſo careleſſe and headſtrong, as that nothing could ſerue to plucke downe our ſtomackes, yet ſore troubles haue broken our hearts, as if we neuer had been otherwiſe. Therefore when his word will not preuaile, the Lord is faine euen to maiſter men by ſtrong hand, that at leaſt hee may tame them by violence, if he cannot bow them to repentance: euen as men handle horſes and ſuch beaſts as they cannot rule; they caſt them, and keepe them vnder by binding them, that ſo they may worke their pleaſure on them. The wilde

Aſſe muſt be taken in her moneths, when ſhe cannot reſiſt: and this courſe Iob 33. 15. the Lordis driuen to take with vs, to wit, to make our hearts to ſmart, and to loade them with ſorrowes, or elſe there would bee no rule with vs: thus I ſay he is faine to take vs downe. According to that which is ſaid in the Pſal. When he ſmote them, they ſought him, yea they ſought him early: Pharaoh himſelfe Pſal. 78. 34. when he felt the ſmart of the plagues of Egypt, ſought for Moſes to pray for him to the Lord. Long it is before men are fitted and framed to heare the Lord ſpeake vnto them: but being bitten with ſorrow, they are glad to 
                  See Hoſ. 6. 1. compared with cap. 5. 13. 14. cling to him. But alas what commeth of the moſt of theſe his corrections and ſharp dealings with ſuch? Nay, for that I can ſay no more but this, that the moſt of them doe but bow for the time, as a bulruſh with the winde, their goodneſſe being as the morning dew, and ſo it goeth away, and they cry out onely while the rod is held ouer them, and afterward they returne againe to their old byas.
            And ſo did theſe heere, and ſo doe many ſeeke the Lord for a time, and yet turne aſide againe as a broken bow. But if ſuch as be thus caſt downe (as theſe were) when God afflicteth them, ſo that one would think they would neuer lift vp their briſtles againſt him any more; if theſe I ſay doe yet waxe bold, and kicke vp their heele againſt him, what ſhall we thinke of them who relent not at all for their euill doings, no nor for Gods heauie hand vpon them, but harden their harts, as the dog which biteth the ſtaffe that beateth them? What then, yee will aske is to bee done; if groning vnder mens burthens of ſinne and puniſhment haue no good effect? All the remedy heere is this, that men in ſuch caſes finding out their ſins, doe alſo ſeriouſly conſider of the fouleneſſe of them, and the woe that they bring with them, and ſo tread them alſo vnder their feet, and beleeue better things to bee comming from God toward them, euen mercy and forgiueneſſe, which onely are able to cruſh their ſinnes in peeces afterwards, as well as to make them kindly and truly acknowledged and cried out of, while the ſmart taketh hold of them. This be noted of their groning.
            Now behold what the Lord did when they did thus complaine and cry Verſ. 16. 18. out; he had compaſſion on them, and raiſed them vp Iudges, that ſhould deliuer them out of the hands of their oppreſſors and ſpoilers, and he did ſo, and was with them; and it repented him that he had ſo ſuffered them to be oppreſſed. He doth oft as he did to Ahab, pitty ſinners, when they ſmarting for their faults cry out of them: but he doth not receiue them to mercy, except they truly forſake them; which I ſay for our inſtruction, that wee may know that the Lord is eaſily to be entreated of vs, waiting indeed our repentance. And when we do but giue ſignes of diſliking our ſinnes for the time, Note. he ſtayeth his heauie hand from purſuing vs: what would hee doe, thinke we, if we came home to him with all our hearts? But ſo we muſt know on the other ſide, that hee in ſo dealing with vs, heapeth hot coles vpon our Note. heads, add maketh vs vnexcuſeable, when wee hauing ſuch faire encouragement at his hands, ſhall yet keepe a loofe from him, and ſhew vnfaithfulnes, when we haue made couenants with him of amendment.
            But heere commeth in their miſery, as in this verſe is to bee ſeene, that Verſ. 17. when he did all this to them that heere is ſet downe, yet for all his pitying them, and ſhewing ſo great kindneſſe toward them, yet their Iudges, who

called them from Idolatry, were not heard nor regarded of them. They conſidered not what a benefit it was to enioy ſuch, although they cried in the anguiſh of heart for helpe in trouble. Now in that this was a common thing with them after their deliuerances, thus vnthankfully to deale with the Lord, in not obeying their Iudges; for ſo they are charged heere to haue done: and in the chapters following is to be ſeene that they did ſo: by this briefly let vs learne, that men are rarely the better for their deliuerances out of their troubles, howſoeuer they crie to God in the middeſt of them. Whereas a man would thinke it ſhould be the thing moſt regarded of them, and they ſhould be oft in conſidering both how irkeſome and vncomfortable it was to them, when they lay in affliction; as in paine of body, by ſickneſſe or diſeaſe, or in purſuit by enemies, or in any other diſtreſſe: alſo what a gracious liberty it was, and what eaſe to them, when they were deliuered yea and with all this they ſhould yeeld rare thankeſgiuing to God for the ſame; eſpecially ſeeing it is the end of all deliuerance, euen the greateſt, and withall this, that we may ſerue the Lord euer after without feare. Luk. 1. 74.
            
            Againe, another thing is not to bee omitted in this verſe, that in ſtead of hearkening to, and obeying God and their Iudges, they fell againe directly to Idolatry, and ſo forſooke the God of their fathers; and moſt brutiſhly bowed themſelues to their Idols which were but blocks, and could doe nothing for them. A deceiueable pleaſure they tooke therein (as mans nature is very prone to ſerue God after a groſſe and falſe manner) yea and the holy ſtory ſheweth, that they did quickly fall to this, and turne out of the way; to teach vs how ſoone a well ordered courſe, and good things are forgotten and laid aſide. This as it may bee obſerued, in this people, that they ſoone waxed wearie of their good beginnings; ſo alſo it is apparant in others that come after them; who though they haue good example before their eyes, to goe before them therein, yet they are ſoone carried another way; eſpecially when the chiefe perſons are gone, who delighted in well doing. And yet further to lay out their ſinne, it is ſet forth by an apt and fit ſimilitude of fornication, euen as holineſſe to God is in the Scripture oft times compared to chaſtneſſe in marriage.
            For as the whoremonger is drunken and beſotted with his lewd companions, ſo that he can regard no counſell, neither can ſee it to be his diſcredit, to be linked in with ſuch an one: neither is moued with the waſting of his goods which is cauſed thereby: euen ſo the ſpirituall whoremonger, which is the Idolater, is as blind as his Idoll, and cannot bee diſſwaded from it; but an Image and Crucifix ouerſwayeth him, when the worſhipping of God in ſpirit and truth is tedious, and vtterly vnſauoury to him. The reaſon of all this which I haue ſaid of him, and of all ſuch at this day, who aggrauate their ſin in the like manner, is this; that men regard nothing but their eaſe & vain pleaſure, & haue no conſciences to performe their promiſes & vowes made to God in the time of their affliction. Againe, they being either void of faith vtterly; or hauing receiued ſome ſmall meaſure of it, and being ſlow & negligent Note. in the meanes vſing daily and duly, whereby it ſhould be confirmed; they hauing alſo others to ioyne & keepe company with them in doing as they do, it eaſily commeth to paſſe, that they ſo ſoone decline, and their promiſe which they made to God of repentance, doth vaniſh like the ſparkles.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTEENTH SERMON VPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES. Verſ. 19. 20. 21.
            
               VERS. 19. Yet when the Iudge was dead, they returned and did worſe then their fathers, in following other gods to ſerue them, and worſhip them; they ceaſed not from their owne inuentions, nor from their rebellious way.
               
               20. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled againſt Iſrael, and he ſaid, becauſe this people hath tranſgreſſed my couenant, which I commanded their fathers. and hath not obeyed my voice;
               
               21. Therfore will I no more caſt out before them any of the nations which Ioſhua left when he died.
               
               22. That through them I may proue Iſrael, whether they will keepe the way of the Lord to walke therein, as their fathers kept it, or not.
               
               23. So the Lord left thoſe nations, and droue them not out immediately, neither deliuered them into the hand of Ioſhua.
               
            
            
               NOw followeth the laſt branch of this ſecond part of Verſ. 19. the chapter; that is to ſay, that when the Iudge died, the people did worſe then their fathers, (as is ſet downe in this verſe,) whereupon the wrath of God was kindled againſt them, as appeareth in the twentieth verſe, and then the fruit of it, namely, Gods puniſhing of them is ſet downe in verſe 21. and the end why he did ſo, in the 22. that was, to proue them, and therefore it is ſaid in the laſt verſe, that God left the enemies in the land ſtill in Ioſhuas time, and did not caſt them out. Now of theſe as they lie in order.
            That it ſhould bee thus with this people as in this verſe it is ſaid, it is no The cleering of the text. leſſe lamentable then wonderfull. For when God had pitied them, (they groning to him) and ſent them Iudges, who ſhould deliuer them out of their oppreſſions, and they likewiſe did deliuer them indeed: after that bleſſing, who would not haue ſaid that they would haue proued a rare people in thankes and obedience vnto God? Now therefore, in that they turned another way when the Iudge was dead, who was ſent to deliuer them, and kept not their couenant which they had made with God, but rebelled againſt him, what trercherie was this? And to that end is their ſinne aggrauated in this verſe, to wit, that they did worſe then their fathers, but following their owne inuentions and euill waies. By all which it is to be gathered, Doct. verſ. 19. what light-headedneſſe and inconſtancy is in men, who haue ſometime made earneſt profeſſion of amendment; alſo what lewdneſſe accompanieth the ſame, to ſet it on worke. Heereupon it is, that all good exerciſes of

prayer, and purpoſes of good life are ſoone forgotten, and worne out of memory with many. A ſimple minded man would thinke, that where there hath been ſo much knowledge in people, and ſhew of good conſcience going with it, as that they both doe cauſe confeſſion of ſinne, and accuſation of themſelues, with breaking forth into ſolemne proteſtation and couenan
                  ••
                of turning to God with all their heart; he would thinke (I ſay) that if after ten or twelue yeeres abſence from them, he ſhould returne againe; that hee ſhould finde rare profiting in the Chriſtian trade; at leaſt much forwardnes in knowledge and in all good duties, and they ſo ſetled therein, that they could not be remoued any more from them.
            But as people much to bee lamented! they who might looke for ſuch a thing, ſhall be like rather to finde it farre otherwiſe, and much worſe, as wee ſee heere it was with theſe. And in ſtead of growing in knowledge and grace, at leaſt of ſetledneſſe and ſtedfaſtneſſe in their good beginnings, they ſhall be found reuolters from the ſame rather; as it goeth with men now adaies, and to haue deuiſed with themſelues, or conſulted with others about new waies and courſes of life, cleane contrary. Some to fall in with Papiſt and ſectaries, other to bee drawne to whoredome and vncleanneſſe; and the greateſt part into depth of worldlineſſe, ſutes, vncharitable contentions, and the like: which though it be fearefull to heare of, yet it is common, and eaſie to be found, euen while good exerciſes of preaching and ſome good neighbourhood continue, and bee enioyed of them: and therefore how much more ſhall this be found where ſuch good meanes are wanting? Oh if goodneſſe preuaile not with them, and haue not the vpper hand, yea if it be not loued aboue all other things, and in price aboue them, and diligence vſed daily in the practiſe of good duties, all ſhewes of the beſt beginnings will ſoone turne to the contrary. And good reaſon it is, that where men profeſſe godlineſſe, which is the greateſt riches, and hath the promiſes of this life 
               1. Tim. 6. 6. & 4. 8. 
               and of the life to come, good reaſon (I ſay) that there they ſhould not be aſhamed, to ſeeke by all meanes to aduance and honour it, to the end that all may know the worthineſſe and price of it; and that it is not without reward euen in this world. Which while few regard to doe, they are worthily put to reproch and ſhame.
            But heere, beſide that which hath been ſaid (a good occaſion being offered Doct. Out of all theſe verſes together. out of all theſe verſes together) wee may gather a good direction for a great part of our life, and that as well before affliction come, as in the time of it, and after deliuerance out of it. Before it come, and while God giueth vs 1 leaue to ſerue him with cheerefulneſſe (which is a ſweet portion in this life) we ſhould greatly labour to keepe well, while we are well, and not doe as this people did here, to wit, prouoke God to puniſh vs for ſinning againſt him as the world doth, negligently or wittingly. Secondly, if we haue, for al 2 our heed taking, broken out againſt conſcience, (which without good heed taking, may full eaſily be) we ſhould cry to God after our fall, & from vnder Note. our burthen, not tarrying till we be driuen to it by extremity, as theſe heere were: and further when we cry to him, wee ſhould wait patiently, (and the rather becauſe we haue by our ſinne prouoked him againſt vs) till God deliuer vs. Thirdly, ſeeing he will moſt certainly helpe, being thus ſought to, let vs beleeue and be perſwaded, that hee will heare vs graciouſly, as wee ſee 3 Pſal. 50. 15.
               
heere he did them, who yet were great offenders, and thus let vs ſtrengthen and inable our ſelues to this patience with confidence. Fourthly, when wee 4 be deliuered, let vs afterward oft remember & conſider in what an vncomfortable eſtate we were before, and how good and gracious the Lord hath been to vs, to bring vs out of ſuch aduerſity, and with daily thankes cleaue to him yet more neerely then before; and in no wiſe prouoke him by renewing Pſal. 89. 31. our ſinnes, as theſe did heere, which were monſtrous, and to our owne coſt (be we well aſſured) it ſhall be. And thus if we be carefull to doe, it ſhall goe well with vs, and good daies ſhall we ſee, as may be looked for in ſo bad 5 a world; and ſuch as haue their thouſands of gold, ſhall not bee able to buy and purchaſe with all their abundance. Deut. 5. 30. Note.
            
            But to paſſe to the next verſe. I hauing ſpoken of the reuolt of this people Verſ. 20. in the former verſe, (beſide the direction which by occaſion I ſet downe there,) the holy ſtory goeth on heere to ſhew what the Lord did to this people thus turning from their good beginnings, after the death of the Iudge; He was ſore diſpleaſed with them, and his anger was kindled againſt them. Here to ſay the ſame that I did there of Gods anger, were but a needleſſe thing. That which I note of it heere, is this; that as before hath been Doct. ſeene, ſo through the whole book it appeareth, that it is vſuall with the Lord to doe thus; namely, when men ſinne, to be angry; that is, to do as men will, when they be angry: for otherwiſe wee haue heard that neither anger, repenting, nor any ſuch affection, or change is in the Lord. And is it not meet that God ſhould thus deale with vs thinke we, when we are ſo ready by euery occaſion to prouoke him? For if this held vs not in awe, we ſhould, euen we who are his owne oft times breake out as the common ſort do (the fleſh being wearie of penting in) whereas the loue of God (I grant) ſhould bee ſufficient to conſtraine vs to our duties. And what a thing were it, that God 2. Cor. 5. 14. ſhould alwaies bee angry with a man? doubtleſſe if any one could bee perſwaded that he were ſo affected to him, not onely his whole life ſhould bee in daily and deadly vnquietneſſe; but he ſhould alſo be ouerwhelmed with the thought of it, and driuen to deſperation. And yet we may know by that which hath been ſaid, that God hath iuſt cauſe to doe no leſſe, but to let his anger burne as fire againſt ſuch as prouoke him. But indeed hee oft deferres the declaration of his wrath, giuing men time and liberty thereby to repent, and doth not once ſhew it many times, when hee is often prouoked. Hereof it is, that when God being iuſtly diſpleaſed, and yet men doe not in in the meane while repent and turne to him, humbly ſeeking mercy; that hee doth afterward declare by his manifold or ſorereuenges, that hee was long before prouoked to anger, and iuſtly offended with them. But this is wiſely to bee marked of vs, that though his owne people ſinne, (as there is none that ſinneth not) to wit, by ouerſight, infirmity, vnauoidable ignorance, 1. King. 8. 46. Note. Pſal. 130. 3. and ſuch like; whereas hee doth not by and by, ſuffer his anger to breake forth, the reaſon is this: he hath ſaid himſelfe, that he wil not looke ſtraightly what is done amiſſe of them: and beſide, when they ſee that they haue fallen ſo, they riſe againe, and this they do daily and ordinarily returning to him againe, & caſt themſelues down in true humiliation before him, in the meditation & application of the work of their redeemer Chriſt, and ſo the Lord is pacified with them againe. Therefore ſuch as are wiſe, will bee moſt

carefull to keepe away occaſions of Gods diſpleaſure; ſeeing the Lords anger is a conſuming fire, and while that is prouided againſt, men may poſſeſſe Heb. 12. 29. their ſoules with peace, and may goe out and in with him daily, with good liking and comfort, thus much of Gods being angry againe, now of the puniſhment that followed vpon it.
            God being thus diſpleaſed with them, ſeeing they had ſo ſhamefully Verſ. 21. tranſgreſſed and broken the couenant that he made with their fathers; therefore hee will no more (hee ſaid) caſt out any of the nations that Ioſhua left behinde. For although Iſrael was oft deliuered out of the hands of ſundry of them by their Iudges; by whom alſo many of them were ſlaine, yet they were not vtterly rooted out, but their poſterity ſprung vp againe afterward, and multiplied in the land, to the great diſquieting, vexing and annoying of his people. This I ſay was the puniſhment: And how ſore it was, may bee thought by this, that theſe nations were left among them to their deſtruction; as in verſe 3. we haue ſeene, where wee heard the ſame puniſhment threatened by the Angell to them at Bochim. But then they repented, and there is no doubt, but God accepted it, as hee promiſed. But this was more grieuous, that afterwards their poſterity did worſe then they. For they there were reproued, and threatened, for making couenants with the Canaanites: theſe for falling flatly to Idolatry with them. Heere, beſides that wee may ſee that for the moſt part, men waxe worſe and worſe, and the good decline, and the bad decay and wanze away in their ſinnes, as may bee ſeene by the example of theſe compared with that we reade in the ſecond verſe; wee may further learne againe, as in verſe 3. we heard, that God will be diſcharged of his couenant towards men, in and concerning the outward benefits of this life, if they ſtand not to their couenants which they haue made with him.
            And if they bee his owne people, hee will puniſh their offences with the Pſal. 89. 31. rod, and their iniquitie with ſtrokes; though hee take not his mercy vtterly from them: and if they be other, he will much more leaue them helpeleſſe, and to ſhift for themſelues, ſo as they fal into depth of euill, who might haue thriued and proſpered through his bleſſings. Yea and they might haue bin in good hope to haue embraced his couenant of grace and mercy alſo: as many are brought by Gods temporary benefits to ſeeke after ſpirituall, ſo might theſe haue done alſo. Therefore, little doe men know, what vexation they they bring vpon themſelues, when they waxe careleſſe in their couenants keeping which they haue entred into with God; (as the leauing of ſome groſſe ſinne, or the forſaking of ill company, worldlineſſe, or ſuch like offences;) and ſo forgetting themſelues, fall to them againe afterward. They ſhall ſurely runne on from euill to worſe that deale ſo with God, and from ſmaller puniſhments to greater iudgements, ſo little cauſe they ſhall haue to reioyce, for glory of their winnings thereby.
            So that beſide other manifold puniſhments which cannot bee reckoned vp, they that breake couenant with the Lord, ſhall alwaies haue ſome ſpeciall eye ſores left to vexe them, as theſe nations were to Iſrael. And as this worthily layeth forth the forementioned puniſhment, in verſ. 15. that the hand of the Lord was ſore vpon this people of his; euen ſo wee ſhall finde it who are vnfaithfull to him in our couenants, as that either ſtubborne and diſobedient children (none of the leaſt plagues) ſhall riſe vp to make our liues

weariſome to vs, which (as Salomon ſaith) ſhall be as corruption to our bones, and Prou. that many waies; as in waſting our goods riotouſly, and with harlots, and vnthriftineſſe, or by imbracing popery, and otherwiſe by waxing prophane. Or we ſhall be croſſed by vnkinde, ſpitefull and vnquiet neighbours; who with ſutes, brawlings, and ſundry diſagreements, ſhall make our beſt pleaſures to be turned into bitterneſſe and wormewood: or we ſhall be plagued with ſeruants, who ſhall conſume vs, and bring reproch and vexation vnto Note. vs, by defiling our houſes, or working vs ſome other annoiance: ſo likewiſe with vnfaithfull and ſcandalous Miniſters, ſutes, or controuerſies, ſo that by one or other of theſe, or ſuch like, wee ſhall haue no comfort in any thing; beſide the many diſeaſes, as collicke, ſtone, burning agues, conſumption; for which wee ſhall bee conſtrained to cry out, and ſay, wee haue no pleaſure in our liues. And yet a greater puniſhment then all theſe, wee ſhall not know, when theſe plagues be vpon vs, that they are for our vnfaithfulneſſe in our couenant, (though more or leſſe, it is the caſe of the moſt that profeſſe the Goſpell, thus to forget our ſelues) which thing yet (in great griefe I vtter it) is to be ſeene in many, that when Gods hand is ſore againſt them, yet they know not why it is ſo, namely for their ſinnes, to the end they might amend.
            In this verſe the end is ſet downe, why God would not caſt out the Canaanites: Verſ. 22. & 23. to wit, to proue them whether they would keepe the way of the Lord; (and therefore it is ſaid in the next verſe, that he left, and did not deliuer them into the hands of Ioſhua: and if they did obey the Lord in fighting againſt them, and making no leagues with them, but follow and do as their good forefathers had done, then they might reape the fruit therof, I meane, the Lords promiſe; to wit, that he would be with them to aſſiſt them, to enioy the land to their hearts deſire: If they ſhould do otherwiſe; then they ſhould declare thereby that their ſtrength was neuer great, if they fainted being tried; and beſide, they muſt beare the burthen that ſhould light on Prou. 24. 10. them.
            And by this we may learne, that God hath this end in afflicting his, that they may haue exerciſe of his graces in them; as patience, faith, hope, and Doct. verſ. 22. ſuch like, that being found furniſhed therwith, they might giue God praiſe, and they themſelues might reioyce: and that they might be humbled, if the contrary ſhould be. And this we ought to be reſolued of in all our troubles, euen when we cannot finde out in our ſelues any particular ſin, for which the Lord afflicteth vs. So that wee bee farre wide, and offer our ſelues great Note. iniurie, when we doe not reſolue of this, that in Gods afflicting vs, he tryeth vs, that ſo we may behaue our ſelues accordingly. The ſame may bee ſaid, if hereſies ſpring vp among vs, that God tryeth vs what we will doe: as Saint Paul ſaith, There muſt bee hereſies euen among you, that they who are approued, 
               1. Cor. 11. 19. that is, of ſound religion and godlineſſe, through long experience, may bee 
               Reuel. 13. 10. 
               knowne. It ſhould teach vs, ſeeing God doth ſo, alwaies to haue our hearts carefully ſet vpon it, and to tell it oft to our ſelues, that whatſoeuer bayts of ſinne are ſet before vs (as a cup of pleaſant wine well coloured, yet mixed with poyſon) wee ſhould not meddle with, nor reach out our hand Note. thereto, and how bold and buſie ſoeuer we behold other to bee in ſnatching greedily at them, and to deuoure them; yet we may not bee enticed with them,

nor looke on them; for why? God doth trie vs thereby what ſtrength of grace is in vs, to reſiſt and turne from them; and as for them that doe moſt readily embrace them, they ſhall ſoone vomit vp their ſweet morſels with bitterneſſe.
            Now to adde this laſt verſe with the former 22. whereas it is ſaid, that Verſ. 23. God did not deliuer all the nations into the hands of Ioſhua, as he did ſome, and could as well haue brought vnder all the reſt; it further teacheth vs, to haue an eye to Gods workes, what things he doth, and to reſolue our ſelues, that he ſeeth alwaies good reaſon thereof: and follow we his direction, and he will leade vs to ſee as much. It is a good grace in vs, if we can iuſtifie him in all that he doth, and to ſay with the people in the Goſpell, he hath done all things well. And yet it is ſo, whether we affirme it or no. But ſeeing wee are grauelled and amazed at many of his workes, not ſeeing any reaſon in them, but we are rather ready to reaſon againſt them, and rebell; [as when he croſſeth vs in our attempts and doings, and that not once, but often, nor in one thing, but in many, and that apparantly, and more then in ordinary manner, about our goods and bargaines, health, and the like] heere therefore I ſay, humbly to ſubmit our ſelues to that which he doth, though it bee no other then we pray daily to doe [thy will bee done of vs] oh it is a thing well beſeeming vs, and yet but our duty. And thus wee ſhould ſay; (if that goe not with our liking which God doth) hee could haue done otherwiſe, as heere hee could haue caſt out the Canaanites in Ioſhuas daies: but as hee left them to try the people; ſo he aduiſedly letteth things alone to proue vs how wiſe, confident, and obedient we will bee therein. Hee could giue learning without ſtudy, and deliuerance out of trouble by and by, or withhold it altogether, that it ſhould not take hold of vs, but he doth not, neither ſeeth it beſt ſo to do, to the end we may frame our ſelues to his good pleaſure, and in euery part of our life bee ſubiect to him. And this bee ſaid of the ſecond part of the chapter, and of all the branches drawne out of the ſame, and ſo of the whole chapter. It followeth in the next.
         
         
            
            
               THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  VERS. 1. Theſe now are the nations which the Lord left, that hee might proue Iſrael by them, euen as many of Iſrael as had not knowne all the warres of Canaan.
                  
                  2. Onely to make the generations of the children of Iſrael, to know, and to teach them warre, which doubtleſſe their predeceſſors knew not.
                  
                  3. Fiue Princes of the Philiſtines, and all the Canaanites, and the Zidonians, and the Hiuites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon vntill one come to Hamath.
                  
                  4. And theſe remained to proue Iſrael by them, to wit, whether they would obey the Commandements of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moſes.
                  
                  5. And the children of Iſrael dwelt among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Heuites, and the Iebuſites.
                  
                  6. And they tooke their daughters to be their wiues, and gaue their daughters to their ſons, and ſerued their gods.
                  
               
               
                  THe ſumme and parts in generall of this Chapter may 
                     The ſumme of the chapter, and parts 2. be fitly ſet downe together: for in the firſt ſixe verſes is ſhewed, why God left the nations in the land, and which thoſe nations were. In the reſt of the Chapter there are three defections or fallings away from God in the people of Iſrael mentioned, and three plagues ſent vpon them for the ſame, and a threefold deliuerance by three ſeuerall Iudges. And thus the holy ſtory beginneth to ſet downe the ſtate of the people, as was ſaid in the former Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  ANd firſt why theſe nations were left ſtill in the land, two reaſons are ſet The meaning of the foure firſt verſes. downe: one in the firſt and fourth verſe, and that was to proue them: the other in the firſt and ſecond verſe, and that was, to make them know warre; not meaning thereby to make them skilfull warriours, (though neceſſity draue them to that, when they ſaw they muſt truſt to their skill) but to let them ſee what it was to bee put to their ſhifts, and to fight with weapons, who had neuer been wont to doe ſo, neither their fathers, ſeeing the Lord had in the former warres with their enemies, extraordinarily fought for them without their owne labour and skill.
                  
                     
To come to the firſt reaſon generally ſet downe in the firſt verſe, and particularly Doct. verſ. 1. and 4. in the fourth, I haue ſpoken of it in the former chapter, and the laſt two verſes: It is heere repeated to beate it into them deepely; and to make them thoroughly perſwaded thereof, that they might then, (and ſo wee now) bend all the force of our hearts to looke well about vs, how we beare our troubles meekely and patiently, depending vpon God for a good iſſue: Pſal. 37. 3. Pſal. 50. 15. which dutie he moſt certainly looketh for at our hands, as throughout the Scripture he teacheth and admoniſheth vs to doe; and wee cannot but bee much diſquieted by our afflictions, if wee doe otherwiſe, notwithſtanding that our corrupt nature doe carrie vs much to rebell againſt the ſame. This is that which we haue to learne by the repeating of thoſe words in this verſe, namely that it is ſaid, God left the nations in the land to trie the people of Iſrael, and to trie them in this, whether they would keepe his commandements or no.
                  Moreouer, we muſt marke that which is ſet downe here in this firſt verſe: Doct. 2. in verſ. 1. that the Lord is ſaid to haue held theſe nations ſtill in the land, which was to the exceeding ſore vexing of his people: to teach vs, that the raizing, remaining, or remouing of troubles, they are all of the Lord, and by his appointing; euen by his will, and of his wiſe diſpoſing, whether wee reſpect the whole Church, or any part or member of it: and they come not by chance, or a mans ill fortune, as the ignorant people ſpeake, (neither is there any ſuch thing) but as the Lord himſelfe ſaith in the Prophet Amos, there is no euill in the city, that is, no trouble, but I the Lord haue 
                     Amos. 3. 
                           •
                        . 
                     ſent it. And if it were otherwiſe, the beſt people, as the worſt are, ſhould (by their afflictions) be at their wits end. Wee may not therefore reſt our ſelues Note. in the ſecond cauſes, neither vexe our ſelues about them (as we doe too oft) which is a ſpurning againſt the Lord, but patiently beare them: ſeeing that whatſoeuer the inſtrument bee, it is certaine, the Lord is the ouer-ruling cauſe, howſoeuer it is euident, that oft times wee cauſe and bring them our ſelues: and therefore we ought to bend our ſelues in all earneſt manner, to patience: and ſo much the rather, ſeeing hee further certifieth vs, that hee doth all for the beſt to ſuch as feare him: ſo that wee doe but encreaſe our Note. ſorrow, who by impatience encreaſe our ſinne; and therefore prouoke we not him, from whom all trouble commeth, and who through his Almighty power can caſt into hell alſo, but feare wee to doe euill in his ſight euermore, that wee may auoid both, and aſcribe vnto him our deliuerances alſo, that ſeeing all ſuch deliuerances are from the Lord, hee may haue his due praiſe from vs. Verſ. 1. 2. The ſenſe.
                     
                  
                  In the end of this verſe and the ſecond, where it is ſaid, that God left the nations ſtill in the land, that he might teach this generation of Iſrael, warre, which neither they, nor their fathers had in times paſt knowne: which is another reaſon, why thoſe nations were not driuen out; this is the more cleare meaning of it. When the Lord by trying them, had found (though he was neuer ignorant what they would doe) and made manifeſt the impiety and idolatry of the people of Iſrael to themſelues: he tooke away from them their ſtrength in war, and withheld his aide from them, which hee had in times paſt giuen to them, and to their fathers in battell with their enemies, ſo that now when they went to warre by their owne power, the Lord withholding his from

them, they knew what warre meant, which before they knew not, when the Lord had fought for them: for then hee gaue them ſtrength, and terrified their enemies and weakened them, and gaue good ſucceſſe to the Iſraelites, but now he left them to ſhift for themſelues: and therefore wee ſee what is meant by this (that they had not knowne warre) when as yet they had not broken their couenant with God, for he had fought for them. They knew not then what it meant to goe to warre, for the Lord had fought for them, but now they did begin to learne.
                  And heere we may ſee, that when by Gods kindnes and many comforts Doct. ver. 1. and 2. miniſtred by him, we cannot be kept in compaſſe, nor be brought to cleaue to him with all our hearts, hee will take another courſe with vs to bring vs thereto: for hee will acquaint vs with wants, trouble and ſorrow, as hee did this people heere, to ſee if they can bring vs thereto: and yet ſuch is his loue to vs, if they preuaile with vs, and worke kindly vpon vs to bring vs to repentance, he will returne to vs againe graciouſly, and continue ſtill his former bounties toward vs. When Ioſhua, and the good generation in his daies Ioſh. 6. 16. 17. truly ſerued the Lord, they were preſerued from their enemies, and knew not what war meant, the Lord himſelfe fought for thē, while they did little more many times then looke on. And in our firſt parents we may cleerely ſee this to be exemplified: while they yet liued in innocency, and were vpheld with the grace of God, they neither knew nor felt any euill: but when they had diſobeyed by eating of the forbidden fruit, they began to know Gen. 3. 7. what good and euil meant. In like manner, children, while in their younger yeeres they haue been ſubiect and obedient to their parents, they are tenderly handled, and haue all things with eaſe prouided for them: but when they grow vp rude and ſtout, and for that, are put forth to their ſhifts, they come to know what hardneſſe meanes (who before were not acquainted therewith) by the rough handling of ſtrangers.
                  And let it be well thought of by vs, for euen ſo God dealeth with vs, if we can by his mercies be drawne to dutie, he is ready to beſtow them plentifully Note. vpon vs, hee thinketh nothing too good for vs, ſo as wee need not know the ſorrowes and vexations that are in the world, in compariſon of that which many thouſands doe feele, and ſmart by them. But if we will follow the common courſe of others, to be like to them in euill, we ſhall ſoone know that it was no meane benefit to be ſo ſheltred by the Lord as we were before; and namely, that ſhall be, when wee begin to feele his heauie hand againſt vs. And wee in this towne, and heereabout haue ſeene, while wee Note. haue made it our chiefe delight, to follow the Lord, not regarding the examples and multitudes of bad and irreligious perſons (who dwell among vs) to be withdrawne by them, we that haue done ſo, wee haue ſeene, I ſay, Gods exceeding goodneſſe toward vs (I ſpeake to his praiſe) and deſire I may neuer ſee the contrary. And in compariſon of the world, I meane, the ignorant and prophane ſort, who deſire not to be acquainted with the Lord and his waies, it may truly bee ſaid, that wee haue ſeene many good daies, when our chiefe care hath been to liue vnder his gouernment; and when wee haue failed at ſome time more then at others, and through frailty forgotten ourſelues, hee hath mercifully quickened and brought vs backe againe: ſo that (for the moſt part) wee haue not knowne what the ſorrowes

of the world meane. And our worſt daies haue been, when we haue forgot ourſelues, and forſaken the good and right way, and walked or ſtepped aſide into Note. by-waies, then he hath taught vs (by wofull experience) what ſorrowes and vexations meane. For example: when we haue in the ſimplicity of our hearts ioyned in the ſweet doctrine of the Goſpell preached vnto vs, and haue minded it chiefly as our beſt treaſure; and when wee haue as well feared to offend the Lord in thoſe things which haue liked vs beſt, prouoking one another to loue and to good workes, oh how hath hee made vs to proſper? and when hath he frowned vpon vs, but when we haue peruerted our waies.
                  In this verſe the nations are reckoned whom the Lord would haue to remaine in the land, among whom his people the Iſraelites muſt dwell: Verſ. 8. 5. reade them in the text. By this that they muſt dwell with theſe wicked nations, Doct. wee are taught, that it is one of the puniſhments among many other, which our diuers kinds of ſinne draw vpon vs, that euen becauſe of them we muſt ſometime dwell with the wicked: for though all muſt haue to do with them, (or elſe they muſt goe out of the world) yet this that I now ſpeak 1. Cor. 5. 10. of, is another matter. Dauid dwelt among the haters of peace out of the holy Pſal. 120. 5. 6. land: as for the Church of Pergamus, whoſe habitation was where Satans throne was; that was Gods triall to them. But the dwelling of Iſrael in Babylon, and their fathers before them among the Egyptians: and the dwelling of theſe heere mentioned among the Philiſtims, Canaanites, and Heuites: theſe habitations (I ſay) were Gods puniſhments and curſes, euen the fruit of their deſerts and grieuous ſinnes: who vexed them many waies, as if Hornets ſhould haue ſtung them: and becauſe ſuch dwellings are brought vpon men by their owne prouokings of God, and that ſundry waies; therefore beſide the ſmart that they ſuſtaine by them through outward troubles, they haue this added thereunto, that they cannot meekely and quietly beare them, for the wound that they haue made in their conſcience by their knowne ſinnes, which is moſt grieuous vnto them, ſeeing they muſt and cannot but remember, that they iuſtly ſuſtaine them. One example of our time I will alleage of two perſons, a yeoman and his wife (I might bring many) Theſe two dwelling among ſundry good neighbours and religions, becauſe they were not like minded to them, becauſe they diſtaſted the Goſpell, tooke a ſore pritch againſt them, without any iuſt cauſe giuen them, and therupon in wilfulnes remoued their dwelling from them. Their going away was to enioy better neighbours, and to bring in the world, and the commodities thereof the faſter. But (to be ſhort) ſeeing yee will long (no doubt) to heare the end; ſo it was, that they enioyed not that which they ſought and went for; for their wealth waſted, and their neighbours, who had neuer known what it ment, neither had learned to vſe them neighbourly, dealt roughly with them, and ſore vexed and wearied them: vpon this, the Lord viſited them both, with great ſickneſſe, euen both of them together. And then they had leiſure to bethinke themſelues of the change they had made, and eſpecially with what minde they had done it: and then the crying out of their doings in this behalfe, and that they did (as it fell out) in the preſence of ſome of them, whom they had firſt dwelt among, being ſent for by them vpon occaſion though they dwelt more

then twentie miles diſtant from them; not ſparing to charge themſelues deepely, and to ſhew their great repentance for their raſhneſſe and wilfulneſſe in their remouing euen to them. So the man died there, the woman in a maruellous manner bewailing her offence, which was compounded of many, and this from day to day. In which time it fell out that I was an eye and an eare witneſſe of much more then I ſay: Shee by little recouered ſo farre, as ſhee might bee carried from thence, and ſo ſhee returned to her firſt dwelling (no friend could perſwade her to the contrary) but neuer recouered her health; but within a while after died at her owne houſe, acknowledging and bewailing her ſin to her neighbors that viſited her, bearing the ſhame of it meekely and with contentment. This example I thought not to be out of ſeaſon to make mention of, by ſo good an occaſion; to admoniſh ſome to make better reckoning of good neighbourhood, who are too ready vpon a tetch taken, to eaſe themſelues with thinking to recouer their dwellings. Beſides, let vs not be ſecure about this, to dwel we care not where, nor in what places ſoeuer, (becauſe ſome can doe no otherwiſe, but it is laid vpon them to bee yeelded to of them, by meere neceſſity) for though it bee Gods triall to ſome of them, and other haue it, as their iuſt puniſhment, yet make wee account of Chriſtian and peaceable habitation as more then a common benefit. And yet ſuch muſt know alſo, that they muſt keepe themſelues vnſtained among the wicked and ill diſpoſed, and haue no fellowſhip with their vnfruitfull workes of darkeneſſe, but groane vnder their burthen to God, that he may eaſe them of it in time, and ſeeke to ſupply their want in ſome other place by the publike meanes (if they want them) as they may. But let other if they can, be free from the company and neere dwelling of ſuch as are prophane, noiſome, and ſpitefull, enioy their freedome rather, as Saint Paul ſaith of ſeruants: if it be their lot to be ſo, let them be contented, 1. Cor. 7. 21. but if they can be free, let them vſe it rather. And that not onely for the hurt that they may eaſily get there; but let their delight alſo bee in the ſaints which are on the earth, and their fellowſhip with ſuch as excell in vertue, for the manifold good that they may reape by them. But heere an end of Pſal. 16. 3. this matter.
                  Now before I goe from the third verſe, which I haue ioyned with the Verſ. 3. 5. An Obiect.
                      fifth; to ſhew that Iſrael dwelt among the nations, this doubt is to bee anſwered, namely, how it can bee affirmed, that the cities of the Philiſtims are ſaid not to haue been poſſeſſed of the Iſraelites, I meane Ekron, Askelon, and Gaza, but to be at the time heere mentioned, in the Philiſtims hands: ſeeing in the firſt chapter of this booke, verſ. 18. it is ſaid, that they were taken and enioyed with their borders, of Iuda and Simeon in warre made with them. Anſw. To the which it is anſwered, that they were indeed at that time taken by them; but now after that, they were not in the poſſeſſion of them, but for the ſinnes of Iſrael, their ſtrength was abated, and the Philiſtims power was confirmed. Whereby without any difficulty it came to paſſe, that they recouered them againe.
                  By the which it may bee obſerued, what changes and alterations ſin worketh, (God in his prouidence ſo appointing) for by their ſinne this came to Doct. verſ. 3. 5. paſſe. By eating the forbidden fruit, what an alteration was wrought in the eſtate of our firſt parents, that they loſt their honour, their holines, and their

happineſſe in one moment of time, and were brought to the contrary, euen to vtter miſery. And Dauid for that one ſinne with Bathſheba the wife of Vriah, what a breach made he of the moſt ſweet peace of conſcience, which Pſal. 51▪ 8. hee before enioyed, beſide the changes that it wrought in this life, by many puniſhments, and in his poſterity alſo?
                  The like is wel knowne of Sampſon, Salomon, and many other of the Lords people. That we may ſee that he ſpareth not his owne, if they prouoke him, as he ſaith in the Pſalme; If mine owne children breake my lawes, I will puniſh euen 
                     Pſal. 89. 31. 
                     their ſin with the rod, &c. And are they exempt in this age who ſin in the like manner? How are many of them plagued for breaking couenant with God, in committing ſome reprochfull ſinne; as adultery, deceit, ſpite, and reuenge, oppreſſion or wrong, groſſe worldlineſſe, forſaking their conſtant courſe in a godly life, and their zealous worſhipping of him? Theſe, I ſay, and ſuch like iniquities (for ſo cunningly can the diuell handle the matter, that they may all poſſibly faſten vpon them) what changes (thinke wee) doe they bring to paſſe? as ſorrow for ioy, feare in ſtead of godly courage and confidence, ſhame for credit and good report, with many ſuch like? Note. This is foretold in Deuteronomie 28. a chapter to this purpoſe, worthie to Deut. 28. 16. to the end. bee often read ouer, becauſe it containeth a propheſie of all the euils which were inflicted vpon this people in their times, for their apoſtacy and backſliding from God. If a man be abſent but ſeuen yeeres from his acquaintance, Oh, how will they ſay, hee is changed? But this is nothing to the change that ſinne worketh. Yea and not only the forementioned ſinnes, which are groſſe among men, doe worke theſe great changes in their liues; but alſo thoſe which are groſſe in the eyes of the Lord, euen they do the like: as the minding, delighting in, and attempting the forementioned ſinnes, or the like, though it bee but vnder-hand (as they ſay) and not effected nor committed, Note. what alterations doe theſe worke in a man alſo? And beſide their other puniſhments which change and disfigure them, the often buffeting of the conſcience (which is ſome taſte of hell) doth alſo as hornets torment them. What doth idleneſſe of minde worke, and the wandring after other loathſome luſts and deſires? alſo a ſlight following of mens callings, and much more the groſſe neglecting of them (wherein yet faithfully and diligently to be occupied is a piece of Paradiſe) what do theſe (I ſay) and ſuch Note. like bring to paſſe, but vnwelcome changes, decay, and waſting of their eſtate with bondage, and diſguiſedneſſe, which they bring themſelues into, in ſuch wiſe, that they haue not the benefit of the Chriſtian life themſelues, and they are afraid through an euill conſcience, to reproue ſinne in other; and if they ſhould, yet are they not regarded in that which they ſay: for they haue diſhonoured the Lord, and hee hath taken their honour from them, that their words ſhall not bee ſet by: So that I may truly ſay, their ſin hath brought many changes into their liues, and they neuer almoſt recouer the comfort of their former daies, (for I ſpeake of ſuch as haue knowne better) ſince they vnhappily loſt it. I haue but ſhewed in ſome ſort what changes ſinne worketh in Gods people.
                  And ſeeing it is leſſe doubted of, that it doth much more in the liues of them who were neuer well gouerned: I will not make the like diſcourſe of the effects that it worketh in them, but ſhut vp briefly that which I meane to

ſay thereof. And to ſpeake the truth, as ſinne ſwarmeth, rageth, and getteth the vpper hand in them, ſo it maketh ſtrip and waſt where it goeth, and hauoke of all that good is, where any apparance was of it in them, as the vnſeaſonable froſt or Eaſt wind doth of the tender bloſſomes in the ſpring: and Note. the like it doth worke in their eſtates and liues that commit it, by bringing in puniſhment and iudgements of God thicke and three-fold. As by whoredome and riot, the waſting of body and goods; by drunkenneſſe, diſeaſes; by quarrelling and vncharitableneſſe, ſutes; and loſſe of their ſweet peace in neighbourhood; by pride, ſtoutneſſe and ſtatelineſſe a fall; yea ruine and vtter miſery. Examples are infinite: as in the deſtruction of Babel for their inſolency againſt God; the ſwallowing vp of Chorah for his rebellion Numb. 16. 31. Exod. 14. 28. Eccleſ. 11. 9. Luk. 16. may be ſeene: alſo in the drowning of Pharaoh for mocking of God ſo oft: to the young man the threatening of iudgement for his iollity: the rich mans going to hell for taking his pleaſure heere: in all theſe (I ſay) with a great number more, this is to bee ſeene, what woe ſinne hath wrought to the committers of it: and it would much more in Scripture and experience at this day appeare, if men were not wittingly blind in beholding it; as alſo but that God hath had a regard to maintaine and preſerue ſociety among men; for which cauſe, many wicked ones are ſpared for a time. And this be ſaid of the changes that ſinne worketh, which I haue ſaid by occaſion of the Iſraelites loſing and yeelding againe the cities of the Philiſtims, with the priuiledges thereto belonging, into their hands becauſe of their ſinne.
                  Whereas it was ſaid before, verſ. 1. and 4. that thoſe nations were left to Verſ 6. The ſenſe.
                      try Iſrael, whether they would obey the commandements of the Lord; here it is ſet downe how they carried themſelues in the triall: namely, that they made marriages with them, and ſerued their gods; they had no power to reſiſt and doe otherwiſe. And by this we may ſee, with what danger wee liue among Idolaters and wicked men: for in that it is ſaid heere, that they ioyned Doct. in marriage together, which was ſpecially forbidden them in Deuteronomie, it is that which the Lord did foreſay would come to paſſe thereby. Deut. 7. 3. 4. And he forbad them ſuch mariages principally for this cauſe, ſeeing he foreſaw and knew that by vnequall matching together, his worſhip would bee greatly impaired, if not turned into the contrary. For godly and religious perſons are often alienated by the parties contrarily minded vnto them, from the true God; as in Salomons example (ſo wiſe a man) is to bee ſeene: who was exceedingly corrupted, and builded places for ſtrange Gods to worſhip them in, being inticed thereto by ſtrange women, whom he loued. And our age hath ſuſtained moſt grieuous ſhipwracke of conſcience and goodneſſe, in that many therein haue ioyned in marriage with Papiſts, and other prophane helliſh Atheiſts: For when they haue by their familiarity together, made marriages with them; what remaineth, but that they, as theſe did heere, doe turne to their religion alſo, and ſerue in the manner that they doe? But of this before, chap. 2. verſ. 2.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON VPON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     VERS. 7. So the children of Iſrael did wickedly in the fight of the Lord, and forgat the Lord their God, and ſerued Baalim and Aſheroth.
                     
                     8. Therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled againſt Iſrael; and he ſold them into the hand of Cuſhan riſhathaim King of Aram-nabaraim, and the children of Iſrael ſerued Cuſhan-riſhathaim eight yeeres.
                     
                     9. And when the children of Iſrael cried vnto the Lord, the Lord ſtirred vp a ſauiour to the children of Iſrael, and he ſaued them, euen Othniel the ſonne of Kenaz Calebs younger brother.
                     
                     10. And the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon him, and hee iudged Iſrael, and went out to warre; and the Lord deliuered Cuſhan riſhathaim King of Aram into his hand, and his hand preuailed againſt Cuſhan-riſhathaim.
                     
                     11. So the land had reſt fortie yeeres, and Othniel the ſonne of Kenaz died.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOw I hauing ſhewed how God tried his by people dwelling among the idolatrous nations, what they would do, and we hauing ſeene alſo what they did, to wit, that they made marriages with them, and ſerued their gods, both which haue bin ſet downe in the firſt part of this chapter: I will now proceed to the ſecond part, and come to the three examples therein ſet downe by the holy Ghoſt; and heerein I will ſpeake chiefly of theſe things therein, to wit, of the ſinne, puniſhment, repentance and deliuerance of the people, and how they turned away againe from the Lord afterwards. The firſt example is to the twelfth verſe: the ſecond to the 31. verſe: the third, to the end. The firſt hath theſe foure things to bee conſidered; one is the peoples reuolting from God, in this verſe: another, the puniſhment brought vpon them for it in the eighth verſe: the third, the peoples crying to God vnder it, verſ. 9: and the fourth, the Lords ſending helpe in the reſt, vnto the 12. verſe; with the fruit that followed.
                  Their ſinne is ſet downe, firſt generally, that they did euill in the ſight of the Lord; and then more particularly, that they forgot him, and fell to Idolatry. Heere I giue this watchword to the reader, that ſeeing I ſhall in this booke often meet with things that I haue already ſpoken of, at leaſt, that there are diuerſe things mentioned oft and ſundry times heerein; therefore I will not goe ouer them againe, as oft as I meete with them, being the ſame

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
ſpecially in the ſame manner, which were but a wearying of the reader with repeating one thing oft: but I will note and chiefly follow ſuch things, as beſide them are occaſioned there. All the things in this verſe are ſuch: I will therefore doe as I haue ſaid, and referre the reader for the reſt, to that which hath been ſaid of them before. Their ſinne ſet downe in generall, that they durſt offend God ſecretly, and do that which was euill in his ſight: and that they forgot the Lord, and remembred not his kindneſſe, and many benefits; and their Idolatry and worſhipping the gods of the nations, which aroſe of the two former: theſe things (I ſay) duly conſidered of vs, do teach this worthie point; to wit, how men breake out into groſſe and foule ſinnes, by the forgetting of Gods goodneſſe toward them, and the taking of boldneſſe to ſinne againſt him, in doing that which is any way euill in his eyes. And ſo by the contrary; the direct way to liue godly, and to bee free from reprochfull ſinnes, is to feare to do any thing amiſſe in the ſight of the Lord in ſecret, and to keepe in mind his benefits, by daily recording them with Note. feruent and hearty thankes. For if the child be drawne to a naturall loue and ioying in the parents, and ſo to bee afraid to diſpleaſe them, ſeeing they make much of it, and giue it all good things: what maruell is it if the Lords benefits, which are renued vpon vs euery morning, being duly recorded of vs, ſhould draw vs to delight in him, and make our ſongs of him; alſo that we Lam. 3. 23. being ready to doe his will, and afraid to offend him in ſecret, what maruell (I ſay) if we ſhould abhore to diſhonour him openly? And if elder children endued with grace, will be faithfull to their parents in their abſence, and ſo ſhunne boldneſſe in offending them in preſence: who doubteth, but that if we feare to offend our God in ſecret, we ſhall ſhunne open and greater offences alſo? So by the contrary this is cleere, that if we grow to this point, that we dare doe that which is euill in Gods eyes, and to forget him, and his vnſpeakeable kindneſſe, though wee commit not by and by the groſeſt and moſt odius things, yet it will not belong before wee breake out euen groſly, wax bold alſo, and worke that which is odious in the ſight of men.
                  Whereas we ought euer to haue before vs Gods bounty and kindneſſe in ſuch wiſe, that they may be barres in our waies, to keepe vs euen from ſmal offences, that ſo the groſer ſinnes may much more bee kept from vs. And ſo Dauid affirmeth, that if he had not been bold to ſinne againſt God in ſecret, he had neuer broke out ſhamefully before men. We know the diuell is called Pſal. 51. 4. a ſerpent; which word ſignifieth properly a creeper, becauſe his property Gen. 3. 1. is, by little and little creepe and winde into vs, to withdraw our hearts Note. from vprightneſſe and conſtancy therein; alſo to cauſe that Gods benefits ſhall be more meanely accounted off of vs: and then boldneſſe in ſinne will creepe vpon vs eaſily, and after that wee ſhall not feare the attempting of great and grieuous ſinnes alſo. It is our wiſedome therefore to conſider Gods goodneſſe to bee ſo great, and the ſame ſo continued to vs daily (as who ſhall but meanely obſerue and weigh the ſame, but he muſt needs confeſſe as much) that we ſhould be afraid and aſhamed to offend and diſpleaſe him, through negligence much more by forgetting ourſelues in both to ſin openly and wilfully. This be ſaid of their ſinne. The puniſhment followes.
                  For this the Lord was ſore diſpleaſed with them, and what maruell? ſo Verſ. 8. The ſenſe.
                      many ſinnes being wrapped vp together, as we haue heard. And hee raiſed

vp againſt them this King of Aram heere named, who held them in bondage eight yeeres. Heere it plainly appeareth, that when God is prouoked, hee will bee reuenged: (as wee haue ſeene in the former chapter) and not Doct. winke at vs, as we are giuen to thinke. And this is not a matter that falles out now and then (as we ſay) but ordinarily, and that vpon countries, townes, families, as well as perſons, accordingly as the occaſion is offered. And yet Pſal. 50. 21. he ſheweth it not alwaies immediately; as wee ſee in deferring his puniſhment to the old world an hundred and twentie yeeres, after he was diſpleaſed with them. So he ſent a famine in Dauids time on the Iſraelites, for ſinne Gen. 6. 3. committed before by Saul, in ſlaying the Gibeonites. But though he ſometime deferre, it is to bring the offenders to repentance, as the Aopſtle ſaith to Rom. 2. 4. the Romans. And if that come not, he wil in deferring, doe as he that draweth his bow deepely, that the ſtroke may be the more deadly. And yet oftentimes he deferreth not, as in Corah, Ananias, and Saphira, and others is to bee ſeene. And when men commit knowne ſinnes, they may make their reckoning, that one of theſe waies God will meet with them early or late, the leaſt of them both will be deadly and vnwelcome.
                  Now then the caſe ſtanding thus, and wee knowing how vnwelcome and weariſome his puniſhments are; we ſee what we haue to doe; that is to ſay, to beware that wee prouoke not God, by following the deuices and deſires of our wicked hearts, and ſo grow hardened through the deceitfulneſſe of ſinne. Oh therefore that wee ſhould be ſo bold and ready to offend, who yet blanke ſo ſoone, and are ſo ſore diſmaid, yea when there ſhall but ſome ſmall correction be laid vpon vs! Oh that neither examples of other, nor our Note. owne experience can make vs wiſe to preuent and auoid ſo many and great iudgements, as are drawne vpon vs daily by needleſſe follie, or wilfull offending! And ſecondly, if we haue already falen, what ſhould bee more looked after, then ſpeedily to remember from whence we bee fallen, and to caſt vp our gorge, and repent, leſt the Lord come vpon vs vnprouided. And as for ſuch as at the hearing of this dare obiect againe, that they beleeue that no ſuch thing ſhall befall them: for they haue (they ſay) done as much as I ſpeake of, and yet they are ſafe to this houre, and haue eſcaped puniſhment: I ſay of them, what haue I to doe with them? I tremble to heare of their brutiſh and bold inſencibleneſſe. They are as one aſleepe in the maſt of a ſhip in great danger, but they feare nothing: and as one neare death by ſickneſſe, but being ſenſeleſſe, feeleth no paine; and as Naball a groſſe ſinner, but regarded nothing that was ſaid to him, till he knew he muſt die, and then he was as a ſtone or or blocke, onely breathing. The puniſhment of ſuch as boaſt, that they are ſafe for all their ſinning, and haue eſcaped all danger, puniſhment, (although it be not ſeene of many, nor of themſelues) is yet far more grieuous then if it were ſeene with eyes, that it is the ſpirit of ſlumber, or an hardened heart, which is of all other the greateſt puniſhment.
                  Thus we haue heard that God was diſpleaſed with them; and therefore 
                        Another point in this verſ. 8. The ſenſe.
                      vengeance could not be farre off, but muſt follow, and now it is ſhewed in what manner that was executed. Gods puniſhing them at this time, was eight yeers embondaging them vnder an heathen and idolatrous King, who might command them what he would, and lay vpon them burthens at his pleaſure. And what the curteſie of ſtrangers was, wee may ſee in Deuteronomy;

namely ſuch, as that they ſhould not regard the perſon of the old, Deut. 28. 50. nor haue compaſſion on the young: and ſuch courteſie as Benhadad ſhewed to Ahab, and yet it was before hee was in bondage to him, and when hee did but beſiege him and his chiefe city, and had onely ſome likelihood to ſubdue him, which hope of his, yet was fruſtrated alſo. For this it was, & thus he ſent him word: Thy ſiluer and thy gold is mine, thy women and thy faire children 
                     1. King. 20. 6. 
                     are mine: Or elſe I will ſend my ſeruants to thee by to morrow this time, & they ſhall ſearch thy houſe, and the houſes of thy ſeruants, and whatſoeuer is pleaſant in thine eyes, they ſhall take it in their hands and bring it away. This was the courteſie which Benhadad ſhewed, when he was but in beſieging Iſrael: but theſe were heere ſubdued to Cuſhan-riſhathaim, and already in his hands, yea and that for eight yeeres, which time vnder ſuch bondage was (we may be ſure) thought a long time.
                  Now we that heare it may iudge, whether they paied not deare for their liberties, that they tooke in ſinning: the chiefe of the which was Idolatry. 
                        Doct. 2. There is no doubt, (conſidering that which heere we reade) but that the Idolatry, and other ſinne which was ſo pleaſant to them in their proſperity, was as bitter to them now in their bondage which it brought them into, neither could it pluck them out of it. But by this let vs learne, what woe and miſery men ſuſtaine and bring vpon themſelues for a little ſtolne liberty, and to ſpeake as the truth is, onely for hauing their will: but let none looke to finde ſinne afterward, to be, as while it is in committing. Eight yeeres ſore bondage, with the diſcommodities and irkſomeneſſe that accompany it, for a little liberty to liue at their pleaſure? And what excellencie or ſuperabounding ſweetneſſe (thinke wee) and delight might that be which coſt them ſo deare, and which they enioyed ſo ſhort a time? Alas it was but the pleaſing of their humour in falling downe before a ſtocke or aſtone. And ſuch are their delights at this day; tranſitorie, vaine, and ſoone flitting away, Note. if not filthy alſo; for which they pay ſo deare, that they debarre themſelues of all ſound and true comfort for them heere, that I ſay nothing how they prouide for themſelues hereafter, beſide other annoyances that they meete withall. Sodome and Gomer for a whole city, Zimry and Cosby for particular Gen. 19. 24. perſons, the former to bee deſtroyed with fire and brimſtone for their filthy pleaſures; the latter to be thruſt thorough in their tent, as they were about Numb. 25. 8. their vncleanneſſe. What was their gaine, if it be laid with their loſſe? and for them that haue been thought to haue ſped better in their matches by the like doings, they cannot be reckoned vp, nor found in the Scriptures, nor yet in experience. So that we might be wiſe, if we did well weigh it, to auoide the ſinne, that ſo we might auoid the puniſhment alſo.
                  The third thing noted in this firſt example of this people, is their ſeeking Verſ. 9. to God; and that in faith and repentance. For when ſorrow pinched them by reaſon of their grieuous bondage, and they ſaw all helpe of man failed them, they fled to God, acknowledging, that they had now proued by wofull experience, that the worſhipping of ſtrange gods had done them little good, my meaning is, they had thereby, and by their other ſinnes, brought thoſe calamities vpon themſelues. And this their crying to God, was not the action of one man, or family, but of the body of the people in generall: and ſome among them (no doubt) did it ſoundly and vnfainedly: & therefore

they repented, though it bee not ſo expreſly ſet downe, as in ſome places; and ſo we muſt vnderſtand this that is ſaid of them heere. It is laid out by this word crying, as the holy Ghoſt in the firſt of Samuel, 7. doth ſet down 1. Sam. 7. 1. the repentance of the people after the like manner; namely, by their lamenting after God; and in other places the ſame is done either by ſome ſigne, or by ſome fruit of it; ſo heere by crying. As if it ſhould be ſaid, that by this they teſtified their ſorrow for diſpleaſing God, their beleeuing of pardon, purpoſe of amendment, and their feruent prayer and confeſſion of their ſin, as all theſe are required by the Lord in true repentance, in Hoſea, 14. And Hoſ. 14. 2. 3. this is the fruit of calamity in the elect, or rather of Gods goodneſſe towards them, whereby he calleth them to himſelfe by affliction.
                  This place, though briefly, yet pithily, teacheth all Gods people what to doe, when they haue prouoked God to afflict them for their ſinnes: and that is this; they ſhould after the thinking vpon both, ſeriouſly cry vnto God, and call vpon him aſſoone as they ſhall bee able; and this is to draw neare to him, as the people in Iames are directed to doe. And this I teach by Iam. 4. 7. ſo good occaſion heere offered, becauſe though men bee for the moſt part, ſecure and careleſſe; yet if their ſinnes bee once brought to mind, and laid before them in any deepe and dreadfull manner; they are in another extremity, as in feare and terrour, doubting that God will not heare them though they pray: for this is their diſpoſition in that time through tentation, when they haue prouoked God, to bee alienated and turned from him by dreadfull feare and vnbeliefe; to whom they were wont while they walked vprightly to haue acceſſe by prayer before. Adam, after his ſinne, was Gen. 3. afraid of Gods voice, (wherein yet before he reioyced) and did hide himſelfe in the thicket for feare of it. So Dauid cryeth and complaineth when Pſal. 119. 25. hee felt his ſinne, that his ſoule cleaued to the duſt; meaning that for very griefe hee was almoſt brought to the graue; and againe, that hee was in Pſal. 130. 1. the depth of trouble, as not ſeeing for the time how to get out of it. This anguiſh he felt in his ſoule, though he was deare in the eyes of the Lord. And the 51. Pſalme teſtifieth how hee was wrapt in ſorrow, as if his bones had been broken, thinking for the time, that hee had loſt all grace of the ſpirit. Pſal. 51. 8. And no leſſe cleerely doth this appeare in Ionas, after that the Lord had purſued him for his ſinne, when in the bellie of the fiſh he cried thus: I ſaid, I Ionas 2. 4. am caſt away out of thy ſight, the waters compaſſed mee about vnto the ſoule. So I may ſay of Gods beſt ſeruants, when they haue ſeene the horror of his wrath againſt them, for ſome ſinne that wounded them, they haue been diſmaied, and almoſt paſt hope, and brought to fainting for the time. And by this wee may ſee, that the ſecure and careleſſe people who (wee know are not behinde other in ſinning, are in a contrary extremity. But to returne to the other, if Gods ſeruants apprehend his wrath, and then fal into the tentation of the diuell, who can cunningly deceiue them, in making it ſeeme greater then it is, to be kindled againſt them, they are caſt downe, as it were with a deadly blow: and thus (I ſay doe all in that caſe, till God put away feare from them. And ſeeing theſe two are contrary; to wit, to bee turned from God by feare and vnbeliefe, and to returne and come home neare vnto him againe by faith; and ſeeing they meet ſo neare together in one perſon, ſo that one of them oft times immediately ſucceedeth the other;

therefore all poſſible ſpeed and care is to bee vſed, that when feare, through the accuſation of the conſcience taketh place, faith ſhould be at hand to expell and ouercome it. But againe to obiect further, it is ſaid, God heareth not 
                     Ioh. 9. 31. 
                     ſinners, and therefore hee will not (they ſay) heare them crying vnto them. But to this I anſwere, that when men repent, he heareth them, as wee ſee in 2. Sam. 12. 13. 
                     Dauid, Peter, and other. And ſuch need not be diſcouraged from comming to him, but take hope aſſuredly that hee will heare them. Indeed they that dare not come and humble themſelues to him after their offence, and ſo ſtand firme in their hearts; or other that doe call vpon him, yet for all that doe it in ſhew rather then in faith and repentance, they (I ſay) doe all one, as if they did not cry to God at all. They therefore who haue learned that God will certainely ſmite and puniſh, if they ſinne; let them alſo learne, what they muſt doe, and how they muſt ſeeke to the Lord when hee puniſheth, as theſe men did heere, taking heed of the extremities before mentioned. If they deſire to turne away Gods wrath from them; then cry they to him alſo in ſeeing their ſinne, and laying it neare their hearts; and if they relent and turne from it, let them beleeue that his anger is alſo turned away from them, they vnfainedly purpoſing amendment of life, and looking duly to it afterwards: but more happie are they who looke warily about them, that they prouoke him not at all, but dutifully and conſtantly hold on their Chriſtian courſe. And this of their crying to God, the third point.
                  The fourth thing in this firſt example now followeth; to wit, of their deliuerance, 
                        Doct. 2. in this and the next two verſes: wherein conſider theſe foure things: firſt, God raiſed them vp Othniel to be their deliuerer: then ſecondly, how he furniſhed him thereto: and thirdly, how hee gaue his aduerſary into his hands: and fourthly, what followed thereof. Othniel is deſcribed heere to be the ſame man, of whom wee heard in the firſt chapter, and who won the city Debir. He is called a ſauiour, becauſe he ſaued Iſrael out of the Iudg. 1. 18. hands of their great aduerſary Cuſhan, that had held them long in bondage: by which deliuerance they had good teſtimony, that Gods diſpleaſure was turned away from them. The Lords thus ſpeedy turning vnto them vpon their repentance, is marueilous, but yet agreeable to that which is ſpoken of him in the Scripture; namely, that hee is ſlow to wrath, and very readie to forgiue. And it is to teach vs that, which wee are hardly brought to beleeue, Ioel 2. 12. namely, that he is moſt ready to remit and to remoue his puniſhments, yea when we haue prouoked him thereto by our ſins, if it repent vs. When Dauid confeſſed his ſin, the Prophet Nathan being ſent of God to moue him to repentance, and vnderſtood by his confeſſion, that he did ſo; anſwered him immediately, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. So the poſterity of this people heere 2. Sam. 12. mentioned, when God had ſent vpon them a ſtrange iudgement in their wheat harueſt, euen thunder and raine, that they might thereby perceiue 1. Sam. 12. 19. 20. and ſee, that their wickedneſſe was great in asking a King, contrary to Gods commandement, who had forbidden them ſo to doe: and the people had giuen teſtimony of their repentance, in deſiring Samuel to pray for them, and confeſſing that ſinne in asking a King, and their other ſinnes; hee anſwered; Feare not, the Lord will not forſake his people for his great names ſake, becauſe 
                     1. Sam. 12. 22. 
                     it hath pleaſed the Lord to make you his people, and I will not ceaſe to pray for you, but I will ſhew you the good and right way.
                  
                  
                     
And the whole Scripture throughout is full of examples, that tend to the ſame end. So that it may boldly and truly bee ſaid, the Lord is gracious, and of great kindleſſe, and repenteth him of the euill that hee had brought vpon his. So that it remaines, that this heauenly Scripture lie not by vs vnoccupied, Exod. 34. 6. and without fruit and vſe. But ſeeing wee doe oft forget the Lord, and thereby doe that which is euill in his eyes (oh fickle and inconſtant people that we are) wee ſhould not ſleepe in our ſinne, but repaire to this remedie to rend our hearts rather then our garments, and neuer to thinke our ſelues Ioel 2. 13. well till we haue recouered our loſſe, and by faith, ſee that wee are receiued into fauour with him againe; for hee waiteth for this our humiliation, and it ſhall neuer come before him in vaine and be fruſtrate, but he will moſt certainly accept of it, and as for vs we ought neuer to be quiet, till wee doe ſo. And wonderfull it is, and to our great detriment, that the way being ſo open to Gods mercy, and louing kindneſſe, euen to them that ſtand in need of it while they ſmart for their prouocations of him, it is (I ſay) to bee wondred at, that ſo few take benefit by it, yea and that aſſoone as they haue offended, Note. they haſt not to returne to him againe, but wander in vnbeleefe, and hardneſſe of heart, till they bee driuen to it by meere neceſſity to bow and cry vnto God.
                  And the more wee bewray our blockiſhneſſe herein, in that wee bee ſo hardly brought vpon our knees, when we haue ſinned againſt God, wee are to know (for I thought it meet to vtter it) that there are no knots nor difficulties in this doctrine, namely, that God will be found when hee is ſought vnto, and will heare when he is prayed to. It is a moſt cleere and well approued truth, and none faile of helpe, but ſuch as doe not either heartily ſeeke it, if they know how, or elſe ſuch as are ignorant how to doe it. And that which I haue ſaid of repenting and returning to God, when wee ſee ſome ſpeciall fault committed, either by negligence or wilfulneſſe; to wit, that we ſhould in ſolemne manner thus cry vnto God, as we haue been taught, euen ſo we ought to doe, though there be no apparant wilfulneſſe ſeene, in our daily ſlips and infirmities, to offer vp to God daily our ſutable repentance for the ſame, that ſo we may bee no time, or not long in the leaſt manner eſtranged, no, nor abſent from God, but continually goe in and out before him through the day, and ſo all our life long, which is our Paradiſe and felicity in this world. And this be ſaid of the firſt, of the three examples, as occaſion hath been offered, to the tenth verſe.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE NINETEENTH SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               WE haue heard how God raiſed vp a ſauiour or deliuerer to the people of Iſrael when they cried to him in Verſ. 10. their oppreſſion, euen Othniel: now it is ſhewed, how he fitted and furniſhed him for ſo great a worke. And that was thus: Othniel being a priuate man, and one of the meaneſt of his fathers houſe, only ſomwhat enriched by his marrying of Ackſah, Calebs daughter, and a man of ſome courage, was the perſon whom the Lord ſtirred vp for this purpoſe. And he being further off then many other from ability hereunto, it is ſaid, that the Lord gaue him his ſpirit, meaning the fruits of his ſpirit; as knowledge and iudgement to vnderſtand the matters of God, and his will; which are things moſt requiſite for a gouernour, and he gaue him alſo encreaſe of courage, ſtrength and wiſedome for warre, and beſides them all, certified him by his ſpirit that he was called of God to ſuch a ſeruice. Now all things being thus appointed by God, he, as it is ſaid heere, iudged Iſrael, that is, hee executed his office, in taking vpon him the protection of his people; wherein the Lord being with him, hee reſcued them out of bondage to liberty againe, and gouerned them, and reſtored the pure worſhip of God among them: and more particularly concerning the ſubduing of the aduerſary of Iſrael, it is ſaid, that the Lord ſtrengthened him againſt him, that Cuſhan-ruſhathaim I meane, and gaue him into his hands.
            And this cleerely teacheth vs, that all gifts of the ſpirit, and all excellent Doct. effects therof, they are none of ours, they are the Lords, he giueth and diſtributeth them at his pleaſure, as we ſee heere, that it was the ſpirit of the Lord that came vpon Othniel, whereby hee brought to paſſe the great things that he did. And whatſoeuer is of any note in man for price and exceliency, it is all of God, and commeth from his meere bounty. Alas there is no bird ſtripped Note. of her feathers more bare and naked, then man in himſelfe, is void of goodneſſe: for what hath he that he hath not receiued? Inſomuch as all Iam. 1. 17. that he hath to glory of is his ſinne. A moſt holy and approued truth, which giueth God his due, and layeth out man in his colours, that hee is nothing elſe, if her robbe not God of his honour, and pranke not vp himſelfe in his gifts, he is nothing elſe (I ſay) but naked, poore, and a mirrour of miſery. Saul the King of Iſrael, when he wrought ſo great a deliuerance for Iſrael againſt the Ammonites: Moſes and Ioſhua in the mighty preuailing for them againſt the Heathen nations, and that in ſpite of all their teeth, who were the

proudeſt of them; yea and Salomon in all his royalties, what had they to commend & ſet out themſelues withall, but the gifts which God furniſhed them with? How doe numbers iet vp and downe, vaunting themſelues, who hauing ſome gifts giuen them of God, but to a farre other end then they vſe them for, namely to honour him, and not themſelues; doe neuer thinke of any ſuch matter, but dare more boldly ſin againſt him, then otherwiſe they durſt doe, and all becauſe hee hath beſtowed ſome gifts vpon them, as perſonage, beautie, ſtrength, wealth; euen as one ſhould ſtrippe a poore body out of his ragges, and put coſtly and comely apparel vpon him.
            For though men be but earth and wormes meate, yet how doe they ſet vp themſelues, ſome for their high aduancement, ſome for their riches, which yet are but borrowed; and other for their painted ſheath, till they take all honour (that they can) from God? yea as if they were petty Gods themſelues, and he onely to bee called God of them. Oh admirable pride, blindneſſe, and forgetfulnes in fleſh! and oh as great patience and long ſuffering in God, that he can beare it at their hands! And yet for all that I haue ſaid I denie not, but hee can afford them theſe his gifts and farre greater, if they could giue him his due thereby, and vſe them to ſet forth his goodneſſe by them, as were meete. The ſame I might ſay of learning, and all other gifts of God, they are the Lords, and beſtowed at his pleaſure, not to puffe them vp that haue them, but that in loue and humility they ſhould vſe them for 1. Cor. 13. 1. the good of others. And much more then his ſupernaturall gifts of the ſpirit, as godly zeale, care to pleaſe God, and ſuch like ought to be vſed to the ſame ends.
            Now to proceed, when God had giuen his ſpirit to Othniel, it is ſaid, Hee 
               Point 2. 
               iudged Iſrael; that is, he did as a valiant captaine, pull them out of ſeruitude, and take the yoke of bondage from their necks, and reſtore to them the true worſhip of God, and gouerne them, and ſo the land had reſt. All this, with ſuch like befell them, when Gods anger was turned away from them, at the repentance of the people. In their bondage and miſery, who would haue ſaid, that it could eaſily, or in ſhort time haue been remoued? eſpecially, that ſuch a change might haue been ſeene? But this teacheth, that when Gods 
                  Doct. 2. anger is remoued from a people or perſon, all things goe well there, puniſhments are turned into bleſſings, and great heauineſſe into ioy and comfort. Euen as a cloudie, darke, and tempeſtuous day is forgotten, when the cleare and faire ſunſhine ouerſpreadeth and beautifieth the earth: and like as when A ſimile two great men who by their ſtrife and contention diſquieted all, are againe made friends, and reconciled; for then the people in that towne reioyce, and hold vp their countenance. So it is ſaid heere of this people, that they hauing been brought into ſuch extremity for eight yeeres, God ſent this Othniel a deliuerer and a Iudge, to whom he gaue courage and wiſedome, ſo that he brought their enemies into ſubiection, and the people had reſt and deliuerance. By all theſe ſignes of his fauour, God declared that his anger was remoued. And euen ſo, we ſhall ſee good daies, if we take heed that God be not prouoked to anger by vs: and though his anger be kindled, yet if we cry and grone to him vnder our burthen, lift vp our hearts and beleeue that he will be mercifull vnto vs, (as moſt certainly he will) and turne away his wrath and diſpleaſure from vs: for in his fauour is life, and when his louing

countenance ſhineth vpon vs, all other things ſhall turne to vs for the beſt. And the Lord doth either remoue outward puniſhments from vs, or elſe vphold vs ſo with his grace to beare them patiently and meekely, that they ſhall be no burthens, but matter of comfort vnto vs. Oh that we ſhould not Note. be ſo wiſe as to preuent this one thing, namely, that the wrath of God might be kept from our ſoules, while the body ſhall want no looking to, that I ſay no more, yea and the meaneſt haue both care and skill, when the tempeſtuous and vnſeaſonable weather commeth, to ſhroud themſelues from it, and beware that it doe not annoy them.
            But further heere, in that both eſtates of this people are ſet downe together, as their bondage with their freedome, their reſt with their trouble, the time of the one, with the time of the other; the holy Ghoſt (I ſay) in ſetting downe both together, doth teach vs to conſider of both, in the like caſe, the one as well as the other, and by the grieuouſneſſe of the calamity to meditate thus: Oh what ſhould wee haue done, if wee had ſo long continued in Note. the eſtate that they were in; wee, I ſay, who by the mercy of God haue enioyed much peace, with plenty of commodities: if enemies euen ſtrangers had brought vs into ſubiection to them, how ſhould we haue borne the burthen? So likewiſe by our deliuerance from them, wee ſhould meditate of Gods goodneſſe to vs after trouble, and from enemies, and to bethinke vs, (which too ſeldome is done of vs) what a great fauour of God it is vnto vs, when paine, penurie, or the like are taken from vs, and to prize the ſame at an high reckoning. And he that deſireth to ſtirre vp himſelfe to true thankfulneſſe to God for ſuch a change and deliuerance will doe thus, as hee ſeeth good cauſe, and hee ſhall in beſt manner performe it, by ſuppoſing in our A Simile. beſt eſtate, that the contrary would be very diſtaſtfull, painfull, and irkſome vnto vs, and yet might haue oppreſſed vs, which yet being through his exceeding goodneſſe paſſed away from vs, behold now light and ioy is come in the place of it. For as the light is the more eſteemed by our being in the darke; and faire weather is the more welcome to vs, after tempeſtuous and vnſeaſonable times: euen ſo is the conſidering of ſore troubles lately oppreſſing vs, an eſpeciall meane to bring proſperity into an high reckoning with vs; which a man would ſay, wee had need to doe, who ſhall obſerue, how ſoone we make it a common thing, and little worth, or rather abuſe it to our owne great hurt and detriment.
            Concerning the time of the peoples reſt vnder Othniel, euen fortie yeers, Verſ. 11. I take it to be the true meaning of the ſtory, and agreeable to the originall, howſoeuer the interpreters differ about it, the beſt tranſlation maketh for it. But in the ſtory of Ehud, verſ. 30. more (if God will) ſhall be ſaid of it, where the vſe of it ſhall be alſo added. So Othniel hauing ſerued his time, was gathered to his fathers, as we are to looke and waite for the ſame, after the like ſeruice in our places. And this of the firſt example of the three before mentioned.
            
               Verſ. 12. Then the children of Iſrael againe committed wickedneſſe in the ſight of the Lord; and the Lord ſtrengthened Eglon King of Moab againſt Iſrael, becauſe they had committed wickedneſſe before the Lord.
               
               13. And he gathered vnto him the children of Ammon, and Amalek, and went and ſmote Iſrael, and they poſſeſſed the city of Palme trees
               
               
                  
14. So the children of Iſrael ſerued Eglon King of Moab eighteene yeeres.
               
            
            Now followeth the ſecond: The ſumme whereof is this, that the people verſ. 12. The ſumme and parts 4 to the 31. verſe.
                of Iſrael prouoked God to anger againe by their ſinnes, when Othniel was dead. And God ſtrengthened the King of Moab againſt them, with other moſt wicked confederates; who oppreſſing them ſore a long time, they cried to the Lord as they had done before, and hee ſtirred vp another ſauiour, one Ehud, who deliuered them out of their grieuous bondage. According to this briefe laying out of the ſtory, the parts may be diſcerned to be foure, as in the former. Which being eaſie to bee perceiued, I will not ſtand to ſet them downe, but ſpeake of them as they lie in order.
            The firſt thing heere to be noted, is, that the people againe wrought euill Doct. verſ. 12. in the ſight of the Lord, as they had done before. And this ſhewes that they broke out further then they did, while Othniel liued, or elſe nothing ſhould haue been ſaid more then before in his daies, during whoſe time though they be not commended, yet neither are they diſcommended. Therefore to ſay nothing of either, ſeeing I haue no ground for it, let that be obſerued whereof the text giueth iuſt occaſion how prone and ready we are to break out, aſſoone as we haue any opportunity. Oh the fleſh is ſoone wearie of pending in. While we are well fenced againſt falles by good teaching and company, I muſt needs ſay, all is much the better with vs, and we be the eaſilier kept from great offences. Heere in this land eſpecially, where wee haue the purity of the Goſpel, and of the true worſhip of God eſtabliſhed among vs, (for it is groſſe indeed to fall from a good courſe, while that is preſent) and alſo while godly Magiſtrates are with vs to encourage vs, as it was with them while Othniel liued. But for all this, (as groſſe as it is) when men will Note. let looſe themſelues with the times to the ſinnes thereof, and ſuch helpes faile them, as I haue ſpoken of, what care ſoeuer hath been among them of honouring God in former times, they are ſoone carried away, euery man as he is diſpoſed, by his owne corruption one to ſome ſinne, and another to another. And yet where all the forementioned outward helpes be, we being eaſily brought to make common things of them, the falſe heart will be ready to breake out, and faſten delight in ſome ſinfull pleaſure or other, if it be not ſtrongly held in by grace, as by a bridle.
            Whereas we ſhould rather grow vp ſtedfaſt in our hope, curbing vp our vnmortified affections, that ſo we might be vnoffenſiue in our Chriſtian courſe, and the better be able to helpe to ſhelter other weake brethren from being ouercome and led away by ſtrong tentations, rather then our ſelues (who haue taſted how good and bountifull the Lord is) to be plunged into the depth of them, by what occaſions ſoeuer to their great offence. I haue oft lamented, and ſtill doe, the lamentable caſe, and wofull eſtate of ſuch, who are eaſily and readily deceiued with the baits of ſinne, when I ſee to what ſhamefull ſhiftings and bondage they bring themſelues, by their yeelding thereto, who might haue walked at great liberty toward God, and with much comfort in their life. But we muſt confeſſe, that this ſhould be much better done on euery ſide, if diligent teaching were ioyned with good example in the chiefe, to giue light and encouragement to the meaner ſort, and godly Magiſtrates, according to their duties, encouraging the good, and ready to keepe vnder the bad and diſobedient. But oh that many of both

ſorts were not diſcouragers. And yet without reſpect thereof, euery particular perſon ſhould looke to his owne waies, not promiſing himſelfe ſuch helpes in this euill world to be euer at hand. This be ſaid of the peoples prouoking of God againe, and of their breaking out, after the death of Othniel. Of other things which might be noted heere, hauing already been ſpoken of, I will forbeare to ſay any more, both in this place, and throughout the booke.
            The puniſhment which God inflicted vpon the people for their renued 
                  The ſecond point in verſ. 12. The ſenſe.
                ſinnes, which is the ſecond thing in this example, followeth in this and the next two verſes: and it was this; that the King of Moab, and other who aſſiſted him, held them in bondage eighteene yeeres; and tooke Iericho, which was called the city of Palme trees, and ſet aide there, the more to oppreſſe Iſrael, ſeeing it was by the paſſage ouer Iordan toward Moab. Where we ſee againe, that if we ſhall waxe bold to ſinne againſt the Lord, hee will ſmite, as we haue heard, come it ſooner, or come it later. But in that hee is ſaid here to ſtrengthen Moab, and as it were to furniſh him againſt his owne people (the wicked Idolaters againſt his true worſhippers) onely for breaking forth now at this time heere mentioned, to offend the Lord more then commonly; it may ſeeme ſomewhat ſtrange. For theſe Ammonites and Amalekites were moſt vile enemies of God, and groſſe Idolaters. But he will Doct. haue vs to know this, that he doth often puniſh his owne people, by them that are worſe then they. And as we ſee he ſendeth theſe curſed nations vpon them, ſo we need not doubt but that hee can and will ſend the very Papiſts, (as little as many looſe Proteſtants feare it) to vexe vs, if we prouoke him, euen as he hath done heretofore, when the ſinne of men, and their knowledge was leſſer then now it is. And ſo the Lord ſpeaketh in Deuteronomie, Becauſe ye haue prouoked me by that which is no God, I will prouoke you by 
               Deut. 32. 21. 
               them, whom ye haue deſpiſed as no people. It is as harſh a thing to ſuffer by the meanes of ſuch as be worſe then our ſelues, as it is for the child to be beaten by the ſeruant. But God will ſuffer them, partly becauſe hee knowes that to be the way to abaſe men, partly becauſe their enemies will ſet it on to the purpoſe when they are let looſe to hurt them, through the malice that is in them; euen as their father the diuell doth when he can. But God would haue his owne learne by the ſmart which they ſuſtaine by their trouble, that their ſinne is farre more odious then they account it, yea then theirs, who whip them, becauſe they haue been taught to know the Lord, and couenanted to ſerue him, but the other are ſtrangers, who are vnacquainted with his waies. And all this is well to be marked, becauſe this errour ſticketh faſt and deepe in the minds of ſome, that wee need not feare the Papiſts, Spaniards, Ieſuites, or any ſuch Heretikes, becauſe we profeſſe the true religion that they hate, and worſhip Chriſt Ieſus whom they diſhonour. And therefore hauing a good cauſe, they ſay, why ſhould we feare, God will fight for vs. I anſwere, they muſt haue with their good cauſe, a good conſcience alſo: for elſe they may as truly ſay, that God will not ſuffer a good man and true, to be robbed of a theefe, or hurt by a witch, which Scripture and experience doth ſufficiently confute: but as God exerciſed holy Iob by the diuel, Iob 1. 2. the head: ſo he doth other of his deare ones by witches and other wicked people, which are his members: and that hee ſuffereth (as hee ſeeth cauſe)

worſe people then his owne to domineere ouer them: the Egyptians tyrannie ouer Iſrael, the Canaanites cruelty, and the examples of other nations in this booke againſt Gods people after both; with the experience of all ages are ſufficient to teſtifie.
            That is cleare enough, but let vs further ſee the reaſon thereof, and Gods meaning therein. For he doth not puniſh his owne people by the wicked, his enemies, becauſe they are in better account with him then they: neither to put them in hope that they ſhall goe vnpuniſhed in the end, becauſe hee vſeth their ſeruice (as he did Satan againſt Iob, to try him,) but becauſe hee will hereby manifeſt how great a finne it is to abuſe, and liue vnworthy the Goſpell; therefore he beginneth firſt to viſit his owne people, and oft times euen by them. But afterwards, as Amos ſaith, he will viſit Damaſcus, Moab, 
               Amos 
               and Ammon, and make them drinke of the dregs: for if hee doe this to a greene tree, in compariſon of them, how much more will he do it to the withered? And as the Lord will be auenged of his enemies, ſo after hee hath corrected his owne he will againe returne to them. Therefore the Church is brought in by the Prophet Micha to ſay thus: Reioyce not ouer mee, O mine enemie, for 
               Mich. 7. 7. 
               though I fall yet ſhall I riſe againe: as the Prophet ſpeaks, meaning that the Lord would finde a time, both to take corrections of them, and yet to be pitifull to them againe; euen as the father will burne the rod when the child relenteth, and promiſeth amendment. And this, if the wicked will not ſee that he chaſtizeth euen his owne, hauing ſinned againſt his knowne truth, but once (as it were) and therefore hee will much more haue a day for them, to pay them to the full for their manifold and long continued rebellions: if they (I ſay) will not regard it, let Gods ſeruants profit by it euery way, both they who are iuſtly viſited for their ſinnes, and alſo they who are more free; who know that hee doth vſe to begin iudgement with his owne houſe, that they 1. Pet. 4. 17. may thereby returne vnto him.
            Beſides that which hath been ſaid of theſe nations, how the Lord ſtrengthened Verſ. 13. them againſt Iſrael; ſo wee may further note heere how they were confederate together againſt Gods people: wherby we may further learne, how the wicked who can ſeldome agree together betwixt themſelues, (for their leagues are ſoone broken) can yet eaſily ioyne together to vexe Gods people. And thus theſe three nations did conſent in one to ſmite them. Euen as we reade that Herod and Pilate, which had been enemies one to the other, were made friends by ioyning both againſt Chriſt. As two dogs that fight each with other for a bone, yet both ioyne in biting the paſſenger. Or A Simile, as theeues who conſent to rob the true man, though they cannot agree in diuiding the ſpoile: for in that they diſagree each from other, it is becauſe they want the true band of vnion: but in that they conſent, it comes from their mutuall hatred of vertue, and feare leſt their owne kingdome ſhould be ouerthrowne. And we finde it as true in theſe our daies, that they who cannot brooke one another, but haue ſharpe contentions and broyles betwixt themſelues, can yet with free conſent, band themſelues againſt Gods ſeruants. Which, (to leaue them to repent for it if God giue them grace) one would thinke ſhould make vs cling and cleaue faſt vnto the Lord, that yet we may haue him on our ſides, and to ſtand with vs againſt them, whenſoeuer they ſhall ſtrengthen one another to moleſt and oppreſſe vs; and alſo

to maintaine our Chriſtian amity with our brethren the more ſtrongly, by breaking off contentions, which eaſily ariſe, leſt the children of this world condemne vs.
            The puniſhment is bondage, and as the former generation was to the Verſ. 14. The ſenſe.
                King of Aram, ſo now they were in bondage to the Moabites: the time that it continued, was more then double in reſpect of the former, euen eighteene yeeres. The people that now were brought into bondage, though they were neither all that were in the former calamity, nor they only, yet the reſt who were growne vp at this time, had ſeene the workes of God, and receiued the religion of their fathers; and therefore they ſmarted iuſtly with the reſt, with whom they had ſinned. By them both wee learne, that they Doct. prouide ill for themſelues, who make ſlight vſe of Gods former corrections for ſinne, and that thereby they bring and pull downe vpon themſelues greater iudgements. As Chriſt ſaid to the man that was healed, Goe thy way 
               Ioh. 5. 14. 
               and ſinne no more, left a worſe thing befall thee. So he threatened in Leuiticus, Leuit. 26. 18. that if they did not amend by the former puniſhments, hee would adde ſeuen times more. And did not Pharaoh finde it, who for his mocking of God, and hardening his heart againſt him, when he confeſſed that God had been iuſt in ſending vpon him ſo grieuous iudgements at the firſt, prouoked him to ſend many more vpon him afterwards?
            And we at this day, who haue had deliuerance from trouble, which our ſinnes procured and brought vpon vs, haue too good proofe of this that I ſay: that we ſmart more by the after ſinnes, and thoſe which we renue daily, Note. then by the former: euen as a renued wound is more ſmartie and dangerous. And ſtands it not with the righteous iudgement of God, that it ſhould be ſo? Is it meet that we ſhould tempt God in ſuch a manner, and that wee ſhould not beare the marke of it about vs in our fleſh, or in our conſciences? And ſo we doe. For to ſay nothing of thoſe who ſinne more willingly, in whom this is more clearely verified, it appeareth in the weaker ſort of Gods children euidently, who ſinne but of negligence and ſome careleſneſſe rather then wittingly, that they ſmart alſo for the ſame. For beſide their outward Note. croſſes, their oft doubtings alſo of their ſaluation, whereof yet they haue had aſſurance before: and by many great feares they haue oft times, that all is not well with them to Godward: the which (for the moſt part) do come of the ſlight and ſlendervſe that they make of their deliuerance from their firſt feare and trouble of minde which they ſuſtained. And it would much more appeare in many others, that their latter troubles which they beare, and by which they ſmart; for their latter and new prouokings of God are farre more grieuous then the former, and they farre hardlier recouer out of them, if they did not burie the remembrance of them, and willingly forget them, through the hardening of their hearts: when yet if they could confider aright of it, euen that is the greateſt puniſhment of all. And although they riſe out of it againe in time afterwards, yet it is done confuſedly; or if they ſee their ſinne and repent of it, it is after a good ſpace, and ſo, much time hath at the leaſt been loſt, or vnprofitably paſſed ouer by them.
            And whereas this puniſhment that was caſt vpon them, was bondage to a forraine nation, both cruel and idolatrous; Oh it was a yoke moſt vnwelcome:

and ſo we are to account of it, whenſoeuer, and whomſoeuer of vs it ſhall fall vpon. Subiection in children to parents; in ſeruants to maſters; in ſubiects to Prince, is naturall and kind. But no ſuch thing is bondage to ſtrangers, but fearefull and tedious, as we haue heard oft times, when ſome perſons heere among vs haue been taken by the Turkes, yea and Dunkirks, into what wofull ſtate they haue been brought. And although God hath mercifully perſwaded our nation it ſelfe from it; yet we know in what danger we haue been, eſpecially to the Spaniard; and namely in that yeere, 1588. And let vs not be ſenſeleſſe in hearing this, or careleſſe: for if theſe reuoltings in the better ſort, and prophaneneſſe (with many particular ſinnes) in the common ſort, continue, if the Lord puniſh vs not, with that one kind, Note. we may be ſure that ſome one or other ſhall be in the roome of it; yea and if we be not blind in beholding it, the plague and dearth hath already ſeazed vpon many thouſands, whatſoeuer be behind to arreſt ſuch as remaine.
            Verſ. 15. But when the chilhren of Iſrael cried vnto the Lord, the Lord ſtirred vp a ſauiour to them, Ehud the ſonne of Gera, the ſonne of Iemini, a man lame of his right hand: and the children of Iſrael ſent a preſent by him to Eglon King of Moab.
            
            The third point and fourth in this ſecond example follow, namely, the The ſenſe. cry of the people, teſtifying their repentance, and the Lords mercy, who pitying them, ſent them another like Othniel, who ſhould deliuer them. The man is named and deſcribed in the text. He firſt ſlue the King of Moab, and after, ten thouſand men of his, ſtrong and good warriours, and ſo deliuered Iſrael out of bondage. This followeth in the ſtory, but it was neceſſary for me to mention it heere, ſeeing otherwiſe, this ſending of a preſent by him to the King of Moab, which the people of Iſrael are in this verſe ſaid to haue done, ſhould haue been hard to vnderſtand, to what end it is ſet downe: whereas the ſending of it to him by the men of Iſraell, was the meane of killing the King of Moab, and the pretence that they had to couer their intent. But more of this afterwards, as the words of the text when I come to them, ſhall offer occaſion. But now let vs handle the points that are in this verſe, as they lie in order, and as for this time we ſhall be able.
            Firſt, it is ſaid that the people cryed to the Lord from vnder their ſore Doct. verſ. 15. bondage, wherewith they were oppreſſed. And had it not been better for them to haue been without it, and to haue ſerued the Lord with comfort, as they did while Othniel liued with them? ſo ſhould they not haue needed to cry. How this their crying was a ſigne of their repentance, I haue largely ſhewed in the former example, verſ. 9. and that may ſerue for both. But that which I will note now from their crying, is this; that the beſt end of our pleaſures of ſinne, is howling and crying; which though it did heere accompany repentance, (as ſeldome it doth) yet is it painful, but without it, dreadfull Note. and deadly: neither doe many meet with that (as I ſaid) though too many haue their part in this. For the times that follow ſinne, when it is done and ended, are not like the time in which it is committed: they full of ſmart and ſorrow, this taken vp in deceiueable pleaſure.
            Conſider this all you that are giuen to your appetite, and will haue your pleaſure, where ye can come by it, howſoeuer the Lord forbids it, and how deare ſoeuer it coſt you. If ye may end with crying (which yet they can ill Note. away with, who hunt after vaine pleaſure. I meane, that which is companion

to repentance) ye haue infinitely to thanke God for it: but who can aſſure you that ye ſhall ſpeed ſo well, and haue ſo good an end thereof? who may iuſtly feare (an hundred to one) that painfull crying, which maketh way to perpetuall howling and gnaſhing of teeth. As your ſinnes haue been great, ſo ſhall your cries be great, ſaith the Lord; as namely he doth by Abraham to the rich man: Sonne, in thy life time thou enioyedſt thy pleaſure, but now thou art tormented. Is not this lamentable, when we might liue comfortably, Luk. 16. 25. enioying our health, peace, liberty, and welfare with Gods good liking? But oh wofull it is, that none of his benefits, how precious ſoeuer, are commonly accounted of vs according to their value; to wit, thankfully, nor vſed ſoberly and aright, but ſo as we are inforced to cry out at the laſt (at leaſt we haue cauſe ſo to doe) of our abuſing of them. For there cannot a iot or tittle of Gods word fall to the ground, who ſaith, Reioyce O young man in Eccleſ. 11. 9. thy youth, and let thine heart cheere thee in the daies of thy youth, and walke in the waies of thy heart, and in the ſight of thine eyes, but know that for theſe things he will bring thee to iudgement. But I cannot goe through this whole verſe at this time. But thus much of this third point beſide that which I haue ſpoken of it elſewhere.
         
         
            THE TWENTIETH SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw followeth the fourth point in this example, and that is; how God had mercy on the people when they cried vnto him, and gaue them another deliuerer, this Ehud by name, of the family of Iemini, which pertained to the tribe of Beniamin, and lame on his right hand. And by this, as Doct. 2. in verſ. 15. it appeares that Gods hand is not ſhortened in raiſing vp one deliuerer after another; ſo we may ſee how good and kinde the Lord is, in hearing the cries and grones of his people, and that often times; euen againe and againe, when they make their complaint vnto him. And this hee doth as well in the daily pardoning of our infirmities which are innumerable, (for who can reckon them?) as alſo in ſuch falles as are more grieuous, if it repent vs from our heart, as he willeth vs to doe in Hoſea. Which doctrine is warily to be receiued, for wee are ready to fall into Hoſ. 14. 1. 2. extremities on both ſides. For ſome doubt and feare that God will not receiue them againe, though they returne to him, remembring their former ſhamefull and wilfull tranſgreſſion: but that errour of theirs muſt be amended. Other are ready, when they heare of Gods receiuing ſinners graciouſly, and that againe and againe (they lamenting after him,) they are ready (I Note. ſay) to thinke that they ſhall eaſily bee forgiuen, without any remorſe or

pricke of conſcience for their ſinne: which is a groſſe abuſing of Gods patience and his readineſſe to receiue ſinners, who haue offended: and differeth not much from them, who ſay, [Let vs ſinne, that grace may abound.] The middle way betwixt both is ſafeſt to goe in: to wit, not to caſt away their confidence, when they vnfainedly turne to God, and yet not to take or arrogate to themſelues the beleeuing of pardon, while they continue bold in ſinning, without broken and relenting hearts. Note.
            
            And this leſſon being learned of vs, as God teacheth it, and hath himſelfe giuen example vnto vs, is a ſound and certaine rule to guide vs toward our neighbours who haue offended vs: that is to ſay, that as he embraceth and forgiueth ſinners returning vnto him; ſo we ſhould not bee cruell or hard-hearted toward them, but readily to receiue them, when they ſubmit themſelues. According to that which our Sauiour anſwered to Peter, when he aſked him, how oft he ſhould forgiue his brother, vnto ſeuen times? he anſwered Mat. 18. 21. him, I ſay not vnto ſeuen times, but ſeuenty times ſeuen. We ought therefore to forgiue them: but what? not the tranſgreſſion of Gods law, for we cannot doe that, for none can forgiue ſinne but God. But the wrong and iniurie Mat. 9. 3. done vnto vs, and the euill minde they beare toward vs, (I ſay) that wee ought (as we profeſſe in the fifth petition) to remit. As for ſatisfaction, if he haue taken away our goods, we may, in the remitting that, doe, as the repentance and ability of the partie ſhall giue occaſion. and ſo I ſay of the puniſhment which he hath deſerued, if he haue hurt vs in our body, name, or otherwiſe; yet if it bee expedient, and that wee ſuſtaine not any great detriment Note. thereby, we may remit it. But yet in ſome caſe, though we forgiue the wrong, yet wee may vrge the partie that is culpable, to ſatisfaction and puniſhment, according to the law of God, and the nation where wee liue; left men ſhould be emboldened to ſinne thereby: yea and ſometime wee who are wronged, ought ſo to doe neceſſarily: otherwiſe we ſhould ſin againſt God, and the Common-wealth. And thus Achan by Ioſua, and the theefe on Ioſh. 7. 25. the croſſe, were iuſtly puniſhed and put to death, for why? both Gods law and mans had elſe been broken. This I haue ſaid of this matter, there being Luk. 23. 41. ſome difficulty about it, that we may ſee what wee are bound to remit vnto our neighbour, and how farre.
            An other thing in this verſe is, that this Ehud, who was giuen them as a 
                  Doct. 3. deliuerer, is ſaid to haue bin lame, but in what part of his body? euen on his right hand, that member which might worſt be miſſed, eſpecially in a valiant captaine and man of war, as he was, and now called to ſhew his ſtrength and skil, wherin we can ſay no leſſe, but that God doth that which is ſtrange and maruellous in our eyes. For he ſheweth vs hereby, that he when it pleaſeth him, (and that is moſt commonly) vſeth weake meanes to effect and bring great matters to paſſe, that his glory may be more eaſily ſeene, and giuen vnto him: yet fleſh and carnall reaſon will not yeeld eaſily thereunto. But for proofe of the doctrine, looke what baſe and weake inſtruments the Lord vſed to vexe a mighty King (I meane Pharaoh) namely, Frogs, Lice, Locuſts, & ſuch like. So Ionathan & his armor-bearer flew many of the Philiſtims: Dauid Goliah. In the Prophet Ioels time, how did the Lord plague the drunkards, and the ſinners of the land, who were ſo iolly, hauing the fruits of the earth in plentifull manner to ſerue their turne, as though there

had been none that could haue reſiſted them, how did he (I ſay) plague the the ſtouteſt and the mightieſt of them by the like weake meanes, ſpoiling thereby the fruits of the earth, without the which their iollity muſt fall to the ground? Thus the Prophet ſpeaketh: Heare ye this, O Elders, and hearken all ye inhabitants of the world; whether ſuch a thing hath been in your daies, or in the 
               Ioel 1. 3. 
               daies of your fathers: That which is left of the Palmer worme, hath the Graſhopper eaten, and the reſidue of the Graſhopper, hath the Canker worme eaten, and the reſidue of the Canker worme, hath the Caterpiller eaten. And to ſee the mighty hand of God in other matters, which farre exceede theſe, (for God can and doth this often, but this ought not to cauſe vs therefore to bee ſlight in meanes vſing to ſerue his prouidence,) How did hee by his Apoſtles, who were ſimple men, and of no great account in the world, yet how did hee by their miniſtery and weake preaching, (as it was accounted) ſubdue the proud and ſtately world to the obedience of the Goſpel? Euen Paul, but one man, how many cities, yea countries did he bring from darkeneſſe to light, and from the power of Satan, vnto God; inſomuch as whole Aſia was filled with his doctrine, and both Iewes and Grecians heard the word of the Lord. And ſo Act. 19. 10. in our daies hee hath perſwaded many to become true Chriſtians by the miniſtery and labours of them, who are of ſmall reputation in the world.
            And why he bringeth to light ſuch excellent tidings of the kingdome of glory, by ſo weake meanes; Saint Paul ſheweth the reaſon in theſe words; We haue this treaſure in earthen veſſels (ſaith he) that the excellency of that power 
               
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 4. 7. 
               might be of God, and not of vs. Therfore deſpiſe not the weake, by whom God worketh; neither let ſuch diſcourage themſelues, who by the grace of humility, meekneſſe, loue, and ſuch like, with their ſmall gifts, ſhall edifie and build vp the Church of Chriſt, when the knowledge in the bare letter, of ſuch as are thereby puffed vp, ſhall doe little good. And as it is in the miniſtery, 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2. ſo ſhall it be ſeene in the people, that true godlineſſe accompanying the knowledge of Chriſt, though ridiculous among men, ſhall do much in perſwading and drawing many to the loue of the Goſpell, and fellowſhip therein; which as it is the greateſt, ſo it is (doubtleſſe) the rareſt thing that is to be ſeene among the people. As in the example of the woman of Samaria is to be ſeene, who brought her neighbours to Chriſt, being conuerted her ſelfe: yea and this may bee ſeene ſtill at this day, that euen priuate perſons truly religious, ſhall with their humility, diligence, and loue, doe much more good then they who haue variety of knowledge and vtterance, being deſtitute of thoſe graces, though they bee little accounted of. The vſe of all that I haue ſaid of this point is, that we haue the works of God (how meanely ſoeuer accounted of) and ſpecially his worke of grace in men, that wee haue them (I ſay) in moſt high reuerence, in compariſon of the gloriouſeſt acts of men. And this of the foure points in this ſtory, from the 12. verſe; namely, 1. the reuolting of the people from God: 2. the Lords puniſhing them: 3. their crying to God: and 4. his ſending a deliuerer to them. And thus much of this matter.
            But theſe foure things in this ſecond ſtory thus ended, there remaineth 
                  The ſence of that which remaineth in the 15. verſe.
                ſomewhat in this verſe, that hath not yet been ſpoken of, and much in the whole chapter by occaſion of the laſt point, I meane of Ehuds deliuering them; with which I will proceed; and firſt with that part of this 15. verſe

that remaineth. The words are theſe: [And the children of Iſrael ſent a preſent by him to Eglon King of Moab.] Heere, if this trouble any, that the largeſt part of this ſtory remaineth behinde vnhandled, and wherefore it ſhould bee ſo, ſeeing the foure materiall points or parts of the chapter haue (as wee haue ſeene) been handled already: I anſwere; all that is behinde to the 31. verſe, doth iſſue and grow out, and by occaſion of the laſt point of the 4. namely, of the deliuerer whom God raiſed vp to the people, I meane Ehud, and is ſet downe to illuſtrate and amplifie the deliuerance of the people, as ſhall appeare, euen how God deliuered them from the bondage of the Moabites, and gaue them reſt. The perſon being this Ehud, as hath been ſaid, the ſtory ſhewes how hee wrought this their deliuerance; and it was thus: firſt, by ſlaying the King of Moab himſelfe, which reacheth to the 27. verſe: then by killing ten thouſand of the men of Moab, which is to the 30. verſe; after the which followeth the ſubduing of the Moabites, and the deliuerance and reſt of the people, to the 31. Now of the firſt of theſe in the firſt place; namely, of killing the King. For the laying forth of the which wee are to conſider, firſt, the things that went before it, namely, by what meanes hee wrought ſuch a great worke, and they are ſet downe to the 21. verſe: then the act it ſelfe, which is to the 23. and the things that followed, to the 27. The things that went before it, as the meanes to worke it by, were the double going or iourney of Ehud to the King of Moab: the firſt when hee deliuered the preſent to him onely: to the nineteenth verſe: the laſt, when he did the act it ſelfe, to the 21: In his firſt iourney to him, note theſe three things: one, the occaſion of it, that was, a carrying of a preſent to him: the ſecond, his furniſhing himſelfe to do the deed, with a ſhort and ſharpe dagger: then the deliuering of the preſent. Thus the ſtorie being ſet downe at large in the text, I haue laid it forth in the ſeuerall parts of it, ſo farre as in this place is expedient for the better vnderſtanding of the reader. Now let vs go through them all in order. And firſt, whereas it is ſaid in the latter end of this 15. verſe, That the children of Iſrael ſent a preſent by Ehud to the King of Moab, for ſo it was indeed, as the word in Hebrew 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                ſignifieth, and not tribute: this (as I ſaid) was the occaſion by which he went to him: ſo by this preſent, the King of Moab was blind folded, that hee might not ſuſpect any ſuch matter afterward, to bee intended by Ehud, when hee attempted and went about the fact in deed. For though it was lawfull for him and the Iſraelites to goe about to kill him, yet it was nothing meet, that they ſhould by any vndiſcreetneſſe, giue him occaſion to ſuſpect it. And by this which was Doct. 4. in verſ. 15. allowed in them, we may ſee, that it is lawful and not diſpleaſing to God, for a good man being in danger or diſpleaſure with another, and namely a ſuperiour, to remoue it (if he can) by a gift or preſent. I know preſents may be lawfully ſent in other reſpects, namely, to ſhew thankfulneſſe for kindneſſe receiued: and I know alſo that a gift ſomtime is ſent to the helping forward of a bad matter, and for the corrupting of iudgement, which is moſt odious; neither of both theſe is meant heere. But to get fauour, and namely, with our betters, by ſuch meanes, when we know no other to bee like to preuaile, there is nothing againſt it, but that wee may ſerue Gods prouidence that way, for the remouing of diſpleaſure. And ſo did our father Iacob ſeeke to Gen. 32. 13. put away the wrath of his brother Eſau, and to procure his fauour. And although

he who receiueth it, doth oftentimes offend therein, for that hee ſhould yeeld fauour without it, yet for the giuer wee know what Salomon ſaith; A gift in ſecret pacifieth wrath. And it doth as well pull downe the heart of him that ſendeth it, as mollifie him that receiueth it, which is farre better then that both, or either of them ſhould ranckle and bee inflamed, each againſt the other. And this may ſuffice to haue been ſaid of this matter, and ſo of the whole 15. verſe.
            
               Verſ. 16. And Ehud made him a dagger with two edges, of a cubit length, and he did gird it vnder his raiment vpon his right thigh.
               
               17. And he preſented the gift vnto Eglon King of Moab, and Eglon was a vnry fat man.
               
               18. And when he had now preſented the preſent, he ſent away the people that bare the preſent.
               
               19. But he turned againe from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and ſaid, I haue a ſecret errand to thee O King, who ſaid, keepe ſilence, and all that ſtood about him went out from him.
               
               20. Then Ehud came to him (and he ſat alone in a ſommer parlor which he had) and Ehud ſaid, I haue a meſſage to thee from God. Then he aroſe out of his throne.
               
            
            
               EHud, whom God had giuen to the people for a deliuerer, was by the conſent of them, choſen to goe with the preſent to the King of Moab, and he knowing that he was to deliuer the people out of his hands, did thus goe about it; namely, to prouide him a ſharpe dagger for more ſpeedy expedition thereof, and girded the ſame vnder his right thigh, that there might be the leſſe ſuſpition of that he intended. For though the danger could not be but very great, and he notwithſtanding be doubted not of good ſucceſſe from God, yet he caſt with himſelfe how many and great the perils were in going about it, that he might the wiſelier auoid them. I confeſſe, that this act that they intended to doe, namely to kill the King of Moab ſecretly, and thus to prouide for it, and to couer it by the preſent that hee offered him, I confeſſe (I ſay) that if God had not called him to it, and ſet him about it, it had been an action (in many reſpects) odious, and highly to be condemned. But God raiſing him vp to ſuch an end, hee was approued of him therein, and that was his encouragement and emboldening, that God had called him to accompliſh that worke.
            And heere note from that which I haue now ſaid, that this is that which Doct in verſ. 15. and 16. muſt encourage vs in the difficulteſt matters; that we in taking thē in hand, are ſet a worke by God, and do know, that he is pleaſed with the things that we goe about: this (I ſay) is that which we muſt be perſwaded of, that wee haue him with vs, to the end wee may cheerefully goe through with them. Looke wee carefully to this, and wee ſhall proſper, and make we it our common practiſe in our affaires, and we ſhall throughout ſee good daies. But if we haue no allowance from him in doubtfull caſes, and much more in ſuch as haue apparant ſhew of euill, we may not enterprize them any more then Ehud might heere without his warrant. And where wee haue no commandement for that which we take in hand, as in a thing that is indifferent, let vs know our liberty, and that wee doe that which wee are perſwaded doth

pleaſe God beſt, and ſo wee ſhall haue peace in that wee goe about. But how little this is regarded, and how men take in hand the things which they doe of their owne head, and to their owne liking, and how ill ſucceſſe they haue in ſuch of their actions, as it is lamentable to behold it; ſo I refer the reader that is deſirous to know more of it, to chap. 1. verſ. 19 22. where I haue ſaid more of it. This be ſaid of the firſt thing of the three, in ſending the preſent.
            In this ſecond of the three things, in that he went ſo well appointed; let Doct. in verſ. 16. vs marke, that when Ehud was ſure of good ſucceſſe in this great worke, and that God would be with him, hee was not idle nor careleſſe, but had greater regard how to goe about in the beſt manner, furniſhing himſelfe, and prouiding this weapon for the purpoſe. Wherein againe wee muſt learne, that it behoueth vs to vſe all good meanes, as diligence, prouidence, and wiſdome, for the well bringing to paſſe euen of thoſe things wherein God hath promiſed good ſucceſſe, and to bee with vs. Yea and further to doe them with readineſſe and cheerfulneſſe, as we ſee we haue good cauſe, being ſo wel encouraged. And ſo all may ſee, and we our ſelues may know that we goe not to worke as men of the world doe: I meane coldly and deadly, onely for the hope of profit, pleaſure, or ſuch like whetting vs on, which are the motiues and perſwaſions that earthly minded and worldly men haue in doing their buſines. And what a grace and bleſſing is that, in our earthly buſineſſe and common workes, that wee may bee ſo heauenly minded in them? for much more we may looke and hope to be well aſſiſted, as the workes which wee goe about, are more heauenly. But thou maieſt reade more of this, Chapter 1. verſe. 4.
            The third thing of the three now followeth, which was the preſenting verſ. 16. 17. of the gift, in carying and offering this preſent to Eglon the King of Moab, (which ſeemed, to ſuch as heare of it, no matter commendable, that Ehud ſhould kill him vnder pretence of kindneſſe) yet hee intending a further 
                  Doct. 2. matter thereby, then he ſhewed, to wit, the deliuering of Gods people by killing him their enemie, it was not onely lawfull, but alſo praiſe worthy in him. And this act of his teacheth, that when we doe ſuch things as are not of beſt note, nor moſt commendable in the eyes of men, ſuch as this of Ehud ſeemed, yet lawfull & allowed of God, we ſhould (if it may be) intend ſome further and better thing thereby, as Ehud here did. And although it haue no effect for the preſent time; I meane, that good which we purpoſe and aime at, yet to wait opportunity to bring it ſo to paſſe. But this wil be better vnderſtood by laying it out in particulars. As for example; if a man be in the company of a bad perſon, which in it ſelfe is no credit to him, (& yet it is not vnlawfull) or if a man giue almes to a poore man who hath no goodnes in him, (which may be thought of ſome to be a maintaining of him,) in both theſe caſes and the like, he that I ſpeake of, ought to haue a further reach and meaning, that is, a deſire and endeauour to do the parties good; as to admoniſh and reproue as there ſhall be cauſe ſeene, or exhort & ſeeke to draw them (as he ſhall ſee beſt opportunity) to repentance; and thereby to ſtay all from taking offence thereat. And ſo I ſay of all ſuch actions: Heſter, as we reade, bad Haman, the enemie of Gods people to a banquet. It was like to ſauour Heſt 5. 5. ill to the godly that ſhould heare of it: but at his firſt comming thither,

though ſhe ſpake nothing againſt Haman to the King, yet at the ſecond banquet ſhee obtained deliuerance to Gods people, who were appointed by Haman to bee ſlaine: and beſide that ſhee procured is ouerthrow. To both which, ſhe made way by bidding him to the firſt banquet, and entended it, though ſhe made no ſhew then of any ſuch thing. So our Sauiour did eate Mat. 9. 10. Luk. 19. 7. and drinke with the publicans and ſinners. It was hardly thought off by the Phariſies: but he ſought their conuerſion by it. Therefore in ſuch actions as haue not the beſt ſhew of goodneſſe (to the end we may bring no violence to our conſciences, nor diſquiet to the godly, and the better alſo to ſtop the mouthes of others) it ſhall bee meete for vs to aime at and intend better things then are ſeene at the firſt ſhew. But then it may bee truly ſaid on the contrary, that they who doe things in ſhew, ſcarce honeſt; as to haunt ſuſpicious places, and the company of thoſe who are of ill note and name, and yet meane worſe then is ſeene, namely to practiſe whoredome, and fall to drunkenneſſe and ill rule, it may (I ſay) truly bee affirmed, that ſuch are vile Note. perſons, and very bad indeed. And moſt of all they who will ſhew ſignes of goodneſſe, as of loue by friendly familiarity, ſobriety and religion, and yet ſpite vs and our holy profeſſion behinde our backes, and carrie themſelues leaudly, are of all other the worſt. But to returne, the like we ſee in Iehu, who although he ſeemed cruell to the view of the world in murthering the houſe of Ahab, yet hauing an eye to the calling of God, went through it with courage, 2. King. 10. which was to be commended. But heere muſt bee a caueat obſerued, that is, that no man preſume by theſe examples to enterprize ſuch like matters without warrant from God, alleaging for himſelfe that his end is good and profitable: this is to go to worke of our own head, yea to call euill good, and to doe euill, that good may come of it. As in a mans priuate caſe to take vpon him to reuenge his owne wrong, which belongs to the Magiſtrate. For as the Lord warrants a man by the ſincerity of his intention, to goe forward, when the thing is lawfull (as we ſee in that act of the two tribes and an halfe building an altar) ſo when we haue no word to beare vs out, we runne Ioſh. 22. 30. into the lapſe and offend againſt the expreſſe prohibition of the Scriptures, which is, [Thou ſhalt not do thine owne will,] whereas that it is written, we Mat. 6. 10. Petic. 3. 1. Theſ. 5. ſhould auoide all appearance of euill. It is not vnlawfull ſimply for a good man to bee in the company of one that is euill; but this excuſeth not him, who obſerueth no circumſtances herein, but ſhall aſſociate himſelfe with ſuch as are of bad note, in gaming, drinking, or haunting of ſuſpected places (as I haue ſaid) although he abuſe the extraordinary fact of Heſter, and the example of our Sauiour, or pretend (as ſome will) the good of the party.
            But as Ehud was appointed to preſent the gift to the King of Moab, ſo it is ſaid heere hee did: which wee know was a great honour and credit vnto him. And he was worthie of it, who did afterward aduenture ſo great danger with it. So God alloweth to them that ſerue him in high places, and performe great duties in Church and Common-wealth, hee alloweth them much credit, honour, and dignitie. And for the one as Princes and noble perſons, ſuch as Dauid, was, Salomon, Hezechia, and Ioſia, with Moſes, Ioſhua and others, haue enioyed the ſame, in reſpect of ſome that were as great as they, but not as godly: Euen ſo it is with vs: For they that truly honour and fauour learning, and good miniſters, and make much of them that feare

the Lord; reſiſting and oppoſing the common aduerſary; they are highly honoured of the Church of God: and ſo it is alſo in the miniſtery: for (as the Apoſtle ſaith) they that rule well, are worthie of double honour: If they 1. Tim. 5. labour painfully and faithfully in the word, and goe before their flocke, as Ioh. 10. good ſheepheards, and ſo rule and guide them by both, and by other cenſures, as occaſion ſhall be offered, they worthily enioy loue and reuerence, with the fruit of both, as credit, and maintenance. And good reaſon there is why it ſhould be ſo with both: for the one laboureth and watcheth directly for the peoples ſoules: the other, in their kinde and place, for the maintenance of their peace, liues, and goods. And that which I ſay of theſe I may ſay proportionably of meaner perſons, and lower places: that as they doe ſeruice to God in their liues, places and employments; ſo are they of greater account, and more ſet by, (and well worthy) then other who doe not ſo. For their care, faithfulneſſe, and trauell for the honour of God is much; and the Lord hath promiſed to honour them who honour him, and to leaue the other without honour. And ſo it was heere, that Ehud had great honour in that he was appointed to deliuer the Preſent to Eglon the King of Moab: And who worthier then he? For beſide his other many worthy acts that he did for the peoples peace and deliuerance: who among them all would haue aduentured their liues for the reſt? Of whom it may bee ſaid, as Pharaoh ſaid of Ioſeph: when he directed him how to prouide in the ſeuen yeeres Gen. 41. 38. of plenty, for the ſeuen yeeres of famine, a wiſe man that ſhould bee fit for that buſineſſe; Pharaoh ſaid to his ſeruants, where ſhall wee finde a man of vnderſtanding like this? let him bee ſet ouer the land of Egypt about this worke.
            Heere the holy Story ſetting this downe, that Ehud preſented the gift to Doct. 2. in verſ. 17. 
               Eglon, addeth this, that he was a very fat man, which may ſeeme to be vttered to no end, ſeeing it is neither ſet downe to his commendation, nor to his diſcommendation; but this is mentioned, that we may ſee a reaſon of that which is in the 22. verſe. And as it is not commended or diſcommended in him; ſo by occaſion heereof, this I will ſay, that fatneſſe of body is to bee thought of, as a thing neither with a man nor againſt him in it ſelfe. For ſome are more diſpoſed thereto naturally then other, though they haue both one diet, and alike kinde of eaſie life; euen as we ſee how one tree waxeth great and tall in the ſame ſoyle, where another is both ſmall and low, as one Oke in compariſon of another. But where men are naturally apt thereto, good keeping doth ſet one forward. And therefore no maruell that it is ſo with ſuch as liue deliciouſly, eating and drinking, and vſing other liberty at their pleaſure. But this may not bee ſpoken without vſe and profit: this let vs learne, that ſuch, either Miniſters or other as giue ouer themſelues, and let the bridle looſe to exceſſe in eating, drinking, ſleeping, playing, idleneſſe, eaſe, and ſuch like, and get fat that way, may little reioyce in it, and ſhall wiſh that they had by labour in their callings, and other good meanes, taken themſelues downe, as Paul chaſtized his body, or at leaſt haue good teſtimony that they haue not growne to that point through their owne ſinne; Tit. 1. 12. therefore that prouerbe is vſed by Paul againſt the Cretians, out of Epimenides, The Cretians are alway 
                     ••
                  ers, euill beaſts, ſlow bellies or Epicures. And their commendation ſhall be no greater, who in the profeſſion of the Goſpell, fat

themſelues through idleneſſe, ſloth, eaſe ſeeking, and ſhunning labour in their callings. And this of Ehuds firſt going to Eglon to deliuer the Preſent.
            The ſecond followeth, in which he ſlue him. Wherein we may obſerue, 
                  The ſumme of verſ. 18. 19. 20. firſt his conueighing home of the men that came with him, and brought the Preſent (which he deliuered) that they might be out of perill, when he ſhould doe that worke of God, ſo full of difficulty and danger. Secondly, how he came backe againe to Eglon, telling him he had a ſecret errand and meſſage to him, and this was to remoue the company which attended on the King, from the place of his preſence. Thirdly, when hee had obtained that, hee repeated his words, adding this, that his meſſage was from God, that ſo the King might attend to it with more reuerence (as hee did, and in token thereof ſtood vp,) and that he might the leſſe ſuſpect any danger, and Ehud might haue aduantage thereby, the more eaſily to diſpatch him. Thus much is in theſe three verſes. Concerning the firſt, of ſending away the people Verſ. 18. vnto the quarries, a place where ſtones were digged vp, neare to Gilgal, a city of the Iſraelites neare Iordan. In that he followed them after the preſent was deliuered, till they were paſt danger, he reſpected many things; and namely, that he might bee freer from care of them, as alſo leſt their tarying ſtill whiles he went about that worke, might haue been a meanes of bewraying it; and further he was loth to bring any more into danger then hee muſt needs. All theſe reaſons moued him to ſend the people away, and tended to the quiet and peace of his conſcience. And his example herein ought to bee Doct. verſ. 18. our inſtruction; that wee may learne to goe about waighty matters with all poſſible deepe and due conſideration, wiſedome, and warineſſe, as Ehud heere did. And if we be not ſufficient of our ſelues hereunto, then take wee aduice of thoſe that be wiſer then we. For the which purpoſe Salomon ſaith, Without counſell thoughts come to naught, but in the multitude of counſellors, there 
               Prou. 15. 22. 
               is ſtedfaſtneſſe. So we muſt bee ſure that ſpeciall care bee vſed, as I haue ſaid, that when great and waighty buſineſſe is impoſed vpon vs, all poſſible regard be had to ſee it well brought to paſſe, and gone about.
            This leſſon being ill learned of Peter, Chriſts beloued Apoſtle, may warne vs, by the exceeding danger that befell him thereby, to put it better in practiſe. For when Chriſt told him of a moſt waighty matter; namely, that hee ſhould denie him: Peter moſt ſleightly regarded it, anſwering raſhly without conſideration, that he ſo little feared that which Chriſt told him of, that Luk. 22. 32. he was ready to goe to priſon, and to death with him: and ſo reſting in his bold anſwere, and deceiueable confidence that he had of his owne ſtrength, for want of aduiſed deliberation, he fell into the ſinne that his Maſter foretold him off, and by a very ſmall occaſion, denied him indeed: and ſo his example is ſet downe and left to vs, to learne wiſedome thereby. Moſes did otherwiſe and farre better: for when he was told that he muſt be ſent to Pharaoh by the Lord to doe his meſſage vnto him, which ſeemed to him ouer Exod. 3. 13. difficult and waighty, yet conſidering thereof aduiſedly, when he ſaw it was impoſed vpon him by the Lord, hee ſtouped to it, fitted himſelfe for it accordingly, and well diſcharged it, and proſpered. And let theſe two examples bee duely weighed and regarded of vs, though contrary the one to the other: and the more vrge vs to practiſe this doctrine: and otherwiſe let vs

not maruell that we thriue not in our waighty attempts, if God be not reuerently harkened vnto in his watchword and warnings, and (as it is moſt meet) duely attended vpon of vs. And this for the generall. Now particularly let this teach vs, that in doing thoſe actions, which ſpecially tend to the glory of God, we haue an eye alſo to the good of our brother. Let vs carrie our ſelues ſo in our zeale toward God, that in the meane ſeaſon wee neglect not dutie toward men, neither cauſe our loue towards our brethren to bee called into queſtion. This is to build in heauen, and pull downe as faſt vpon earth. Ehud heere did farre otherwiſe. It was highly commendable in Paul, and became him well, that he deſired King Agrippas conuerſion, without Act. 26. 29. enioyning him with that benefit, his owne bands. And it becommeth vs to be ſo wiſely feruent in Gods cauſe, that yet wee would not willingly hazard the ſafety, liberty, credit, wealth and welfare of others, by our zeale and ſuffering for it: nay rather, (if there becauſe) redeeme their freedome by our owne damage and detriment. Many are of this prepoſterous opinion, that becauſe they thinke themſelues ſtrong enough to vndergoe trouble and reproch for the Goſpell, and a good cauſe; therefore they looke that all other zealous perſons ſhould doe ſo too, and are ready to cenſure them ſharpely who are not as they themſelues ſeeme to be, not regarding their weakneſſe (who not finding themſelues fit to beare the burthen, ſhould bee pitied in that behalfe: or elſe they thinke that it is a diſcredit to their good cauſe, to ſuffer for it alone: and thus they winde them into a dangerous ſnare with themſelues by drawing them to promiſe and vndertake that which they be vnfit for. Whereas we reade that ſome of the ancient, and ſome of our late Martyrs, who wiſely and charitably tendring the peace and good of their weake brethren, reſolued to beare the brunt themſelues, and counſelled them to prouide for their conſcience, by flight from perſecution, if they felt not themſelues fit to goe vnder it. For the reſt, looke in the next Sermon.
         
         
            THE ONE AND TWENTIETH SERMON WHICH IS THE FIFTH ON THE THIRD CHAPter of the booke of IVDGES.
            
               OF Ehud it followeth ſtill of his conueying away the men when Doct 2. in verſ 18. the Preſent was deliuered, that all inconuenience might bee auoided on both parts: of whom let vs learne, not onely to bee warie that wee bewray not ſecrets vndiſcreetly to any (which hee wiſely preuented by ſending them away) and therefore much more not to many: But alſo as he did, ſo let vs doe; it agreeing with the rule of charity, namely, that if danger trouble, or ſorrow muſt needs enſue and follow by doing ſuch things which wee goe about, and muſt needs take in hand, yet let our care be that the trouble bee no more to

any then it muſt needs be, nor the danger or heauines take hold of no more then muſt of neceſſity haue their part therein. As Ehud ſaw the burthen lay vpon him, hee might if hee would, haue laid it vpon other beſide himſelfe, but that in no wiſe hee would doe, but ſent the reſt of the company home, that they might be out of danger. Which thing I well remember our Sauiour alſo moſt carefully practiſed, and that with no leſſe tender loue and kindneſſe toward his weake Diſciples. For when the Prieſts and Iewes with their band of ſouldiers came to apprehend and take him, they telling him, when he demanded of them whom they ſought, that they ſought him: hee anſwered them, If ye ſeeke me, let theſe (meaning his Diſciples) goe their way: 
               Ioh. 18. 8. and the reaſon of that ſpeech was, that they might eſcape danger.
            Much like to both theſe examples, was the doing of the Shunamite in the ſecond booke of the Kings. For when her child was dead, which the Prophet Eliſha obtained of God for her, ſhee hauing none before, and ſhee knowing and beleeuing, that it ſhould be reſtored to life againe vnto her; 2. King. 4. 21. 22. when ſhe had talked with the Prophet, and made her moue and complaint vnto him, which ſhee ſaw ſhee might doe, and yet returne home againe the ſame day: what did ſhee, thinke wee? Surely this, ſhee locked vp the dead child in the Prophets chamber, (which ſhee had perſwaded her husband to build for him in their owne habitation, to reſt at, when hee paſſed by) and made his death knowne to none, leſt trouble and ſorrow ſhould thereby haue been cauſed to the whole family, and neighbours thereabout, and by faith had the child reſtored aliue vnto her againe. The griefe and care for it muſt needs light on her, and ſhe ſuſtained it her ſelfe, and would haue no other to ſorrow for it, or be troubled about it. But our ſinne about this thing is great, that when wee might with a little trouble to our ſelues, free and eaſe many other, yet wee raiſe and procure it to other alſo: yea and wee bee Note. not ſatisfied, vnleſſe they ſmart as well as we. So farre are we off from regarding other, and from ſeeking their peace, who would liue peaceably by vs. As for example, it is commonly to be ſeene, how many rough and boyſterous husbands grieue and diſquiet both wiſe and family, by their loud and vnbeſeeming as well as vnſeaſonable complaints and outcryings, (whereby they diſquiet the whole family) for ſome ouerſight which they eſpy; yea they haue oft times no cauſe at all to doe ſo; or at leaſt if they had any iuſt cauſe to be grieued, yet a little patience and bearing with the treſpaſſers (as the cauſe requireth) and ſober and kinde telling them of it, might haue done farre more good, and haue kept the whole family quiet. The ſame I may ſay of the wife, if ſhe be giuen to waſpiſhneſſe, and bee ſhrewiſh, hot, and wrathfull, who thereby troubleth both husband and the whole houſe: and this accuſation reacheth yet further; euen to the ſpitefull and malicious, who are not onely oft iarring, and at ſtrife with their neighbours vpon ſmall or no occaſions, but are ready to ſue them at the law for euery trifle, and ſo trouble both them, and themſelues alſo. Whereas the vertuous Queene Heſter beholding how ſhee was the onely hope and helpe vnder God of the Heſt. 4. 16. Churches deliuerance from Hamans plot and deuiſing to waſt and deſtroy it vtterly; tooke vpon her the going about it, though it was with moſt likely perill of her life, and that without the hurt of any one beſide; ſaying in ſo doubtfull a caſe, If I periſh, I periſh. Yea Saul himſelfe, who yet had no commendation

through the ſtory for vprightneſſe and goodneſſe, would not ſuffer any of the murmurers and repiners againſt his entring in, to bee puniſhed at his firſt comming to his kingdome, as ſome would haue had it, but 1. Sam. 11. 13. choſe rather to put vp the diſgrace, ſaying: there ſhall no man die this day; for to day the Lord hath ſaued Iſrael. And this by occaſion of Ehuas ſending the people away that went with him, being the firſt of the three things mentioned, to be contained in theſe 3. verſes.
            Now followeth the ſecond thing, to wit, of Ehuds ſecond going to Eglon, 
               Verſ. 19. 20. The ſenſe.
                and what he ſaid. Hee returned in haſt from the place neere Gilgal in the land of Iſrael, whither hee had conducted the people, which could not bee farre from the place where King Eglon lay: for hee hauing brought the Iſraelites into ſubiection to him; it is cleere thot he lay neere their borders, the better to ſee them kept vnder: and he comming to him, told him hee had a meſſage which was of ſecreſie to doe vnto him. Whereat the King required him to ſtay the vttering of it, till the company ſtanding by, were commanded out of the place. For hee hauing ſo lately receiued a preſent at his hand, had no ſuſpition of any trechery to be intended by him. The company being gone, Ehud was admitted to come neare vnto him. And telling him that his meſſage was from God, hee ſtood vp to doe reuerence at that name: and ſo by this meanes he had the way made more eaſie for him, and the better opportunitie to doe the worke he went about.
            And in theſe two verſes we may ſee, conſidering that the Lord called Ehud to this worke, for the deſtroying of that his peoples enemy, and to deliuer them out of his hands, (for elſe it had been a moſt bloody and trecherous act) we may ſee (I ſay) the courage and confidence that was in him, to aduenture that great danger that hee did, by going about to kill Eglon the King: who, if before his attempt he had been detected and found out, had been put (who doubteth?) to moſt extreme tortures among enemies, and no friend of his ſtanding by or in preſence. And what had hee to vphold himſelfe by, in that great difficulty and fearfull danger, but his truſt in God, and confidence, that hee who laid that worke vpon him, would bring him well through it? And yet how hard a thing it was for him, who ſeeth not, if he will rightly conſider it, in that difficulty and great ſtraite that hee was in, to beleeue that God would make way for him, and enable him to ſuch a worke, all likelihoode thereof being taken away. And this teacheth vs, what Doct. verſ. 19. the nature of faith & confidence is, wherſoeuer, and in whomſoeuer it is to be found: that they looke not vpon things that are ſeene, which may-work 2. Cor. 4. 24. deadly diſcouragement and anguiſh: but vpon that which is not ſeene with Note. mortal eye, and that is Gods power and willingneſſe ready at hand to helpe vs forward, and to encourage vs (to waite for the accompliſhing of that which we beleeue and looke for) in our greateſt need.
            This it was that animated and ſtrengthened Ehud to attempt this dangerous worke. And this faith and confidence hartened and emboldened the Ioſh. 3. 13. 14. Prieſts, when the Lord by Ioſhua commanded them for their paſſing into the land of Canaan, to ſet their feet on the water, to goe ouer the riuer Iordan, (how vnlikely ſoeuer it was) their beleeuing (I ſay) the Lord by the mouth of Ioſhua, that a way ſhould be made for them to paſſe through ſafely, as on dry land, euen that it was that hartened them to doe it, who yet in ſo

doing, muſt of neceſſity haue been drowned by mans reaſon and iudgement. And this faith made Peter bold to pronounce to the lame and diſeaſed, euen while they lay viſited, to pronounce (I ſay) in the hearing of all Act. 3. 6. and 9. 34. that ſtood by, when he ſaw no likelihood thereof appeare: Ieſus Chriſt maketh you whole, ariſe and walke. For hee beleeued Chriſt who had ſaid to him that he ſhould worke a miracle, whenſoeuer it was expedient, and that faith made him bold to ſay ſo: whereas if that had not been immediately done indeed, which he foreſaid ſhould come to paſſe, that the parties ſhould bee healed; he ſhould haue been vtterly diſcredited, and laughed to ſcorne, and caſt out from mens company, as a deceiuer.
            This faith made the holy Martyrs yeeld their bodies to the fire, for the Note. defence of Gods truth, while they beleeued, not onely that they ſhould bee receiued after into glory; but alſo that God would ſtrengthen them for the preſent time to endure the flame. And this it is that inableth vs to ſuffer the hardneſſe which wee willingly ſuſtaine throughout our liues, euen this, that we truſt and reſt perſwaded, that God will bring vs well through it, and afterwards receiue vs into his eternall kingdome. Which cauſed Saint Paul 
               Act. 21. 13. to vtter theſe words: Why weepe ye thus, and rend my heart? for I am reſolued and ready not to bee bound onely, but alſo to die at Ieruſalem for the name of the Lord Ieſus: and euen ſo he taught, writing to Timothy; Therefore we ſuffer becauſe we 
               1. Tim. 4. 10. 
               beleeue in the liuing God, who is the ſauiour of all, but eſpecially of them that beleeue. And this of Ehud in theſe two verſes, and of his words ſpoken to the King. and as for ſuch as aske why he deluded the King with a lie, while hee went about to kill him, ſeeing hee vttered no meſſage to him at all; when yet hee told him hee had a meſſage from God vnto him: to them I anſwere; the word which is tranſlated meſſage or errand, doth not onely ſignifie a word or meſſage by mouth, but alſo a thing or deed, ſuch as that was which he did vnto him; for he was ſent from God to kill him, euen as among the Latines, Verbum & res. Quid hoc verbi eſt? Quid hoc rei eſt? both are one.
            Now followeth the third thing, and that is in this 20. verſe, namely, of Ehuds 
               
                  The vnfolding of the latter part of verſ 19. and of the 20. laſt words to the King immediately before he killed him, and of Eglons behauiour thereat, as it is heere ſet downe, let vs conſider: of which, this I ſay; In that he ſhould ſo ſimply hearken to, and beleeue him, admit him into his ſecret parlour, and that Ehud being a ſtranger, ſhould neither be ſuſpected, nor ſearched (as the manner is, and great reaſon was for it) before hee ſhould haue acceſſe to the King, and that none of all the Kings attendants ſhould aduiſe ſuch a matter, that hee ſhould not bee ſuffered to ſtand on his feet before the King, which was more ſuſpitious,) but rather commanded to bee vpon his knees before him, and then that hee ſhould cauſe his owne company to goe out of the place, and leaue them two onely together; but eſpecially to let Ehud depart, before they ſaw all to be wel: Theſe (I ſay) and ſuch like, if the Lord had not blinded, and caſt a myſt before them, could neuer haue paſſed as they did. And we may ſay, it was much like that which we reade of Abner, captaine of Sauls hoaſt, and all his men; to wit, that when 1. Sam. 26. 15. he imagined that Dauid purſued him, and ſought his life, and ſhould therefore haue more ſpecially watched and attended the Kings perſon, then at other times; yet that euen then all the armie ſhould be aſleepe together where they lay; in ſo much that Dauid challenged Abner for it; was it not admirable?

For it could not haue been ſo in any reaſon, except God had caſt a ſleepe vpon them, to the end that Dauids integrity and innocency toward Saul, might be knowne, when there was ſeene no other way to ſhew it, and all ſaw (that would) how he might haue killed Saul.
            
            And hereby let vs learne, that when God will haue any worke wrought, Doct in verſ. 19. & 20. or any thing brought to paſſe for his glory, the good of his Church, or deſtruction of his enemies, he hauing many waies to bring it to paſſe, will effect it through infinite difficulties, without our troubling our ſelues about it. For his prouidence alway miniſtreth to, and makes way for his purpoſe till it be executed. Dauid was ſo coped in by Saul at one time, that there ſeemed no hope of eſcape: but then the Lord whiſtled him away, and ſet him about other buſineſſe. What lets and diſcouragements (thinke wee) had Noah to hold him from that great worke of building the Arke to the preſeruing Gen. 6. 13. 14. of the world, and the Church of God? I will leaue it to the conſideration of the reader, rather then ſpend the time in laying it forth. In the bringing to paſſe Gods promiſe to Ioſeph in his dreame, what a long time was it before it was effected? euen well nigh twentie yeeres: and how vnlike, and in the meane while, how many difficulties were raiſed and ſet in the way to the fruſtrating of it? as the malice and enuie of his brethren, ſome of them intending and ſeeking to kill him, but all the company conſenting that he ſhould be ſold to ſtrangers a farre off, from whence they thought he Gen. 37. 21. 22. ſhould neuer haue bin any more ſeen of them, neither his dreames come to paſſe: and then his impriſonment alſo after all, by the falſe accuſation of his whoriſh miſtriſſe: who would not haue ſaid, that by the meanes of all theſe, he ſhould haue been vtterly depriued of the benefit of the promiſes which God had made to him? But could they preuaile? was any iot of Gods word Gen. 42. 21. made voide, ſo that it came not to paſſe?
            And was all the cruell malice of Haman eaſily auoided in plotting the deſtruction of all the Iewes Gods people: the day thereof being appointed, Heſt. 7. 50. the King perſwaded by him to let all be as hee would haue it, and no friend to them, (but they were as ſheep appointed to be ſlaine) but they that were in as great danger themſelues, that is to ſay, Heſter and Mardocai: and when ſhee the Queene, who was all their hope vnder God, ſhould goe about to helpe them out of the danger, ſhe brought her ſelfe thereby into the preſent perill of her life. And yet becauſe it could not be poſſible that the Church of God ſhould be ouerthrowne, did not he moſt ſtrangely deliuer it? But to let paſſe examples in Scripture; euen thus the Lord hath and doth vphold his Church heere and there for a time againſt all enemies and lets, and will doe, till he hath accompliſhed, and made vp his number. And when wee ſee that he continueth his fauour more ſpecially to any place or people, through many trials, let vs ſay, the Lord hath done great and maruellous things for Note, them, and they had need to acknowledge his kindneſſe, and profit by it more then in common manner, leſt their account be harder to be made then other mens. And to come to ſhew it more particularly, and ſo to conclude this point; if euery priuate perſon whom this concerneth, could weigh through what difficulties, (as tentations and diſcouragements,) God hath brought him to hold and keepe faith and a good conſcience, both in the beginning, middle part of his combate and conflicting daies, and more ſpecially

when he hath well nigh runne his race, and finiſhed his courſe with ioy; oh what thankes would he render to the Lord for it? For all ſuch may well Note. remember how oft they haue ſaid within themſelues, that they ſhall neuer be ſtabliſhed and perſeuere to the end, and that the promiſe of heauen made to them, is too good to be true. And yet God hath ſo mixed his power with their weakeneſſe, and ſo vpheld them beyond their expectation, that hee hath brought them ſafely through all that they feared. Oh I cannot ſufficiently magnifie and commend this goodneſſe of the Lord, and withall, the glorious worke of faith, and what wonders they effect! and yet little known or asked after. But ſeeing the arme of the Lord is no more ſhortened now, then in times paſt, but he doth great things for them that beleeue at this day; let vs alſo learne Dauids leſſon: Commit thy way to the Lord (ſaith he) and beleeue 
               Pſal. 37. 3. 
               that he will effect it, and he will doe it in deed, without any needleſſe and indirect trouble, or fretting care of thine: but if we beleeue not, I deny not but that we may ſee (as Eliſha told the Prince of Iſrael, and Mordicai Heſter) 
               2 King 7. 2. Heſt. 4. 14. Gods promiſes performed to others which hee made, as the vnbeleeuing Prince did, but we ſhall haue no part therein our ſelues, nor cauſe of ſound reioycing thereat, in as much as we had no exerciſe of our faith in beleeuing them. Therefore this worthily deſerueth at the hands of all the children of God (to whom the fruit of this doctrine hath in any meaſure been granted, and who haue any proofe of their faith at al, that at leaſt they yeeld the Lord thus much; that as they bee thankfull (yea euen with admiration) to conſider how hee hath brought matters to paſſe for them beyond hope: ſo that they arme themſelues to beleeue ſtill, and that more aſſuredly that God is able and willing to make way for them in all their deſires, or diſtreſſes, without which yet they ſhal loſe the benefit of this his power and loue. But more of this, as occaſion ſhall be offered.
            As for Eglons riſing vp at the mention of God, as though hee had reuerenced Doct. verſ. 20. him, (for this is the next thing that followeth in the text) howſoeuer they vſed to doe ſo at that time who were but heathen Kings, as Baalam before, when Balak then King of Moab, came to him, and his Princes with him, to aske what Gods anſwere was to him, Baalam (I ſay) then ſpake thus vnto him: Ariſe Balak to heare Gods voice, and to giue reuerence to it. Concerning his riſing vp (I ſay at the naming of God (that wee may make ſome good vſe of it, wee are ſure it ſerueth to conuince Atheiſts, and prophane ones, who are farre from yeelding any. But if yee will ſay, what reuerence was that which they gaue, ſeeing they were Idolaters, and did it at the naming of God, whether it were the true God Iehouah, or any other, I ſay, ſufficient to condemne theſe. But ſome make ſhewes of reuerence when in truth they offer diſgrace. So we reade of the Phariſies, that when it was proued to them by the blind man, that Chriſt had opened his eyes, which they Ioh. 9. 24. could not abide to heare, they would not take knowledge of it; but as though they might boldly and freely detract from him whom they hated, (ſo that they gaue words of honour to God) bewrayed their hypocriſie, who would ſeeme holy, and therefore ſaid; giue glory to God, wee know that this man is a ſinner: and ſo bewrayed that they had no religion, when yet they would ſeeme to goe before others therein: ſeeing this is true, that hee that honoureth not the ſonne, neither doth hee honour the father. Let all this

then, both ſerue to ſhame all brutiſh and prophane perſons, (who yet are in the viſible Church) who aſcribe not ſo much to the word preached, neither regard the meſſage of God, with ſo much reuerence as this heathen Eglon did; who in token thereof ſtood vp when Ehud told him that he had a meſſage for him from God. But to leaue theſe, let it bee a watch word to vs that profeſſe the true worſhip of God, that we pleaſe not our ſelues in the worke wrought; I meane in giuing outward and bodily worſhip to God, and in Mat. 15. 9. calling him father; ſeeing neither they who draw neare to him with bodies onely, doe pleaſe him; neither all that ſay, Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the Mat. 7. 21. kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the wil of the father that is in heauen: 2. Tim. 2. 19. and againe, ſeeing it is written, that all who call on the name of the Lord, muſt depart from iniquity: let vs regard that duly, without which wee ſhall haue no more to commend vs to God, then this Heathen King had. But of this enough before, cap. 1. verſ. 4. It followeth.
            
               Verſ. 21. And Ehud put forth his left hand, and tooke the dagger from his right thigh, and thruſt it into his belly.
               
               22. So that the haft went in after the blade, and the fat cloſed about the blade, ſo that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly, but the dirt came out.
               
            
            OF Ehuds intent and preparation to kill Eglon King of Moab, wee haue The ſenſe and doctrine of theſe two verſes. heard: now followeth the execution of it. For as Iael was ſtrengthened by God, to deſtroy and kill Sicera, captaine of Iabin King of Canaan; ſo the Lord ſtrengthened Ehud heere, to bring downe Eglon King of Moab, that Iſrael his people who cried vnto him, might bee deliuered out of the bondage that he had brought them into. And thus God in a moment tooke Doct. in verſ. 21. away the life and honour of him both together, by one deadly blow? wherin hee would ſhew vs the wofull eſtate of thoſe, who haue nothing but in this world, to what end they may come euen heere, they know not how ſoone and ſuddenly, beſide the irkeſome deſolation that ſhall meet with them when they goe hence. Oh the baſe and lothſome death that God would haue him brought vnto, and yet in his flouriſhing eſtate, ſo far from likelihood of any change or decay at all! If wee regard any thing, wee will conſider this: examples are infinite. Thus Belſhazzar and Herod were taken downe in the middeſt of their iollity. Adde to theſe, Nabal for the vncomfortableneſſe 1. Sam. 25. 37. 38. of his death, with Zimri that burned himſelfe, to burne the Kings pallace in Tirza, and ſo died; and with Ioaſh the King of Iuda, 1. King. 16. 19. who was ſlaine of his ſeruants, and Iezabel, whoſe blood was without compaſſion 2. King. 12. 20. daſhed againſt the ſtones. Euen ſo, doe wee not daily ſee the flouriſhing Luk. 21. 6. eſtates of men turned to moſt deſolate decay? in ſo much as they bee iuſtly reproued for making them their Paradiſe; and that by the words of our Sauiour [are theſe the things ye looke after?] and alſo when hee Luk. 29. 42. bewailed them, for that they died without hope. And heere by ſo fit an occaſion as is offered by Ehuds killing of Eglon this King of Moab: I thinke it not vnfit in this place, (though in a word, and by way of execration) to note and bring to the remembrance of the Reader, the curſed practiſe of Ieſuites in murthering, and bringing vntimely death vpon the Lords annointed, Kings and Princes, vnder the colour of their

hereſie (as they call it) or leſt they ſhould incurre ſome way the Popes diſpleaſure for not doing ſo; as though they would helpe the Lord to cut off ſuch as flouriſh and proſper. And the rather I mention them, becauſe they defend themſelues by this fact of Ehud, and ſuch like, moſt impudently and abiurdly, to couer their horrible treaſons and murthers. The two laſt Kings of France were thus handled, and the facts with the doers highly extolled by theſe that hartened them on thereto. Oh villaine intolerable! whereby, as by their perſecuting the Goſpell, they moſt liuely ſhew themſelues to bee vtter aduerſaries to Chriſt, and to bee moſt neare akind to them who commit the ſinne againſt which we ſhould not pray, that cannot bee forgiuen. But to leaue them whom God alloweth not to bee inſtruments of ſuch bloody acts and trecheries, let vs returne to the perſons before mentioned, who liued heere in pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon, and were without God in the world, and ſoone periſhed miſerably.
            Theſe with many other mentioned in the Scriptures, and in later Chronicles (for I ſpeake of the chiefe and greateſt perſons, ſeeing they doe moſt moue affection,) ſo highly aduanced in this world, and yet ſo ſoone and ſuddenly ſpoiled and bereaued of all their honour and excellency (as I haue ſaid) and to change it with a baſe death, and a worſe eſtate afterwards; doe liuely ſet before our eyes the miſery of all ſuch, as looke no further, then after brauerie, iollity, vaine pleaſure, and large poſſeſſions, which they can neither keepe, when their deadly blow is giuen them, and when their dreadfull woe commeth, ſo that they might bee any comforts to them; nor loſe and part from them (if they haue any time to thinke thereof) without deadly diſlike, and moſt bitter vexation. So that it may worthily warne all ſuch as be of high degree, and much more vs that are inferiour perſons; and therefore ought firſt to ſtoope to conſider of, and prouide for our ende, that when we muſt departhence, (which time is moſt vncertaine) we may bee prepared to die happily, and prouide to be receiued into heauenly habitations. For wee ſee what a pitifull and dangerous thing it is to reſt vpon that which we enioy heere, as wealth, pompe, young yeeres, or any other earthly proſperity. The Lord ſcatters men in the imaginations of their hearts. He ſweepes downe their warped thoughts, as copwebs with beezome. It had been well with Eglon, and ſuch as hee was, (all that heare of him will ſay) if he had enioyed nothing; and much better if hee had been nothing. Note. Euen thus the hand of God is againſt all his enemies, and when the day of reckoning commeth, they periſh. It is reported (in the hiſtory of that time) that an Emperour of Rome, Adrian by name, when hee ſhould die, and Melanct in Adriano. leaue all his iollity, being ſuddenly ſtricken with great terrour, vſed theſe words: Oh my poore wandring ſillie ſoule, which haſt been long a companion and gueſt of my body, what ſhall hereafter become of thee, or whither wilt thou goe? Thou haſt been iollie, merrie, and full of ſporting and pleaſures, but now thou muſt goe where theee is no ſuch matter, forlorne, deſolate, and forſaken. Behold in this great man, the wofull apprehenſion and fearefull preſage of the woe to come, euen while he liued: the which doubtleſſe ſeazing vpon the mighty and glorious (when no outward thing can comfort them) ſhould flaight and terrifieal ſorts and degrees of men from reſting vpon any earthly props, wanting Gods fauour for their chiefe ſtay and refuge.
            
               
And heere in laying out the fearefull manner of killing Eglon, occaſion Doct in verſ 22. being offered to make mention of that which was lothſome to the eare; in that it was vttered in more ſeemly termes and words: we may learne how warily wee ſhould ſpeake of things more vnſeemely, or which are more harſh in the hearing; and follow the holy Ghoſt in our termes, namely to vtter that (which might elſe offend the eares of the moſt) in more ſeemely and honeſt words. So the action of the marriage bed is vſually expreſſed by the holy Ghoſt in moſt chaſt and ſeemely words. As it is ſaid of Dauid, 
               1. King. 1. 4. when Abiſhag the Shunamite was brought vnto him to miniſter to him, though ſhe cheriſhed him, and lay in his boſome in his extreme age, that he might get heate by her, it is ſaid in modeſt words, that the King knew her not: ſo Mary, how can this be, ſeeing I knew not a man? Such are the termes vſed Luk. 1. 34. by the holy Ghoſt, of diſcouering the ſhame and couering the nakedneſſe of Noah our father, as Shem and Iaphei did. And although education and good manners teach vs modeſty, yet grace muſt teach the language of Canaan, whereof this is a part. The Lord commanded Iſrael to couer their Deut. 23. 12. 13. 14. excrements with their paddle, becauſe hee walked among them: and ſo ought we to behaue our ſelues, eſpecially Preachers muſt beware of brode, vnſeemely, and offenſiue ſpeech in this kinde, becauſe they are to vtter the will of God, in the moſt ſeemely and reuerent phraſe and manner. And diuers other ſuch might bee brought forth, but that I would not bee long in this matter, where fewer words may ſerue. Which is to the iuſt reproofe of many in our time, who as they are rude and brutiſh in their behauiour, ſo haue they as beaſtly and filthy tongues to vtter their mindes by, in too vnſeemely manner, as they know who are their companions, and like vnto them. And this of Ehuds killing Eglon.
            
         
         
            
            THE TWENTIE TWO SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               VERS. 23. Then Ehud got him out into the porch, and ſhut the dores of the parlour vpon him, and locked them.
               
               24. And when he was gone out, his ſeruants came, who ſeeing that the doores of the parlour were locked, they ſaid; ſurely hee doth his eaſement in his ſommer parlour.
               
               25. And they tarried till they were aſhamed: and ſeeing he opened not the doores of the parlour, they tooke the key and opened them, and behold their Lord was fallen dead on the earth.
               
               26. So Ehud eſcaped (while they tarried) and was paſſed the quarries, and eſcaped to Seirah.
               
            
            
               NOw of the things that followed this action, and pertained to it, according to the diuiſion made in the end of the fifteenth verſe: they are ſet downe in theſe foure verſes, and tend all to this end, to ſhew how God made way for Ehuds ſafe eſcaping. And therefore firſt note we ſomewhat generally, and then more particularly afterward. For his comming forth, in that none of the Kings ſeruants were at hand to goe into the Kings parlour preſently, or if they were there attending, yet that they ſhould be ſo negligent and forgetfull to goe in forthwith, but to tarrie till Ehud might be gone paſt all danger, it was as I ſaid of his going about it, ſo ordered by God▪ that all might ſay, thus hee would haue it, and then we know, that none can withſtand or reſiſt it. To teach vs the ſame ſo that although a man would thinke, that there might be many waies to ouerthrow and fruſtrate Gods purpoſe, yet none of them ſhal ſtand, for why? there is no counſell againſt the Lord. Who would not haue thought, but Prou. that Pharaoh might haue kept the people of Iſrael ſtill in his land, and that Exod. 12. 41. none could haue brought ſuch a mighty people) euen many hundred thouſands) out of it againſt his will? But yet behold, ſeeing God would deliuer them, it was not he, nor all his chariots, no nor all the Kings in the world, if they had ioyned with him, that could haue hindred it.
            It might likewiſe haue been thought an eaſie matter for King Ahab and Iezabel, full of ſpite and cruelty, with all their ſtrength, friends, and retinue, 1. King. 19. 1. 2. whom they might haue commanded and ſet about it, to roote out and take out of the way, the poore Prophet of God Elias, which they deſired moſt earneſtly to haue done: but ſeeing God would preſerue him to honour his name, it was in vaine for them to attempt or goe about it. So for Paul, one

ſeely Apoſtle to conquer ſo great a part of the world by the preaching of the Goſpell, which it had vtterly reiected, how admirable a thing was it? ſeeing it is manifeſt, that the malitious Iewes reſiſted, and came againſt him in all places: but who might withſtand God, when he would haue it ſo? For in that one city at Corinth, he bad him go forward in preaching, and faint not, Act. 18. 9. 10. 11 where he had much people; adding this for encouragement thereto, that none ſhould be able to hinder it. And let vs in theſe daies be wiſe by ſo many faire warnings. It cannot be that one of Gods faithfull ſhall periſh, therefore let vs not ſmite at ſuch, with tongue nor hand as hee loueth: hee will Note. fight for them, and curſe them that curſe his, and they ſhall repent it, if not too late, that they went about to hurt them. But of this I ſpake before in the Gen. 11. 35. former Sermon, though not in the ſame words, nor making the ſame vſe thereof: therefore thus much briefly of theſe verſes in generall.
            Now that it is ſaid in this verſe, that Ehud, when he had done this worke Doct. of verſ. 23. vpon Gods enemy, came forth neither in feare, nor any great haſte, in any diſguiſed manner, but as though hee had done nothing worthy ſuſpition, neither gaue any token of a guilty conſcience, but as one that had ſerued God in that worke. It liuely ſetteth before our eyes the peaceable fruit of an excuſing and quiet conſcience. Behold the like in Iael, the wife of Heber, 
               Iudg. 4. 22. who hauing ſlaine Siſera, whereas any other doing ſuch an act of his owne head with a murthering mind in ſuch a matter, could hardly haue auoided it, but he ſhould haue bewrayed himſelfe eaſily and palpably: as is to bee ſeene in Iudas betraying his maſter, who cried out of his owne fact, ſaying; I Mat. 27. 4. haue ſinned in betraying the innocent blood. And it may teach vs how greatly the quiet and excuſing conſcience of the innocent and righteous man differeth from the guilty and accuſing conſcience of the vngodly. And it agreeth with the words of the Wiſe man, who ſaith; The righteous is bold as 
               Prou. 28. 1. 
               a Lion, but the wicked fleeth, when no man purſueth him. The ground of this his peace, was the diſcharge of that duty which the Lord impoſed vpon him, in this extraordinary caſe, the which otherwiſe had been abominable parricide. And although this viperous brood of Ieſuites pretend the like diſpenſation from their pettie god the Pope, and thereupon harden their hearts, and ſet an impudent face vpon the matter, as if they had no wound or terrour of conſcience: yet the truth is, their ground being naught, the cauſe of this boldneſſe is ſhameleſneſſe, impudency, and want of conſcience at all, if they be not wounded. Hell can onely terrifie theſe helhounds, for God they feare not, and they haue hardened their faces (as it ſeemeth) to regard no man. Where we may ſee a double benefit that the godly reape and enioy by hauing allowance and warrant from God for the duties they doe: to wit, inward quietneſſe of mind, and ſtrength and courage thereby to beare any outward danger or trouble, if need ſhould bee, and both the contraries to purſue and take hold of the other, that is, an helliſh minde toward God, and terrour and dread though they bite it in, in regard of the world, or an hardened heart which is worſe then both.
            As for thoſe which waited on the King, they did fooliſhly: they ſhould Verſ. 24. 25. The clearing of them.
                haue caſt the hardeſt, when Ehud came forth of the parlour, and haue ſtayed him, and not haue kept out ſo long, and haue made ſuch delay as they did: for delaies are dangerous where the matter is weighty, in which they are vſed.

And they being thought ſo wiſe that the keeping of their Lord and maſter was committed to them: they failed greatly and groſly in their duty; and therefore they reaped the fruit thereof, when after their long tarying, they came in at the laſt and found him ſlaine. This is that which delay breedeth Doct. verſ. 24. 25. in all things, (not in their doings onely) and the more danger, the greater the things are, as I haue ſaid. Thus Baa
                     •
                  ah and Rechab by the negligence of the Kings officers, ſlew him on his bed. And as this teacheth euery priuate man to be diligent and warie about the duties that belong to his function and calling, to preuent loſſe and damage; ſo eſpecially it commendeth vigilancie and circumſpection in al ſuch, as through whoſe hands great matters of ſtate and gouernment doe paſſe, that neither by their careleſnes, conniuence, or other ſiniſter reſpects, they ſuffer that miſchiefe to grow vpon Church and Common wealth, which by their prouidence might in ſeaſon be preuented ere it bee helpeleſſe. The fit ſeaſon therefore is to bee taken, in earthly buſineſſe and our common affaires, as this was heere by Ehud: wee muſt vſe the opportunity; reape the corne when it calleth for the ſickie, and ſtrike the iron while it is hot: ſo our market muſt be made, while a good peniworth may be had. Doe all thou haſt to doe with diligence, while the day Eccleſ. 5. laſteth: the night will come, wherin ſuch workes cannot be done. Remember the rich man, who being in hell in torments, was denied a drop of cold water, becauſe hee auoided them not while he enioyed plenty. So Haman made requeſt for his life too late And by their ſlackneſſe and delay we may Luk 16. 25. much more be warned in the weighty affaires that concerne our happines, 2. Cor. 6. 2. to take the fit ſeaſon: that is, to ſeeke the Lord while he may bee found, and not driue off from day to day, but to remember our maker in the daies of Eſa. 55. 6. Eccleſ. 
                     ••
                   1. our youth, and to day, while wee heare his voice, not to harden our hearts, Pſal. 95. 8. but imbrace his meſſage both in the Law and promiſes of God by faith vnto ſaluation. The ſeruants that kept not Saul, but ſlipt in great danger, were acceſſaries (as Dauid tels Abner in Sauls caſe) though they betrayed him 1. Sam. 26. 16. not: euen ſo the careleſſe delayer to get faith and repentance, ſhall periſh, as he that hates to be reformed. The fiue fooliſh Virgins knocked to be let in, Luk. 13. 3. Pſal 50 16. Mat. 25. 11. 12. when the doore was ſhut. Euen ſo in all particular actions of our life, looke we before all other things to keepe our conſcience pure and good. To the like purpoſe much might bee ſaid. And this by occaſion of the ſeruants delay, and their aſtoniſhment, when they ſaw how it fell out to them thereby.
            
               Ehud reaped the benefit of this their delay, for while they thus draue off Doct. verſ. 26. and loſt the time in which they ſhould haue carefully attended vpon their Lord, hee eſcaped out of their hands, and wound out of all danger, hee paſſing the quarries, which it ſeemeth were places betwixt Gilgall of the Iſraelites, and the Moabites, which before he could get beyond, he was not paſt danger: and ſo comming to Seirah, a place heere mentioned in the borders of Iſrael, further off from danger, he was in ſafety. And thus wee ſee againe, that they who are wiſe and ſpeedy in their buſineſſe, doe thriue and proſper, when they who delay the time, doe apparantly ſit in their owne light, and worke their owne ſorrow and annoyance, as wee haue heard: euen as he who hauing fooliſhly refuſed a good bargaine, which might haue been for for the benefit and maintenance both of him and his long after, mourneth

and diſpaireth of the like offer and opportunity. The diligent hand maketh rich, and he that watereth ſhall alſo haue raine. Curſed is hee that doth the Lords buſineſſe negligently. The people in Iohn Baptiſts time receiued the Mat. 11. word with greedineſſe, happie was hee that could enter firſt into the kingdome of God, and they that make no haſt doe neuer come thither. And yet they that ſtriue to enter in at the ſtraite gate ſhall bee receiued into glory: when other ſhall ſeeke to enter afterward (too late) and ſhall not bee able. And therfore the Apoſtle tels vs, that ſuch as can redeeme the time, are wiſe men; the fooliſh beleeue euery thing, and ſo driue off, and are taken in the 
                  Compare verſ. 16. with the 15. of Epheſ. 5. ſnare. Thus wee ſee the wiſe take the opportunity, and bring their matters thereby to a good paſſe. But for all that I haue ſaid of ſpeedineſſe, yet vnderſtand me thus: that raſhneſſe is as farre from commendation, as driuing off the time, and delay. Thus much of Ehuds firſt worke in killing the chiefe enemie of Gods people, that Eglon the King; which was a great meane of their deliuerance and reſt.
            
               Verſ. 27. And when he came home, he blew a trumpet in mount Ephraim, and the children of Iſrael went downe with him from the mountaine, and hee went before them.
               
               28. Then ſaid he vnto them, follow mee, for the Lord hath deliuered your enemies, euen Moab, into your hands. So they went downe after him, and tooke the paſſages of Iordan toward Moab, and ſuffered not a man to paſſe ouer.
               
               29. And they ſlue of the Moabites the ſame time about ten thouſand men, all fed men, and all warriors, and there eſcaped not a man.
               
               30. So Moab was ſubdued that day vnder the hand of Iſrael, and the land had reſt four ſcore yeeres.
               
            
            THe ſecond meane of Iſraels deliuerance followeth; and that was, the Verſ. 27. The ſenſe and ſumme of theſe 4. verſes.
                cutting off of ten thouſand of the valiant men of Moab, which was the other good helpe toward their deliuerance beſide the killing of the King, which now followeth to the ending and making vp of this Story, to verſ. 31. But firſt it is ſhewed what Ehud did to the bringing of this to paſſe. The things that Ehud went about, whereby ſo many of the Moabites were ſlaine and Iſrael was deliuered, were theſe three: firſt, as hee was a valiant man, ſo he comming to the place heere mentioned, Seirah by name, (it was not Seir in Idumea, but neare to mount Ephraim in the land of Canaan, as was ſaid before) hee did not leaue the worke vnperfect, which hee had begun in killing the King of Moab, but 1. with a trumpet he called together the men of Ephraim, and by his authority ſtirred them vp to warre: and 2. to encourage them the better therto, he aſſured them from God of the victorie: and 3. with this, they tooke vp and beſet the foords of Iordan, where the Moabites paſſed ouer too and fro out of Iſrael into the land of Moab: and by this meanes they ſtayed ſuch of them as were on that ſide the riuer, that they could not eſcape and goe ouer, and thoſe that came out of the land of Moab ouer the riuer to reſcue their fellowes, and purſue Iſrael, they ſlew alſo, till ten thouſand men of good courage were cut off. And this if they had not done, the Moabites being ſo inraged againſt them for that which was done to their King, they had made ſpoile and hauocke of them, whereas

now they ſubdued them, and obtained a long time of reſt themſelues. Thus much for the clearing of theſe 4. verſes.
            Now of that which we are to learne out of them. Ehud did not delay, as 
                  The meaning of verſ. 27 particularly.
                we ſee, for that had bin full of danger, but now while the Moabites through aſtoniſhment at that which was befallen them, could not by and by ſee and determine what was beſt to be done, he plied it, and went to worke, as wee haue heard. It is as hard a matter to vſe an opportunity wiſely, and purſue the occaſion effectually when it is offered, as it is at firſt to get and take it. But Ehud loſt no time, but followed it hard: and as he had eicaped while the ſeruants delayed; ſo now hee gathers his army together, while the Moabites (being amazed with terrour) were fit by paſſing to and fro to bee purſued, and diſcomfited. And as this doth ſhew how vnwearied wee ought to be in Doct. thoſe actions that tend to the glory of God, the good of the Church, and the confuſion of the enemies thereof; ſo, more generally it teacheth vs, when we haue made a good beginning in any thing, that we ſhould not bee ſlacke in going forward, and following it: but as Ehud heere did, wiſely and carefully labour to bring our worke vnto an end. It is a thing much more common to begin well, then to goe forward ſo, whether wee vnderſtand it generally, to make a beginning in Chriſtianity, or in any particular part thereof, it is moſt true. For the formoſt, many of vs come to profeſſe the Goſpell indeed, and imbrace it commendably, by hearing it ioyfully, in conuerſing with Gods people kindly, & in forſaking many parts of our former bad liues. But when wee ſhould hold on in this good manner to ſearch Note. further into our ſelues, to finde out our ranke corruptions, and to purge our ſelues of them, and to be grounded in our moſt holy faith, and ſtabliſhed as Iudg. 19. we may attaine to, we waxe ſoone weare, and begin to ſtand at a ſtay, and ſo we loſe all our labour that we haue beſtowed already, and fruſtrate the work that was well begun.
            And ſo to ſay the ſame of particulars, it is well ſeene, that many attempt ſundry good actions commendably; as the labouring for a good Miniſter, and the drawing of the people to godly ſociety and loue in a towne, and to haue an eye to the vnruly: other begin good exerciſes and orders in their family, and namely, prayer morning and euening; and ſome vſe good meanes for the well ordering, and good gouerning of their liues, and labour to roote out particular abuſes out of them, and to entertaine grace and good duties, and many ſuch like I might mention. But I cannot tell how it commeth to paſſe, that as if they thought theſe good things ſhould laſt but for a while, or as though they would hold in good plight without meanes (wherin they ſhew that they are not well grounded, though they did well for a ſeaſon) ſo they goe to worke, and what with diſcouragements and croſſes on the one ſide, and allurements and prouocations on the other ſide, they faint and breake off: whereas that ſhould not bee, till the worke were brought to a good end, that ſo they might goe forward in other duties in like manner. Neither ſhould wee looke to the things paſt, what good wee haue done more then other, to become leſſe carefull thereby in going forward; Phil. 3. 13. 14. but what remaineth yet to bee done till wee haue brought our good attempts to paſſe; and one good duty ſhould follow after another, vntill we haue finiſhed our courſe with ioy. Wee muſt remember that the Merchant

went and bought the pearle when hee had found it: and the wiſe Virgins Mat. 13. 42. Mat. 25. 4. kept oyle in their lampes. And heere it were to good purpoſe to thinke of Ehuds vnwearied care and labour, till he had brought all to a good end, and of ſuch other as did the like; and to conſider with our ſelues (as hee and ſuch did) how all that hath been done of vs in ſuch caſes, ſhould bee but in vaine; and beſide, great danger and detriment muſt needs come vpon vs, if wee ſhould (as too many doe) breake off in the mid way. Oh what doe men loſe heereby: euen beſide all their labour, the fruit of it alſo. But of this we haue occaſion to ſpeake often elſewhere.
            Further, in that it is ſaid that he hartened them on againſt the Moabites, aſſuring them that the Lord had deliuered them into their hands, and that he drew them after him, and they did as he willed them; wee ſee the worth of a good guide, what he may doe with thoſe which he is ſet ouer, and how much, ſtrong and well grounded perſwaſions preuaile, where they be vſed in ſeaſon and good manner, God bleſſing them as hee hath promiſed. Heathen Captaines haue done much with their ſouldiers, and Princes and lawmakers with their ſubiects: who yet (we know) could neither certifie them of the things they promiſed, and encouraged them to hope for, neither if they could; were the things of any other fort or kinde, then temporary. Now then how much more are they like to preuaile with men, who both Note. bring infallible promiſes from God, and alſo of things which pleaſe him (as Ehud heere doth) and they doe not onely glad the hearts of the perſons therewith, in as much as they vnderſtand thereby that God will bleſſe them heere abundantly, and alſo that their reward is great in heauen.
            As the Lord ſpoke to Ioſhua ſaying: Bee valiant and of good courage, for I 
               Ioſh. 1. 3. 
               haue giuen the whole country of the Canaanites into thy hands: ſo ſpake Ehud heere vnto the men of Ephraim in the name of God, and by his authority. And theſe are the perſwaſions that are like to preuaile, I ſay not with the faithfull onely: but (if any may bee) theſe are of force to moue euen other alſo. Not that they can be throughly perſwaded thereof without faith, but for that they doe very much moue their minds, and the rather by the example of better then themſelues, and alſo they doe cauſe them the more to enquire into ſuch things, and how they ſhould bee done, till they grow acquainted with them, that ſo they may in time beleeue and ſo doe them in faith alſo. And let this which I ſay bee better conſidered in two things: the one in the promiſes of eternall life, the other in thoſe which belong to this preſent life.
            For the firſt, when God ſhall by ſome faithfull meſſenger of his, aſſure the hungring ſoule, and the man of an afflicted ſpirit, of pardon of his ſinnes, and eternall life, and that he ſhall vndoubtedly enjoy them, requiring this withall that he giue credit therto, and beleeue the ſame; how greatly (think we) do they moue and preuaile with him, as we ſee Chriſts words did with Zachee, and Pauls with the Iailor, and with many other? And for the ſecond Luk. 19. 8. 9. Act. 16. 33. likewiſe, I meane the temporary promiſes of this preſent life (as this was one, that Ehud heere offered and ſet before the people) as the promiſe of bleſſing and good ſucceſſe to ſuch as obey God, by walking diligently in their particular calling, and the promiſe of a good end and iſſue out of trouble to them which commit their way to God, and are well occupied vnder Note.
               
in the meane ſeaſon: to theſe, I ſay, how forcible are ſuch promiſes, and what power haue they to vphold the hearts of ſuch, in a comfortable expectation of the things promiſed? whereas without them, nothing could doe the ſame. Oh therfore what good may a godly Miniſter do in both (euen as her ſuperiours alſo, eſpecially being men indued with the gifts of the ſpirit) if he continue in loue to put the poore people daily in remembrance of theſe things, in the middeſt of the manifold changes of this life? And therefore as God ſhall impart to any man in the miniſtery or otherwiſe; more light, wiſedome, experience, and grace, either in beleeuing or obeying, the more muſt hee apply himſelfe to enlighten, aduiſe, and ſtrengthen thoſe whom God hath ſet him ouer for that purpoſe; knowing that it is not euery mans caſe, to be able to miniſter vnto himſelfe or other, aduice or direction, (though it were much to be deſired) eſpecially in a matter of difficulty, and in a doubt of conſcience, or in tentation, or vnder the croſſe. Peter therefore betruſted with this office, to confirme his brethren, as a man of a thouſand, as Dauid, Pſal. 51. vndertooke it, who had himſelfe firſt well learned it, and was the better able to performe it to other. Neither let any man thinke it a diſgrace to himſelfe thus to ſee, and walke, by the eyes, and vpon the feet of others. It is a mans wiſedome, and a great portion from God, to receiue direction by ſuch meanes. Heere I will ſtay.
         
         
            THE TWENTIE THREE SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to goe forward; the valiant warriours of Ephraim being encouraged thus by Ehud, and other helpe being called together therewith, as we haue heard, and they keeping the paſſages to and fro, betwixt Iſrael on their owne ſide, and Moab on the other ſide of Iordan, they killed all the Moabites that offered themſelues to ſtirre and be helpers in that time of their great calamity and abaſement, wherein they had loſt their King: theſe (I ſay) whom Ehud drew together, ſo beſtirred themſelues, that ten thouſand of the beſt warriours of the Moabites were put to the ſword. Thus they of Moab were weakened, and Ehud and the people of Iſrael did more and more preuaile. By all this we ſee that as there is a time of affliction and calamity to the people of God (as it had beene heere to Iſrael) and that is, when they haue prouoked God, and their ſinnes haue made them naked before the Lord, that is to ſay, deſtitute and voide of the grace and helpe of God, (as it is ſaid of their fathers when they had made a Calfe in Exodus) as I ſay, there is ſuch a time; ſo there is a time againe of deliuerance and ioy, and that is, when the people riſe out of their

ſinne penitently, and ſeeke the Lord with their whole heart, then hee moſt graciouſly returneth to them againe, in whoſe fauour is life.
            And this comfortable eſtate may wee enioy from time to time, to haue the Lords louing countenance to ſhine vpon vs, far more delightfull to our ſoule, then the faireſt and ſweeteſt weather can bee to the creatures of the earth, i
                  •
                we can like to preferre it, as it is the beſt before all other: and we hauing Note. obtained grace to doe ſo, if we ſhall goe a ſtep further, and can thinke it our beſt wiſedome to continue in ſo doing wee ſhall abide in Gods fauour Ioh. 15 10 alſo, and keepe our ſelues well when we are wel, which is the happineſſe that can in this life be enioyed. The Lord doth not ſtint and tie vs to times, in which only we may haue peace with him, and ſee good daies; but he would that wee ſhould liue in ſafety vnder his protection all the day long: and ſo Deut. 33. 12 from time to time, that we may haue proofe how good and bountifull hee is. But we are waily and inconſtant, and abuſe his lenity and kindneſſe toward vs, when hee not onely holdeth many troubles and ſorrowes from vs, but alſo lodeth vs with the benefits of health, and welfare. inward and outward, Note. Pſal. 68. 19. and that alſo while others ſmart and are in heauineſſe.
            Wee deale with him, as pampered horſes, and children much made of, who right ſoone waxe looſe and wanton. And wee cauſe the Lord to turne our good and ioyfull daies into glooming and ſorrowfull times: as through the ſtories of the booke of God doth euery where appeare, that many after good beginnings did ſo though little to their comfort. Oh how ſoone did this people mentioned in this booke, and their fathers, as wee reade in Deuteronomy, with ſundry other generations following, as the ſtories doe teſtifie, Deut. 32. 15. kicke vp their heele againſt the Lord, when hee did yet feede them with the fat of wheat, and make them drinke of the ſweet? And this reuolting worketh ſuch a change in our beſt ſtates and ſeaſons, as cauſeth to complain and cry. Let it therefore cauſe vs to bee reſolued vpon this, and that in due and good conſideration, ſo that wee may conſtantly hold the ſame: to wit, that if wee deſire to ſee good daies heere, and enioy long life with the Lord hereafter: that (I ſay) wee flie euill, and follow that which is good: and 1. Pet. 3. 11. heerein let vs ſee that wee deale not hollowly with the Lord: and if by occaſion we ſlip or fall, and forget our ſelues (as this people heere did, verſ. 7.) Note. yet let vs take heede that we harden not our hearts, and ſo lie ſtill, but beare Mica. 7. 7. our puniſhment contentedly, becauſe we haue ſinned, and make ſpeed to turne againe to the Lord our firſt husband, who will receiue vs graciouſly: and as he hath ſmitten vs, ſo he will heale vs; and as hee did before comfort vs, ſo he will reſtore ioy and gladneſſe to vs, as in time paſt. And this being done daily in the ſmaller ſlips, ſhall the eaſilier be gone about in greater fals, and ſhall alſo be a meane to keepe vs from them. Yea doubtleſſe the Lord will doe great things for vs; and as hee abaſed the enemies of this people, the Moabites heere, ſo will hee bring the wicked vnder vs, and leaue them afflicted and ſcourged in our roome. Prou.
            
            Now followeth the third and laſt thing mentioned in this latter part of Verſ 30. The vnfolding of it.
                the ſtory, and that is, reſt after, for a good while.
            This long time of peace the Lord granted them, and could willingly affoord it them, and it is all one to him to giue a long time thereto, as a ſhort. And as it was a great bleſſing, ſo it was more then was promiſed. Indeed

the Lord ſaid, that he would giue Moab into their hands, and the people enioyed that (as a fruit of their faith) which laid hold on Gods promiſe. But heſides, he lengthened out the time of their reſt, further then hee promiſed them. To teach vs that God neuer commeth ſhort or behinde hand with vs in performing his promiſes, but giueth vs good meaſure, heaped vp, and Doct. verſ. 30. running ouer; and thereby ſheweth that hee is liberall and bountifull toward vs. And this is his vſuall manner of dealing with his, to giue more Luk. 6. 38. then they aske or looke to receiue; for hee giueth more then hee himſelfe promiſeth. The prodigall child asked, that hee might be receiued but as an hired ſeruant, but his father, who reſembled the Lord in kindneſſe, receiued Luk. 15. 19. 22. &c. him for his ſonne, and declared it by entertaining him gladly, with all things agreeing therto. So the woman of Canaan came to Chriſt for helpe for her Mat 15. 22. 28. daughter; but he not onely granted her that, but alſo bad her take what ſhe would. Euen as father Iacob, who feared that hee ſhould neuer ſee Ioſephs face, thinking he had been deuoured of ſome wild beaſt, did yet ſee his childrens Gen 37. 33. 34. compared with 48. 11. children.
            This if it were beleeued, were able to make our liues comfortable? For to ſay the truth, all our welfare is according to our faith, and yet the Lord giueth fartee aboue that which we can beleeue. Therefore this ought to encourage Note. vs, to labour to giue him credit in all that we ſeene impoſeth vpon vs, and requireth of vs, in that wee vnderſtand and ſee, and reſt perſwaded that he will haue vs to goe about it. For we may know, that our reward ſhall he exceeding great in ſo doing. Let vs inſtance this in two or three particulars, and we ſhall finde the ſame that other haue done before vs. If we marke it, we may perceiue, that when we haue ſomtime in our afflictions beſought the Lord but for ſome eaſe and mitigation of the force of them, whether ſickneſſe, paine, diſeaſe, or any ſuch like, he hath deliuered vs altogether, and beſides, bleſſed vs abundantly. And ſo to ſhew it in any other particular, when great ſorrow hath been riſing toward vs, he hath oft times turned our ſorrow into ioy. And euen ſo, as long-continued peace was to this people vnlooked for, when their very deliuerance from ſubiection to the Moabites, would haue been ful welcome, though it had been but for a ſhort time, that they might haue had but ſome breathing from their bondage: ſo the Lord dealeth with vs, that whereas in ſome of our troubles, we haue feared as Hezechiah did, that wee ſhould neuer fee light, nor good daies any more; yet Note. the Lord of his exceeding goodneſſe hath reſtored vs to our former ſweet Eſa. 38. 11. liberties for a long time after. But oh what might be ſaid of this argument? Although we muſt alſo know, that hee ſeeth reaſon ſometime, and that for good cauſe, to hold vs off and deferre vs. But more of this in Chap. 1. ver. 2. And heere an end of this ſtory.
            Verſ. 31. And after him was Shamgar the ſonne of Anath, which ſlew of the Philiſtims ſixe hundred men with an oxe goade, and he alſo deliuered Iſrael▪
               
            
            THis ſhort ſtory of Shamgar, is the third and laſt ſtory mentioned in this chapter of the Iſraelites deliuerance, by an other Iudge. But who this Shamger was, or of what tribe hee came, the Scripture doth not let downe. But it appeareth, that when they had enioyed long peace vnder Ehud, after

his death, the Philiſtims began to vexe and oppreſſe them, and then the Lord ſtirred vp this Shamgar to defend them, that they might not againe be brought into bondage as they had bin before. And among other of their victories which were many, this one is brought in, as moſt admirable, though it be but briefly mentioned. For a great number, euen hundreds to be ſlaine by one man, and he vſing ſo weake an inſtrument, and the whole nation of the people to bee preſerued thereby from ſo fierce enemies, what is in this whole booke ſpoken of, of the like kind, to be for ſtrange and admirable? vnleſſe it be the like act of Sampſon.
            
            Wherein we may ſee, that euery ſlight thing may be a weapon or warre for Gods people, when hee will ſay, it ſhall preuaile: and that it is not the number of men, nor the meanes, that God regardeth when hee will get the victory. Therefore Dauids ſmall and ſmooth ſtones to throw in his ſling, 1. Sam. 17. 40. 4
                     •
                  . Iudg. 15. 15. were ſufficient furniture and armour to ſley the Philiſtims champion Goliah: and Sampſon with the iaw bone of an Aſſe ſlew a thouſand men: and Iael with a bare naile, killed Siſera, that valiant captaine of Iabin King of Canaan. And ſo great an act did this Shamgar, by ſo weak an inſtrument, when the Lord pleaſed to giue the victory. And this truth ſhould wee ſee verified as clearely as euer they did, if we would hold this ſure and conſtant, that wee are his, and deare vnto him: ſecondly, when we feele our outward oppreſſions and diſcouragements, or our inward infirmities, feares, and tentations, if then (I ſay) wee did not looke how weake wee our ſelues are, and vnfit to wade through them all, and beare them, forgetting Gods power, which ſerueth 1. Sam. 30. 6. for the vſe and comfort of his weake ſeruants, and to be made knowne in their infirmities: euen ſo wee ſee Dauid did, namely in his ſore diſtreſſe, 2. Chron. 12. 9. comfort himſelfe in being wearied with Sauls purſuing of him. And yet what a grace that was in him we may ſee by this, that hee being at an other time, and forgetting himſelfe, in a ſore combat, brake out thus, and in his raſhneſſe ſaid, I ſhall one time or other fall by Saul: But wee ſhould looke how 1. Sam. 27. 1. ſtrong the Lord is who loueth vs: who alſo lookes downe from heauen, to ſee who are weake, that he may be ſtrong with them. For indeed when wee 2. Chron. 16. 9. ſee our owne impotency, this ſhould lift vp out heart, and cauſe vs to reach out our hand to Gods mercy, which is in a readineſſe for vs. So that if he be able to helpe vs, that ſhould bee enough for vs, how vnable ſoeuer wee bee to beare the burthen our ſelues. So wee haue learned to beleeue, and to Pſal. 27. 1. ſpeake, The Lord is my light and ſaluation, whom ſhall I feare? the Lord is the ſtrength of my life, of whom ſhall I be afraid? Remember wee alſo what the Apoſtle ſaid: I am able to doe all things through him that maketh me able. And againe, Phil. 4. 13. 2. Cor. 12. 10. 
               I will reioyce in mine infirmities: for when I am weake, then am I ſtrong: euen ſo we not fainting in our many troubles, but by faith drawing and deriuing Gods power vnto vs, as we haue good leaue to do, yea as we are commanded by himſelfe to doe, we may reſt quiet, for God will not diſappoint vs, and in that reſpect the Apoſtle Iames wille
                  ••
                vs to bee greatlieſt comforted, when we fall into diuerſe tentations, that to our faith may be tried to be ſound (and that is better then gold) bringing patience with it. And yet if Iam. 1. 3. the Lord be not with vs, nor wee cling not to him by faith, no munition or warlike furniture when it is needed, nor the ſtrongeſt nor ſureſt helpe in time of peace ſhall be able to doe vs any good. Therefore neither could the

walles of Iericho preſerue the city when God went againſt it, nor Goliahs 
               Ioſh. 
                     •
                  . 2. ſword defend him, but turne againſt him; not Pharaeohs Chariots get victorie for him, but faile him when the Lord would not go with them. And therefore euen as it is ſaid in the Pſalme, that a King is not ſaued by the multitude Pſal. 33. 16. of an hoſt, neither is the mighty deliuered by his great ſtrength; ſo an horſe is but a vaine helpe to ſaue a man. And ſo wee may ſay of all creatures. If the Lord be at peace with vs, they are on our ſides, to ſtand with vs; but if he frowne vpon vs, they ſhall be againſt vs. Lo ſuch a thing it is to bee in league and fauour with him, that all ſhall turne to the beſt vnto vs thereby; yea euen the fierceneſſe of our enemies: the heauens, the earth, the creatures ſhall be all at one with them, who are in couenant with him, who is the Lord of them. But I will proceed in the next chapter.
            
               THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE booke of IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. And the children of Iſrael began againe to doe wickedly in the ſight of the Lord when Ehud was dead.
                  
                  2. And the Lord ſold them into the hand of Iabin King of Canaan that raigned in Hazar, whoſe chiefe captaine was called Siſera, which dwelt in Haroſheth of the Gentiles.
                  
                  3. Then the children of Iſrael cried vnto the Lord, for he had nine hundred Chariots of iron, and twentie yeeres he had vexed the children of Iſrael very ſore.
                  
                  4. And at that time Debora a Propheteſſe, the wiſe of Lapidothiudged Iſrael.
                  
                  5. And this Debora dwelt vnder a Palme tree betweene Rama and mount Ephraim, and the people of Iſrael came vp to her for indgement.
                  
               
               IN this Chapter is ſet downe another falling of the children of Iſrael from 
                     The ſamme and parts of the chapter 4. God, and Gods correcting of them: their repentance alſo: and laſtly his deliuering of them by Debora, Barak, and Iael. The firſt of theſe is in the firſt verſe, the next in the ſecond verſe, their repentance in the third: and their deliuerance in all the reſt of the verſes, to the end of the chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  In that this relapſe of theirs was ſaid to be after Ehud was dead, as though Shamgar had not been betwixt both, it was moſt likely it was for that, hee was but a very ſhort time a deliuerer vnto them. But yet he was after Ehud a deliuerer of the people, though but for a ſhort time, as appeareth in the laſt verſe of the former chapter.
                  For the firſt of the foure things, I meane the ſinne of the people of Iſrael, Verſ. 1. which againe they committed (for ſo it is ſaid heere, that they did againe that which was euill in the ſight of the Lord) vnderſtand it of them who had ſeene the former deliuerance, and alſo of their poſterity who enioyed the bleſſing. Of the phraſe or manner of ſpeech vttered by the holy Ghoſt, to wit, that they did euill in the ſight of the Lord; I will not ſpeake any more, hauing handled it twice before. But of their ſinne let vs conſider. And that is,

that they abuſed their long enioyed peace and reſt vnder Ehud. The ſumme of it is, that they did leaue the right way of ſeruing God, and encreaſed their ſinne ſundry waies. And this is indeed the diſpoſition and common practiſe Doct. verſ. 1. of men, who are not led and gouerned by Gods grace, that they are not the better for their proſperity, but much worſe: for by aduerſity they are held downe, and diſabled from much ſinne, and ſo are reſtrained at leaſt; ſo that, as the way is ſhut vp to them from thence by affliction, ſo their appetite is much abated thereby alſo. But in liberty, peace, and abundance of Gods benefits, they are more eaſily led on, and enticed, and ſo the was is ſet open to them, and they doe as readily walke in it; and being vngouerned, they are ſoone let looſe. And we muſt know, that it is not thus with the wicked onely, but euen with ſuch as haue been ſometime vnder Gods direction, that euen they are ready to forget themſelues, yea and the moſt doe, and waxing bold, breake out by meanes of their proſperitie after the ſame manner.
                  And ſo it fell out with Dauid himſelfe, who when hee had ſubdued his enemies vnder him almoſt on euery ſide, euen to his hearts deſire, he fell moſt dangerouſly to the great prouoking of God. And Iehoſaphat, otherwiſe a 2. Sam. 11. 4. godly King, when hee was lifted vp and made drunke as it were, with the company and fellowſhip of wicked Ahab, did ſore forget himſelfe, ſo that he was faine to be reproued for it of the Lord by his Prophet. A lamentable caſe, that when they bee ſo ſore oppreſſed either by enemies, or other 2. Chro. 19. 2. croſſes, that their life waxeth weariſome to them, and their diſtreſſed eſtate cauſeth all that looke on them to pity them: and when the Lord ſhall in that miſery of theirs haue compaſſion of them, and ſet them at large, it is a lamentable caſe (I ſay) that they ſhould become ſo groſly vnthankfull, forget their late aduerſity, and as ſoone in a manner as God hath enlarged them by his benefits, that they ſhould thus vnnaturally (as I may ſay) diſguiſe themſelues, euen as if they would ſet themſelues to grieue the Lord for his gladding and comforting of them. This may (I thinke) bee a watchword to vs, to take heed how we vſe our proſperity, and to teach vs to make ſmall haſt to be made great in the world by Gods preferments, great wealth and Note. commodities, vnleſſe we lay faſter hold of grace wherby we may vſe them rightly; that is, to bee humble vnder them, and thereby forward and fruitfull in doing the good that we may. Let vs then take heed ſeriouſly, that wee count it not happie in it ſelfe to liue delicately for a ſeaſon; from whence it commeth through our corrupt nature, that wee contemne others, giue our ſelues to vanity, pleaſures, wantonneſſe, and delights, and ſome of vs alſo to profit ſeeking and gaine, though neuer ſo filthy and groſſe, as our chiefe treaſure, whereby godlineſſe decayes, and the vſe, at leaſt the power of all good meanes.
                  But what ſhould wee doe (yee will aske) when God giueth vs ſuch a wealthie and a comfortable outward eſtate? I ſay we ſhould be rich in good 
                     1. Tim. 6. 12. Tit. 3. 8. 
                     workes, and doe workes to neceſſarie vſes. Oh, men ſo well prouided for, what good might bee done to their owne ſoules, and to the ſoules and bodies of their brethren. But to this point (alas) things are now come, that we may ſay with griefe, that few haue any mind to vſe their liberties aright, or (almoſt) to doe any good. And this being duly conſidered, ſhould cauſe

our wondrings to ceaſe, why ſo few godly Chriſtians enioy any great portion of outward bleſſings in compariſon, (for it is ſo) euen becauſe the Lord prouideth a better thing for them, when hee giueth them a mediocritie in them all, as of maintenance, of credit, account and fauour with their betters, and mixeth each houre of ſunſhine with an other of cloudy and vnpleaſing weather; and all to keepe their affections from growing too ranke, and intemperate, and to containe them within their bounds in that condition, which is beſt for them, and fitteſt to ſerue the Lord in, without loathing or Note. wearineſſe. The earth which is too ſtrong and luſty, runneth vp into weede A ſimile. and ſtalke, but the well tilled and compaſſed, bringeth forth a plentifull crop. And rare is the man, whoſe fruites are not more gratious and conſtant in a moderate eſtate, then in a mighty, which cauſed the wiſe man to ſay; Neither to much, Lord, neither too little, for I ſhall runne into the extreame Pro. 30. 8. of vnthankfulneſſe or diſcontentment. Doubtleſſe, if as proſperity groweth, ſo piety encreaſed withall, and the loue of the giuer waxed ſtronger, as his gifts are multiplyed, and waxe greater, and God would not ſtint men as hee doth. But it is cleare, men can beare no exceſſe or abundance in this kinde, without notorious defect or decay in godly duties: outward welfare of body (like the ſplene) cauſeth a leaneneſſe and euil-fauouredneſſe of ſoule, as moſt men vſe the matter. But this be ſaid of the firſt of the foure things contained in this Chapter; namely, of their ſinne.
               
            
         
         
            THE TWENTY FOVRE SERON VPON THE FOVTRH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     OF the firſt thing of the foure contained in this chapter we haue heard. Now followeth the ſecond, and that is their puniſhment, Verſ. 2. who ſo prouoked the Lord: namely, that he gaue them ouer to an other aduerſary, more fierce and furious then the former: that was one Iabin King of Canaan, that raigned in Hazor: But ye may obiect, that ſuch an one in all reſpects was ſlaine by Ioſhua, 
                     Obiect. much aboue an hundred yeeres agoe. For thus wee reade in the booke of Ioſhua; At that time Ioſhua returned and tooke Hazor, and burnt it, and ſmote 
                     Ioſh. 11. 10. 
                     the King thereof, to wit, Iabin, with the edge of the ſword: for Hazor before time had been the head city of all thoſe kingdomes. I anſwere, it was ſo indeed, and Anſw. now another of that name and kindred, was riſen vp, and had builded the city againe, and now being growne ſtrong and populous, preuailed againſt Iſrael, and held them in the greater bondage; and for this cauſe, euen that he might be reuenged vpō them for his predeceſſor, whom their fathers, Ioſhua
                     
and others, had waſted and ſlaine, and they did therefore oppreſſe them much the ſorer. This I thought good to ſay for the clearing of this difficulty. Now to proceed: This Iabin King of Canaan is further deſcribed by his chiefe captaine, which was Siſera, a great warrier, and terrible. Whereby we may know, that the eaſe of the Iſraelites was reſtleſſe ſeruitude, and the hope of their deliuerance deſperate.
                  Now by this new calamity thus brought vpon this people, (to omit that which I ſaid of the puniſhment in the former examples) where a man would Doct. verſ. 2. not haue looked for it, we may obſerue and ſee, that when all things ſeeme quiet and peaceable to vs, and when we think that we are ſafe on euery ſide, ſo that no hurt can befall vs, yet if the Lord haue a controuerſie with vs, hee doth in a maruellous manner raiſe vp ſome great trouble againſt vs: yea and that as it were, out of the ſparckles of former afflictions, (when we ſuſpect none) as hee did heere, which were thought to haue been quenchedlong agoe, he bringeth a fire and flame, as it were, to burne and conſume vs. So that when men thinke all to bee ſure, God raiſeth vp vexations that way where one would not looke for them. The Amalekites, when they had taken Ziclag, lay drunken and wallowing like beaſts, fearing no danger, and were 1. Sam. 30. 16. ſuddenly come vpon and ſlaine. So the Apoſtle ſaith, When men cry peace, and that all things are ſafe, then ſhall ſudden deſtruction come vpon them, when they are 
                     1. Eheſ. 5. 3. 
                     not aware, like the trauell vpon a woman with child, and they ſhall not bee able to auoide it.
                  
                  Thus God ſeeth it good to tame and raw the licentiouſneſſe and pride of men, and (that which is maruellous to ſay) if hee ſhould not doe ſo, there were no liuing for vs one by another. The beſt in towne and country, would kicke vp their heele; yea and notwithſtanding hee thus pluck downe the Note. pride of one or other euery day, yet ſuch as are ſpared bee neuer the better. The long viſitation with plague, which hath ſwept away many thouſands, what are the moſt part the better for it? The irreligious boldneſſe of many in this age, if they bee in fauour with their betters (whoſe breath yet is in their noſtrels) or if they haue but wealth aboue the common ſort, nay if it be but bare health, how doe they abuſe it? how little doth good teaching, or the diuerſe examples of Gods iudgements vpon ſundry others, preuaile with them? And why? becauſe (while they feele them not, the day of reckoning is put farre off, and we dreame that we haue a priuiledge aboue all others, till the effect confute vs. The caſting downe of Babell, the drowning of Pharaoh and his army, the thruſting through of Zimri and Cosby in their tent, the ſwallowing vp of Chorah and his company into the earth, with thouſands more in ages paſt, and now all cut off in fearefull maner, for their ſeuerall rebellions againſt the Lord (lamentable to ſpeake) what little abatement of ſinne (yet) for all this, doe they worke in the moſt? nay are they not worſe and worſe who liue in theſe latter daies, and haue heard or ſeene the iudgements of the former times? Therefore let ſuch of vs as cannot but confeſſe, that God hath done much more for vs, watch and beware, leſt for the like looſeneſſe and bolddeſſe found in vs, the Lord awake vs; and if hee ſeaze not vpon vs with the ſame plagues, as he did on theſe; yet (ſeeing his quiuer is full of arrowes of all ſorts, that is with all kinds of iudgements) he will reſerue ſome for vs, as he hath done to others before vs, and come vpon

vs ſuddenly in the like manner.
                  Now this Iabin had for the chiefe captaine of his armie, Siſera heere named, 
                        The opening of the latter part of verſ. 2. who is ſaid to haue his abode in Haroſheth of the Gentiles, ſo called, for that it was a countrey full of woods: (for ſo the word ſignifieth) whereto, as vnto a moſt ſafe and well fenced place, the Canaanites who were Gentiles, did fly, and repaire, and dwelt ſafely therein; when ſo many of them had been ſlaine in Ioſhuas daies, and there they remained, grew vp, and ſtrengthened themſelues, vnto the time that is heere mentioned. Thus they growing vp, and not being cut off, as God commanded the people of Iſrael to doe, we ſee now what a vexation euen this one generation of the Canaanites in that corner of the land, were vnto them, beſide many other in diuers other parts of it.
                  And by this we ſee what miſchiefe and woe wee prouide for our ſelues, Doct. 2. in verſ. 2. (euen ſuch as cannot bee knowne till they come) and all this through our neglecting duties commended (as this people of Iſrael heere did) and ſuffering euill perſons and their foule vices, to grow vp, in and among vs, which we might eaſily in time haue ſubdued and brought vnder. I ſay, the ſuffering of them, which wee haue been full willing to nouriſh, and could bee brought to offer no violence vnto them, haue cauſed ſorrow vpon ſorrow, and moſt weariſome and vncomfortable daies vnto vs: which when they were come, we would haue bought of with much coſt, and could not. Thus anger, impatience, wrath, vncharitableneſſe, reuenge, teachines, frowardnes, Note. lewd luſts, and vncleane deſires, with many other like, though wee haue thought them not worthie of rebuke, neither could bee brought to deface, and diſgrace them, no not to our owne ſelues, that ſo they might haue been ouercome and weakened in vs;; euen theſe haue maſtered vs, and waxen ſtrong in vs, which is enough to disfigure the godly life in vs, and to marre the beauty of our profeſſion; beſides that theſe ingender in vs, and bring forth litters of open and outward ſinnes, (al may eaſily know what I meane) farre more ſhamefull and monſtrous then themſelues.
               
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  NOw followeth the third thing in this Story, namely, the repentance of Verſ. 3. the people, ſet forth as in the former chapter, by crying. The reaſons thereof are added, and they are two; the one, becauſe this Siſera had nine hundred iron Chariots, wherwith by continuall egreſſe and regreſſe he had vexed them ſore: the other, that he had done thus to them twentie yeeres. Of this crying, ſignifying their repentance, I haue ſpoke before, and alſo of the repentance which their fathers offered, when God afflicted them. That which is to be conſidered heere, not ſpoken of before by the like occaſion, is this:
                  That where it is ſaid, they were twenty yeeres in bondage, before they Doct. repented and turned to God; we may behold the monſtrous and poyſoned diſpoſition of our nature, which will not ſtoope nor bow to the Lord in true humiliation, vntil it be driuen by maine and force, euen till we be ſhut Note. out euery where elſe. As wee ſee in children of a ſtubborne nature it is neither a checke, nor a rod will breake their ſtomacks: nay it is not a few ſtripes

that will make them cry out, and when by rougher handling of them, they he forced to roare, it is but for very ſullennes; til they ſee there is no remedy but that they muſt receiue correction for their euill doings, and then the multitude of ſtrokes and the ſmart they feele breakes their hearts at length, and makes them yeeld: and euen ſo it is with vs, who ſhould bee much wiſer: whereas if wee ſhould but ſtep aſide a little from our Chriſtian courſe, we ought with the like willingneſſe of mind by which we ſtrayed, returne and riſe vp againe. For ſo the Prophet Ieremy complaineth; Doth a man fall, 
                     Ier. 8. 6. 
                     and not riſe againe; or goe out of the way, and not returne? And if this rebelliouſneſſe and bad diſpoſition were in the wicked onely, it were leſſe to bee maruelled at, but let it be well conſidered, and it ſhall be found in ſuch as haue ſometime ſerued God in truth; who if they loſe the hold that they had, and haue ſuffered the wicked fleſh, that is, their ſinfull nature, to get the vpper hand in them againe; oh how hardly is it put out of poſſeſſion againe? So that as the diuels ſaid to our Sauiour Chriſt, thou art come to torment vs before 
                     Mat. 8. 29. 
                     the time. So it is euer too ſoone, and very impriſonment to the wicked fleſh, to be brought vnder the Lords wing againe, and to put on his yoke, though it be eaſie as it is ſaid to be.
                  This is the cauſe why licentious diſſoluteneſſe is in ſo great account at this day in all ſorts, and ſo dimme light ſhineth out of them who ſhould bee lights to other. And if it ſhould be demanded, how Gods people can keepe ſo long from vnder his gouernment, and are ſo loth to returne againe vnder it: I anſwere, partly confuſed knowledge, ignorance and forgetfulnes how to returne (if they were euer well grounded at all) is one cauſe; and partly the lothneſſe and vntowardneſſe of the fleſh to bee pent in, ſeeking liberty rather amiſſe, euen that is the other. And thus while men haue any ſhelter how rotten and helpeleſſe ſoeuer it be, they flie from God. But for as much as when no ſhifts will ſerue, they muſt returne againe to the Lord their firſt husband, as it is ſaid in Hoſea, let all that bee wiſe, with all ſpeed returne to Hoſ. 2. 7. 1. Tim. 6. 6. him, and make godlineſſe (as it is indeed) the greateſt riches and chiefe ſtay, ſeeing that is alwaies and onely comfortable. As it is the Pſalme: A day is 
                     Pſal. 84. 11. 
                     better therein, then a thouſand elſewhere. And ſeeing wee in miſeries and troubles do as this people heere did, often fall a ſighing and ſorrowing, yea murmuring and fretting, and yet turne not to God, nor from our ſinne; but bite on the bridle of our puniſhment, and yet at laſt we muſt bee brought to it for all our vnwillingneſſe; therefore as we ſhould take heed that we keepe the profeſſion of our hope firmely, while wee may; ſo yet when wee haue fallen, let vs not deſpaire, no nor yet delay to turne to God with the ſooneſt, as I haue ſaid.
                  Againe, by this people many may learne good. They were held vnder 
                        The vnfolding of the other part of verſ. 3. and purſued by him that had nine hundred Chariots of iron, alwaies going out and in among them, to vexe and oppreſſe them on euery ſide. A plague great enough one would thinke, for euen the mercies of ſuch are cruell. And Prou. 12. 10. yet this was not the worſt that befell them, for God was alſo againſt them, and had ſold them into their hands: and now while it was thus with them in ſo great miſery, what ſhould they doe? and yet which is more, twentie yeeres to be in this eſtate, how ſhould they be able to abide it? By the fearefull example of theſe, and yet ſome of them belonging to God, it is good for

vs to take occaſion to conſider the eſtate of them, who are vnder ſundry ſore and great calamities, the Lord ſending them for their rebellions and grieuous prouokings of him, and himſelfe frowning vpon them, who ſhould haue been their comfort in their troubles. Oh how ſhould it grieue vs to behold it? For when they are in perplexity and vexation, by men or otherwiſe, and then haue God againſt them alſo; this commeth neare the ſaying, Woe to him that is alone. Herein Dauid ſhewed himſelfe wiſe: for when hee Eccleſ. 4. 10. heard Gods meſſage from the Lord, concerning the chuſing of his puniſhment; he anſwered; Let me fall into the hands of the Lord, and not of men. The 1. Sam. 24. 14. reaſon was, becauſe he knew himſelfe to haue repented, and therefore that in iudgement the Lord would remember mercy. But oh how terrible a thing is it to fall into the hands of God being our enemie; or into the hands of men, when he hath giuen vs vp to their pleaſure, to be handled as wee deſerue? Euery affliction is ſharpe and heauy, when God makes it ſo, by ſetting an edge vpon it, and by preſſing downe the conſcience vnder the loade of his wrath. Conſider ſome particulars: for example. The pouerty and penurie of many thouſands, and the ſame as poore in knowledge of God, and grace. Others in marriage vnquiet, thruſting one another out of doores, Note. children crying about them, the neighbours diſquieted among them, all going to hauocke in family, and God in the meane time alſo an enemie to them, what an heauie calamitie is this to behold? Others to bee taken captiues by forren enemies; as Sampſon put to grinde, or (which is worſe) to Iudg. 16. 21. the gallies; and which is worſt of all) to haue no God to flie to in this their diſtreſſe, which yet is the caſe of many, who haue held their heads full high, and were alſo farre enough in their owne conceit, from ſuch an eſtate, oh how wofull is it? And if the ſore diſeaſed, ſicke and pained perſons ſhould bee added to theſe, with other miſerable ones, and yet without God in the world; all theſe thus to bee diſtreſſed, which I haue mentioned, with ſuch like, almoſt without number, oh how lamentable is it to thinke on? And whereas ſome of theſe bee Gods children, they muſt know, that if they will doe as his enemies, he will make them ſomewhat like them, in bearing the marke of it: ſo that as the wicked flie from God, and hate him for ſmiting them for their ſin: ſo his owne children hauing likewiſe prouoked him, ſhall oftentimes make but ſlow haſt to him, through an ill conſcience telling them that they are not welcome, till they come in another manner; to wit, in vnfained repentance. All this I haue ſpoken to a double end; one, to perſwade all to labour aboue all things to make God their friend, that is, by ſeeking to be reconciled to him, that thus in their troubles they may haue a refuge to fly to for comfort. The other is, to moue ſuch as are free from both kinds of miſeries, to pitie them that are vnder both; and to conſider, that ſeeing they may goe in and out before the Lord without feare, both in their daily courſe of life, and alſo in their ſuites, &c. therefore they ſhould deadly abhorre ſinne themſelues, which onely makes them feare his power and iuſtice, and that as much as euer they reioyced in his fauour, and ſo doing, mourne for them whoſe miſery I haue mentioned, that are in an eſtate both dreadfull and damnable. And this be ſaid of the firſt three parts of this chapter, out of theſe three verſes, to wit, of the ſinne of the people, of their puniſhment, and of their repentance.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth part of the Chapter.
                  THe fourth part of this ſtory followeth, of Gods deliuerance of them out Verſ. 4. The ſumme in generall to the end.
                      of the hands of Siſera: and this vnto the end of the chapter; and that deliuerance was wrought, as I ſaid before, by the helpe & miniſtery chiefly of the three perſons mentioned afterwards in this chapter, Debora, Barak, and Iael. Debora, though a woman, was ſtirred vp by the Lord to iudge Iſrael, that is, to declare the will of God, in that time of extreame calamity, vnto the people; to anſwere their doubts what they ſhould doe, and to bee the chiefe meane of their deliuerance, by counſell giuing, and encouraging of Barak and the reſt. Barak was he that ſhould leade the army, and purſue the enemies, and with a ſmall armie of the people to ouercome and deſtroy them: and Iael killing the great captaine of their enemies, I meane Siſera, with her owne hands, had her due commendation among the reſt, all were diuerſly employed, and yet each of them helping forward the execution of Gods iuſtice and charge vpon that huge armie of the Canaanites, and for his peoples deliuerance. This bee ſaid in generall of the whole worke that followeth, ſpoken of in this chapter. Now I will goe to the particulars, verſe by verſe.
                  And to begin with Debora to verſe 14. and to ſee what ſhe did. Firſt, the holy Story deſcribeth her in this verſe and the next. Secondly, it is ſaid the children of Iſrael came vp to her for iudgement, verſ. 5. And thirdly, it is ſhewed what ſhe ſaid to Barak, hauing ſent for him, verſ. 6. 7. then how ſhee anſwered Barak, when ſhe ſaw him not forward, verſ. 9. and laſt of all, how ſhe encouraged him to the battell, after they had prepared themſelues on both ſides to it, as is ſhewed to verſe 14. She is deſcribed, firſt by the extraordinarie place that ſhe was ſet in, to wit, that ſhee was a Propheteſſe: ſecondly, by her condition of mariage, that ſhee was the wife of Lapidoth: thirdly, by her calling, that ſhe iudged Iſrael: and fourthly, by her dwelling, vnder a Palmetree, betweene Ramath and Bethel, in mount Ephraim. And by this woman, and the other two perſons before mentioned (as I haue ſaid) God gaue a new and great deliuerance vnto his people out of their twentie yeeres bondage, vnder that Iabin King of Canaan. And this vnſpeakeable Doct. Out of all the verſes following in generall. goodnes of the Lord in paſſing by their ſo great and foule indignities ſo oft times wrought and committed againſt him, doth yet better and better confirme vs in that which we haue been taught before, that the Lord is ſo tenderly affected to his people, that hee cannot turne away his eare from their prayers and grones vnder their heauie burthens, but pitie and deliuer them. No, as the Prophet ſaith, if a mother ſhould forget and bee hardhearted to her owne child, yet the Lord cannot bee ſo to his, which doth iuſtly lay to Eſa. 49. 15. their charge the wilfulneſſe and ſtifneckedneſſe that is in many, and heape hote coles vpon their heads, ſeeing that when they may haue eaſe and helpe in their oppreſſions and miſeries for the asking of it and praying for it, without their further charge and trouble, they cannot bring their hearts to it, but chuſe rather wilfully and frowardly to lie ſtill in their ſorrowes, then to humble their hearts, and ſeeke after God for deliuerance. And as God is kinde to his, ſo he ſetteth out himſelfe to be ſo, to the end he may harten and

embolden vs to beleeue the ſame, wee being in our greateſt need moſt hardly perſwaded ſo to doe, through the great vnbeleefe that is in vs. Alſo he ſheweth ſuch compaſſion to vs in another reſpect, euen that wee ſhould alſo learne to ſhew the like goodneſſe and kindneſſe to our brethren in their calamities, that we may ſo much the better reſemble him. But of this before. Heere I will end.
               
            
         
         
            THE TWENTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE FOVTRH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to proceed: beſides that which wee haue heard, wee may note hereby what weake and vnlikely meanes God Doct. 1. in verſ 4. deliuereth, when it pleaſeth him. For as before hee raiſed vp Ehud, a man lame of his right hand, to deliuer his people, and after him Shamgar, who had no other weapon then an an oxes goade thereto; ſo now he vſed a woman, (for ſhee was the wife of one Lapidoth) as his inſtrument, to the effecting of ſo great a worke as the ouerthrow of that Iabin was. To ſhew, that his power is not tied to valiant and mighty men, leſt his glory ſhould be giuen to them alſo; nor to ſtrength and forces, though hee allow them to be vſed, and yet not truſted in, but to this, that wee put confidence in him, who is our ſtrong rocke againſt our ſtrongeſt enemies: as Prouerbs 18. 10. and to our prayers which auaile much with him, if they bee feruent. Iam 5. 16. And this he requireth ſtraitely to be beleeued of vs. And ſo hee vſeth to doe 2. Chron. 20. alſo in the deliuerance of his peoples ſoules out of the bondage of Satan and hell. For by meane men, and thoſe that bee of no great note for their wealth or preferment, hee ſubdueth the hearts of the mighty, piercing and breaking them with the powerfull force of their preaching, (if they wil lend their eares to heare them) that ſo the excellent gift of faith may be wrought in them, he ſo putting heauenly treaſure in earthen veſſels, to that end and purpoſe; 1. Cor. 4. 7. and that all may ſay to his praiſe when they ſee it, that it is hee that worketh, and whoſe the power is, though ſillie man bee vſed by him as his inſtruments.
            This woman, as God vſed her to deliuer his people, ſo ſhe was alſo endued Of Deboras calling that ſhe was a Propheteſſe. with the ſpirit of propheſie, to reueale the will of God to them, and to anſwere their doubts. For which cauſe it is ſaid in the next verſe, that the people came vp to her for counſell and iudgement: For it is thought, that Doct. 2. in verſ. 4. their oppreſſion by that Iabin was ſo great, that the people of Iſrael could not haue ordinary Iudges. Now though it was rare to haue women Propheteſſes, vet now and then God ſtirred vp ſuch, as Miriam the ſiſter of Moſes, Hanna the mother of Samuel; and Hulda in the daies of Ioſias the King: and 2. King. 22. 14.
               
in the new Teſtament, as Anna the daughter of Phanuel, and the 4. daughters Luk. 2. 36. Act. 21. 9. of Philip, in the booke of the Acts recorded. And it is not vnlike, that ſome of theſe women that were indued with the ſpirit of propheſie, did inſtruct and teach the people, declaring to them thoſe things which God had reuealed vnto them, ſeeing the gifts of God are not giuen to bee buried, but to be vſed for the edifying of the Church in publike and priuate. And for proofe of this which I ſay, we are to know, that propheſying is not onely taken for the foretelling of things to come, but for making knowne the will of God in matters of ſaluation, and to both ends God vſed women ſometimes, 1. Cor. 14. 34. though now he forbid them. (As for thoſe forged, or diabolicall ſhee ſaints and Propheteſſes, of whom the Church of Rome boaſteth, we aſcribe as much credit to them, as the dreames of Monkes deſerue.) Therefore wee muſt alſo heere take heed, that wee bring not that into example which the Lord hath wrought extraordinarily, when it hath pleaſed him: For wee are tied by Pauls rule, ſet downe to the Corinthians, to wit, that women keepe 1. Cor. 14. 34. ſilence in the congregation. He addeth a reaſon, becauſe they muſt bee ſubiect to their husbands. But the teachers office is to haue authority ouer thoſe which are taught by them, and to gouerne them alſo as well as to inſtruct them, which is not permitted to the wife ouer her husband, neither ouer other men. But ſeeing the Lord in theſe latter times vſeth not commonly extraordinary inſtruments as he did in former daies, eſpecially vnleſſe he furniſh them alſo with extraordinary gifts, but ordinary: therefore wee are to admire and reuerence his goodneſſe in both: and the vſe hereof is, that as it is our bounden duty to praiſe God highly, for that hee hath ſtirred vp ſome in all ages to be lights and helps, in and for the good of his Church, yea and 1. Theſ. 5. 20. Heb. 13. 17. extraordinary, as we ſee heere, in the want of other, ſo (to come home to our ſelues) while he prouideth ordinary helpes and meanes for vs in theſe daies to the building vp of the ſame, his Church among vs, it behoueth vs that both we receiue them with all due reuerence, making right vſe of them; and that none preſume to ſet vp themſelues extraordinarily, as many of theſe ſeparatiſts do without gifts anſwerable, although God hath done ſo ſomtime, and fitted them for the ſame, and granted that priuiledge to his, when it hath ſeemed good vnto him.
            Now further to proceed, this which is ſaid of the marriage of Debora, being 
                  Of Deboras married eſtate. Doct. 2. in verſ. 4. a Propheteſſe, can teach vs no leſſe then this, that they who haue attended on God in the miniſtery in former times, whether men or women, or ſuch as doe it at this day, are not deſpiſed of God for their married eſtate, but counted of him faithfull, and put in his ſeruice, as this Debora was: which though there is no cauſe to make queſtion of, (ſeeing they who teach other the whole counſell of God, and ſo by conſequent, how to vſe the married eſtate aright, a man would thinke ſhould much more bee fit to vſe it in the beſt manner themſelues) yet I ſay ſo, for that the Romiſh prelacie, who ſnatch at euery occaſion to raile on the Miniſters of the Goſpell, (and ſo they doe becauſe of their marriage,) doe what they can moſt ſpitefully and iniuriouſly to bring the faithfull Preachers into an odious account with all men. And they haue thought this a meet matter in them to barke at, vnder a pretence that the marriage bed, (for they thinke better of the whoriſh bed) can no way ſtand with ſuch an holy calling as the miniſtery is; which being

Gods ordinance for all ſtates of men to enioy, were ſhamefull in them to Heb. 13. 4. ſpurne againſt, though they themſelues liued moſt chaſt, ſeeing while they goe about to diſgrace the perſons, they fight againſt the ordinance of God, yea and that which is highly commended of him: but much more reprochfull and odious it is in them ſo to doe, ſeeing the ſame deuout perſons, (as they would bee counted) are, and that many of them, as is well knowne, groſſe whoremongers themſelues, (that I ſay no worſe) and ſuch as liue in filthie vncleannes, though Prieſts by their calling. But for further proofe of this truth, I meane the mariage of Miniſters to be lawfull, ſeeing I haue begun to ſpeake of it, this I will adde: that the examples of the Miniſterie vnder the Law, as well as their practiſe at the comming of Chriſt, and after in the Apoſtles times, doe maintaine and iuſtifie it: yea and ſince thoſe times, the Church of God for many hundred yeeres, (till Gregories and Siricius times, who were Popes of Rome) doe proue and teſtifie the ſame. The Prophets firſt, as 2. Chro. 15. 1. 
               Obed, Hanany, and other: the 2. Chro. 16 14 Leuites, as Mattaina and his predeceſſors; and Exod. 29. 4. for Prieſts, Aaron, Eliazer and their poſteritie, all vnder the Law married, declare that they are by malice blinded who condemne mariage in the Miniſterie. And for the latter times in the new Teſtament, Zacharie and Elizabeth ſo liued in their mariage, to wit, iuſt before God, and Luke 1. 6. walking in all his commandements, as had been impoſsible for them to do, if their condition of life had bin vnlawfull. And for the Apoſtles, Peter himſelfe was married, to goe no further. This by the occaſion offered, I haue ſpoken as briefly as I could. And let them that ſerue God in the Miniſterie, preach Chriſt Ieſus diligently, and endeuour faithfully tobe vnoffenſiue in conſcience toward God, and in their liues toward men, and they ſhall not need to feare ſuch Scorpions, for their ſting is plucked out from doing them any hurt. And if the vncleannes and lewd liues of ſome perſons in the Miniſterie, gaue no more occaſion to the aduerſaries of inſulting, (which yet is the fact and ſin of ſome perſons, and not any blot in the calling) then that ſome do take the benefit of the ordinance of God, in that they are married; many Miniſters might ſit without red cheeks and a glowing conſcience, and the aduerſarie with ſhame hold his peace, without any triumphing And let this alſo that hath been ſaid, check and controle that relique of Poperie, that ſtill hangs about many of the people, in the Miniſtery, who verily thinke them worthy and good Miniſters who leade a ſingle life, without any other reſpect, whereas mariage is nothing, and ſinglenes, yea virginity are nothing of themſelues, but a pure ſpirit in a body vnderfiled in both, which ſome of theſe little regard.
            The next thing in the deſcribing of Debora, is, the ſetting downe of her Verſe 5. Of Deboras dwelling.
                dwelling, that it was vnder a Palme tree in Mount Ephraim, and the naming of her husband, being (no doubt) a man of good note then, though to vs vnknowne; theſe things, I ſay, ſeeing nothing is ſet downe in vaine in the holy Story, had (as it may ſeeme) more vſe in that time, then wee now can ſee: which I may truly ſay of many other things therein contained, which ſhould ſomewhat ſatisfie the reader, when hee ſeeth not ſo much in ſome places, as he doth in another. And yet the holy Ghoſt ſets downe many circumſtances oftentimes, as for the fuller credit of the hiſtorie, eſpecially where it elſe might ſeeme queſtionable, as the time, places, names, &c. ſo to

giue more light to the thing handled. Onely let this content vs, that, as a dwelling was allowed her, though ſhe being a Propheteſſe, was married, and Doct. verſ. 5. perhaps of ſome note, it being expreſſely ſpoken of, and ſet downe: ſo it may ſerue to aſſure vs that God doth the ſame to ſuch at this day as are in the ſame condition, ſeruing him with honeſt and good hearts in the Miniſterie; I meane hee alloweth them a place to liue in, to their good contentment, euen ſuch as hee ſeeth fitteſt for them: though the Popiſh Clergie, and ſome other alſo, count them vnmeete to liue at all, but rather worthie to be rooted out of the earth. But of this thus much.
            Now it is further ſaid here, that the children of Iſrael went vp for iudgement Doct. 2. in verſ. 5. to her, I meane Debora; who by the ſpirit of prophecie, anſwered their doubts, and determined of their controuerſies, and declared to them the will of God; by all which, they might the better doe the duties that concerned them. Where we are to conſider the louing kindnes of the Lord, as to them, that they might euen then in their oppreſſion by the King of Canaan, haue one to anſwere their doubts that troubled them; ſo in other ages, and much more in this of ours, that he hath prouided, that ſuch as make queſtion of any thing that troubleth them, may be anſwered and ſatisfied. If that which ſhe did, being but one perſon, and a woman, was to be accounted a ſingular fauour of God (as who can deny it?) what a mercie of God is this to vs, that we haue ſolemne and publike aſſemblies, not in one place of the land, but in many, (and but for the ſinne of ſome perſons, ſhould haue them throughout in all places) to teach the will of God, that all who are not wilfull, or negligent, may learne to know the Lord, from the greateſt to the leaſt, and alſo the things that belong to their peace? Thus when (I ſay) we may priuatly vnburthen our ſelues of any doubtfull and dangerous opinions, or trouble of conſcience (as wee may, God be thanked) and that many waies; oh what a priuiledge is it? Theſe things ought ſo much the more to moue vs to be in admiration at the loue of God the giuer, becauſe in falſe religion and worſhipping of God, (as in the Papacie) there is no ſuch thing to be looked for, or enioyed: for their ſeruing of God, is compact of fancies, dreames, and lies, the inuentions of men, as a dunghill is full of filthines and droſſe. And as for the relieuing the conſcience of any ſuch as are diſtreſſed and diſquieted, there is as much comfort miniſtred to them either out of Parſons Directorie, or out of the Meditations of Frier Granatenſis, (which yet ſauour moſt of all the reſt, of any pietie) as the poore traytor Iudas found at the hand of the Prieſts, when he complaining and crying out, that he had ſinned in betraying the innocent blood, anſwered, after the vnmercifull manner of ſuch as they were [looke thou to that] as if they ſhould haue ſaid (though they ſet him a worke) ſhift for thy ſelfe: that is the comfort thou ſhalt haue of vs. But to returne: Though God hath euery way prouided well for vs to be inſtructed ſoundly, and graciouſly relieued and comforted, (as I haue ſaid) yet it is to be lamented, that many of vs are glutted with the good meanes that wee haue, and ſuffer them to lie by vs, as it were a ruſting. And euen thereafter is the good fruite that we bring foorth in our liues thereby.
            
               
               Verſ. 6. Then ſhe ſent and called Barak the ſonne of Abinoam out of Kedeſh of Naphtali, and ſaid vnto him, Hath not the Lord God of Iſrael commanded, ſaying, Goe and draw toward Mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thouſand men of the children of Naphtali, and of the children of Zebulon?
               
               Verſ. 7. And I will draw vnto thee, to the riuer Kiſhon, Siſera the Captaine of Iabins armie, with his charets and his multitude, and will deliuer them into thine hand.
               
               Verſ. 8. And Barak ſaid vnto her, If thou wilt goe with me, I will goe, but if thou wilt not goe with me, I will not goe.
               
               Verſ. 9. Then ſhe anſwered, I will ſurely goe with thee, but this iourney that thou takeſt, ſhall not be for thine honour: for the Lord ſhall ſell Siſera into the hands of a woman. And Debora aroſe, and went with Barak to Kedeſh.
               
            
            NOw we haue heard the deſcription of Debora, and what ſhe was: it followeth The meaning of theſe foure verſes. how ſhe went to worke in this great buſineſſe of the Lord againſt Iabin. She therefore as God commanded, ſent to Barak, as he is here deſcribed in the text, the ſonne of Abinoam, that hee ſhould goe and furniſh himſelfe with tenne thouſand men, and aſſured him, that God would giue him victorie ouer Siſera, the Captaine of Iabins armie, and ouer all his multitude. Barak at firſt feared, but after beleeued, and went forward to the worke: and ſeeing he was afraid through vnbeliefe, therefore he refuſed to goe without her; for the which ſhe found fault with him, and told him God would puniſh it, ſo that he ſhould not haue that honour, which otherwiſe he ſhould haue had. And after that, Barak and Debora went to Kedeſh together. Thus much for the meaning of theſe foure verſes. Now of both theſe Debora and Barak in order. Firſt of the meſſage in the ſixth and ſeuenth verſes: then of that which followed vpon it, in the other two following.
            Of Debora firſt, the holy Storie ſetteth downe this, that ſhe ſent the meſſage More particularly of the ſixth and ſeuenth verſes. of God to Barak, adding thereto the promiſe of victorie; both which I ioyne together, ſeeing wee may more cleerely ſee that which wee haue to learne thereby. And out of both points of her ſpeech, namely the commandement of God to Barak, and his promiſe of good ſucceſſe; this ioyntly I giue the reader to marke, that theſe two things are the principall motiues and reaſons to perſwade, and that are to leade vs in the moſt of our actions, Doct. 1. in verſ. 6. and 7. (to the end, we may rightly effect and bring them to paſſe) namely the commandement of God, and his promiſe of bleſsing. I ſay, in the moſt of our What are the principall reaſons that are to leade vs in the moſt of our actions. actions, not all; for as much as ſome of them are free and indifferent to be done, or left vndone of vs, and in them we are thus to be guided; namely, that we vſe that part of our libertie in things indifferent, which we ſhall by due conſideration find to tend moſt to the glorie of God, our owne inward peace, and the edifying or leaſt offence of Gods people. Otherwiſe (as I haue ſaid) in things forbidden or commanded by God, let vs take our direction accordingly, as we haue heard, and harten on our ſelues to ſhunne that which is forbidden, or to obey the contrary, being incouraged by the promiſe of bleſſing annexed to both. And this is a moſt bleſſed and comfortable direction to all Gods ſeruants at this day, and ſhall be likewiſe to the end of the world.
            
               
And it is that which hath carried our fathers forth in their moſt difficult workes and parts of their liues. Moſes in going to Pharaoh, to fetch the people of Iſrael out of their grieuous bondage, which Pharaoh would not agree Exod 3. 11. 12. to, what encouragement had hee hereto? verily euen this, that God ſaid to him, goe, for haue not I commanded thee? And againe, I will be with thee to bring it to paſſe. And the ſame was Ioſhuas authority, and the hartening of him to the guiding of the ſame people into the land of promiſe, and in rooting the idolatrous nations out of it, euen the word of the Lord, he ſpeaking thus vnto him: Ariſe, goe ouer this Iordan, thou and all this people, vnto 
               Ioſh. 1. 25. 
               the land which I giue them: as I was with Moſes, ſo I will bee with thee; I will not leaue thee, neither forſake thee. And this was Pauls vpholding and ſtay, as throughout all the places whither he went preaching; ſo at Corinth, where hee was in great danger. For thus the Lord ſaid to him by a viſion in the night; Feare not Paul, but ſpeake, and hold not thy peace; for I am with thee, and 
               Act. 18. 9. 
               no man ſhall lay hands on thee to hurt thee, for I haue much people in this city. And the ſame I may ſay of many other.
            And by the ſame commandement and promiſe of God, wee are guided ſtill, who proſper and like well in our life, and no other waies. And this is that life of faith, which is ſo highly commended in the Scriptures, when it Note. is ſaid, the iuſt ſhall liue by faith. And are not wee ſubiect to the ſame diſcouragements, Heb. 10. 38. and the like that they were in ages paſt? that ſo we may ſee wee haue the ſame need to bee ſtrongly vpholden, and ſoundly encouraged, as they were? But though it be not to bee doubted of, but that many doe ſee this, and haue learned thus to be guided in their actions (for they only liue comfortably) ſo it is as much to bee lamented, how infinite perſons know not that there is any ſuch eaſie and plaine way to guide them; no, neither can they bee brought from being led by their carnall reaſon, and prophane cuſtome, in the actions of their life, neither can bee brought to ſtoop and Note. ſubmit themſelues to any ſuch gouernment, as God hath ſeene beſt: by meanes whereof they going about them, as it liketh them beſt, not looking what God requireth; if they doe a good thing, or what he promiſeth, therfore they doe it not ſo as he is pleaſed therewith; to wit, becauſe hee commandeth Note. it, much leſſe to that end, and with ſuch a mind as it ſhould bee done with, encouraged by his promiſe. Therefore they haue many plagues in their liues by following their owne deſires and waies; and when it falleth out better with them, that they proſper in the world, yet haue they no ſound comfort in any thing that they doe. Apply this to all affaires in mens callings.
            Therfore I will ſay this one thing to thee, whoſoeuer thou art that wouldeſt liue comfortably. Try the working of this doctrine in thee: looke but one weeke to thy calling faithfully, to diſcharge the duties of it conſcionably; Note. and ſo farre as thou haſt knowledge, endeauour to obey all other commandements of God; and be firmely perſwaded of the promiſe of God to thee, that thou art ſafe in ſo walking. For he hath annexed a promiſe of bleſſing to the obeying of euery commandement: yea and that an hundred fold more then thou forgoeſt thereby. Thou wilt aske, how ſhalt thou know that God doth reward thee ſo? I anſwere, bee thou iudge thy ſelfe, if he deale not ſo with thee. For example, let this be the caſe: Thou wilt ſay,

if thou wert not tied ſo ſtrictly to obey God, thou couldeſt take thy pleaſure in merrie company, or benefit thy ſelfe as other men doe, to gaine and get commodity, whereas now thou being tied to make conſcience, dareſt not doe ſo, but muſt loſe and forgo much thereby. I heare thee; now heare thou me likewiſe. Thou confeſſeſt that the profit and pleaſure thou forgoeſt by obeying God, is vnlawfull, and againſt conſcience; for otherwiſe, who holdeth Note. thee from it? Now put the caſe, that when thou haſt ſo gotten it, God vrge and cauſe thy conſcience to prick thee, and thou beeſt wounded therein, which ſtingeth worſe then Hornets; for ſo God doth one time or other make mens ſinne ſmart and ſting the committers of it, in moſt painfull ſort, or (which is worſe) leaues them hardened. If thou knoweſt what this meaneth, or beleeueſt that which I ſay to thee, what wouldeſt thou not giue to be healed of this intolerable paine? Euen all that thou haſt, how much ſoeuer it be. For that is a ſigne to thee of loſing thy ſoule vtterly, if thou perſiſt therein: and what ſhall it profit a man to winne the whole world and loſe his ſoule? 
               Mat. 16. 26. Thou fiſheſt with a golden hooke, which being loſt, is not recompenſed by all thou catcheſt therewith. Now anſwere mee, haddeſt thou not been voide and rid of this terrour and taſt of hell, if thou haddeſt auoided and reſiſted thy ſinne? Mighteſt thou not haue been quiet and merrie, as other of Gods ſeruants be, if thou haddeſt obeyed the Lord? Then tell me, would not that thy mirth and quietneſſe haue been an hundred fold better, and more welcome to thee then thy profit & pleaſure, which hath brought thee this helliſh torment of conſcience? this wound and ſting which taketh away all delight from thee, ſo that for deliuerance out of it, thou wouldeſt giue all that thou haſt? Therefore know, that God will giue an hundred fold more profit, eaſe, & pleaſure to thee, euen in this life, if thou obeyeſt him, or doeſt any thing for his ſake, ouer thou ſhalt find by making thy beſt gaine of thy ſinne. But I muſt remember my ſelfe, for I haue bin long in this point. Only Mat. 19. 29. this I adde, that it is to bee bewailed, that this heauenly wiſedome ſo little Note. entreth into men, nor preuaileth with them. Alas they haue no leiſure to thinke of the reckoning, being in the middeſt of their iollity.
            It is alſo worthy our noting, that while Siſera was in his flouriſhing, and Doct. verſ. 7. iollity, the Lord threatens to take him downe, and to bring him low. I will, ſaith the Lord to Barak, draw vnto thee the chiefe captaine of Iabins army, and his chariots, and whole hoſt, to the riuer Kiſhon, and deliuer him into thine hand. Oh! how fearefull then is the eſtate of Gods enemies, euen ſuch as are euill workers, and ſet againſt Gods people, that in the middeſt of their pompe and pride, the Lord hath taken their names (though in another manner, and to another end then the names of Recuſants are taken) to anſwere it, euen that he may be reuenged on them? And hath not this been a common vſe with ſuch? with Chorah, Naball, Iezabell, and many others; that while they walked heere on the earth at liberty, their deſtruction was told from heauen to bee at hand? and they ſummoned to appeare to their Eccleſ. 11. 1. arraignment? and if ſome of them then did not, neither now many doe know before it commeth, neither once dreame of any ſuch thing, nor feare it: yet ſeeing it is euer comming, (and hauing threatened it) and ſo it hangeth as a ſword point continually ouer their head; oh how vncomfortable is it to thinke vpon? Oh therefore be we alwaies vnder his wing and abide we

in his loue, that ſo we may be euer out of horrour and feare, that God doth not marke vs for his enemies. Which miſerable condition the vnbeleeuers are alwaies in, vnleſſe they be hardened, which is far worſe, as I ſaid before: for if his anger be kindled but a little (as it is euer toward them a great deale) Pſal. 2. 12. happie are they that feare him. I would not therefore bee a bad perſon, if there were any way to ſhun it, euen for this cauſe, whereas yet all the terrors heere, are but a glimps of thoſe that follow afterwards. And contrarily, why Note. ſhould not the godly be content to beare ſome hardneſſe heere, ſeeing they are freed from the greateſt terrours (if they know their liberties) both heere and heereafter? But ſomewhat like this I ſpake of in Eglons example before.
            Now I ſhould proceed to ſpeake of Barak, hauing begun with Debora, and ſaid of her that which is occaſioned by the text: but I ſhould haue no time thereto in this ſermon; therefore an end heere.
         
         
            THE TWENTIE SIXE SERMON ON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               WE haue heard of Deboras meſſage to Barak, in the two Verſ. 8. former verſes. Now followeth Baraks anſwere to her meſſage in this eighth verſe. If (ſaith hee) thou wilt goe with me, I will goe, elſe not. This anſwere of his ſeemes to yeeld little to Gods commandement, ſent to him by Deboras miniſtery, neither to aſcribe any thing to Gods promiſe, and therefore ſhewes how he profited not by thoſe two ſtrong peſwaſions to leade to duty, mentioned before, but proues that hee aſcribed more to her preſence, then to Gods promiſe: which, what could it be leſſe, then a great blemiſh in him, Heb. 11. 32. as may bee ſeene by his amending his fault afterwards? Whoſe faith is ſo highly renouned among the worthies, in the epiſtle to the Hebrues? Beſide, ſhe was offended with him, for his ſo anſwering, and therefore it was (doubtleſſe) infidelity in him. If it bee asked, why then is hee afterward ſo highly commended for his faith? I anſwere, that when the meſſage came firſt to him, the thing enioyned him from God by Deboras meſſage, ſeemed to be moſt full of difficulty. For he was commanded to make commotion, and to rebell againſt him that was King ouer them, to wit, this Iabin, who was very great and mighty; he was alſo charged to gather an armie of men together, though hee was but a priuate man himſelfe. Theſe things therefore for him to take in hand, and that againſt ſuch a fierce and ſtrong captaine as Siſera was, it made him afraid to ſet vpon ſuch a worke, and eſpecially, while he was vnexperienced in ſo great a triall and difficulty, and this was

the cauſe why hee could not beleeue, except ſhee went with him, that God would deliuer him with his men of warre into his hand.
            But afterward weighing better the commandement of God, and his promiſe, God by his ſpirit aſſiſting him, hee beleeued the words of Debora, and obeyed, and ſo obtained the victory by faith, as it is ſaid in the forementioned place to the Hebrues. And how vſually this falleth out, and commeth to paſſe, euen to the godly, that at the firſt they doe ſtagger and doubt, How ſoone faith is quailed. and beleeue not by and by, and that through the ſtrong reliques of the old Adam, there is no man of God but hath proofe; and yet for all that, afterward they being ſtrengthened by the ſpirit of God, recouer themſelues againe, Note. and beleeue confidently. This is apparent in Dauid, euen after he had beleeued, ſaying, O Lord, waſh mee throughly, cleanſe me, for I am wholly filthy: 
               Pſal. 51. 2. 10. And againe, Create in me a new ſpirit; as if the old had been vtterly loſt. Alſo in Moſes, when he was firſt commanded to goe to Pharaoh, how fearefull he Exod 3. 11. compared with 10. 26. was at the hearing of the meſſage, and how hee ſhrunke backe: but afterward, how boldly did he execute the ſame, and deliuer it vnto him? Euen Note. ſo the beſt of vs, when we heare of the death of our deare friends, or of great loſſes that are befallen vs; alſo at the beginning of great ſickneſſe and paine arreſting vs, oh how doe we faint, and diſtruſt that we ſhall neuer ſubmit our ſelues, and yeeld obediently to them (though God command vs ſtraitly to Pſal. 37. 3. doe ſo) while we caſt both our eyes on the burthen and croſſe; that is, on the the things that are ſeene, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, and while wee are not 1. Cor. 4. laſt. yet come to our ſelues to looke vp to God with confidence, and to things not ſeene, but eternall. But when we weigh how they come from him that loueth vs, and therefore cannot intend our hurt; we then ſubmit our ſelues to God, and ſtay vpon him for grace to go vnder all, and waite patiently for a good iſſue. And becauſe our hearts ariſe oft times againſt our brethren, when we ſee theſe weakeneſſes in them, and begin to iudge and thinke too hardly of them for the ſame, the Lord therefore letteth vs ſometimes ſee the ſame or other ſuch in our ſelues, that ſo wee may learne to beare with the infirmities of them.
            And when wee haue experience of this, it cauſeth vs to bewaile tenderly Gal. 6. 1. the weakneſſes that we ſee in our brethren, and with the ſpirit of meekneſſe helpe to hold them vp, rather then by and by to cenſure them ouer ſharply for the ſame. And it is to be deepely bewailed, to ſee how farre off many are from duty in this behalfe, (though otherwiſe religious, and ſuch as loue the truth frō their herts) are ouercome with deadly cōceits againſt their brethrē when they ſee they haue fallen by infirmity, & are ſtrongly incenſed againſt Note. them, & leaue thē to themſelues, neuer telling them of it kindly, as if they ſee thē ouercome of impatience, teaſtineſſe, anger, or if their zeale & feruency in ſeruing God be ſlaked, & abated, or that they be offenſiuely taken vp of, and carried away with the world. Theſe and the like (I confeſſe) are ruſt cauſes to raiſe griefe in vs, and are much to be diſliked of vs, when we eſpy them in ſuch as be well thought of by vs, and they are blemiſhes in them not to be borne with or allowed: but yet for all that, when wee ſhall ſee ſuch things in them, wee muſt beware that wee cenſure them not too hardly, (for who hath giuen vs authority to iudge them?) crying out vncharitably, that there is no religion in them. For though it cannot bee denied, but that the diuell

hath, by watching his opportunitie, got aduantage ouer them; yet they being not vntractable, but only deceiued in their ſo offending, and yet in other parts of their liues they holding their care to pleaſe God, and labouring to keepe a good conſcience; we muſt not for ſome one ſuch weaknes, fall by and by to ſuch hard iudging of them, and to depart from them (which is vtterly againſt charitie and dutie) but to think, that there being ſo many ſnares to intangle men, it may eaſily enough be ſo with them, as wee may ſee it to be with our ſelues (if we be not blinded with ſelfeloue) in the like trials, for that we doe not, without ſpecial grace, and heed taking, auoid the like falles. And therfore we muſt hope that they may, yea and ſhal (no doubt) through Gods helpe, ariſe, and grow in good ſort out of them againe.
            And yet I doe not ſpeake this as though I would iuſtifie ſuch offences in the liues of Gods people, or as though I went about to ſalue them vp with gentle words, (for I know, that where ſuch breaches are ſuffered to paſſe in the liues of them who are otherwiſe religious, they doe much hurt to other by example, and to themſelues by quenching the ſpirit in them, ſpecially if they be defended and continued long in, vnconfeſſed, and renounced, that they may be forgiuen them) but yet we that behold them, muſt wiſely ſhun extremities in iudging of them, on the one ſide, as well as on the other; as I haue ſaid, and no more condemne the perſons, then we allow the ſins. And as for the common profeſſors, who when they ſee ſuch, frailties appeare in the forwarder ſort of Chriſtians, begin to pleaſe themſelues therein, and to condemne all other good parts in them, I ſay to them, if they ſtumble thereat, and they themſelues walke on in their groſſenes, they ſhall in time ſee themſelues guiltie of farre greater and more horrible ſinnes; or if they ſtill goe forward in condemning and inſulting ouer them, they ſhall doe it to their owne confuſion. And this by occaſion of Baraks diſtruſt.
            More particularly alſo let Baraks anſwere in clinging ſo to Debora, teach Gods people this wiſdome, not ouer-much to giue place to their affections, Doct. 1. in verſ. 8. euen in things lawful, but to ſubmit themſelues to the will of God, and pray for ſtrength to reſt therein. It ſeemed a very equall and commendable requeſt in Barak, to deſire the companie, aduice, and direction of Debora: and ſo it was in the generall: but when hee ſaw it was Gods will hee ſhould depend immediatly vpon him for ſucceſſe, he ſaw againe that it was his weaknes ſo much to depend vpon her preſence. And although it is ſo commendable a thing for men to cleaue to the Miniſtery and aſſiſtance of their faithfull guides, while they continue among them, yet if any eſpieth his owne weakenes and childiſhnes in this, that he cleaueth too neere vnto them, as thinking that without them hee ſhall miſcarrie, and cannot bee vpholden without them, let him checke himſelfe, and labour for ſuch ſtrength of knowledge and faith, as may inable him to go vpon his owne feete, and liue by his owne faith, depending directly vpon Gods promiſe of vholding and preſeruing him in the middeſt of his diſcouragements, feares, and weaknes, without ſuch meanes, if he may not enioy them. But while ſome with Barak aſcribe too much to the Miniſter of God it is too true, that many deſpiſing and nothing regarding the miniſterie of men, grow ſhiftles and ſhameles, being as farre from hope of happineſſe, as they are voide of grace and goodneſſe.
            
               
Now followeth the ſpeech of Debora to Barak, when he made the forementioned anſwere vnto her, to wit, that he would not goe, vnleſſe ſhe went Verſe 9. with him. And this ſhe ſaid: I will go with thee, but it ſhall not be for thine honour. Wherein ſhe findeth fault with him, and tels him, that hee ſhould ſuffer the puniſhment of his infidelitie, while the glorie which he might otherwiſe haue had thereby, ſhould be giuen to a woman, meaning Iael, and not in the leaſt part to her ſelfe: whereby ſomewhat may be noted, both generally and particularly. For the firſt, we may learne that which may do vs much good; to wit, that God will puniſh vs ſome way for our vnbeliefe. Doct. verſ. 9. For wee ſee, that God doth not put vp at mens hands, this and ſuch other ſinnes, as I named in the former verſe; eſpecially, when they come more of knowledge then of frailtie, and when we ſee that we doe amiſſe, and yet Note. through blind ſelfeloue, we will not finde fault with our ſelues for the ſame, but extenuate or hide our ſinne, God therefore ſpared not Zacharias for his vnbeliefe, though otherwiſe a righteous man, but made him dumbe for a Luke 1. 
                     •
                  . ſeaſon. And he telleth vs all as much in the Pſalme, where he ſaith, If mine owne children breake my ſtatutes, and keepe not my commandements, I will viſite 
               Pſal. 8
                     •
                   31. 
               their tranſgreſsion with the rod, and their iniquitie with ſtrokes; although I will not take my louing kindneſſe from them. The like is to be ſeene in Moſes, who becauſe he diſtruſted the Lord in ſmiting the rocke, bare the ſcarre thereof to his death, being denied entrance into the land of Canaan. So Ioaſh for diſtruſting Eliſhas meſſage, and ſmiting the earth but thrice, was rebuked by 2. King. 13. the Prophet, who would not haue found fault with him, if he had not bidden him ſmite it oftner. Thou ſhouldeſt (ſaith he) haue ſmitten fiue or ſixe times, and ſo thou ſhouldeſt vtterly haue deſtroyed Aram, but now thou ſhalt ſoile them but thrice; and ſo they ſhall get ſtrength againe to reuenge themſelues. And euen ſo doe ſuch both feele and finde, who regard not what the Lord ſaith vnto them, neither giue credit to his word, and much more all ſuch, as giue the bridle more groſſely to their vnruly paſſions. And this ſhould (a man would thinke) both cauſe vs all to ſhunne ſuch boldnes with God, as will prouoke him to make vs ſmart for the ſame: and alſo, it ſhould make vs beare the more with the infirmities of our brethren, for as much as wee ſee God correcteth them for the ſame, and ſhall wee alſo adde ſorrow to their ſorrow, when wee ought rather to haue compaſſion on them, and pitie them? This be noted in generall.
            Now more particularly, ſeeing Barak was puniſhed with loſing the glorie, Doct. 
                     •
                  . in verſ. 
                     •
                  . which he ſhould haue had but for his vnbeliefe, this teacheth vs, that glorie, and good name & report, is reckoned among the good things that a godly perſon may deſire and be glad to enioy: nay, it is that which hee ſhould enſue, becauſe it is a token of Gods approbation, if his people report well of vs: ſeeing they are taught by the ſame ſpirit, to diſcerne who are like them. Therefore Iohn, by a probable argument, proueth Demetrius to be a 
                  
                     •
                  . Ioh. 11. good man, becauſe of his good report. It is to bee lamented, that all they whom God alloweth, doe not deſire this alſo, and deſerue it by the fruites of their loue toward his Church: For it is the note of an arrogant and diſſolute perſon, to ſcorne the good opinion that his brethren conceiue of him. Euen as precious oyntments are knowne by their ſmell, ſo is a godlie Chriſtian by the ſauour of his good name, eſpecially in the place where he

dwelleth, as being beſt knowne there. Indeed, the principall care ſhould be to giue the Lord his due praiſe, for elſe we beguile and deceiue men in cauſing them to thinke well of vs, and much more we doe dangerouſly deceiue our ſelues: but that being well regarded and looked vnto, in the next place let our care be that the Church of God may giue vs allowance, and ſee iuſt cauſe to report well of vs. As it is ſaid of Zacharie and his wife, that both they Luke 1. 6. were iuſt before God, and toward men vnreproueable, and therfore of good report. So Cornelius had a good name among the Iewes. Now glorie or Act. 10. 22. good name, is a certaine good opinion and eſtimation conceiued of a man for his well doing. For thoſe things which good men doe vertuouſly and well, doe purchaſe commendation and glorie vnto them. The end to the which which we ought to vſe and direct this good report, is this, namely the aduancing of the name of God, and alſo to giue good example to other of following vs: and as the ends are both good, ſo is that good alſo, by the which they are procured. Therefore although a good name bee not to bee ſought for it ſelfe, as though that were the thing wee chiefly intended, and reſted in, and no other, yet it is not to be deſpiſed, for thoſe ends which I haue mentioned, namely, the glorifying of God, and the edification of our brethren.
            Now to end this verſe, let this be briefly added, that Debora yeelding to, Doct. 3. in verſ. 9. and helping the weaknes of Barak in going with him, teacheth vs thus to regard, helpe, and incourage our weake brethren, by counſell, trauaile, and example.
            
               Verſ. 10. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedeſh, and hee went vp on his feete with tenne thouſand men, and Debora went vp with him.
               
               Verſ. 11. Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab, the father in law of Moſes, was departed from the Kenites, and pitched his tent vntill the plaine of Zaanaim, which is by Kedeſh,
               
               Verſ. 12. Then they ſhewed Siſera, that Barak the ſonne of Abinoam, was gone vp to Mount Tabor.
               
               Verſ. 13. And Siſera called for all his charets, euen nine hundred charets of yron, and all the people that were with him, from Haroſheth of the Gentiles vnto the riuer Kiſhen.
               
            
            IN theſe foure verſes, the holy Ghoſt ſheweth, how they did on both ſides prepare their armies, both Barak and Siſera. He accompanied with Debora at Kedeſh, gathered together ten thouſand men out of the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulun to Mount Tabor, which of the writers is called alſo Ithaberins, not farre off from Kedeſh, for they went on foote. The place is neere to the borders of Aſher, Naphtali and Zebulon. And this mount hath neere it, the riuer Kiſhon, where the Prophet Elias killed the prieſts of Baall. And note, for the better vnderſtanding of the ſtory, that al the places mentioned, to wit, Kedeſh, the plaine of Zaanaim, mount Tabor, were all neere ioyning together, and to the riuer Kiſhon. This of Barak. Siſera hearing of this preparation of Bazak, did alſo make ready his armie, which is not mentioned here, ſaue his nine hundred charets of yron: but Ioſephus ſaith, he had thirtie thouſand footmen, tenne thouſand horſemen of the Canaanites, and three

thouſand other charets. But howſoeuer it was, ſure it is, that hee made a mightie preparation, and therewith he came to this riuer Kiſhon. And this of the preparation on both ſides, mentioned in theſe foure verſes And with both there is a briefe ſtorie put in, of the dwelling of Heber the Kenite, the ſonne of Hobab, Moſes father in law, that he had pitched his Tabernacle, and was by Gods prouidence come to dwel nigh the riuer Kiſhon, and in a part of the border of Kedeſh. But why this is brought in, ſhall appeare better afterward in verſ. 18.
            The chiefe thing in this verſe to bee noted, is the faith wherein all theſe agreed and conſented, which are here ſpoken of and mentioned, I meane Barak and his armie, with Debora. For they tooke in hand a moſt hard work againſt ſo fierce a Captaine, as Siſera was; ſo well prouided and appointed by Iabin, who was King ouer the Canaanites. And who would not haue ſaid, that their preparation againſt the Iſraelites, muſt needs in the reaſon of man, haue wrought an vtter ouerthrow of them? As ſure it is, if they had been ouercome, as they were an handfull, and few to many; and weake alſo, but their enemies ſtrong; they had bin moſt cruelly and barbarouſly handled by them. But notwithſtanding all this, when they were perſwaded, that as they were ſet on worke by God, ſo in his power they went about it, and tooke it in hand; not caſting their eyes vpon the difficulties and diſparagements, that were in the way againſt them, for God (they beleeued) would ſtand with them, and giue them the victorie. And this indeede is the Doct. verſ 10. right propertie of faith thus to doe, to look vp to God, who hath commanded that which we take in hand, and promiſed bleſſing thereto. By this and Ioh. 14. 1. by no other meanes, Abraham the father of beleeuers, forſooke his owne Heb. 11. 8. countrey, and went whither God ſent him, from all his kindred, not knowing what he ſhould finde in the place whither he went. And Moſes choſe rather to ſuffer affliction with the people of God in the wilderneſſe, then to Heb. 11. 24. enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon in the houſe of Phaeraos daughter, which the Scripture ſaith he did by faith. And thus did the walles of Iericho Ioſ 6. 20. fall downe, as God had promiſed, at the ſeuenth daies end, the people beleeuing it ſhould be ſo, and compaſſing them about all that time, with the blowing trumpets of rammes hornes, as God had commanded. And this is it, which we ſhould intend and looke to doe in all that we goe about. This faith, for which alſo theſe worthie perſons are by name commended in the A commendation of ſaith. eleuenth to the Hebrewes, is able to carrie vs, as well as euer it did them, through all difficulties, while we haue an eye to the charge giuen vs, and the promiſed reward, although we ſee nothing with bodily eyes, but that which is againſt vs, and matter of diſcouragement. For ſo the Apoſtle S. Iohn ſaith, that this ſaith ouer commeth the world, euen all the difficulties that are in it. This 1. Ioh. 5. 4. faith, when it is once ſetled on the great promiſe of ſaluation, is afterward the fitter to apprehend and lay hold on theſe temporarie promiſes of this life, about the which (it being a Iewell of inualuable price) if we were occupied and exerciſed with ſo conſtant a care, as wee are about matters of leſſe waight, (if not needleſſe and vnprofitable) we ſhould be able to ſay much of the benefit that commeth by it, and haue neere acquaintance with God by the helpe of this our faith. But ſeeing I haue ſpoken of this matter before, I will bee the briefer in it, though wee cannot heare too often of it,

from good ground of the word, as occaſion is offered.
            But whiles I am thus in commending of Bararks faith, me thinkes I heare ſo me obiecting, that the laſt thing ſpoken of him in the ninth verſe, was his vnbeleefe; how is hee therefore ſay they, ſo ſuddenly brought to ſuch a change? I anſwere, that though Barak had been hindred before by vnbeleefe, yet afterward hee recouered himſelfe, as wee ſee heere; and that was when God had giuen him better conſideration of the charge enioyned him, and promiſe made vnto him. So if we haue failed in beleeuing through the difficulty that wee ſee, or by raſhneſſe, yet let vs weigh Gods promiſe more duly, and ſo beleeue more hartily, and be better ſtayed by good conſideration. And to that end let none ſit downe like a tyred perſon, and giue ouer his hold and hope, ſaying; I ſee this is too good and precious for mee to enioy, for I ſhould neuer be able to beleeue it, &c. Not ſo; but then let thy want encreaſe thy thirſt, as Dauids did, Pſal. 51. and deſire to bee enlarged, Pſal. 51. 2. 3. and pray, Lord helpe my vnbeleefe. And remember that weakeneſſe may be forgiuen, where there is ſtriuing againſt it; but wilfulneſſe, or prepoſterous and inuincible vnbeleefe is damnable; for God lookes to bee credited Ioh. 3 1
                     •
                  . vpon his word, promiſe, and oath, beſides the many experiments which we haue, if not of our ſelues, yet of other men; who of weake became ſtrong. And as God bare with Baraks infirmity heere, in yeelding to him, that Debora ſhould goe with him: ſo he will tender and helpe our weake faith, and that many more waies then we can ſee, and all to encourage vs. Thus much be ſaid of this.
         
         
            THE TWENTIE SEAVEN SERMON ON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE booke of IVDGES.
            
               NOw further, let vs note in this verſe by the ioynt agreement Doct. 2. in verſ. 10. of all theſe heere mentioned; I meane Debora, Barak, and the ten thouſand of Zebulun and Nephtali, (eſpecially it being ſo needful that they ſhould ſo conſent together) how good and worthie a thing it is for the ſeruants of God to ioyne and bee like minded in good things; though it doe not directly tend to their owne profit and earthly benefit, or not ſo much as to the common good & behoofe of al the people, or many, (as here it did,) but to a town or family, the commendation of this gift of free conſent together in many good people is clearely to be ſeene in the Apoſtles, and thoſe that kept company with them; of whom it is ſaid, that they were altogether of one mind: which cauſed Saint Paul to make ſo earneſt a requeſt to the Philippians Act. 2. 10. to remoue from them contention and pride; whereby this conſent

and agreement is eaſily broken. For wee know it is no eaſie matter for many to ioyne and agree together, and that by reaſon of ſo much contrariety as is in mens minds, and for that one is ſo ready to croſſe and withſtand an other, eſpecially in good things, through Satan by his ſubtill and malitious policy working therewith, who gaineth much by their diſtraction and diſagreement, as in Paul and Barnabas may be ſeene. It is therfore to be ſought & laboured for alwaies, by the loue and wiſedome of godly teachers, who by their doctrine, perſwaſions, and good example, doe much helpe heereto. Thus had Debora and Barak preuailed with theſe ten thouſand, that they drew them to this worke ioyntly, as if they had been but two perſons. Oh, agreement in good things, what is like it, either in beauty or delight, as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, Behold how good and pleaſant a thing it is, for men to dwell together 
               Pſal. 133. 1. 
               in godly vnity? And experience teacheth the ſame. For there, many vniting their force of couroge and wiſdome in one, they doe eaſily reſiſt the common enemy, and (which is harder) their owne corrupt paſſions and rebellious nature, the which to what euill and miſchiefe it carryeth them, the infinite broyles, ſutes, quarrels and controuerſies of almoſt all places do too truly teſtifie. Such are they who in louing and kind agreement betwixt themſelues, doe ſubmit themſelues to the word of God, whereby they become meeke and humble, and ſo they eaſily conſent to that which is good. The want of this godly agreement, and the contrary readineſſe in men to breake out one againſt another, hath oft cauſed mee to bewaile, (for who ſeeth not great cauſe ſo to do) the boyſterous and fierce contentions of many, and thoſe not onely of the common ſort, who are for the moſt part rude and ignorant, but of them alſo who are to be counted brethren, and yet doe ſo readily let looſe their hearts to bitter contentions and raſh iudgings of their brethren, if they doe not worſe: and yet (which is greater madneſſe) this is for a ſmail cauſe (as if they doe but diſſent in opinion and iudgement one from another in things indifferent, wherein both follow the light of their knowledge,) whereby they giue too great teſtimony, that they little know themſelues aright, and that they haue full ſlightly ſearched into themſelues, to ſee their many ranke corruptions of ſelfe loue, priuie pride, frowardneſſe, impatience, vncharitableneſſe and ſuch like, that ſwarme and beare ſway in them; and that they beſtow ſmall coſt vpon themſelues, nor time to find fault with their owne doings, (to wit, how farre they are off from the rule of charity,) that ſo they may become humble and peaceably minded toward others. Nay, (which is worſe) they hold their vnchriſtian conceits and iudgings of their brethren, ſo ſtrongly and wilfully, that they verifie the prouerbe, making their bitter contentions with them like the bars of a palace, that cannot bee broken: and like cities ſtrong and well fenced, that cannot eaſily bee beaten downe. This is farre from godly agreement, Prou. 18. 19. and conſequently from that harty louing together, which ſhould bee like a threefold cord, that is not eaſily broken, which our Sauiour ſaith is a ſure Eccleſ. 4. 12. token that they in whom it is, are his very Diſciples indeed. As for agreement in euill, ſuch as theirs was in the Pſalme, it is as hurtfull and odious, as Ioh. 13. 35. Pſal. 2. 1. 2. it is common: but though hand ioyne in hand, the wicked ſhall not eſcape vnpuniſhed; 
               Prou. 11. 21. and ſo I leaue them, adding this; where there is no agreement in euill, there leſſe is committed. And therefore wee had need to pray the Lord

to ſend a ſpirit of diuiſion among ſuch, as that was betwixt the Phariſies and Sadduces, that ſo much miſchiefe may be preuented rather then ſtabliſhed. And this of the preparation of that Debora and Barak made.
            Now followeth, (before I come to Siſera) a ſhort ſtory of Heber the huſband Verſ. 11. The vnfolding of it.
                of Iael, put in by the way, to wit, that he (being of the poſterity of Hobab, Moſes father in law, who remoued from his kindred and brethren, as we ſaw in cap. 1. verſ. 16.) was come to this Kedeſh to dwell, where Barak aſſembled his men of warre. To the which place God by his prouidence directing him, ſent him, as appeares afterward in verſ. 17. that thereby hee might, as he did by Iael Hebers wife, cut off this great enemie Siſera. By which we may learne a right profitable leſſon. That while we goe on heere in our ſimplicity in this earthly dwelling to ſerue Gods prouidence, as his word Doct. verſ. 11. leadeth vs, God will in our moſt caſuall actions direct, regard, & bleſſe vs ſo, that in time we ſhall ſee it to be ſo, though we knew not before what ſhould come to paſſe. Heber remoued his dwelling from his kindred, not in hatred to them, but as he ſaw it moſt conuenient for him, though (it is true) he intended not thereby the deſtruction of Siſera, neither came there any ſuch thing into his mind; but the Lord purpoſed it, and appointed that by this meanes of his comming to dwell there, it ſhould be brought to paſſe: Heber onely conſidering, and aduiſedly bethinking himſelfe what was beſt for him to do about the ſetling of his dwelling, and ſeeking to liue among Gods people, and looking no further.
            So by the ſelling of Ioſeph into a ſtrange countrey, a thing in likelihood Gen. 45. 8. tending to his vndoing, yet it is manifeſt, as hee told his brethren, that God ſent him before, to preſerue them and their poſterity aliue, and not they. So when Iacob was ſent away by Rebecca, his mother, to Padan Aram, to auoide Gen. 
                     •
                  8. 2
                     •
                  . the wrath of his brother Eſau, the cauſe was good, but hee went, vncertaine what ſhould befall him in a ſtrange land; and therefore hee thought, and vowed, if he might haue bread to eate, and clothes to put on, and that God would be with him, and keepe him in his iourney, that then he ſhould be his God, meaning that he ſhould bee more ſtrongly confirmed in ſo counting him. Therefore God, who guided his iourney, bleſſed him greatly, ſo that when he returned, hee remembred Gods benefits which hee had ſince that, beſtowed on him, ſaying: I came ouer this Iordan with my ſtaffe; that is, poore, Gen. 32. 10. and without all prouiſion, but now haue I gotten two bands. So when Moſes married Iethros daughter, liuing obſcurely in the wilderneſſe, and ſuffering affliction with the people of God, who would haue thought that any good ſhould haue come thereby? And yet beſide his admirable deliuering of the Iſraelites out of Pharaohs bandage, he was alſo a meane to draw Iethros poſterity to religion, and the true worſhip of God thereby. Euen ſo, offer we our ſelues vnder Gods gouernment, and all things ſhall bee in time, directed by him to a good end, though we ſee it not by and by; yet wee ſhall; ſo as wee may be bold to ſay it, for he will bring it ſo to paſſe. For it is to bee knowne, that while we wander heere on earth, yet we are not in darkeneſſe, as others are; neither are we caſt off as Orphans and left deſolate, but God careth for 1. Pet. 3. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 10. vs his faithfull ones, otherwiſe then he doth for the reſt of the world.
            And it being ſo with vs, though wee ſee not the mind and purpoſe of God toward vs in particulars at the firſt, and what will fall out through the

courſe of our liues, yet wee are ſure that his ſpeciall prouidence watcheth ouer vs for our good; ſo that we need not doubt but that God directeth all things to that end. This is a wonderfull ſtay to all beleeuing people; and without faith, ſound knowledge, and vſe thereof, all Gods doings are ſtrange to vs, both before we ſee the iſſue of them, and ſometime afterward alſo, and namely his croſſes and afflictions: but as they are diſtaſted of vs, and vtterly vnwelcome, ſo are his benefits neuer receiued of vs in good ſort, and to the right end; namely, to make vs truſt in him more firmely, and cleaue to him more conſtantly, whereas we ſhould be much more moued hereby, to commit the ſucceſſe of all vnto him, till our experience haue brought the Rom. 5. 4. hope that ſhall not make vs aſhamed. For there need bee no doubt but that he watcheth for vs thus clinging to him, when we ſleepe, and vpholdeth vs Prou. 6. 22. while wee walke, and propoſeth good towards vs, euen then when wee ſee no likelihood thereof. And while it is thus with vs, it is not vnprofitable to conſider, how ill it goeth with thoſe, who reſt vpon blind fortune (as they call it) and goe on in the ſtrength of their carnall wiſedome, looking for great matters, but all in vaine, they being little or nothing acquainted with Gods prouidence. Lamentable it is to ſee how ſuch are toſſed, vexed, and vnſetled with cares and ſorrowes, and that not only in their moſt vncertaine and doubtfull affaires, but alſo in thoſe which are more ſure and certaine, as they thinke and imagine.
            Beſides, it is not vnprofitable for vs to marke another thing in this ſhort 
                  Doct. 2. ſtory, and that is this: that ſeeing this Heber remoued, and had his dwelling apart from the reſt of his brethren the Kenites, vpon good conſideration, (for otherwiſe the holy ſtory would haue found fault with it,) the reſt of them departing from Iericho, and dwelling with the tribe of Iuda in their Iudg. 1. 16. borders, (as we heard in chap. 1.) in that, I ſay, Heber did thus, who yet, as is cleare by the ſtory, did not offend God therein, wee ſee it is not vnlawfull for the people of God to ſettle their dwellings apart from their neighbours and kindred, & brethren in profeſſion; but it may fal out to be meet for them to do ſo: for God hath not appointed that all the faithfull ſhould dwel together; neither can it be ſometime for ſundry conſiderations and reſpects: as we reade that Abraham and Lot, by reaſon of the great abundance of cattell that they both had, and for want of paſture, departed one from another: euen as before when their poſterity grew and multiplied in one familie, they married, and were diſperſed into diuerſe. And many other things doe cauſe that. Indeed if wee may dwell together with Gods people, in the places of beſt choice, it is not to be neglected, but deſired hartily (for many ſhall be hindred from it by neceſſity) and if that liberty may bee enioyed of vs, let vs make a pretious reckoning of it, and ſet our ſelues to liue together kindly, profitably, and peaceably, which too many regard not to doe, but if it cannot bee without great inconuenience, let vs not ſtriue againſt God, for we gaine nothing thereby, and what know we what God hath appointed to be done by vs in another place? It may bee wee may bring ſome to God by our remouing, and bee ſeated among ſuch as ſhall bee like our ſelues, or may by our good conuerſation which they ſhall ſee, be turned vnto vs. Which two things we ſhould principally aime at, and endeauour vnto when we muſt change and remoue our dwelling.
            
               
Now it followeth that after this ſhort degreſſion (as we haue heard how Verſ. 12. 13. 
               Barak prepared and furniſhed himſelfe to warre, ſo it was told Siſera what he had done) and that hee prepared his army likewiſe when hee heard that Barak had done ſo. His power what it was, I meane, how great and feareful, I haue ſhewed already. That which we haue heere principally to note, in addreſſing himſelfe to the battel, is the difference betwixt him on the one ſide, and Debora and Barak with their few thouſands on the other. They both prepared themſelues to warre we ſee, but theſe went about it by Gods commandement; hee in the pride of his owne heart, and without God. They truſted in the promiſe of God for victory, he in his owne ſtrength, and Note. great army. They went againſt Gods enemies, he againſt Gods friends, yea againſt God himſelfe. Whereby we may ſee that it much auaileth to haue a Doct. verſ. 12. 13. good cauſe to maintaine, and to haue God to goe with vs therein, as many examples in Scripture teſtifie of the warres of godly Kings with idolaters. A good cauſe is the defence of the Goſpell, and the true worſhip of God by a Chriſtian Prince, againſt ſuch as would force him to Poperie, or any other falſe worſhip, by open warre: alſo the maintaining of his owne dominion, bounds, or right in great and waighty matters, or recouering them being vniuſtly detained from him. A Chriſtian Prince in theſe and ſuch like caſes may make warre, and command his people againſt the enemie: and ſo I may ſay of the like. But to leaue this inſtance and to lay out this doctrine in another, more familiar to the common ſort; it is manifeſt where the like is to be found among vs who are in peace, to wit, that we haue a good cauſe, and our controuerſies with the bad, it is manifeſt, I ſay, that the one ſort hath great encouragement by the goodneſſe of his cauſe, to follow it rather then the other, who hath none at all, but much againſt him. For where all theſe encouragements are, or the moſt which Barak had, and of which I haue ſpoken; they are to animate men to their duties; ſo I will not ſay, what ſucceſſe and bleſſing particularly ſhall follow them who vſe them, but they ſhall moſt certainly reape great fruit thereby, and abundantly one way or other: and therefore good reaſon that ſuch ſhould doe the Lords worke diligently: and contrariwiſe, the other, if they could bee made to conſider what they goe about, in following a bad matter, they ſhould neuer dare be hold to proceed as they doe, to wit, ås Siſera did to defend an ill cauſe, but they would feare to goe forward, and deſiſt from their attempts. Good and bad goe to worke both alike (as theſe heere did) for outward preparation, but not in a like manner, nor with the like minde, nor to the like end. And although Siſera had not wilfully, in the pride of his heart, gone againſt Iſrael becauſe they were Gods people (as Pharaoh did) and although hee bee not properly to be charged for not conſulting with God, or weighin the cauſe in going againſt Gods people; (for alas he was an Heathen, and therefore ignorant of ſuch matters) yet to ſpeake the beſt that may be ſaid of him, hee truſted in chariots, horſes, ſouldiers, and munition; thereby purpoſing with maine force to reduce the rebellious Iſraelites, as hee counted them, to the yoake of obedience, and knew alſo that they were Gods people. But it was indeed no wonder that he tooke this courſe, being a curſed Canaanite, ſuch an one as he was. But to leaue him, and to come nearer our ſelues; is it not admirable, that among vs who are of the viſible Church, there ſhould bee

found ſome, that in their enterpriſes, life and dealings, maintaine an euill cauſe one againſt the other, as Barak and Siſera did? for what though their actions both ciuill in religious exerciſes be the ſame, and that in outward reſpect there appeare little or no difference in ſome of them? yet ſo prophane and vnconſcionable many of them are, that they hold the righteous an abomination, and deface, as the Phariſies did Chriſts, their beſt actions, and will ſee no difference betwixt their owne and the others. And to pleaſe themſelues, thus they ſay of them; Tuſh, as preciſe as they ſeeme▪ they doe but as we; they follow their trades, buy, ſell, eate, drinke, marrie, &c. and we do as they, reade, pray, heare the word, receiue the Sacrament, &c. what oddes therefore betwixt vs? yes: for why? ſhall not two be in the field, Mat. 24. 40. or at the mill, and yet the one receiued, the other forſaken? and the one a reprobate, the other choſen? Surely as they differ in their ends, ſo they differ in the meanes vſing that leade thereto: and though they differ not in dying, for the outward manner) yet they differ in this, that one dieth happily, the other miſerably: and ſo they doe in their affections differ, as in their deſires, hope, encouragements, and ſucceſſes. The one asketh, who will ſhew 
               Pſal. 4, 7. 8. 
               vs any good? The other prayeth, O Lord lift vp the light of thy countenance vpon vs, for it is more to vs then all abundance. And in this light both of knowledge for direction, and of grace for aſſiſtance thereto. The godly man walketh looking at the promiſe in all his lawfull attempts, knowing alſo that the Lord, who is his light to guide him, will bee his defence alſo, to vphold, proſper Pſal. 84. 13. and bleſſe him. The other walkes in darkeneſſe, being led by erronious opinion, ſenſe, example, nature, and ſometimes ſhame, feare, and proud confidence in himſelfe; and therefore goeth through many dangers, ſmarts, ſorrowes, whether he be croſſed, or whether he haue his deſire. Hee reeleth alſo and ſtumbleth, as the Egyptians did, when darkeneſſe did ouerſpread them, while the Iſraelites walked in ſafety, at liberty. In a word, the one ſerueth God, the other the diuell: the one is cheerefull, patient, confident: the other of a contrary minde and carriage. Therefore let euery man who deſireth to be approued of God, iudge himſelfe, and as for others, both ſuch as I haue ſpoken of, and they who doe the ſame actions with them, though wee know not with what mind, let vs conceiue the beſt, ſo farre as in charity we may, of them; but yet let vs ſuſpend our ſentence and allowance of them, till after longer triall, and further knowledge of, and acquaintance with them. And conſider yee that reade this what I ſay, and the Lord giue you vnderſtanding. For in that which I haue ſaid of the wicked incenſed againſt the righteous, (their deeds being good, but their owne euill) conſiſteth a great difference betwixt a true Chriſtian and a counterfait; as to him that will lay both ſorts together with good conſideration, ſhall appeare. And of this Scripture heere an end.
         
         
            
            THE TWENTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE FOVTRH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſ. 14. Then Debora ſaid vnto Barak, Vp: for this is the day that the Lord hath deliuered Siſera into thine hand. is not the Lord gone out before thee? So Barak went downe from mount Tabor, and tenne thouſand men after him.
               
               Verſ. 15. And the Lord deſtroyed Siſera, and all his charets, and all his hoſt with the edge of the ſword before Barak, ſo that Siſera lighted downe of his charet, and fled away on his feete.
               
               Verſ. 16. But Barak purſued after the charets, and after the hoſt vnto Haroſheth of the Gentiles: and all the hoſt of Siſera fell on the edge of the ſword: there was not a man left.
               
            
            
               WE haue heard in the former verſes how both ſides, Barak I The ſumme of theſe three verſes. meane, and Siſera, addreſſed themſelues to battell: in theſe (to come more neerely to the intent of this fourth part) is ſhewed, whoſe the victorie was, namely Baraks: and how? verily Debora incouraging and aſſuring him, that euen the ſame day wherein ſhe ſpake it ſhould bee obtained and gotten; and he beleeuing it, went downe with his men of warre, (few though they were) and he meeting Siſera with his bands at mount Tabor, (no more is ſaid of the matter) they were deſtroyed both charets and horſemen, not a man was left, but either drowned in the riuer Kiſhon that was there by, or ſlaine there at mount Tabor, or purſued (as the charets and horſemen were) and ſo put to the ſword, and Siſera himſelfe was driuen to flie away on his feete, but in vaine. Oh the wonderfull deliuerance that God gaue vnto his people that day!
            This here ſet downe, is the third ſpeech that Debora vſed to Barak, and that Verſe 14. The vnfolding of verſ. 14. at mount Tabor: and though the laſt, yet not the leaſt, but mightie, forceable, and in due ſeaſon. For it appeareth by the text, that when Barak ſaw Siſeras huge army, he was diſmaied, and therfore ſought the fitteſt place about mount Tabor, and the fureſt, to ſhrowd himſelfe in, from the violence and rage of Siſera. Which fainting of his, ſhe perceiuing, called him backe, and ſtirred him vp to fight, by her words and perſwaſions, ſaying, No power of man how great and fearfull ſoeuer, ſhall be able to hinder thee from obtaining the victorie, which the Lord hath purpoſed to giue thee this day. At which ſpeech of hers hee was animated, and tooke heart, and went to the battell, and, as we haue heard, preuailed.
            And here is moſt notably ſet downe one meanes whereby the power of Doct. faith is ſtrengthened, and whereby it is wonderfully drawne to contemne

and ſet light by all diſcouragements, and breake thorow them, the leaſt whereof without it, would bee ready to ſet a man at his wits end. And that was here Deboras heartning perſwaſion to Barak (as Gods voyce) to animate him. And therefore it much auaileth to heare Gods promiſes oft times by the publike Miniſterie, and effectually publiſhed and fitly applied vnto vs in the fitteſt manner that may bee, and in ſickneſſe, temptation, and other times of fainting, when a man is much weakened and diſmaied, to Note. haue, as Barak had here by Debora, ſuch forcible and liuely quicknings: but beſt of all, if a man be able himſelfe to doe that dutie to himſelfe, and by the prayer of faith to ſtrengthen himſelfe in ſuch time of need. Oh! there are many ebbings and faintings in our liues, euen after good ſtrength and refreſhing: we haue ſometime good patience and hope vnder our croſſes, but another time wee feare the greatnes of them, that they will ſwallow vs vp, eſpecially if they be more then common. Againe, wee ſometime purſue a finne, and haue it in the chace, and preuaile ouer it, which hath ſore laid at vs, and wound in with vs very farre, to draw liking and conſent from vs vnto it: and ſometime it carrieth vs with maine force after it.
            And what is it that hath relieued vs at ſuch times? Truly euen this, if we haue been able to beleeue that God will ſtrengthen vs againſt it, and that he hath promiſed ſo to doe, and if alſo by prayer not fained, wee haue ſet our faith a worke, though it hath lien as almoſt dead before; euen thus we grow to weaken the liking of that ſinne in vs: as for feare of danger or ſhame of the world, they are but dull edged tooles to cut off the head of ſuch a monſter. And although wee be brought oft times to that point as to doubt, yet we ſhould alſo ſtriue by our faith in our prayers againſt it, and it ſhall not be in vaine to doe ſo. And the ſame wee ſhould doe in our feare before affliction commeth, and in our heauines for it, when it is come. For they that know any thing of the eſtate of a Chriſtian, know this; that he is many times in great feare of falling into ſome finne, yea and perhaps, that which is foule and odious, though it be not vſually ſo: Now if we doe not call to minde, that God hath promiſed ſtrength againſt all ſuch aduerſarie power, and that by the weapons of our warfare, (which are not carnall, but ſpirituall) wee ſhall be able to beate downe ſuch ſtrong holds; and if with the prayer of faith (as need requireth) we ſet not our ſelues ſo to doe, we ſhall ſoone perceiue that we loſe ground, and grow weake, as Barak did for a while; who yet was ſtrengthened againe by Debora, ſo that hee did moſt valiantly afterwards, in ſo much that he was renowned among the Worthies, and reported to haue obtained the victorie by faith; for at the hearing of Deboras words he went downe from mount Tabor with his men neere to the riuer Kiſhon againſt Siſera. This of the incouragement by Debora, and the fruite of it Barak.
            
            Now it followeth that the Lord gaue Barak victorie, the rare and marueilous Verſe 15. 16. victorie, ouer his and Gods enemies. For the Lord waſted the huge armie of Siſera, howbeit, by the fighting of Barak and his men againſt them. And ſuch of them as haſted in their flight toward Haroſheth of the Gentiles for ſafetie, (from whence they came) they were ouer taken alſo and put to the ſword, ſo that none eſcaped. And Siſera was driuen (ſo great the ſlaughter was, and the battell ſo ſore) to forſake his charet wherein hee rode, and to

eſcape on foote, if it might be, among the common ſouldiers. Now it is to be conſidered by what meanes this great victorie was gotten: tenne thouſand vnexperienced ſouldiers going againſt ſo many thouſands of horſemen, and footmen, and yron charets. The Lord (it is ſaid) gaue Barak the victorie; which no man doubteth of, ſeeing he is all in all: It is an harder queſtion, how Barak obtained it of God: and that was by faith, after that Barak got ſtrength and courage againe by Deboras perſwaſions, ſhe her ſelfe being conſtant in faith all the while: for then, and not before, he went down from mount Tabor with his men to meete Siſera, being before afraid, looking downe from thence vpon the huge armie that he ſaw. This was Barak his armour of proofe to defend him, euen his faith. And if this cannot bee cleerely enough ſeene in this ſtorie, fetch more cleere proofe of that which I ſay, from another ſcripture. Thus writeth the author of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, after he had ſet downe the faith of ſundrie perſons, as Abraham, Moſes, and other; he adde to: What ſhall I more ſay of Gedcon, Barak, &c. who 
               Heb. 11 32. 
               waxed valiant in battell, and by faith turned to flight the armies of the aliants.
            And by this wee may ſee againe the mightie force and power of faith, Doct. where it is firme and ſtrong, what great things it bringeth to paſſe. It is no marueile though it be ſaid by the Apoſtle, that faith ouer commeth the world, 
               1. Ioh. 5. 4. euen all and the greateſt difficulties therein. For what hardnes doth any man goe thorow in his whole life like vnto this here mentioned, and ouercome it alſo, vnleſſe it be thus, euen by the helpe and power of faith? which Note. is no more then to giue credit to God in that which he ſpeaketh, when wee ſee no ſuch thing, nor likelihood if it, but rather of the contrary many times with our bodily eyes. Euen thus hath God magnified his word in all ages, when men haue found euery part of it true by faith, and by this it hath pleaſed him to make men ſee his vnſpeakable kindneſſe, while they beleeue the promiſe in which he offereth it vnto them. By this faith we alſo at this day haue ſure hold of forgiuenes and eternall life, euen ſo many as are wearie of Note. ſinne, and thirſt for both, and that becauſe we iudge him faithfull that hath promiſed, and by this we are perſwaded of a good end of our daies, becauſe Phil 1 6. 1. Theſ. 
                     •
                  . 24. God hath ſaid it, to all in whom he hath made a good beginning thereof. So ſaith the Apoſtle, faithfull is he that calleth you, who will alſo doe it. So that all things are poſſible, how vnlikely ſoeuer, to him that beleeueth. This is the cauſe why ſome more eſteeme and price this faith then gold that periſheth: and declare, that they cannot doe too much to come by & retaine it, euen while they bee laughed to ſcorne of the wicked world, who think it meere fooliſhnes to doe ſo, as Noah the preacher of righteouſneſſe was in his time, while he beleeuing that an vniuerſall ſlood ſhould come, prepared the Arke. But herein I might wade infinitly, and this I confeſſe, that howſoeuer I forbeare to ſpeake of the moſt of other things twice; yet of this I profeſſe to ſpeake as oft as I ſhall haue occaſion, the thing itſelfe being ſo excellent, ſo neceſſarie, and yet ſo difficult, to ſee thorowly into. I only now require, that we may weigh the power and truth of Gods word, to the end we may ſtay our ſelues vpon it. The word of a man whom wee count faithfull, doth much perſwade vs in great difficulties, and quickeneth is if hee bring vs good tidings, when we were before in great heauineſſe. When Beniamin
               
came with this ioyfull tidings to his father Iacob full of heauineſſe: Ioſeph thy ſonne is yet aliue, and is ruler ouer all Egypt; the heart of Iacob reuiued. Gen. 45. 26. If it be ſo by giuing credit to a man; what confidence and ioy is it like to worke, if we beleeue a glad tidings which may bee of many things ſent vs from God? Doubtleſſe, hereby our weake knees are ſtrengthened, and our ſorrowfull hearts are comforted more then can be expreſſed. I wiſh therefore that vnto vs concerning faith, that which S. Iames did of patience, to wit, that it may haue her perfect worke, ſo ſhould wee be ſure to want nothing that is good.
            The next thing after the victorie ouer Siſeras armie, is to ſee the extremity that he himſelfe, the leader and chiefe captaine of it, was brought vnto: for he was faine to leaue his charet which was his defence, and to ſhift for himſelfe on foote among the common ſouldiers, that he might ſaue his life if it were poſſible. This, I ſay, remaineth in this 15. verſe to be added. And here, as in fitteſt place, I think good to note this, becauſe of the former doctrine, (one contrary cleering the other): that as Barak and Debora did by faith ſo great things, by ſo ſmall and weake meanes: ſo Siſera wanting this (as being of the heathen Canaanites, how could he ſo much as taſte of it?) was for all his wiſedome, policie, and power, waſted, put to flight, and al his troupe and band brought to deſtruction. Here was verified that ſaying, an horſe is but a 
               Pſal. 33 17. 
               vaine thing to ſaue a man: Likewiſe another ſcripture that ſaith, Some put their truſt in charets, and ſome in horſes, but we will remember the name of the Lord our 
               Pſal. 20. 7. 
               God: They are brought downe and fallen, but we are riſen and ſtand vpright. And therefore (to referre the reader to gather the infinite annoyances of vnbeliefe, and therewith the great benefits of faith out of the former doctrine) I will conclude that as without faith it is impoſsible to pleaſe God, ſo God being Heb. 11. 6. againſt all which are deſtitute of it, and an enemie to them, how can they looke to ſtand againſt him, but to fall and bee confounded? And this they finde daily one or other of them, though it be little marked, and it is ſoone forgotten, (another generation riſing vp in their roome) who know not the workes of God, and yet they haue their time alſo ſet them, wherein they ſhall finde the like. For if this be true in the greene tree, how much more in the withered? If through vnbeliefe, euen the righteouſeſt finde it a matter of ſuch difficultie to be ſaued, before they attaine it, what ſhall become of 1. Pet. 4. 18. him that is an vnbeleeuer altogether? And further, if particular defects in faith coſt Moſes and Barak diſaduantage and diſhonour, what ſhall the end Numb. 21. 12. of ſuch be as neuer had any? Surely the wrath of God abideth vpon them: and ſo ſhall doe for euer, and ſhew it ſelfe in a farre more terrible manner, if Iohn 3. 36. they haſte not after it, and ſo, as that they attaine it, Ioh. 3.
            And here another thing is to be marked, that when God doth not bleſſe, 
                  Doct. 2. but blow vpon mens furniture & furtherances, and taketh part againſt thē, euen theſe things which were armour and defence to them before, they caſt them away as burthens and impediments. As Siſera here was driuen to leaue his charet now that he was ſo purſued of his enemies, which yet had been, and was counted, as his houſe of defence vnto him. For God will haue vs know, that his fauour is toward all his, as the pleaſant ſunſhine to the earth and the creatures therein, which maketh all pleaſant and beautifull, Note. and if that ſhould ceaſe to ſhine, the earth with all that is therein, ſhould

ſtinke and come to naught. Euen ſo, if God turne away his louing countenance from a man, and frowne vpon him, all that was precious to him before, is vnpleaſant, euen as the moth conſumeth the beautie of a garment, as it was ſaid of Ieruſalem, when God was diſpleaſed, that all her pleaſant Lamen. 1. 10. things were matters of ſighing and ſorrow vnto her. Whence is it, that many a man of great poſſeſſions, can yet finde no ſauour nor relliſh in them, eſpecially if any affliction or trouble be vpon him? Why is the heart ſo locked vp, that it cannot ioy in any commoditie? in wife, children, wealth, fauour? Will ye know the reaſon? becauſe firſt, outward things are ſo farre ſweete as the Lord ſweetneth them, and otherwiſe the enioyers thereof find no taſte nor ſweetnes in them; no, they haue no vſe of them. If God be not Pſal. 119. 59. a mans portion, all other portions are enioyned without his loue, and ſo turne to gall and bitterneſſe. As Nabals wealth, Achitophel his wiſedome, Hamans fauour. For when Ahaſhueroſh abandoned Haman, what ſtead did his wife, friends, or former fauour ſtand him in? The wrath of the King blaſted all theſe, as the froſt or Eaſt winde doth the tender buds. Nabals heart was as 
                  •••
               one, when he preſaged the euent that followed. Achitophels wiſedome was that which brake his necke. Againe, the wicked force themſelues to finde a deceiuable ſweetneſſe in theſe tranſitorie things without God: therefore he iuſtly depriues them thereof, and turnes them out of kinde, ſo that although hee hath ſuffered them for a while to flouriſh, and take their pleaſure in them, yet when they haue long ſurfetted of them, they poyſon them, yea and in ſhort time alſo, as he ſeeth good.
            The vſe of this is, that wee account the fauour of God all in all to vs, and further then wee haue that ſhining vpon vs, glorie not in any earthly prerogatiue, as honour, beautie, wealth, or whatſoeuer elſe. For many of the vaine people of the world doe finde to their coſt by wofull experience, that when they haue ſpent their whole life and precious time to get them, (I may truly ſay alſo, they haue loſt heauen for them) yet they finde (I ſay) with what vexation they enioy them, though they would make others beleeue, that they are as a paradiſe vnto them: But to bee ſure they cannot keepe them, when God will pluck them from them, as we ſee both by the two rich men in the Goſpell, and by daily experience: and that is enough for wiſe men to Luke 12. 20. proue how little there is in them. And this by occaſion of Siſeras loſing Luke 16. 23. all.
            
               Verſ. 17. Howbeit Siſera fled away on his feet, to the tent of Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite: (for peace was betweene Iabin the King of Hazor, and betweene the houſe of Heber the Kenite.)
               
               18. And Iael went out to meet Siſera, and ſaid vnto him, turne in my Lord, turne in to me, feare not. And when he had turned in vnto her tent, ſhee couered him with a mantell.
               
               19. And he ſaid vnto her, giue me, I pray thee, a little water to drinke, for I am thirſtie: and ſhee opened a bottlell of milke, and gaue him drinke, and couered him.
               
               20. Againe, he ſaid vnto her, ſtand in the doore of the tent, and when any man doth come and enquire of thee, ſaying; Is any man heere? thou ſhalt ſay, nay.
               
               21. Then Iael Hebers wife tooke a naile of the tent, and tooke an hammer in her
                  
                  hand, and went ſoftly to him, and ſmote the naile into his temples, and faſtened it into the ground, (for he was faſt aſleepe and wearie) and ſo he died.
               
            
            VVE haue heard how by Debora and Barak the battell was proſpered, The opening of theſe verſes. as in this fourth part of the chapter hath been noted: now it followeth how a full end was put to it by Iael. To whoſe tent Siſera fled, as the fitteſt refuge for ſhelter, it being neere the place where the battell was, and peace being betwixt Iabin the King of Canaan, and Heber her husband. The things principall in theſe 5. verſes, are three. One how Siſera fled thither, in the ſeuenteenth verſe. The ſecond, by what meanes his death was brought on, in the next three. The third, that it was by her effected, in the 21. And this ſtory doth ſhew, why that is ſet downe in the eleuenth verſe, where I referred the Reader to this place, to wit, that Heber the husband of Iael, came and dwelt in the plaine of Zaanaim by Kedeſh, apart from his brethren, euen to this end, though he intended it not, yet by Gods appointment and prouidence, that Siſera might haue his deadly wound and blow there. And by Siſeras flying on foote to Iaels tent for ſuccour and ſhelter, we ſee another difficulty that this Siſera was driuen to, beſide the ill ſucceſſe that he had in the fight; and withall we may obſerue, to what ſhifts and extremities Doct verſ. 17. Note. wicked men though they bee great & mighty perſons may be brought: for they who could command a whole country, may be conſtrained to hide their head in a priuate tent and corner. And they who haue gloried as Lords of all ſtore and plenty may come to this, that they may be glad of a draught of milke or water to ſaue their liues. To Ahab King of Iſrael this word was ſent by Benhadad who beſieged him, that all his ſiluer and other precious 1. King 20. 3. things were his, whereto Ahab anſwered, it is true (O King) thine they are. And the ſame Benhadad ſo boaſting and braging ouer him, was afterward himſelfe brought to this point, and that by the ſame Ahab, that hee looſing in two battels, as good as two hundred and fiftie thouſand men, beſide chariots and horſes, he was driuen to flie on horſe-backe into a ſecret chamber, and yet euen there to be in great feare of his life alſo. And ſo in other ſtories it is reported of Darius the Perſian King, that being in flight purſued by his enemies, and in a great thirſt paſſed by a Lake, out of which hee tooke vp puddle water, and hauing drunke it out of his hands, proteſted hee neuer dranke ſweeter in his life.
            Now if ſuch mighty ones may for their ſinnes bee driuen to ſuch ſtraites and ſhifts, then meane perſons much more are eaſily and ſoone depriued of all that they haue, and that many waies. Therefore if wee be wiſe who now liue, or they who ſhall come after vs, howſoeuer wee enioy much, wee will learne, as wee haue oft been, and heere are taught, not to put our truſt in vncertaine 
               1. Tim. 6. 17. 
               riches, but in the liuing God; neither to be high minded, but humble and lowly (knowing to what changes we be ſubiect) in which eſtate there is no danger. And in that wee miſcarrie not daily, with the ſilly worme that is trod on, and with the beaſt ſlaughtered, that fed euen now at the paſture, it is onely Gods forbearing vs.
            In that it is ſaid that Heber had peace with Iabin, the Scripture ſets not downe how and in what manner it was: therefore by occaſion of this their peace, about which, or the like, ſeeing ſome might moue a queſtion; for anſwere

and our inſtruction this may be ſaid, that if there were conditions betwixt them, (Iabin and Heber I meane) about limits and bounds of ground, how farre they ſhould reach, or what hee ſhould pay for the ſame, or ſuch like, they were lawfull: but if they had been for the ioyning with him againſt his enemies, without reſpect, (which was not ſo) then their peace had not been good, nor to bee allowed. According to this that I ſay, let our inſtruction be. For if a ciuill league be betwixt the true worſhippers of God and Idolaters, about keeping and enioying that which is ſeuerally their, ſafely and quietly, that is not to be diſliked: for the godly while they be heere, deſire not to dwell alone in the world, neither can they chuſe (they know) but they muſt haue dealings with the men that liue in it: and againe, they are commanded by the Apoſtle, that they ſhould, as much as in them lyeth, haue 
               Rom. 12. 12. 
               peace with all men. And ſo moſt Chriſtian Emperours haue had peace with the barbarous people that were ſtrangers to true religion, and ſo did the people of Iſraell with the nations which were neare adioyned to them, (except the ſeuen that were accurſed) for the Lord did not command them to make warre with the reſt that dwelt about them.
            But if they ſhould vrge the religious people to ioyne their aide with them in making warre with them againſt other nations which are Gods people, that in no wiſe is to be yeelded vnto. For it went ill with Iehoſaphat, for going to warre in league with Ahab againſt Ramath in Gilead. As alſo for ioyning in fellowſhip with Iehoram his ſonne, when hee ſent ſhips with Compare 1. King. 22. 48 49. with 2. Chron. 35. 36. 37. him into Tarſis: for a tempeſt ariſing at Ezion Gabar, his ſhips were broken. So Aſa King of Iuda ſent ſiluer and gold to Benhadad King of Aram, to help him againſt Baaſha King of Iſrael, but hee was reproued for it of the Lord. 2. Chron. 16. 3. And ſo (no doubt) it is lawfull for Chriſtian Princes to confederate with not onely Chriſtian, but Popiſh or Heathen in ciuill caſes, as for the better ſecurity of their dominions, maintenance of peace, and thoſe commodities which follow thereupon, as traffique, &c. but to hold correſpondence with 2. Chron. 19. 2. them in religion, or to profeſſe themſelues friends to their friends, whom God curſeth; or enemies to their enemies that were to doe as they in the Pſal. 2. 1. 2. Pſalme, that banded themſelues together, whom God will ſcatter. Now that which I haue ſaid of leagues made betwixt nations, or one man, (as Heber was) with a King, namely, Iabin King of Canaan, the ſame I ſay of one priuate perſon with another, liuing together: And that is briefly this: that a godly Chriſtian may liue in peace with the wicked, and vſe him in ciuill caſes to buy and ſell, and borrow, and lend, as it may conueniently bee done betwixt them; but this muſt alwaies be prouided for, that he ioyne not with Heb. 12. 14. him in his ſinne, neither that hee haue any fellowſhip with him in falſe worſhip.
            Hitherto of Siſera his going on foot to the houſe of Iael; now it is ſhewed Verſ 18. how ſhe vſed meanes to bring him to his death: firſt, as is mentioned in this verſe. For ſhee went to meet him, and drew him in by faire and alluring words, and bids him not feare. Heereby (there is no doubt) hee was more throughly perſwaded, that hee ſhould bee ſafe there. But this was a traine to draw him to further danger, as we ſee by that which followeth, ver. 21. And all this duely conſidered, with other things which ſhee did, mentioned in the text, cauſeth queſtion to bee made, whether Iael did well or no, in thus

deceiuing him. But that queſtion is eaſily anſwered. For ſhee doing it to an enemy, not hers, but Gods; one that all Gods people ought, by vertue of his commandement to haue rooted out as they were able; in a word, a chiefe Canaanite, and ſhee bleſſed and praiſed of God for that which ſhee did. By Iudg. 5. 24. all this I thinke, it is cleare ſhee offended not at leaſt in the ſubſtance of the action. But this hath been anſwered before, by the like occaſion in Ehuds example. But for vs who haue not the like commandement (except the ciuill Magiſtrate, and the lawfull executioner,) wee haue in no wiſe, liberty to follow her example, but to ſticke faſt to the rule that teacheth vs, to walke toward all men in vprightneſſe, and all good ſimplicity and innocency, giuing vnto the worſt their due.
         
         
            THE TWENTIE NINE SERMON ON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               IT followeth of Siſera, who being very dry with trauelling Verſ. 19. 20. 21. on foote, and inward griefe heating him, deſiring ſomewhat wherewith to quench his thirſt, and ſhee gaue him liberally milke to drinke, which was fitteſt to bring him aſleepe. But when he had well drunke, he forgets not the danger he was in, while ſuch as paſſed by might be ready to aske after him there; and therefore hee diligently inſtructeth her to be carefull euery way for his preſeruation and ſafety. By the giuing him drinke that he might fall aſleepe, and ſo ſhe might the more conueniently diſpatch him by ſo good an opportunity, ſhe ſhewed her readines to help cut off Gods enemies, and therin as wel to ſerue him as his Church, which well appeareth in theſe three verſes: and this thing in generall, wee Doct. verſ. 19. 20. 21. all are bound to follow her in, though not in that particular manner.
            For as God commended the vniuſt ſteward, for that he had done wiſely Luk. 16. 8. in making prouiſion for himſelfe, when he was put out of his ſtewardſhip; although he condemned his particular fact, in that he ſought it by falſhood and fraud: ſo is our godly care to helpe the members of the Church, and to reſiſt the enemies of it, both are very commendable in vs, though we muſt beware of all vnlawfull meanes vſing, which tend thereto. Thus as Debora, Barak, and Iael wrought a wonderfull deliuerance for Gods people; ſo they who haue place and authority put in their hands by God, are bound to doe for the ſafety of the whole Church, if they will proue themſelues faithfull and zealous. And priuate perſons whoſe power cannot reach farre, ought to doe the ſame toward particular members of the Church, and that part of it where they dwell, ſo farre as they ſhall be able.
            Of Iaels readineſſe to cut off Gods enemy Siſera, and of her faithfulneſſe

wee haue heard: now further in this 19. and 20. verſes is ſhewed how God Verſ. 19. 20. did cauſe him to truſt Iael, and to put confidence in her for the hiding and keeping him from his enemies. And as he did in this; when he purpoſeth euill againſt wicked men, he commonly blindfoldeth them, takes away prouidence and counſell from them, and ſuffereth them to chuſe that courſe to follow in their liues and actions, which proues the vnhappieſt to them, euen worſe oft times then their greateſt enemie could take againſt them; as I may ſay of Pharaoh in his wilfull ventering on the ſea to follow after Iſrael: what Exod. 14. 28. enemy could ſo much haue hurt him, as he did himſelfe. So that a wicked man is neuer ſure of peace and ſafety when he is at the beſt; for the Lord is able to defeate him firſt and laſt, euen many waies: for why? there is no peace to the vngodly, as the Prophet faith; neither is there any counſell againſt Eſa. 57. 21. the Lord Iehouah. Againe, as hee truſted in her, ſo the Lord made her deceiue and diſappoint him. Both which doe confirme vs in that which hath now been ſaid, and teach vs, that when it pleaſeth him, hee leaueth the wicked deſtitute of all helpe, and fruſtrate of their hope of ſucceſſe, or that they put in their friends, yea and further, hee will make all his creatures to worke againſt them. Which he doth, to ſignifie to them, that hee is againſt them alſo. Which though hee teſtifie to them before by his word, which ſaith, the wicked are an abomination vnto the Lord; and againe, the workers of iniquity Prou 1. 5. 9. doth hee abhorre; yet he ſeeing that his word is caſt behinde their Luk 13. 27. backes, doth therefore as it were, ſpeake to them by his creatures, and that as ſenſibly (to ſuch as can iudge) as hee did to Baalam, in opening the mouth Note this. Numb. 22. 28. of the dumbe Aſſe, and cauſing it to ſpeak to him, when he (ſeeking the wages of iniquity) would not haue heard the Lord ſpeake to him, nor enclined his heart to obey him.
            Thus doth God deale with vile and vnconſcionable men, that he will ſet (as I ſay) not their friends onely, but euen the hoſt of heauen, and the creatures of the earth againſt them. Thus Saul, when he had forſaked the Lord, 1. Sam. 19. 12. 1. Sam. 28. 15. could neither haue his daughter faithfull vnto him, to ſend Dauid his enemie to him, neither could he haue any Prophet of God to ſpeake to him in his greateſt neceſſity and ſtraits, as his own words do teſtifie, he complaining thus; I am in diſtreſſe, for God is departed from mee, and ſpeaketh no more to me by Prophets, &c. Neither could Senacherib haue his ſonnes truſty to 2. King. 19. 37. him, but was ſlaine of them, by whom he ought by nature to haue been defended: yea and they did it in the Temple, while hee was worſhiping Niſhroch his god, in whom hee truſted, and looked alwaies for helpe from him, and notwithſtanding he preferred him before the true and liuing God; yet euen then he was diſappointed. Thus Ammon alſo and Iezabel were not ſecure 2. King 21. 23. 2. King. 9. 33. from their owne ſeruants. And if it bee thus done to the mighty; how much more then to the meane, who haue leſſe helpe to ſtand by him? And not onely their beſt helpes faile and deceiue them, but, as I ſaid, all things are againſt them. Thus haileſtones helped Gods people to deſtroy their enemies the Canaanites: The Lord (ſaith the holy ſtory) caſt downe great ſtones 
               Ioſh. 10. 11. 
               from heauen vpon them, and there were more that died of the haileſtones, then they whom the children of Iſrael ſlue with the ſword. So the waters, euen the riuer Kiſhon deuoured this hoſt of Siſera. So Abimelech was ſlaine with a piece of a milſtone. Abſalon by an oke catching hold of his long haire, (his ornament) Iudg 9. 53. 2. Sam. 1
                     •
                  . 9.
               
               Chorah ſwallowed vp of the earth. So a wallfel vpon ſeuen and twenty thouſand Numb 16. 31 32. 1. King. 20. 30. 
               Aramites that eſcaped the battell.
            The Sunne alſo ſtood ſtill in the middeſt of the heauen, and haſted not to goe downe for a whole day: and this was to the end it might the longer Ioſh. 10. 12. giue light, and bee an helpe to Ioſhua and the people to auenge their enemies. And (to adde this one thing to the former,) I affirme, that there are not the meaneſt nor baſeſt creatures, but they are harneſſed as men of war, to fight in the Lords cauſe, and at his commandement, againſt the wicked, as the many plagues caſt vpon Pharaoh, I meane the lice, flies, graſhoppers, Exod. 8. and 9. & 10. chap. and the like, euen they (I ſay) may teſtifie. So that in this one reſpect, in that neither the friends of the wicked ſhall be faithfull to them, when God will otherwiſe haue it; and namely when they are vnfaithfull to him, but that he himſelfe and his creature ſhall be armed againſt them, what can bee ſaid leſſe then this, euen woe be vnto them. But infinite are the other plagues that hang ouer them, and doe oft times meete with, and take hold of them: beſides that they are euery houre in danger, when ſome kind of fearefull death or other ſhall ſweepe them away to carrie them to their laſt and vttermoſt ruine. So that, as I note ſome of the wofull iudgements that hang ouer them, or be already vpon them; ſo if there were many more particulars ſet downe as they might bee, with the intolerable and moſt terrible paines of the damned, one would thinke there were ſmall cauſe, why any ſhould flock Note. to their company, or long and deſire to be of them, and to taſte of their dainties. And yet they are at this day, (which is ſo much the more to bee bewailed,) as the ſand of the ſea, and ſwarme in all places; that for my part (I ſay) when I cannot but know it to be ſo, and thinke vpon it, and what little hope there is to reclaime the moſt of them; Oh that mine eyes were a fountaine of 
               Ier. 9. 1. 
               teares, that I might weepe bitterly for the woe and loſſe of ſo many people. If it ſeeme ſtrange which hath been ſaid of the multitudes of them that ſhall periſh, Rom. 9. 27. Mat. 20. 16. the mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken it. Though Iſrael bee as the ſand of the ſea, yet but a remnant ſhall be ſaued. And although I cenſure not men by the miſchances as they are called, that befall them (but are indeed the iuſt iudgements of God vpon them) ſithence neither all wicked men are thus puniſhed, nor all thus handled are wicked men: yet ſeeing this is the lot of the vngodly, and the portion of their cup which their wicked life hath brought vpon them, let none of them eaſe their ſtomacks by charging God, neither waſh off all with crying out of their hard fortune and hap, as they count it; their onely hope (if any be) is to beleeue and bewaile it. Neither let the godly call into queſtion the prouident care of their louing father, becauſe they ſee that oftentimes theſe caſualties and calamities betide them, but cleaue more firmely to the promiſes and the whole truth of the word, beleeuing that (ſeeing they are at amity and peace with the Lord) hee can make all creatures inſtruments of their good; and not onely their friends faithfull to them, both in heauen and earth; yea their very enemies to bee at one with them, and more truſtie to them, then they are one to another. And if God thus tender their whole perſon, then their ſoules be pretious in his eyes, and their bodies (no man doubteth) are alſo regarded of him, and both are ſafe vnder his protection. Mat. 4. 6.
            
            But now to ſpeake a little of Iaels faithfulneſſe, though a like point to this An Obiect.
               
hath been handled, yet her action in alluring Siſera into her tent (with promiſe that he ſhould be ſafe there, and bidding him not feare,) and yet murthering him afterward ſo cruelly (as it ſeemeth) this (I ſay) beſide that I haue ſaid of it, is thought to be ſo farre from the truſtineſſe which ſhould bee in them, who vndertake the ſafety of thoſe whom they receiue into their houſes, that it is counted rather barbarous cruelty & trechery. And the more to vrge an anſwere hereunto, it is obiected, that it hath alwaies been as well the care as the credit of ſuch as take ſtrangers into their cuſtodie, to ſee thē ſafely kept in their houſes from annoyance and danger. Iure hoſpitij, as we ſay, that Gen 19. 8. is, by the right due to them by thoſe that receiue them. The example of Lot is alleaged, who for the defence of thoſe ſtrangers that turned in vnto him, offered much inconuenience to himſelfe, and his daughters, that hee might free the ſtrangers whom he receiued, from iniurie. The like is ſaid of the care Iudg. 19. 23. of that old man (mentioned hereafter in this booke) to the Leuite and his concubine, whom he had receiued as ſtrangers into his houſe. Hereupon and by the like, it is concluded, that as it were by an vniuerſall law, the promiſes that are made to ſtrangers for their ſafety, ſhould bee inuiolably kept. The very Barbarians ſhewed much kindnes in a like caſe, as wee reade in the Act. 28. 10. booke of the Acts to Paul and his company entertaining them kindly, yea and did more alſo then that vnto them, for they laded them with neceſſaries at their departing.
            To all that hath been ſaid of faithfulneſſe to bee ſhewed to ſuch as it is Anſw. promiſed to, as Iael did: I anſwere, that I am of the ſame mind, that it ought to be ſo; and the Scripture doth ſtraitely vrge the ſame. But yet wee muſt know, that no bands of familiarity and equity are ſo neerely ioyned together, and ſo iuſt, but that if God for cauſes beſt knowne to him, command otherwiſe, they are to bee broken. And ſo it may ſeeme to bee of this act of Iael. For ſeeing the Lord had now curſed, and commanded to be deſtroyed, theſe Canaanites, and Siſera their captaine, therefore neither ſhee nor any other might heere take vpon them to ſaue or ſpare them, but doe to them as God directed them, and ſo ſhe did. Thus the Leuites followed and Exod. 32. 27. obeyed Moſes in killing their friends and kindred, who had committed idolatry with the Calfe which they had made, and pleaſed God highly in ſo doing. In this reſpect, and by vertue of this commandement of God, Abraham went about to kill his ſonne: and they that thinke fooliſh pitie ought to be ſhewed contrary to the word of God, let them remember what befell the King of Iſrael, who when hee had ſpared Benhadad the King of Aram, 1. King. 20. 42. contrary to the word of God, was reproued by the Prophet at the cōmandement of God, in theſe words; Becauſe thou haſt let goe out of thy hands a man whom I appointed to die, thy life ſhall goe for his life. And therefore to returne to Iael, foraſmuch as I ſee, that the Lord was the only gouernour of this worke, and commended her for it, in the next chapter, by Debora, yea pronounced her bleſſed, when the action of killing Siſera is ſpoken of; therefore I conclude, that ſhe being certainly perſwaded of Gods wil in that which ſhe did, and commanded of God ſo to doe; her deceiuing of his hope, was no more ſince in her, then Abrahams attempt to kill his ſonne was, or the Leuites ſleying of their kindred for their idolatry. And this for anſwering the queſtion. The doctrine hath been taught already, that wee haue no authority to The vſe of the anſwere.
               
follow her example, but the word, wherby our actions muſt be guided as by a rule, and by no example without it. Thus wee haue ſeene (as I ſaid in the beginning of the chapter) that the Lord by Barak, Debora, and Iael, ſubdued Siſera with his huge armie.
            It followeth:
            
               Verſ. 22. And behold, as Barak purſued after Siſera, Iael came out to meete him, and ſaid, Come, and I will ſhew thee the man whom thou ſeekeſt, and when he came into her tent, behold Siſera lay dead, and the naile in his temples.
               
               Verſ. 23. So God brought downe Iabin the King of Canaan that day before the children of Iſrael.
               
               Verſ. 24. And the hand of the children of Iſrael proſpered, and preuailed againſt Iabin the King of Canaan, vntill they had destroyed Iabin King of Canaan.
               
            
            NOw it is ſhewed, how Iael came out to meete Barak, who not finding 
                  The ſenſe of theſe 3. verſes.
                
               Siſera among thoſe who were ſlaine, followed after him; and ſhe told him what ſhe had done vnto him, and thus ſhe preuented Barak, leſt hee ſhould wearie himſelfe with ſeeking him, and bee grieued when he found him not, and hee came into her tent, and found it ſo. And by Baraks purſuing him, it appeareth that Siſera was not deceiued in that hee feared it, and warned Iael to preuent it. Likewiſe it appeareth here, that the Lord deliuered his people out of the hands of Iabin, and deſtroied him. Here let vs note two or three things, and ſo come to an end of the whole chapter. And firſt, though Iael muſt imbrace and hold peace with Iabin, yet wee ſee her heart Doct. went not with him, neither did ſhe like his crueltie and oppreſſion of Gods people, but ſought to turne it away, and ſhe reioyced to ſee the people of God to preuaile, and to helpe them all that ſhe could, as Nehemiah and Eſter did, vſing their fauour they found with Kings, to this end. It teacheth, that the godly doe giue good teſtimonie how they diſlike it, when the wicked Doct. verſ. 22. 23. rule, and haue all in their hands: as Iael did here, by her worthie helping to beate downe Iabins and Siſeras power. For (as Salomon ſaith) when they beare rule, the people ſigh. And contrarily, what ioy they haue, when God giues them godly guides, and makes them to proſper, ſuch as Moſes and Ioſua 
               Prou. 29. 2. were, with other, who did more aduance the Lord and his true worſhip, as it became them, then they did themſelues. And ſo it is in meaner eſtates, that we haue great cauſe to praiſe God, when he feebleth and diſgraceth the vngodly, and proſpereth the enterpriſes of his ſeruants, in any place of ſuperioritie and gouernment, and ſo in meaner conditions. And let all ſuch as are vnder them, glorifie God by bringing foorth much fruite, when they enioy ſuch liberties, and let them feruently intreate (for much good may be Iohn 15. 9. done in ſuch times) the Lord when it is otherwiſe, to change it: remembring that which is written in the Pſalme: Pray for the peace of Ieruſalem, they 
               Pſal. 122. 62. 
               ſhall proſper that loue thee, I will procure thy peace, &c.
            Further we may learne, that as Barak purſuing Siſera, as he was commanded, Doct. 2. out of all theſe verſes. obtained a great bleſſing of God; ſo ſhall all that incline their hearts to follow the commandements of God with a pure heart. For it is the fruit of Gods promiſe, and he is not pleaſed, if wee walking wiſely and diligently in Pſal. 19. 11. our calling, doe not beleeue the ſame. For through vnbeleeſe, wee depriue

God of his honour, and our ſelues of our owne due, which hee hath freely and graciouſly bequeathed vs. But contrarily, by giuing credit to God, and walking in a good courſe, (as frailtie will permit) we may in reuerence, and yet in confidence, looke ſurely for bleſſing, either outward with other, or at the leaſt, the inward ioy of a good conſcience, that is as continuall feaſting, which is alwaies a companion in ſuch a caſe. And therefore great pitie it is that wee ſhould through our owne folly, at any time, depriue our ſelues of ſuch a benefit. And eſpecially this bleſſing wee may enioy by faithfull diſcharging of our duties, that as Barak here heard by Iael the good tidings concerning Siſera that ſhe had ſlaine him; euen ſo, much good ſhall wee reape by the members of the Church to the gladding of our hearts: It is one of the fruites of well doing, which followeth it, as the ſhadow doth the bodie: as good report, and ſucceſſe in things, and incouragement to goe forward. Whereas if our waies be crooked, and euill in the ſight of the Lord, wee may looke for no better in places where we come, but to heare of that which will ſting vs, as the coales of Iuniper. And from hence are many of the cries and complaints that we heare: for mens ill doings are rung about their eares, with reproch, threatnings of them, and ſuch like, as doe make them take little ioy in their liues. So on the contrarie, many ſhall bee the comforts of them that doe well. And as Iael here did not a little glad the heart of Barak, by telling him of the death of Siſera the chiefe enemie of Gods people, while hee purſued after him; ſo it is the part and dutie of all Gods people to bring ioy and gladneſſe to their brethren, as they are able, and to keepe ſorrow and griefe from them by all meanes, as occaſion ſhall be offered. And this ſhould be one ſpeciall fruite of the communion and fellowſhip of Gods ſeruants here on earth. But in as much as for all Barak purſuing of Siſera, yet he ſlew him not himſelfe, but Iael. Here Barak ſaw the 
                  Doct. 3. word of God liuely verified, which Debora had ſpoken of vnto him before in the 9. verſe, to wit, that the honour of that victorie ſhould not go to him, but to a woman, as we ſee it did to Iael. And euen ſo, if we marke, we ſhall as cleerely ſee the ſame, when we haue offended againſt the Lord, that one or other chaſtiſement ſhall meete with vs, and ſeaze vpon vs, and if it be not with vs after we haue ſinned, as if an arrow ſhould pearce thorow our liuer, Prou. 7. 23. for the ſorrow wee conceiue for it, be wee well aſſured it is behinde and to come, and in the meane while, or one time or other, wee ſhall carrie ſome marke of our diſobedience, as Barak did here, for that was the word of the Lord that it ſhould be ſo, as Debora ſaid, I will goe with thee, but the honour of the victorie ſhall not be thine: as hath been noted before with the vſe thereof.
            Laſtly, we may ſee by this ſubduing of Siſera, and deſtroying his mightiē 
               Doct. verſ. 24. armie, how eaſily the Lord can breake the forces of his enemies, and pull downe, and turne away their wrath and rage from his people, (as a man would turne the riuers of waters, which way he liſteth) or cut off their perſons from the earth; and if it were not ſo, what good man could liue by them? And what a comfort that may be to Gods people, in that the Lord cuts off their enemies in due ſeaſon, is not hard to conceiue, when we conſider what a ſcourge and plague one man oft times is to another, being inraged and incenſed, euen a wolfe, nay a diuell. But waight a little, and behold,

in time, the arrow of Gods deliuerance to his, and ſhame and confuſion vpon his impenitent and implacable enemies, except (as is rather to bee deſired) he change their hearts. But of this more largely before verſ. 15. Thus much for this chapter: I will end this Sermon with the beginning of the next.
            
               THE FIFTH CHAPTER ON THE Booke of IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Then ſang Debora and Barak the ſonne of Abinoam, the ſame day, ſaying;
                  
                  Verſ. 2. Praiſe ye the Lord, for the reuenging of Iſrael, and for the people that offered themſelues willingly.
                  
                  Verſ. 3. Heare ye Kings, hearken ye Princes, I, euen I, will ſing vnto the Lord, I will ſing praiſe to the Lord God of Iſrael.
                  
               
               THe ſumme of this Chapter is a praiſing of God by Debora and Barak, 
                  The ſumme and parts of this Chapter. after the victorie.
               The parts of it are three: the firſt is, one point of their ſong conſiſting in offering praiſes to God, to verſ. 14. The ſecond laieth out the goodneſſe of God to Iſrael ſundrie waies in this battell, and namely three: firſt, ſhe bringeth in them that did helpe in it, to verſ. 19. by occaſion whereof, mention is made of ſuch as did not helpe. Secondly, ſhe ſheweth how vnproſperouſly it fell out againſt the Canaanites in the battell, to verſ. 23. Thirdly, the hinderers of the victorie from Iſrael, are curſed, and Iael that did helpe to get it them, is pronounced bleſſed, to verſ. 28. The third part of the chapter ſheweth how in their ſong they mocked the boaſting of Siſeras friends, to verſ. 31. and ſo as an addition thereto, they ſhut vp the ſong with a prayer in the 31. verſe.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  NOw to leaue the two laſt parts, to bee conſidered of in their due place, I come to the firſt, and that is their ſong, which containeth three things. The firſt that is in their ſong, is this; that they exhort the Iſraelites to praiſe God with them for thoſe that offered themſelues willingly to the battell, in the two firſt verſes; and the Kings and gouernours, that were ſtrangers, to heare what they ſaid, and that is in the third verſe. In the ſecond part, and next verſes following, they ſet downe the Lords mercies long before powred out on their fathers, and now lately to them in the deliuerance of his people, to the eighth verſe, and exhort them to praiſe God who inioyed the commodities that came by the victory, to the twelfth verſe. The third thing is, that Debora ſtirreth vp her ſelfe againe to ſing praiſe to God, and Barak to the triumph, verſ. 12. 13.
                  Now to begin with the firſt and ſecond verſes, wherein they exhort Iſrael Doct. verſ. 1. to praiſe God with them, before they begin the ſong: for they enioyed the benefit of deliuerance, as well as they that got the victorie: It teacheth, that all ſuch as receiue Gods benefits, doe owe this dutie of praiſe to him,

and that the heart and the tongue, if it may be, ought to goe together in that action. The Lord looketh for it, and the Church hath alwaies practiſed it, Luke 17. 17. though not in a like manner. As Moſes and Miriam did full ſolemnely at the Exod. 15. 1. drowning of Pharaoh and his charets: ſo the women for the many victories that God granted to Iſrael, came foorth ſinging in this manner: Saul hath killed his thouſand, and Dauid his tenne thouſand. Likewiſe Ezechias after his 1. Sam. 18. 6. recouerie, with Anna the mother of Samuel, and many other. And it was Iſai. 38. 9. &c. the vſe and practiſe of Gods ſeruants to penne their ſongs, and often to repeate them, to quicken the memoriall of Gods benefits and his kindnes, in their owne and the hearts of other, and to knit themſelues more neerely to him by this part of his ſeruice performed in Chriſt Ieſus, according to his will.
                  Agreeable to this is the exhortation of the Apoſtle, In all things be thankfull: 
                     1. Theſſ. 5. 18. for as Gods mercies are renued euery morning, ſo good reaſon, that our Lamen. 3. 23. thankes ſhould be alſo. And as it is acceptable to God, ſo it is no ſmall benefit that redoundeth thereby to our ſelues, for it drieth vp the bitternes that is readie to riſe vp in vs by occaſion of Gods afflicting vs, and crucifieth and ſcattereth ſuch like poyſons as lie lurking in our hearts; thankfulneſſe, I ſay, Note. chaſeth them away, and ſuffereth them to haue no place there. Indeede it is proper to Gods people to offer to him this dutie, euen as it is ſaid, in Sion is God praiſed, the hypocrites (as the Phariſie, who gloſingly vttered theſe Pſal 65. 1. Luke 18. 11. words, Lord I thanke thee, that I am not as other men) they cannot praiſe him, but the conſent of mindes and hearts ſanctified, as the ſweete harmonie in Note. muſicke, this onely can doe it, and teach others the skill to doe it alſo. As therefore the thankes of moſt men (wanting the feeling of Gods loue and bleſſings) is meere diſſimulation and taking Gods name in vaine: ſo it is much to be lamented, that the better ſort (whom it would become ſo well) ſtirre themſelues vp ſo little and ſlowly hereto. For thankſgiuing, as confeſſion and ſupplication, ſhould be ſeaſoned and accompanied with feruencie, as a companion: which amplifieth and (as Debora here did) makes ſongs of the bleſſings which others paſſe ouer in ſilence: beſides the affection it ſelfe, which is inlarged in a more then common manner, eſpecially being quickned (as ſhe here was) by ſome new or rare teſtimonie of Gods loue, either bodily or ſpirituall mercies, or deliuerances from euill of both ſorts. But here we may ſay, Plenty makes vs barren: for though we haue ſo much cauſe of thankes, that we can looke on no ſide, but wee may ſee many: in ſo much as we be bound to ſhew it in things, yet moſt men know neither how to begin, nor to make an end. The daily benefit of health, recouerie out of diſeaſes, protection from dangerous caſualties, peace of land, and peace in familie, poſteritie, thriuing in the world, credit, our harueſts and commodities, nay our Sabbath and Communion, in the Goſpell and the fruites of it; who (may it be thought) makes his daily ſong of theſe, adding hereto perſonall benefits, which euery one receiueth in his owne perſon. Many mens prayers conſiſt of ſuite and requeſt making to God, without any thankes either adioyned or following, as in the nine lepers is to be ſeene; others giue thankes in words, but they want wings to lift them vp to heauen, I meane, faith, feruencie and loue. And the beſt thinke it enough to mumble a little inward thankes, and that ſometimes, for ſome bleſſings: but who is the man

of many, that makes his thankes breake out into ſongs? Songs are more then common praiſes. Chriſtians ſhould haue two bookes, in the one to record their faults and falles; in the other to regiſter Gods benefits: both ſhould ſerue to ſet them a worke in confeſſion and thankes. For thankes neuer goe alone without other graces: A thankfull heart is patient alſo, humble, faithfull, Note. conſcionable, dutifull: by thankſgiuing we quicken vp our faith, zeale, feare of God, and renue our couenants daily: for how can wee diſhonour him, when we profeſſe our ſelues to be infinitly beholding to? This, beſides that it iuſtleth out iangling, contention, and ill ſpending the time; ſo it drieth vp the froth of our euill hearts, fretting, diſcontentment, impatience, hardneſſe of heart, and all of the ſame kinde, as I haue ſaid. In a word, he that praiſeth God aright, worſhips him aright, as we ſee in the Pſalme: and ſo to Pſal. 50. 23. ſay much in one word, he that is thankfull is a good Chriſtian. Oh then let vs looke better to this, and make amends for our arrearages herein. For hee that lookes wee ſhould bee thankfull for affliction, as that holy man Iob was, much more (a man would thinke) lookes that it ſhould be ſo for bleſſings, which moſt iuſtly by many degrees do more chalenge it. Let euery one that of the Iſrael of God ſay, The mercies of the Lord continue for euer. Let it not ſeeme tedious to recount old mercies, both the greateſt of redemption, and the leſſer of preſeruation: yea helpe we our ſelues forward mutually, as Barak and Debora here did ſing in conſort. Doubtleſſe an vnthankfull life, is Note. a ſottiſh, helliſh life, ouergrowne with all that naught is, and therefore lothſome to a Chriſtian. He that ſaith, I would I could doe euery duty as well as this of thankes, is a foole, not knowing what he ſaith, he prates like a Parrot. Thankfulneſſe is not without godlineſſe. But I cannot well proceed further as this time.
               
            
         
         
            THE THIRTIETH SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               WE haue heard largely of thankeſgiuing in the former ſermon with the cauſes, manner and neceſſity thereof; Doct. 2. in verſ. 1. now beſide the action of thankeſgiuing, which I haue ſpoken of, the circumſtance of time is alſo to bee marked; that is to ſay, that they did it the ſame day: for ſo it is ſet downe in the holy ſtory: then ſang Debora and Barak the ſame day. This teacheth vs not to make delay in any good thing, but vſe the opportunity in due ſeaſon, and ſo for this duty of giuing thankes. And while the occaſion offered of ſo doing is freſh and in remembrance, the mind feedeth the affection with more plentifull matter, that it may be ſtirred vp more feruently to performe

that dutie: whereas in time things grow ſtale and are forgotten; yea and that quickly: ſo that wee had need to take the vantage againſt our bad memories, and blockiſh hearts, by ſuch meanes. And although ordinarily we ſhould performe this dutie, three times a day in ſolemne manner; namely in the morning, euening, and at noone tide, yet otherwiſe beſide that, as Pſal 55 17. God ſhall giue vs occaſion by more then common benefits and deliuerances, we ſhould prouoke our ſelues hereunto; and namely, as Saint Iames ſaith, Note. when one is merrie or diſpoſed to ioy let him not ſuffer that affection to vaniſh, but expreſſe and vtter it to God in ſinging praiſes. And ſo afterward we ought to continue the memory of his infinite mercies throughout our whole life, and to this end write them, (we that can) that whereas they grow to a multitude in time, and all cannot alwaies be remembred, as were to bee wiſhed in ſome ſort; yet at leaſt wiſe, when wee reade them ouer, wee may readily renue (as we ſhall ſee cauſe) our thankes to God for them. But great is mens blockiſhneſſe, as I haue ſaid, and endleſſe wandring by ſwarmes of cogitations after other things, which hinder this, wherby they ſee not cauſe hereof; and when they doe, yet their ſlothfulneſſe is ſuch, that they delay and deferre to pay this due to God, till their appetite be gone, and afterward lets and hinderances comming in the way breake it off, ſo that they cannot performe it. And this be ſaid of thankes.
            In the ſecond verſe ſhee ſhewes why God ſhould bee praiſed: one cauſe Verſ. 2. was, for that he had been auenged of his enemies in the behalfe of the people, and for their ſakes: for though hee had long vſed them as executioners of wrath againſt his diſobedient people, yet now their ſinne was come to the top, and his peoples ſin was repented of; therfore their turne was come about now to be brought to puniſhment. Another cauſe of their thankes for the people Zebulun and Naphtali, who had willingly offered themſelues to follow Barak againſt Siſera, although hee had no authority ouer them before. Both theſe are expreſſed in this verſe, in theſe words; Praiſe ye the Lord, for auenging of Iſrael, and for the people that offered themſelues willingly. Heereby wee learne, firſt, that God is the reuenger of the Doct verſ 2. iniuries and wrongs of his people, euen as hee himſelfe ſaith; Vengeance is 
               Rom. 12. 19. 
               mine, and I will repay ſaith the Lord: yea, hee will doe it in his due time, and that 
               Luk. 18. 7. 
               right ſoone: for ſo he ſaith, and we had need to marke it. If, ſaith he, the vnrighteous Iudge will doe right to the poore widow, leſt ſhee troubling him with oft ſuing vnto him, ſhould at laſt weary him: ſhall not God auenge his elect which cry day and night vnto him, yea though it bee long? I tell you 2. Theſ. 1. 6. hee will auenge them quickly, and recompence tribulation to them that trouble his, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. Waite we therefore, hee hath not forgotten himſelfe; but as the Wiſe man ſaith, If thou ſeeſt the oppreſsion of the 
               Eccleſ. 5. 7. 
               poore, there is a greater then the oppreſſor. But though there might much more be ſaid of this point to the like purpoſe, yet who beleeueth theſe things? according to the words of our Sauiour, When the ſonne of man commeth, ſhall 
               Luk. 18. 8. 
               he finde faith on the earth? teaching vs, how hardly men ſhould beleeue, though hee gaue therein a fearefull watchword thereof, to all that ſhould come after, which ſhould make vs the better to looke to it: ſo this complaint may as iuſtly bee made ſtill at this day, that wee are dull and ſlow of heart to beleeue this and ſuch other truths as were vttered to vs by the Prophets and Luk. 24. 25.
               
Apoſtles. But that is our woe and miſery; for why ſhould wee not reſt quietly, while the Lord takes part with vs that are his children, and giues vs ſo faire and ſtrong encouragement?
            But let vs paſſe to the next point in this verſe. The other thing in Doct. 2. in verſ. 2. this verſe is this, that the people ſhould praiſe God for thoſe that offered themſelues readily and willingly to purſue Gods enemies, which teacheth, that ſuch as doe the worke of God, ſhould goe about it willingly and cherefully. For as he loueth a chearefull giuer, ſo he doth a cheerefull doer 2. Cor. 9. 7. of that which he commands: and contrarily, Curſed is he that doth the Lords buſineſſe negligently. It is therefore highly to bee reioyced in, and God much Ier. 49. 2. to be praiſed for it, where men are forward in Gods matters, and where the waightier and more excellent they bee, the more courage and delight men Note. haue in the taking of them in hand. Among the which I reckon the preaching of the Goſpell and the profeſſion of it, with the duties of our particular callings, and ſuch like, wherin to be forward & cheerful, as people be in hay and harueſt, & in going to markets and faires; it honoureth God highly, and all ſuch as behold it, ought to praiſe God heartily for giuing ſuch gifts to men, as are rarely to be ſeene among them: for they that doe ſo, ſhew plainly that they looke for a reward from God, when they can goe roundly and readily about buſineſſe, which other men ſo aukely goe about. For the moſt part men be too forward and ready to leaud company keeping, and to the ſins of the time, and other workes of the fleſh; but when they ſhould obey the Lord, or bee ſet about any good worke, eſpecially, whereof no profit is like to redound to them, they goe moſt aukely and vntowardly about it; euen as the euill debter, who is to do worke to his creditour to pay him. And therefore fearefull and grieuous is the ſinne of thoſe looſe liuers, who if any bee forwarder and zealouſer in Gods matters then other, in duty doing to him ward, them they mocke and diſcourage, who yet ſinne grieuouſly, in that they be not companions with them. But of this the leſſe, becauſe I haue ſpoken of it in the former chapter. Thus much of this verſe.
            Now in the next, in calling Princes and great perſons to harken, as they Verſ. 3. doe in this verſe; it is to teach them to know from whence their victories and all greatnes come, and to aſcribe them to the Lord, according to Chriſts words in the prayer, [thine (O father) is kingdome, power, and glory for euer:] as for them, there is not the leaſt iot of the praiſe thereof due to them, God honours them, in that he will make them his inſtruments therein, and furniſh them with any gifts to that purpoſe, I meane, to doe him ſeruice. And yet as though they were of abſolute power of themſelues, forgetting the Lord that aduanced them, they aſcribe their great acts and victories to themſelues: as Senacherib againſt Hezechia, and Benhadad againſt Ahab; yea 2. King. 19. 36. 1. King 20. 3. and this they did both of them, before they had got the victory, and did not tarrie till they had conquered their enemies, and then crow ouer them, (which yet had been their great ſinne) and prided themſelues in that they had done, as Nabuchadnezzar in his Babell; and therefore they were put to ſhame, both of them moſt worthily, being themſelues brought vnder in a manner fit for ſuch braggers, as would thruſt the Lord out from helping them; nay rather they challenged euen him, and oppoſed themſelues againſt him, as is to be ſeene in the ſtory of both. And therefore in one battell Benhadad
               
loſt an hundred and ſeuen and twentie thouſand men, ſo that hee and his, euen a few that were left with him, were conſtrained to flie; and in the other battell, wherein very many of his men were ſlaine, hee was brought to greater ſhame and abacement, as his laſt refuge; to wit, his ſeruants to goe to the King of Iſrael with ropes about their necks, to entreate for their liues. And as for Senacherib, the Angell of the Lord flue an hundred foure 2. King. 19. 35. ſcore and fiue thouſand of them in one night: and ſuch ſucceſſe, at leaſt in the end haue all ſuch, as are like to them. Hence it is that the Scripture (for the further bewraying the pride and vanity of ſuch) vſeth theſe phraſes; The Lord ſmote Beniamin before Iſrael. The Lord fought for Iſrael. And againe, ſtand ſtill and behold the ſaluation of the Lord, &c. And among other Exod. 14. 13. names the Lord is called, ſtrong in battell, and the Lord of hoſts. And ſurely if a ſparrow fall not to the ground without his wil, neither is the lot without his diſpoſition; much more doe the euents and hazards of warre depend vpon his prouidence, being oft times matters of as great weight, as the alteration of kingdomes and eſtates come to. Now if Princes muſt know their victories and honour are giuen them of God; then much more we inferiours ought to learne it well, that we are beggers, and haue nothing; nay wee are worſe then nought, rather then that wee haue ought to glory of, as it would ſoone appeare, if we could be brought to conſider aright of it, euen what infection is in vs to taint and poyſon all our actions; or if the Lord ſhould but thruſt at vs for our euill deeds, but euen (as it were) with his little finger.
            Beſides, in this verſe Debora declareth that ſhee will, yea (repeating her 
                  Doct. 2. words) that ſhe will praiſe the Lord; whereby it appeareth ſhee called Barak to it her ſelfe, and ſheweth, that ſhee was ſo liuely quickened and ſtirred vp with the feeling of Gods goodneſſe declared vnto them, that ſhe would doe that dutie, if no other did. For as the whole Church of God fared the better for this victory; ſo ſhe acknowledged her ſelfe a part, to haue receiued great benefit thereby alſo; and therefore as ſhe was formoſt in the onſet, ſo is ſhee firſt in thankeſgiuing, and put not off the duty to the reſt of the people, but rather goes before other therein. And indued ſo God worketh in his oft times, that his ſeruants are ſo rauiſhed with thinking vpon his louing kindneſſe, Note. that they cannot bee ſatisfied with prayer and praiſe giuing to God in publike among other, but they muſt doe it alſo by themſelues alone, as Dauid ſaith; I will praiſe God in the congregation, and I wil praiſe him in ſecret: and they are ſo bent vnto it, that if other ſhould not, yet they themſelues, & as many as they can prouoke, will do it, as the noble man Ioſhua ſaid; If al run Ioſh. 24. 15. to idolatry, I and mine will ſerue the Lord. And if we conſider it well, how few weigh Gods goodneſſe in publike bleſſings, (as in the late diſcouerie of the treaſon) although many praiſe God openly for faſhion, and in ceremony, we ſhall find it no more then needeth, to practiſe this duty alone by our ſelues apart, as we reade of the tribes oft times, as well as among others; elſe would not our Sauiour haue willed vs to goe alone, euery one by himſelfe into his chamber to pray, as Iſaac alſo did in the fields, how little ſoeuer many Mat 66. Gen. 24. 63. be acquainted therewith; and therefore finde the leſſe benefit by the prayers and thankeſgiuing, which they make with others (they being in great likelihood made but in hypocriſie) or which others make for them. Euery mans owne ſoule beſt knowes what cauſe hee hath of thankes, better

then others, and accordingly let him profeſſe it, though there bee not many which will be brought to it. And of Deboras firſt words in the ſong wherein ſhee ſtirred vp the Iſraelites to praiſe God, and the reaſons why, thus much be ſaid.
            
               Verſ. 4. Lord, when thou wenteſt out of Seir, when thou departed out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heauens rained, the clouds alſo dropped water.
               
               5. The mountaines melted before the Lord, as did that Sinai before the Lord God of Iſrael.
               
               6. In the daies of Shamgar the ſon of Anath, in the daies of Iael, the high waies were vnoccupied, and the trauellers walked through by waies.
               
               7 The townes were not inhabited: they decayed, I ſay, in Iſrael, till I Debora came vp, who roſe vp a mother in Iſrael.
               
            
            IN the firſt of theſe two verſes, which alſo containe the beginning of their The ſumme of theſe verſes, and more particularly the fourth and fifth verſes. ſong, Debora ſetteth downe the Lords great mercy in one example to her forefathers the people of Iſrael, which had been ſhewed long before: in the latter two, ſhee maketh mention of his goodneſſe toward them at that very time preſent. In the great deliuerance mentioned in the former chapter, but more particularly to ſpeake of both, and to begin with the firſt in the fourth and fifth verſes, we are to know, that this ſtory mentioned by her, containeth the acts that were done by the Lord, after he brought the people of Iſrael beyond mount Seir, when Iſrael (38. yeeres after their going out of Egypt into the deſert) were come neare to the land of Canaan: namely, how wonderfully the Lord tooke part with his people there, and ioyned himſelfe vnto them againſt their enemies. For he going with them in a pillar of fire and a cloud, did terrifie their enemies the Ammorites in ſuch wiſe, that though the Iſraelites were vnexperienced in warre, and ſtrangers there, and were weake and vnfit alſo for ſuch worke, yet their enemies could not reſiſt them: and not onely ſo, but ſhe ſaith, that the Lord caſt ſuch a feare vpon them, as if the earth had trembled, and great ſtormes and tempeſts had been caſt downe from the clouds, and as if the mountaines had melted, and been ſhaken. By theſe allegoricall ſpeeches ſhe deſcribeth the feare that was ſmitten into the Amorites at Iſraels comming neare them, when the Lord brought them out of Egypt. And further ſhee addeth to the ſame end, that euen as mount Sinai (for ſo it muſt bee vnderſtood, though the word (like as) bee not expreſſed) at the Lords comming downe vpon it, was ſhaken and moued; ſo did the nations at the comming of Iſrael feare, and were terrified.
            And in laying out Gods kindneſſe thus towards her fathers long before ſhewed to them, as commonly this is reckoned to be one, that he brought them out of Aegypt thorow the fearefull wilderneſſe to Canaan, in many other Ioſh. 24. 2 &c. Iudg. 2. 1. places of the Scripture: her meaning is, to declare that hee ſhewed not this fauour now of late onely to them who liued at that time, but of old and long agoe alſo to his people in former ages, as they ſtood in need of his aide Doct. verſ. 4. & 5. diuerſly, and that for their ſakes alſo. And if wee obſerue the Scriptures, (which are a glaſſe of Gods adminiſtration and gouerning of his Church)

we ſhall ſee that there is little mention made of other nations of the earth, or their affaires, but the bent of them is wholly (as it were with a ſtreight line) directed to the Churches vſe and benefit, as either to puniſh or bleſſe them for his people ſake. To this his Church all his workes of loue, mercie, iuſtice, wiſedome, prouidence, are referred: for though God be the Sauiour of all, yet eſpecially of the faithfull in his Church. From whence wee are to learne, that God hath in all ages bin bountifull and gracious to his Church, as well as now; euen to our forefathers in their daies, and ſo from age to age as it is written, his mercie endureth for euer. For it hath been deare to him, as the ſpouſe or bride to the Bridegrome. And his loue hath been more hot then fire that cannot be quenched with much water. And to this end, hee hath been ſo affected to it, that it might know that he loueth it: as hee ſaith in Exodus: If ye will diligently attend to my voice, and keepe my couenant, ye ſhall be my chiefe treaſure in all the earth, though all the earth be mine. A doctrine moſt Exod. 19. 5. needfull to be made vſe of among vs, ſeeing his people be as deare to him now, as in any age paſt, and he did neuer ſo cleerely teſtifie his loue to his Church in any generation heretofore ſince Chriſt, or before, as hee hath done to this.
            And if it were beleeued, and wee throughly perſwaded of it, there were nothing like to draw vs more neerely to Chriſt, nor to ſet our hearts and delight vpon him, then the oft and due meditation and thinking on it: whether we ſpeake of thoſe who are in Chriſt alreadie, or of ſuch as lie yet in vnbeliefe, to draw and perſwade them. For theſe ſhould be better incouraged by many degrees more then they be now, to labour to taſte how good the Lord is: and they who haue alreadie begun, ſhould breake through all lets and difficulties (which doe much hold them backe) farre more eaſily then now they doe, to be vnited more neerely vnto him their head. Whereas it may be ſpoken with griefe, that in ſtead hereof, many profeſſing well, euen where Gods loue is made knowne, doe cleaue to the pleaſures of ſin, profits and preferments, howſoeuer come by, rather then to ſtriue to enter in at the ſtreight gate: and the beſt are too backward, conſidering that if we haue any treaſure in heauen, our hearts muſt needs be there alſo ſet on heauenly things: but they who mind earthly things aboue other, which ſhould be all in all with them, and doe as ſeldome thinke rightly of either of both, and yet would be thought to doe otherwiſe, are no beautie but a blemiſh to the Chriſtian life. Oh how lamentable is it then, that ſo many ſtill remaine! (as the old world out of the Arke, and the latter world out of the Common-wealth of Iſrael) ſo theſe euen as aliants from the Church. For though all crie, The Church, The Church, becauſe they heare there is no mercie, bleſſing, or ſaluation out of the Church; yet as if Baptiſme were ſufficient, they ſeeke not the priuiledges of the Church; effectuall calling, faith, charitie and ſanctification, and the fruites thereof; and therefore they are ſtill little better then the ſcumme and ofſcouring of the common band of the wicked; who hauing no title, no promiſe, no God, no hope, but are out of Gods precinct and gouernment: and therefore wee may ſay of theſe, The Church is wanting in the Church. All Gods mercie, and whatſoeuer is excellent in him, are out of their reach; no ſuch priuiledges appertaine vnto them, becauſe they are not ſeparated from the wicked, whom the ſoule of

the Lord abhorreth. Againe, in that God made the enemies afraid of his 
                  Doct. 2. people at their comming thither, it was his great loue toward them to honour them ſo highly among thoſe who contemned and hated them: and if hee had not ſo fauoured and taken part with them, they had been vtterly diſcouraged, and ouerwhelmed by them. And he would teach vs thereby, that though his children be baſely eſteemed, and contemptible among the prophane worldlings, who are buſily ſet to follow their pleaſures and profits, ſcorning religion as too baſe for them, yet he makes them oft afraid of them, when it pleaſeth him, and their conſciences doe accuſe them, that ſeeing their own waies are euill, and that the others good, & do pleaſe him, that they ſhall come to iudgement, when the other ſhall lift vp their heads and reioyce. I herefore it is ſaid, that Herod feared Iohn Baptiſt, and when he had Mark. 6. 20. beheaded him, yet hearing that Chriſts fame was great a little after, hee was afraid that he had been Iohn, and that he was riſen againe from the dead, to be reuenged of him. So when the iudgement of God fell vpon Ananias and Saphira for their diſſembling, and the people ſaw that God did honour Acts 5. 11. 12. his Apoſtles, and magnifie their miniſterie among many, it is ſaid that great feare came vpon the wicked, who knew that they liued not after the Apoſtles doctrine, neither liked their courſe: inſomuch, as they durſt not through an accuſing conſcience, ioyne themſelues to them whom God honoured, for feare leaſt they ſhould haue been brought foorth openly, and bewrayed by ſome iudgement of God, for their halting, as Ananias was. So Felix though he were Pauls Iudge, yet trembled, and was afraid, when hee heard Acts 24. 25. him boldly to preach of iuſtice and temperance, meete for his place, but farre from him, and of the iudgement to come; and yet Paul himſelfe was then without all feare thereof. Sehon and Og trembled, and were afraid, to ſee the high hand and outſtretched arme of the Lord, wherewith Iſrael was carried.
            It was not for naught, that the Lord expoſtulated ſo with the man who came among thoſe that were bidden to the feaſt, not hauing on his wedding Matth. 22. 12. garment: ſaying vnto him, What doeſt thou here without it? for the man was euen ſpeechleſſe, and could not for feare and aſtoniſhment vtter his words. The Lord will haue all ſuch to know, that the companie of his faithfull people is not for the prophane, and for ſcorners; by the which example, and many other ſuch, he hath (as it were) put a bridle in the mouthes of many, that though they deſpiſe Gods people, yet they ſhall not be without feare of them: and therfore he caſt the dread of his people vpon them, as here it is ſaid. And hath it not been ſeene in the late perſecution of the Note. Proteſtants in this land in the time of Poperie, which ſome yet aliue can teſtifie to be true, that many of the perſecutors were more terrified in hearing their anſwers to them, and beholding the boldnes and courage that was in them, then the Martyrs themſelues were terrified by their ſentence of death read and pronounced againſt them. And be we no leſſe aſſured of this, that many ill diſpoſed people, who would wiſh that there were neither God, nor iudgement, nor any better liuers then themſelues, yet they are conſtrained of times to ſay, the godly life is beſt, and yet fret to ſee it in the practiſers of it, being void of it themſelues. Oh therefore, happie is the people whoſe God is the Lord Iehoua, and bleſſed are they that haue him for their King.

And let this vphold, content, and delight all ſuch, though they ſeeme to be the vileſt and moſt miſerable of all other, God will not forget their longing to be diſſolued, and to be with him, and know they, while they doe ſo, their worſt day in the week ſhall be farre better, then the others beſt in the yeere. And howle ye deſpiſers, and tremble and vaniſh away, for that ye ſee, great Act. 13. 41. is their portion, whom ye hate, with the Almightie, and your ſelues caſt out of his fauour and habitation; and euen ſo in your aduerſitie & day of Gods viſiting you (as Diues in hell had ſenſe thereof) ye doe acknowledge it. The old world ſcoffed at Noah his building the Arke, till the flood came, and then his former preaching terrified them. In like manner, I ſay, if we walked in our innocencie with vprightnes and reuerence among men, the Lord would worke aſtoniſhment in the wicked and reprobates, and the very godlineſſe of his people ſhould conuince and amaſe the beholders and contemners, as Pharaos troopes were, when they ſaid, The Lord fighteth against 
               Exod. 14. 25. 
               vs for Iſrael.
            
            The next verſes I referre to be handled in the next Sermon.
         
         
            THE THIRTIE ONE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw (to goe forward) theſe two next verſes are the verſ. 6. 7. The more cleere meaning of thē.
                ſixth and ſeuenth: wherein is ſet downe their late receiued fauour of God, as in the two former verſes, his loue of old to their fathers hath been ſpoken of. In theſe two, to the end that this their deliuerance by the Lord may be ſeene to be the greater, and his loue to them, ſhe laieth out the deſolation that they were in before the victorie, that one contrarie might the better be ſeene by the other. The holy Ghoſt therefore ſheweth, in what afflicted ſtate the Church of God was by reaſon of their ſinne, and that from the death of Ehud till Debora got the full victorie. For though Shamger and Iael did worthily and valiantly in their place, yet Iſrael was ſore oppreſſed after the death of the one, and before the great act of the other; ſo as paſſage by the high waies, traffique, iudgement, and habitation in their villages, were intercepted vntill now: and Iſrael was conſtrained to keepe themſelues in ſtrong and well fenced Cities, vnleſſe they would become a prey to the Canaanites. And this oppreſſion continued by Iabin, till Debora was raiſed vp by God, and till her gouernment began. Of Iael we reade not of any great thing that ſhe did before, neither is it like that ſhe had done any, becauſe ſhe had peace with Iabin, and Siſera alſo fled to her as to a truſtie friend, and therefore it is like that ſhe is named with Shamger for honour ſake, becauſe

ſhee liued in theſe troubleſome and dangerous times, and becauſe ſhee did one worthy peece of ſeruice afterwards.
            And heere by theſe calamities of the people of Iſrael, and the deſolation Doct. that they had been in, when all good liberties and pleaſant things were taken from them, it is right worthie our conſideration, to thinke what a fauour of God it is, that together with the true preaching of the Goſpell, all the forementioned commodities are enioyed of vs; namely, outward peace in the land, and that we may dwell ſafely vnder our vine and figge tree, and may 1. King. 4. 25. Nehem. 8. 10. eate of the fat, and drinke of the ſweet, that wee may ſafely trauell and paſſe throughout all places and countries of this dominion, by the protection of good lawes, and that we haue exchange of our commodities with the benefit of good neighbourhood, and husbandry, to the preſeruation of our liues, and the maintaining of our families, &c. All theſe this people had been depriued of; whereas the want of any of them would ſoone driue vs to complaine heauily, and cry out. Oh we do little conſider how deepely, yea how Note. infinitely wee are bound to to the Lord for theſe liberties, and for the great good wee may reape and enioy thereby. And yet theſe many good things which the Lord hath vſually beſtowed vpon vs, and daily doth, (bleſſed bee his holy name therefore) wee thinke becauſe all the land enioyeth them as well as our ſelues, wee owe no ſpeciall duty of acknowledging them, more then we ſee the moſt doe, which is not worth the ſpeaking of; nay we looke for them by due and good right; and which is worſt of all) many do ſpend them waſtfully, and to the maintaining and encreaſing of diuers ſinnes among them, which we durſt not do if wealth and quietneſſe were wanting: ſo truly the Wiſe man ſpeaketh of one of them; [the rich mans riches are his Prou. 18. 11. ſtrong city, and as an high wall in his imagination. And in a word, we haue ſo little leiſure to thinke of God his goodneſſe, that by abuſing his benefits wee haſt to bring vpon our ſelues the ſame miſery which theſe were in, vnder, and eſpecially after this Shamgar, and before God ſtirred vp this Debora among them.
            Oh, how doe we prouoke our good God to caſt vs into ſome fore calamities, as they heere were in, that we might cry to him by feeling the ſmart thereof, as ſome daily doe, whom God would haue to bee examples to the reſt, leſt many ſhould taſt of their diet? but fearefull it is for all this, to ſee how few are the better for all the iudgements of God that bee vpon themſelues, or that they behold others for the ſame ſinnes which they both commit boldly, but runne on till their courſe come to ſuffer (yet) worſe and heauier things at Gods hands for them. But while wee cannot amend it in others, let vs bewaile it in them, which is a right property of true loue; praying alſo for them, and for our owne parts; let this example of theſe their calamities, ſo many and grieuous as haue been ſpoken of, cauſe vs to account of Gods goodneſſe ſo highly, in withholding them from vs, that they may make vs fruitfull thereby in euery good worke, eſpecially ſeeing wee haue many other good encouragements thereto: and alſo for that when wee want them, we ſay wee can doe little good without them. But now in that ſhe addeth, Till I, euen I Debora aroſe] we muſt take it farre otherwiſe then it ſoundeth; not aſcribing her words to a paſſion of womaniſh impotencie The clearing of the next part of the verſe. and boaſting, much leſſe to a contempt of Barak, who was the inſtrument of

the victorie, as well as her ſelfe; but to the heauenly exaltation of her ſpirit, lifted vp pathetically to praiſe the Lord for the great deliuerance wrought by her: as we ſee the like in Dauid, in the Pſalmes; Paul, and others. And 
                  Doct. 2. this deliuerance being wrought by Debora, teacheth, that al the forementioned calamities, being remoued from the people, by her their gouernour at that time, it teacheth I ſay, what great things the Lord worketh by the Magiſtrate and gouernour, as he did by her, ſhee being at that time the ſame to the people, euen their Iudge in Iſrael. But indeed this is done eſpecially when they are zealous for Gods matters, and doe their duties in their places, and haue the ſpirit and affection of her, euen to be mother like vnto the people, who as ſhee gaue counſell to her inferiours, as a mother to her children, being a Propheteſſe, and deliuered them from their enemies, being their Iudge: So they being ſet ouer them, as guides and Magiſtrates, ſhould bee vnto them who are committed to their charge, euen like minded to her, to wit, to haue care that they may be taught, though they be themſelues no Prophets, by ſuch as are furniſhed of God to that purpoſe: and with a motherly care to protect them from iniurie and wrong, and to turne the edge of the ſword againſt their enemies. And thus much of Gods mercies of old, and lately ſhewed on his people, as in theſe 4. verſes hath been declared. But it followeth.
            
               Verſ. 8. They choſe new gods, then was warre in the gates. Was there a ſhield or ſpeare ſeene among the forty thouſands of Iſrael?
               
               9. Mine heart is ſet on the gouernours of Iſrael, and on them that are willing among the people, praiſe ye the Lord.
               
               10. Speake ye that ride on white Aſſes, ye that dwell by Middin, and that walke by the way.
               
               11. For the wife of the archers appeaſed among the drawers of water: there ſhall they rehearſe the righteouſneſſe of the Lord, his righteouſneſſe towards his townes: then did the people of the Lord goe downe to the gates.
               
            
            THe holy ſtory hauing ſet downe the peoples deliuerance out of their The ſenſe of the eighth verſe. great calamity and oppreſſion from Siſeras army, goeth on in this eighth verſe, and ſheweth the cauſe why they were caſt vpon them, and that was for their idolatry, by meanes whereof (it is ſaid) they had no heart to take vp weapon, no not any of them throughout all the tribes, againſt their enemies. In the next three verſes, all ſorts are ſtirred vp and called to praiſe God, The ſumme in generall of the other three. that tooke benefit by the victory and deliuerance, as ſhall bee particularly ſhewed, when I ſhall come vnto them by the order of the text. Now to begin with the eighth verſe, Barak and Debora vtter this in this part of their ſong, that then the warre began to oppreſſe the Iewes, and the enemies to beſiege their cities and gates, where they held their iudgement ſeates, when they had turned to idolatry: ſo that this was the cauſe of their grieuous puniſhment.
            By the which we may ſee how greatly God is diſpleaſed with men, when Doct in verſ. 8. they will runne after the ſins that they haue been forewarned of, and commanded to take heede of; (euen the ſinnes which his ſoule abhorreth) as Iſrael had oft times been admoniſhed of this Idolatry. The Lord will not

put it vp at their hands. And who can denie, but that it ſtandeth with moſt ſound reaſon, that when men, who are but vile wormes, ſhall thus boldly kicke vp their heele againſt their maker, they ſhould ſmart for it, and not be ſuffered to commit ſuch inſolencie againſt him vnpuniſhed? And therfore he gaue vs examples hereof in the Apoſtate Angels, which kept not their place 
               Iude 6. that he ſet them in, and therefore that he threw them downe for their diſobedience: and in our firſt parents whom hee draue out of Paradiſe, when Gen. 3. 24. Note. they hauing ſo great liberty, as they might haue eaten of any fruit in the garden except one tree; yet counted all little, in reſpect of that which was forbidden them, and ſtood on thornes, till they had caſt behinde them the commandement of God, and eaten of that forbidden fruit alſo. Now if God ſpared not the Angels, and our firſt parents, who were innocent before that their fall, what may other offenders looke for? whoſe ſinnes are as the haires of our head in number?
            And in that he dealeth not thus with wilfull tranſgreſſors at this day, it is not for that he ſhould be vniuſt or carnall in ſo doing, but he beareth much with them, as all may eaſily ſee, and is patient toward them, to this end that be may thereby bring them to repentance; which if any abuſe, they pay for Rom. 2. 4. 2. Pet 39. all their boldneſſe in the end; in ſo much that hee who ſpeedeth beſt, ſhall haue ſmall cauſe to brag of his winnings. And yet he ſhoaleth out ſome one Note. of an hundred, heere and there, (not many indeed in compariſon of thoſe who haue offended in that kind) whom he ſtriketh by and by with deadly blowes, and ſetteth him on the ſtage, to publiſh, as it were, by his wofull example to all the reſt; (though he bare longer with ſome other, for the cauſe before alleaged, what he might doe to them, yea and in perfect iuſtice execute vpon them. And therefore let all that are wiſe take warning, while they hold a good courſe, to continue it, and they that are out of it, haſt ſpeedily vnto it: and let none tempt God boldly, to doe that which he forbiddeth, for he will not be mocked, they ſhall pay deare for their ſo doing. And yet though God ſpare them from outward warre and iudgements for a time, yet as the Prophet Eſay ſpeaketh, that there is no peace to the vngodly; ſo they may be ſure they ſhall haue warre with him in their minds. And let all praiſe God, to whom he giueth an heart to ſhunne the euill and ſinnes of the time in which they liue. And for the idolatry of the Church of Rome, I may ſay moſt of the Papiſts doe wilfully and malitiouſly erre againſt the truth; and ſome for their pompe and bellie, and many doe it of meere ſuperſtition, and blind deuotion, and cuſtome, as they receiued it of their forefathers; ſeeing they that leaſt offend therein among the reſt, doe put Chriſt out of office in their ſeruice they giue him, and honour him as their King, but with a crowne of thornes, and a ſcepter of a reed in his hand; bee it knowne vnto them, that their damnation ſleepeth not, their wee is at hand: And that they may partly gather by the vncomfortable, yea fearefull death of many Papiſts and great maſters, and maintainers of popery who for all the boldnes in their life time, whereby they beare out matters; yet when they muſt die, ſome cry out they are vndone, other cry out of their religion: and but for the hardneſſe of their hearts, it would be ſeene in more of them. And no maruell, ſeeing they try not their eſtate what it is? This being obſerued, that the greateſt offenders among them ſhall ſmart moſt. But yet

this I will ſay, that for all their deuotion and faſt cleauing to the Church of Rome, if it pleaſe God, that if they might bee brought to heare the ſermons of learned and religious preachers, and to admit of their conferences, many of them would renounce that trumpery, as ſtanding vpon rotten props, and embrace the truth of the Goſpell ſtabliſhed ſo ſtrongly.
            And further, in that it is ſaid that they could not take vp a weapon againſt their enemies; no, they had no heart to handle ſhield or ſpeare, becauſe of their ſinne, as idolatry, and other enormities; it plainely ſhewes, that mens 
                  Doct. 2. ſinne turneth euery thing out of courſe againſt them, and contrary to the nature, vſe and end, for the which it is created and appointed of God: euen as this people durſt not take weapon in hand to fight for their liues, their conſciences accuſing them, that God would be againſt them. Wherefore is the weapon ordained, but for a mans defence againſt his enemie? and why hath God giuen courage to man, but that at ſuch a time, I meane of warre, and other neceſſity, it might be put to vſe? But behold heere was neither of both imployed or ſet a worke, any more then if they had not been at all. When Achan had troubled Iſrael, by taking the execrable thing, the Lord tels Ioſhua, that therefore they could not ſtand before their enemies. How Ioſh. 7. 12. Note. much more if they themſelues had ſinned? Oh mens ſinnes turneth plenty into want, courage into timerouſneſſe, and fainting of heart; and light into darkeneſſe, and all out of kind. Behold what it did in Ieroboam; when hee 1. King. 13. 4. ſtretched out his arme againſt the Prophet of God, for reprouing him for his idolatry at Bethel, his arme was immediately withered and dried vp, that he could not draw it in againe. So Gehazi when he had taken moſt wickedly 2. King. 5. 25. both money and raiment of Naaman the Syrian, pretending his maſters ſending him for it, and after his returne had anſwered his maſter Eliſha with a lie; maruellous it is to ſay, and againſt nature and any ſound reaſon in mans iudgement, what came vpon him, euen a leproſie forthwith, ſo that he went out a leaper as white as ſnow. And the band of Prieſts, Iewes, Ioh. 18. 6. and ſouldiers, that came into the garden to apprehend and take our Sauiour Chriſt, ſo boldly and trecherouſly, yet ſuddenly they went backe like drunken men, and fell to the ground aſtoniſhed, and vnfitted vtterly, for ſuch a purpoſe as to lay hold of him, and that at one word ſpoken by our Sauiour and yet not in terrifying manner, as he might haue done, ſaying: he was the man whom they ſought. So that in ſeeking him, they were both luſty and ready to lay hold of him, yet when they had found him, they could doe nothing to him: for their ſinne had taken their power and ability from them. For who is able to reckon vp how many waies God hath to viſit, aſtoniſh, and terrifie men for their ſinne? Therefore among other puniſhments in Deuteronomy threatened, this is one, a trembling heart, a ſorrowfull mind, Deut 28. 65. and feare both day and night. And if the Lord ſhould not handle ſome thus, other would not bee afraid, but would abuſe his Maieſty, yea and faithfull people alſo much more groſly would tempt God, then now they dare doe, though euen now many doe it too boldly, when they forget themſelues. But Hypocrites goe verie farre in ſinning boldly, as other doe who are like them; therefore many are apalled among vs, ſome hauing their wit and reaſon taken from them; ſome become fooliſh, ſome madde men; other Note.
               
againſt nature, laying violent hands vpon themſelues; their ſeuerall ſinnes doe (though no reaſon of man ſeeth it) doe (I ſay) driue them to it. This is another fruit to be ioyned to the former, which ſinne bringeth forth. True it is indeed, the Lord dealeth not thus in kind with all ſinners: nay wee ſee how impudent and braſen faced moſt bee in their leaud courſes, and ſet vp their buſtles againſt the ordinance of God. But though their foreheads bee of braſſe, yet their hearts be glaſſie, their conſciences (if they would yeeld) are as water powred forth: they haue not the true Lion like courage and boldneſſe which in their iollity they would haue all thinke that they haue, but ſin hath infeebled them, they cannot abide the force and ſting of their conſcience, but fall downe coward-like, when it ſmiteth them: neither can their ſinne abide the hand of God, which as it is euer readie to be reached foorth againſt them; ſo when it is ſo indeed, they are ſoone diſmaied, as Nabal was, when he heard he ſhould dye. True it is, they ſet a good face vpon the matter openly, bragging and bracing, as I haue ſaid: but when their conſcience and they goe to it hand to hand (as it doth but ſeldome) then in their neceſſitie it is with them, as if an armed man were vpon them; their white liuerd hearts doe vtterly faile them. And yet where is he, that by ſuch checkes of the word, and his conſcience, and the feare of many arreſtings of him from God, doth once complaine and crie out of his eſtate, and ſo ſeekes ſtrength and recouerie out of it, by faith, peace, and confidence, with the true deteſtation of his ſin, which like a Witch ſo inchaunteth and diſableth him of all courage and boldneſſe, and turnes him into a very coward and weakling? Now in that men doe not perceiue this, as they might eaſily do, their blindfolding of themſelues, and hardning of their hearts, is the cauſe thereof.
            Now Debora turneth her ſelfe to diuers kinds of men, and diſtinguiſheth Verſe 9. 10. 11. The laying open of theſe verſes.
                them one from another, exhorting them all, as ſhe her ſelfe did, to praiſe and magnifie God. This I will lay open more plainly, it being ſomewhat hard otherwiſe for ſome readers to vnderſtand, and diſcerne the ſame. And firſt in this verſe ſhe beginneth with the chiefe of the armies, and thoſe that offered themſelues willingly to the battell. In the next verſe, ſhe ſpeaketh to the rich Merchants that rode on coſtly beaſts, that were, as hee calleth them, white Aſſes, and ſuch as ſat in iudgement. And thirdly in this ſame verſe alſo, ſhe ſpeaketh to all meaner perſons that trauailed on foote, ſeeing there was now libertie for them to paſſe to and fro in the high waies, ſhe moueth theſe (I ſay) to magnifie God: Euen all ſorts of people who went out and in by the gates of the citie for their buſineſſe, profit, pleaſure, or any other neceſſarie vſe. In the ſecond verſe, ſhe nameth the very boyes and girles, who could not ſafely goe out to draw water, without danger of the archers, who lay in waite ſecretly to ſhoote at them, and ſo put them in perill and ieopardie of their liues, or to be ſore wounded; theſe might now (ſhe ſaith) fetch their water without feare of hurt. Then ſhe calleth to them who dwelt in villages and vnwalled townes (their danger hauing been very great, ſo as they were driuen away from their houſes) telling them that they might now returne home againe, and dwel in them quietly as in times paſt: and laſt of all, ſhe ſpeakes to thoſe who were wont to meete in the gates of

the citie, that is, in the open places for iudgement. All theſe ſhe moues to praiſe the Lord, for that he had now, by that one deliuerance and victorie, ſet them all at libertie, and in peace.
            Now to make our profit of theſe verſes, and more particularly to examine Doct. verſ. 9. them, and to begin with the ninth; whereas ſhe ſaith in this verſe, that her heart was ſet on the gouernours of Iſrael, or (which is all one) her heart was toward them to prouoke them: meaning, the cauſe was ſo great why they ſhould praiſe God, that ſhe could not chuſe but ſpeake to them: as if ſhe ſhould ſay, ſhe deſired moſt earneſtly that the chiefe of the armie, and the gouernours and captaines thereof, and great men, ſhould praiſe God: the reaſon was, becauſe they, with her and Barak, were the chiefe in that buſineſſe, and they going before them, the other ſhould the eaſiler be drawne by their example to follow. And it liuely teacheth, and ſetteth before the chief doers in ſuch martiall affaires, alſo the wealthie, and heads in ſocieties, that they ought to be the firſt in giuing good example, both of praiſing God, and in other commendable parts of Chriſtian dutie. For why? The greateſt haue a greater portion in Gods bleſſing and deliuerance, then the meaner haue: I meane, they enioy much, and haue much to loſe, and therefore they owe much while they enioy all in peace. And ſecondly, it is a goodly ſight to behold Captaines in warre, and Gouernours and Magiſtrates in peace; and more particularly (to deſcend lower, and to come neerer the Commons) Headboroughs in townes, and the fathers of families, to be lights in religion and holy practiſe, to the reſt, and examples in the ſeruice of God: and the inferiours to follow, euen as the flocke followeth the bell-weather: for they are both ſoone diſcouraged by their backwardnes, and haue need of ſetting forward, as by incouragement and good example they are eaſily brought to be.
            Therefore the Lord in giuing charge to all by their families, that they ſhould remember to keepe holy the Sabbath; beginneth with the gouernour 
                  Command. 4. thereof, ſaying, firſt thou ſhalt doe it; then hee goeth forward to the ſonne, daughter, and ſeruant: Euen ſo on the contrary, and much more, when the greateſt perſons goe before the reſt in ill example, we ſee how readily they follow. So wee reade, that the Prieſts, Leuites, and guides of the Ezra. 9. 2. people were the chiefe and firſt in taking to them and their ſonnes, ſtrange wiues of the Amorites and Canaanites, againſt the commandement of God, and then many of the people followed them therein, when they were returned out of the captiuitie. Euen ſo wee might ſee it throughout, if I ſhould alleage many examples. And ſo God be thanked, in ſome ſort wee ſee, that where the chiefe men in any ſocietie, be forward in ſeeking knowledge, and be zealous in flying euill, and reſiſting it, as their places will giue leaue; and in following a good courſe, their care and labour is not in vaine, but to good purpoſe: but where the guides of other, as their Miniſters, maſters of families, and chiefe in townes, are prophane, lewd, ill company keepers, idle, gameſters, make-bates, contentious and ſlanderers, there yee may bee ſure to finde them that are led by them, and that depend vpon them, to be ſutable. But otherwiſe, if they ſee that the winde blowes againſt them, then they hang downe the head, and are nipt in the bloſſome, and containe themſelues. And here ſee a note of difference betwixt the godly and the

lewd. The one, with Ioſhua, vndertaketh for himſelfe and his, they will ſerue Ioſu. 24. 15. the Lord. The other, like thoſe Phariſies, are not onely ill diſpoſed themſelues, but doe alſo pull backe, and pluck downe, with them, as many as they can, from the beſt orders and companies. And while men muſt liue with ſuch, rare is he, who (in ſuch a caſe) is a law to himſelfe, and can keepe his reſolution, rather to ſerue God alone, then to giue ouer for want of companie. But if any be better diſpoſed then other among them, they muſt fetch their light from other places, for the moſt part, or elſe bee in danger in the companie they come into, to loſe that little they haue, and to be led into darkneſſe.
            Now Debora hauing ſpoken of the chiefe, doth by that occaſion deſcend 
                  The opening of the other part of the verſe, and the Doct. 2. to name and mention the meaner ſort of the armie, to wit, the two tribes of Naphtali and Zabulon, who were willing to take that worke in hand againſt the Canaanites, and were eaſily drawne to put to their helpe, as appeareth chapt. 4. 10. They therefore being ſo forward in ſo good a cauſe, and thereby reaping ſo happie a fruite of their labour, that is, victorie ouer their enemies, euen they (I ſay) loſe not their due commendation, but are brought in here by Debora, as the woman in the Goſpell who powred ointment on our Sauiour, of whom he ſaid this: Whereſoeuer the Goſpell ſhould be preached, that which ſhe had done to him, ſhould be ſpoken of. So the people that honoured God in this worke, are praiſed by her: which was alſo to their comfort. Dauid ſaith of ſeafaring men, that they could beſt ſpeake of Gods wonders in the deepe: ſo theſe being eye witneſſes, nay, inſtruments, and helpers forward of this deliuerance, might beſt (by experience) ſpeake of the goodnes of God therein, and ſo (no doubt) did honour him for it, and therfore God would honour them, by regeſtring their memorie: euen ſo there is nothing loſt, that we doe at Gods commandement, and for his ſake, he is a plentifull paimaſter and rewarder. But in that both chiefe and meane, were to praiſe God for the victorie, ſhe calleth thē to a renouncing of their owne ſtrength, or boaſting of their owne arme, which poſſibly they might haue done, and to aſcribe all to God: as indeed ſhe might well; for what were a few of two Heb. 26. Doct. 3. in verſ. 9. of the meaneſt tribes of Zabulon and Naphtali able to doe againſt the entire forces and mightie armie of Iabin? euen ſo, they that are forward in Gods buſineſſe, vnleſſe they groſſely forget themſelues, they are readie to honour and praiſe him, which cannot be without their owne comfort. For theſe two agree well together, that where there is readineſſe to obey God, there is the like in praiſing him, and abaſing of our ſelues, and that alſo accompanied with ioy of heart. And as it was heere with Debora, ſo ſhe ſought to haue it with them: and the ſame we ſee in Dauid, when hee being aduiſed by Ahigail, not to ſhed innocent blood, he being eaſily perſwaded by her counſell to forbeare, did ſo, and after it praiſed God highly, and arrogated naught to himſelfe for following her aduice, when ſhe had ſo wiſely and in ſo good ſeaſon miniſtred it vnto him; and that (wee may be ſure) was not without his owne reioycing. Oh it well becommeth vs to bee forward in Gods matters, and yet not to be proud for our ſo doing: and there can come no worſe end thereof, then thankes to God, who hath vſed vs as his inſtruments, and comfort to our ſelues: as wee may truly ſay, who doe more thankfully and ioyfully partake the Word and Sacraments, then they who

haue with moſt profit receiued the Goſpell, and are moſt zealous welwillers to religion? whereas the ſlothfull, and they who are vntoward thereto, neither finde any taſt or ſauour therein, but are moſt diligent to promote ill cauſes, they ſhall in ſtead of the prerogatiues of the other, haue (as they iuſtly deſerue) reproch, vexation, and other puniſhments of God, euen in this life. Therefore let all in humility bee carefull and ready to bee imployed in Gods buſines and ſeruice, and not to arrogate ought to themſelues; for that is the onely ſweet life, and to be deſired: and herein is our heauenly father glorified, if we being forth much fruit.
            In this verſe ſhe ſpeakes vnto the rich and wealthy, who for honour ſake, Ioh. 15. 9. Verſ. 10. and the rule they had ouer the people did ride on coſtly beaſts, as we reade in chapter 10. 4. and 12. verſe. 14. Theſe whether they liued by their lands 
                  The meaning of the firſt part of th
                        •
                     s verſe, with the Doct. 1. and reuenues, or by their traffique and merchandiſe, for as much as they were hindred by the enemies from enioying their commodities, and their paſſage had been cut off both by ſea and land, and now they might freely enioy the ſame againe: they therefore were to come forth (ſhe ſaid) and giue thankes to God for that great enlargement and liberty. And thus wee ſee, the Lord will not haue the duty of praiſe hudled vp in groſſe, as though a word for faſhion might ſerue the turne; but in perticular, he will haue all ſorts (as they feele his benefits ſweet and comfortable to them diuerſly) ſo to make new amplifications, and hearty repetitions of his goodneſſe, that ſo all ioyning in a conſort together, the muſicke may be the ſweeter, and his praiſe may be the fuller. For no one condition of people could poſſibly haue laid forth the benefit of their deliuerance, and the commodity of this their liberty and peace reſtored to them in any manner as all ſorts might together: the Merchant could record his owne priuiledge that hee enioyed thereby, better then the husbandman; and ſo euery one in his ſeuerall place more then in anothers. But what was this in reſpect of that which ſhe requireth; namely, that all ſtand forth in it together? And to take occaſion to ſhew in this one worke of God, what a goodly thing it was for all ſorts of people to praiſe God then, ioyntly together for their deliuerance and victory; who doth not conceiue what an heauenly ſight it were if the like might be ſeene throughout in the congregation, for the renued benefits of God, whereby wee liue and are made ioyfull? I ſay, if with heart and voice wee did thus praiſe God, as well for them, as for thoſe that are paſt, what a goodly ſight were it? As it was by Moſes and Miriam, and with the men and women, for the ouerthrow of Pharaoh: the like was, for the deliuerance of the Church in Heſters time; and in ſome of our ſolemne praiſing of God, we may ſee it ſo among vs. But oh then, what a ſolemne and triumphant ſight ſhall that be, when the Lords glory ſhall bee ſung and ſounded forth in his heauenly kingdome, by Angels and Archangels, Patriarches, Prophets, and Apoſtles, Martyrs, Saints, and all that bleſſed company; I ſay, what a ſolemne ſight ſhall that bee? The very thinking that ſuch a thing ſhall bee, is the greateſt Note. comfort that can be heere enioyed, and next vnto that celeſtiall ioy itſelfe: of the which we would not be depriued, if wee were wiſe, nor loſe our part therein (by muſing often on it,) for all that is tranſitorie and vaniſhing, what ſo euer account they make of it who know no better.
            But to returne now to the rich and great men whom Debora in this verſe Doct. 2. in verſ. 10.
               
moueth to praiſe God, by this let all the rich and ſuch as enioy wealth and great commodities doe the ſame, and acknowledge what a benefit it is to them, whether they bee great Merchants, to buy and vtter their wares, for their maintenance, and encreaſe of their wealth, which could not bee, but muſt needs faile, if that lay dead; or liberty of trauelling ſafely, and of free contracts were hindred, and whether they be otherwiſe great in riches and reuenewes; let them doe this likewiſe; and the greater perſons they bee in either kind, the more let them ſeeke to excell themſelues in this duty of praiſing God, and they being forward in that, they may be inabled to doe more good workes to neceſſary vſes. By which we may alſo ſee, that God alloweth wealthy men to occupie and proſper in their calling; for why? he commandeth them to walke in their callings till he come; and teacheth, that the diligent hand maketh rich: and there need bee no queſtion made of that, for the Lord allowes that men ſhould encreaſe rather then diminiſh that Prou. 10. 4. which they haue, both to auoide burthenſomneſſe, and for the ſupply of others, ſo as they practiſe godlineſſe therewith, as equity, truth, ſincerity, innocency, patience, & ſuch like. The which they haue good incouragement to do, when they haue both liberty to follow their courſes of dealing, and alſo ſeeing godlines hath the promiſes of this preſent life, and of that which 1. Tim. 4. 8. is to come. And if it were ſo that men were debarred of traffique, and the vſe of their calling, as theſe rich men here mentioned had been, what an heauie croſſe were that, ſeeing there is no other way, but to ſpend vpon the ſtocke till all be waſted? & that is ſoone done, where it is not renued: alas, how ſhall the family be maintained, & all charges defraid, if the freedome of gathering in mens commodities and dealings bee taken from them? Doe wee not ſee that the weather, or a little ſickneſſe, diſabling a man to worke, cauſeth complaining? how much more when the liberty is wholly interdicted? But yet if God doe ſomtime bleſſe, men may not looke to haue alwaies one and the ſame courſe of thriuing and proſpering. But howſoeuer it bee, let all bee highly thankfull, for that they may vſe the benefit of traffique, or other improuing of their commodities, as theſe now did, and let them be fruitfull in well-doing, as they would readily promiſe to bee, if they were againe vnder the croſſe, and ioyfull in the vſe of preaching and Sacraments, with other duties; which is the true praiſe that God expecteth. But as for ſuch as depriue themſelues of the benefit thereof by their owne default, they haue much to anſwere for. Such are idle perſons, and ill husbands, as we call them, and ſuch, as, if the Lord ſomewhat alter the courſe of their takings and gaines, and they come ſhort therof, ouer they did ſomtime before, they fret and complaine that their trades be naught, & that they ſhall be vndone: and much like to them are they, who hauing got by their trades well, conceale their eſtates, & faine themſelues bankerupts, to defeat others of their goods; or ſuch other as caſt the burthen vpon their thriftleſnes and improuidence vpon their trades, dealings, or blind-fortune, forgetting how God had ſomtimes bleſſed them therein before. Therefore let vs know (whatſoeuer the bad practiſes of men are) that it is a great fauour of God, that people may haue free recourſe to markets and faires, and other like places of buying and ſelling commodities, euen as the want thereof is a ſore puniſhment, when people neither know where they ſhould vtter their commodities, nor

buy them whereof they ſtand in need: in both which conſiſted their maintenance, as was ſaid before. And yet lamentable it is to ſee, what abuſe the corrupt cuſtome of our time hath brought this liberty vnto. For many doe not onely ſteale away Gods due, I meane the Sabbath, to doe their worldly buſineſſe on; but there are other, whoſe common trade and practiſe it is (in a more prophane manner,) to harbour theeues, to receiue ſtollen wares, to entertaine drunkards, to become bauds to adulterers, and to ſpend that day leaud, and vnſeemely meetings and match-makings, ſtage-playes, and other reuell rout; and all vnder the honeſt colour of exchanging commodities, and maintaining their charge. So that in ſtead thereof, men and women ſet to ſale their good name, chaſtity, ſobriety, and whatſoeuer elſe ſhould bee pretious to the godly.
            Now vnto theſe before mentioned, of greater wealth and place, whereas ſome thinke, that in the next words ſhee ſpeaketh to men of meaner ſtate, 
                  The opening of another part of verſ. 10. and Doct. 3. ſuch as is ſaid here [dwelt by Middin] a place they ſay, where they met more vſually for a Mart or exchange of their wares, which place being before intercepted by the enemies, and now free for all to haue recourſe to it, and paſſe too and fro by the high waies, ſhee exhorts them that repaired thither to praiſe the Lord. This opinion of theirs is gainſaid by the pureſt tranſlations, and beſide, one thing ſhould bee vnderſtood in both places, to wit, of tra
                  ••
               ique and merchandiſe, if it were ſo. But the word [Middin] is not to be taken heere for the proper name of a place where wares were ſold; but the words [dwelling by Middin] are to bee tranſlated thus; [ſitting in iudgement. As if ſhe ſhould ſay, let men of authority and rich lawyers, who may now ſit in iudgement about ciuill cauſes, let ſuch praiſe the Lord, becauſe they may now doe it ſafely. It is the honour, credit, peace and benefit of Magiſtrates and learned counſellors, as alſo the welfare of the people, that places of iudgement and iuſtice be frequented and vpholden: as we ſee heere in England in our Terme times at Weſtminſter, and out of Terme in other places, where equity and right are maintained, and wrong and iniurie puniſhed. Oh it is a time full of deſolation, when through famine, plague, or any in
                  •
               ection, ſuch places muſt lie vnoccupied in the times when they ſhould be frequented and ſet a worke in deciding cauſes, helping the innocent to his right, and weeding out of euill doers. Whereby we may gather how heauy times thoſe were, when iudgement ceaſed, and the open places where iuſtice was miniſtred, were laid waſt, and left voide. And therfore we reade in the former chapter, that the people could not enioy that liberty of publike iudgement ſeates, but they were driuen to go priuately to Debora for iudgement, not dwelling ſumptuouſly in palace or caſtle, famous in that reſpect, Iudg. 4. 5. or honourable, but obſcure vnder a Palme tree. Now therfore as they when they might againe boldly and freely ſit in iudgement, are heere called to praiſe God for it: So ſuch perſons with vs enioying ſuch priuiledges, ought to call themſelues duely and daily to zealous thankeſgiuing, with ſuch other duties as accompany the ſame, yea their whole life ſhould ſauour thereof. And they ſhall haue much to anſwere to God who do otherwiſe. As for the people, what duty they owe for enioying this benefit, I will ſhew by a fitter occaſion in the next verſe.
            But to let theſe goe of whom I haue ſpoke in this verſe, becauſe Debora 
               Doct. 4. in verſ. 10.
               
heere ſpeaketh alſo to all ſuch as went, and walked by the way; this ſhould cauſe all ſuch as goe to and fro about their buſineſſe, pleaſure, or other neceſſarie vſes, as trauellers, to praiſe God highly for ſuch liberties, ſe
                  •
               ing a little before that, the high waies lay vnoccupied: and to ſpeake of the benefit thereof one to another to his praiſe, and not to trauell to and fro in rude, prophane, and looſe manner, gabling like wild geeſe in vnciuill and rude ſort; as though they enioyed ſuch liberties to offend God by them. And much more ought their behauiour and communication to bee ſober and Chriſtian like, when they goe to the houſe of God, to bee edified by the word, prayer, and Sacraments, and alſo when they returne home againe, and in a word, to walke harmeleſſe in all places; which behauiour is much out of vſe in this land, and yet (God bee thanked) not altogether in ſome places. But heere an end for this time.
         
         
            THE THIRTIE TWO SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to proceed with the reſt that I haue begun withall, Verſ. 11. heree Debora ſpeaketh to the ſeruants, that in going forth to draw water for their neceſſary vſe, were not free from the archers, who ſhot at them, and put them to much paine, trouble, and danger, or feare at leaſt thereby 1. Sam. 16. 11. Where we ſee, that as they who are in the meaneſt places of ſeruice, are not to bee ſuffered to enioy their liberty to liue idly, but to be imployed and occupied, (as Dauid, when he was young kept his fathers ſheep) and ſet to worke, that they may be maintained thereby: (and ſuch ought to be thankfull when they may goe to it in peace:) ſo they are to bee admitted alſo, and taken into the number of them that worſhip God in the aſſembly, and therefore ought duly to bee brought thither by their gouernours, and taught there to know him. Euen ſuch as cut wood and draw water, the very droyles in houſes, (as they are called) who doe the moſt ſeruile workes: and therefore in ſome countries, ſuch as keepe ſwine, Note. ſheepe, and cattell, which is more baſe then to ſerue them onely, euen theſe I ſay, being of them who are redeemed by the precious blood of Chriſt, as well as other, ſhould be taught to honour God aright, and to liue vnder his gouernment, and therefore not ſuffered to liue brutiſhly, as in ſome places they doe, but be brought forth by their parents or rulers, into the congregation of the faithfull, to learne thoſe things that concerne their happineſſe and peace: this being preſuppoſed, that there they ſhall be taught. Which I ſpeake to the ſhame of ſuch maſters, and gouernours, as neuer regard any ſuch matter, neither conſider that they owe that education to them, for the

ſeruice they doe them, and the vſe they make of them, and moſt of all, that they owe it them, by the band with which they are tyed to it by Gods commandement: whereas the life of ſuch is as miſerable for their ſoule, as they vnder the Turkes gallies for their bodies: yea euen as aſſes who ſpend the day in toyle, and then are thruſt at night into emptie ſtables; ſo are they ſent after their tedious and brutiſh ſeruice, vnto their wofull home, and at laſt to hell, as a heauie recompence of their labour. Fie therefore vpon ſuch tyrants. And yet if ſome maſters in conſcience of the commandement, doe (for ſome it may be doe) giue them more libertie to goe to the aſſemblie to worſhip God; yet oft times another euill is in the way, that when they come there, they haue nothing taught them, ſo that by one meanes or other, all that liſt may ſee they die miſerably: of which ſort, oh that the number were not too great. Thus much of theſe.
            The next ſort ſpoken to in this verſe, are they, who dwelling in villages 
                  The opening of the next point in verſ. 11 and vnwalled townes, were left deſolate, and driuen from their habitations, and they laid waſte, rifled, robbed, and left ruinous by the enemies: this to be the meaning of the ſecond point in this verſe, appeareth cleerely by the beſt tranſlation; theſe ſhe ſaith, might now ſafely returne to their habitations and townes, and make vp their ruines and breaches, and dwell in them againe as before. They were therefore to acknowledge the goodneſſe of God with the reſt, who yet beſide the driuing them from their owne home, were alſo much impoueriſhed, and ſuſtained great loſſe, beſide feare and trouble thereby. And this (beſides the dutie of thanks for our ſafe and conuenient dwelling and harbour) ſhould teach vs all to bee highly contented, Doct. 2. in verſ. 11. and patiently to beare our impaired and decaied eſtate, when by Gods prouidence, without our fault and negligence, it falleth out to be ſo, ſeeing we cannot be ignorant, that Gods people haue had their part in ſuch aduerſities before vs: alſo loſſes by fire, water, or any other ſpoyling or waſting of our goods, when ſmall likelihood could be ſeene thereof before. For theſe things fall out, and the like changes, where and when God will, for the ſinne of men, as couſonage, deceit, ſecuritie, hypocriſie, wilfull ignorance, worldlineſſe, idleneſſe, delicacie, exceſſe, &c. (which God curſeth ſometimes with beggerie) raſh truſtings, ſuretiſhip, &c. and they ſhould beare their puniſhments, becauſe they haue ſinned: and after their repentance, when God Mich. 7. 7. hath ſtaied the plague, they ſhould thankfully, and without murmuring, receiue the remnants of their commodities, if any remaine to them: as wee reade the men of Beniamin did; and not deſperatly and impatiently to leaue Iudg 21. 23. all at ſixe and ſeuen, becauſe they ſee themſelues diſabled from euer recouering their former eſtate: which is a ſigne of a proud heart, refuſing and ſcorning to ſtoope to the Lords hand and viſitation, as Iob himſelfe did, whoſe loſſe yet (we know) was exceeding great. But oh the madnes of men, who Iob 1. 21. when they being occupied about their commodities, are croſſed in them, contrarie to their expectation, they are at their wits end, when the Lord hath taken but that which he lent them. They dreame of an eternitie here, Note. and when they haue well feathered their neſt, (as they ſay) they thinke they are well for many yeeres: oh death how vnwelcome art thou to ſuch? nay the ſmalleſt loſſes doe cauſe them to rage and crie out. The Lord therefore ſeeing this, pulleth from one here, and from another there, to acquaint all

with changes, and teacheth them thereby, that if there remaine but ſomewhat to them, of the plentie which they ſometime enioyed, ſo that they haue not vnthriftily waſted it themſelues, they ſhould be thankfull, as theſe here are willed to be, who full gladly came againe to their ruinous dwellings, from the which they had been driuen by the force of their enemies. And they whoſe hearts cannot bow to yeeld to their afflictions meekely and patiently, but doe rebelliouſly and brutiſhly harden them againſt God for his iuſt corrections, ſhall gaine this thereby, to haue them with Iudas broken in peeces with his mallets of terror and deſpaire, to their vtter confuſion. Oh, full little doe ſuch know themſelues, by ſpurning againſt God, to kicke (as it were) againſt pricks. It is Gods mercie (as the Prophet ſaith) Lamen. 3. 22. that they are not conſumed: much more then, to giue them breathing, being, and liuing, and therefore they ſhould humbly receiue Gods corrections.
            The laſt ſort that ſhe calleth to praiſe God, were they that came together in the gates of their cities, where their iudgement ſeates were appointed to be. Theſe meetings had ceaſed, and had been broken off, through the preuailing of their enemies, and now by their deliuerance were frequented againe. What a puniſhment that was, and how great a calamity to the Common wealth, to haue execution of law and iuſtice left off, and laid downe, tending ſo neceſſarily to the ſafegard of mens eſtates, or to the maintaining thereof; by the cutting off of malefactors, and the doers of iniurie, as robbers, and ſuch like; how great a plague that was, I ſay, they well know, who are not ignorant, that the whole ſafetie (in a manner) of the Commonwealth, is maintained and vpholden by ſuch due execution of law and iudgement. And for this benefit (that I may come from them to our ſelues) Doct. 3. in verſ. 11. all that liue in the Church and Common-wealth with peace and welfare, haue cauſe to magnifie Gods exceeding goodneſſe in that one reſpect. For hereby they liue ſafe and quiet in their houſes, they enioy their goods and commodities, and that which is the greateſt of all other, they may the better haue libertie and the benefit of true ſeruing of God, which maketh all the reſt of their liberties ſauourie. And this with the other particular commodities which are enioyed of vs hereby, is to bee acknowledged to bee great and bountifull, the rather for that ſuch common bleſſings vſually enioyed, are ſeldome reckoned of vs to be thanke worthie. And among thoſe who went out and in at the gates, we may vnderſtand all other, who either paſſed through, for their profit, pleaſure, or for any other neceſſarie vſe and cauſe, which libertie all may conceiue how great it was, and therefore both they then, and we now who enioy the ſame libertie, muſt hold our ſelues infinitly bound to praiſe God in this behalfe.
            And now we haue heard how Debora hath called all ſorts to the praiſing of God, and that euen for ſuch benefits as are in little account with vs, no nor thought of, how great they be, let it warne vs of one common fault, that we be more mindfull hereafter of Gods goodneſſe, in his miniſtring to our vſe, the daily benefits which he beſtoweth on vs for this preſent life, then we are wont to be: as the ſunne-ſhine and the raine; the peaceable following of our callings within doores and without; the vttering and exchange of our commodities; our ſafe dwelling from danger of enemies, and the benefit

of mill and market. And what ſhall I ſay elſe? as for our freedome from forrain enemies, and our trauel without danger, from place to place, with other that are innumerable: which though we haue thē in great part in common with the vnreaſonable creatures, yet without them we know our life ſhould be deadly weariſome to vs, yea none at al. I ſay it is certaine that theſe common bleſſings, and many other ſuch are not acknowledged of numbers through the ſeuen yeers together, which ſhould bee remembred (one or other of them, I meane) oft times euery day: which if it ought to be in theſe common benefits now mentioned, (which yet are but tranſitory;) then what cauſe had the Apoſtle, in reſpect of all together, which ſerue for his life, and that which is to come, to charge vs in all things to bee thankfull? And 1. Theſ. 5. 19. by this that all ſorts are heere ſpoken to by the Propheteſſe; it teacheth that all ſorts of men, and particular perſons among them, are to know that they muſt anſwere to God for themſelues about thankes, euen as elſewhere euery man is commanded to walke in his particular calling, and the duties therof. For ſo ſaith the Apoſtle in the firſt epiſtle to the Corinthians; Let euery man abide in the ſame vocation wherein hee was called. But it followeth 1. Cor. 7. 20. in the text.
            
               Verſ. 12. Vp Debora, vp, ariſe and ſing a ſong: ariſe Barak, and leade thy captiuity captiue, thou ſonne of Abinoam.
               
               13. For they that remaine, haue dominion ouer the mighty of the people: the Lord hath giuen me dominion ouer the ſtrong.
               
            
            NOw that Debora hath called all the people of Iſrael to thankeſgiuing for 
                  The ſenſe of theſe two verſe. 12. 13. the victorie, in the three former verſes, ſhee ſtirreth vp her ſelfe in this twelfth verſe by an elegant figure, that other might bee whetted on by her example to doe the ſame. And ſhe calleth Barak to triumph, and with a certaine pompe to make a ſhew of his enemies captiuity and conqueſt: which was to the great honor of God, when all might vnderſtand, that the Canaanites were for the moſt part ſlaine, and they that remained aliue, were priſoners to the Hebrues, who were moſt like a little before to be chopped to pieces of them & other of Gods enemies. In the 13. verſe ſhe amplifieth the victorie by another compariſon of the conquerers, with thoſe who were conquered: theſe hauing been valiant, wiſe, and well prouided: but that they ouercame them; namely, the Iſraelites were but as a remnant, and yet baſe and contemptible. This is the ſumme of theſe two verſes.
            Out of her prouoking of her ſelfe to praiſe God, as if ſhee had been much Doct. 1. out of verſ. 12. behinde in that dutie, when yet ſhe had been commendable therein, as wee haue heard, and had alſo vrged other thereto; wee may ſee that this hath been the manner and courſe of Gods people, to thinke they could neuer do enough in praiſing God, when they haue entred ſeriouſly into conſideration of his goodneſſe, but euer thought themſelues cold and backward in reſpect of that they ought to haue been. Doubtleſſe the due weighing of the cauſe, made her ſtil to ſee more and more into Gods admirable kindnes, till ſhe was aſhamed of her vnthankfulneſſe. But ſome will ſay, all cannot be as Debora was: it is well if we can be thankfull when we be prouoked by others, they ſay, and by good meanes, as by the word, &c. To which I anſwere,

It is cleare indeed, wee come behinde her in the duty; but is there not enough to moue vs to be equall to her, yea to excell her therein? Shee is thus thankfull for the victorie, wee haue no need nor cauſe to fight: ſhee praiſeth God for peace recouered with the hazard and danger of ten thouſand men, we enioy ours without putting it into queſtion: ſhee, for bodily bleſſing, we haue infinite to the maintenance of health and welfare, then the which what could ſhee haue more for this preſent life? beſides many that are ſpirituall to ſeaſon the other, and yet wee come ſhort of her in thankfulneſſe neuertheleſſe. And that which I haue ſaid of Debora, the ſame we may ſee in Dauid, Anna, and others. Hee in the Pſalme, hauing none equall to him in the performing of that duty, affirming that hee would doe it three times, nay ſeuen times a day, and that hee would doe it openly in the congregation, and priuately by himſelfe; yet as though hee had much forgot himſelfe, and had waxen dull, and been behind other therein, hee quickeneth vp himſelfe to it, ſaying; O my ſoule, praiſe thou the Lord, and al that is within 
               Pſal. 103. 1. 
               me, praiſe his holy name. Hee ſtirreth vp himſelfe, wee ſee, to bee feruenter, when yet he was very forward before. Which I ſpeake not, as if both he and other Gods beſt ſeruants and moſt feruent, did not feele oftentimes a kind of ſleepy deadneſſe in them to good duties, and remiſſeneſſe of ſpirit creeping vpon them, (as it is certaine they doe, ſeeing they carry that corruption about them, which will oft cauſe a wearineſſe in them of well doing for the time,) but they hauing a greater power of grace working in them to ſubdue it, they gather vp and ſtirre themſelues againe by ſuch occaſion, to more earneſtneſſe, and ſo finde themſelues refreſhed (by a new meditation of their ſlackneſſe) with double courage to ſet vpon their duties. And to that end they helpe and ſharpen on themſelues, as Dauid and Debora did; and ſometime are ſupported by other, as we ſee Moſes his weake hands were faine to Exod. 17. 12. be holden vp by Aaron and Hur againſt Amalek By this we ſee a manifeſt difference betwixt them and the wicked: who though (as they ſay) they like well of prayer, and hearing, and of thankeſgiuing: yet they profeſſe they cannot endure nor away with ſuch continuall ſeruice; affirming where that is vrged that men ſhall neuer haue done. For as they who beleeue how greatly they are beholding to God for his goodneſſe, do charge themſelues with their vnthankfulneſſe, euen when they are forwarder then the moſt; conſidering they are then but vnprofitable ſeruants: ſo the other are ready to poſt it off to others, as teſtifying thereby, that they be more beholding to God then they hold themſelues to be, and thinke euery little to bee enough that they are to doe to God, yea and that a word and away may ſerue the turne; euen very froth it is that they offer to him, a mocking, no ſacrifice: the heart neuer enclining (for it cannot) to any ſuch thing. Rom. 8. 7.
            
            Another thing in this verſe is concerning Barak, and that is, that hee ſhould in a ſhew and with ſolemne pomp ſet out the conqueſt and victorie The elearing of the next part of the verſe. which God had giuen them ouer their enemies. Which though after the victory in warre, it was vſed to bee done by the Heathens ouer ſuch as they conquered, to the priding of themſelues, and the vttermoſt diſgrace of them that were ſubdued; yet this was (we ſee) ſpoken by the Propheteſſe, to the end that God might haue honour therby; for one end ſhe propounded, both of his act, and of her owne; and that was, the giuing of honour to

the Lord. For the ſeeking of a mans owne glory, is no glory, but a taking it Prou. 25. 27. Doct. 2. in verſ. 12. from God, and a prouoking of him thereby. Nay, where men would thinke that it as a due deſert to them; yet euen there let them beware that they take it not; but let vs all acknowledge Gods goodneſſe with thankfulneſſe, for that he will vſe our ſeruice to the honouring of his name. But to fleſh and pride our ſelues in the yoking and ſubduing of our enemies, this were no better then the act of Adonibezek, who moſt cruelly cut off the thumbs of the hands and feet of ſeuenty Kings, and made them as dogs, to eat bread vnder his table, that hee might glorie in their extreme reproch and ſhame. This act of triumph was common to the people of God with the Heathen, but not done in ſo prophane and common a manner. And as it hath been in war, ſo the like in ſome ſort we ſee at this day in the time of peace, that tehre are of al ſorts who hauing ſutes and controuerſies depending betwixt them, get the day of their aduerſary, and doe bring the one the other to a meane and poore eſtate; I ſpeake of ſuch as contend lawfully, and hauing a good cauſe, and right on their ſide, they preuaile by order of iuſtice one againſt the other, and doe in a certaine manner triumph thereby. But what then? In all this the one beareth as hee is more graciouſly ſeaſoned then another, a lowly mind, and remembreth (though he haue the better hand, and other wealth beſide,) whence hee came, who ſet him vp, and why; that is, not to glory fooliſhly of his welfare ouer his aduerſary, but to be thankfull to God, and therefore is moderate and ſober in the vſe of all ſuch liberties, and more fruitfull in doing good. The other vſeth them to pride himſelfe, to ſcorne others, to boaſt of his ſucceſſe, and to be more impudent, prophane, and lawleſſe. Both theſe triumph ouer their aduerſary; but the one in good manner as not glorying that he hath gotten the victorie of himſelfe, or by his owne ſtrength, the other moſt vnbeſeemingly, being a ſlaue, and peſant to his vnbridled luſts, and glorying in the pride of life.
            The reaſon of honouring God by them both, Debora and Barak I meane, Verſ. 13. is ſet downe by her in this verſe; and that was, ſeeing the Lord had wrought wonderfully for them, and giuen many men, euen an huge army, into the hands of a few; and valiant and noble warriers he had cauſed to be ſubdued by them, that were but weake and meane. And though ſhee aſcribe it in the firſt part of the verſe, vnto the perſons; yet that we may know that ſhe ment them to be but the inſtruments onely appointed by God to get the victory, therefore in the latter part of the verſe, ſhe maketh the Lord the cauſe of it, ſaying, that he made them able to obtaine, and ſo to preuaile ouer them.
            And ſo we (dearely beloued) when the like falleth out to vs, that God by ſmall meanes worketh great things for vs, let vs learne before to be ready to ſee and acknowledge it. For example, when the Lord ſhall aſſwage the extremities Note. of his ſeruants, either in paine, ſickneſſe, feare of vtter vndoing, or in the cruelty of their enemies, whereas none ſaw how they might bee like to recouer themſelues any more; as when all helpe and hope by manward is paſt; when he (I ſay) ſhal then ſhew his helpe, that was not in any likelihood to haue been looked for, is it not time to behold his great goodneſſe and wonder at it with due praiſes? His preuenting of that notorious Gun-powder treaſon, with the remouall of many great enemies of his people, when death onely was like to haue done it (God knoweth when) and that in

our remembrance, ſince the entering in of our late deceiſed Queene of bleſſed memorie, and the Kings Maieſty, (whom God inable to tread them vnder his feet) what thankes doe theſe worthily require of vs?
            Moreouer, to ſee the fruit of this Goſpell, which is for the moſt part ſo contemptible in the world; what great things it doth in ſubduing the ſtony hearts of many vnto the power of it, and in changing them, (though for the great cumpaſſe of the land, and the long time that it hath bin preached, we may and ought to lament, that it hath preuailed with no more, yet that grace that the ſincere preaching of it hath wrought in many thouſands, is to be remembred, thought vpon, and acknowledged, to Gods eternall praiſe. Euen as in all ages God hath done wonderfully, I meane, great things by ſmall meanes; as in caſting downe the walles of Iericho by ſeuen daies compaſſing it with blowing trumpets of Rammes hornes. Alſo his inabling Gedeon with three hundred men to ouerthrow an armie of the Midianites, who as graſhoppers couered the face of the earth. And Dauid with his ſling to conquer great Goliah. But I muſt heere cut off, ſeeing the verſes following are many, and muſt be handled together.
         
         
            THE THIRTIE THREE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 14. Of Ephraim their roote aroſe againſt Amalek: and after thee, Beniamin, againſt thy people, O Amalek: of Machir came rulers, and of Zebulon they that handle the pen of the writer.
                     
                     15. And the Princes of Iſſachar were with Debora, and Iſhachar, and alſo Barak: he was ſent on his feet in the valley: for the diuiſions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart.
                     
                     16. Why abodeſt thou among the ſheepfolds to heare the bleatings of the flockes? for the diuiſions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart.
                     
                     17. Gilead abode beyond Iordan: and why doth Dan remaine in ſhips? Aſhur ſat on the ſea ſhore, and tarried in his decayed places
                     
                     18. But the people of Zebulun and Naphthali haue ieoparded their liues vnto the death in the high places of the field.
                     
                  
                  
                     THis is the firſt point of the ſecond part of the chapter, in theſe 
                        The ſenſe of verſ. 14. words of the text to the 19. verſe: which ſecond part was diuided into three: as is to bee ſeene in the firſt entrance into the chapter. In the firſt, they are brought in to the ſong firſt, and commended by Debora, that did helpe in the warre, in the 14. and part of the fifteenth verſe, and by occaſion of them, they are mentioned next, and

their ſlothfulneſſe is reproued, who being of the tribes, did not helpe in the battell; which is done in part of the fifteenth verſe, the 16. and 17. and after ſhee commendeth Zebulun and Naphthali, for that they had ieoparded their liues for their brethren, and this in the eighteenth verſe. This to be the meaning of theſe verſes, all may ſee that will throughly looke into it. But yet it muſt be acknowledged, that there is difficulty in ſome of them.
                  This therfore I will cleare as I am able, and labour to remoue the doubts which may be raiſed to trouble the Reader. To the which end wee muſt remember that which was before ſaid, that Debora firſt ſpeaketh of them in this ſecond part of the chapter, which did helpe in the warre. And ſhee beginneth with Ephraim, And whereas ſome expound it that this root of Ephraim that roſe againſt Amalek was Ioſhua; and by Beniamin, in that they vnderſtand him that ſhould fight againſt them afterward; that is to ſay, Saul, who did ſo indeed. It is true, that both theſe are ſaid to haue gone againſt Amalek, but what is that to this purpoſe? For heere in this part of the ſong, Debora ſignifieth who they were that fought againſt the Canaanites at that time. Therefore it is rather likely, that by the root of Ephraim ſhe could not meane Ioſhua, who was dead long before; but ſhe meaneth her ſelfe, being one that was a chiefe perſon in that tribe: for it appeareth, that ſhee was an Ephramite, and it is ſaid that ſhe iudged Iſrael, dwelling vnder a Palme tree between Ramath and Bethel in mount Ephraim. And ſure it is, that by her charge and authority the battell was taken in hand. But then ye will obiect, that the warre heere mentioned is ſaid to haue been againſt Amalek, not the Canaanites: I grant it, but by a figuratiue ſpeech; in Amalek we are to vnderſtand the Canaanites alſo. And thus much for anſwering this firſt doubt out of theſe words, [Of Ephraim their roote aroſe againſt Amalek.]
                  
                  The next is out of the words which follow immediately in the ſame verſe, which are theſe; [and after thee, Beniamin fought againſt thee O Amalek.] Heere vnderſtand this word (Amalek) as before. But that by Beniamin here, we ſhould vnderſtand Saul, being of that tribe, there is no ſenſe in it, Saul being yet vnborne; but certaine of the tribe of Beniamin: for it appeareth by theſe words in the text, that ſome of the tribe of Beniamin alſo adioyned themſelues to Debora, from the firſt beginning of the battell, though (it is to be thought) they were but few in compariſon. The other words in this 14. verſe haue this meaning; as theſe firſt [out of Machir came rulers] that is, out of them heere named of Machir, which was a noble family in the halfe tribe of Manaſſes, there came certaine worthy men to helpe in the battell. The laſt words of the verſe, which are theſe, [Out of Zebulun there came they that handle the pen of the writer,] they haue this meaning; that the learned and skilful Lawyers, who were exerciſed in handling the pen, did helpe as they might fitlieſt be employed and vſed, whether by weapon or by counſell. The firſt 
                        The meaning of verſ. 15. and 16. part of the fifteenth verſe concerning Iſſachar, hath this ſenſe: that this tribe is highly commended, both for that they that were chiefe in it conſented to Debora, and alſo, for that they did in their place, as Barak did in his: for as he was ſent to mount Tabor, ſo it ſeemeth that the Princes of Iſhachar were ſent into the valley with their footmen, and in the perill and ieopardy of the Iſraelites by their enemies, they did ſet vpon them with great courage, and behaued themſelues valiantly, and therefore they are highly commended.
                  
                     
Thus ſhe hauing mentioned them that helped in the battell, ſhe turneth, by occaſion of them, to thoſe that did not helpe, beginning in this 15. verſe with the tribe of Ruben. That tribe is reproued, for that it held backe to the great griefe of their brethren, from fighting among them, and for that they did not in ſo great danger come foorth to helpe them. This tribe dwelt beyond Iorden in the fat paſtures, and as it appeareth, for their too much minding, and care of their cattell, and their commoditie thereby, they neglected the care of the Common-wealth. And in that it is ſaid, that there were great thoughts of heart for the Reubenites diuiding themſelues from their brethren, whether the meaning of the words be, that theſe thoughts were great and loftie in them, that ſcorned to goe at Deboras commandement, being but a woman; or whether they were thoughts of wondring and lamenting in their brethren, for that they came not as well as others, to helpe them in the battell; the repetition of the words doth giue more warrant for to take them in this latter ſenſe, as a lamentation: as if it ſhould be ſaid, Oh that Reuben ſhould not come ouer Iorden to helpe as the moſt of the other tribes did: oh, it was wondred at, and much to be lamented. And beſides, to charge that tribe to be proud and inſolent, is more then wee may or ought to doe vpon an vncertaine ground, for it requireth good proofe for the auouching of that.
                  
                     Reuben (that is the Reubenites that came of him) is here deſcribed by their calling and trade, that they were keepers of cattell, and the places that they dwelt in, namely among goodly paſtures. And where it is added, Why ſatteſt thou among the ſheepfolds to heare the bleating of the flockes? it is ſo to be taken, as if the Reubenites abode and remained ſtill with their cattell, for all the danger that was: and did declare thereby that they did ſet more by them, then they did pitie their brethren, by going to helpe them. In the 17. verſe, Gilead is in like manner complained of, they abode ſtill in their dwelling 
                        The meaning of verſe 17. place beyond Iorden, as the Reubenites did, dwelling neere vnto them; while their brethren the Iſraelites were in great ieopardie, fighting with their enemies. But here commeth another great doubt to be anſwered, that Obiect. ſeeing Machir, a noble familie in the tribe of Manaſſe, was ſaid before, to come to helpe their brethren, and they poſſeſſed Gilead: I ſay if Gilead bee commended before to come, why is it here reproued for not comming? This doubt is anſwered thus: Manaſſe had two ſonnes, Machir and Iair, of Anſw. whom came two great families, both which poſſeſſed Gilead. Therefore thoſe Gileadites which came of Machir, could not bee they who are reproued, for they came to helpe; but the familie of Iair, who alſo dwelt in Gilead, for they came not.
                  The next that are reproued here, are they of the tribe of Dan. Who are not reproued ſimply for trauailing in ſhips vpon the ſea, but they are blamed here for remaining in ſhips. Now at that time (whether they did ſo to ſhelter themſelues thereby from their enemies on the ſea, or for their trafique, and did not rather goe out of them, and helpe the reſt) they were worthie to be found fault with, for their ſo doing. For what though they were ſtriken with ſuch a feare, when they heard of the armies of their enemies? that was their ſinne, that they haſted not to the reſt, againſt their enemies to aſſiſt them, but that they put themſelues in ſhips, that ſo they might paſſe

and eſcape from them, or follow their owne priuate buſineſſe: which was a thing vtterly vnbeſeeming them, they were therefore worthily and iuſtly reproued for it, as I haue ſaid.
                  The laſt tribe that is found fault with, is the tribe of Aſher, who excuſe themſelues for being abſent from their brethren; partly for that they dwelt farre off, and partly for that their townes and cities were ruinous, and not well fenced, and therefore they ſaid, they tarried at home, leſt their enemies might haue taken occaſion by their abſence to ſpoile them, which they ſaw they might eaſily haue done. And there is no doubt, but that it was grieuous to theſe tribes to be thus rebuked; the which the holy Ghoſt would haue to be done, partly for their owne cauſe that they might ſee in what great fault they were by not going to helpe their brethren, how lightly ſoeuer they accounted of it, and alſo that they might repent for it: and partly in reſpect of others, which I will ſhew when I come to the doctrine. And this be ſaid of the tribes commended and reproued, except the two tribes of Zebulon and Naphtali, who did more ſpecially icopard their liues for their brethren, as it followeth in the next verſe.
                  Here ſhe commendeth them both in an high manner (though ſome 
                        The ſenſe of verſe 18. chiefe men in the tribe of Zebulon ſhe had praiſed before, and that for their forwardnes againſt Gods enemies, in ſo great perill, as we haue heard, they were in. For it was a ridiculous thing in the iudgement of men, for ſuch a ſmall number as they were, to goe againſt ſuch huge armies, and all as valiant ſouldiers addreſſed in warlike furniture, by whom they might haue been ſwept away in leſſe then an houre; but they preferred God and his word before their owne liues. By the high places mentioned here, the mount Tabor is ſignified, on which they were appointed to ſtand to behold the multitude of the Canaanites, and yet they not flying away from them, but marching toward them, their faith appeared to bee ſo much the greater, and therefore they are thus commended. Thus much for the meaning of theſe fiue verſes.
                  Now I haue cleered that which was needfull to be made plaine in this Doct. of verſe 14. 15. ſtorie, there being ſome difficultie therein; the next thing is, that we ſeeke a further benefit by it. And firſt by them who are commended for yeelding their helpe in that great worke of the Lord, as Ephraim, Beniamin and Iſhaker, mentioned in the 14. and 15. verſes; we may ſee, that ſuch as doe ſet themſelues to further Gods people, or his ſeruice, ſhall not be vnrecompenſed, nor forgotten; as theſe are here regeſtred to their praiſe, neither is any to thinke, that the labour and trauell ſo beſtowed, is in vaine. And whereas ſome obiect, That now the Scriptures are finiſhed, and therefore no man Obiect. can looke for the ſame particular reward that theſe enioyed; I meane, to be Chronicled in the monuments thereof: yet let them know, that if they be Anſw. faithfull and conſtant to the end, the Lord hath written their names in another booke, farre more durable, euen the booke of remembrance, wherein he writeth the workes of the Saints, that he may both here, and for euer reward them, and honour them before men Angels. For though it be vſuall Matth. 25. 34. with men to doe as the Butler did to Ioſeph, I meane to let goe vnrewarded many kindneſſes and duties done to them by their neighbours, yet God who is leſſe bound to the beſt, by any due of deſert, but only of his free promiſe

and gracious fauour, he, I ſay, will not doe ſo: for why? if one offer but a cup of cold water vnto any, in the name of a Diſciple, that is, becauſe he is Mich. 1. 42. ſo, the Lord will not leaue him vnrewarded. Therefore when the woman in the Goſpell had powred ointment on the head of our Sauiour, he ſaid, that Mark. 14. 9. whereſoeuer the Goſpell ſhould be preached, that act of hers ſhould bee remembred and ſpoken of. Much more they who ſhall honour God more fruitfully and faithfully, may aſſure themſelues, that great is their reward from him: for hee that ſhall forſake any thing for his ſake, ſhall receiue an Matth. 19. 29. hundred fold for it, euen in this life, beſides the happineſe that abideth him in the life to come.
                  Oh therefore the blockiſhnes and vnbeliefe of the greateſt part euen of Chriſtendome, who deſiring to enioy good daies while they liue here, doe in no carefull manner take the way thereto; but ſhift as the baddeſt ſort do, to take their part in the ſinfull pleaſures of this life. By meanes whereof, though they thinke themſelues on the ſurer hand, and to play the part of wiſe men; yet in truth they neuer finde the quiet and ſweete fruite of the Goſpell, which yet many of them profeſſe; nor euer attaine the happie life, here or after, that they looke for.
                  Oh, things preſent doe ſo dazle their eyes with their deceiueable beauty, and their hearts are ſo hollow, inconſtant and vnfaithfull, that if they be tickled with loue and liking of any thing that pleaſeth their humour, how diſhoneſt, yea and filthie ſoeuer it be, they are drawne after it, as the ſilly fiſh with the bait. So that it is no maruaile, that few doe beleeue that their labour in the Lord ſhall be rewarded; by chuſing rather to abide affliction, then to embrace the ſhort pleaſures of ſinne. Oh the number is great of Malach. 3. 14. them that follow the deuices and deſires of their owne wicked hearts, vpbraiding the godly with the ſmall gaine they get by their zealous profeſſion of religion. Indeed it is a thing impoſſible for an vnbeleeuer, to ſee either the vnfruitfulnes of his owne eſtate, or the gaine of the contrarie: as wee ſee by them in Malach. 3. who aske in plaine termes, If it be not in vaine to ſerue God, and what profit commeth thereby, &c. But this ought not to trouble the righteous, as we ſee in the 16. verſe of the ſame chapter: but if through frailtie they ſlip into that temptation, as Dauid did, Pſal. 73. let them doe as Pſal. 73. 13. he did, verſ. 17. enter into the Sanctuarie of God, and change their opinion. But as faſt as one ſeeth another taken away, and for all the fearefull manner of the death of ſome of them, who haue liued as if they feared neither hell nor iudgement day; yet what one of an hundred remaining behinde ſtill, is brought any thing neerer to a Chriſtian life thereby?
                  Now more particularly by theſe of Machir or Manaſſes, Zebulon, and Doct. 2. in verſ. 14. 15. 
                     Iſſachar, which were chiefe men in the tribes, and yet forward and readie to ioyne with the reſt againſt Gods enemies; wee learne, that as the mightieſt and wealthieſt ſhould not come behind others in any part of Gods ſeruice, but put foorth themſelues before them, as theſe here did: ſo they that doe not ſo, muſt ſee that they ſhall haue reproch for their negligence and ſloth, as the other ſhall be renowned of God himſelfe, as wee ſee here theſe be: which were enough to put heart and courage into that ſort of men particularly, if ſinne haue not plucked it out. But of this I ſpeake in other places by occaſion, and therefore I ſay no more now.
                  
                     
Now Debora paſſeth from theſe whom ſhe commended, and turneth to the other whom ſhe diſcommendeth, in theſe verſes. Whereby we may ſee Verſ. 15. 16. 17. how great the reproch of thē is, who do not helpe in Gods houſe, to ſet forward his worke, and to ioyne with his ſeruants therein. For ſuch do not only diſcourage their brethren, and let the worke lie raw and vnperfect; but they fleſh their aduerſaries, and God knoweth whether they would not alſo turne on their ſides, if they ſhould be tryed. Wherein it is not amiſſe to obſerue the plaine dealing of the holy Ghoſt in this narration: for as he ingenuouſly yeeldeth teſtimony of praiſe to the well deſeruing: ſo hee conceileth not the ſhame of the careleſſe and ſlothfull, but rebukes them without reſpect of perſons. Which dealing, as it ſheweth what courſe he will take in that ſolemne day, wherin he will iudge the world with equity: ſo it ſhould driue all fooles out of theſe conceits, whereby they beguile themſelues ſaying; ruſh, God will doe neither good nor euill; and that hee will not ſmite them, but they ſhall eſcape better then others, &c. which was the errour of them who (till they found the contrary) would neuer be perſwaded but their eſtate was good, ſaying, Lord, Lord, &c. as though thereby they ſhould haue entred into his kingdome. And as this is true in the generall, ſo is it in particulars, both bodily and ſpirituall. For though in the corrupt practiſe of this wicked world, we ſee euery one is for himſelfe, as the prouerbe ſpeaketh; poſting off the regard of the needy to others: yet if we enter into the Lords ſanctuary, and looke what is required by his word, wee ſhall finde it odious, vnnaturall, and highly diſpleaſing in the ſight of God, that there is not compaſſion in one to another, and care in one ouer another, as equity and band of duty requireth; that as they ſhould warme the hearts of their brethren with relieuing them readily in their bodily neceſſities and dangers; ſo ſhould they comfort their ſoules likewiſe with holy inſtruction and ſpirituall refreſhing, as by good occaſion and opportunity they may. And as theſe ſhould haue done it in warre, ſo ought we as well in peace. This dutie owe ſuperiours, either in nature, age, place or gifts, to the inferiours, to backe, encourage and inſtruct them: equals, to each other, to admoniſh, comfort, viſit, and ſupport, or reſtore one the other in meekeneſſe as there ſhall be cauſe. This is not the Miniſters duty alone, but of others; which if it were practiſed, wee might ſay indeed that great is the benefit of Chriſtian fellowſhip; whereas now men looke vpon one another, as if they knew them not, and had as lieue haue their roome as their company. But what other is to bee looked for, while Gods ordinances, (whereby hee hath prouided that this duty of caring one for another, ſhall bee nouriſhed) are contemned and ſet at naught? But yet for all this, I would not thus bee vnderſtood, as though men ought to breake off and leaue their lawfull callings to ſeeke (as ſome ſay they do) occaſions to be doing of good, by conference, &c. as ſome idle and phantaſticall perſons are glad to pretend ſuch things, to the end they may liue idely, and be held within no bounds: but yet (as it may fall out) when they are called more neceſſarily to ſome ſpeciall duties of viſiting one another in ſickneſſe, or eating and drinking together, for the time, vpon ſome ſuch waighty and iuſt occaſion they may. But otherwiſe they are, and that with faithfulneſſe and diligence, to attend vpon their lawfull vocation, vnleſſe with their conference and good communication and

ſuch like doing of God, they may do the duties of their callings alſo; which in trauelling and iourneying together about their buſineſſe, they may. And this be gathered from the reproofe of all the tribes in generall, mentioned in theſe three verſes.
                  But now let vs marke ſomewhat out of them more perticularly. For of 2 
                     Reuben and Gilead it is expreſly ſaid, that they neglected this duty for their owne profit, and that they were more bent to the ſeeking of that, then to lend their helpe where they owe it. This was found fault withall in them: euen as our Sauiour found the like fault with them, who were inuited by Luk. 14. 18. him vnto another duty, euen to the great ſupper, as theſe were to fight againſt Gods enemies, they excuſing their abſence for their owne priuate advantage, euery one his way: one had hired a farme, another had bought oxen, and he muſt euen then go trie them; and another had married a wife; to whom may bee added the third ſort of hearers mentioned by our Sauiour, whoſe ſinne was of the ſame kind, whom the cares of the world, and thornes of riches choke, ſo that the ſeed ſowne in them brings forth no good fruit. This worldly minde and ſloth in men to preferre their owne Mat. 13. 22. profit before Gods buſineſſe, far more waighty; God in no wiſe can abide. And yet a common ſinne it is, and not in the worſt ſort of profeſſors onely; (as we ſee in Martha, who loſt the beſt part, when Chriſt was at her houſe, and that by cumbring her ſelfe needleſly) who for their owne priuate commodity neglect and paſſe by duties to God and their brethren, and thoſe very waighty: for while they puddle for earthly pearles, they forgoe the peerleſſe pearle of faith and regeneration, being, (if they could ſee it) farre more gaineful then their beſt merchandiſe, and by infinite degrees excelling them all. And let vs all take heede, ſeeing commonly it ſo falleth out, that he who is wittingly careleſſe in ſome duties, is not very forward in other, how waighty ſoeuer, that it be not ſo with vs, that while we aime at heauen, more then ſome other, we be not waighed downe, as it were, with bolts vpon our heeles, to the depth of earthlineſſe, and ſo make our dwelling vnder the earth; in perpetuall darkneſſe.
                  And this by the occaſion of the ſin in theſe two tribes, bewailed by Debora, ſpeaking in her ſong of one of them thus; for the diuiſion of Ruben, in that he diuided himſelfe from his brethren, there were great thoughts of heart, that is, much maruelling and lamenting for his ſo doing. Of the other thus: Gilead remained beyond Iordan; as if ſhe ſhould ſay, euen then, when their brethren were fighting with their enemies, they of Gilead ſat ſtill at home, whom yet the buſineſſe concerned as much as themſelues that lamented it. And was not that then very lamentable? And as I haue ſpoken of this one ſinne, the ſame may be ſaid of the reſt how much to bee bewailed they are, and namely, theſe more neere akind. Euen ſo it is, when good men to theſe, as techineſſe or conceits, or any other ſiniſter corruptions to ſeparate men from their brethren, and thereby to make them backward in helping forward the good things which otherwiſe might bee, as in keeping the vnruly in order, and within compaſſe; or helping to bring in a ſound and good miniſtery, or any other commendable thing, by their care and induſtry. Oh how it ſhould grieue vs when wee ſee them backward in any good thing, who ſhould bee forward. Indeed when the diuell hath ſo fare wound in

with men, as to diuide them from their brethren, they ſtand ſtifly in defence of their doing (ſo little doth it greeue them) but it pierceth the hearts of the godly, in reſpect both of the wrong done to themſelues, & the ſcandall offered to others; as alſo becauſe they deſerue thereby, that their former forwardneſſe and fruits ſhould bee called into queſtion. Demas made light of his going from Paul: but hee writes mournfully of it to Timothy, in this manner: Demas hath forſaken me, and hath imbraced, that is to ſay, hee 2. Tim. 4. 10. reſteth in this preſent world. And no maruell; for the truth is, the better a mans properties be, the more lamentable are his perſonall blemiſhes. Euen as when a man comely, and of very good ſhape in all other parts very perſonable of body, hath a wooden leg, or ſome other groſſe disfiguring of him, all men obſerue it with commiſeration and pity.
                  Now of Dan ſeuerally ſhe complaineth, for that they of that tribe fled away Doct verſ. 17. for feare of the enemies, from their dwelling places, if not alſo for their worldly profit, as Reuben and the other did, as we haue heard in the expoſition of this verſe. So that as theſe did another way, and in another reſpect deſerue blame, as wee ſee, namely, for their feare of their enemies, whereas they ſhould haue rather vnderſtood, that it behoued them to haue taken part with their brethren: ſo the ill fauouredneſſe (if it could bee ſeene with the eye and the vnſeemelineſſe of it in them,) teacheth what a ſlauiſh affection this feare and timerouſneſſe is, and what a burthen to Gods ſeruants, when their faith is damped, and hindred by it, that it cannot haue the proper worke; that is, to harten and encourage them to bee forward and zealous in the worke of the Lord, but ſhiftingly to prouide for themſelues. And therefore in the Reuelation, this ſpirituall fearefulneſſe is threatened as ſeuerely Reuel. 21. 8. as adultery and murther; and therefore (doubtleſſe) is no leſſe then a great blemiſh. This, I ſay, is in men a ſhamefull ſinne, to be content that other ſhall beare the brunt, and themſelues goe free. Such ſhall ſmart and be wounded deeply, when the other ſhall reioyce. Howbeit this I will adde, that as this fearefulneſſe comming from a falſe heart, deſtitute of the loue of God and faith, is damnable diſobedience to God, and trechery to men: ſo yet becauſe it may through infirmity cleaue to a right good ſeruant of God (for we muſt wiſely diſcerne of the cauſe from whence it ariſeth,) therefore we muſt not count alike of both: as we haue good warning by Peters example, who of meere frailty feared to confeſſe his maſter, but by and by he went by himſelfe, and wept bitterly for it: whereas they whoſe feare riſeth of falſhood and meere carnall reſpects onely ſeeke groſly to auoide danger, but relent not after for their ſinne: therefore we muſt be waile both, but pity them that haue been ouercome through frailty, and commend their eſtate to God, to giue them more ſtrength and courage, and not daring be bold to cenſure them ſo farre as to ſay, that Chriſt will denie them before his father; for they are as farre from falſhood and malice, as they are from reſolution and Chriſtian magnanimity, yea and much further; and let vs rather that thinke we ſtand, beware that we fall not.
                  Now after all theſe, ſhe ſpeaketh of the men of Aſhur, who excuſed their Doct. 2. in verſ. 17. not comming forth to helpe againſt their enemies, by meanes of their weak defences at home, and their farre diſtance: but howſoeuer they thought they had good reaſon for their abſence, we ſee that they are alſo reproued by

the ſpirit of God in Debora. To teach vs, that it ſhall little boot vs to make defences for our ſinne, and that wee cannot hide it from God, and that hee looketh for another thing at our hands, that wee ſhould not refuſe to obey his word, no, though it be with ſome danger. Which if we refuſe to do, as theſe are heere diſpraiſed, and ſharpely reproued for not ſo doing; ſo we in the day of iudgement ſhall be not onely put to ſhame and rebuke with in ecouerable loſſe for our ſlight gaine by our excuſe making; but alſo we ſhall be caſt from Gods preſence for euer. Thus wee haue heard how ſhee hath commended the tribes that did fight againſt the enemies, and diſpraiſed thoſe that refuſed, and hath ſaid nothing of Iuda, Simeon, Leui, and Gad; and therfore neither haue I any thing to ſay of them, who muſt haue my ground of all that I ſpeake, from the word. And that which remaineth in this firſt point of the ſecond part, is of the two tribes, Zebulun and Naphtali: who in the middeſt of the earthlineſſe, feare and pretences of their brethren, did (as wee haue heard in the expoſition of this verſe) put their liues in danger by fighting with the enemies. Of whom although I haue ſpoken ſufficiently Doct. verſ. 18. before, yet this I adde, that if the cauſe ſo require, we ſhould be ready to giue our liues for the brethren. Which Saint Iohn meant, when he ſaid, wee ought 
                     Ioh. 3. 16. 
                     to lay downe our lines for the brethren, euen as our ſauiour did, leauing vs an example. And as this caſe falles out ſeldome, ſo yet when it doth, we ought not to be to ſeeke of this readineſſe, and willing minde to do this ſeruice for them, conſidering that we are neuer like to yeeld our liues in better maner, vnleſſe 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . it be for the Lords cauſe and Goſpell directly, which is in a manner all one. And why not? when we ſee that ſome will be ready to doe ſo for ſome benefactor of theirs, who hath been bountifull toward them. As S. Paul ſaith, for a good or bountifull man, perhaps ſome will die. Now if wee ought to hold Rom. 5. 7. our liues on this condition, that beſide the many caſualties whereto they are ſubiect, they ought alſo to bee ready to bee offered at the pleaſure of God with all things elſe that we enioy with them, wee may ſee, that it is no wiſe part to be wedded to that which wee haue heere lent vs heere below, nor to our liues themſelues, as we are (and the rather, for that our Sauiour profeſſeth, that he who will ſaue his life, ſhall loſe it) priſing them at ſo high a reckoning as wee doe; namely, to count them as our paradiſe; which is the chiefe cauſe that we doe ſo dote vpon them, and alſo that we do ſo meanely eſteeme and make account of the life to come, as that our hearts do little long after it. And to conclude, by the oppoſition of theſe forementioned tribes, let vs learne wiſedome, and iudge righteous iudgement. Let vs marke the repugnant example of both ſorts of men, the zealous according to knowledge on the one ſide, and the careleſſe on the other: alſo their actions their affections, and their reward, obſeruing how the Lord honoureth, encourageth and recompenſeth the one with the loue of his people, & maine bleſſings: and how he brandeth the other with a blacke cole of infancy and ſhame: that as we like or abhorre their portion) ſo we may like the grace of the one, and abhorre the practiſe of the other. It followeth.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRTY FOVRE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſ. 19. The Kings came and fought, then fought the Kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo: they receiued no gaine of money.
               
               Verſ. 20. They fought from heauen, euen the ſtarres in the
                        ••
                      courſes fought againſt Siſera.
               
               Verſ. 21. The riuer Kiſhon ſwept them away, that ancient riuer, the riuer Kiſhon. O my ſoule thou haſt marched valiantly.
               
               Verſ. 22. Then were the horſe hoofes broken with the beating together of their mightie men.
               
            
            
               IN theſe words is contained the ſecond point or branch of The ſenſe of theſe foure verſes. the ſecond part of the chapter, wherein Debora ſetteth downe the manner of the battell on the behalfe of the enemies, namely, that they came ſolemnely to fight, and well prouided; accompanied with Kings, both of Canaan and other countries, to furniſh and adorne the armies: and yet for all that, they fought vnproſperouſly and vnhappily, and had very hard ſucceſſe. For the Lord fought againſt them from heauen; the riuers and waters ſwallowed them vp, and ſwept them away: and their horſes were vnhoofed. Now when they were fought againſt all theſe waies, they were ſcattered & fell before Iſrael, in wonderfull manner, for all the multitude & ſhew of them. This vnproſperous fighting of theirs, is ſet down by her, firſt generally in the 19. verſe, & then more particularly in the next three; as ſhall appeare when we come to them. In the 19. verſe thus; by a figure whereby (not without a bitter vpbraiding of them) ſhe intimateth more then ſhe expreſſeth. They receiued no gaine of money: nay, they ioſt all, and Iſrael enioyed a rich ſpoile. The like figure is vſed in the Pſalme: A broken heart thou wilt not deſpiſe, that is, Thou wilt make Pſal. 51. 17. great account of it. The phraſe it ſelfe, as we vſe it, (for it is a nipping ſcoffe) is as much, as if ſhe had ſaid, they might put the gaines in their eyes, &c.
            In this verſe alſo ſhe ſheweth the pompe and multitude of the enemies, Verſe 19. and how they filled all the plaine betwixt mount Tabor, and the townes of Taanach and Megiddo, euen to their riuers running by them, which were called by the ſame names; this (I ſay) Debora doth as well declare, as how ill they ſped, namely, that they got not that which they ſought and looked for, I meane, the ouerthrow and ſpoile of the Iſraelites: nay rather, they were miſerably ſpoiled and diſtroyed themſelues. By the which, two things may be noted: One, that wee may ſee the glorie of wicked men, floriſhing like

the greene bay tree. I ſay, of wicked men, (for otherwiſe, I grant, godly perſons may be honourable and great) and we may ſee alſo that this their glorie reacheth, as it were, to the very cloudes, as wee reade in the Pſalme: yea Pſal. 37 35. and that in the time of warre, as here, which yet can in no wiſe ſhew it, as the times of peace may: yea, and that for their glorie they may be ſholed with Princes, and be almoſt companions with Kings: theſe, I ſay, and ſuch like, we may poſſibly ſee, as terrors to daunt and grieue vs; for the aduancement of them, is heauineſſe and matter of hanging downe the head to the righteous. And w
                  ••
               t of this, you may ſay, when this may bee ſeene? and why ſhall it be thus▪ Surely, that Gods people may not haue their eyes dazeled with their pompe and glorie, when they ſhall ſee them pulled from it; but that they may hereby be weaned and eſtranged the more, from the dangerous and poyſoned baites that would hurt them, as they haue done the other, but by faith 
                  •
               ee their downfall euen in the middeſt of their glorie, and while they to their hearts deſire enioy all outward things, and all becauſe they are the Lords ranke enemies. Secondly, that they may cleaue to God more faithfully, and alſo waite more conſtantly to ſee the glorie of ſuch turned to ſhame, if they preuent it not by repentance. And let this be the vſe of this firſt thing vnto vs.
            The ſecond that I note here is this, (according to that in the Prouerbs) that the wicked doe not alwaies roſte that which they get in hunting: that is, they 2 Prou. 12. 27. doe not alwaies attaine to that, which they promiſe themſelues in the earneſt deſire of their hearts; and whereof they haue great likelihood, as well as hope: but God cutteth them off from it, to their great vexation and diſappointment: yea, and the godly ſhall ſee it, and triumph, as Debora did here, and Iſrael ouer Pharao. For though that be true, that they are fatted here, and haue more then they might looke for, (which yet they haue but to their deſtruction) yet, that the righteous may not enuie them, but ſee that the Lord takes their part againſt them, and leſt the proud themſelues ſhould thinke there is no God that ſeeth them, they are croſſed in their purpoſes, and many times when they hope for that which they would moſt willingly enioy, the Lord fruſtrateth and mocketh them, as he did the King of Aram, 2. King. 6. 12. when all his ſecret plots and purpoſes againſt the King of Iſrael, were bewraied to him by the Prophet Eliſha, and hee ſheweth them thereby, that they haue him not alwaies at their commandement: as neither can they goe about any of their attempts, without his ſufferance. That it may be verified, that (when none elſe can) yet euen then God reſiſteth the proud. And as the Lord thus matcheth and diſappointeth them, when it ſeemeth good to him, in their common dealings, that they attaine not that which they aime at, and looke for; ſo eſpecially when they fight againſt God, and play the giants againſt heauen like Nebuchadnezzar: and when their inſolencie vttereth it ſelfe againſt the poore Church of God, (as many of them chuſe this as the fitteſt obiect to vomit their poyſon vpon) then the Lord in an anſwerable manner riſeth vp and ſcatters them; lookes downe from heauen, and laughs them to ſcorne, and ſcatters them: for why? they banded themſelues againſt his annointed.
            For example ſake, though the Scripture be full of ſuch, let theſe two at this time ſuffice. The one is of them that would build a citie that ſhould Gen. 11. 4.
               
reach vp to heauen, to get them a name, the Lord ſet himſelfe againſt them, caſt downe their building, and called the name thereof Babell, that is, confuſion. For what a pride was in them, and to what had it been like to haue growne, if God had let them alone, and ſuffered their worke to goe forward? The other example is of Haman, who being ſo inward with the king, Eſter 7 10. and aduanced by him, when he looked yet to riſe higher, he was, vnlooked for, caſt downe from all his dignitie, when his ſhame was made ſutable to Note. his glorie. And thus (as it fared here with Siſera) in ſtead of great ſucceſſes and increaſings of their purpoſes and dignities, they are not defeated thereof only, but are faine to loſe that which they enioyed before; the Lord making their ambition, the next meane of their ouerthrow. So God deales with many; of whom, ſome riſing out of the dunghill to great wealth and honour, not only are ioynted otherwiſe oftentimes, but when they want nothing but life and length of daies, to enioy their floriſhing eſtate ſtill; behold, euen that way he meeteth with them, and by death, ſomtime reprochfull enough, but to be ſure, with paine and woe enough, beſides that after their going hence, hee cuts them off from all their iolitie, as it were, at one blow. And who, fearing God, might haue liued by them, if they could haue prolonged their daies?
            This be ſaid of the 19. verſe, and in generall of their ill proſpering againſt Verſe 20. Iſrael, in their fighting: now more particularly, Debora ſheweth in this verſe, that euen from heauen, that is, from the higher region of the aire, the ſtarres and planets raiſed the raine and the winde in their faces, yea the haile and tempeſts to fight againſt Siſera, ſo that thereby God ſhewed himſelfe to be againſt him, all his preparation and furniture of charets, horſes and men ſeruing him to no purpoſe, but diſappointing him. This teacheth vs, that when God will both heauen and earth, and the powers of both, ſhall fight againſt Doct. verſ. 20. Leuit 26 19. Exod. 14. 28. Gods enemies, euen as all the plagues written in the booke of God, doe at his commandement, ſeaze vpon, and torment them. So the haile from aboue ſlew Gods enemies, and the Sunne ſtood ſtill to that end: ſo froſts Ioſh. 10. 11. 12. and floods, plague and tamine, with other ſuch, haue in our time fought againſt them from God. I haue handled this point more largely before, I will onely anſwere one obiection in this place. It is obiected, that the godly Obiect. ſuſtaine the forementioned iudgements and the like, as well as the wicked: therefore when ſhall wee be able to proue and ſay, the Lord in laies them vpon his enemies, as if he aimed at that alone? For Iob had his ſheepe and ſeruants burnt vp and deuoured by fire from heauen, as if Satan would Iob 1. 16. thereby haue perſwaded him, that God himſelf made warre with him from thence: his body was alſo ſmitten with ſore byles, from the ſole of his foote vnto the crowne of his head, and he tooke a potſheard to ſcrape him. I anſwere, that God ſendeth theſe and the like to his children, as trials, or corrections Anſw. to heale them of ſome dangerous diſeaſe, as pride, looſenes, worldlineſſe, &c. but to his enemies, as ſcourges for their wicked liues, to begin their helliſh torments here; and as this euer true, ſo if their ſinnes be manifeſt, wee may ſo iudge of the particular offenders that he meaneth no leſſe toward them, and that without any feare of iniurying them, vnleſſe they repent.
            The next particular aſſiſtant to Iſrael, that is ſaid to haue fought againſt Verſe 21.
               
               Siſera, was the riuer Kiſhon: which though it was not vſually deep, yet now the waters roſe higher, and ouerflowed the bankes, and was ſpred out further: and becauſe both the armies met there by, therefore it is deſcribed by her, the riuer of mettings, namely of both the armies, for the word is better tranſlated ſo, then as ſome doe tranſlate it the anctent riuer, and by an elegant repetition of the word, ſheweth that it drowned and carried away many of the enemies, euen as the duſt and other filthineſſe is ſwept out of an houſe with a broo
                  •
               e. Not that all were ſlaine that way, which could not be, when the men were many, and the place not large, but that many flying, were there deſtroyed. And this being a thing neither feared of the enemies, nor made reckoning of by Gods people, doth worthily teach vs, that when we walke vprightly with God, he cauſeth many things to lend their helpe to vs, which wee neuer thought of, nor looked for; and not onely perſons to be kinde to vs, but alſo other commodities, comforts, and incouragements to meete with vs: yea the very places where we dwell, and whither we come. And the very ſame things which haue been fatall and deadly enemies to others, to be helpfull, and as it were, made friendly vnto vs.
            
               Iacob thus being faithfull to the Lord, hee inriched him greatly, ouer hee euer looked for, or ſaw likelihood of, but rather of the contrary: and ſo dealt he with his father Iſaac before him, being among ſtrangers in the land. And ſo he prouideth for many of his deare ſeruants, who comming ſtrangers to Note. a place, where it was little likely to get, either grace, knowledge, or other commodities, he hath yet by giuing them honeſt and good hearts, bleſſed them otherwiſe, with loue and fauour of the beſt, with a ſweete life, inward peace, growing in goodneſſe, fruite of prayers and other holy labours, with contentment, and ſuch like; that it may for euer worthily perſwade all to get into Gods ſeruice, and to be vpright hearted toward him, ſeeing godlineſſe 1. Tim. 1. 12. bringeth ſo many and great commodities. But of this I ſpake ſomewhat before alſo. But on the contrary it may be ſaid, that when men ſeeke not the Lord with all their heart, neither be carefull that their waies may pleaſe him; they not only proſper not long, (which yet they were as like to attaine to as the moſt) but they loſe euen that which they had, and are toſſed about with many calamities, and with this, as the greateſt of all, that when God frowneth vpon them, they beleeue it not: the danger whereof may eaſily be gathered by the drunkard, in the Prouerbs; who was ſtricken, he ſaid, for his ſinne and the fruites of it, whoredome and ſuch like, but hee was not ſicke; Prou. 23. 35. he was beaten, but hee knew not, therefore he would follow his ſinne yet ſtill.
            The ſpeech vttered by Debora, [O my ſoule thou haſt marched valiantly or, 2 as it is in the Hebrew, O my ſoule thou haſt trod downe ſtrength, namely of the enemies, which we know was very great. If wee take it in the firſt ſenſe, ſhe triumpheth in a generall manner through the courage and furtherance that God gaue her: if in the latter it is the ſame, but more particularly ſhe ſpeaketh to her ſoule reioycingly, that ſhe had trode vnder foote might and ſtrength, ſeeing God had armed her with power againſt ſo great enemies, as if ſhe ſhould ſay, that therefore ſhe need to feare the power of none hereafter, God being ſtill with her. Both affoord this worthie inſtruction, that when wee haue ſeene that God hath giuen vs great deliuerance while wee

truſted in him, as ſhe heere did, wee ſhould for euerafter promiſe our ſelues 2. Chron. 16. 8. that hee will doe the like to vs ſtill, ſeeking to him in the like manner, that ſo Note. Rom. 5. 4. we may harten our ſelues to beleeue it. This agreeth with Saint Pauls doctrine, that experience bringeth hope: and with his practiſe, ſaying, God hath 2. Cor. 1. 10. deliuered vs, doth deliuer vs, in whom wee truſt that yet hereafter alſo, hee will deliuer vs. And doubleſſe this experience is the proper fruit which faith bringeth forth, without which what were our life? wee are not freed from all affliction, becauſe we haue eſcaped one: but we remaine ſtill ſubiect to the ſame, or the like: and what ſhall it boot vs to haue been ouercommers in the one, if we be foiled by another, (as we may eaſily be, euen by a leſſer, without this armour) through vnbeleefe, when before through faith wee ouercame a greater. Surely, no more then it ſhould haue booted Dauid to haue killed the Beare, if he had been ſlaine by the Lion, or the Philiſtim. And therefore learne hence, that though we ought to beleeue in him for his promiſe ſake; yet we much better doe it (or ought to doe) when we haue a pawne lying by vs, I meane experience of the truth of it: but hard is the caſe of them who haue neither of both.
            The third thing that made the Canaanites fight vnproſperouſly againſt Verſ. 22. Iſrael, was the breaking of their horſe hoofes with the oft beating together of the mighty. The horſe hoofes are naturally moſt ſound and ſtrong, ſo that they be not eaſily cleft aſunder, nor broken: but they ranne heere with ſuch violence in that skirmiſh to ſaue themſelues, and ſo ſmote one againſt another, that they broke their hoofes. In which caſe wee know, that they could neither ſit their horſes to purſue their enemies; neither ſhift for themſelues by flying. This moſt liuely teacheth vs, that no man ſhould truſt in his owne ſtrength, nor in the ſtrength of an horſe, in charrets, or in riches, no not in Princes power, nor in any earthly thing whatſoeuer. It is as eaſie for the Lord now to leaue men, and diſappoint them in their vaine confidence of young yeeres, great wealth, hope of long life, or ſuch like, as it was to plucke off Pharaohs chariot wheeles, and heere to breake the horſes hoofes of the Canaanites, and ſo to bring vpon them deſtruction thereby. Thus we haue heard in this ſecond branch of this ſecond part of this chapter, how hard and ill ſucceſſe the Canaanites had in this battell.
            
               Verſ. 23. Curſe ye Meroz (ſaid the Angell of the Lord) curſe the inhabitants thereof; becauſe they came not to the helpe of the Lord, to the helpe of the Lord againſt the mighty.
               
               24. Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite ſhall be bleſſed aboue other women, bleſſed ſhall ſhe be aboue women dwelling in tents.
               
               25. He asked water, and ſhe gaue him milke, ſhe brought forth butter in a lordly diſh.
               
               26. She put her hand to the naile, and her right hand to the workemans hammer: with the hammer ſmote ſhe Siſera, ſhe ſmote off his head, after ſhe had wounded and pierced his temples.
               
               27. He bowed him downe at her feete, hee fell downe, and lay ſtill at her feet, hee bowed him downe, and fell: and when he had ſunke downe, he lay there dead.
               
            
            
               
IN theſe verſes and this part of the ſong followeth the third and laſt 
                  The ſenſe of theſe 5. verſes.
                branch of the ſecond part of the chapter; wherein Debora firſt ſetteth downe the wrath of God againſt ſuch as refuſed to helpe in the worke of the Lord, as were the Merozites; and that ſhee doth in this 23. verſe. And then ſhe declareth the fauour of God toward them that helped therein, (beſides thoſe who were in the battell) as Iael, and this ſhe doth in the other 4. verſes. More particularly in this 23. verſe ſhe calleth all in her ſong to curſe this city with her; for that it being neare the place where the battell was, yet the inhabitants thereof refuſed to helpe their brethren, being called thereto, and requeſted. The other tribes before mentioned had ſome kind of excuſing themſelues, neither were deſired, though they knew of it; but theſe beheld and yet would not ſet hand to helpe; therefore they are thus dealt with. But ſeeing it might be thought to come of ſtomacke and reuenge, that ſhee pronounced ſuch ſharpe threats againſt them; therefore ſhe ſaith, the Angell of God bad her ſing ſo.
            And thereafter we are to learne what we may doe about cursing: that it Verſ 23. is in no ſort lawfull for vs to curſe any man, for to ſatisfie our owne reuenging mindes. For when we deale in our owne matters, we muſt loue our enemies; and as our Sauiour teacheth, bleſſe them that curſe vs: but if God it Mat 5. 44. any time ſhew that hee will haue any to bee deſtroyed, they who know his will, they are to approue the ſame. This is the harder to learne, becauſe that corruption which lurketh in vs, and is chained vp from notorious breaking out willingly, ſeeking the opportunity and pretence of zeale to ſhrowde it ſelfe vnder; euen as a ſecret traitor ſeeing the dore open which leadeth to the Princes chamber, dare not goe in alone, but waiteth till ſome of the nobles or guard paſſeth in, and in that company he cunningly conueyeth himſelfe to worke miſchiefe. Pray we for grace therefore to watch the dore of our lips, through which many good words of bleſſing paſſe: and let vs beware that no curſed ſpeech paſſe by alſo, vnder what colour ſoeuer. And thus did Dauid, directed by God, and other of the faithful, who curſed Gods Iam. 2. 10. 11. enemies, as in the Pſalme: who yet as they were, did otherwiſe in kind affection, and the ſame not euill, bewaile them. As Samuel, and Ieremy, and our Pſal. 109. 6. &c. Sauiour, did bewaile and weepe for the deſtruction of wicked men; wherin we haue no doubt but they pleaſed God. Now to ſuch as demand what they ſhall doe to them who vexe the godly, and rage againſt the Goſpell? the anſwere is, that we are to pray God to change their minds, or to weaken their power, that they may not be able to doe the euill they would: and if this be not granted, then wee muſt craue ſtrength to beare that which wee muſt goe vnder.
            And heere wee muſt further learne, on the contrary, by the example of theſe of Meroz, to obey God, calling vs to any duty, as they did, who followed Debora and Barak; and to helpe thoſe that are in want and need; eſpecially if they follow their calling, contrary to that which theſe men of Meroz, and the people of Peniel and Succoth, in the ſeuenth chapter did, who denied to refreſh Gedeon & his men, as they purſued his enemies and theirs. But if theſe were pitifully handled, and the men of Meroz curſed for not helping their brethren; what thinke we ſhall be done to them, who not onely helpe not the ſeruants of Chriſt, but vexe, grieue and oppreſſe them? And

if no other thing can diſſwade them from ſuch a courſe, yet let this; that they themſelues are euer like daily to bee taken hence by death: then ſhall Note. they come to their accounts, as they ſee on euery ſide many to be, who were as vnlike as they; and while they remaine here, they ſhall haue God againſt them, who hath profeſſed that hee will bee an enemy to thoſe that are enemies to his. And this of Meroz briefly, for in ſo long a worke I am vnwilling to repeate the ſame thing often.
            Now ſhe calleth all Gods people to bleſſe and wiſh well to Iael, as one Verſe 24. bleſſed among other women of her linage and kindred, who dwelt in tents, as the Kenites did; and repeateth the words for more force. Thus the Lord would haue her commended vnto all poſteritie, to the rouzing vp of other, who are ſlack and backward in all good things, that when they ſhall ſee that God doth ſo highly account of the readineſſe of ſome in his buſineſſe, other may be quickned to the ſame care in well doing. For were this deeply imprinted in mens hearts, and throughly perſwaded to thē, and often thought of, that God knoweth their workes, and is a plentifull rewarder of all that Heb. 11. 6. ſeeke to pleaſe him, they would be much more forward, euery one in the things which are commanded him. But of this I haue ſpoke alſo by occaſion offered, before.
            Here Debora commendeth the wiſedome of Iael, but ſuch as proceeded Verſe 25. from faith in her, that ſhe called Siſera into her tent, and couered him, and gaue him drinke fit to caſt him into a ſleepe. And in that it is ſaid, ſhe gaue him butter alſo in a lordly diſh; it is likely that ſhe offered food to him, that he might drinke the more liberally. By all theſe ſhe made way the more eaſily for that ſhe afterward brought to paſſe. By this example we are taught to be wiſe and circumſpect in the things we goe about. For though it be requiſite that they bee lawfull, yet if wee bee not circumſpect, and doe not forecaſt inconueniences, and to doe them in ſeaſon, and fit time, good manner, and to the right end, there may much griefe, diſcommodity, and inconuenience follow, which will much diſquiet vs: and through raſhnes and improuidence, wee may bring that to an ill end, which yet was lawfully taken in hand of vs. As if men will embrace religion, yet they walke looſly and lightly. Rebecca when ſhe ſaw that Iacob her deare ſonne was deadly hated of his Gen. 27. 43. brother Eſau, and that hee ſought opportunitie to kill him, did not onely keepe him out of the way (for ſo he might one time or other haue had his will of him as Cain had of his brother Abel) but auoided many dangers at once, by ſending him into a far countrey to her fathers houſe (from whence ſhe came) to dwell there (though it was hard for her to forbeare the ſight of him any long time) euen with her brother Laban in Padam Aram. And why? ſhe knew that in that ſpace the wrath of his brother would be abated, as ſhe alſo ſaid. A wiſe part therefore it was in her, in that weightie matter. And the wiſedome of Abigall in preſeruing her houſe, which the fooliſhnes 1. Sam. 25. 28. of Nabal had otherwiſe deſtroyed, was as commendable. And ſuch wiſedome to preſerue our liues, goods, credit, grace, and inward peace therewith to preuent dangers, and auoide many needleſſe troubles, is a great furtherance to liue well, and to make our liues more fruitful to other, and comfortable to our ſelues. Onely take wee heed that we aſcribe naught to our Note. wit, and that we perke not aboue that which is meete: but in all humilitie

ſerue we Gods prouidence, and ſo we ſhall finde it no ſmall benefit to be free from careleſneſſe, raſhnes, and fooliſhnes, which throughout our life cauſe much euill and griefe, which are vnwelcome. About this ſee more in chapter 3. 15.
            
               Debora here addeth to the wiſedome of Iael, her courage and fortitude. Verſe 26. The ſenſe.
                For was it not a point of courage for a woman to ſet vpon ſo valiant a Captaine, as Siſera was? and to take the naile in one hand, and the hammer in the other, (it ſeemeth other weapons were not at hand) and to aduenture to ſtrike them into the temples of his head, as he lay? For what though he was aſleepe? might hee not at the firſt blow haue ſtarted and riſen vp with the paine, and ſo haue ouerthrowne her in his rage, and that a great deale more likely then to haue receiued his deadly wound at her hand? The very forme therefore, and being of this fortitude, was no manniſhnes, or ſtoutnes of courage by nature, (for of that we can ſay nothing) but only faith.
            And in this laſt verſe of this third point, in this ſecond part of the chapter; 
                  The ſenſe of verſe 27. when hee was almoſt ſlaine, Debora ſetteth downe certaine motions, which appeare in ſuch as haue their deadly blow by violent death. For he being ſo wounded, his body through extremitie of paine, bowed twice or thrice. For he went about to riſe: but hauing no ſtrength, he fell downe againe, and lay miſerably at the feete of Iael. And thus God brought proud Siſera to ſhame, and to a fearfull end, though ſo valiant a Captaine, and that by the hand of a woman.
            Now what ſhall wee ſay to this? Surely it teacheth, that when God will doe ſome great thing by any, he will alſo fit and inable them thereunto. Euen Saul himſelfe had an heart giuen him furniſhed with gifts for gouernment, when God had once called him. Moſes when hee ſhould be ſent to 1. Sam. 10. 9. Exod. 3. 11. & 10. 26. 
               Pharao, to carrie the people of Iſrael out of Egypt, how did hee complaine and diſable himſelfe? but when God had furniſhed him, hee waxed bold. The Virgin Mary, when word was brought her, that ſhe ſhould be the mother Luke 1 35. of our Sauiour, anſwered with aſtoniſhment; How can this thing be, ſeeing I know not a man? But when it was told her by the Angell, the holy Ghoſt ſhall come vpon thee, and the power of the moſt high ſhall ouer ſhadow thee: therefore alſo that holy thing that ſhall be borne of thee, ſhall be called the ſonne of God; Then Mary ſaid, Behold the ſeruant of the Lord, be it vnto me according to thy word.
            
            The examples are infinite, that may be brought to this purpoſe. But I will containe my ſelfe, adding onely this one, how ſhould the Apoſtles, being poore fiſhermen, doe ſo great a worke, as to ſubdue the greateſt part of the world to their doctrine? which was as if a man would haue vndertaken to tame the wilde beaſts in the wilderneſſe: But by Chriſts ſending them the moſt powerfull gifts of the holy Ghoſt; as the confirming of their faith, the increaſe of knowledge, courage in paines taking and to withſtand their enemies, the gift of tongues, and of working miracles, wee ſee it came ſo to paſſe. And though ſuch things be not wrought in theſe daies, as neither is it neceſſarie that ſuch ſhould now be wrought; yet many of the ordinarie workes which God will haue to be done by his, in this latter age, are great and not to be paſſed ouer ſlightly.
            For how vnlike a thing is it, for a priuate man or woman, who haue no other outward gifts of God, to ſpeake of, but onely this, that they can reade

the Scriptures in their owne language; how vnlike is it, I ſay, that ſuch liuing among people of moſt prophane and bad behauiour, ſhould not bee Note. tainted with them, and defiled by them; as he that toucheth pitch? Nay, that they being baited, diſgraced, and ſcorned of them, (as they are in many places) ſhould not faint and be diſcouraged by them, and driuen from their hope, and profeſſion of it, but that they ſhould walke on in the vprightnes of their hearts, and innocencie of their hands, ſo farre and ſo long, till their light ſo ſhining, doth lighten ſome of theſe which hated them, who ſat long in darknes, and cauſe them to embrace that conuerſation, to the which they had been ſuch deadly enemies before; this (I ſay) is a thing to be wondred at, euen as to ſee the lambe and the lion to feede together. And yet (God bee Eſay 11. 6. bleſſed) ſo it is at this day, in ſome places, and ſo it hath bin in former times, that when mens waies haue pleaſed the Lord, he hath cauſed not only their Prou. 16. 7. very enemies to be at one with them, but alſo their very hearts to be intirely knit to them. Yea many ſillie perſons, ſo furniſhed with grace by God, haue forced great ones to wiſh from their hearts, for all their wealth and power, that they were like to them.
            And yet this is more, that a Miniſter of the Goſpell, who is to challenge them openly that keepe not the commandements of Ieſus, and in his name Reuel. 12. 17. to rebuke and threaten the workers of iniquitie (though all this is, of the louing Iohn 16. 8. 1. Tim. 4. 16. and kinde Preacher, done to ſaue their ſoules, by turning them from their euill waies;) that ſuch a Miniſter, I ſay, who is not only hated for his good will, and counted their enemie for telling them the truth; but alſo accuſed Gal. 4. 16. by them, purſued alſo, and not ſuffered to be quiet among them; yet ſhould conſtantly hold out his labours, with a life vnoffenſiue, what a work of God (thinke we) is that in him? who were like to continue ſo gracious a courſe in the middeſt of ſo many diſcouragements (whereof I haue mentioned but a few;) if the Lord ſhould not giue them faith to beleeue, that of their loue to him, they ſhould feed his lambes and his ſheep, and that in ſo doing, Ioh. 21 15. they aſſure themſelues they ſhall be plentifully rewarded? and to this end that he will giue them ſhoulders, I meane courage to beare their ſo great a Heb. 11. 6. burthen? Theſe are no ſmall things, which yet God worketh among vs, that we may ſee he regardeth vs, as he did ſome in former times.
            The other and laſt thing to be noted in this ſecond part, is of Siſera; that the Lord pulled him downe, and caſt him from his ſo great honour and valiantnes. Verſ. 27. For as it was a great abaſement for ſuch a Nimrod to be driuen to ſo great a ſtreight, as to lurke in another mans houſe, not daring to peere foorth (as the ſillie bird beaten into the buſh by the hawke) ſo it was yet farre baſer to fall by the hand and at the feete of a woman. Let vs learne, that the Lord bringeth to naught the high and haughtie, and that to their vtter Doct. verſ. 3. 27. ſhame, who were ſo great and proud. It is no ſtrange thing in the Scriptures to finde it thus, though fooles wonder at it, who will learne no inſtruction by it. The Lord caſteth the mightie from their ſeate. Witneſſe Abimilech, who in his deſperate mood, being ſtriken on the head with a milſtone by a Iudg. 9. 54. woman, called his page, and bid him to runne him through, leſt it ſhould be ſaid, A woman ſlew him. And yet that which was ſaid of him, was reprochfull enough, to wit, that a baſe page ſlew him: and agreeth well with the point in hand. Thus Abſolon, who had ſtomacke to riſe againſt his father, ſo kinde

to him, was brought to a baſe and reprochful death, very fit for ſuch an one, 2 Sam. 18. 15. being thruſt through by Ioabs common ſouldiers. And Iezabel, ſcorning God and his Prophets, was, according to the foretelling of the Lord, made dogges meate, and dung vpon the earth, being throwne out of the window 2. King. 9. 37. from her royall palace. The proud and ſtout Iewes, who railed on Peter, calling him deſpitefully, a drunken man, were ſo terrified with their ſin, that Acts 2. 37. they were glad to ſeeke to be comforted euen by him, whom they had ſcorned. And well is it with them, whoſe pride the Lord reſiſteth in mercie for their good, as hee did Pauls, by appalling him firſt, and then ſending him to poore Ananias, who being his comforter now, had been a prey for him, if God had not preuented it. For the reſt whom I haue mentioned (they excepted alſo in the ſecond of the Acts) the other, I ſay, were reſiſted to their coſt and vtter vndoing And ſo by the fooliſhnes of preaching (as it pleaſeth 1. Cor. 1. 21. the world to call it) and an humble ſubmitting of themſelues to his holy doctrine, they that are ſaued muſt attaine; but as that generation of vipers, the Phariſies, were glad to come to Iohns miniſterie, if ſo be they tooke any good by it. Be we therefore humble and meeke, they who are graced, are 1. Pet. 5. 7. they that finde fauour with him; but as for the proud, he reſiſteth them, and ſetteth himſelfe againſt them, till they be confounded (if they ſo abide) and be brought to naught. And therefore let the ſcorners and enemies taunt and mocke the ſimple profeſſors of the truth, like Edomites, they ſhall one day wiſh they had been like them, and iudge them more happie then themſelues, as Diues, for all his ſuperfluitie, did wiſh that he might haue had, not the eſtate of Lazarus, (which he ſaw no hope to attaine) but the thouſand part of it, euen that he might dip his finger in cold water, and quench his thirſt; which yet might not be granted him. And therefore, let vs but ſtay a while, and containe our ſelues, and wee ſhall ſee theſe boaſters and contemners, (if they will needs hold on their courſe) wee ſhall ſee them (I ſay) ſwept away, and they ſhall be no more: ſo little cauſe ſhall we ſee of hauing our teeth water after their dainties. They are wiſe, who can in the iolitie and proſperitie of the enemies of the Church, ſee their ouerthrow by faith, and count their floriſhing and bragges to be but vaine crakes. And thus Pſal. 73. 18, 19. much be ſaid of the ſecond part of the Chapter.
         
         
            
            THE THIRTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 28. The mother of Siſera looked out at a window, and cried through the latteſſe; Why is his charet ſo long a comming? why tarrie the wheeles of his charets, &c.
                     
                     Verſ. 29. Her wiſe Ladies anſwered her, yea, ſhe anſwered her ſelfe with her owne words.
                     
                     Verſ. 30. Haue they not gotten, and they diuide the ſpoile? euery man hath a maide or two, Siſera hath a prey of diuers coloured garments; a prey of ſundrie colours made of needle worke on both ſides, for the chiefe of the ſpoile.
                     
                     Verſ. 31. So let all thine enemies periſh, O Lord, but they that loue him, ſhall be as the Sunne when he ariſeth in his might. And the land had reſt fortie yeeres.
                     
                  
                  
                     IN theſe words is contained the third and laſt part of the The ſenſe of all theſe verſes. ſong of Debora, and ſo of the Chapter, and hath two members: in the firſt, ſhe bringeth in the boaſtings of the women that were enemies to Gods people, and Siſeras deare friends, and derides them, in the firſt three verſes. In the laſt member, ſhe oppoſeth a propheticall prayer againſt their boaſtings, wiſhing therein to the remainder of Gods enemies, deſtruction; and to the Iſraelites, all increaſe of good things: and that increaſe ſhe laieth out by a compariſon of the Sunne from the riſing to the noone tide; euen ſuch ſhe wiſheth it to be. More particularly, to come to the firſt point, ſhe ſaith, that Siſeras mother was looking 
                        Of the 28. particularly.
                      out, and longing for her ſonnes retune, with his great ſpoile and bootie, fearing yet the hardeſt, becauſe he tarried ſo long, till ſhe was anſwered by her Ladies, and ſo anſwered herſelfe; that he was buſie in diuiding the ſpoile.
                  This place laieth out the exceeding care that parents haue of the welfare Doct. verſe 28. of their children, and the thought they take for them in any likelihood of danger, they being betwixt hope and feare about them: and if they be long out of ſight, they are much penſiue for them, and troubled within themſelues, eſpecially if they be in any perill. The which (ſetting apart the odious 1. Sam. 
                           •
                        . 5. 2. Sam. 18 33. fact of Siſera) was commendable in his mother, and according to the rule of nature, to hope and long for his proſperous returne, and to feare the contrarie. So Saul, that was after King of Iſrael, knew his fathers affection to be ſo tender ouer him, that when he was ſent to ſeeke his aſſes, and tarried long, 1. Sam. 9. 5. not finding; he haſted home, leſt his father ſhould turne the care of recouering the aſſes into care for his ſonne. And Iob, though in a farre better reſpect,

feared, euen when his ſonnes feaſted together for increaſe of loue, leſt they ſhould offend God. So Dauid in his charge to Ioab, abounding in this tender loue toward his ſonne Abſolon; when hee made warre againſt him, did ſtreightly command him to intreate him gently: And S. Paul teacheth, that we ſhould haue care of our owne; which well becommeth all, and the 1. Tim. 5. 8. contrarie is vnnaturall: whether wee reſpect their neglect of their bodily maintenance, and ſo leauing them to ſinke or ſwimme, when yet they may relieue them, or their ſoules welfare and ſaluation, by neglecting or denying them holy inſtruction & education in the waies of the Lord; by meanes whereof, they are left as a prey to the lewd and bad, by their wicked companie and example; which is farre worſe then bodily penurie and miſerie, though who knoweth not, that it is wofull to be brought vp idle, and without a lawfull trade of life, deſtitute of neceſſaries. Of both vnderſtand that of Salomon; Teach a childe, &c elſe he may teach thee on the gallowes. But Prou. 22. 6. as there is a ſinne in the defect, that is, vnnaturalnes in parents to their children, not to be allowed, no not ſo much as that of Siſeras mother, which I 2. Tim. 3. 3. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . laſt of all mentioned; ſo there is in the exceſſe, another ſinne that is farre more common then that; as when parents are too fond ouer their children, and cannot abſtaine from ſhe wing affection toward them, and that without diſcretion, to wit, to the vnruly, diſobedient, and ſubtill and wilfull; as well as to the ſimple, timerous, tractable, and religious; whereby they giue them occaſion, nay they incourage them to abuſe them boldly, ſaucily, and with ſmall reſpect, and to winde them which way they liſt. Thus Dauid by Adoniah, and Ely by his ſonnes found it, and ſmarted for it accordingly. Whereas men ſhould hold their children in a godly awe, and keepe them within compaſſe, by authoritie, which God hath giuen them ouer them; and yet not in rigour, neither voide of parentlike kindneſſe. For want of which regard had by parents toward their children, on both ſides great inconuenience Note. falleth out; that ſome are handled and oppreſſed with vnſeaſonable ſeueritie, who deſerue it not; and other are cockered with too much indulgence and lenitie, till they be made much the worſe for it. And not much vnlike to this laſt mentioned affection in parents, is this, or rather a branch of it; that ſome of them, through a deceiuable humour, deale out their loue to their children vnequally, when yet by the cariage of themſelues it is equally deſerued, affecting the one for ſome outward reſpect, or priuate conceit; as Iſaac did Eſau, and Dauid Abſolon, who thought there was not ſuch another to be found.
                  There is yet another error in parents toward their children, who are too farre carried in affection to them, and that is, that becauſe it is permitted vnto them, nay commanded, to prouided for them; therefore they runne into moſt troubleſome and penſiue care to prouide for them, and thereby fall into moſt noiſome temptations & ſnares of the diuell to benefit them, whereas they ought to haue well learned this leſſon before, that for all their affection toward them, they ſhould not offend God for their ſakes, nor neglect or loſe any grace, neither leaue any worke of charitie and mercie vndone, nor ieopard their owne ſaluation by wounding their conſcience any manner of way for them: They ſhould conſider, that it is ill pitie towards their children, which makes them impious againſt God, and iniurious againſt

man, and moſt of all againſt themſelues: nay rather, what torment ſhall it Note. not be to their conſciences, vnleſſe it be worſe, to remember that they haue increaſed their childrens portions with the complaints of the poore, or through their worldlineſſe, and they muſt now goe and ſuſtaine endleſſe woe for it.
                  But while I thus ſpeake, it ought of children to be marked, that this affection of the parents, if it were but according to nature rectified, and ſanctified in them toward their children, (though it did not weaken their eſtate for their preferment, (as I haue noted out of the fact of Calebs endowing his daughter) ought to be a ſufficient motiue and perſwaſion to them their children, euer to ſhew all reuerence, obedience, and thankfulnes to them; though many parents, and mothers eſpecially, who can moſt hardly bee brought to keepe within their bounds toward their children, may after they come to yeeres of diſcretion, iuſtly complaine, that the more they haue ſhewed their loue to them, the leſſe they are ſet by, and regarded of them. Oh what I haue obſerued and ſeene in this which I now ſpeake of, and that not in one or two? but another occaſion may be giuen to ſay more of it in another place. And this of Siſeras mothers affection to him.
                  Of Siſras mothers ſpeech we haue heard, much longing for his returne: Now it followeth in this verſe, how the other Ladies, among whom his Verſe 29. 30. The meaning.
                      wife was thought to be, anſwered her, and that in ſuch wiſe, as appeareth in the text, that ſhe being ſorrowful, was ready to take comfort by their words; euen as all that be in heauineſſe (which is vnwelcome of it ſelfe) would willingly, and are eaſily brought to deſire comfort, yea though it be not miniſtred to them from any good ground, nor aright. And the ſumme of their comfort was this; that there was no doubt nor queſtion to be made, but that Siſera had got the victorie ouer his enemies: and that his tariance was, as in ſuch caſes it falleth out, for the diſtributing of the bootie and ſpoile which was taken therein, to euery one according to his labour, condition, and worthineſſe: which (ſaid they) being much and of great value, after ſo noble a conqueſt, it could not in a ſhort time be diſpatched. This was the conceit and falſe perſwaſion of the Ladies, wherein they reſted, and did comfort themſelues for all that his long tariance. And it ſetteth a worthie inſtructiō before vs: namely, how readie people are to be carried away with vaine Doct. verſ. 29. conceits and vngrounded hopes of comfort, and how eaſily they deceiue themſelues therewith: whereas they ſhould looke that they haue good warrant for that wherein they take comfort. For elſe what other thing is it, then as the common prouerbe ſpeaketh, namely a building of caſtles in the ayre? Euen as hee that dreameth ſleeping, or imagineth waking, that the thing which hee deſireth, ſhall euen ſo come to paſſe as hee would haue it. What is more fooliſh then to pleaſe ones ſelfe in thinking, that he may finde ſuch a maſſe of gold, and be aduanced to ſuch and ſuch honour, and thereupon to take pleaſure in promiſing himſelfe what a pleaſant life hee will leade.
                  And is this fooliſhnes thus to deceiue a mans ſelfe? Then how much greater wiſedome is it, or what better ground hath it, which the wiſe men of the world (as they are called) doe make their common practiſe? who yet doe ſcorne the fanſies and dreames of the other, who haue naught? And

that is this: They reckon how long they ſhall liue in the eſtate they are in, and hope to come to better. They make account what great bargaines they Note. ſhall haue, and what great gainings and commings in: how plentifull increaſe their corne, cattell, and other commodities ſhall bring foorth. Others in another kinde, euen about that which beſt liketh their humour, doe ſeriouſly beate their braines, how they may be reuenged vpon them whom they deadly hate, and what meanes and waies they will vſe to bring them low, and haue their will of them. Another ſort reſolue how merrie they will be with their mates and companions, in drinking, whoring, and in their ſundrie kindes of play and paſtime: whereas many times they are cut off from their hope before, and when it is come, it laſteth not. All theſe and ſuch like, as Agag (who merrily promiſed himſelfe, that al feare of death was paſt, when it was at hand) what warrant haue they of theſe their conceits and fond deluſions, and dangerous dreames? When S. Iames mocketh one ſort of them, ſaying; Goe to ye that ſay, to morrow we will goe to ſuch a place, &c. And Iames 4. 13. againe, Salomon challengeth all ſorts of them, asking them why they boaſt of Prou. 27. 1. to morow, when they cannot tell what may fall out ere to morow, in ſuch a changeable world as this is, and what alterations may come before? as they that obſerue may ſee daily, to the iuſt condemning of all ſuch for meere fooles, that reſt vpon ſuch bruſed reedes, and broken holds, and yet goe for the only wiſe men.
                  How many haue made their account all theſe waies that I haue mentioned, to haue their will fulfilled? and to vexe Gods people at the heart, threatning to roote them out, as Haman did the Iewes; who yet haue themſelues Note. been, before their reckoning was accompliſhed and brought to paſſe, ouerthrowne and laid in the duſt? For do ſuch as are but wormes, looke to haue the Lord at commandement? and to appoint him how hee ſhall rule the world, diſpoſe of things, and ſerue their turnes? And yet as abſurd a thing as this is, what one among many is aſhamed of his boldnes and folly, or as if he were wearie of it, and repented, doth take a better courſe, and ſeeketh to haue warrant and good aſſurance of that which he comforteth himſelfe in? or how many other take example by them to be any whit the wiſer?
                  But for better ſight into the folly of theſe men: and to make it appeare to be more groſſe, let vs put the caſe, that theſe future ioyes of theirs were not vncertaine, as they are of all ſeene and found to be, but that they were ſure to enioy all their pleaſures, profits, and iolities that they make account of, and that alſo as long as ſenſe and ſtrength would ſuffer; what had they gotten? Muſt they not ſoone be forced with old Barzillai for very age to giue 2. Sam. 19. 35. ouer, and to ſay, Can we diſcerne betwixt good and euill? haue we any taſte in that we eate, or in that wee drinke? can wee heare any more the voyce of ſinging men and women? But although theſe are dangerous errors (as who can ſay leſſe of them?) yet they are but (as we ſay) particuler aberrations in their actions, whiles many of them haue been taught, and doe profeſſe to be better gouerned: whereas there is another kind of conceitednes, to wit, of erroneous iudgement, no leſſe common, but farre more dangerous, becauſe it directly concerneth the hope of eternal life, which they are content to fixe on mens opinions, renouncing the pure word of God for their light and direction; whoſe liues cannot poſſibly pleaſe God, when they haue no

faith to beleeue in his promiſes. Such is the vnſauourie and damnable doctrine of Rome, whoſe light is darkneſſe, and their beſt comforts are deadly and ſtrong errors, and blaſphemous deluſions.
                  Others there are, who through meere ignorance, ſuffer themſelues to be led into a fooles paradiſe, conceiuing ſtrangely of their good caſe they are in, becauſe of their falſe perſwaſion, that God is mercifull; and that they are none of the worſt ſort: God (they trow) neuer made them to damne them: they meane well (they ſay) and heare, pray, receiue the Sacrament, loue honeſtie, with a thouſand ſuch worne reaſons. And yet error is ſo ſtrong, (eſpecially in this kinde) that euery man cleaueth to his conceit, and as the prouerbe is, wee eaſily beleeue that, which wee would haue ſo: whereas, God knoweth, the end of this hope is ſhame. The mother of Siſera was neuer more notably diſappointed of her hope and expectation, then theſe fooles ſhall be, when they looke for the effect thereof, as the ſpiders web, which is ſwept downe in a moment.
                  But to returne to that from which I a little digreſſed, I meane, of mens putting their confidence in things changeable and tranſitorie, in as much as all this which I haue ſpoken of, vaniſh in a ſhort time, ſo what wiſedome is it to hunt after ſuch things, as children doe after a butterflye? and to make them their felicitie, as if God had appointed no better things to be attained and come by? Nay further, ſeeing they muſt giue an account of Note. theſe their doings, which they ſhall neuer be able to doe, to their comfort, of one among a thouſand; what wiſedome is this to be counted, when they muſt for their pleaſures of ſinne, which they enioyed ſo little a while, when they muſt (I ſay) heare the ſentence pronounced vpon them, Depart ye that were louers of pleaſures more then of God, to endleſſe woe, where weeping Luke 13. 47. 2. Tim. 3. 4. and gnaſhing of teeth ſhall be, who would needes preferre a ſhort and ſmall folly, before happineſſe eternall.
                  Therefore let vs learne firſt, to ground our opinion out of the word, and be ſure wee can well iuſtifie our hopes and conceits: and reioyce in theſe things that will ſtand by vs, and whereof we haue good warrant from Gods owne mouth: which cannot deceiue vs, nor fruſtrate our hope. And if yee aske, what this reioycing is that I meane; I anſwere, this: to know that our Luke 
                           •
                        0. 20. names are written in heauen: and to endeuour to haue alwaies a good conſcience both before God and men: to haue ioy in the holy Ghoſt, and to be Act 23. 1. perſwaded that a crowne of glorie is laid vp for vs, when wee ſhall once lay 2. Cor. 1. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 1. downe this tabernacle of our body, and ſhall haue finiſhed this our courſe in this manner. In a word, our ioy ought to be in the Lord, and in his alſufficiencie. And let this be to vs in ſtead of the boaſtings that other make here, of their vaine, vncertaine, and deceiuable hope, and ioy, as this was of theſe heathen and prophane Ladies, who might haue waited and hoped for Siſeras ioyfull returne, till their eyes had fallen out of their heads, before they could haue enioyed that which they looked for, but as farre from it then, as at the firſt.
                  More particularly in this 30. verſe, Debora being a Propheteſſe, laieth out Verſe 30. Doct.
                      in her ſong how the Ladies did deſcant of the diuiding of the ſpoile, in theſe two points, that beſides their goods, euery ſouldier got a maide or two, but Siſera had precious things, namely, garments of diuers colours wrought by

the needle, which were very coſtly. By the firſt, that they muſt needs ſo immodeſtly and vnchaſtly breake foorth, (as Debora ſaith they did) ſpeaking of the common ſouldiers, that euery one got a maide or two at his pleaſure, which if it were ſo, was vnmeete talke for women to haue in their mouthes, it ſheweth, where there is no true knowledge of God and his word, there whoredome is but a paſtime and may-game, a matter to laugh at euen among women as well as men; yea euen in the aged themſelues (who ſhould goe before others in ſobrietie) we ſhall behold yet, a delight to ſpeake of, ſee, and heare vncleane actions and reports, euen as other weightie matters are alſo lightly ſet by of them. Which is the leſſe marueile that it was ſo with them, when euen where the Goſpell is preached, it may be ſeene to be ſo. In ſo much, that they may praiſe God highly, who haue receiued light and conſcience to make difference betwixt good and euill, and to abhorre and haue in deteſtation this vngracious and rotten kinde of ſpeech not beſeeming Chriſtians, and all ſuch curſed workes of darkneſſe; which to doe, is farre off from them who liue in darkneſſe, and walke in vnbeliefe.
                  But theſe Ladies aſcribe to Siſera the coſtlieſt and beſt things, as we haue heard. Where beſides that wee ſee, that they and all ſuch deceiued themſelues in their erroneous conceits, as hath been ſhewed before; ſo wee may ſee what are the things which be in beſt account with the ignorant and vnbeleeuers, Note. and they are iolitie, earthly glorie, and things coſtly and precious in the eſtimation of men. As for thankes to God, of whom they receiue all, and for making heauen their treaſure and portion, it is no ſuch matter as they are acquainted with, or doe (almoſt) dreame of. Which is ſtill to teach Gods ſeruants how great their portion is, who haue not the things of greateſt price in this world, their reſt and treaſure, but things durable and eternall: but more of this before.
                  Now by this acclamation with ioy, Debora concludes her ſong, praying, Verſe 31. that as Siſera triumphed, ſo might al Gods enemies: meaning, that as he was deſtroyed, ſo all like enemies of God might be: and on the contrarie, that all who loue the Lord may not only be preſerued, but multiplied and beautified with all good things, euen as the Sunne groweth in his beautie to the noonetide. Where firſt, in that Siſera was ſhamefully ſlaine, and returned no more home with victorie, as his mother alſo did feare as much, let vs learne, that the euill which the wicked feare, ſhall light vpon them. Their feares are many, as both the Scripture teſtifieth, that feare ſhall be vpon them on euery ſide, euen as their ſorrowes alſo are many. And whereas I Pſal 32. 10. noted before, that they doe pleaſe themſelues greatly in their hope of the Obiect. beſt things, ſome may thinke I contradict my ſelfe, in ſaying they are afraid, and fearfull: I anſwere, they may haue both; feare, I meane, and hope, at diuers Anſw. times, and yet neither of them good, but hope deceiuable, and feare troubleſome. Beſide, wicked perſons are not all of the ſame kinde, and feare is ſeene moſt in them who are leaſt euill: but boldnes is in the worſer ſort: all wicked men incline to feare properly and naturally; for it is a companion to ſinne, ignorance, and vnbeliefe, but they hope and preſume wilfully, 1. Ioh. 4. 18. and labour to expell feare, which though in great part they doe indeede, yet becauſe no violent thing is continuall, therefore oft times they miſtruſt, and feare, and ſuſpition of trouble comes in place againe. And we may ſee,

that liſt to marke it, that it is ſo, as in Balaam, who wiſhing that hee might Numb. 23. 10. haue died the death of the righteous, feared that he ſhould not doe ſo. The ſame I may ſay of many other: For why? they running deep in debt with God, their conſcience accuſeth them, that they ſhall one time or other be called to their vnwelcome account, and ſo, the thing that they feare, ſhall 1. Cor. 11. 31. come vpon them. And yet will they not come to agreement with God, by iudging themſelues, that ſo they may not bee iudged of him, but bee free from all feare (as frailtie will permit) of his iudgement, and therefore refuſing ſo to doe, their feare iuſtly falleth vpon them.
                  The ſaying of Salomon proueth that they haue many feares, where hee ſaith, the wicked ſlieth when no man purſueth him: that is, through feare. And Prou. 28. 1. that may be ſeene to haue poſſeſſed the very Phariſies (who yet bare it out moſt boldly before men) by the words of Nicodemus, bewraying his fellow Phariſies ill conſcience through feare, ſaying to Chriſt, We know that thou art 
                     Ioh. 3. 2. 
                     a teacher ſent of God, and acknowledge thy great miracles: as if hee ſhould haue added this, though wee will not be knowne of any ſuch thing before men, yet thus it is with vs, when wee meete and talke of thee together, and are afraid. But ſome will aske, What then ſhall we doe to ſuch? ſhall we aduiſe them to ſhake off their feares, and plucke vp their hearts againſt them? Doubtleſſe no: this were to fight againſt their conſcience, and to make it impudent and hardned (which is much worſe) whereas it did before but accuſe them: but if they cannot preuent ſuch feare by remouing the cauſe thereof, which is their ſinne, let them next to that be perſwaded to repent for it. We reade of the third Captaine that came to E
                           •
                        as, that beholding 2. King 1. 14. his two fellowes deuoured with fire from heauen for doing their meſſage to the Prophet ſo imperiouſly and boldly, he came to him in all ſubmiſnes, and entreated him to come downe to the King. Euen ſo, to come to our ſelues, aske thy conſcience what makes thee feare? If thou findeſt that the Lord hath a controuerſie with thee, and (that depending) and that thou canſt not be quiet, goe and ſeeke agreement with him, as the Captaine did; it is but a follie to ſtand out with the Lord: for if thy conſcience accuſe 1. Ioh. 3 20. thee, he is greater, as knowing much more againſt thee. If thou canſt come to the Lord, and ſay, in the truth of thine heart; O Lord, I feare leſt my ſinne ſhould bring ſome ſudden deſtruction vpon me: I haue no peace within, nor without, becauſe of it, and thy diſpleaſure for it; I goe continually in hazard of ſome fruite thereof, beſides that which is eternall: therefore, ſay (O Lord) humble me, and cauſe me to feare ſinne, and not the puniſhment only: turne my terror into broken heartedneſſe for ſin, and ſo bring peace and quietnes againe into my ſoule. Doe thus, I ſay, and thy feares ſhall vaniſh; otherwiſe, who ſhall pitie thee in them, if thou pitieſt not thy ſelfe, in taking the way to remoue them? And to this purpoſe, I aske, did not the Prieſts in the Goſpell meete with that which they feared, when Chriſt, whom they would needs crucifie, that they might be rid of him, roſe againe? to bring a greater feare vpon them at the laſt then at the firſt? And as they would in no wiſe feare, when their ſinne was at the higheſt, and yet we ſee they were conſtrained to feare; ſo there is no doubt, but that there are ſome hardned, which doe what they can, to put feare away from them, hauing their conſciences ſeared with an hot iron, whoſe damnation (yet) ſleepeth not, neither ſhal they

eſcape feare, but it will ſeaze vpon them, when they would not. And wheras it may be ſaid, the godly are much afraid ſometime as well as other; I anſwere, it is true: but that tendeth to a good end; as if they haue taken libertie amiſſe, or rather ſtolne it, to breake out of the good and righteous way which they had couenanted to walke in, they cannot but bee afraid, when they come againe to themſelues; but it is for that they ſee they haue offended their mercifull father, therefore they cannot be quiet, till they bee in fauour againe with him. And let the other know, that euen ſo and much more muſt they do, to wit, in their falles, feare; and take no reſt nor peace to themſelues before that: elſe, when their time commeth, that which they feare, ſhall alſo fall vpon them: but if they conſider duly of their eſtate, and while they may, and before the time of their trouble come, turne their feet againe into the way of Gods teſtimonies, God will burie all the indignities which they haue wrought againſt him, and will receiue them graciouſly. Hoſ. 14 3.
                  
                  In the firſt branch of her propheticall prayer, that, not her enemies, but 2 Gods, might be as Siſera, ſhe hauing warrant ſo to pray, did as became her, and ſo ſhall all wee doe, who ſhall doe ſo, vpon ſo good a ground and warrant: but otherwiſe take we heed that wee pray not againſt any, what faire pretence ſoeuer wee haue to doe ſo: for as God hath reclaimed very bad ones, ſo what know wee whom he may call home among vs? But of this I haue ſpoken.
                  For the other part of Deboras prayer, that the louers of God may proſper 3 in the abundance of all good things, and grow therein, as the Sunne doth in his ſtrength to the noonetide, let it bee noted, that this is prayed for to them that loue the Lord; and onely to them, as the bleſſing in the ſecond Commandement is to them that loue him, who teſtifie that they doe ſo, by keeping his commandements. And this prayer being made in faith, obtaines as much, as is asked in it. And therefore when ſhe prayeth for it, it is all one, as if ſhe had affirmed, that it ſhall be ſo: namely, that they which loue the Lord ſhall want nothing that is good. And ſo Dauid ſaith, who had good experience of it, that the Lord withholdeth no good thing from ſuch as Pſal. 23. 1. Pſal 84. 13. keepe their hearts pure and good: which none can doe, but they that loue him. Yea and marke further that ſhe ſaith, they ſhall grow therein euen from ſtrength to ſtrength as the Sunne doth, euen to his full beautie. So ſpeaketh Salomon in the Prouerbs: The way of the righteous ſhineth as the light, that ſhineth more and more vnto the perfit day: ſignifying thereby, that Prou 4. 18. the godly herein reſemble the Lord Ieſus, who himſelf increaſed in ſtrength Luke 2. 52. of body with addition of grace, and fauour with God and men: and ſo they alſo increaſe daily in knowledge and grace, vntill they bee ioyned to Chriſt their head, and ſee the Lord in the Sion of his holineſſe.
                  Behold then here a ſingular priuiledge, which the louers of God doe enioy: that while they looke carefully and conſtantly to preſerue and vphold the loue of God in them, euen thereby they grow in grace and knowledge of God, and of Chriſt; and they come to haue more neere acquaintance with them, and haue proofe of their fatherly kindnes toward them, and ſo haue ſtronger hope, that it ſhall yet be better with them afterward: for their obedience paſſed, yeeldeth them more courage and ſtrength to go forward in their good courſe. Now if we did conſider the miſerable courſes of many,

who for want of this gracious gouernment of God, runne into all kinde of ſinne, and fearefull puniſhments, (for the wicked waxe worſe and worſe) and how ſome euen of Gods deare ſeruants by their very declinings and careleſnes, for a ſmall time, ſee many ill daies; how ſhould we make account of this precious libertie, bequeathed vnto vs in this behalfe? For ſuch as looke to the maintaining of the loue of God in them, and the nouriſhing Note. of it by thankfull acknowledging of his euer flowing kindneſſe toward them, (I ſpeake a great thing) neede to feare no worſe eſtate to Godward then they haue enioyed alreadie: but euery day to looke for better and better, both greater faith, and better obedience; which cannot be wanting to Note. vs, but when we are wanting to our ſelues, and failing in our loue to God: and yet I meane no perfectiō of it, which cannot be in any, but more vſe of ſinceritie and feruencie in Gods ſeruice, euen ſuch as hath alreadie been in them. But he that liſteth to reade more of this growing in grace of my ſetting downe, may reade the twelfth chapter of the ſixth treatiſe of my book. In the meane ſeaſon, let this ſpeech of Debora, make ſuch to looke better about them, who are farre from this thriuing and growth in grace, or the fruite of it, if they deſire to be in honour and fauour with God. And if they be voide of them, let them know, that the cauſe thereof is, that they loue not God, whatſoeuer they pretend to the contrarie; and without that, what welfare can there be to the ſoule? It cannot proſper, but rather decaieth as a man that is ſicke of a deſperate diſcaſe, and growes worſe and worſe, till vtter conſumption and death it ſelfe doe follow. Therefore it is a worke of no ſmall weight to trie our ſelues whether we loue God: it will quite the coſt abundantly. If we can once get that, wee are on the thriuing hand, no feare but wee ſhall doe well: and then wee giue good proofe thereof, when wee loue, and deſire well to the brethren, when nothing is too deare for himſelf, and where there is ſtill an earneſt thirſting after both: (as all things that grow haue an appetite of growth) theſe (I ſay) with more then a common care of honouring God in the place we liue in, a daily longing home, with vprightnes and conſtancie; are euidences of our loue to God that cannot deceiue. And this affection (be wee well aſſured) will breake out where it is, by ſuch fruite as I haue mentioned, as Ioſephs did vnto his brethren. Gen. 45. 1
                  
                  To this ſong of Debora, the holy ſtorie addeth this, that God gaue his people by and after this victorie, fortie yeeres reſt and quietnes. A great bleſſing: euen ſo we all know what a benefit any great deliuerance is, out of paine, ſickneſſe, priſon, bondage, penurie, or the like miſerie, eſpecially when it is for long continuance? But how much more then, the ſweete peace of conſcience that paſſeth vnderſtanding, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt, and that for long continuance, after the trouble of minde and feare of damnation, which was ſometime? But of this alſo elſewhere ſomewhat hath been ſaid.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE THIRTIE SIXE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Afterward the children of Iſrael committed wickedneſſe in the ſight of the Lord, and the Lord gaue them into the hands of Midian ſeuen yeeres.
                  
                  Verſ. 2. And the hand of Midian preuailed againſt Iſrael: and becauſe of the Midianites, the children of Iſrael made them dennes in the mountaines, and caues, and ſtrong holds.
                  
                  Verſ. 3. When Iſrael had ſowne, then came vp the Midianites, the Amalekites, and they of the Eaſt, and came vpon them,
                  
                  Verſ. 4. And camped by them, and deſtroyed the fruite of the earth, euen till thou come vnto Azzah, and left no foode for Iſrael, neither ſheepe, nor oxe, nor aſſe.
                  
                  Verſ. 5. For they went vp, and their cattell, and came with their tents, as Graſhoppers in multitude, ſo that they and their camels were without number; and they came into the land to deſtroy it.
                  
                  Verſ. 6. So was Iſrael exceedingly impoueriſhed by the Midianites: therefore the children of Iſrael cried vnto the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  IN this Chapter, it is ſhewed, how Iſrael againe prouoked the Lord 
                     The ſumme and parts of this Chapter are 4. by their wickedneſſe, verſ. 1. And how the Lord puniſhed them by the Midianites, to verſ. 6. Then that they cried vnto the Lord, and he reproued them, to verſ. 11. And laſtly, how he called Gedeon and prepared him to deliuer them; and this is to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  TO begin with their ſinne, it appeares that they did grieuouſly prouoke The ſumme of the firſt part. the Lord, as they had ſometime before done, as in the third and fourth Chapters it appeares, where their puniſhment was likewiſe a long time continued vpon them. But yet after the death of Debora and Barak, the valiant deliuerers of them out of the hands of the Canaanites, they did againe depart from the good courſe wherein they had liued before, and fell againe to idolatrie, and other ſinnes. This be ſaid of their ſinne, as may be gathered out of the firſt verſe, and the 25.
                  With the which to begin, for our further benefit, the inſtruction that we are to take out of from hence, is this; That ſeeing in all the ſtories before ſet downe, as well as this, of the puniſhing of Iſrael, they begin thus: The children of Iſrael did againe that which was euill in the ſight of the Lord: ſeeing

(I ſay) it is thus, we may learne, that it is naturally ingrafted in the heart of man, that though there bee holy affections kindled in it by ſome good meanes, yet in time they dye, and wane away; and in ſtead of them, the heart is carried againe to the euill, that it moſt deſireth. And it being thus with them that haue ſome goodneſſe and beginnings of faith in them, what are all the faire ſhewes of hypocrites, when they be at the beſt, but a morning dew? So that though men may (perhaps) ſerue God for a while, Hoſ 6. 4. in a good manner; yet they are gone from it before wee be aware, waxing wearie and prouoking God afreſh; this ſicklenes and inconſtancie are ſo deeply rooted in them, and thereupon it falleth out, that they are carried away by the error of the wicked, and inticements of the world, from a good courſe; to be faſhioned like other men, though it be very groſſe and abſurd which they fall to.
                  A great reaſon hereof is this, that the beſt are renewed but in part, and much corruptiō remaineth to be purged out of thē, which requireth the taking vp of their thoughts and care; which it is meet they ſhould take knowledge of, that ſo they may ſee that they haue worke enough, (and haue little Note. cauſe to be idle and waxe wearie of it, I meane (beſide many other duties) of croſſing and ſubduing the euill of their hearts; eſpecially, ſeeing their reward is ſo great in ſo doing. And yet with griefe it may be ſaid, that in all ages, both perſons and Churches little conſidering this, haue fallen to this courſe that I now complaine of. As they in the Pſalme, who ſtarted aſide like a 
                     Pſal. 78. 35. 
                     broken bow. The people in Exodus did the like; who in the abſence of Moſes from them, but a few daies, fell moſt ſhamefully to idolatrie. So the people Exod. 32. 6. mentioned in S. Iohn, who counted Iohn Baptiſt a burning light, and for a 
                     Ioh. 5. 35. 
                     time reioyced in him: whereby yee may gather, it was but for a time. Theſe with many, too long to be ſtood vpon, doe ſhew, how ſoone men decline from a good courſe.
                  And wel it were with vs in this latter age, if we looked better to our ſelues then they did: but as well perſons and families, as almoſt whole townes, wanze and waxe cold in their ſeruing of God; who yet were ſometime of the forwarder ſort of profeſſors, a few God reſerueth who deſire to keepe their firſt loue to the Goſpell, and their brethren, that they may be a ſeed in Note. euery corner of the land almoſt, to teach the generations to come, (if the world continue) to feare the Lord aright, hee hauing appointed a remnant to remaine, and a Church, though ſmall, vnto the worlds end. Which being ſo, teacheth the beſt of vs, what need we haue to deſire to enioy the beſt meanes, and namely the ſincere preaching of the Goſpell, whereby we may grow on in grace and knowledge of Chriſt, and cleaue neerely to him: conſidering how oft wee haue been by Gods gracious working in vs, reuiued and refreſhed thereby: and how dead in good duties wee are, and vnprofitable (our conſciences being Iudges) without them. And it is well, if here by this, we winde out of all poiſoned baites that are laid for vs.
                  And this of the firſt of the foure parts of the Chapter I haue ſpoken in this former part of this verſe, and ſomewhat alſo before in other Chapters, that is, of the peoples ſinne.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  NOw it followes, the ſecond, that is, of the puniſhment that followed their ſinne, and how they cried to the Lord vnder it, in theſe ſixe verſes. Their puniſhment was ſeuen yeeres oppreſſion by the Midianites, as in this verſe is to be ſeene, and the manner of their oppreſſing them, is ſet downe in the fiue verſes following. And for their oppreſſion by the Midianites, let it Verſe 1. Doct. 2. in verſ. 1 Lamen. 3. 40. teach vs, that it was iuſt becauſe they had ſinned. For God ſcourgeth men iuſtly, and not without their due deſert: Man ſuffereth for his ſinne, as the Prophet Ieremy ſaith: So that if any ſhould thinke they are hardly handled, being puniſhed of God, let them proue themſelues without ſinne, or elſe let them hold their peace. Nay, I will yeeld more then ſo to them, let them be able but to proue this, that they haue only offended through infirmitie, and not rather wilfully, and of knowledge, and they ſhall either be freed altogether from great vexations in their liues; or elſe they ſhall freely and without conſtraint confeſſe, that God hath dealt iuſtly, yea mercifully, in ſo viſiting of them, rather then that he hath done them any wrong. Thus much for this, and that God will puniſh, when men prouoke him by their tranſgreſſions, as we may here learne, I haue in other places ſhewed.
                  The manner of the Midianites oppreſſing the people of Iſrael, was the Verſe 2. The ſenſe.
                      ſpoiling them of their victuall, namely corne and cattell, for the ſpace of ſeuen yeeres, without which they could not liue. Their corne they deſtroied, when they had ſowen their fields. And they were driuen to make them cabins in the hollow places of the earth, vnder the hils and rocks, where they had holes and creuiſes to let in light, to defend themſelues from them: and in the fields and lower parts of the earth they made them dennes and darke places, not fit for habitation, but in which they might ſafely lay their goods and ſubſtance, to hide them from the Midianites. They made alſo high towers and ſtrong, from which they might ſee a farre off, which could not be beaten down eaſily: and theſe ſhifts they were faine to make. For their enemies were as graſhoppers on the face of the earth, and their camels and other beaſts, to deſtroy the fruites of the Iſraelites, were almoſt without number. What theſe Midianites were, and of what ſtocke they came, it is not neceſſarie to inquire, ſeeing it is not ſet downe, though ſome writers ſay that they had their beginnings thus: that one of Abrahams ſonnes which he begat of his wife Ketura, builded a citie beyond Arabia in the South, in the deſert of the now called Saracens, and called the name of it Midian, or Madian, and the people of it were called Midianites, or Madianites, and were ſuppoſed to be they of whom the Kenites came. Theſe brought with them the Amalakites, and men of the Eaſt to helpe them.
                  This was a grieuous and ſore affliction, to be thus driuen to extremities Deut. 28. 33. Eſay 17. 10. 11. for want of food. And yet no other then was long before threatned (among many other) to come vpon them for their apoſtacie and idolatrie. For what though we heare of no conſuming of the people of Iſrael in battell; yet, beſide that it could not be, but that many of them were ſlaine by ſo long and violent aſſaulting them, ſo what death is more cruell then by liuing, to be

famiſhed? and what miſerie in this life greater, then to be to ſeeke of foode, where it can hardly be come by, and yet that which is to bee reſerued, and had, is ſcarcely fit to preſerue life? Here therefore by the contrary wee may ſee, what a benefit of God this is, when in a land, and in cities, townes and villages, all people may be fed fit for their condition, when there is no inuaſion of forraine enemies to ſpoile and deſtroy the fruits of the earth, whereby the inhabitants are preſerued: nor any famine, by any other iudgement of God: and when there is no iuſt cauſe of complaining in our ſtreetes. We know in the great famines that are mentioned in the Scriptures, yea and in ſmaller famines in our owne remembrance, what crying and lamentations there haue been. In the daies of Abraham, Iſaac, and chiefly of Iacob, 
                     Gen. 42. 2. when they were forced to ſend into Egypt for corne. In the time of Elimelek and Naomi, when they were driuen from their dwelling in Bethelem Ruth 1. 1. Iuda, to goe and ſoiourne in the land of Moab, for want of food: and after in the daies of Ioram King of Iſrael, when the men had no other way 2. King. 6. 25. to preſerue their liues, but by eating that which was againſt nature, yea and yet they could hardly come by it; and when the women did eate their own children, as alſo in the laſt beſieging of Ieruſalem by the Romans.
                  And to what end ſpeake I this, but that we ſhould lift vp our hearts, and more feruently, and oft be thankfull to God for this one benefit of plentie? although who ſeeth not, that it is indeed but one of many, yea of infinite other, which wee receiue? And why doth God this? Euen to the end men Doct. verſ. 2. 3. 4. 5. may follow their callings, diligently and conſcionably, with cheerefulnes; and with the ſame minde walke in the feare of the Lord continually. And therefore the euill example in life, that in the abundance of Gods earthly bleſſings doth flow euery where, in drunkenneſſe, and all laſciuiouſnes, doth draw vpon men greater plagues, then wants and famine are, and that is, leanenes of ſoule, blindnes, vnbeliefe, hardneſſe of heart, and impenitencie: which if we had the ſpirit of the Prophets, wee ſhould deeply bewaile. But to leaue ſuch, I adde this, that for the quickning vp of the beſt, it were fit for Note. them, when they grow to a meane and common eſteeming of theſe benefits of God, to ſuppoſe with themſelues, and put the caſe that they were in want and penurie, euen in the ſtate of this people of God by the oppreſſion of the Midianites, or the like: As that when they haue ſowne their ſeede, it ſhould be ſpovled before their faces, ſo that they ſhould not eate of it, and that the prouiſion which they haue made for their liues, ſhould be carried away by enemies, or taken from them, and they famiſhed for want of it: it would make them better to value and prize ſuch benefits, and yeeld to the Lord a more holy and fruitfull vſe of them. Whereas commonly men doe not ſo, till they be driuen to it by wants, and decay in their ſubſtance, then they can ſay; Oh what plentie of Gods benefits we once enioyed?
                  Another thing in theſe verſes is to be marked, that we bring double vexation vpon our ſelues by ſinning againſt the Lord, and by ſeeking to haue 
                        Doct. 1. our will, againſt the word of God. The one is this, the affliction that is ſent vpon vs for ſinne, as here the ſtirring vp of the Midianites againſt the people of Iſrael for their tranſgreſſion; or any other, as loſſe of their goods, diſeaſes, ieopardie of their liues, &c. The other vexation, is that which proceedeth from the former: and that is of many ſorts, as may be liuely ſeene in this preſent

ſtorie, and namely in theſe verſes. For what toile, time, and coſt, beſide the diſquietnes that went therewith, were they driuen to beſtow (that I may include much in few words) to defend, or to ſaue themſelues from the vtmoſt hurt and danger, which was wrought and intended againſt them? what ſhifts were they faine to make to preſerue their liues, and ſaue their goods out of their enemies hands? which yet when they had done what they could, they were not able to doe.
                  If they had been only hurt by them in their cattell, corne, and other commodities, and had ſuſtained that onely for their puniſhment, it had been a deare paying for their pleaſure, that they took in their ſinne; but when they Note. were in this bondage, that they could doe nothing elſe but watch and ward for their liues, and to build and botch, digge and delue, and beate their braines to deuiſe, how to hide their commodities from them, what ſorrow vpon ſorrow, and one vnquietnes vpon another did they heape vpon their heads, till they loſt all the welfare of their liues in a manner, and made them more weariſome and vnwelcome then death it ſelfe? Is this the fruite of ſinne, and the good that it bringeth to the committers thereof? And yet if I ſhould lay out the fruit of the ſinne of Cain, Eſau, Abſolon, and other, who could not be ſtaied from the committing of it; what better thing could I ſay of it, or what better fruite could I proue it yeeldeth to the committers of it?
                  So that as the baite is pleaſant which the poore fiſh biteth at, but it being caught by the hooke, bringeth paine, torture, and wearying of it ſelfe to ſaue the life: ſo is it with him that will needes taſte of the pleaſure of ſinne, as I haue ſaid. And if this be the great good that it intendeth againſt ſuch as follow one kinde or other of it with tooth and naile, who alſo lie ſucking to draw pleaſure out of it, as a childe doth by the breaſt, then let them all be taken and condemned for fooles, who are maſters in that profeſſion, and are vpholders of that trade and occupation. Yea let them bee reckoned in the number of them, of whom the prouerbe ſpeaketh, The foole beleeueth euery 
                     Prou. 14. 15. 
                     thing. And againe, O ye fooles, how long will ye loue fooliſhneſſe? For why? they Prou. 1. 22. haue choſen a way that ſeemeth pleaſant, but the iſſues thereof are the way of death. They doe moſt certainly take more paine to goe to hell, then the righteous doth to heauen. And as their reuolting brought vpon them this miſerie, ſo let all thoſe who haue falſified their promiſe, and broken their ſolemne couenant to God of ſeeking more zeale, greater fruitfulnes, watchfulnes and care, let them (I ſay) alſo feare that their euill conſcience wil draw vpon them one accuſation and trouble after another, and that the further they decline, the greater ſorrow they bring vpon themſelues. Some haue been brought to that point, that they haue made queſtion whether they might lay violent hands vpon themſelues, to auoid the terror of minde.
                  Further alſo obſerue here, what ſhifts they chuſe to make, rather then they 
                        Doct. 3. would ſeeke to God by humiliation and repentance, for releaſe. They loue their freedome well, who hauing their citie beſieged by the enemie, till extreame famine compell them to eate dogges, cats, and ſuch vermine, as is noiſome to nature, yet chuſe to endure ſuch difficulties, rather then yeeld. And ſo doubtleſſe, they loue their luſts well, who ſuffer themſelues to bee made ſuch ſlaues and drudges to them (as theſe here were) rather then they

would abandon them, and returne to the Lord with vnfained renouncing of them. Alas, they muſt leaue them with ſhame and double repentance at length, when they haue wearied themſelues as theſe did: but till their owne rod hath made them ſmart, who may tell them of the vnfruitfulnes of their toileſome trade? Toileſome I may truly ſay; both conſidering with what great adoe they bring their ſinne to ripenes and perfection; and then what ſhifts they vndergo to winde themſelues out of the woe and miſerie, which (in ſtead of fruite) their ſinne brings vpon them? It is a good piece of the life of an adulterer, firſt to compaſſe and fulfill his vncleane luſts: and when he hath done, to couer and keepe himſelfe from ſhame, and to make faire weather of it againe. And ſo the thriftleſſe ſpend-good, what adoe makes he to ſcrape together ſomwhat to maintaine his riotous humour? and when he is brought to beggerie, then he muſt caſt about him afreſh, how hee may defray that, and auoid the gallowes, or a baſe and wretched life. In a word, it is true which Salomon ſaith in Eccleſiaſtes; To the ſinner God giueth paine: he Eccleſ. 2. 20. giues him ſowre ſauce to his ſweete meate, painfull ſeruice to his ſweet luſts. And yet without Gods ſpeciall goodneſſe neither of theſe ſhall preuaile with a lewd perſon to pull him from the loue and liking of them, though they coſt him ſo deare, and though he beare and bring foorth with paine, and the ſweate of his face. There will be found an Hiel to build Iericho, though hee knew it will coſt him and his neuer ſo dearly. Therefore they are happie whom God hath entertained into his houſe, and holds them vnder his gouernment: becauſe neither is his word tedious to them, nor his Matth. 11. laſt. commandements grieuous while they are doing them: and as for any trouble which can befall them after for their ſo doing, firſt know that it can not ſting them being borne for a good cauſe, and they ſhall goe vnder it without diſquiet, be vpholden in it by grace, and after count it great ioy in that they ſuffered.
                  The people of Iſrael, we haue heard in the former verſes, did kindly ſhew Verſe 6. in their doings, the nature and diſpoſition of ſinful and wicked perſons, who little truſt to God in their troubles, they forgot him, and did flie for ſuccour and refuge to earthly helpes and ſtaies; as towers, dennes, and other munition and defence, forſaking him; but the holy ſtorie ſheweth in this verſe, that none of them all preuailed, neither did they preſerue them. And although by their ſhifting they ſaued their liues, and got and ſaued that foode which with much adoe kept them from ſtaruing; yet who ſeeth not the miſerie, which, for all that, they indured in extreame pouertie, bondage and feare? Euen ſo, wee muſt know, that it is not enough for wicked perſons to beware of their enemies, and to fence themſelues from the common troubles of the world; but firſt of all, and chiefly they ſhould preſerue themſelues from the wrath of God; which while like fooles they doe not, they preuenting and auoiding the ſame, they ſeldome eſcape, nor be free from the other. Therefore the Lord in the prophecie of Habakkuk, laugheth to ſcorne ſuch made defences of men. And in Obedia the Lord ſaith to ſuch; Habak 2. 5. 6. Obediah 3. 4. 
                     Thou that dwelleſt in the clefts of the rocks, whoſe habitatiō is high, that ſaiſt in thine heart, who ſhall bring me downe to the ground; though thou exalt thy ſelfe as the Eagle, and make thy neſt among the ſtarres, yet euen thence will I bring thee downe, ſaith the Lord.
                  
                  
                     
They doe not ſee that God hath a thouſand waies to fight againſt them: and that he who plucked off Pharaos charet wheeles, and broke the horſes Exod. 14. 25. Iud 
                           •
                        5 22. Eſter 
                           •
                        . 10. 2. Chro. 20. 22. hoofes of Siſera; who drew vp the great Lord Haman to the gallowes; that tooke heart from the Ammonites and Moabites, that in ſtead of fighting againſt Iudah, they fell vpon and ſlew one another; and weakened Zenacherib ſo, that he ſlew by an Angell in one night, an hundred, foure ſcore, and 2. King. 19. 35. fiue thouſand of his armie; they doe not ſee, I ſay, that he who did thus ſhew his might againſt theſe mightie ones, and many waies beſide, hath done the like; can alſo fruſtrate their attempts and hope in theſe daies alſo. The ſpirit of ſlumber is caſt vpon them, and blindneſſe hath taken hold of them, that they cannot ſee and beleeue, that the like iudgements ſhall not meete with them, till they haue felt and ſmarted by them.
                  Therefore let men make peace with God firſt, and turne from their ſins, that he may alſo turne from his fierce wrath: or elſe when they make their reckoning of peace, and proſperitie, length of daies and deliuerance from their enemies, and other troubles, the contrary euils fall vpon them; and if Note. not preſently, yet they are at hand, and alwaies iuſtly to be feared, before they come. Oh what proofe haue wee ſeene of that which I ſay, as former ages haue done alſo? How many might haue done well, and proſpered, if they had been more carefull to be reconciled to God, then to leane to their owne deceitfull dreames, by a vaine hoping, that life ſhould ſtill haue been granted them, the which while it laſted, they were as they thought, in paradiſe: but for all their welfare were ſoone cut off from all. And the reaſon is, that men goe to worke without God, they neither ſeeke his fauour, nor direction from him, either in their actions or afflictions: and therefore their enterpriſes are either croſſed, or elſe curſed in the vſe and enioying of them: and as for their troubles, they are to ſeeke either how to abide them, or to get out of them in a good manner. Thus a wicked man is vnhappie both waies, whether hee proſper or no: for either hee feares a change, or elſe his feare commeth vpon him, as an armed man. Therefore when I conſider this, I thinke the beleeuing Chriſtian twice happie, euen when he is iudged miſerable by men of the world, becauſe hee hath choſe the good part with Mary, and hath ſought to haue God on his ſide, who doth not only keepe fearefull iudgements from his, being a ſure defence in time of need, but maketh that portion which they enioy, a ſweete and ſauourie bleſſing vnto them; and yet they haue farre greater riches then thoſe. Thus much of their puniſhment, in the ſecond part of the Chapter.
               
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  THe third followeth in this ſixth verſe, namely, that the people repented, Doct. 2. in verſ. 6. and turned to God: which as was ſaid before, is teſtified, and declared by a ſigne thereof, which is crying. And here, not to inſiſt vpon the ſame things, which in other places I haue done, that which I will note from hence is this, that ſeeing they now ſought to him at laſt, who ſhould haue been their firſt refuge, we may note another point of vnthriftineſſe, and fooliſh dealing in the men of this world; That when they will needes goe trie maſteries in their neceſſitie and calamities, by truſting to broken holds, and

vaine helpes of their owne deuiſing, and ſmart for it, as I haue ſaid; then at laſt with ſhame they muſt be faine to ſue and repaire to God. And what if he will not receiue then? as it falleth out ſometimes to bee ſo, as in the Prouerbs, [Becauſe you would not heare when I called, ye ſhall crie, and not be Prou. 1. 20. heard] Whither goe they then? But if he doe, what a farre fetched iourney haue they taken before, yea full of vexation and weariſome, beſides that Note. they haue loſt all their former labour? I conclude therefore, with this aduice and warning to ſuch as haue eares to heare; Seeke the Lord while he may 
                     Eſay 55. 6. 
                     be found, and driue not off from day to day, leſt he come ſuddenly and there be none to turne away his heauy wrath from you: and in the meane while, happie are they who doe ſo. For they in ſo doing ſhall not doe as this people did here, flie to rocks, hide themſelues in caues of the earth, and build towers to be ſafe from their enemies, as theſe did here from the Midianites, which yet did not ſafely keepe and defend them, but they flie to the ſafe rocke and tower of defence; as the wiſe man calleth it; I meane, to the name Prou. 18. 10. of the Lord, euen the Lord of hoſtes, who is a moſt ſtrong place of refuge, the righteous flie thither and are ſaued.
               
            
         
         
            
               THE THIRTIE SEVEN SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 7. And when the children of Iſrael cried vnto the Lord, becauſe of the Midianites,
                  
                  Verſ. 8. The Lord ſent vnto the children of Iſrael a Prophet, who ſaid vnto them, Thus ſaith the Lord God of Iſrael; I haue brought you vp from Egypt, and haue brought you out of the houſe of bondage,
                  
                  Verſ. 9. And I haue deliuered you out of the hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppreſſed you, and haue caſt them out before you, and giuen you their land.
                  
                  Verſ. 10. And I ſaid vnto you, I am the Lord your God: feare not the Gods of the Amorites, in whoſe land you dwell: but you haue not obeyed my voyce.
                  
               
               
                  NOw whether they cried to the Lord, firſt through anguiſh Verſe 7. 8 9. 10. of heart, which was cauſed in them by the force of their calamities; but was neither pleaſing to God, neither could obtaine any thing of him, vnleſſe it had come from faith: (which is very probable) or whether before their crying, the Lord ſent the man of God here mentioned, vnto them, it cannot certainly be ſaid; but ſure it is, God of his great mercie to them, ſent a Prophet to preach to them, and to bring them to true repentance, ſpeaking to them much like the meſſenger that

was ſent to their fathers before at Bochim. For he repeates Gods benefits to Iudg. 2. 3. them, as the other did, and deliuerances, and chargeth them with diſobedience alſo.
               Out of theſe words wee may ſee, it is a fit time for preaching to worke, Verſe 7. 8. when men are inwardly ſtung with ſmart of their afflictions, as it appeareth theſe were, when the man of God was ſent to preach vnto them; for then m
                     •
                  n will ſuffer themſelues more eaſily to be reproued for their ſinnes, and will cauſe themſelues, as they ſee cauſe; and the word is receiued into their 
                     Doct. 1. hearts more readily: whereas they are otherwiſe moſt commonly hardned, and hate to be reproued. And yet further then men come prepared to our daily and ordinarie preaching, it profiteth them nothing. The danger is this, that they are like to quench the ſpirit after, and to dull the edge of ſuch good beginnings of grace in them, which will moſt certainly come to paſſe, if they be not carefull to ſtirre them vp daily. Men while they haue elbow roome, thinke that the preacher, yea God himſelfe muſt be beholding to them for their hearing: but when God hath them cooped in a narrow compaſſe, his roddes being held ouer them, then the Preacher is welcome, yea ſought to earneſtly, and God is plied with confeſſions and prayers. We ſee it, though with griefe, and haue too great experience of it, in the practiſe of the ſecure and irreligious ſort, who though they mind not God all the yeere long, yet fall to prayer and deuotion when ſome great thundring, lightning, and tempeſt doth aſtoniſh them, and when the likelihood of death is vpon them. His word they heare daily without any great reuerence, but his terrible workes, ſeene and felt, though but ſeldome, make them hide themſelues in corners for feare. By whoſe example we ſee, what need the Lord hath to bore eares into our ſoules, by terror, and amaſing iudgements, as Iob ſpeakes, chap. 33. becauſe his word is wound about mens fingers, and made Iob 33. 16. but as the confuſed noiſe of many waters, and as a ſound beating the aire, going in at one eare and out as faſt at the other. Let not ſuch boaſt themſelues as are ſpared, except they applie themſelues to the hearing of Gods voyce by the Miniſter, who can skill to doe his meſſage with more regard and earneſtnes: for either the more is behind, if they belong to God, and they muſt haue ſomewhat to quicken their appetite thereto, and to make it ſinke deeply into their hearts, and worke vpon them powerfully for their good; or elſe woe be vnto them, the Lord in all likelihood hath caſt them off, and taketh no pleaſure in them, and greatly it is to be feared that when affliction ſhall come vpon them, yet by reaſon of that their former vnbeliefe and contempt of inſtruction, they ſhall doe them little good. The thing that they ſhould doe is this: when the Lord laieth his hand vpon them, let them examine themſelues, touching their affection to the word, and how little they were moued by it in the time of their health & proſperitie, and ſo they may eaſily finde, that their blockiſhneſſe, and careleſſe or vnprofitable hearing; their deadnes, fulnes of ſtomacke, and ſuch like, with earthlineſſe, wearineſſe, wandring, drowzineſſe, &c. haue cauſed the Lord to ſend ſuch trials vpon them (be they inward or outward) as might grinde off their flat Note. and blunt edge, and ſet on a ſharper and keener vpon them: that with deſire and meeknes they may embrace the word, and finde it ſauourie to their taſte, till it haue wrought vpon them as it ought, that is, euen to caſt them

into the mould of it. And this let ſuch know, that if their afflictions tame them not, nor meeken their ſpirits vnder the hand of God, but that they fight againſt him, as Pharao did, and will not ſee and vſe well this ſeaſon which is offered them, that if they be deliuered once againe out of them, they may haue ſound preaching in all high reuerence; let them know (I ſay) that their caſe is wofull and deſperate. For as the Lord ſaith in the like caſe by his Prophet; O people how ſhall I intreate thee? or what ſhall I doe Hoſ. 6 4. vnto thee? So he may ſay vnto them: for he hath no other phyſicke, then his word, mercies, and chaſtiſements. If none of all them can breake the heart, there is no helpe, nor hope, that if he ſhould vſe extraordinary courſes (which they are not to looke for) that hee ſhould preuaile any more with them, then he did with the Prieſts, who going againſt their conſciences in bringing Chriſt to his death, were no more moued with his reſurrection. Therefore they are wiſeſt, who put not the Lord to this extremitie, but hearken to him when he ſpeaketh, and offereth them faire, by the voyce of his meſſengers: and deferre not till affliction, as a ſecond warning, be ſent vnto them: leſt then alſo, they be found alike vnprouided, and being hardned, leſt God ſhould not vouchſafe them that mercie to mollifie & ſoften them: as (the truth is) they who tempt him ſo farre by preſumption, doe not eaſily recouer themſelues, though God doe viſit them by his corrections, or iudgements, but rather (for the moſt part) go further from him, and increaſe their rebellion.
               But whether theſe men cried out being forced thereto by their many 
                     Doct. 2. and ſore afflictions or no, this is ſure, that when the man of God had deliuered his meſſage to them, and had ſhewed them their vnthankfulnes to God for their many deliuerances, and had conuicted them of their diſobedience, they did then crie out in token of their great griefe for their offending God, as their fathers before had done. Here (not to repeate the ſame things which I noted before out of the like words vttered at Bochim) this is to be marked, that the Lord here ſent his meſſenger, as he did there, to call the people to conſideration of themſelues, and their doings, and we ſee what need they had thereof. All generations declare what they are, and to what wrack and ruine they come, who are not helped, and that in due time and ſeaſon, with this wholeſome inſtruction from God; that the righteous ſmiting them they may not fall into the hands of the vngodly, to be rung about by them Pſal. 341. 5. to their vtter ſhame and reproch, and ſo fall into the iawes of the diuell, to be vndone without recouerie. And when the Lord dealeth ſo graciouſly with any, as that they may enioy this benefit of ſound teaching, let them beware that they harden not their hearts at the hearing of it, (the oftner they heare the happier it is for them) but with meekenes receiue it, that it may bring foorth fruite in them plentifully, euen to eternall life.
               The Prophet, who was ſent vnto them, puts them firſt in minde of Gods Verſe 8. 9. benefits, and many deliuerances from their enemies. The next thing here to be conſidered of vs out of theſe words in the 8. and 9. verſes, beſide that which we haue heard by the like occaſion, is this; that we record and keepe a memoriall (as they here ſhould haue done, and were reproued for not doing) of our deliuerances out of trouble and calamitie, in which we ſaw, that we might, yea muſt haue lien ouerwhelmed and drowned, if the Lord had

not in good time brought vs out of them. Theſe deliuerances, I ſay, out of bondage, priſon, ſickneſſe, paine of body, and anguiſh and torment of conſcience, and the like; and how oft they haue been enioyed of vs, and how comfortable and welcome vnto vs; ought to be daily remembred and acknowledged with heartie praiſes to God, as well as his benefits. Hee who marketh them, ſhall finde them many and great, beſide thoſe that are common, ſo that he may truly ſay, God hath deliuered from many deaths. And becauſe of the peoples forgetfulnes, in the former ages, we ſee how oft they were put in minde of this one deliuerance out of the bondage of Egypt. Therefore the Prophet Dauid, and other holy Penmen of the Pſalmes, in the behalfe of the people, doe ſo often call to minde, and ſometimes with admiration and aſtoniſhment, Gods former deliuerances, as the whole 124. Pſalme witneſſeth thus: If the Lord had not been on our ſide (may Iſrael ſay) when men roſe vp againſt vs, they had ſwallowed vs vp quick, the waters had ouerwhelmed vs, &c. Oh our forgetfulneſſes of the like kindneſſe of God, it is enough to accuſe to Godward, though wee had no other ſinnes, ſeeing wee cannot be ignorant into what dangers, and depths of ſorrow we haue ſometime Note. been plunged, when wee lay crying and complaining, and (perhaps) praying alſo vnder the burthen of them, that it would not haue bin thought that we could euer haue forgot the Lords kindneſſe, if he ſhould euer haue brought vs out of them: and yet when he hath done ſo, yea againe and againe done ſo, we haue with Pharaos Butler, and the nine leapers, forgot all. Gen. 40. 23. Whereas we haue learned, that many yeeres after, euen as long as wee reape the benefit of ſuch deliuerances, yea euen till death, we ſhould praiſe God for the ſame, according to that which was taught our fathers in the Pſalme: Let Iſrael now ſay (that is, long after their deliuerance) that God is gracious, and 
                  Pſal 118 2. 
                  that his mercie endureth for euer. Now I haue ſpoke but of thankes for deliuerance out of trouble, to the which, if we adde his benefits (which are innumerable) what can be required of vs leſſe then this, that in all things, and alwaies wee ſhould be thankfull? And this bewraies the blockiſhneſſe of 1. Theſſ. 19. ſuch, who being vrged to giue thankes, aske wherefore? what haue wee receiued more then others? we enioy but our part, in common bleſſings, as the moſt doe, &c. As if thankfulnes were ſome extraordinarie dutie, lying onely vpon ſome few perſons, rarely fauoured of God. No, the Lord requires no more of thee, then he doth of them who are equall to thee, nay inferiour to thee in benefits. But thou like the ſwine, takeſt all that commeth, not regarding what, or whence, ſo thy turne be ſerued: and thus deuoureſt many bleſſings, through thy brutiſhneſſe, which a godly Chriſtian would make matter of daily praiſe; and inlarge the greatneſſe of them, by muſing both how vnworthie he is of the leaſt, and how ill it ſhould goe with him, if he were but in the caſe of ſuch as want them. If the Lord ſhould exerciſe ſuch vnthankfull blockes with the diſeaſes, which many deare ſeruants of his ſuffer, the paines of Colique, Strangurie, Burning feuers, the Stone, and giue them their portion in penury, cleanenes of teeth, nakednes, ſicknes, &c. they would then ceaſe extenuating Gods benefits, or cōparing themſelues with ſuch as are inriched with greater then themſelues: yea, they would then thinke that freedome from chaſtiſements, were great cauſe of thankes, though they wanted many bleſſings. But to the full ſtomacke, the hony Prou. 27. 7.
                  
combe is not ſweete. Others thinke this dutie diſcharged, if they haue their tongues tipt with formall words of bleſſing and thankes; though their hearts, and loue be ſet vpon the bleſſing, and not on the beſtower of it, and therefore out of the ſame fountaine commeth bitter as well as ſweete, they curſe God as eaſily when the leaſt thing croſſeth them, as they bleſſe him while hee pleaſeth their humour, by ſeaſonable weather, plentifull crops, good ſucceſſe in their affaires, &c. whereby they bewray that their thankes are but the froth of prophane perſons, and comming from their luſts being ſatisfied, euen as their prayers alſo did in their troubles and extremities, as Saint Iames ſpeakes. And a third ſort there are, better then the former, who Iames 4. 3. yet cannot be brought to ſeaſon their whole life with this thankſgiuing, as Paul requireth: neither yet thinke themſelues worthie of reproofe, for vnthankfulneſſe. They ſay, they hope it is neither lying nor whoring, nor wronging, &c. which they ſuffer for, when they are afflicted: and as for this that they be not alwaies thankfull, what ſinne will we make it? they cannot repeate (they ſay) the ſame words ſo often. For anſwere, I ſay: vnthankfulnes (indeed) is no direct ſinne againſt man, but it is farre greater; for it is an high degree of wrong offered to God, and neuer goeth without an heart and life tainted with many lothſome euils & corruptions. Therfore, let not theſe examples be rules for Gods people to follow: let their whole life be an honouring of God by thankſgiuing: and as they only can do it, becauſe they are beholding to his Maieſtie for farre greater fauours, then ſtrangers; ſo let them both in their prayers, and otherwiſe in their vſuall practiſe, entertaine this dutie alſo, as a daily companion, as a token that they do not vſe Gods bleſſings to boldnes, looſenes, wantonnes, or any other licentiouſnes, but get ſtrength againſt them; ſo that all their life may fare the better for their thankfulnes, and other ſuch good meanes, as indeed a thankfull man, weigh it aright, is the onely good Chriſtian; and the life that is voide of it, goeth with much diſobedience, as we ſhall ſee in the next doctrine.
               In this tenth verſe the man of God telleth them, that the Lord charged Verſ. 10. them, that they ſhould not ſerue the gods of the Amorites, and yet they did. So that their obedience was like their thankes; they neglected that, ſo they did this. There ſhall need no proofe, that we are too like them in both. Our liues witneſſe it: but, O wretched people wee, who receiuing a charge from him, who hath done vs all the good that we could neuer haue deſired, and is all in all to vs; yet as though we were tyed to him by no bond of dutie, we refuſe to be ſubiect and obedient to him in things he commands vs. The heathen Centurion could ſay, I haue ſouldiers vnder me, and I ſay to one, 
                  Matth. 8. 9. 
                  goe, and he goeth; and to another, come, and be commeth: and to my ſeruant, doe this, and he doth it: And we, who haue ſolemnely couenanted with the Lord, and haue been (as I may ſay) hired with bleſſings to ſerue him; wee turne our backes vpon him, and with his owne benefits we ſtrengthen our ſelues to grieue him, in the breach of his Sabbaths: in the leauing off, or cold vſe of our prayers; in vncharitablenes, reuenge, and the breach of other particuler commandements, which is not to be ſuffered.
               
                  
                  THE FOVRTH PART OF THE Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 11. And the Angell of the Lord came and ſate vnder the oake which was in Ophrah, that pertained vnto Ioaſh the father of the Ezrites, and his ſonne Gedeon threſhed wheate by the wine preſſe, to hide it from the Midianites.
                     
                     Verſ. 12. Then the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto him, and ſaid vnto him; The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man.
                     
                     Verſ. 13. To whom Gedeon anſwered: Ah my Lord, if the Lord be with vs, why then is all come vpon vs, and where be all his miracles which our father told vs of, and ſaid, Did not the Lord bring vs out of Egypt? but now the Lord hath forſaken vs, and deliuered vs into the hands of the Midianites.
                     
                     Verſ. 14. And the Lord looked vpon him, and ſaid; Goe in this thy might, and thou ſhalt ſaue Iſrael out of the hands of the Midianites: haue not I ſent thee?
                     
                     Verſ. 15. And he anſwered him; Ah my Lord, whereby ſhall I ſaue Iſrael? Behold, my father is poore in Manaſſeth, and I am the leaſt in my fathers houſe.
                     
                     Verſ. 16. Then the Lord ſaid vnto him: I will therefore be with thee, and thou ſhalt ſmite the Midianites as one man.
                     
                  
                  NOw wee haue heard the third part of the Chapter, that they turned to the Lord by the reproofe of the man of God, which though it bee not expreſſed, appeareth by this, that God ſent them tidings of deliuerance. The fourth part followeth, wherein the victorie ouer the Midianites is promiſed. This promiſe is amplified foure waies. Firſt, by naming the perſon, who ſhould deliuer them; that is, Gedeon, to verſe 17. The next, by granting him a ſigne, whereby hee might know who hee was that ſpake to him, to verſ. 25. The third was a charge of caſting downe Idolatrie, giuen to him by the Lord, to verſ. 33. Laſtly, how Gedeon attempted warre after the Idolatrie was deſtroyed, God granting him a double ſigne, whereby he might know that he ſhould haue the victorie, and this to the end of the Chapter. Thus much be ſaid in generall of this fourth part of the Chapter.
                  The particuler branches follow: the firſt is, that Gedeon ſhould deliuer 
                        The ſenſe to verſe 17. Iſrael out of the hands of the Midianites. For the declaration of the which foure points are alſo to be conſidered. Firſt, the Angels appearing to Gedeon, and ſaluting of him comfortably, to verſe 13. The ſecond is, Gedeons ſorrowfull anſwering of him, to verſe 14. Thirdly, the Angels words to remoue his heauineſſe, ſaying, hee ſhould deliuer Iſrael, to the 15. And laſtly, when Gedeon ſaw not how it could be done by him, the Angel told him, and ſatisfied him, to the 17. Now let vs looke into theſe verſes more neerely. It is ſaid in this 11. verſe, that the Angel of the Lord came after the peoples repentance, Verſe 11. 12. and ſate vnder an oake in that place Ophrah, where Ioaſh dwelt, who was of the familie of Abiezer in the tribe of Manaſſe, and the father of Gedeon. This Angell was the ſonne of God, (as verſe 13 proueth) appearing to him in the ſhape of a man, and ſaluting him thus, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man; as it ſhall well appeare, by the courage that God will giue thee in the waightie affaires that follow. Now Gedeon was thraſhing corne, to hide it

from the Midianites, that he might preſerue his life thereby, and the liues of thoſe that were his. And this ſpeech the Angel had to Gedeon, before he told him that he ſhould deliuer the people out of the hands of the Midianites.
                  Out of this 11. verſe, note diuers things, and firſt this: that men of wealth Doct out of verſ. 11. and place, as Gedeon was, in ſo meane a tribe, though hee was ſpoiled of the neceſſarie helpes of maintaining his life, as the moſt of the reſt alſo were, ſuch men (I ſay) ſhould not refuſe labour, as husbandrie, or any other of honeſt ſort. Gedeon had ſeruants and yet he thraſhed the corne himſelfe. And it is a thing which we reade to haue been not onely practiſed of him, but of the old fathers mentioned in the Scriptures; as in all other writers, that what time they had free either from religious or ciuill affaires, they imployed it about cattell and corne. For they would not ſpend the precious time in eating, drinking, play, or idleneſſe, which they abhorred, euen as the religiouſer, yea and the ciuiller ſort of our Gentrie alſo doe. For they take vpon them honeſt imployments. The one ſort, after reading diuine bookes and Chronicles, and ſtatutes, whereby they may benefit both themſelues and others, with the knowledge of Gods law and mans: the other, after they haue read of matters to helpe gouerne and doe good in the Commonwealth, (although they little looke after religion) will haue recourſe to huſbandrie.
                  Such, namely of the firſt ſort, were Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob and others, as Gedeon here, whoſe father Ioaſh was in ſome authoritie among the people, yet his ſonne contemned not the practiſe of husbandrie, which is and may be ſpoken to the iuſt charging of many in our age, who if they bee borne worſhipfully, thinke it too baſe, how meane ſoeuer their wealth be, either to ſet and appoint to themſelues any times for reading, or to haue any skill in that honeſt ſtate of husbandrie, ſaue onely to take their rents and liue of them; which yet were more commendable in them, if they did not conſume the reſt of their time in idleneſſe, paſtime, or worſe. Whereas tillage, keeping of cattell, planting in their fields, and grafting with ſuch like imployments, are both delectable, gainfull, and honeſt, and ſuch as chace away many needleſſe charges, and much ill company, (which is a great waſter) and the ill ſpending of the time in ſuch vaine exerciſes as they delight in. And if it be not allowed to men of worſhip to paſſe their time in ſuch manner, but that euen they muſt occupie their talent, till the Lord come, and Luke 19. 13. not paſſe the time in fleſhly eaſe taking, play, idleneſſe, and other like prophane behauiour, much leſſe is it tollerable in meaner perſons to be ill imployed. But beſide this, ſeeing by ſo fit an occaſion I am lead to ſpeake, I will therefore ſay a little (and that not vnprofitable) of this common ſort of people. For the moſt part, (ſetting aſide the skumme of townes, I meane, the vnthriftie and riotous, and the godleſſe poore, who liue vpon the ſweate of others) this I may ſay, that they take paine enough, and a man ſhall not need to ſpend much time in perſwading them to worke: but this is hardly beaten into them, to obſerue the due manner of working, or the end why, or the ground whereupon. The motiue is penurie, the end couetouſneſſe, and the manner brutiſh. They want, and would haue to defray the hard world, or to beſtow vpon their luſts, and to maintaine themſelues in pride of life: but neither worke they becauſe they thinke it is a ſin to be idle, nor becauſe

they looke for any other fruite of their labour, ſaue the bringing in of the peny. They ſee not whoſe commandement it is, that they ſhould labour, Geneſ. 3. therefore they goe through it with vexation, diſcontentment, diſtruſt, Gen. 3. 19. endleſſe carking, and tying God to their girdle, to giue what ſucceſſe they deſire: which if they get, they take it for granted, that he loueth them: if not, they ſtorme. To the impure, all things are impure, and ſo are their callings: Tit. 1. 15. they doe the workes of them commonly, not to ſhunne noyſome luſts, temptation, and the fruites of ſloth: nor to ſerue Gods prouidence, neither to ſharpen and fit themſelues thereby to religious exerciſes, and to good duties, nor to auoide offenſiue burthening of others, nor to doe good and relieue them that want, &c. and ſo to obey God in all: nay, to ſpeake the truth, when they are in their ſhops, at markets, in their fields, they are far from ſetting God before their eyes: much leſſe doe they beleeue that God is with them there, to bleſſe them in their worke, as well as when they are occupied in duties meerely religious. Siniſter ends and cauſes doe compell the moſt to yeeld ſome obedience to Gods commandement; but, doubtleſſe, if all were now men of worth, and might liue of themſelues, we ſhould haue few workers. As we ſee by their words, ſaying, Oh ſuch a man is happie! Why? becauſe he need not worke, nor toyle as we doe, but liue eaſily, and enioy the world at will. And by this they bewray that they could bee content to doe ſo too, if neceſſitie vrged them not to doe otherwiſe. Therefore, their labour is as diſpleaſing to God, as their idleneſſe, in a manner, as they vſe it. A wofull thing, ans not without the curſe of God vpon ſuch as will not learne a better direction: that whereas ſome goe about their worke in faith, beleeuing that becauſe they are Gods beloued, therefore God will giue them reſt, bleſſing and ſucceſſe: others riſe earely, ſit vp late, drudge and Pſal. 127. 1. droile, eate the bread of care, and drinke the water of affliction; yet either they thriue not, or at leaſt, they are as much to ſeeke of ſoule-prouiſion, I meane grace and hope of ſaluation, at the end of their weariſome life, as at the beginning: whereas it ſhoud haue been their firſt work, after they came to yeeres of diſcretion. Which ſhould teach vs wiſedome, and not to giue God a ſhort and formal pittance of ſeruice, when we be at Church on the Sabbath; but ſeeing that great worke is to ſeeke with the moſt, therefore to giue all their diligence thereto, that is, to make their ſaluation ſure; that all the ſixe daies we may wholly giue vp our ſelues to other affaires, without ſo much as minding God, or godlineſſe. For the Lord will haue vs ſerue him religiouſly, as well in actions ciuill, not religious, (of their owne nature) as holy: and this is the ſcope of his third Commandement, which tieth the ſeruice of God to euery part of our liues in our common courſe of liuing, as well as the ſecond doth, to religious duties: and therefore muſt be extended to our particuler callings, as being the greateſt part of our time, and wherein our liues are moſt taken vp. But I will proceede in the next Sermon, and here an end. Now to proceed where I left.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               WHile Gedeon was thus hard at worke and labouring, the Doct. 2. in verſ. 11. Angell came and ſpake comfortably vnto him, as if he had bin praying, or in the like exerciſe; and not to terrifie him. To teach vs, that our buſineſſe and works of our callings are no lets to vs frō hauing cōmunion and fellowſhip with God, neither doe hinder his preſence and comfortable being with vs. And the ſame may be ſaid of our callings themſelues ordained by him, bee they meane and baſe, or waightie. Therefore the Lord was with Iacob in his Gen. 28. 20. iourney, and in the way when hee was going from his brother Eſaus wrath and rage. And ſo hee made the Goſpell effectuall in Lydia by Pauls preaching, ſhe being then a ſeller of purple, and rich, and not yet truly conuerted to God. And the Lord bleſſed the two tribes in their calling, and habitation, ſaying: Reioyce Zebulon in thy goings out, [that is, in thy proſperous voiages on the ſeas] and thou Iſhachar in thy dwelling in tents, meaning in thy quiet keeping at home about thy traffique and buſineſſe.
            And by this which I haue ſaid, let vs marke; that if it be not long of our ſelues, our lawfull callings and buſineſſe are no hindrances of vs from the ſeruing of God holily and religiouſly, (as ſome thinke they be) but that from them we may goe to prayer or the like exerciſe, in good manner, euen Note. as wee may from theſe to them. Although I may truly ſay this, that for not well learning it, few can ioyne theſe wiſely and rightly together, becauſe their affections and delights are ſet too egerly towards that which ſauers of the earth and of gaine; which is the cauſe that meaſure is not commonly kept therin. Dauid, ſaying, that he had rather be a doore-keeper in the houſe of the Lord, then to dwell in the tents of the vngodly, (which he would not haue ſaid, if mens attendance vpon the baſeſt worke in their lawful callings, had been an hindrance to them from Gods ſeruice) may by his words ſtay and comfort many weake Chriſtians, who thinke that they are much letted from the duties of godlineſſe, euen by the very vſing of their callings, becauſe they be not ſpirituall, as prayer and the like exerciſes are. But to end this, let the vſe of that which hath been ſaid, be thus much vnto vs, that wee Note. euer labour to be ſo innocent, & well gouerned in al our earthly buſineſſe, and workes of our calling, that we may not driue the Lord from vs, but haue him alwaies with vs by the ſpirit of truth, direction, and comfort, as we haue heard he hath been with other (and was here with Gedeon) in their earthly affaires, for that is the vſing of them aright, and in their kinde.
            
               
The next thing in this verſe is this, that though the Lord ſent his Angell to Gedeon for his owne reliefe and comfort, and alſo the peoples, yet wee ſee this was not done, till they were brought neere to extremitie: all helpe of man was paſt: and they had no other refuge vnder God, but to prouide for themſelues by flying from their dwellings to ſaue their liues. As for example, Gedeon, whoſe father was in ſome authoritie, and therefore none of the pooreſt, yet was at this point, euen thraſhing a little corne, by the aide and nouriſhment wherof, he and his might flie from the Midianites, as farre as that laſted to carrie them.
            By this we learne, that God ſeeth it expedient in his wiſdome, ſometime to leaue the godly long vnder the croſſe, and not to put an end to their troubles by and by, as ordinarily he vſeth to doe: according to that which is ſaid in the Pſalme; Heauineſſe may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning. 
               Pſal 30. 5. And againe, He that commeth, will come, and not tarrie. But he knoweth Heb 10 37. Hoſ. 6. 4. well, that when he vſeth ſo to doe, wee commonly conceiue hope thereby, that our affliction (be it ſickneſſe, diſeaſe, loſſe, or any ſuch) will not hold vs long; and therefore our deuotion is more ſhort and cold; and we in ſo doing, neither honour God, nor haue any proofe of our faith and patience, neither experience, another time after, how to beare our trouble aright: For Note. the which cauſe, the Lord ſometime diſappointeth our falſe hope, and putteth vs to greater plunges, by holding vs longer in our affliction, to the end we may ſearch our ſelues deeplier, and we may be more throughly touched with the feeling of our ſinnes, and rebellions; and ſo turne to him in faith and amendment.
            For this cauſe the Lord holdeth vs ſometime on the racke the longer, as in paine, ſickneſſe, or penurie; as alſo bondage to ſuch as haue ſuperioritie ouer vs, and vſe it to our great diſquiet and wearying of vs, and we pray and long to be deliuered, but the Lord ſeemeth not to heare vs pray, but letteth the burthen remaine ſtill vpon vs. Wherefore, thinke we, doth he ſo? when he profeſſeth, that he afflicteth not willingly, neither delighteth therein, and Lament. 3. 39. yet we lie in paine and griefe. I anſwere, the Lord ſeeth wee be not yet tamed and humbled ſufficiently, great hath the pride of our hearts been, our inconſtancie, vnfaithfulneſſe, vncharitablenes alſo, with other ſinnes, and our mindes are ſet on the world exceſſiuely, and wandring after our diuers luſts. And we are like to returne to theſe courſes againe, if we were ſet at libertie, as ſoone as we deſire: therefore doth he ſeeke to weane vs from theſe and the like, by continuing ſuch vnwelcome croſſes vpon vs.
            So wee are for the ſame cauſes depriued oft times of our deare companion in mariage, which is a great part of death it ſelfe; or driuen from our owne habitation into the fearefull priſon, which taketh much from the delight of liuing; yea, and we are tried with ſudden dearth, as oft times by exceſſiue raine and wet; ſometime by drouth: as Gedeon here was in as hard a caſe, being driuen to flie from his owne dwelling, in a manner famiſhed. In theſe & the like, God leaueth his ſeruants, for the cauſes which I haue mentioned: and alſo to the end that his deliuerance and eaſe giuing after them all, may be the more precious when it commeth, hauing been ſo long deſired: and thirdly, to this end he holdeth his roddes the longer ouer vs, that patience may haue her perfect worke in vs, and himſelfe haue the whole

praiſe. An example of this which hath been ſaid, wee haue in Ioſhua 7. where Ioſhua 7. 5. the people hauing promiſe of Gods aſſiſtance, went againſt the men of Al, not making queſtion but they ſhould ſpeed as well as they had done before at Iericho. But loc, on the ſudden they were ſmitten before their enemies. This aſtoniſht them, till the Lord tels Ioſhua the cauſe: Ye looke, ſaith the Lord, it ſhould be with ye as at other times, but I ſee cauſe of the contrarie. Looke well into the matter, and ye ſhall find that there is ſacriledge among ye, and therefore ye cannot ſtand before your enemies. So that though they were doing the worke of God, yet becauſe there was found in them this infection, it made the Lord to croſſe their hopes, that ſo they might purge out their ſinne, and goe about the worke in a better manner. Many wonder why the Lord ſaieth them long vpon their ſicke beds, whereas if they had their health, they ſay they ſhould worſhip him in publike and priuate with more cheerefulnes. Wheras the Lord aimeth at a further matter, and would purge out their coldnes, hypocritie, careleſneſſe, and other ſinnes accompanying them euen in their good duties, that ſo they may returne thereto with more reuerence, and conſcience. We reade that Paul after his great lifting vp into heauen, was buffered with vnwelcome temptations: which though hee prayed that he might be rid of, yet the Lord ſuſpended his helpe, that Paul might be humbled, and fitted to vſe his knowledge the more fruitfully.
            Now followeth the ſalutation of the Angell; the Lord is with thee, thou valiant 
               Verſe 12. 
               man. If we marke the ebbe and low eſtate of Gedeon (as we haue heard) it was wonderfull to heare this newes brought him, that the Lord was with Note. him, as it was lamentable to ſee in what diſtreſſe he was, when hee heard the words of this meſſage vttered to him. For it was as much as if the Angel had ſaid, the Lord loueth thee, as one of his deare ones, and he is with thee euen now to comfort and preſerue thee, euen in this thy oppreſſion, and therfore none ſhall be againſt thee to hurt thee. This was much to be ſaid in ſuch a time of calamitie, to ſuch an afflicted perſon. And yet, wee muſt know, that it yeeldeth to vs the like inſtruction. That euen in great outward troubles, and inward diſquietnes of minde, when a body would thinke that God, and all good men were our aduerſaries; yet in all this is God with vs whom he hath made a couenant with, yea he loueth and careth for vs, as deare and precious vnto him, euen as Chriſt Ieſus the ſonne of his loue was, though without beautie among men, and as a withered branch, deſpiſed, Eſay 53. Eſay 53. 2. Therefore the ſpouſe in the Canticles ſaith, I am blacke, but comely O ye daughters, 
               Cant. 14. 
               &c. meaning, that the Lord Ieſus her husband eſteemed no whit leſſe of her, neither was ſhe any whit leſſe amiable in his eye, being tanned in the ſunne, then when ſhe was in her perfect beautie. Indeede, the ſinne which cauſeth the Lord to afflict, is odious: but the affliction it ſelfe argueth, that he makes much of vs, becauſe thereby he would purge out of vs that which he miſliketh, which affliction when it hath wrought kindly, the Lord can ſoone change our hew, and reſtore our former beautie, as Iobs example witneſſeth.
            The reaſon is this, he hauing once teſtified his loue freely vnto vs before, at our effectuall calling, and ſhedding it plentifully into our hearts by the Rom 5. 5. holy Ghoſt, ſaying to our ſoules, I am your ſaluation, and your exceeding great reward, and your God alſufficient: and binding vs to beleeue the Gen. 17. 1.
               
ſame; he remaineth like himſelfe, and changeth not; and therefore hee requireth that wee ſhould doe the ſame, that is, by faith hold it faſt in our perſwaſion, that he doth ſo And this is more, that the Lord is ſo affected to vs in the depth of our afflictions, as if we were freed from them all, and were in the middeſt of all proſperitie, which is hardly beleeued for the time while the croſſe oppreſſeth vs. The vſe of this is, that we labour aboue all things to Iudg. 19. be builded vp in our moſt holy faith, that as by it wee ouercome other difficulties 1. Ioh. 5. 4. in the world, ſo we may thereby ouercome this feare and doubt alſo in the middeſt of our calamities; namely, that in our tribulations wee may not ſhrinke backe from this perſwaſion, that for all theſe, yet God is with vs, according to that which the holy man ſaith in the Pſalme; yet God is good to 
               Pſal 73. 1. 
               Iſrael, euen to all that are of an vpright heart, though in outward ſhew it might ſeeme otherwiſe. And againe, Out of the deepe [he meant of ſorrowes] he cried 
               Pſal. 130. 1. 
               vnto the Lord, and he heard, and deliuered him. And to make one point of two, the ſame vſe we ought to make of the other words of the Angell, in calling him valiant man; which was true, becauſe God ſaid it, yet to Gedeon vnlikely to be ſo, and yet he found it afterwards to be ſo. Let it teach vs, to giue God his due, namely, that he be beleeued in al that he ſaith; yea that he ſaith vnto vs, though we be not able to ſee nor feele ſo much for the preſent time, as neither Gedeon did. A point worthie to be marked, ſeeing where God giueth Note. good teſtimonie of his fauour, or reuealeth his will in any thing, we are not as readie to ioyne with him, for the moſt part; but doe faint and doubt, becauſe wee ſee not with bodily eyes (as Thomas deſired to doe) the thing promiſed, as we would. And whereas this troubleth many, that the wicked take occaſion hereby to deſpiſe them, when they ſee that God ſeemeth not to regard them, while hee ſo abaſeth them: let ſuch know, that their miſtaking of the matter, & their falſe ſurmiſing of Gods good meaning to them, ſhall not hurt them, if they fixe the eyes of their mindes vpon this, that God is vnchangeable & conſtant in al his waies, alſo if they can learne to eſteeme of themſelues according to that knowledge and inward feeling they haue had of Gods ancient loue and regard of them in times paſt: and ſo doing, the more their enemies ſcorne them, the neerer the Lord is to them, to take away their reproch.
            But this is well and cleerely laid out in the next verſe, therfore I will paſſe Verſ. 13. to that. It appeareth in this verſe, that as neere as God was to Gedeon, yet he ſaw it not: but concludeth, that ſeeing he and the people of the land were vnder ſuch oppreſſion by the Midianites, that it could not be well with them, neither could he beleeue that God was with him. And he confirmes himſelfe therein, by a reaſon, though of no ſtrength, thus: God was indeed with our fathers (he ſaith) when he brought them out of Egypt, & wrought many miracles for them, but hee did not ſo now for him and the people, therefore how could he thinke, ſaid he, that God was with him now. This ſpake Gedeon from an heauie heart, euen then when the Angell was ſent directly to him with glad tidings. But let vs further examine his words, and make our benefit of them. In ſaying, the Lord could not be with him while Doct. the Midianites ſo oppreſſed them, he ſhewed his great weakneſſe, as I ſaid in the former verſe, affirming that he could not beleeue, while hee ſaw it to be ſo with him. Whereby we may ſee, how hardly the faithfull can be perſwaded,

that the Lord is with them in affliction, how ready ſoeuer they bee to acknowledge it at other times, which I ſpeake not, as though none were: Dan. 3. 21. for both the three children caſt into the hoat burning furnace, and Daniel into the Lyons denne, haue left moſt worthy teſtimonie of their inuincible Dan. 6. 16. faith in their great extremitie, with many other both in ages paſt, and now among vs. But yet in time of calamitie it muſt needs be ſaid, eſpecially if it belong and ſmartie, that our corrupt nature, which is vntoward, and hardly ſuffereth vs to giue credit to Gods promiſes is furtheſt off then from letting vs ſee into them, and beleeue them; and the diuell is readieſt to worke vpon our weakeneſſe at ſuch times, and to take the opportunitie thereof to feare and terrifie vs; and with his fiery darts of vnbeliefe to pierce our hearts, whereby it is with vs, too oft and vſually, as it was here with Gedeon, in ſo much that the Lord being euen then neare vs by his promiſes of comfort and incouragements, which were ſufficient to content and ſtay vs, yet wee ſee it not, neither thinke it to be ſo, ſeeing we giue not our ſelues to ſtudie and Note. conſider aright of this point; which diſtruſt of ours is as vnbeſeeming vs, as it is burdenſome to vs. The remedie muſt be that which I ſpake of before, and ſhall haue cauſe to mention it againe, and that is, to reſt vpon the word and promiſe of God, though we ſee not preſent helpe, as Chriſt ſaid to Martha, Did I not tell thee, thou ſhouldest ſee the glorie of God, if thou canst beleeue? As Ioh. 11. 40. for profane perſons who want faith, what wonder, if they meaſure Gods loue by their preſent flouriſhing, and liuing in eaſe, or wealth, and by their enioying of theſe outward things below, whereby their luſts may bee ſatiſfied? And what wonder, if they iudge it impoſſible, in their deepe diſtreſſes and croſſes, that euer they ſhould wade out of them? As wee reade of that Prince of Iehoram in Iſrael in a fore famine, who hearing the Prophets meſſage from God, touching ſuddaine plentie that ſhould bee on the next day, hee ſaid: Though the Lord would make windowes in Heauen, to powre downe 2. King. 7. 2. corne and prouiſion, yet this thing could not come to paſſe. What was this elſe, but a bold preſuming in great blindeneſſe of that which hee apprehended not, and a very deriſion of the prophecie? And the like we ſee daily in ſuch brutiſh people, who hearing vs preach this doctrine of depending vpon Gods all ſufficiencie by faith, euen in affliction, doe little better then ſcoffe at it; Giue vs wealth, ſay they, and corne and wine, giue vs our fill of meate Pſal. 4. 6, 7. and drinke and money, and as for faith, take it whoſe will. Therefore while they proſper, they are as merry as Nabal, but if God giue them a ſuddaine blow, it ſtrikes them downe flat: they neither haue any armour, to beare off the dint thereof, neither faith to beleeue that it ſhall euer be any better with them but much worſe. Their euill conſcience makes them feare, that this trouble, or that diſgrace, either ſickneſſe or loſſe, will be their vndoing: and as Hamans friends comforted him, ſo they doe themſelues, Heſt. 6. and that Heſter 6. 13. was thus, Thou ſh
                     •
                  lt ſurely fall. And yet in their iollitie who haue ſuch apparance of hope, and ſo great confidence in their eſtate, that it ſhall continue, as they? Better and better they looke for, and feare no change till it come. This I ſay of them: but how vnbeſeeming is it, that a beleeuer ſhould haue ſo much as a tang of this ſtrong vnbeliefe in his deepe ſorrowes? to wit, not onely to wiſh it were otherwiſe, which in ſome ſort is not to be diſalowed, and eagerly to deſire a redreſſe, and impatiently to beare the burthen which

his ſinne hath brought vpon him: and not to be little vpholden by this, that God is the God of the vallies as well as the mountaines; that his loue is the ſame 1. King. 20. 23. in trials (if it alſo appeare not greater) which it was in proſperitie. So vnwelcome is the croſſe, and ſo ſweete is the contrarie to the fleſh, that men haue no eares to heare of this doctrine, to beleeue that God is neare vnto them; yea euen with them in the middeſt of their ſufferings. For why? They looke onely at this, in my proſperitie God was with me, but now my eſtate is contrarie, therefore God is abſent. And therefore if any man be at hand to promiſe them health, fauour, or reliefe in their ſickneſſe, trouble or loſſe, they lift vp their eyes, and open their eares to that voice, though it come but from a man like themſelues; but to God who hath promiſed, I will bee with thee, I will not leaue thee, nor forſake thee, they cannot bee comforted with that ſaying, but ſtill looke full heauily, and ſwearing with Gedeon euery one by himſelfe: Oh Lord, if it bee ſo that thou art with me, how then is this euill and trouble come vpon me? Why? Did I euer promiſe thee (ſaith Ioſhua 1. 5. he) that no aduerſitie ſhould betide thee? Nay rather, haue I not ſent this euill, that thou mighteſt therein haue good proofe of my loue toward thee, in vpholding thee therein? And learne this leſſon yet better, that I am yeſterday and to day, and the ſame for euer. And this is the more odious in vs, Heb 13 8. that we doe not onely faile thus in great and ſearching troubles, ſuch as this was; but euen in ſmaller alſo. And yet, which of vs will not be ready to accuſe the Iſraelites (if queſtion be moued of them) for calling for their fleſhpots and garlike, being then in the wilderneſſe, which ſometime they had in Egypt, and for their murmuring, when they had no other foode but Manna, and now and then wanted water: thus our tongues are ready to deſcant of others, and our cenſure to goe vpon them; which ill becommeth thoſe that ſhew by their own fainting vnder lighter croſſes, that their ſtrength of faith was but ſmall in the time of their peace, and when they had libertie and freedome from affliction, though then they could ſay aloude with open mouth, that they knew God, beleeued in him, and loued him.
            This be noted of vs, out of Gedeons firſt words in this verſe: but now further, in that he was much occupied in remembring and ſpeaking of his forefathers, counting them happie for the myracles which God wrought for them, in reſpect of himſelfe: hereby wee ſee how common a ſinne it is amongſt vs, that wee meaſure our happie eſtate to God ward, by our preſent ſenſe, I meane, by Gods bleſſings or corrections vpon vs, which who ſeeth Ioh. 14. 2. not how an vnequall a rule it is to goe by?
            But further let vs marke, that Gedeon being much occupied about the prerogatiues 
                  Doct. 3. of Iſrael in Egypt, to wit, how God ſhewed himſelfe preſent to them, in working miracles for their deliuerance as if there had been no other thing done there; and as though hee ſhould ſay, they were happie, but wee die here for want of helpe: but marke we (I ſay) this that he ſpeaketh not a word of their bondage, and hardnes, which they ſuffered there, and in the wilderneſſe, as well as that they ſaw his miracles.
            And ſo doe we, if we haue not the peace, proſperitie, welfare, and other prerogatiues that many of Gods ſeruants haue, and namely of our condition: (by meanes thereof (I ſay) we thinke he is preſent with them) but wee account our ſelues to be forgotten and neglected of God in compariſon of Note.
               
them; when yet wee little know of the wants and ſufferings, both outward and inward, of ſuch as we iudge to bee ſo happie, and God to bee preſent with: neither doe wee heare of their ſorrowfull complaints: and thus wee iudge and ſpeake, becauſe of their preſent proſperitie which wee ſee; when yet it is apparent that wee our ſelues are not deſtitute of as great bleſſings ſome other way. A great infirmitie (doubtleſſe) but much greater it is in vs, who haue been taught this oftentimes from many worthie grounds of holy Scripture, that wee ſhould not iudge of our ſelues by others, ſeeing wee know not their eſtate as we doe our owne: for it is certaine, that they haue many great calamities vpon them, euen then when we iudge them to be ſo happie; and there is no doubt, but that they thinke the ſame of vs, for ſome good things they ſee in vs, which they want, and are voide of, we haue a ſurer rule to goe by, which cannot deceiue vs, that is this: that the Lord once louing vs, he doth all things for the beſt to vs. Which if it be ſo, why forget we that, and meaſure our eſtate by other mens. And becauſe wee haue not ſo vſually the comfort of our faith by preſent ſenſe and feeling thereof, when yet we dare not denie but we haue other graces of God in vs, and the workes thereof, which are inſeparable companions to it, wee doe offend much in this, that wee will both bee readie to iudge, and conclude, that we haue no faith, and will count other happie in reſpect of our ſelues, when yet we little know their wants, and complainings thereof, as I ſaid before.
            Beſides, this ſheweth what an enemie our corrupt nature is vnto vs, in the well bearing of our troubles; and how ingenious and skilfull wee are, to catch vp that which ſhould hurt vs, as children doe in handling kniues, or ſuch like, and turne the edge of euery thing againſt our ſelues, which being with godly dexterity hādled, might ſingularly benefit vs. But oh, how ſlow and dull are we in taking hold vpon any ſuch thing as might ſtay vs, quiet, reſolue, and comfort vs? Rare is that man who hath learned this wiſedome, and giueth not place to the diuell, from whoſe malice it is, that in temptation all things ſeeme contrarie to that they be, becauſe we looke vpon them with a troubled eye, and through a falſe glaſſe. The inſtance here vſed by Gedeon, was meete to haue confirmed his faith, rather then to haue weakned it, if he had taken it aright. For if in their troubles before, and in the wilderneſſe, the outſtretched arme of the Lord ſaued them, euen miraculouſly, whoſe worthineſſe yet was as little as his to deſerue it; then how could it hence follow, that now it was ſhortned, and weakned, ſo that it could not helpe him, but was as preſent to vphold him? Againe, let men learne wiſedom by this, in the vſe of example of other men, that by their ſides we ſtrike not through the Lord by our vnthankfulnes. Salomon ſaith, Say not that their daies paſt are better then the preſent, this is follie. Oh, ſay men, In the daies of Eccleſ. 7. 12. our forefathers, what plentie, what ſeaſonable times, what happie liuing there was? Why ſo? And yet if it had been ſo, they wanted many things of more precious nature, which we enioy: and had their part in all our croſſes too, famines, yet the people were but a few, peſtilence, ſword, and warre eſpecially; alſo ill ſeaſons of droughts and wet: vnleſſe their murmuring be againſt God, for multiplying mankinde, what cauſe haue they elſe, to open their mouthes and complaine? But our vnthankfulnes for that wee enioy,

cauſeth vs to be diſcontented in our ſelues for that we want, and to grudge againſt God for partialitie; whereas if we compared things equally, we had ten times more cauſe of preferring the preſent condition, taking it with all hardneſſe, as it is not to be denied but there is much. And ſo oft times doe the poore grudge againſt the wealthy, or rather againſt the Lord who made Prou. 22. 2. both, as Salomon ſaith. One repines that hee is rather a tenant, then a landlord: an vnderling, rather then a commander; a deformed perſon, meanly accounted of, behind hand, diſeaſed, rather then as ſuch or ſuch wealthie men, great, perſonable, honourable, before hand, healthfull. Conſider as wel their wants as their endowments; their grace, as their other parts; the vſe they make, and the account they muſt make of them; their troubles alſo which accompanie them, as well as their gifts and bleſſings: and ſo doing, thou ſhalt ſee, if not thy ſelfe equall, (for God is the author of ſuch inequalitie, and that in great wiſedome) yet at leaſt not ſo much inferiour; to bee ſure, to haue cauſe to be more thankfull.
            But this (laſtly) is not to be omitted; that Gedeon asking for the miracles 
                  Doct. 4. which their fathers told them of, doth ſhew, that their fathers had according to the commandement of God, declared to their children the wonderous workes that he had done for them; and it ſeemeth alſo, that he had learned by them, to know and beleeue them. So muſt parents and children doe, the one ſhould be able to tell, as we ſee in the Pſalme; and the other to hearken Pſal. 78. 1. to the great workes of God, and not to fables: neither ſhould tales of vaine things be told, as of Robinhood; nor the dregges and fragments of popery, and filthie reports of lewd actions, to corrupt their children; as too many parents doe, and hurt them as much this way as any other, who yet are not a few: but they ſhould cauſe them to drinke in the water of life, by good inſtructions. And if parents pleade their owne inabilitie hereto, let them know, that the Miniſtery of the word is a ſpecial meane to ſupply that want: let them be diligent hearers themſelues, and tell the ſame foorth to other, and ſtirre vp their children to doe ſo: that ſo by liniall deſcent, the knowledge and feare of God may be deriued to their poſteritie; that the Lord and his goodneſſe to them, may be had in perpetuall remembrance. And let their children ſee that they minde Gods matters with no leſſe cheerefulnes and regard, then they haue done their worldly affaires: and to this let their parents traine them; for elſe they will ſee light at a creuiſe, and wee know it quickly pricks that will be a thorne. As they be framed vp and manured at firſt, ſo their ſoile will after either beare thornes and briars, or good fruites.
         
         
            
            THE THIRTIE NINE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw followeth the third point in the diuiſion of theſe Verſ. 14. The ſenſe.
                ſixe verſes, and that is, the words of the Angell to Gedeons ſorrowfull anſwere, thus: Whereas thou ſaiſt, that God ſhewed his power to your fathers in deliuering them by miracles, go thou armed by him with the like power, and thereby deliuer thou Iſrael out of the hands of the Midianites, and thereby thou ſhalt know that God is as able to doe great things now, as well as before, yea and that he doth in like maner for his people euen now, as he did in ages paſt. And to make his words of more authoritie with him, he addeth this interrogation, Haue not I ſent thee? And we muſt know, that the calling of the Iudges is ſo diligently deſcribed, that we may vnderſtand, that priuate men were not able to take in hand ſuch great workes without authoritie from God, as to gather armies, and to take vp weapons againſt the mightie: it was a matter of great difficultie and danger, and therefore God authorized them, as here he did Gedeon, and ſo hee did others; that they giuing credit thereto, might be heartned: and therefore he ſaith, haue not I ſent thee? And to returne to Gedeon; thus the Angel proued that God was with him, if he made him able to deliuer Iſrael, which to doe was no leſſe then to worke a miracle.
            By this we all that feare God, are taught; that the times are not ſo hard, no not when we are in affliction, as we take them to be. For either helpe is neerer to vs, then we are aware, (as it was here with Gedeon) or we make our Note. trouble ſeeme greater then it is in it ſelfe, by aggrauating it, when yet wee might ſee, that it either is not ſo great as it ſeemes, or might be many waies greater; or we haue greater comforts elſewhere, which were able to aſſwage our ſorrowes, if wee did not ouerwhelme our hearts with immoderate heauineſſe, which driueth away all comfort from vs. And therefore when wee are ſad and heauy through wants and croſſes, this leſſon ſhould be well learned before of vs, that for all this the Lord is with vs, and he is good to vs: for euen ſo haue other our good fathers been before vs perſwaded in their afflictions; and though they haue now an end of all ſuch languiſhing feares, dolefull doubts, and troubleſome thoughts; yet in their time they had their Note. part in them as we ſtill haue, and we ſhall haue an end of them, and reſt from them, as they now doe.
            There hath no temptations taken vs, but ſuch as appertaine to man: and 2. Cor. 10. 13. God is faithfull, who will not ſuffer vs to be tempted aboue that we be able,

but will euen giue the iſſue with the temptation, that wee may be able to beare it. And therfore, as our Sauiour ſaid to his Apoſtles, when their hearts were troubled beyond meaſure for his bodily departing from them; Let not your hearts be troubled; beleeue in God, and beleeue in me, that I can helpe you 
               Ioh. 14. 1. 
               ſtill, and will be with you: ſo ſhould wee doe, that is, not looke with both eyes vpon our afflictions, but with one eye vpon his conſtant loue and aſſured Note. promiſes, yea and ſettle our hope therein more throughly, by ſaying (as God commandeth) hath not he bidden vs doe ſo? euen as the Angell ſaith to Gedeon about conquering the Midianites, haue not I ſent thee? So the two Diſciples that went from Ieruſalem to Emaus, when our Sauiour went into their companie in the way, bewraied their vnbeliefe concerning his reſurrection that day. This day, they ſay, hee ſhould haue riſen againe, but becauſe they heard not of it, they did not think that there was any ſuch thing. Luke 24. 21. But did not our Sauiour ſhew them their fault, ſo as they ſaw it? for they knew that it was euen he who they ſaid ſhould haue riſen againe that day. Of Mary and Martha the like may be ſaid: who were both beleeuers in Ioh. 11 39. Chriſt, and beloued of him; yet when Chriſt went about to raiſe vp Lazarus, and to that end asked them where they laid him, did they not ſhew that they thought it could not be now done, and therefore anſwered; Lord, by this time he ſtinketh, for he hath been dead foure daies: And yet that they might ſee their weaknes in beleeuing, Chriſt raiſed him vp, which they thought impoſſible In all theſe, and in Gedeon, wee may cleerely ſee our faces as in a glaſſe. For in a croſſe, eſpecially if it bee any thing ſmartie and ſharpe, although we gaue teſtimonie of our faith before, and that with ioyfulnes; yet now in the triall of vs, how poorely are wee armed to goe through it, and perſwaded of the good iſſue of it? Doe we not hang downe the head and Note. faint, and ſay within our ſelues, this croſſe will be our vndoing? And againe, it cannot turne to our good, neither could any haue been ſo vnwelcome to vs. For example, if wee be depriued of our deare companion in mariage, or loſe ſome round ſumme of money, or be otherwiſe impaired in our wealth, or vnder ſome ſtrange paine; doe we ſay, as in time of peace, in meeknes of ſpirit, the Lord who loueth vs, hath done this for our good? euen he that cannot ſuffer the winde to blow vpon vs, hath ſent it? Doe we ſay, It muſt be thus, and is expedient for vs? It is long firſt (I feare) and full faintly done, if we doe it at length, and few attaine thereto. And yet, doe wee not ſee in theſe and the like, the marueilous hand of God, how hee ſendeth light in darkneſſe, ioy in heauines, and as it were, life in death? Doth not God bring vs through them, otherwiſe then wee looked for, and doth he not make vs ſee, and afterward acknowledge, that ſuch affliction was good for vs? Euen as he ſaid to Gedeon here, doth the Midianites oppreſſing of you ſeeme impoſſible to be auoided? Behold then, euen thou ſhalt doe that which ſeemeth impoſſible, and ſhalt ſubdue and ouercome them. Thus wee ſee how we ſhould make our profit of this anſwere.
            
               Gedeon receiuing this anſwere from the Angell, that he ſhould deliuer Iſrael, Verſ. 15. The ſenſe.
                doth now in this fourth point aske of the Angell, by what meanes hee ſhall do ſo great a matter. For theſe words, by diligent conſidering of them, we find not to be ſpoken doubtingly, as before, but as inquiring, and asking a queſtion: as if he ſhould ſay, I doubt not but that ſhall be done which is

promiſed, but I aske by what meanes it ſhall be brought to paſſe. For hee ſheweth that he is not of ability, ſeeing, he was but of a poore family in the halfe tribe of Manaſſeh, which was alſo meane, not mighty as ſome other, and alſo for that he was the leaſt in his fathers houſe.
            His meaning was, that he maruailes that he ſhould deliuer Iſrael, ſeeing he wanted all things which were required to ſo great a worke. For warre could not be taken in hand by a poore man, and one of a meane condition, ſuch an one as he knew himſelfe to be, ſeeing riches and power, and authority eſpecially, were required thereto. And if it be asked whither Gedeon offended Eſay 36. 5. in mouing this queſtion, ſeeing Sarah, and Zachariah were reproued for the like queſtion asking: I am ſure, that ſo Abraham and the Virgin Mary asked the like, and were not reproued, as neither Gedeon was here; Neither was it the mouing of the queſtion that was found fault with: but the doubtfull minde with which it was moued, and therefore they two doubting, were found fault with, that is, Zacharias and Sarah; Abraham and Mary were not; neither therefore Gedeon, as appeareth by the anſwere of the Angell, who reproued him not; but anſwered his queſtion.
            And by this we may learne, that as queſtions moued with doubting of Doct. that which the Scripture reſolueth vs of, is euill, ſo to moue queſtions where we are ignorant, of weighty points which we would be reſolued of, is commendable, in all matters that tends to edification, and moſt of all in and about thoſe which are moſt neceſſary; as Paul himſelfe and the Iailer, before their conuerſion, and after they began to looke after their ſaluation, did ſo; to wit, asked queſtions about it. And to be ſlacke and backward in ſeeking of reſolution, in ſuch caſes where we are ignorant, and haue cauſe to inquire and aske, is in no wiſe to be liked, but rather threatens great hurt and danger: [whereof more might be ſaid; but occaſion hath bin already offered to ſpeake of this duty (of ſeeking relation in doubtfull caſes, both in opinion and conſcience) before.]
            The Angell anſweres him without rebuking him, and ſatisfieth him in Verſe 16. The ſenſe.
                that which he demanded, (that is, how he ſhould be able to doe ſuch a worke:) ſaying; howſoeuer in warre ordinarily taken in hand, riches, power and care requiſite, yet in this, my power without them, ſhall ſuffice: for thou ſhall ſaue Iſrael, not by them, but by my power, becauſe I will be with thee, and by the ſtrength that I will giue thee. And ſo God anſwered Moſes when he ſent him to Pharaoh to deliuer his people out of Egypt: & to Ioſua in like manner, when he ſhould lead the children of Iſrael after him, into the lande of promiſe. And ſo Gedeon here was ſatisfied, eſpecially by theſe Exod. 3. 12. Ioſh. 1. 5. words of the Angell, to wit, that he ſhould ſmite Midian as if they were but one man, euen as it was all one, for the Lord to deſtroy one, as it was tenne hundred thouſand. And this came to paſſe when the Midianites ſlue one an other. So that in vſing meanes to ſerue Gods prouidence, we doe well, when we ſee God his meaning to be, that we ſhould do ſo: but alway with this caueat, that we take heed of Aſa his ſin, who is ſaid to haue made his Phyſitians his God, by ſeeking to them and truſting in them, not ſeeking God [in them. But let vs euer beware leaſt we grow to that profanenes which we read of in that curſed Rabſhaketh; I meane, to iuſtle God out from our enterpriſes,

ſaying as he did, Counſell and ſtrength are for the warre; and ſo not to truſt in the Lord our God.]
            This ſpeech here vttered by the Angell to Gedeon, [I will be with thee] the Doct. verſ. 16. Lord vſeth oft times, and not alwaies in the ſame particuler meaning: ſometime it is vnderſtood of ſome outward bleſſing or deliuerance, as he meant to Ioſhua, in ſaying, I will be with thee againſt thine enemies, and bring thee into the land of promiſe: ſometime of the inward and ſpeciall grace of God, to guide and comfort his withall; as to Mary, Luk. 1. 28. and ſometime both, as to Iacob when hee dreamed by the way of Aram, God ſpake to him, and ſaid to him, I will be with thee; meaning it both of his grace that he would giue him to vphold him, and alſo of other helpe; as in the next words which he addeth there, he doth more particulerly declare, ſaying; I will keep thee whither ſoeuer thou goeſt; whereby he meaneth, that hee would bee Gen. 28. 15. with him to deliuer him from outward enemies till hee ſhould inherit the land which he promiſed him. The words are to be vnderſtood in this place in the firſt ſenſe, namely of deliuering the Midianites into the hands of Gedeon: though I denie not, but Gedeon obtained the latter alſo, as well as the former.
            And this ſhould teach vs, that if God haue promiſed to any of his, who beleeue vnto ſaluation, his power, protection, and helping hand in any outward troubles, they may and ought to beleeue, that he will doe, as hee hath promiſed. And as he ſhewed himſelfe to be his, in this manner, ſo hee will vndoubtedly be with vs in this age, to helpe, deliuer, and giue ſucceſſe to vs, as he hath alreadie done greater things for vs. But yet, ſeeing we vſe to look too narrowly to Gods outward promiſes, that if they be not performed to vs to the full, we are readie to complaine; therefore know we this, that if he doe faile in any point of that which wee looke for, his promiſe being but conditionall, he will ſupplie all ſuch wants by his grace ſpirituall, ſo as wee beleeue: as patience, contentation, and confidence, which are farre more worth then if we enioyed the outward benefit it ſelfe. For the ſpirituall includeth temporall, as reaſon in the ſoule of man containes the inferiour powers of motion, ſenſe, growth, and life. Sunder not thoſe that God hath combined together. If hee haue giuen vs his Chriſt, wee know he hath no Rom. 8. 32. greater things to denie vs, and much leſſe he will ſmaller. And doubtleſſe, for want of beleeuing the greater, wee faile ſometimes of the ſmaller; and that iuſtly, as a puniſhment of our diſhonouring God by our diſtruſt.
            Beſides this, we may learne here, that the power of God communicated 
                  Doct. 2. to vs, is ſufficient to make vs doe and worke great things, farre aboue our reach and abilitie, in warre or in peace; in perſecution, alſo againſt ſinne, the diuell, or whatſoeuer elſe: as here, when God promiſed his power to Gedeon, he aſſured him, that euen he, a weake man, ſhould bee able to ſubdue a mightie and great people. And when is this might giuen to men? euen when God calleth and appointeth them to any ſeruice that ſhal require and ſtand in need thereof. As now Gedeon being called to this ouercomming of the Midianites, he was furniſhed with the gifts he had not before; as wiſedome, courage, ſtrength, and faith in particuler promiſe of aſſiſtance and victorie. And therefore by it hee is ſaid to haue been made ſtrong, and of a Heb. 11. 34.
               
weake man, valiant in battell. Heb. 11. So hee enabled Paul to beleeue the Act. 26. 11. promiſe of ſtanding by him and bearing him out, at ſundrie times before his enemies: whereby hee wrought ſuch a worke, as none but an Apoſtolicall ſpirit could worke. And euen ſtill the like courage, cheerefulnes, hope, gifts, he giues to ſuch Miniſters of his, whom he meanes to vſe to the great ends mentioned, I meane to bring many to Chriſt, Act. 26. and Epheſ. 4. which Acts 26. 18. Epheſ. 4. 12. he denieth to them whom he calleth not, and who beleeue not in him. So that they neuer ſhall be able to compaſſe that which the other ſhall.
            So had Moſes, and the Apoſtles, as their place and occaſions offered, did require. And ſo may and ought wee to be perſwaded, that how vnfit and vnworthie ſoeuer we are and feele our ſelues to be, if the Lord call vs to any eſtate or dutie, he will arme vs againſt all difficulties, toile and tediouſneſſe therein. The Lord doth not lay heauie burthens vpon men, and giue them weake ſhoulders: but dealeth out to euery member his meaſure, according to the vſe and ſeruice which belongs to it: a double ſpirit to Eliſha aboue Eliah, according to his double neede. Euen as we ſee the gift of ſtrength is giuen to the armes and ſhoulders in mans body, becauſe they ſerue for the ſtrongeſt vſe. And ſo, becauſe he knoweth the difficulties both within and without, which a godly Chriſtian ſhall meete with, therefore he leaues him not to ſinke vnder them, but giues him faith, and enables him by that to ouercome, not one or a few, but the world, that is all. And as our Sauiour 1. Ioh. 5. 4. Matth. 6. 30. ſpeakes, Hath the Lord ſo clothed the graſſe, the creatures, and will he not much more prouide for his people? So by the like argument, hath God giuen euery creature, euen the beaſts, ſome one gift or other, according to the neede thereof, to it own preſeruation, as ſwiftnes to the ſmall, ſtrength to the great, to ſome one kinde of armour, to ſome another; and ſhall he faile in the neceſſarie furniſhing of his people with that grace, without which they ſhould not be able to attaine the end of their redemption and election? No doubtleſſe. But here is a two-fold obiection: Firſt, many who zealouſly deſire to 
                  Obiect. 1. Anſw.
                doe good in the Church, or otherwiſe, yet want gifts. Anſw. It is not euery mans part to iudge aright of another mans gifts: for gifts which may ſeeme meane to vs, may be mightie through the bleſſing of God concurring to effect great matters. Againe, I ſay, if God giue but ſmall ſufficiencie and gifts, he requireth but a proportioned worke and ſeruice: for he exacts not that vantage of him who hath but one talent, which he doth of another who hath fiue. To the ſecond obiection, that many whoſe gifts are great, 
                  Obiect. 2. Anſw.
                doe little good. I anſwere: Their ſinne is the greater, but that hinders not that doctrine; for though all whom God ſets on worke ſhall bee fitted, yet not contrarily, if he appoint them not to the worke, neither call them to it.
            
               Verſ. 17. And he anſwered him, I pray thee, if I haue found fauour in thy ſight, then ſhew me a ſigne that thou talkest with me.
               
               Verſ. 18. Depart not hence, I pray thee, vntill I come vnto thee and bring mine offering, and lay it before thee: and he ſaid, I will tarrie vntill thou come againe.
               
               Verſ. 19. Then Gedeon went in, and made ready a Kid, and vnleauened bread of an Ephath of flower, and put the fleſh in a basket, and put the broath in a pot, and brought it out vnto him vnder the oake, and preſented it.
               
               Verſ. 20. And the Angell of the Lord ſaid vnto him, Take the fleſh and the
                  
                  vnleauened bread, and lay them vpon this ſtone, and powre out the broath, and hee did ſo.
               
               Verſ. 21. Then the Angell of the Lord put foorth the end of the ſtaffe that he held in his hand, and touched the fleſh and the vnleauened bread, and there aroſe fire out of the ſtone, and conſumed the fleſh and the vnleauened bread; ſo the Angell of the Lord departed out of his ſight.
               
               Verſ. 22. And when Gedeon perceiued that it was the Angell of the Lord, Gedeon then ſaid; Alas my Lord God, for becauſe I haue ſeene an Angell of the Lord face to face, I ſhall dye.
               
               Verſ. 23. And the Lord ſaid vnto him, Peace be vnto thee: feare not, thou ſhalt not dye.
               
               Verſ. 24. Then Gedeon made an Alter there vnto the Lord, and called it Iehouahſhalem: vnto this day it is in Ophrah of the father of the Ezrites.
               
            
            OF the firſt of the foure things mentioned in the 11. verſe, to wit, who Verſ. 17. The ſenſe.
                ſhould deliuer Iſrael out of the hands of the Midianites (which was Gedeon) wee haue heard: now followeth the ſecond, namely of the ſigne which Gedeon asked, by which he might know who he was who talked with him. To proceed therefore, Gedeon hauing a promiſe of ſo great a matter as the victorie, from the Angell, who ſpake to him; whom he tooke to be neither Angell nor God, but a man to vtter the words of God vnto him; he deſires of him a ſigne, that he might not be deceiued with a fancie, but might know that he was ſuch an one as could make good his word to him, that is, a man of God, as hee tooke him to be. Here before I goe on further in the ſtorie, I will ſtay a while by occaſion of this ſpeech of Gedeon. And let vs know, that which he did, in deſiring this of the meſſenger, was meet for him to doe; for it behoued him to trie the ſpirits, whether they were of God or no. For an euill ſpirit can change himſelfe into an Angell of light. And this 2. Cor. 10. 14. is eſpecially to be done, when any thing is vrged vpon vs that is doubtfull, and which may ſeeme vnlawfull to be done. For there a man may not eaſily aſſent, vnleſſe he be perſwaded that ſuch a thing is from God. Excellent and commendable are the examples of Manoah, Cornelius, the men of Beroea, Iudg 13. 12. Act. 10. 7. Act. 17. 12. for this wiſedome.
            And this is to teach vs, that we ought to haue the like ſcruple, and make the like queſtion, when any thing doubtfull is vrged vpon vs, that for no Verſ. 17. Doct.
                mans pleaſure, nor by example of any, we be led; but to proue all things by the waights of the Sanctuarie, which is the word of God: that ſo wee may be ſatisfied. And if in the mouth of two or three witneſſes that bee confirmed which is brought vnto vs, wee are there to reſt: and that ſhould be enough to vs; but as for miracles or ſignes now, that it is the truth which is taught vs, we are not to ſeeke or aske for any. And the like we are to doe in all our troubles and feares, and not to fetch comfort from conceit, or the ſpirit without the word, or from any thing elſe, which is but a falſe ground. And this wiſe regard in Gedeon, to deale ſure in ſo weightie a caſe, and not raſhly to depend vpon a bare mans word for the effecting of ſo great a work, as hee knew none but God could enable him vnto: laieth greatly to our charge, who in matters of farre greater weight, doe yet deale farre more looſely and ſlenderly then he did in this. The wiſe man ſaith, The foole beleeueth 
               Prou. 14. 15.
               
               euery thing▪
                meaning euery thing, which hee deſireth and would faine haue, he beleeueth, and is eaſily perſwaded of it that it is ſo as he would haue it, though he haue nothing of moment and good ground to ſhew for it. Among men it is counted a ſigne of great folly to deale thus rawly in things onely concerning our temporall eſtate, and to reſt vpon euery mans word and report, yea though it be but ambigious and obſcurely vttered: and the reaſon is good, why it is ſo: they who doe ſo, giue euery man aduantage to ouerreach, abuſe, deceiue, and wrong them, beſides the great controuerſies and contentions, ſuites and charge, which they procure to themſelues needleſly thereby. But (to ſpeake of weightier matters) what one among many counteth it his folly, to hold his ſaluation vpon ſandie grounds and euidences, as vpon his owne good meanings and deſires, vpon the good opinion that others conceiue of him, vpon ſome ſlight ſorrow for ſinne, or confeſſing of it to God, alſo vpon his hearing of the word, vpon a blinde hope, or vpon ſome good yet common fruites of hearing; as good ſpeech, in ſome places, vpon taking liking of good people, liking the Miniſterie, or lending, and giuing ſome thing to the poore in their diſtreſſe: theſe things are good indeed, and (I am perſwaded) found to be in few, but yet theſe are not to be taken for infallible tokens. Nay, concerning this waightie matter, men are willing to build the hope of their ſaluation, vpon the bare word of a Miniſter, though hee neuer ſaw ſound reaſon for his ſo ſpeaking, and aſſuring them thereof, but for that they haue been baptized, and doe liue in the viſible Church, neither haue they any thing out of the word of God to quiet and reſolue themſelues: whereas the triall of a mans ſtate to Godward ſtands in this, that by the Scripture he can proue himſelf to be an happy perſon, becauſe the word hath humbled him, changed him, reformed him, and wrought in him faith in the promiſe, an earneſt longing after that which is promiſed, and a waiting for it, till it be enioyed without wearineſſe, and an heartie deſiring that other did ſo likewiſe, with ſuch other. But of this much is written.
            To proceed further, Gedeon now hauing deſired a ſigne for the confirming Verſe 18. 19. The ſenſe.
                of his faith, and thinking him to be, as I haue ſaid, a man of God, deſired him to ſtay till hee went and prepared for him, as Abraham and other had done in the like caſe, and while he ſhould refreſh himſelfe, he purpoſed to talke further with him about the ſigne. And the things which he prepared for him, were both fit to be eaten as nouriſhment, as alſo to ſerue for ſacrifice, though the word ſignifieth both a gift, & an offering: but for proofe that Gedeon brought not theſe things foorth to the man of God, (as hee tooke him to be) for ſacrifice, but that he might be refreſhed by them, hereby it may appeare, that he neither ſet vp any altar there, as he did afterwards, to offer peace-offerings thereon; (reade verſe 24.) neither did hee take the man to be God to conſume it with fire. I haue ſet downe that meaning of the verſe, which by weighing both, I take to be the trueſt. And yet I denie not, but that the Angell vſed that meate, beſide the expectation of Gedeon, he vſed it (I ſay) for a ſacrifice, as appeareth in the 21. verſe, and thereby gaue the ſigne, which was before asked of him. Both come to one end, for a ſacrifice was the ſigne to Gedeon, whether firſt or laſt. The things that Gedeon brought are named in the 19. verſe. According to the ſetting downe of theſe

things, to wit, that Gedeon did, as Manoah did, that is; offer refreſhing to the meſſenger, we are to know that the men of God were in former times in ſo great account with his people, that they were glad that might receiue them, and as the manner then was, to make them ſtay to eate with them. And Abraham, as I ſaid, did the like: euen ſo did Lot alſo, and they loſt nothing Gen 18. 3. and 19. 2. thereby, as we may reade in the ſtorie of them both. The ſame did Gedeon here, who thought him to be an holy man, and therefore deſired him to take ſome repaſt with him.
            This hoſpitality was vſed of the godly to ſtrangers, according to the commandement Doct verſ. 18. and 19. Heb. 13. 1. of God in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, which is this; Be not forgetfull to intertaine ſtrangers. For they are ſad in heart, and when they are regarded in ſtrange places with kind and heartie welcome, as being commended thither by the Church of God, as it is meete they ſhould, (for how elſe can they be knowne for ſuch) it is a worthie fruite of loue in them that receiue them, and it maketh glad the hearts of the other, who are receiued of them. Much more (then) ought ſuch kindneſſe to be ſhewed to the 
                  •
               aithfull, that are knowne to vs, and are in wants. And they that ſhut vp their compaſſion from ſuch, (when the prophane will be too forward that way, to their companions, yea to their dogges) how dwelleth (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) the loue of God in them? Not that hereby I approue of their raſhnes, 1. Ioh. 3. 17. who to auoide vncharitablenes and vnmercifulnes, put no difference betweene ſuch as they harbour, or relieue, which the Apoſtle preciſely warneth vs of, in the Galath. 6. 10. that we aime eſpecially at them that be of the Gal. 6. 10. ſame houſehold and body, whom it moſt concernes vs to looke to, hauing charge of ſuch poore giuen vs by Chriſt. Such as obſerue not this, light vppon good perſons by haphazard, as we ſay, and for the moſt part doe caſt away their bread vpon the waters. For many glozing hypocrites, with counterfeit faces and letters of teſtimonie, with ſome pretence of honeſtie, doe abuſe good people, who repent them often of their forwardnes in receiuing ſuch rangers and locuſts, both Miniſters and others. For beſides their gifts, they haue drawne them by cunning flatterie, to lend them money, or ſhew them other curteſie anſwerable, and yet as deceiuers, haue left them in the lurch; to teach them wiſedome againſt afterwards. The like may be ſaid of raſh Suretiſhips, Commendatorie Letters, and the like to ſuch, as of whom we haue no pledge, to vſe Salomons phraſe. Let Chriſtians learne wiſedome by this, and not vnder colour of pitie become a prey to ſuch hypocrites, as make benefit to themſelues of that their ranging courſe, and will be readie to recompenſe them with nought but deriſion and ſcorne for their ſimplicitie. Though, I confeſſe, it is the ſafer extreme of the two, and the neerer to charity, to be credulous, then too ſuſpicious of them, as being vnknowne and ſtrangers. But as we learned in the former point, not to truſt our ſelues without good proofe, ſo (I trow) much leſſe others, being not approued.
            In theſe two verſes is declared, how Gedeon was rewarded for his kindnes Verſ. 20. 21 ſhewed to the man of God, as he tooke him to be: and how he ſeeking carefully to know the will of God, where it much concerned him, and whereof hee doubted, hee was well ſatisfied and comforted thereby. For the meate which Gedeon brought him, being as the man commanded, laid on a rocke, he by diuine power brought fire out of the rocke, and burnt vp and conſumed

the fleſh and vnleauened bread. Euen as Eliah called fire from heauen, 1. King. 18. 38 and conſumed the burnt offering, to the conuicting of the Baalites. And as he for the cleerer manifeſting of the miracle, powred much water vpon the burnt offering before it was conſumed; ſo did the Angell here cauſe the broth to be powred on the place, to moiſten it, where the meate ſhould be conſumed, for the better manifeſting of the miracle. And the like is ſaid of Abel, Heb. 11. that by faith he obtained of God this reall teſtimonie of Gods approbation, that hee receiued his offering and ſignified the ſame, as God vſed to doe, by conſuming it, Gen. 4. By the like miraculous burning of it, Heb. 11. 4. with Gen. 4. 4. 
               Gedeon was confirmed, that the meſſage which was brought him of his deliuering Iſrael was true, hee being knowne to bee the Lord Iehouah, who brought it.
            And here let vs learne, firſt by this earneſt ſeeking of Gedeon to know Gods Doct. verſ. 20. 21. will, in that hee was ſo anſwered, and ſatisfied: that wee neuer ſeeke to the Lord in vaine in deſiring heartily to bee reſolued of our doubts, or eaſed in our conſciences. For it is true in the praying for theſe, as for other things, which the Apoſtle Iames ſaith, the prayer of a righteous man auaileth much, if it 
               Iames 5. 16. 
               be ſeruent. Oh to depend on God in our difficulties and doubtfull caſes, and to vſe the beſt meanes we can with confidence, and with an humble & quiet ſpirit, how much it aduantageth vs? And contrariwiſe, we may be troubled long enough, before we ſhall finde eaſe, if we either vſe any indirect or vnlawfull meanes, or if in the vſe of the beſt we commit not our way to God, and depend vpon him. Dauid in the 73. Pſalme complaines greatly of a Pſal. 73. 13, 14. temptation which grew vpon him, and ſtrongly aſſaulted him, to wit, That becauſe they who feared not God, proſpered outwardly more then himſelf did, therefore his eſtate was not ſo good as theirs, nor he beloued of God, ſo much as they: wherein, if God had not ſhewed him an iſſue, he being ſo vnable for the time to ſtay himſelfe, how had he been wearied and diſcomforted thereby? But hauing with good aduice weighed the matter in the ballances of the Sanctuarie, laying their and his eſtates together, what ſignification giueth he of a ſatisfied and quiet minde? How cleerely ſaw he his owne follie in grudging at their poore happineſſe, or rather daintie miſerie? And ſo as a man recouered out of a frantike paſſion, and new come to himſelfe, how freely doth he ſhame himſelfe, calling himſelfe foole, ignorant, and a beaſt for his ſo iudging, and then deſcry the dangerous condition of the vngodly, as that they were ſet in ſlipperie places, for all their floriſhing? So great is the ioy which Gods people conceiue, when they hauing conflicted Note. long with doubts of minde, or ſorrow of heart, either before forgiuenes enioyed, or after; they flee to God, either by prayer, as Hezekiah did, or hearing Eſay 38. 2. the word, reading, communicating their feares and griefes to ſuch as can quiet them and pacifie their conſcience: as the example of Cornelius ſending to Peter, and the Eunuch communicating with Philip, who went away reioycing, with ſundrie others, doe witneſſe? which ſhould be ſufficient to incourage them who ſuffer theſe ſores to feſter inwardly through concealing them, and ſo to preuaile againſt thē, (through their negligence and fainting vnder them) to make their caſes knowne in time: for if they can neither by prayer, faſting, hearing, &c. find comfort againſt their heauineſſe, reſolution in their doubts, ſtrength againſt ſinnes, direction for particuler duties and

the like, their laſt refuge muſt be to repaire to them that can doe the part of an Ananias to Paul, or this Angell to Gedeon; I meane, bring to mind ſomewhat which might ſpeake to the heart of them, and reſtore them to good health and comfort againe. Which (doubtleſſe) during the temptation, they could not feele. But the folly of men, or their baſhfulnes, or ignorance is great, who denie themſelues the libertie which God alloweth them, and ſo procure the more ſorrow to themſelues. I ſpeake of ſuch, as may haue reſolution, for ſeeking: whereas thouſands cannot, who full gladly would make their benefit thereof. But here it is time to make an end.
         
         
            THE FORTIETH SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               HOW Gedeon was anſwered and ſatisfied about the Doct. 2. in verſ. 20. 21. ſigne he asked, wee haue heard: Now note wee further here, what a bleſſing and reward he obtained of God for his kindneſſe and curteſie he ſhewed to the man, as he thought him to be: whereby wee ſee how God rewardeth thē that receiue and make account of his true ſeruants and meſſengers. Gedeon, though he were driuen by the Midianites, euen neere to famine, and ſore oppreſſed by thē, ſo that the forgoing of a little in that time of need and extremity, was more then a thouſand times as much in the time of plentie; yet euen then he did not withhold his liberalitie from this meſſenger Heb. 13. 2. of God. And what loſt he by it? Nay, how infinitly did he gaine? So, Abraham doing this dutie, receiued for good men, Angels of God. So, that poore widow yeelding her mite to the Prophet of God, that is ſomewhat, 1. King. 17. 13. euen of the little that ſhe had, receiued great abundance for it. So, our Sauiour ſaith agreeably to this: Whoſoeuer ſhall giue vnto one of theſe little ones he Matth. 10. 42. meant ſuch as beleeued in him, and were in the ſight of the world, abiect to drinke but a cup of cold water onely, in the name of a Diſciple, verely I ſay vnto you, he ſhall not loſe his reward. But of this dutie before: this I adde by way of remembrance thereof.
            This intertainment is a part of liberalitie, and a fruite of the Spirit. So any refreſhing of the hearts of Gods Saints, is a worthie worke, and ſhall be regarded of God. I acknowledge that men muſt doe in this, as they may continue other duties which are impoſed vpon them, about their own fleſh Philem 7. and familie, but yet they muſt not vnder that colour be cold and backward in this dutie of loue, neglecting and letting paſſe ſuch opportunities of doing good as are offered, for vncertainties to come. As for them that waſte much vpon lewd companie, play, gaming, whoring, drinking, they ſhall one

day know to their coſt, what it is to laſh out, and ſpend the good bleſſings of God in ſuch vnprofitable and hurtfull manner, whereby ſo many members of Chriſt might be relieued. But for the intertaining and beſtowing of a good part of mens goods in ſuch manner as I here ſpeake of, and commended, as Gedeon did, it is to receiue men for their mutuall good and edification, and not to euill and carnal ends. And therfore that Chriſtians, through ſelfeloue, or worldlineſſe ſhould be too faſt handed, ſcantie and nigardly towards other their poore brethren, it ſauours of ſmall liking or ioy they haue in their communion of Saints, or fruite of their profeſſion, whatſoeuer loue to God they pretend. For the practiſe of loue and mercie muſt approue our godlineſſe to be ſound, and not frothie. And yet this is apparent, that many a man ſaueth more by his vpright and conſcionable walking and feare of God, (the which before hee made no conſcience to miſpend vpon his luſts, as many other doe) then would well ſerue them to allot and applie to good vſes. But to returne, when the Angell had thus reſolued Gedeon, by the ſigne mentioned, he departed from him; which cleerely ſheweth to what end he came vnto him.
            Now as it falleth out oft times to Gods ſeruants, that the end of one trouble Verſ. 22 23 24. The briefe meaning of them ad, and a larger vnfolding of the 22. verſe.
                is the beginning of another, there ariſeth a new trouble to Gedeon, after that he was deliuered out of the former doubt & danger. And in the next verſe, it is ſhewed how hee was brought out of it, and in the 24. how hee giueth God thanks for it. His trouble was this, that he had ſeene an Angell of God, therefore he feared hee ſhould die. And no maruell: for wee ſhall reade in many places, that the old fathers, when they had ſeene God (as he might be ſeene, or an Angel,) were ſore terrified, and afraid that they ſhould die. So in this vnperfit ſpeech, ſaying, I haue ſeene an Angell of God] hee ment, as we alſo muſt ſupplie it thus; I ſhall die. So Iacob after he awoke, and Geneſ. 28. 16. perceiued the Lord to be preſent in the place, where he lay, and had dreamed that night; was afraid, and ſaid, The Lord was in this place, and I was not aware: and hauing wraſtled with the Angell, thinking that he had been a man, maruelled that he liued.
            So when Manoah knew that it was an Angell of the Lord, that had ſpoken Iudges 13. 21. to him, he ſaid to his wife; wee ſhall ſurely die, ſeeing wee haue ſeene God. So the people ſaid to Moſes on Mount Sinai, when God came Exodus 19. Deut. 5. 25. 27. downe, they were ſo afraid, that they deſired Moſes that he would intreate the Lord to ſpeake no more to them in that manner, leſt they ſhould die. The reaſon of this feare in them, was ſinne, that made them, as Adam, afraid Gen. 4. 10. of Gods voice after he had ſinned, which before he reioyced aboue all things, to heare. And thus through the darkeneſſe which came of ſinne, they not being able to abide the light of Gods preſence, their conſciences draue them to flie from God, who is almighty, and holy and pure, who can abide no vncleanneſſe, which all mortall men are full of: ſo that euen they who were not tainted with wilfull ſinning againſt God, eſteemed it is preſent death to haue God preſent. As the good Prophet Eſay teſtifier
                  •
               , ſaying: Woe is me, for I am vndone, becauſe mine eies haue ſeene the Lord of Hoaſts. And though he confeſſed that hee was a man of poluted lipp
                  •
               s, for the neerer men come to God, the leſſe blemiſhes and ſmaller they ſee in Eſai 6. 5. themſelues) yet we know that was indued with grace. But this in him and

others came of their iuſtly troubled conſcience, vnſound and vnpure, ſeeing that God of himſelfe by nature, is both the author of life and comfort, and therefore not to be feared: and ſo was he now in his appearing to Gedeon in this place full of mercy and goodneſſe, and in many things decclared the ſame vnto him, though he, when he knew that it was the Lord, was euen (as it were) brought out of himſelfe, ſaying alas, becauſe I haue ſeene an Angell of the Lord, face to face.
            This teacheth what high reuerence we ought to haue God in, as oft as 
                  Doct. Verſ. 22. we come into his preſence, where he hath promiſed more eſpecially to appeare and be preſent, namely, in the aſſemblies of his people; and to bee no otherwiſe affected, when wee thinke of him, and pray vnto him (but yet without terror) and by conſequence euery where, becauſe we haue learned, that he is euery where. And the rather wee ſhould follow the examples of the ſeruants of God in this their reuerence before God, (and yet learning to reſiſt immoderate feare) becauſe of the contrary lightneſſe and boldneſſe of many in this point, doe not thinke of God in any ſort, as his Highneſſe and Maieſtie doth require. And yet I ſpeake this euen of ſuch as are not of the worſt ſort. But as for the prophaneneſſe and brutiſhneſſe of ſome, who are in a contrary extremity to Gedeon, and to all that walke in reuerence before God, it proceedeth from a farre worſe cauſe then the moſt imagine, to wit, meere groſſe ignorance, or infidelity: as appeareth by their behauiour both in publike place, where God is more ſpecially preſent, and in priuat, whither they reſort for their pleaſure and buſineſſe. In the one, they paſſe the time in ſleeping, prating, laughing, gazing about, wandring of mind, and the like vnreuerence: in the other in drunkenneſſe, wantonneſſe, gaming, rotten and curſed ſpeech and behauiour. So that the cauſe of this extreamitie in theſe, and or their ſo great vnreuerence, is no other then I haue ſaid, the leaſt of both which, ignorance I meane, prouoketh them not (we ſee) to deuotion (though Poperie ſhameleſſely calles it the Mother thereof) but to diueliſhneſſe, and at length, to deſparation. For as here the contrary exceſſe in Gedeon aroſe from the beholding of God amiſſe, and the too much obſeruing of his glory without his goodneſſe: ſo the not reuerencing of God at all, either in his word or works, is the fruite of meere blindneſſe and darkeneſſe and vnbeliefe. But to returne, as the ſeruants of God, ought to carrie themſelues in all high reuerence, in all places, and ſpecially in his worſhip by Prayer, the Word and Sacraments; ſo when we indeuour to doe thus, yet if we deepely thinke and conſider of our owne vileneſſe and wretchedneſſe, and of Gods greatneſſe and glorious maieſtie, out of the fleſh and humane nature of Chriſt, and without applying his ſufferings and obedience to vs by faith, we cannot be without danger and ſenſe of ſwallowing vp, as Gedeon and other were. And not only ſo, but we are oft times ouercome and almoſt ouerwhelmed, when we doe the beſt wee can, and thinke of Chriſt as we are able, we are ſo eaſily led and carried by the ſpirit of bondage and feare. And therefore what may we thinke of the ſuperſtition in Poperie, which hath cauſed in the people ſuch carnall feare of God and ſlauiſh terrors and ſeruile worſhip; but that it is the bane and poiſon of infinite thouſand people? becauſe it is a doctrine that driueth to diſpaire, leading men with horror of Gods wrath, but ſheweth them no way to eſcape it which

will ſtand them in any ſtead, iuſtling aſide vnfained faith, which onely knits vs to God through Chriſt, and cauſes vs to pray or draw neere to him, without aſtoniſhment, yea with much comfort. But to leaue them, and to returne to the people of God, I grant that this is through want or weakeneſſe of faith, which I ſaid of them: ſuch want and weakeneſſe is oft times in the beſt of vs, or at leaſt may be, ſo that we are not priuiledged from it. And this argueth our great ſinne and corruption, and that our faith is neuer here perfect, when it is at the beſt. The view, ſenſe & experience hereof, and of feare and frighting, is notably and clearely diſcerned to be in vs, in thunder, lightning, or ſome other apparent danger, when the preſence of Gods glorious Maieſtie preſſeth vs more neerely. And though now we in this latter age of the world, are not to looke for ſuch appearances of Chriſt and Angels in the ſhape of men, but are ſent to Moſes and the Prophets, and to ſearch the Luke 16. 29. Ioh. 5. 39. Scriptures to know that, of and concerning God, which we haue need of, yet in the former and firſt age both of them were; as in the forementioned examples of Abraham, Iacob: and Manoah is to be ſeene: and in that Viſion of Eſay, when he ſaw God ſit in a throne, and with him Seraphins crying one Eſay 6. 2. 3. to another, Holy, holy, holy, &c. The vſe hereof is, that we daily by faith, with reuerence, approch to the throne of grace for forgiueneſſe, and thereby take holy confidence to our ſelues to goe out and in before the Lord in all ſeruice, and to view and conſider his workes of iudgement, without corrupt Note. and terrible feare, and yet without vnſeemely lightneſſe and boldneſſe; for this our good God, is a great God and a conſuming fire, Heb. 12. And by this Heb. 12. 29. temperature, we ſhall be kept from extreamitie on both ſides. For as this eſtate driueth away lightneſſe, ſo we may be aſſured, that we bee in beſt manner freed from the feare of Gods wrath iuſtly deſerued by our ſins, (while we hold faſt our confidence and aſſurance of the pardon thereof, with the continual keeping them vnder, being forgiuen) wherby we ſhal be freed alſo from ſuperſtitious, carnal, and ſuperfluous feare, which, whereſoeuer it is, doth not a little diſtemper the mind, and make it vnfit for dutie. Iohn 14. 1.
            Now further beſides this, ſeeing after Gedeons doubt anſwered by the Doct. 2. in Verſe 22. Angell, this new trouble aroſe immediately, that he feared hee ſhould haue died by ſeeing the Angell of God; we ſee how one trouble and griefe commeth in the necke of another to Gods ſeruants; who if they ſhould not haue deliuerances accordingly, ſhould faint and not be able to goe vnder them. Euen as we reade of Iob, that one meſſage being ended of the loſſe of cattell, Iob 1. 18. another commeth to him of the throwing down of his houſe by the winds, and the killing of his children. And although there be intermiſſion from trouble, God prouiding for his people, that they may not be diſcouraged, as if all ſhould come at once, they muſt needs be; yet their frailtie ſo requiring, 1. Pet. 1. 6. Note. he ſeeth it beſt that the rod be held ouer them euery while, and ſometime make them ſmart; and all little inough, to hold them within their bounds. For we may all, euen the beſt, ſay with the Prophet, before we were afflicted, we 
               Pſal. 119. 67. 
               went aſtray, but after we kept thy word.
            The vſe hereof firſt is this, that ſeeing we are ſubiect, and lye open to trouble ſo many waies, wee neſtle not our ſelues here below in any earthly delights, ſo that we be vnwilling to heare of any change, but rather looke for it, and be armed againſt it; and ſo the ſmart that commeth thereby, ſhall not

ſting and aſtoniſh vs, as otherwiſe it will. And ſecondly, ſeeing God ſeeth it meete in his wiſdome to exerciſe vs with many afflictions, he ſeeing that 1. Pet. 1. 6. we haue need of them, and all to the end that ſo he may the better hold vs vnder; it is moſt abſurd, that we ſhould in any ſort ſeeke to fulfill the luſts of our hearts, whereby wee multiply and bring further trouble vpon our liues.
            The other thing therefore which we may note here by Gedeon, is this, 
                  Doct. 3. how ſoone our faith is ouerwhelmed by affliction. For though the Angell prooued it to him, to his good contentment, that he was the man which ſhould deliuer Iſrael out of the oppreſſion of the Midianites; yet as though no ſuch thing had been ſpoken to him, nor beleeued by him, by and by, as ſoone as he perceiued that he was an Angell with whom he ſpake, he thinking before that he was but a man of God, behold how he is troubled afreſh. Although theſe two about which he was troubled, were contraries; to wit, the promiſe of God in the firſt; which hee doubted of; and his feare in this laſt by ſeeing his Angell. In the which to ſtay a while, ſeeing it is the point now in hand; we know he could not deliuer Iſrael, as he was told, and beleeued he ſhould, if he muſt die before the time came. And yet not conſidering what he ſaid; he affirmed reſolutely hee ſhould die, when yet Iſrael was not deliuered: euen ſo are we much dazled and vnſetled by affliction. Much like to Martha, when her brother Lazarus was dead, and Ieſus was come thither, ſhe came mourning to him, and ſaid, Lord, if thou hadſt been 
               Ioh. 11. 22. 
               here, my brother had not been dead: but now I know alſo, ſaid ſhe, that whatſoeuer thou askest of God, he will giue it thee. Wherein ſhe teſtified, that he could, if it pleaſed him, raiſe him vp againe. And yet marke, when Ieſus after that, went to the graue to raiſe him from death, and bad them take away the ſtone, Martha ſtood by, forgetting what ſhe had ſaid before, and anſwered Ieſus, as not belieuing that he could be raiſed to life, O Lord, it is too late, he ſtinketh alreadie, for he hath been dead foure daies.
            
            And who doth not find it to be true, which I haue ſaid, namely, that faith which is well grounded, and worketh now with comfort by loue, ſhall eaſily be found to languiſh and waxe faint through doubting and feare, if affliction come in the way to trie vs? For why? we are ſo prone to vnbeliefe, that if we doe not at the firſt triall, alwaies ſhew and bewray it, which yet oft times we doe, yea, before the trouble come, when we ſee but a likelihood of it, we ſhall at leaſt doe it, if we be long held vnder the affliction, and eſpecially if it be any great matter; as ſome ſore loſſe, paine, or the like. So that it is not without eſpeciall cauſe, that we are commanded by the Apoſtle, not only to bee rooted, but alſo to bee confirmed, and to abound in faith with Col. 2. 7. thankſgiuing. Let vs conſider, to this end, that it is but the fruit of our corruption, thus to feare and doubt, when wee ſhould beleeue, and to reaſon againſt Gods promiſes, affirming that they cannot be performed, when wee ſee likelihood of the contrary; yea though we doe it not with any bad meaning, as neither Gedeon did here, yet it is our great ſinne to offer God ſuch diſhonour: let vs ſtriue rather to beate downe our fooliſh feares and paſſions, ſeeing it is moſt like, and we are ſure to ſpeede the worſt thereby, and in that we giue place to our paſſions, we ſhall do it to our coſt, although we repent for it. Our Sauiour ſeeing Martha in that ſudden feare and diſtruſt,

checkes her, ſaying; Did I not ſay vnto thee, if thou couldeſt belieue, thou ſhouldeſt ſee the glory of God? As if he ſhould ſay; Looke to my word, looke not to the vnlikelihood. Manoahs wife was ſtronger then Gedeon or her husband, in the like caſe: If God would haue ſlaine vs (ſaith ſhe) he would not haue ſaid we ſhould haue a ſonne, and ſo ought Gedeon to haue reaſoned: God will not kill me now, ſeeing I muſt deliuer Iſrael: for theſe are contraries, and thus when Manoahs wife ſaw that one of them muſt needs be falſe, ſhe rather confuteth her husband then the meſſage of the Angell, and concludeth, doubtleſſe we ſhall liue, and not die, for the word of God is more worth the reſting vpon, then our owne conceits. And thus it ſhould bee with vs, that Note. we be not alwaies off and on, now carried with full ſaile of faith, and by and by caſt downe, as if we had neuer been the men, this fickleneſſe is vnbeſeeming vs. Men wiſh that it were alwaies alike with them, and yet find the contrary; becauſe they kept not their eie fixed vpon the promiſe, daily renewing their hold therein ſtedfaſtly as at any time before they did; conſidering, that as the Sun is alway the ſame, whither it be ouer caſt with cloudes, or ſhine forth clearely, ſo is Chriſt Ieſus yesterday, and to day, and the ſame for euer, vnchangeable in himſelfe, if wee change not our perſwaſion of him through vnbeliefe.
            In this verſe it is ſhewed, that while Gedeon was thus perplexed with Verſ. 23. The ſenſe.
                feare, the Lord comforted him, that hee being free from it, might the better goe about that which was appointed him. For we know what a dangerous hindrance to faith, feare is. And therefore, what hart could hee haue to belieue that hee ſhould worke ſuch a deliuerance, who feared death euery minute of an howre? And the Angell put away his feare, by promiſing him good ſucceſſe, and quietneſſe of mind, and that he ſhould not dye. This is Doct. the great goodneſſe of God, that he will not long leaue his faithfull people in pinching feare, and penſiue heauines: but in good time deliuereth them, leaſt they ſhould be too much caſt downe and diſcomforted. And ſo the Scriptures teſtifie, that God would not haue people left in troubleſome paſſions; as feare or ſorrow, which how troubleſome they are, our experience teacheth. Ioſhua was ſore troubled, when the people of Iſrael fell before the Ioſh. 7. 7. 10. men of Ay, but God ſoone put him out of it. So likewiſe the good women in the Goſpell were ſore afraid, by reaſon of the earthquake, and the appearing of the Angell, but he bid them not to be afraid, euen as here he ſaith to Matth. 28. 5. 
               Gedeon, Peace be to thee. Thus it were meet for all poore troubled conſciences, to mark diligently how comfortably God ſpeaketh to them, as that they ſhould put away their needleſſe ad hurtfull feares and griefes; for the which cauſe the Lord willeth with a doubling his words, Eſay 40. 1. that his afflicted people ſhould be comforted: for thus he ſaith there, as alſo in many other places; comfort ye, comfort ye my people. As if he ſhould ſay, comfort them Eſay 40. 1. euen at the heart. And this aduice had ſo much the more neede to bee receiued of them, becauſe when they begin once to be heauy, they forget that they were euer comforted, and paſſe their bounds in heauineſſe. But when ſuch diſtempered perturbations ariſe in vs, and diſquiet vs through an euill conſcience, and by meanes of ſome offending God willingly or negligently, which by care we might haue auoided, (in which caſe wee haue no warrant to take comfort to our ſelues, neither doth God at any time vſe to comfort

vs therein, here the courſe that is to be taken, is, that we ſolemnely proſtrate our ſelues before him, accuſing our ſelues, and bewailing our ſinne, with broken hearts for mercy, as well as looke for other deliuerance, and he will returne to vs moſt graciouſly, powre oile and wine into our wounds moſt ſauourily, and eaſe our griefe readily, and all our feare ſhall be driuen away. For if we doe well, who (as Saint Peter ſaith) ſhall feare vs? Ezekiah 
               1. Pet. 3. 13. is a notable example of this, who being in his ſickneſſe troubled with the feare of vntimely death, whereby he feared iuſtly that the Church of God might the ſooner be infected with idolatrie, being not yet well ſetled in the true worſhip of God, nor throughly purged; made an heauie complaint, as appeares Eſay 38. not for that hee deſired life ſimplie for it ſelfe, as for the Eſay 38. 10. good of the Church. But going to the Lord by prayer in this perplexitie for recouery, the Lord ſtaid his mind, and ſent his Prophet to encourage him both by promiſe and miracle, and beare him word hee ſhould recouer, and then he goeth vp to the houſe of the Lord, and makes a ſolemne thankſgiuing for his recouery. But ſeeing many, euen of Gods deare ones, doe either not know how to repaire to God in this manner, or if they doe, yet they cannot humble their hearts, therefore they trouble themſelues with ſuffering the ſting of an ill conſcience to pricke them, which in continuance of time is forgotten, and being not kindly healed, they ſoone breake out againe, and ſo they make there life vnprofitable when it is at the beſt, and till they caſt vp that vnſauorie gorge by ſome great outward affliction, which ſearcheth deepe, or by ſome agonie of mind, whereby they are brought by the helpe Note. of ſome wiſe and experienced Miniſter to true repentance, they come to no better eſtate.
            Now followeth Gedeons thankſgiuing, which clearely prooueth that hee Verſ. 24. The ſenſe.
                receiued comfort, and was well ſtaied by the Angels words vnto him. For whether we take it thus tranſlated, as it is by Tremelius [he builded an altar to the Lord, when he had pronounced peace to him] or whether thus, as in the Geneua tranſlation it is read, he builded an altar to the Lord, and called it Iehouahſhalom, that is, the Lord of peace; I ſay, in whether ſoeuer of theſe we take it, it is a thanks to God, yea and that in ſolemne manner: for if he called him the Lord of peace who had giuen him double peace, to wit, both in freeing him from his dreadfull doubt firſt, and afterward alſo from his feare. And ſo Gedeon leauing that remembrance of his thankful hart there vnto poſterity, all may ſee that it was a ſolemne thanking of God. And to the ſame end that tendeth which is ſaid, that he built the altar: it was in token of his thanks, after God had quieted his mind, both about the deliuerance of the Iſraelites from the rage of the Midianites, and alſo from his feare by ſeeing the Angell of God.
            And therefore out of this action of Gedeons, we learne to take all good occaſions Doct. of thanks to God, not onely ordinarily for daily benefits, and priuately by our ſelues as well as openly; but alſo as God ſhall giue vs occaſion by ſuch mercies beſtowed vpon vs, which are more then ordinarie, as here he did to Gedeon, and before this, to Moſes, Ioſhua, Debora, and others, and doth Note. oft times to vs in the yeere, and in the ſeuen yeere, by deliuerances, protection, and vnlooked for mercies and benefits. And further, as hee here did it in a ſolemne manner, ſo ought we, as much as in vs lieth: for he left teſtimony

of his thanks, to thoſe who came long after him. But of thankſgiuing I haue ſpoken before.
         
         
            THE FORTIE ONE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               VERS. 25. And the ſame night the Lord ſaid to him, take thy fathers young bullocke, and an other bullocke ſeuen yeeres old, and deſtroy the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut downe the groue that is by it.
               
               26. And build an altar vnto the Lord thy God vpon the top of this rocke, in a plaine place, and take the ſecond bullock, and offer a burnt offering with the wood of the groue, which thou ſhalt cut downe.
               
               27. Then Gedeon tooke ten men of his ſeruants, and did as the Lord bad him: but becauſe he feared to doe it by day for his fathers houſhold, and the men of the city, he did it by night.
               
               28. And when the men of the citie aroſe earely in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken, and the groue cut downe, that was by it, and the ſecond bullocke offered vpon the altar that was made.
               
               29. Therfore they ſaid one vnto another, who hath done this thing? and when they inquired, and asked, they ſaid, Gedeon the ſonne of Ioaſh hath done this thing.
               
               30. Then the men of the citie ſaid to Ioaſh, bring out thy ſonne that hee may die, for hee hath deſtroyed the altar of Baal, and hath alſo cut downe the groue that was by it.
               
               31. And Ioaſh ſaid to all that ſtood by him, will ye pleade Baals cauſe? or will yee ſaue him? He that will contend for him, let him die yer the morning: if he be God, let him pleade for himſelfe againſt him that with caſt downe his altar.
               
               32. And in that day was Gedeon called Ierubaal: that is, let Baalpleade for himſelfe, becauſe he hath broken downe his altar.
               
            
            
               OF the ſecond branch of the fourth part of the Chapter we haue heard; that is, of Gedeons asking of a ſigne: Now followeth the third, containing the charge that God gaue him to the 33 verſe.
            For after all this that we haue heard, before he begin The generall ſumme of theſe verſes. the warre, hee is commanded to deſtroy and caſt downe idolatrie, and to ſet vp true religion, and worſhip of God. And this is in theſe words: Caſt downe the altar of Baal, and cut downe the groue that is by it and erect another, and offer to God thereon: which Gedeon did accordingly: and this to the 28. verſe. And yet he did this with perill euen of his life, as appeareth verſe 30. but God ſtirred vp Ioaſh, Gedeons father, againſt the men of the citie, and deliuered him out of their hands, as we ſee to the 33. verſe.
            In this verſe, and in the 26. more particularly, the Lord for the deſtroying Verſe 25. 26. The ſumme of theſe two verſes particular
                        ••
                     .
                of Idolatrie, bids Gedeon take his fathers young bullocke, euen the ſecond

bullocke which was ſeuen yeeres old, which had been kept to be offered to Baal. In thoſe which were ſuperſtitious, that they ſpared no coſt for the ſeruing of their luſts: but the Lord hindred, and held that ſacrifice from Baal, commanding the alter to be caſt downe, and alſo the groue that was by it, to be cut downe; for in ſuch places for the pleaſantneſſe of them, the people vſed, and choſe to worſhip, I meane in ſuch places beſet with woods and groaues: ſuch places vnder trees, and on hilles, which they called high places, Deut. 12. 2. 3. &c. the fathers alſo delighted in to offer, before the Lord forbad them, being mooued thereby to the meditation of heauenly things the rather. And the Idolaters did the like vnto their Idols, as theſe here did in offering to Baal, through a ſuperſtitious opinion that ſuch places were fitteſt to ſtirre vp deuotion. And therefore God commanded them to be caſt and cut downe, and their altars to be deſtroyed. And this did God command Gedeon here to doe, and another to bee builded: and that ſecond bullocke that was appointed for Baal, to bee offered as a burnt offering to the Lord, with the wood of the groue which was cut downe.
            Here for our inſtruction, out of theſe two verſes, this is worthily to be Doct. verſ. 25. 26. &c. noted, that when God at that time went about to deliuer Iſrael from the bondage of the Midianites, hee would yet haue Idolatrie to be firſt ouerthrowne, leſt they ſhould afterward returne to it againe. Teaching vs thereby, that nothing goeth forward happily in the Common-wealth, except good order be taken firſt for the walfare of the Church, namely, by rooting out, and caſting downe Idolatry and ſuperſtitious worſhipping of God, and ignorance; and a planting and ſtabliſhing of the true preaching of the Goſpell. Which teacheth both Magiſtrates what is firſt to be done of them to the people committed to their gouernment, and alſo priuate men; that in vaine they ſhall looke (either the one or the other) to proſper in their liues, I meane, to enioy Gods bleſſing with cheerefulnes and ſound comfort, if God be not with an vpright heart firſt honoured and ſerued. But if this be, is it all? No, but euen then let them looke to the manner of their worſhipping God alſo, and namely in hearing, let them take heed how they heare, as Chriſt teacheth, and that is, by caſting away all guile, maliciouſnes, &c. and to receiue the word (ſo as it may be ingrafted in them) with meeknes and Luke 8 18. Iawes 1. 21. teachablenes, as becommeth beleeuers. But more of that in another place.
            In the meane while, as I haue ſaid of Idolatrie, ſo I ſay of their ſinnes; let vs further learne therefore, that as they were commanded to put away Idolatrie, which was their ſinne, before they could doe God true ſeruice any other way; ſo I ſay, let vs learne, that before we offer to God any acceptable dutie, we put away our ſinne, whatſoeuer it be, that riſeth vp in our way, be it neuer ſo liking and well pleaſing to vs: For it doth but choake and ſmother the graces of God in vs, if there be any, euen as the briars and brambles doe the corne, that it cannot ſpring vp and proſper. And this rule is to bee obſerued of vs both of the firſt time, when God counteth vs faithfull, and 1. Tim. 1. 12. putteth vs in his ſeruice, and of all times following, when wee haue ſtepped aſide. Thus Eliah before he reſtored the ſound worſhip of God, deſtroyeth 1. King 18. 40. the Baalites: and the ſame courſe tooke al the good Kings which reformed the Church, as Iehoſhaphat, Hezekiah, Ioſiah. And 
                  〈…〉
                charged the Iſraelites to deſtroy and roote out the Canaanites at their firſt entring vpon their

poſſeſſions, as wee haue heard in this booke, and before: foretelling them, that otherwiſe they would draw them from his true worſhip. Iacob therefore before he went vp to Bethel to worſhip God, did by his commandement, Gen. 35. 1. cauſe all his houſehold and thoſe that were with him, lately come out of Padan Aram from Laban, to put away their Idols, and clenſe themſelues, that ſo they might worſhip the Lord in good ſort and manner. So we muſt purge out the old leauen, and become a new lumpe, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: 1. Cor. 5. 8. For it fareth with vs herein, as with the ſtomacke: which though it receiue neuer ſo good meates, yet the bodie proſpereth not by them, if it be A ſimilitude. full of corrupt humours: no more doe we thriue in any good actions wee take in hand, if we goe about them, being fraught and clogged with our ſins knowne, or ſuch as are ſuſpected to be in vs, till as moſt filthie corruption they be purged out. Therefore alſo Saint Peter requireth, that men put away all maliciouſnes and guile, with ſuch like annoiance firſt; and then as new borne 
               1. Pet. 2. 1. 2. 
               babes deſire the ſincere milke of the word, that they may grow thereby.
            And as a ſore or wound in the bodie, though neuer ſo good ſalues be laid thereto, is not healed thereby, vnleſſe the corruption and hurtfull humours A ſimilitude. be firſt drawne out: ſo is it with vs. So that not onely this is true in the generall reformation of the Church, but alſo of each particuler member of it, and perſon. And it is the order which the Lord vſeth in the fitting of all his people for his vſe: firſt he mortifieth them, then he quickens them. Neither could our Lord Ieſus haue riſen againe for our iuſtification, if he had not Rom. 4. 25. firſt died for our ſins and tranſgreſſion. And let him who would haue ſound comfort in his doing of dutie, firſt learne this obedience, to ſubdue and bring into ſubiection, his rebellious and euill heart and luſts, with 
                  〈…〉
                thereof, and then the other ſhall proceed roundly, without impediment. For all the good doctrine which God hath ordained to ſweeten and 
                  〈…〉
                the ſoule with, and to furniſh the life, alſo the helpe and benefit of praier and the Sacraments, they all loſe their for
                  ••
               , and leaue no fruite in vs behinde them, if wee be loden (euery one) with the foule and loathſome ſinnes, in which hee hath liued, and that they bee not purged out by true repentance.
            And this is eaſie to be perceiued and ſeene, as in perſons, ſo in euery place, towne, Church and houſe, where the forementioned meanes are vſed. And who among vs that haue any experience, but they haue marked this in many, and neede not be aſhamed to ſay it of themſelues, that whatſoeuer rules and good inſtruction, for the well guiding of our liues, haue bin giuen, and learned of vs, with the benefit of the Sabbath, with prayer, publike or priuate, and ſuch like; they haue come to a ſmall reckoning, and they doe vs little good, if we haue not let out the venome of rancour, ſpite, deſire of reuenge, vncleane luſts, worldlineſſe, and the like, that haue been ſeated and ſpread in our hearts, and caſt vp (as filthie vomit) the noiſome fruite thereof, out of our liues.
            And it is the cauſe at this day of ſo little profiting, and ſo ſlender fruites of our preaching, as we complaine of iuſtly, and inueigh againſt it bitterly; for that people are at a point, they will doe as they haue done, and retaine Note. the ſinnes which in times paſt they haue walked and delighted in, when yet we haue daily, in the earneſteſt manner that wee could, diſgraced, and made

them odious, with the moſt fearful & ſharp threats of God adioyned thereto. Yea and contrariwiſe, if any make right and kinde vſe of our Miniſterie, who ſeeth not, that they be thoſe that waxe aſhamed of themſelues, after they haue ſeene their faces in the glaſſe of Gods law, and with Ephraim bemoned themſelues, & bin confounded, becauſe they did beare the reproch Iere. 31. 18. 19. of their youth; when the old rootes haue thus bin decaied, then new ſprigs of grace haue ſprung out in their roome, and then they haue begun to lament after God. Magiſtrate, Miniſter, Maſter of family, and priuate perſons, if they be well aduiſed, they ſpeake thus, yea, they all finde this to be true.
            And in this 25. verſe, it is further ſaid, as we ſee, that God appeared here Doct. verſ. 25. to Gedeon in the night, when it might haue ſeemed that he had been neglected and forgotten, euen then gaue he a weightie charge vnto him: whereby we are taught that God watcheth ouer his to doe them good, when they are ſleepie, and minde nothing: as we reade he did to Samuel, Salomon, and 1. Sam. 3. 4. 1. King. 3. 5. Pſal. 121. 4. other of his faithfull ſeruants. For he that keepeth Iſrael doth neither ſlumber nor ſleepe: meaning that he waketh and watcheth continually to keepe his from danger: for the which cauſe it is ſaid, by the Apoſtle Peter, that his eyes are vpon them, as the mothers vpon the young childe, ſtanding by, to ſee that it take no hurt. For, as it is in the Pſalme; if the Lord keepe not the citie, the watchmen watch but in vaine: but if God take part with his, the ſtrongeſt enemie ſhall not be able to hurt them. It is ſaid of Peter, Act. 12. 6. that while he ſlept betweene two ſouldiers in the night, bound with two chaines, the Angell of the Lord came vpon them, and ſmote Peter on the ſide, ſo that his chaines fell off, and he was deliuered from Herod. See alſo Pſal. 4. I will lay Act. 12. 6. 
               
                  〈…〉
                owne and take my reſt, for thou (O Lord) vpholdeſt me. But ſeeing Pſal. 4. 8. 
               
                  •
               e keepeth the bad alſo, and there ſome (perhaps) will ſay, therefore it might 
                  ••
               me no great matter, that he keepeth and watcheth ouer the faithfull: but for anſwere, I ſay with the Apoſtle God is the ſauiour of all men, that is, from 1. Tim. 4. 10. outward troubles, but eſpecially of the beleeuers; for he preſerueth their ſoules from euill, vnto ſaluation. As if he ſaid, he keepeth and ſaueth his own with a fatherly care and affection, but the wicked, though he keepe them, yet he doth ſo as a Iudge keepeth aliue euill doers, but vnto their deſtruction. But of his people that is verified which is written by Salomon: He watcheth ouer them, when they ſleepe, and communeth with them when they awake, Prou. 6. 22. and when they walke he doth gouerne and guide them. And hereupon, in that Gods care is thus ouer his, in the night ſeaſon, as well as in other parts of their liues, hereupon I ſay it is, that as they reioyce in the Lord alwaies in all that they ſet their hand vnto through the day; ſo they haue this fruite of it in the night alſo, that they meditate and make their ſongs of his louing kindneſſe, as Dauid ſaith of himſelfe, that he would praiſe God in the night Pſal. 119. 62. ſeaſon, when the other haue their terrors, for their bad doings, or imagine euill in their beds to draw vpon them greater and ſpeedier iudgements.
            Now further, out of both theſe verſes together note, that as it was not enough for Gedeon to ouerthrow the Altar of Baal, vnleſſe he builded another Doct. 2. in verſ. 25. 26. to the Lord; nor to build one to the Lord, vnleſſe he caſt downe the Idolatrous Altar: Euen ſo, it is not enough to ſhunne euill, except we doe good. And therefore it is not ſufficient to be no couetous perſon, except a man bee mercifull: it is not enough to bee innocent, except a man be alſo

fruitfull in doing good; for one God is the commander of both. It is a true ſpeech, Negatiues conclude nothing: and here it is eſpecially true. Therefore let all ſuch, as whoſe goodneſſe and outward actions witneſſe not for them, ſuſpect that they deceiue themſelues in the reforming of the hart. For ſurely an heart purged, will bee fruitfull. Againe, it is not inough to forſake Poperie, &c. vnleſſe the pure Goſpell bee imbraced. Let the one abandon the other, as Dagon and the Arke could not ſtand together. They that make an hotch-potch of both, are an abomination to the Lord. And here we may further learne, that two religions in a land, though the one tolerated onelie, two contray or diuers waies I meane, of worſhipping God, can no more ſtand together then Chriſt and Belial. For then the Lord would haue ſpared Gedeon a labour, and only enioyned him to goe about the warre and ſettle ſound religion, letting idolatrie alone. The falſe religion is the canker of Ioſh. 7. 24. the true, and as the execrable thing tooke hold vpon the whole ſubſtance of Achan: ſo doth this bring a curſe vpon the other. Now to returne, whereas the Lord bad the bullocke, dedicated to Baal, to be offered as a burnt ſacrifice to himſelfe: I anſwer, he is Lord of all, he might turne it to what vſe he pleaſed. But it followeth not, that we, without his commandement, may take vpon vs to iumble together Gods worſhip, and ſuperſtition. For the which cauſe, as ſometime he commanded that the gold and other things vſed in idolatrie, ſhould paſſe through the fire, and ſo it might be vſed, ſo ſomtime, he commanded, that they ſhould vtterly be deſtroyed. To returne therfore in a word, to the point: As we ſee what a blemiſh it had been in Gedeon, if he had done the one part of the charge, and not another, like Saul in the 1. Sam. 15. 15. 26. buſineſſe of the Amalakites; ſo by the way, it teacheth, that God alowes not for ſeruice, duties done by halues, but that they ſhould be ſoundly and in one part and point as another indeuored after: neither doth hee allow vs to bee our owne caruers to take what pleaſeth vs, and turne the other backe again, which we may ſee more clearely by the example of one that was guiltie of this fault. Of Iehu it is reported, that when he had ſlaine all the curſed poſteritie of Ahab, and deſtroyed the Prieſts of Baal (which was the purging out of falſe worſhip in great part) yet whereas the other part of ſetting vp true worſhip ſhould haue followed it, the text makes a ſtop, and ſets downe a manifeſt ſeparation betwixt them thus: But from the ſinnes of Ieroboam the ſonne 
               2. King. 10. 29. 
               of Nebat Iehu departed not; nay more, nor from their golden Calues in Bethel and Dan. Why then did he deſtroy Baal? Surely he was carried to it, by a common gift of the holy Ghoſt, euen feruency in that worke: which made him an inſtrument for that purpoſe; but that he did it not with a true deteſtation of the ſinne, it is manifeſt, for then hee would haue abandoned the other alſo, and haue reſtored pure worſhip in ſtead of it. This ſhould teach vs, that holy inſtruction, which is ſo oft in general commended to vs, when we haue hated to the pit of hell (for ſo the word ſignifieth in that place) that which is euill, then neglect not to doe that which is good. Rom. 13. nay to cleaue to Rom. 13. 9. it as a thing which is cemented as glaſſe windowes are, the words are pithy. So ſaith the Apoſtle, Let him that ſtole ſteale no more: yet it is not ſufficient; Epheſ. 4. 28. that a man be not a thiefe; therefore he addeth, But worke with his hands, and doe the thing that is good, for that is a good token he is reformed. And commonly in Scripture we ſhall ſee this order obſerued: that vnto prohibitions

firſt ſet downe, there are added commandements of dutie: for though of the two it is the firſt and hardeſt, to purge out a corrupt habite and a leaud qualitie: yet it is not all, God will haue it appeare to be ſo by a new and contrary practiſe to the former, that the worke may be ſound and perfect. Neither doth he command men to clenſe out their euil, and ſo keep themſelues void, empty and barren of grace: (which were to ſet vp a neutralitie rather then Chriſtianity) but he wil haue men ſeaſoned with grace, and ſtabliſhed Heb. 13. 9. with it, as it is to the Hebrewes. And he who commandeth vs not to ſow among thornes nor weedes, giues vs no libertie to neglect planting, when we haue rooted vp the other.
            For cutting downe the groues, it was before this time (that Gedeon was Doct. 2. verſ. 25. Deut. 12. 3. charged to do it) commanded ſo by God in Deuteronomy; which argueth, that they were greatly abuſed, as other waies, ſo in worſhipping ſtrange Gods there. True it is, that the old fathers did before the forbidding thereof, worſhip God vpon high hils, from whence, they ſeeing farre off, the varietie of Gods creatures, it was a meanes of good meditations to them, and of more ſequeſtring of their minds from earthlineſſe. And we our ſelues being on high places, and beholding the trees, and other creatures of God a farre off, with the ſituation of the countries on hilles and vallies, what an admiration at the infinite workes of God commeth into our minds, thereby? we are brought to heauenly meditations, and to ponder Gods power, wiſdome and loue to vs. The Idolaters (no doubt) choſe thoſe places for the pleaſantneſſe of them, that thereby, and with the delight they had in the worſhipping of their idols, they might be rauiſhed in their ſuperſtitious maner, as the Papiſts in their falſe and will worſhip, when they be at their fond deuotion, in the places beſet with Crucifixes and other Images, ſounds and ſonne
                  •
               s, doe imagine and dreame that they bee in a corner not of paradiſe, but of heauen itſelfe. Thus can the diuell tranſforme himſelfe into an Angell of 
               2. Cor. 11. 14. 
               light.
            
            And here we may ſee, that howſoeuer Gedeon was accounted of God for Doct. 3. in verſe 25. his faithfulneſſe; yet his father maintained idolatrie; for his were the wood or groue, the altar and the bullock, being implements of their idolatrie. And theſe the Lord commanded Gedeon to remooue and take away, to the end wee may learne, that in purging religion, or in the amending of faults, wee muſt alwaies begin with our owne families, and neareſt kindred; leſt otherwiſe we ſhould ſhew our ſelues ridiculous, in ſeeming to be very forward in reproouing and correcting other, while our owne bee neglected and paſſed 1. Pet. 4. 17. by. Thus God beginneth iudgement at his owne houſe. Thus did Ioſhua 
               Ioſh. 24. 15. in his reforming the whole Congregation, profeſſe moſt worthily, I and my houſe will ſerue the Lord. And Ely, a Iudge alſo, for not gouerning his houſe, and ſtaying the outrage of his ſonnes, is ſeuerely threatned. And good reaſon: for ſithence next to our ſelues (who muſt firſt of all be reformed, or els our zeale ill becommeth vs, and argueth hypocriſie) the next, I ſay, are our kindred and families. Therefore wee muſt without partialitie firſt ſet vpon them, that ſo it may appeare that we deteſt ſinne heartily, in that we cannot endure it in thoſe whom we loue beſt: and others may be aſhamed to ſtand out in their owne defence, and feare to offend. For if the father firſt begin with his children, how ſhall his ſeruants looke to eſcape?
            
               
Now it followeth how Gedeon did that which God commanded him, Verſ. 27. The ſenſe.
                but ſeeing he appointed him no time when hee ſhould doe it, he therefore diſpatched it in the night, for feare, leſt if he had done it in the day, he might haue been withſtood by his fathers ſeruants, and the men of the citie; yea, and himſelfe haue been ſlaine. In that he obeyed the Lord, he teſtified his faith: in that hee did it at the beſt aduantage, in the night, hee ſhewed his wiſedome. And though he feared, yet his feare was not ſuch, as it hindred his faith.
            In both theſe, Gedeons example is our inſtruction: his faith firſt is to bee Doct. verſ. 27. Gal. 1. 16. followed of vs, that by meanes of it, wee ſhould not commune with fleſh and blood, when God commandeth ought vnto vs, but beare downe all lets that ſtand vp in the way to hinder vs from obeying: as friends, and counſell giuers againſt it, and count them, as Chriſt did Peter, when hee diſwaded him Matth. 16 23. from going to Ieruſalem to ſuffer death for his people, hee called him an aduerſarie to him, euen Satan. So muſt all ſtrong rebellion be beaten downe, (that ſtandeth vp in our way) by this weapon of our warfare, which 2. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . 4. is not carnall but ſpirituall, and mightie through God, to cast downe ſtrong holds; it muſt, I ſay, by this armour of our faith, bee brought into ſubiection. And for example: if feare ſtand vp in the way particularly, to hinder vs, let faith ſtriue with it to caſt it out, which is beſt able of any grace that is in vs, to ouercome and put it by. And thus did Eſter, who had no ſtronger weapon then her faith, in as great perill of her owne, and her peoples life, both which with Gedeon are ſet forth for the example of al that ſhall come after, to follow them in belieuing. But oh, where are ſuch to be found, who ſhall be readie, (no, though it be in the hazard of the Church) to doe that which theſe did, I meane, to fixe their faith on God; or if any be ſo minded, yet how weaklie and faintly ſhall it be done, and how long ſhall it be in performing? But this hath often been ſpoken of.
            And this be ſaid of Gedeons faith: now ſomewhat be ſaid likewiſe of his 
                  Doct. 2. wiſedome. His wiſedome is highly commended in his caſting downe their idolatrie; that ſeeing God ſet not, neither appointed the time when hee ſhould doe it, therefore hee did it in the night, wherein hee might bee freeſt from reſiſtance and danger. Doue-like innocency and obedience to God, Matth. 10. 16. muſt be ioyned with the wiſdome of Serpents. In many duties doing wee muſt watch the beſt opportunitie, time and place, vnleſſe the Lord preſcribe them to vs. So did Sampſon in the great deſtruction of the Philiſtims, watch Iudg. 16. 30. time and place, and tooke opportunitie, when thouſands of them were aſſembled to make themſelues paſſe-time by mocking and laughing at him; then he ſet his ſhoulders to the maine poſtes whereon the houſe ſtood, and caſt it downe vpon the Princes and the reſt, and ſlew thouſands of them.
            So it was ſaid of Dauid, hee did wiſely, whither ſoeuer hee went out, and 1 Sam. 18. 5. God was with him accordingly. And it is a ſingular gift of God in his children to be wiſe in the things they take in hand, that they giue no aduantage to the wicked, nor the diuell; but take the beſt and fitteſt occaſions to bee well occupied, as time and place giue leaue, both in holding their profeſſion generally, and alſo in the doing of other particular duties: that where they ſee inconuenience like to come, they may by wiſe forecaſting, preuent the ſame, and lay their moſt care where greateſt danger is to bee ſeene and feared. Note.
               
Wherein though all attaine not the ſame and like meaſure, yet it is well when al labour as they are able, to attaine it. But ſome marre their good actions with the ill and vnwiſe manner in which they doe them. As Iobs friends did, in ſeeking to comfort him. The particular inſtances are infinite. But thinke we of them by this example. For if Gedeon had gone about the work inioyned him, raſhly or vndiſcreetly, in the day time, who ſeeth not that euen his obeying of God in ſuch a mnner had marred all? But Iael was bleſſed Iud. 5. 24. for her wiſdome ſhe ſhewed to pull downe Siſera. And thus Abigail by her 1. Sam. 25. 34. Prou. 14. 1. wiſdome deliuered her houſe, as Salomon ſaith; and the wiſe woman mentioned in 2. Sam. who ſaued a whole citie. The children of this generation 2. Sam 20. 16. teach vs herein. And therefore pray we all for the ſpirit of wiſedome, that we not only doe that which we are commanded, but that we ſtudie to do it in the beſt ſort we can: and yet alwaies ſhunning as a rock, carnall ſhifts and policies. But of this the leſſe ſhall ſerue, being alſo often enlarged.
         
         
            THE FORTIE TWO SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               WE haue heard of Gedeons faith and wiſedome about the Verſ. 28. 29. 30. The ſenſe.
                caſting downe of the altar of Baal: and wee may ſee a good reaſon why he was faine to vſe the beſt and ſureſt meanes for the effecting of it, and for the ouerthrow of their idolatrie. Firſt, ſeeing it was ſtabliſhed among them, and had taken roote: therefore all that he could do was little enough to throw it downe. And alſo for that the people were ſo ſuperſtitiouſly addicted thereto, and ſo delighted in it. But let vs now ſee in what outragious manner the people inquire after the man that had done it: and when they with conſent agreed, that it was Gedeon, how furiouſly they ſought to haue him put to death.
            Here many good points may be noted about idolaters, which I will brieflie 
                  Doct. 1. ſet downe. Firſt this, how deepely idolatrie, ſuperſtition, and falſe worſhip is rooted in peoples hearts, and ground faſt; as is to bee ſeene in theſe, and through theſe ſtories, and thoſe in the booke of the Kings; as the Philiſtims blind deuotion to their Dagon, and the peoples fond and mad zeale in maintaining the falſe worſhip of Baal in Ahabs time, their offerings to them, their bowing downe, and praying to them. So that a man might haue as eaſily plucked their hearts out of their bellies, as to haue diſſwaded and alienated their loue from them. The reaſons are, firſt, becauſe as ſinne, ſo error is ſtrong, plauſible and deceitfull. Secondly, God accurſeth all that will not hearken to the truth, ſo that they ſhall belieue lies, and be bewitched 2. Theſ. 2. 10.
               
therewith. See and conſider to this end, Eſay 44. 19. Thirdly, the worſt Eſay 44. 19. weeds haue deepeſt roots, and corrupt cuſtomes or opinions, becauſe they agree with mans bad nature, are not eaſily rooted out; whereas thoſe which are good and commendable, are like precious plants or flowers, which hardly take any roote at all, and may be pluckt vp with two fingers. As at this day the curſed reliques of heatheniſh and popiſh faſhions, how hardly are they laid downe, looke but to ſome vaine and fooliſh cuſtomes, and the 
                  •
               ond deuotion of the ſuperſtitions all the yeere long, in kneeling before ſtockes and ſtones, and ye may eaſily gueſſe how hard a thing it is to remooue and expel them & the like. Gamaliel ſaid of the doctrine of the Apoſtles; If it be not of Actes 5. 34. God, ye ſhal not need to oppoſe it, it wil fal of it ſelf. But we muſt know that God not working by miracle, as he did then, Satan and his complices will in theſe daies trie the vttermoſt, and vſe all meanes ere that come to paſſe: yea as we may ſee, they grow in experience and pollicie, ſtrength and reſolution alſo, to vphold their rotten building, vntill (as at death (to be ſure) it ſhall) it fall vpon their ſhoulders. Whereas the true and pure worſhip of God, what authoritie, credit, or heartie loue doth it find or obtaine at the hands of the moſt of them who profeſſe it? Nay, they haue ſoone inough of it, many reuolt and fall from it, and they that retaine it, doe it (for the moſt part) in a moſt dead and cold manner. Inſomuch, as the diligenteſt preaching, and earneſteſt perſwaſions, doe ſcarcely preuaile ſo farre with men as that they get ſo much as a name of a good religion in the places where they dwell: when yet (if it were ſo) their zeale is neither grounded vpon knowledge, and if it be in ſome, yet are they not ſtabliſhed and ſetled therein; and yet Note. further, euen of them there are very few that hold conſtantly in a good conſcience, the profeſſion of their hope with ioy vnto their end.
            And although this good conſcience bee farre from the idolaters of our time, for it can onely come from ſaith in Chriſt, and aſſurance of his fauour, (whatſoeuer blind zeale and deuotion be in them) yet therein they doe, as I ſaid before, giue and aſcribe much to their corrupt religion, and falſe worſhip, in coſt, in time ſpending about the ſame, and feruencie therein, aboue a number of vs to ours. So that if they went vpon good grounds, and had any promiſe from God for their ſo doing, they might haue to reioyce aboue many of vs. But they and ſuch of our ſelues, as I compare with them, in comming ſhort of their zeale, ſhal ſpeed both alike, while they (I meane the Papiſts) haue this caſt in their teeth, Who required this at your hands? And againe, let him that ſet you on worke, pay you your wages. And to them of our profeſſion, this ſhall be ſaid; This people draweth neere to mee with their bodies, but 
               Matth. 15. 8. 
               their hearts are farre from me, and therefore in vaine doe ſuch worſhip me.
            
            And yet this I will adde, ſeeing I haue ioyned theſe popiſh worſhippers with the idolaters of ancient time, affirming them to be like to them in zeale, this I ſay, I will adde concerning them, that this deuotion is but in few of them in theſe our daies, like to that which was in thē of former ages, though (as they blindfold mens eies) it goe for currant, that they bee all zealous that are of that profeſſion, when yet it is manifeſt that numbers of them are moſt ſubtill and hollow hearted diſſemblers and deceiuers. For to grant that ſome of the ignoranter ſort are feruent in their falſe religion and blind deuotion, yet the moſt of the reſt deceiue the world, and are not ſo zealous as

they are wilfull, ſpitefull, and malicious, who doe that which they doe, partly for their belly, and partly (though againſt their conſcience) to vphold their religion by tradition, when they cannot by Scripture: and all to this end, that it may, (as much as in them lieth) be receiued for the truth, rather then that of the Proteſtants, whom they deadly hate and abhorre. As for that they hope to merit by their zeale, which doth the more ſet them forward, it is to bee granted, that they are much whetted on thereby, though they be deceiued: but ſhould not the promiſes of God freely made to vs of all good things, much more animate and harten on vs?
            Another thing note we here, how ſoone and earneſtly they inquired who 2 ſhould deface their Baal, and ſtrippe him of his ornaments? whereas Gods word may lie vnpreached by many occaſions, long inough, before it be asked where the fault lieth, and complained of, and bewailed; or before the neglect thereof be ſought to be remedied. In Poperie, if a man ſhall ſpeake againſt the maſſe, or their breaden God, or diſpraiſe any, yea the leaſt part of their traſh and trumperie, he ſhall be more cruelly handled then for blaſpheming in the higheſt degree. Which appeares by ſuch as in the time of perſecution in our owne land, attempted zealouſly to deface that idoll, who of all other were put to moſt exquiſite torments. Euen as Gedeon here was purſued, and as a moſt hereticall and ſeditious diſturbur, was called for to be put to death, for offering that reproch vnto that baſe idoll Baal. Oh, it were an happie time, if men were as zealouſly bent againſt atheiſme, ſuperſtition, idolatrie, adulterie, and ſuch like, as many are zealous for them: and that holy and heauenly things were in that account and requeſt with many, that open and apparent ſinnes are with them. And thus at this day doe the moſt men ſtorme and rage at the Miniſter of God (who is Gods ordinarie inſtrument, as Gedeon was the extraordinary) when they ſee that he is not content to dally with them, but in good earneſt ſtriueth to pull them from their ignorance, formall, and could worſhip of God, vncleaneneſſe, or whatſoeuer other ſinne they cleaue vnto; (as theſe did to their idoll Baal) and ſerue. The poore man Gedeon here had not more adoe to ſaue himſelfe from this furious and eager multitude, then the Miniſter hath (in many places where the Goſpell hath not preuailed) to defend himſelfe from a ſwarme of hornets, which flie about his eares, ready to ſting him (I might rather haue ſaid wild beaſts to deuoure him) by their curſed reprochfull ſlanders and virulent tongues for his caſting their Baal to the ground.
            Alſo it appeareth, that there were not many there that were as Gedeon, vpright hearted men, and ſuch as did openly ſhew their diſlike of idolatrie, becauſe they could ſo eaſily find him out, and light vpon him, as the guiltie partie, as they counted him, with ſo ſlight inquiry. So that he was as eminent for his pietie, as Saul for his ſtature, who was taler then all the people, and could not lie hidden. And the odious man of many hee was with them, to whom yet if they could haue ſeene, they were all beholding, and but for whom alſo they had all grone to wracke and had periſhed. And wee ſee, what eie-ſores, and how odious ſome one or few good profeſſors of the Goſpell are to a companie of prophane hickeſcorners, and what a troubleſome life they leade amongſt them: being baited and vexed by them at their pleaſure, and made their laughing ſtocke, as Sampſon to the Philiſtims: for

whoſe ſake (yet) they are ſuffered by the Lord to liue, that they may come to repentance, being neere inough (by all likelihood) to be vtterly deſtroyed and to be brought to naught, but for them; as we may reade in the ſtory Geneſ. 18. 32. of Geneſis, if there had been but ten righteous men in Sodome, the city had not been conſumed. Yet, and though they haue ſuch benefit by them, they ſticke not to ſweare, that but for them they might liue merrily, and without diſturbance. Therefore where God hath prouided better for a people, and muzled the mouthes of ſuch tigers and beares as theſe, ſo that they may profeſſe the Goſpell without danger, or feare, purſuit, and ſcorne of their betters) who commonly are the wings to protect the inferiour ſort of baſe and ſpitefull perſons) let ſuch ſee and acknowledge a great libertie and releaſe, and vſe it wiſely while they inioy it, as the Churches of Samaria and Iudea, Actes 9. 31. and Galilee did in the booke of the Acts. leſt God take from them their props, ornaments and protectors of them, and make them to ſay (as many doe full heauily) we would gladly be zealous and fruitfull in our profeſſion, (but (alas) we cannot ſo ſoone peepe out of the doores, but we are pelted in againe, and beaten back with the frownings, diſgraces, and opppoſitions of ſuch as are mightier then our ſelues. But of this point more anon.
            Thus farre of the outrage of the people: now of the anſwere of Ioah to Verſe 31. 32. The ſenſe.
                them, in the next two verſes. For he, as a wiſe Magiſtrate, did at the firſt ſuppreſſe and bridle the rage of the people. Now becauſe it was ſaid before, that the ground with the groue, altar and bullock did pertaine to Ioaſh, and were his: it is cleare, that he had alſo vpheld the idolatrie: how was it then, that he ſhould thus lightly ſuffer the act of his ſonne Gedeon to paſſe vnpuniſhed, (ſome man perhaps will aske,) and that he ſhould find fault with the people, for ſeeking to puniſh the treſpaſſer againſt Baal? I anſwere, that Ioaſh was certified of the will of God, very likely by Gedeon his ſonne, as Sampſons father was by him, that marriage he ſought with the Philiſtion woman was of the Lord. But howſoeuer it was, hee doth ſhew that God ſtirred him vp to be a fauourer of his ſonnes doing, for hee doth with three reaſons driue the people from their hold, and beates them backe from their purpoſe and attempt. Firſt, he reprooues them for their boldneſſe, for that they being priuate men, did without any calling take vpon them to bee reuengers of Baals quarrell, and that contrary to the will of God. And ſecondly, he threatens them with the feare of Gods iudgement, and that preſently. And thirdly, by an Ironicall ſpeech againſt Baal (ſaying, if he be a God, let him pleade for himſelfe) he ſhameth them, and driues them from their enterprize. And this be ſaid for the layingout of the 31. verſe. In the 32. he giues his ſome a name according to the anſwere hee had made to the people, and that name was Ierrubbaal.
            
            And here in generall occaſion is offered to conſider, how ſtrangely God Doct. in verſe. 22. wrought for Gedeon, and againſt his enemies, beyond al expectation ſtirring vp Ioaſh to aſſiſt and oppoſe the other. Who would not haue ſaid, that the people would haue borne downe Gedeon, they being backed ſo ſtrongly, and hauing an idolatrous Magiſtrate on their ſide? But behold, the Lord turnes his heart as he pleaſeth, and makes him ſtand out in the defenſe of his ſonnes act, whoſe cruell Iudge he had been more like to bee, to condemne him to death, as theſe mad people required, and looked for. And wee muſt thinke

that it was no ſmall courage to him, to doe thus, though a Magiſtrate. For this concourſe of the people was not ordinary, in a iudiciall manner but mutinous, and not vnlike to that of Demetrius in the caſe of Dianaes worſhip. But the ſame God, who (when hee ſaw it meet) cauſed Lyſias, an Heathen Captaine, to become a Protector of Paul againſt the Iewes: and Paul himſelfe to be a Preacher of the Goſpel which he had before perſecuted, did this alſo, and his hand is not yet ſhortned from doing the like for the good of his Church, and incouragement of his people, according to that ſaying of the Wiſe man: When a mans waies pleaſe the Lord, he will make his very enemies Prou. 
                     •
                  6. 7. his friends: and by conſequent, thoſe things which were moſt feared, as being like to worke moſt againſt them, he will make them to worke contrarily, euen to their moſt good and furtherance: and beſides, God turnes the hearts of men, as riuers of water. Examples we haue in Cyrus the reſtorer of the Iewes, and the worſhip of God. Pilates wife, Achiſth to Dauid, &c. But this by the way onely.
            More particularly, we may ſee in Ioaſh, who was before an Idolater, but being inſtructed about the will of God againſt that wickedneſſe, how ſoone hee was able to reſiſt and ſtand againſt it. This teacheth that it is but ignorance and vnbeliefe, that cauſeth many to practiſe and maintaine, either a falſe worſhipping of God, or any like wickedneſſe: though I denie not, but ſome doe worſe, who though they know it to be euill, yet will doe ſo wilfullie. The other are to be better hoped of; who if the Lord vouchſafe them the mercie that he did Ioaſh, ſhall ſoone bee changed from their former ill courſe, and abhorre and ſtand againſt that moſt deadly, which before they maintained and practiſed. And therefore a deteſtable ſtate to liue in, is Popery, out of the which they will not ſo much as ſeeke to be brought, by hearing the Goſpell preached, and therefore they lie ſtill therein to their confuſion, with all ſuch as doe like vnto them. Whereas many in other kinds of ſinne, are brought out of it by preaching, and are turned to God by true repentance. Agreeable whereunto is that of Paul, I was a perſecutor, blaſphemer, 
               1. Tim. 1. 15. 
               &c. but the Lord had mercie vpon me, becauſe I did it ignorantly. Noting that one cauſe why few of his ſect were conuerted, becauſe, as our Sauiour ſaith, They 
               Ioh. 9. 41. 
               knew they did euill, therefore their ſinne remained. This is not to incourage any to liue in ignorance; for the leaſt puniſhment is condemnation, if men preferre Ioh. 3. 19. darkneſſe to light, whatſoeuer the cauſe be. But as Chriſt ſaith, in Matthew 2. The iudgement of Tyrus and Zidon ſhall bee eaſier then of Corazin Matth. 11. 20. and Bethſaidah at the day of Gods comming, for they had repented, if they had been inſtructed. The vſe is, to comfort ſuch as affect to be ignorant, hoping thereby to eſcape Gods wrath: whereas rather they ſhould conſider that their ignorance wil procure it, yea, is a chiefe cauſe of other ſinne which cauſeth it: yea and becauſe that it is eaſie and no hard matter for ſuch as are ſimplie and not wilfully ignorant, to get knowledge and faith, if they would applie themſelues to hearing; therefore ſeeing they perſiſt in their blindnes, they cauſe an inuincible ignorance to grow vpon themſelues, which ſhal be as ſeuerely puniſhed as obſtinate diſobedience and contempt. But let ſuch as God hath mercifully enlightned, conſider and pitie the thouſands that lie in darkeneſſe, praying God to preuent them with the light, wondering that Iohn 14. 22. God ſhould reueal himſelfe to them, rather then to the world.
            
               
Alſo we may learne from hence, that when God ſheweth mercie to one 
                  Doct. 2. in a kindred or family, it oft redounds to many of the reſt, as when one is raiſed to promotion, the reſt fare the better. So here God reuealing himſelfe to Gedeon; his father, and ſo his familie were brought to the knowledge of the true God. The reaſon whereof is double. Firſt, Gods bleſſing vpon the ſeed & ſtock of the righteous. Secondly, becauſe where God hath wrought graciouſlie in ſome one in a kindred or family, there commonly is wrought a great deſire to doe good to the reſt, and that in great tenderneſſe and loue. As Paul profeſſeth to the Romans, My hearts deſire for Iſrael is, that he may Rom. 10. 1. be ſaued. And although they doe not alway preuaile (becauſe ſaluation followeth Gods election, not nature) yet often it doth: and where it is otherwiſe, the iuſter is their condemnation. For proofe of this, our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe may bee an example, who brought his diſciples, and ſome of his kindred to be religious. And he hath taught vs, that the Goſpell is compared to leuin, which ſpreaddeth further and further. And thus by ſome one whom God hath well ſeaſoned with grace, many of the reſt haue been in like manner made partakers of the ſame grace with them. A ioyfull ſight to behold. I would it were not ſo in Poperie, that one did draw many: and it were to be wiſhed, that it might be ſeene to be more common in the receiuing of the Goſpell effectually, that the reſt of the familie and affinity did ſo. This, I ſay, is often ſeene; though commonly one of a city, and two of a tribe, as the Prophet ſaith, meaning but a few. Yea, how often is it ſeene, that a godly Abigail is coupled with a Nabal, and Iob with a fooliſh woman? How truly is it ſaid of many good parents, Their children are vngratious, as they tell Samuel to his face? yea and of how many parents alſo, who are badly diſpoſed, 1. Sam. 8. 5. that euen their children ſhall riſe vp againſt them, and condemne them, for that they go before them in knowledge & the feare of God? while they being wedded to their will, take ſcorne to learne of them; nay, it were well, if they would learne of good teachers, and that they abuſed not their authoritie to curbe and diſcourage their children. But as for the third ſort, moſt wofull is their eſtate, when like father like child, as the head is ſo is the foote, all ignorant, brutiſh and vngodly, as Eſay ſaith.
            Now further by Ioaſh his anſwer, let vs conſider ſome thing, and then by the people, as occaſion is offered. In him by the ſpeeches he vſed, note we 
                  Doct. 3. Verſ. 31. the properties of a worthie magiſtrate, to wit, to defend Gods true worſhip, and to caſt downe idolatrie, to oppoſe himſelfe againſt the ſeditious and cauillers, and other wicked men, euen vnto death. His countenance, courage and power, beſide his affection, ought to be manifeſted in Magiſtrates, for the defence and ſtabliſhing of all Gods ſeruice; and ſo ſhould it be alſo in meaner men. But the commonneſſe of euil, and the ſtrength that it hath got in al places, dulleth the edge of the moſt of theſe now a daies. And this ſlackneſſe Matth. 24. 12. and coldneſſe, in Magiſtrates is as truly the cauſe why iniquitie ſo aboundeth, as any other: ſo that if euill hauing the vpper hand doe cauſe both publike officers of iuſtice, and priuate perſons to be more vnable to reſiſt it, and ſo the more vnwilling to goe about to puniſh it, they may thanke themſelues. Dauid profeſſeth of himſelfe, that betimes he would cut off from the 
               Pſalm. 101. 8. 
               houſe of God, the wicked: that is, all ſcorners and maligners of the ſound worſhip and worſhippers of God. Oh it were to be wiſhed (& indeed in that we

pray no more earneſtly for ſuch, wee iuſtly complaine) that all gouernours were of Dauid his minde, that ſo the reſt might liue vnder their authoritie, an honeſt and quiet life, free from the noiſomnes of ſuch goates as by their hornes and ſtinch peſter the ſheepe, which would faine liue peaceably, and ſerue the Lord by them. For when the common ſort ſee ſwearing, blaſphemie, the contempt of the Sabbath, drunkenneſſe, and other abominations to ſwarme in many places, who ſeeth not that both they dare more boldly doe the ſame, and that they who will not, ſhall be ſcorned and grieued to ſee them?
            We may further note here that ſinne ought to be ſo odious, and in ſo vile 
                  Doct. 4. account, that we ſhould be much grieued to behold the maintaining of it, and them that will ſtand for it. For now that Ioaſh was himſelf armed againſt idolatry, he demaunds if they, the blind people would ſtand for it, and plead for Baal. And yet they might haue replied, we plead no more for him, then thou thy ſelfe haſt done, and that very lately, in whoſe groue Baal was placed. But now the caſe was altered with Ioaſh, euen as it was with Paul, when he preached the Goſpell which he had perſecuted before. It is a notable token of repentance, when mens affections and deſires are quite changed from the euill things, which before they could not be drawne from: yea 2 Cor. 7. 11. and when they breake out into holy indignation at themſelues and other, for the ſins which they committed againſt God, although they know them forgiuen. And ſurely, an vpright hearted man would thinke that all ſhould abhorre the ſin that he hateth, and it grieueth him to ſee another deceiued and held in the ſnare that he himſelf hath bin holden in: & therfore counts it abſurd that any ſhould maintaine and delight in it: whereas the contrary now a daies may bee ſeene, that hee is diligently marked that will ſtand againſt it: and ſo few there be ſo well minded, that they may ſoone be noted.
            Their ſhamefull boldnes is likewiſe to be marked by the words of Ioaſh here, ſaying; Will ye plead for Baal? he that doth ſo, let him die before the morning. Who although they ſaw the Magiſtrate againſt them, yet they were ſo blind, that they ſtood in the defence of their idolatrie. And euen ſo we may ſay; Great is the boldnes that is growne vp in this age, while not only they doe the euils openly, which men and women in former ages haue bluſhed for the ſecret doing of the ſame [be it the ſinne of Zimri and Cozby or the like]: but alſo ſuch dare reuile and raile vpon thoſe who ſpeake againſt their lewd doings. But theſe truly verifie the ſaying, The wicked men and deceiuers 
               2. Tim. 3. 13. 
               waxe worſe. And how ſhould it be that in the laſt daies ſhould be ſo perilous times, if as the day of the world groweth neerer to an end, ſo ſinne waxed not more and more out of meaſure ſinfull? And that, both for the number of ſinnes, (for we ſee new additions and faſhions daily) and for the meaſure alſo, I meane the greedines, impudencie and pertinacie of ſinners, who are not aſhamed of their euils, but with the harlot in the Prouerbs, who wipeth her ſelfe as cleane of all her filthineſſe, as if ſhe had been a virgin. Wee ſee whores were growne, by that time, to a degree of boldnes: for Tamar was iudged an whore by her father, becauſe ſhe had couered her face. But this Gen. 38. 15. maske is long agoe pluckt off, not onely from them that bee of her occupation, but the moſt ſpirituall adulterers now a daies, are ſo farre from being aſhamed to ſhew their faces, that they are not thought maſters of their

trade, if they dare not ſpit in the face of modeſtie and all reprouers. And what is to be ſaid of the aged, and men in wealth, (who haue ſomewhat to beare them out) when euen youthes (of both ſexes) whoſe honour ſhould be their bluſhing, (which euen heathens called the Colour of vertue) are braſen faced, and inferiours of al ſorts take vp that curſed ſpeech, who is Lord 
               Pſal 12. 4. 
               ouer vs? But oh, who doth not ſee the Lords marke ſet vpon them, while by ſhame, and ſorow their belliesful, with other miſeries, they come daily euery one in his courſe, to a wofull end?
            Furthermore, it was well anſwered by Ioaſh, Let Baal plead for himſelfe: 
               
                  Doct. 5. meaning, if he can, what need you? if he cannot, it were a ſhame to pleade for ſuch a god, as could not plead his owne cauſe. As Elias alſo, in the like 1. King. 18. caſe, ſaid to the blind people: and ſo it may be ſaid to all maintainers of Idolatrie, and ſuch like abomination; If the Idols be gods, whom they worſhip, let them keepe themſelues from the fire. And they who will needs thinke their doings to be good in maintaining and reaſoning for ſuch ſtockes, let them waite and ſee what will be the end thereof, and what will come of them. They were well ſet a worke to plead for him, who was ſo farre from helping them in their neede, that hee could not reuenge his owne cauſe againſt ſuch as would deface him: and ſo are all that are like them; ſuch a maſter he is whom they ſerue.
            Laſtly, out of this verſe 31. and the former, in that Gedeon ſeruing God ſo 
                  Doct. 6. commendably, as he was commanded, (for which alſo hee is by name commended as a worthie perſon, and a beleeuer) was yet called ſeditious of Heb. 11. 32. them that were themſelues ſo indeede, and that therefore hee was counted worthie to die, who yet was the meane whereby the other did liue, note that when the wicked are charged neuer ſo iuſtly for their euill doings, yet they euer returne the accuſation vpon their accuſers. For example, the doctrine of Gods word, and the Preachers thereof, doe by Gods bleſſing, become the meanes and outward inſtruments of much good doing, and ſome turne from their euill waies thereby, but what diſſenting is there among the reſt for this, when they ſee it? In ſuch wiſe, as that they fall commonly to this exclamation, that both teachers and ſuch as follow their doctrine, are troublers of the people, but as for themſelues, they haue done no euill. Euen as the Papiſts crie on the other ſide, that they are diſturbed and diſquieted, for that they may not be ſuffered to ſerue God, as they would bee glad to doe, nor their Prieſts to ſet foorth their pedlary ware to ſale, to the ignorant and ſuperſtitious, whom they had ſometime deceiued, and as their fellowes in many places ſtill doe, no leſſe palpably, then Simon Magus did the people of Samaria, whom he had with his ſorceries bewitched.
            Theſe will not ſuffer their Idolatrous worſhip at any hand to bee ouerthrowne, but ſay, as the people ſaid to Ieremy, We will worſhip the Queene Ierem. 44. 19. of heauen that is, the Moone and other ſtarres: and as the fooliſh people of Epheſus, who cried out in a mad mood, Great is Diana of the Epheſians, when Acts 19. 34. yet who were more vnlike to make tumults and ſedition, then they whom they accuſed, as Paul and his companie? So (to leaue theſe, and to returne to them whom I began with) thus crie the wicked out when their lewd doings bee reproued iuſtly out of pulpits; Preachers are ſeditious; they make ſtrife and tumults where they come, and draw people after them, whereas

they were quiet and well enough before: but who are they whom they draw? euen thoſe who forſake their companie, whom I ſpeake of, and leaue off their curſed manners and behauiour, ſo that they are now depriued of them, therefore now they make their part good againſt them, crying out that they are ſeditious. Thus Elias was charged to trouble the land, when he taught the true ſeruice of God, and reproued Idolatrie, but he ſhewed who were troublers of the land, to all that liſt to know it, euen ſuch as be not obedient to the commandements of the Lord. But that all may ſee, that ſuch are not to be charged as troubleſome perſons, whoſe preaching bewraieth the bad ſort, who are therefore incenſed againſt them, becauſe their euill deedes are brought to light by them; neither they who obey their doctrine, though they bee hated of the greateſt part; that ſaying of our Sauiour teacheth: I came not to ſend peace into the earth, but the ſword, and debate. And againe, Matth. 10. 34. 
               I am come to ſet fire on the earth, and what is my deſire if it be alreadie kindled? 
               Luke 12. 49. So that if ciuill diſtenſion and trouble follow vpon our preaching, and profeſſing, it is the filthie heart of the rebellious ſort, out of which that ſtinch commeth, as out of a dunghill, who can away with no better ſauour.
            Now in that Ioaſh called his ſonne Ierubbaal, [Baal ſhall contend againſt Doct. verſ. 32. him] not in reproch, but for a memoriall he did it; which brought the Idol into contempt. So hee was called Ierubboſheth, 2. Sam. 11. 21. This ſheweth, that he was ſo farre from being aſhamed of his owne or his ſonnes fact, that he reioyced in it that Idolatrie had the foile by his meanes, as all well minded people ſhould doe the like. But I proceed.
         
         
            THE FORTIE THREE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſ. 33. Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites, and they of the Eaſt, gathered together, and pitched in the valley of Izreel.
               
               34. But the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon Gedeon, and he blew a trumpet, and Abiezer was ioyned with him.
               
               35. And he ſent meſſengers through all Manaſſeh, which alſo was ioyned with him: and he ſent meſſengers to Aſher, and to Zabulon, and to Naphtali, and they came vp to meete him.
               
            
            
               NOw followeth the laſt point of the foure in this fourth part of 
                  The ſumme of theſe 3. verſes.
                Chapter, as was noted in the 11. verſe. In which is ſhewed, how Gedeon (after that the Midianites gathered themſelues together) prepared for warre againſt them; he hauing before deſtroyed Idolatrie, and ſet vp the true worſhip of God: that thus all the people might ſee, when it was done, how ill it might haue been

vndone againe, and how profitable it was for them, which Gedeon had done ſo: though we may remember what troubles and ſtirres were raiſed againſt him, before he could bring it to paſſe. But oh, what a mercie of God was this to them, that the Midianites were held in all this while? who bound their hands and feete till Gedeon had brought ſo worthie a worke to paſſe, but euen he whom none were able to reſiſt, euen the Lord omnipotent? The ſumme of theſe three verſes is this: That the Lord gaue occaſion to Gedeon, by bringing the Midianites, and other aſſiſtants to them, into the land, to preuaile againſt, and get victorie ouer them. For he truſting to the word of God, by which he had been, and that lately, ſo well ſtrengthened; prepared to goe againſt them: and the Lord armed him, and he drew helpe together out of the tribes that were neere vnto him, as is to be ſeene in the text, ſo that Iſrael was againe reſtored in great multitudes.
            Thus after all the trouble that Gedeon had, both otherwiſe, and by feare of Doct. verſ. 33. the Midianites now prouoking the Iſraelites to battell, and the many hurts that they did thē before, yet God would (we ſee) haue his true worſhip ſet vp, & Idolatrie caſt down firſt, as we haue heard; which the wiſe men of the world though they had allowed, would yet haue deferred till after the victorie. And note we hereby, that it much pleaſeth him, yt we ſhould not poſt off the great and waighty cōmandements of his worſhip & ſeruice, for our earthly affaires & bodily buſineſſe, though waighty, if there be time enough to diſcharge them; no nor lay aſide the exerciſes of praier, hearing, reading, and the like, for our owne pleaſure. And we our ſelues may ſee, that it is very meete and expedient that it ſhould be ſo: and how cheerefully we may goe about the one, when wee haue well diſcharged the other: whereas by deferring, we leaue them vndone altogether ſometimes, and our appetite is much quailed when we returne to them. As therfore we reade, that as great neede as there was to make all poſſible ſpeede to reſcue the Church in the great diſtreſſe it was in at that time, yet that Heſter ſought the Lord by faſting Heſter 4. 16. and prayer, before ſhe went to the King, and went after that with great courage to him for helpe, and preuailed. But it is otherwiſe with vs; for we, for the moſt part, firſt ſerue our ſelues (what though in doing things that are lawfull?) and ſeeke our owne profit and pleaſure, which is our great ſinne: and yet that is not all, but hauing ſo done, we are alſo by the leaſt occaſion eaſily brought to omit the Lords due altogether many times (as I haue ſaid) or at leaſt to performe it ſlackly, coldly, and by halues, ſo that it were as good vndone.
            This appeareth to be too true in the common courſes of men and many of their dealings, and of theirs who are not the worſt. And namely in this one: when we haue ſet an order for praying in our houſes, we will not perhaps, as ſome doe, omit it altogether afterwards: but yet we then, for the moſt part, meete to performe this dutie to God, when we haue ſerued our ſelues, and filled our bellies firſt, in which caſe wee be commonly oppreſſed Note. with drowſineſſe and ſleepe, which are (a man would think) vtterly vnmeet to accompanie Gods ſeruice, and therfore little pleaſing to him, that it were farre better to diſpoſe of a fitter time for that buſineſſe, and yet other things not to bee left vndone. And wee muſt take heed both in this which I now

ſpeake of, and all the like that we take in hand, leſt we giue iuſt ſuſpition that we thinke any thing is good enough for the Lord.
            In the publike worſhip of God, the Church hath giuen a better example, that we doe our duties to God before we refreſh ourſelues. Abrahams ſeruant hauing but a meſſage of his maſters to doe, did ſo diligently follow the doing and executing of it, that hee would not take his owne neceſſarie repaſt, Gen 24. 33. in his hunger and wearineſſe, till he had faithfully diſcharged that buſineſſe. And Iehoſaphat being neerely driuen by the Moabits and Ammonits, did firſt ſeeke the Lord by faſting and prayer, before he would take weapon in hand. And let all marke what he loſt thereby, or whether hee could poſſibly haue found the like helpe and ſo preſent as he did, by all ſpeedie following his buſineſſe, by all policie and power that hee could haue made. And yet I adde this, becauſe I would lay no burthen needleſly on the conſcience of any man, that in neceſſitie, which cannot be auoided, a man may omit the greater dutie for the leſſe, if it could not elſe be done at all, and ſo as opportunitie be watched and taken to doe it afterwards. To conclude about this matter, let this practiſe of Gedeon teach vs this rule, to wit, to giue the precedencie alway to thoſe duties which are of beſt price, and withall of greateſt neceſſitie. Now I call that neceſſitie, which not only is commanded, but abſolutly and alwaies, ſo that it is ſinne to neglect and omit it; as to watch, beleeue, repent, &c. they may not be left of, and laid aſide for any cauſe. So to heare the word in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, is commanded, as alſo to doe our earthly buſineſſe on the ſixe daies: yet to omit both, at ſome time is no ſin, becauſe they be commanded but for ſome time to be done, & may in ſome caſes and at other times be diſpenſed with & omitted but the other are euer neceſſarie; as to be humbled for ſin, to beleeue in God, alſo to loue and feare God, and to be patient, & ſome other, with the like duties of the firſt Commandements. Now theſe are abſolute duties, and charged vpon vs generally and alwaies: no buſineſſe may be preferred before theſe whatſoeuer: no delay is to be admitted, no though it be vnder colour of moſt ſerious returning thereto afterward: For where we take libertie to our ſelues in theſe caſes, God curſeth vs, Satan gets ground of vs, and the worke for the which we lay them aſide, is commonly naught worth, when it is done in the beſt manner. And therefore wee ſee that Felix pretending that he would heare Paul againe at leiſure of thoſe things, which his terrified conſcience durſt heare no longer for that preſent; neuer had leiſure to heare him againe at all, ſeeing he did it not both when he ought and might. For the ſecond ſort of duties: as prayer in familie, priuatly by our ſelues, with the like, although they are not duties of ſo ſimple neceſſitie, that no other actions may euer hinder them; yet let them who haue ſolemnely couenanted with the Lord to vſe them, and ſeene great cauſe thereof, and fruite thereby, beware how they winde out themſelues of this courſe, vpon vnwarranted occaſions: for ſo they ſhall neuer want ſome one or other ſhift to ſalue the matter, till the breach be growne ſo great, that a ſlender patch will not mend it, nay griefe and ſlight repentance ſcarcely will repaire it: as wee ſee a cloſe and ſmooth lid of a frame, if it warpe once, is not eaſily brought to his leuelnes againe. God ſhall teach wiſedome in the caſes of lawfull omiſſion, to ſuch as leane

not ſo much and ſo long, to their owne, till they haue laid themſelues vnderfoote. But that the chiefeſt duties, when all things are rightly conſidered, ought to be (as I haue ſaid) preferred before other, the words of our Sauiour in that patterne of prayer, Matth. 6. do clearely ſhew; where before he mentioneth Matth. 6. 9. 10. any petitions tending to the good of ſoule or body, hee commands vs to aske the things which concerne the glory of God, which ſtands in the comming of his kingdome, and doing of his will. So that if it were poſſible, that a good might aske the pardon of ſinne, deliuerance from euill, or neceſſaries to this life, without reſpect had to this, that God might bee honoured in all theſe, it were his great ſinne ſo to doe. For the very ſaluation of a mans ſoule is to be hazzarded and neglected, (if it might bee) rather then that it ſhould ſtand in compariſon with this, as by Moſes and Pauls requeſt for the peoples forgiuenes and conuerſion may appeare.
            Secondly, in this that the Midianites banded themſelues againſt Iſrael, very 
                  Doct. 2. like to haue ſpoiled them both of their liues & goods, as they had almoſt done before, we ſhould conſider to what changes in our eſtate we be ſubiect; and that is, euen vnto the looſing of all the good things that God hath inriched vs with, to make our liues comfortable. Oh, when we are in health, peace, abundance, and well married, with the feare of God accompanying them, it is (doubtleſſe) a little paradiſe that wee liue in, as here on earth wee Note. may looke for, and in compariſon of that we may ſee the moſt to enioy that we liue among) and they are wiſe who can acknowledge it, to giue God the praiſe by bringing foorth much fruit. And yet God can affoord vs this and more too, if we could vſe it well, and do good with it. But ſeeing men neſtle Iohn 15. 9. themſelues vpon theſe vncertaine things, (which is little wiſdome in them to doe ſo, but a bold tempting of God;) we ſee what ſtrange alterations fall out in their liues, that their eſtate changeth from that it was, I ſay not as other mens, by age, ſickneſſes, diſeaſes onely, (for to them we are all ſubiect) but from towardneſſe, hope and likelihood of goodneſſe, which they had ſometime, and therefore they ſhould haue been rooted, and growne forward therein: and ſuch as neuer had any, waxe much worſe and worſe, and by their afflictions they be much diſguized.
            For by that time that cruell enemies, domeſticall or forraigne, (I meane in the world) haue oppreſſed them, as both may eaſily bee: or ſuites, debt, Note. ſuretiſhip, or priſon haue moleſted them (which commonly fall out to be) or the vnrulineſſe and diſobedience in children, the vnfaithfulneſſe and leaudneſſe of ſeruants, and the vnpeaceableneſſe and vnappeaſableneſſe in neighbours and landlords, with great iniuries offered by them, ſhall vexe them; together with ſickneſſe and other calamities which meet with them; I ſay, when ſome of theſe, as mothes in a garment, haue eaten into them, the beautie of their eſtate is decaied, and conſumed: in theſe caſes, I ſay, they are altered and changed, as if they had neuer been the perſons. So that as Elimelech by famine was conſtrained to change his dwelling, and good Dauid by his owne ſonne was almoſt driuen from his kingdome; euen ſo, and much more, when ſundry of the forementioned waies ſhall afflict bad men, doe they not ſhew the vncertaine hold that they haue (and yet they haue no hold of any better) of the things which are in greateſt price heere among men, together with the reproches and diſgraces that befall them? that I ſay

nothing of ſundry kinds of death to cut them off from all: and are ſufficient proofes of that which I ſay. So that we haue good cauſe to beare a low ſaile, Note. euen when we be at the higheſt, and to thinke we haue little, when we haue the moſt. And to looke for our change in our proſperitie, and to make heauen our habitation againſt we go hence, and the earth with the pompe and beautie of it, but as ſmall and vncertaine riches. Indeed all the glory of theſe things muſt haue his end: yet commonly where God is not prouoked much, there is no vnſeaſonable change of mens proſperitie into miſery: but a kindly inioying it with Gods good liking: though ſometime God afflict thus for other ends, as Iob, &c. And becauſe many of Gods deare ones prouoke him to turne their bleſſings and delight temporall, as in wife, children, goods, beautie, ſtrength, &c. into ſorrowes, and puniſhments, which muſt be ſo, or elſe it would bee worſe with them: let them alſo beware that they breake not out further againſt him, leaſt by any ſinne wilfully committed and not repented of ſpeedily, they cauſe and procure this to themſelues, that they be roughly handled of him, more then commonly, euen like other men, and that particularly by the groſſe abuſe of theſe outward things themſelues, where to they are ſubiect, they bee not deformed and diſguized by ſtrange and rare afflictions. God hath all good things in ſtore for his, but he can alſo ſoone ſtrip them thereof, as Ieremie ſaith, in the perſon of the Iewes, Lam. 1. 12. euen as hee withholdeth them altogether from ſome other. And this I thought good to ſay, though ſomewhat of this argument hath been ſaid before.
            It followeth how God furniſhed Gedeon with gifts of the ſpirit, both wiſdome and courage, whereby, according to that which hee had ſaid to him before [Goe in this thy power, and thou ſhalt ſaue Iſrael out of the hands of Midian] he was new fitted for it. Which teacheth, that when God appointeth his ſeruants to any charge or buſineſſe of his, hee inableth them to goe through it, and miniſtreth helpe to them accordingly. So Paul ſaith in a farre greater 1. Tim. 1. 12. worke then this of Gedeons, that God counted him faithfull, and put him in his ſeruice, after he had appointed him thereunto. So Saul when he was choſen King, had gifts giuen him to gouerne, God making him thereby, as the text ſaith, another man. So the Lord dealeth with thoſe whom hee maketh Miniſters of the Goſpell, that they ſhall doe his meſſage to the people faithfully and diligently, and plainely and powerfully; to the iuſt challenging of them, who boldly take vpon them ſo waightie a calling as doth concerne the ſauing or deſtroying the ſoules of men, hauing no furniture of preaching the Goſpell ſoundly and clearely, neither any care to looke that way, nor other grace beſtowed vpon them. Now Gods worke is not onely ſome great ſeruice, as Gedeons to fight, and Pauls to preach, and Moſes to deliuer Iſrael from Egypt: but euen to liue in the married eſtate, to walke in a calling publike or priuate, and much more to profeſſe the name of Chriſt, in what condition ſoeuer. And when we ſpeake of Gods calling a man to this worke, (I meane not any ſenſible calling by voice,) as here Gedeon extraordinarilie was: but when a man entreth into theſe eſtates, functions, or actions by direction and warrant of the lawfulneſſe or neceſſitie thereof, from the word and ordination of the Church. Vſing alſo the holieſt and beſt meanes to obtaine faith, knowledge, wiſdome and conſcience to diſcharge them well: to ſuch I ſay,

God will not be wanting, although they may thinke that their caſe is not as Gedeons, (and yet they had need bee no weaker in faith, nor lower brought then he was) and that they are but ſeely priuate perſons; yes, God will ſo bleſſe them, and proſper their lawfull enterpriſes, yea though they deeme themſelues vnfit to vndertake ſuch workes, or vnable to goe through them: that ſo as they ſhall haue cauſe to bleſſe the Lord, and wonder at his loue and faithfulneſſe to them, when they who goe about the ſame, to obſerue how he aſſiſteth and bleſſeth them, and on the other ſide, how they who relie vpon their own head and pollicie, ſhall wanze, come to nothing, and be reſiſted by him; as we reade of ſuch as being commanded to goe againſt the Canaanites See and reade Num. 14. from verſ. 40. to 45. refuſed; but, would needs goe fight againſt them being forbidden, and therefore they were ſore diſcomfited. But of this I haue ſpoken before.
            
               Gedeon being thus furniſhed, was in couraged to go againſt Gods enemies, Verſe 34 35. and ſo much the more, ſeeing he had ſuch ſucceſſe before by the promiſe of the Angell. Where note, how well things proſper with vs, and goe forward, when we are certaine, that we be ſet a worke by the Lord: and more particularly, when we are furniſhed with faith in his promiſes for the preſent, and time to come, and heartned by the experience of Gods helpe in the time paſt. For it was not for nothing, that the Lord meaning to ſet him a worke about a greater ſeruice, gaue him good proofe firſt, as of his owne weakenes, ſo of his aſſiſtance in the leſſer, I meane in the deſtroying of Baal; of which point more hereafter, if God will. Now both theſe did worke vpon him mightily, and ſo wee then eſpecially, when with both, our conſciences can witneſſe to vs, that we haue caſt off, and purged out ſuch ſinnes wherein we liued before, oh then, I ſay, we goe on roundly and readily in the duties wee take in hand. And ſo on the contrary, if we doe but crop them off by a preſent and ſlight diſlike of them, we ſhall ſenſibly and eaſily feele how awkelie and vntowardly wee goe to worke, as the Iſraelites againſt the Beniamites. Iudg. 20. Cap. 20. But of this point often by occaſion before.
            In blowing the trumpet, to draw and call together the companie that 
                  Doct. 2. ſhould aſſiſt him, marke who were ſaid to follow him to the battell: euen Abiezer, meaning the people in his tribe, and of the familie that he was of, that had been ſo furiouſly bent and ſet againſt him for the ouerthrowing of Baal: who alſo would haue had him put to death for the ſame; which may bee maruelled at to ſee them ſo turned vnto him. But the Lord (no doubt) changed their hearts; and againe, they ſaw no hurt fell out to Gedeon by Baal, as the Barbarians to Paul by the viper, which they verily looked for. Acts. 28. 5. For many doe iudge of the profeſſors of Gods worſhip, according to the outward bleſſing and ſucceſſe, and eſpecially beginners: who yet in time Note. grow to ſee into the matter better, as they did, Ioh. 4. who told the woman, Ioh. 4 42. that though they were drawne by her to heare, yet they beleeued then vpon a better ground, as their owne knowledge. But to returne againe; If men that runne after vaine idols, and all other that ſerue God amiſſe, and not after his word, would conſider, what they get thereby, euen leſſe then nothing; and how they are deceiued in that wherein they put their truſt; they would ſeeke further, and ſerue the Lord onely, and him alſo according to his word, with an vpright heart, as knowing him to be a bountiful rewarder and Heb. 11. 6.
               
pay maſter. Yea and the godly would take more hart to themſelues in Gods buſineſſe, if they conſidered how the Lord cauſeth many reſiſters and enemies of them and their goodneſſe, to turne to their practiſe, and cleaue vnto Reuel. 3. 9. their profeſſion, to worſhip at their feete, and to ſerue God with them. A worthie fruit of their innocency, though it procured them but onely a good report, and ſome generall allowance: but when it draweth others to the heartie intertainment of the truth with them, in the loue thereof, it is much more. But I noted ſomewhat of this point in Ioaſh, vpon the entrance into the ſtorie, or elſe where.
            The reſt of the Tribes about him, as Zebulon, Aſher and Naphtali, followed Verſ. 35. him. For though the Lord called Gedeon onely, yet he could not alone fight againſt the enemies. For our faith in God doth not exclude the helpe of men, nor the ſecond meanes which may lawfully and conueniently bee inioyed. For Gods ſeruants are not led by faith to tempt God, but to ſerue his prouidence, as in wiſdome they learne to doe. And this is one eſpeciall cauſe why God will furniſh him whom hee calleth, becauſe hee giueth him grace to ſeeke aſſiſtance from him in all his enterpriſes, and to ſerue his prouidence. And ſo is one bound to helpe another, where need requireth, as the Tribes here did Gedeon. Reade more of this Chap. 2. verſ. 3.
         
         
            THE FORTIE FOVRE SERMON ON THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH CHAPTERS OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               VERS. 36. Then Gedeon ſaid vnto God, If thou wilt ſaue Iſrael by mine hand as thou haſt ſaid.
               
               37. Behold, I put a fleece of wooll in the threſhing place: if the dew come on the fleece onely, and it be drie vpon all the earth, then ſhall I be ſure that thou wilt ſaue Iſrael by mine hand, as thou haſt ſaid.
               
               38. And ſo it was: for he roſe vp earely on the morrow, and thruſt the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, and filled a bowle of water.
               
               39. Againe, Gedeon ſaid vnto God, be not angry with me, that I may ſpeake once more: let me prooue once againe, I pray thee, with the fleece: let it now be drie onely vpon the fleece, and let dew be vpon all the ground.
               
               40. And God did ſo that ſame night: for it was dry vpon the fleece onely, and there was dew on all the ground.
               
            
            
               HOw Gedeon prepared to go to the warre againſt Midian we haue The ſenſe of theſe verſes. heard in the former 3. verſes, in which began the 4. point in the 4. part of the Chapter, according to the diuiſion made in the eleuenth verſe, whereto wee may remember was adioyned his asking of a double ſigne. And in theſe words the holy ſtory ſheweth,

that he being now furniſhed of the Lord with gifts, as we haue heard, and hauing gathered his army together, and being gone to meete the enemies, where they had pitched; in theſe verſes (I ſay) it followeth how he deſired of God the firſt ſigne; by the which hee might bee confirmed of, and concerning the victorie. The ſigne he asked was this: that he putting a fleece of wooll on the threaſhing flore, the dew might come on the fleece onely, and it might be drie vpon all the earth. Wherein he is maruelled at, that for all the promiſe of God, and confirming of him before, he ſhould doubt, and aske a ſigne. I anſwere vpon the due conſideration of the thing, that though it may be like inough, that hee was not altogether void of blame, yet hee did not herein tempt God, (as ſome did who asked a ſigne of Chriſts authoritie) but deſired onely to haue his faith confirmed thereby, which would otherwiſe haue wauered. As the man in the Goſpell, who beleeued, and yet prayed, Lord helpe mine vnbeliefe, ſo did Gedeon. Beſides, the Lord granted Mar. 9. 24. him his requeſt, without any reproouing of him, which it is not like hee would haue done, if Gedeon had doubted. Laſt of all, I am the rather thus perſwaded, becauſe he is reckoned in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, among them Heb. 11. 32. that were commended for their faith.
            Herein we are to conſider of our weakeneſſe in beleeuing by occaſion of Doct. in verſ. 36. 37. 38. 
               Gedeons asking a double ſigne: and of the louing kindneſſe of the Lord in pitying vs therein, and bringing vs out of it, euen as he yeelded to him in both. For our ſelues this may be ſaid, that though wee beleeue Gods promiſe, yet there ariſeth naturally in vs daily and continuall weakeneſſe of faith; partly by yeelding too much to carnal reaſon, partly through ineuitable frailty, the Note. fleſh fighting againſt the ſpirit in vs. And hereof it is, that we are faine to wraſtle, and to be in the battell as it were, and in the cumbat daily to vphold and preſerue our weake faith, which otherwiſe would ſoone faile and giue ouer, as by experience we haue oft found in other, and our ſelues. As in the examples of Peter comming on the water to Chriſt, Martha in raiſing Lazarus, Dauid complaining of his ſadnes and heauines of heart, the Diſciples in their too much aſcribing to Chriſts bodily preſence, and an hundred more in Scriptures doe teſtifie.
            And much more may the ſame be ſaid of our ſelues: yet while we feare our frailtie againſt ſuch aſſaults, as we haue cauſe daily to doe, and learne to reſt on God, as thoſe deare ſeruants of God did, wee are much ſtaied, and our hearts well eaſed thereby, in reſpect of former times. As to ſay a little in particuler by the contrary: when wee haue obtained of God the gift of beleeuing that we are freed from condemnation, and that wee ſhall haue eternall life: if we reſt there, and looke not daily to reuiue our hearts by hearing the word often, whereby the feeling of Gods fauour is more reuiued and quickned, and alſo by remembring and applying Gods promiſes from day to day, and from time to time, and with both, if we labour not alſo to reioyce therein, that ſo we may be kept in holy compaſſe thereby: wee ſhall be euer flitting; off and on, and ſtand at an vncertaine ſtay: And this ſhall not onely be at our firſt beleeuing, (which there is leaſt doubt of) but euen after we haue been ſtabliſhed and ſetled therein. For at firſt, aſſurance is not eaſily obtained ordinarily, till we haue had ſome experience of Gods louing Note. kindneſſe towards vs, and of our owne vprightnes.
            
               
And euen ſo I may ſay the ſame of beleeuing Gods promiſes in other temporary things: how we ſhall faint therein, without the forementioned exerciſe: and more hardly beare our croſſes, or goe vnder ſome paine and ſickneſſe, or haue victorie ouer ſome ſpeciall ſinne, and mortifie ſome corruption that hath much preuailed in vs. But if theſe be purſued earneſtly, and the other promiſes of grace bee oft and vſually recorded, with feruent prayer to God for ſtrength; it is not to be denied, but much fruite ſhall follow, and we ſhall ſenſibly perceiue, that wee get ground of our ſelues in that behalfe, and grow more neerely acquainted with the minde and will of God, that he will grant vs further to preuaile againſt ſuch difficulties: and yet if wee grow to thinke that we ſhall neuer obtaine grace againſt our corruptions, nor outgrow diſcouragements, nor well beare our croſſes, or finde bleſſing in our callings, notwithſtanding the vſe of publike and priuate meanes; yea further if wee doe minde and looke after theſe things but now and then, and that ſlightly alſo; we may well know, that there is no fruit to be expected to come thereof: which is the cauſe why ſome, who are not deſtitute of true faith, are often times (as it were) new to begin in theſe things, after long going about them.
            Now this ſtanding at a ſtay, and ſmall profiting in the ſubduing and ſtriuing againſt vnbeliefe, commeth not barely▪ and altogether of frailtie, when we would gladly preuaile and cannot: but in great part of yeelding to temptation, and occaſions drawing vs violently▪ to ſinne againſt our conſcience, (which cauſeth a mans hold vpon the promiſes to faile exceedingly) or too much giuing place to carnall reaſon, which perſwadeth that wee neede not Note. giue ſuch attendance to theſe things; but in the meane while, wee ſee that we are greatly ſet backe thereby. So that it is manifeſt, that without diligent heed taking to the ſtrengthening of our faith, we eaſily grow to diſtruſt God and his promiſes. And much more, if we will hearken to ſuch voyces as we ſhall too oft heare ſounding in our eares, that we neede not take ſuch paine, nor haue our heads beaten and occupied about it: whereas all diligence is to be giuen thereto for attaining ſo excellent a gift, as that is. And moſt of all, when by willing offendings of God we weaken our ſelues; which how ſmall need we haue of, we may eaſily ſee, when we conſider that wee fall to doubting through the vntowardnes of our hearts, without adding further ſinne, our faith being fitly compared to fire, which may as well goe out by negligence in adding thereto, as wilfulnes in quenching thereof.
            This our ſinne in ſo hardly giuing credit to God, is aggrauated hereby, that if we are to deale with men, about great matters, wee are eaſily ſatisfied, and beleeue them, if wee haue their word and writing: which manifeſteth too plainly our diſtruſt towards God, from whom nothing is inough to ſtay vs, vnleſſe with Thomas we may groſſely feele and ſee that which we deſire. Nay I ſay more, if we be to compaſſe any matter for our owne pleaſure, profit, or preferment, oh how bold and full of courage we be, although we muſt goe vnder perill, loſſe, or any ſuch like thing, for obtaining the ſame: but to ſuffer any difficultie or danger, ſo much as to ſtretch out our faith to beleeue, or our hope to waite for that which God hath promiſed, though hee giue vs neuer ſo great cauſe and incouragement, by good euidence and teſtimonie, Note. and by former experience, of others, and our ſelues, yet wee haue no

heart to it. Therefore if we be wiſe, let vs be much ſtronglier built vp in the confidence of Gods fauour, and of his promiſes, take more paines to abide therein, pray and watch againſt the occaſions of vnſetling it, and chaine vp our ſo great aſcribing (as we haue done) to ſenſe and reaſon. And ſo doing, we ſhall ſee our ſelues well propped vp and vpholden, though we haue no promiſe of miracles to doe it, as Gedeon had.
            Of one of the ſignes that Gedeon asked, wee haue heard: now followeth the other.
            When Gedeon had deſired one ſigne, that the fleece might be moiſtened with dew, and the ground drie, now he deſired, that when dew was on the Verſ. 38. 39. 40. earth the fleece might be drie; and to both the ſignes asking, God yeelded; which he would not haue eaſily done, if he had not approued it. To teach, that if in our weaknes and timourouſnes wee had this wiſedome, to repaire to God, and make our mone to him, in feeling our burthen, and to ſay with confidence, Lord ſtrengthen our faith; we ſhould be ſtaied and eaſed: and ſo in all diſtempers whatſoeuer, we ſhould not be left to our ſelues, nor forſaken. Which many (as I ſaid) haue not learned to doe, and therefore their whole life is but a conflicting with doubts and feares, riſing anew in their mindes, and that endleſly, by the malice of the diuell diſquieting and moleſting them: and hindring them from that reſolution and holy boldneſſe which God alloweth and commandeth to be in them. And whereas the enemie buzzeth into them, that it were preſumption to hold the promiſe of forgiuenes and life, otherwiſe then doubtingly: this fact of Gedeon in ſo earneſt and doubled requeſting of ſtrength and confirmation from God, ſhould daſh and quench it. And ſo by our proofe of Gods anſwering our prayers at one time, wee ſhould learne to vſe the ſame meanes againe in a like manner, and as often as neede ſhall require at another time: knowing, that as it is Gods honour to be beleeued in his promiſes; ſo it ſtands with his good liking, that we often ſue to him, to giue vs ſome cleere inſight into them, how they belong to vs, (though wee tye him to no certaine meaſure) that ſo we may be ſtaied.
            Neither is it to be omitted, that Gedeon in this ſecond ſuit, commeth with a deprecation of his owne boldnes and importunitie with God, which muſt be warily vnderſtood. For hereby it followes not, that God was angrie, or Gedeon was bold in making this requeſt: (for then Gedeon had ſinned highly in doing that which he knew would anger God) but rather out of a moſt inward feeling of that vnbleefe which hee deſired to be forgiuen, and ſupplied with confidence: as alſo in deepe humilitie, conſidering how great a libertie he had (being but a ſillie worme) that he might ſpeake ſo freely to the Almightie, and be admitted into ſuch familiaritie with his Maieſtie; he vttereth this ſpeech full of reuerence, Be not angrie with thy ſeruant; as if hee ſhould ſay, It is iuſt with thee to bee diſpleaſed with my weakneſſe in beleeuing: but (O Lord) pardon that (bee not angrie) and ſeeing I craue ſtrength againſt it, (as thou giueſt me leaue to doe) let my deſire be granted, and my infirmitie couered. And in both the reſpects named, the Saints of God in Scripture haue euer vſed themſelues thus reuerently and humbly, and the Lord ſo reſpectiuely, as Gedeon here doth. As the example of Abraham ſhewes, praying for Gedeon. So wiſe, and able to vſe ſuch a priuiledge,

ſhould we al ſeeke to be, that we knowing how baſe mettle we are, euen duſt and wormes, priuiledge, (that I ſay no more) and yet admitted into the preſence of God of glory, we ſhould admire it with humilitie, that he giues vs acceſſe to him; oh how ſhould it affect vs, yea what reuerence ſhould it draw from vs? Euen as when a poore man comes often to the ſame friend to borrow money: he comes not ſaucily and looſely, as if it were a common matter, and for the which he were little beholding to him, but caries thanks and reuerence in his countenance and behauior. But of this ſtory of Gedeon before.
            And this is that which I purpoſed to ſay of, and concerning our ſelues. 3 Now that which I haue to ſay of the Lord is this: namely, how reſpectiue he is to his children, and what a ready eare he giueth to our prayers, yea and that particularly in this point, of ſtrengthening our faith. Gedeon twiſe deſired a ſigne to confirme him, and God granted it to him. To ſhew, that if (as I haue ſaid) we could pray for it, and long for that grace (as precious as it is) it ſhould be granted vs. But we would bee glad to inioy it, but in our weakneſſe and fainting, we doe not plie God with feruent requeſts, that we may Note. be ſetled in belieuing either that power ouer our ſpeciall ſinne ſhal be giuen vs, or hope and patience to beare ſome trouble. If we were oft with God in this behalfe, and earneſt; wee ſhould finde, that God would furniſh vs accordingly, aboue that which wee could looke for. Thus Abraham, Dauid, Paul with others, grew ſtrong in faith. And this of the whole chapter.
            
               THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE Booke of IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Then Ierubbaal (who is Gedeon) roſe vp earely and all the people that were with him, and pitched beſide the well of Harod: ſo that the hoaſt of the Midianites, was on the North ſide of them, in the valley by the hill Moreh.
                  
                  2. And the Lord ſaid vnto Gedeon, The people that are with thee are to many for me to giue the Midianites into their hands, leſt Iſrael make their vaunt againſt mee, and ſay, My hand hath ſaued me.
                  
                  3. Now therefore proclaime in the audience of the people, and ſay, Whoſoeuer is timerous or fearefull, let him returne, and depart earely from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people, that were at mount Giliad, two and twentie thouſand, ſo that ten thouſand remained.
                  
                  4. And the Lord ſaid vnto Gedeon, The people are yet too many, bring them downe vnto the water and I will trie them for thee there: and of whom I ſay to thee, this man ſhall goe with thee, the ſame ſhall goe with thee: and of whomſoeuer I ſay vnto thee, this man ſhall not goe with thee, the ſame ſhall not goe.
                  
                  5. So he brought downe the people vnto the water. And the Lord ſaid vnto Gedeon. As many as lap the water with their tongues, as a dogge lappeth, them put by themſelues: and euery one that ſhall bow downe his knees to drinke, put apart.
                  
                  6. And the number of them that lapped, by putting their hands to their mouthes, were three hundred men: but all the remnant of the people kneeled downe vpon their knees to drinke water.
                  
                  
                     
7. And the Lord ſaid vnto Gedeon, By theſe three hundred men that lapped, will I ſaue you, and deliuer the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the other people, goe euery man vnto his place.
                  
                  8. So the people tooke victuals with them, and their trumpets, and he ſent all the reſt of 
                           •
                        ſrael, euery man to his tent, and retained the three hundred men: and the hoaſt of Midian was beneath him in a valley.
                  
               
               THe ſumme in generall, and parts of the Chapter are firſt to bee conſidered, The ſumme and parts of the Chapter. and then a more particular view to be taken of it afterwards: and the ſumme may be laid out in the parts, which are three. The firſt, how God made Gedeon ſend all the people, ſaue three hundred, backe againe, as being too many for the battell, to verſe 9. The ſecond, how God aſſured him againe of the victorie, by a dreame, which one of the enemies had, and by the interpreting of it by another of them in Gedeons hearing, and this to the 16. verſe. The third is the victorie it ſelfe ouer them, which God gaue him: and this to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  TO come to the firſt part, there is no difficultie in it, for when hee had The ſenſe of the firſt part. pitched his army, ready to goe meete the enemies, the Lord cauſed him to ſend them all away (excepting three hundred) leſt they ſhould giue out, that they had ouercome the Midianites by their owne ſtrength. And thoſe three hundred hee alſo appointed to him, taking them out of the ten thouſand, that remained after the ſending of the other two and twenty thouſand away. In Gedeons drawing neere the enemies with his armie, wee may ſee 
                        The ſenſe of the firſt verſe, and the doctrine. Note. how hee was confirmed in his faith that hee ſhould obtaine the victorie, whereabout he had doubted ſo much before. And although I grant, that it was meet he ſhould be ſtaied by ſo great meanes as God vſed for that purpoſe, yet we ſee that faith commonly failes moſt, when the triall is greateſt, and the danger neereſt. Therefore in that he was now heartned and incouraged, when he ſaw the great number of the Midianites, and he himſelf was now with his ſmall armie in compariſon of theirs, to meete and fight with them: it is cleare, that he was well perſwaded of the truth of Gods promiſe, and that he did caſt himſelf confidently thereupon. Thus his faith grew and Doct. verſ. 1. ſhewed it ſelfe apparantly.
                  So ſhould we, when we haue been much laboured with, to belieue by the preaching of the Goſpell, and haue our ſelues alſo much been occupied in attaining thereto; we ſhould, I ſay, then look for the fruit thereof. And namely, to haue proofe of our faith indeed, in and about the common difficulties, wherein in times paſt wee haue bee foiled, and found it almoſt impoſſible ſometime, or at leaſt very vnlike that we ſhould preuaile by faith, euen there I ſay, we ſhould looke to haue ſome ſtrength thereof otherwiſe then in former times. As for example, when a man ſeeth his ſinnes and the guilt of them, though he be truly humbled for them: euen then to lift vp the hand of faith to heauen, and lay hold on the mercy of God in Chriſt. Alſo in time of temptation, to reſiſt temptation, by beleeuing, that God wil giue vs victorie. Againe, when a man muſt loſe goods, and life, and all that hee hath for

the Goſpell, or elſe to forſake it, then to cleaue faſt vnto it, beleeuing that we ſhall be great gainers thereby. And ſo, when a man wanteth meat, drink, and apparrell, yet euen then, to acknowledge Gods prouidence, though by weake meanes, and reſt in it peaceably. In like manner, hauing long heard the word, and how we ſhould make it profitable to our ſelues by belieuing it, we ſhould grow to this point, that we ſhould be wearie of our rouing and wandering, of our ſleeping, of our diſcourſing and diſputing againſt that which we like not, being vnpleaſant to our fleſh, and ſay with Samuel: Speake Lord, for now thy ſeruant heareth, and is ready to reſt in thy will, whither reproouing, commanding, or incouraging: yea and to be vpholden, guided, reformed, or kept within compaſſe, whither by the terrors, commandements, or promiſes of it. So ought we in all other parts of dutie to be readie to ſay euery one for himſelfe, Lord, now haue I learned how I ſhould worke in my 
                     Note. 
                     calling, vſe my peace and proſperitie, behaue my ſelfe in ſecret, and with others, and walke throughout my life innocently and fruitfully, belieuing that I ſhall not loſe the fruit of my labour. And further, I bleſſe thy name, I am ready to bee put the triall, and am not altogether as in times past, each occaſion offered by thy Maieſtie is welcome, I am the more incouraged to ſtoope meekely vnder mine affliction, when I ſee thou haſt ſent it, for then I belieue thou art readier to aſsiſt mee in bearing it, and that thou wilt giue a good iſſue out of it: and therefore farre be it from me to be ſo plunged 
                     Note. 
                     and amazed at trials, as I haue been, for that were to be euer learning, and neuer come to knowledge, yea it were alway to be a child, going by the helpe of others, and neuer alone, which is the propertie of a changeling. And thus doing, wee ſhall find that which the good Martyr found; that when God called him to the ſtake he endured the fire, though before hee could not endure the flame of a candle to ſinge ſo much as his finger. In theſe, and ſuch like, to haue proofe of our faith, is a thing much to bee reioyced in, and a good ſigne that our faith groweth, and is ſtrengthened otherwiſe then it hath been in times paſt, according to the ſaying of the Apoſtle to the Coloſſians: Be rooted and grow in 
                     Coloſſ 2. 7. 
                     faith, that ye may abound therein.
                  
                  And ſo I might ſay of many things particularly, as of impatience, anger, wrath, vncleane and vnchaſt deſires, exceſſiue feare of trouble, conceits, terchineſſe, raſh iudging, and many other more: when we haue purſued, and had them in the chace, diſliking, condemning, and long time and oft praying againſt them, we ſhould looke for ſome victorie ouer them, and by the faith in which we prayed, to reſt perſwaded, that ſuch meanes ſhall not bee vſed of vs in vaine: but looke that the rootes of them, which were faſt ſetled in our hearts before, be now looſened in vs, and more and more dailie, and that it ſhall ſo appeare euen then, when any new occaſion ſhall bee offered, and when we ſhall be prouoked to offend by any. This will liuely ſhew, (though wee ſhall neuer be vtterly void of the reliques and ex
                        •
                     crements of our corrupt and rebellious heart,) that our faith is better confirmed in the word that commandeth vs, to purge them out. And this a man would thinke were more to the honour of Chriſtians, then to boaſt and iangle of their faith, and faile in the triall ridiculouſly: which is an eaſie religion to learne, if it might goe for payment. To whom a man might ſay, Where is now that tongue of thine, which ſo luſtily bragged of faith? as Zebul ſaid to Gaal, cap. 9.
                  
                     
Alſo we further ſee here, that though Gedeon had the promiſe of God that 
                        Doct. 2. he ſhould ouercome the Midianites, yet hee lies not ſtill, but ſerueth Gods prouidence by furniſhing himſelfe with a armie good as he could conueniently to goe againſt them. And ſo we ought to vſe ordinary meanes to bring any worke to paſſe appointed vs of God, though wee haue the promiſe of good ſucceſſe from him, and yet againe on the other ſide, we ſhould not attribute any thing to them, for that were to detract from God his due. But of this before at large.
               
            
         
         
            THE FORTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to goeforward where I left, in this verſe, God tels Verſ. 2. 
               Gedeon, that the people of his armie were too many to giue the victory vnto, leſt they ſhould aſcribe it to themſelues. This ſpeech of the Lord ſheweth, how vnfit wee bee, to haue any great matter committed to vs, or to our truſt and gouernment, for wee are moſt Note. Lam. 1. 1. prone to abuſe it: and therefore he is faine oft-times to take away many good things from vs, leſt they ſhould much hurt vs, though they might (if wee could rightly vſe them) turne to our great good, and the benefit of others. This people of Iſrael, if they had gone altogether to the battell, and got the victory, they would not haue acknowledged God to haue giuen it them, but their owne power and skill, and yet wee know how miſerable they were a little before, when Gedeon himſelfe complained in what diſtreſſe they were, and how low they were brought: ſo that one would thinke, they were vnfit inongh to aſcribe ought to themſelues, and that they ought rather (hauing been brought from ſuch bondage as they had been in before) yea and they might alſo eaſily haue ſeene cauſe to giue glory to God for it, if they with two and thirtie thouſand (eſpecially ſo many thouſands of them being faint-hearted ſouldiours) had ſubdued more then an hundred thouſand perſons. And this is the more odious in this people, becauſe they would haue abhorred ſuch a leaud conceit or quality in themſelues while they remained vnder bandage, yea, if they had been asked: What if by you (being but feeble and few in reſpect of your enemies:) the Lord would deſtroy the Midianites, would you not thinke God had fought mightily for you? Oh they would haue confeſſed no leſſe, but ſeene that it had been cauſe of great thanks. True; till the victorie had been gotten: and then who but themſelues had foiled the Midianites? So it may be Saul and Ieroboam while they were vnderlings, would haue counted it a greater priuiledge, and themſelues highly indebted to God, if hee would haue beſtowed a leſſe matter then a kingdome vpon them, but when they had

got it, they ſhewed they were vnable to be made partakers of ſo great a felicitie: and wee ſee, that they were not fit to haue ſo weighty and glorious matters as kingdoms committed vnto them. Euen as wee ſee, meane and beggarly perſons, that neuer knew what belonged to wealth or dignitie, yet if they be raiſed vnto it, cannot beare it, nay the ground cannot beare them: if they bee ſet on horſebacke, they ride out of reaſon, euen till they breake their owne neckes: whereas ingenuous and wel-bred natures can aſwell carry themſelues in ſuch a condition, (eſpecially if education and grace meet together) as the pooreſt can in a bace and ſimple. And ſurely many of vs can as hardly beare a little wealth, ſmall reuenues, a few hundreds, nay Note. ſcores, as Saul and the other could their kingdomes: though (ere wee had them) we were as lowly and meane in our owne eies, as our fellowes.
            Therefore, as I ſaid, we may ſee, how ſoone we abuſe Gods benefits, and all ſuch good liberties, as he beſtoweth vpon vs, as riches, health, promotion, credit (I would I might not ſay ſpirituall gifts alſo) euen as Pharaoh his princely eſtate and greatnes: the rich man in the Goſpell, his wealth: Herod, 
               Luke 12. 19. Actes 12. 23. the very praiſe and commendation that was giuen him by the people. So we that can challenge nothing at Gods hands as due debt to vs, but trouble and ſorrow, which is the fruite of our ſinne; what a lamentable caſe is it, that the Lord ſparing vs much from ſundrie calamities, and furniſhing vs with benefits of diuers kinds, to draw vs to know, loue, belieue in him and honour him, that we cannot for al this, ſo ſoone inioy any thing that is ought worth, but by and by wee ſet vp our bruſtles, wee forget from what a curſed eſtate, and whence we came, and kick vp our heeles againſt the Lord: and yet this is eaſie to bee ſeene in all eſtates of men, and kinds of Gods benefits.
            So that the Lord if he loue vs, ſeeth that there is no better way to be taken with vs for our good, then to take away ſuch liberties againe from vs, and to let out our humours, ſeeing they breed but a pleuriſie in vs, or to croſſe vs in them, leſt they ſhould ſteale away our hearts from him, and ſo we driue him to ſay of his benefits, as he did of this people: There be too many of them, I muſt make them fewer, or elſe they wil glory of their multitude and greatnes. Euen ſo we cauſe the Lord to ſay of vs, as to Saul (a bad perſon) they haue to much Note. wealth, I muſt plucke ſome of it from them: they haue had health too long, I muſt abridge them of it: they haue had too many of my benefits, as eaſe, credit, countenance, &c. vnleſſe they could vſe them better, I muſt, ſaith the Lord, of neceſſitie take them from them. And this is the cauſe why the Lord holds many of his vnder, that commonly they haue no great matters put into their hands, and are much croſſed in thoſe earthly commodities that they loue beſt, leſt they ſhould be the worſe for them. And it is rarely ſeene, that euen they are better by them, then if they had them not. Therefore except God ſhall beſtow vpon vs an humble and wiſe heart, and well ballanced with grace, to account of theſe things as they are, to wit, tranſitory, and ſoone flitting away, and to valew the heauenly treaſure of faith, and a godly life aboue all earthly riches: let vs know that the Lord deales wiſelier with vs, then we are aware, in dieting and ſhortning of vs: and we our ſelues ſhall ſee it as clearely in time (if wee marke it) as theſe Iſraelites did, that God hath done vs no wrong in taking ſomewhat away which we had, or denying vs ſomewhat which we deſire. And as for ſuch as ſeeke aboue all things to floriſh

and haue the world at will, they are not ſo happie, as they bee counted, eſpecially in their owne reckoning, neither will ſhew themſelues the wiſeſt men in the end: as by this and the like, may bee ſeene of them that will weigh it.
            But to come yet more neere to that which is noted in the text, not onely men abuſe Gods benefits other waies, but this one way alſo, that is, to vaineglorie, as it is ſaid, that this people here mentioned would haue done: and therefore the holy ſtory addeth it as a reaſon why the Lord would not haue ſo many goe to the battell, leaſt they ſhould ſay, that they had preuailed by their owne might, and ſo ſhould haue taken Gods honour to themſelues. And by this wee learne, why God denieth, and doth not giue vs in our attempts, many, great, or any meanes at all ſometime, and if he doe, yet not with any good ſucceſſe, or at leaſt, not as hee is wont to doe, (although to mans reaſon there bee likelihood enough, yea very great) becauſe if he ſhould, man would ſnatch the glorie from him to himſelfe. As Nabuchadnezzar did when he ſaid: This is great Babel that I haue built: Zenacherib that Dan 4 30. E
                     ••
                  . 35 15. 1. King. 20. 11. blaſphemed the Lord by his Captaine Rabſhakeh: So Benhadad ſo groſly for got himſelfe in boaſting what he would doe, that hee was anſwered wiſely in this manner, [Let not him that girdeth on his harneſſe, boaſt himſelfe, as he that putteth it off] And they to whom S. Iames wrote, how fooliſhly concluded they before the ſucceſſe, and bragged of their gaine, before they Iames 4. 13. knew they ſhould haue it? What would they haue done (thinke we) if they had alreadie enioyed it alſo? And is not this ſtrange, that whereas wee pretend, (if wee might partake ſuch and ſuch bleſſings) wee would bee much more thankfull and ſeruiceable for them, the Lord ſhould conuict vs of diſſimulation and falſehood, telling vs that we know not our owne hearts, for wee would bee more proud, bold, and vainglorious? So that if the Lord ſhould not bewray to vs, what poiſon lurkes in vs, we ſhould thinke that he did himſelfe great wrong in cutting many ſhort of their deſires, who might be like to doe him ſeruice by enioying them: whereas (alas) he knowes that in ſo doing, hee loſeth no honour himſelfe in ſo dealing with men, nay hee hath much adoe by ſuch meanes to keepe men from deſtruction, at leaſt from deepe diſhonouring of him. But to returne, it is moſt true, that if God did not denie much to vainglorious perſons which they deſire, they would neuer giue him his due, but take it to themſelues: inſomuch as wee ſee that ſuch doe not onely vaunt of their wealth, birth, ſtrength, and ſuch like, but if they haue onely ſome good qualitie, as that they be prouident husbands, or will keepe their promiſe, and pay their due, where it is owing, they glorie thereof, and diſgrace other that faile therein, though the moſt of their other doings may be caſt as dung in their faces, to their ſhame. But giue we vnto God his due: promiſe we to our ſelues nothing, but vpon condition if God will: and acknowledge wee him as the giuer, and as one that hath right to diſpoſe of that which he hath giuen vs: and when we are denied ſucceſſe in that which wee hope to bring to paſſe, let vs in token that we confeſſe the Lord may iuſtly ioynt vs, not fume and fret, raile and curſe, and much leſſe vtter we ſo much in words to others, that we thinke we are accurſed, when wee ſee ourſelues croſſed, but beare wee it meekly and patiently: and the

greater our gifts are, which we haue receiued, in more humble, fruitfull, and dutifull manner let vs ſhew our ſelues to vſe them.
            That Gedeon was bidden to ſend away many of the people, and why; we Verſ. 3. haue heard: now let vs ſee who they are that be exempted from the warre, and ſent backe, (of which ſort there were two and twentie thouſand) the text noteth them to bee thoſe that were faint-hearted and timerous, and ſo had God commanded in Deuteronomy that ſuch ſhould be ſent backe, leſt Deut. 20. 8. they ſhould diſcourage other. Here this is to be conſidered; when Gedeon their Captaine thought them meet for warre, and God had called them alſo to that place, and duty, and giuen them gifts for that purpoſe, though they waxed timerous: in that they through faint-heartednes, and ſloth, did not vſe and employ their gifts, the ſhame and ſin was theirs, though God ſent backe: I ſpeake it for our owne edification and benefit; for if many here were exempted by God from the battell, and yet thought fit and meete by men, doe not well beſtow and vſe theſe common gifts of the Spirit, as skill and knowledge in manuary things pertaining to the bodie, and this preſent life: how much more may we thinke, that about the more excellent gifts of the Spirit, as illumination, and matters belonging to the life to come, men doe deceiue the expectation of thoſe with whom they liue, and be other, I meane farre worſe then they goe for? Oh it is true, that there are many Note. perſons, who goe in the ſight of men for good: yet the Lord doth not account ſo of them, but exempt them from his militant Church, euen as he ſhoaleth out a great many of theſe ſouldiers, as faint and vnfit for warre, when they ſhould come to fight with their enemies: whom yet Gedeon thought meete perſons for it, and yet we know, wee are much eaſilier deceiued in iudging about them, then theſe. Looke we therefore to it, in a thing by infinite degrees more precious, how God iudgeth of vs: and hang wee not vpon the opinion of men. For hee is not allowed whom men or ones 2. Cor. 10. 18. ſelfe praiſeth, but whom God praiſeth. And therefore we are not to account of all that are among vs profeſſing the Goſpell, no, though they be not branded with notorious ſins, to be ſound hearted and good Chriſtians, though we know no other by them, till God make them manifeſt, as he did theſe in their kind: Is it for vs to iudge before the time? but howſoeuer men iudge, ſuch as feare God, and depart from euill (as he himſelfe commended Iob for ſuch an one) it is ſure that they only are accepted of him.
            More ſpecially to applie this: As the oddes betweene the faint-hearted and valiant ſouldiers was great, euen three to one: and yet all went about the ſeruice of God in outward ſhew: ſo great diſproportion there is (among ſuch as worſhip God) betweene the lukewarme or indifferent ſort of Chriſtians, and the feruent, heartie, and zealous worſhippers. Indeede God Rom 2. 28. cōpared with Reu. 3. 16. doth not inable nor allow vs to ſeuer the one from the other (ſo that wee may determine how farre the number of the one exceedes the other) as here he did Gedeon: but wofull proofe bewraieth no leſſe then I haue ſaid. And yet he that diſmiſſed theſe white-liuered ſouldiers from the armie of Gedeon, and onely accepted the ſeruice of theſe three hundred, whom hee fitted for the purpoſe with faith and reſolution; will alſo exclude all hollow-hearted, lukewarme, and temporizing Chriſtians from hauing a part among ſuch as

he will honour, ſo farre as that he will not bee honoured by them. I meane not that all Chriſtians ſhould bee martiall men, and fit for the field: but as Gods worke is diuers, ſo a diuers kinde of ſpirit hee requireth in them that doe it: in Gedeons men, courage and might; in Chriſtians, feruencie and reſolution to walke with God. For though wee haue no Midianites to fight withall: yet we haue worſe enemies, both within vs and without: and therfore haue need of ſpirituall magnanimitie to vſe ſpirituall weapons againſt them. And though we were not warre-faring men, yet in that wee be but waifaring, (as all Chriſtians are both) we had need of feruencie and ſpirit. For he that in generall commands, Rom. 12. Be feruent, or hot in ſpirit; commands Rom. 12. 11. Iames 5. 16. Iames. 1. 19. Matth. 11. 12. the ſame in prayer, Iam. 5. ſaying, be feruent therein; likewiſe in hearing, Be ſwift to heare: telling vs that the violent ſnatch the kingdome to them, &c. and the like affection alſo we muſt haue in all duties. Though in deede when dangers and troubles befall men for their profeſſion, then is a ſpeciall occaſion offered of expreſſing what courage is in them: but if wee nouriſh not that grace daily in other duties, how ſhall it be at hand when we haue greateſt need of it? And this I ſpeake, becauſe I ſee that the ancient and heauenly fire which once appeared moſt worthily in many, both in their entrance and progreſſe of their good courſe of pietie and a good conſcience, is turned to aſhes and extinct, or burnes ſo cloſe and feeble, that it can hardly be diſcerned: and in ſtead thereof, either a blockiſhnes and deadnes Note. is come vpon men, or a faint-hearted remiſneſſe and indifferencie, as if men cared not greatly whether they profeſſed or no, and (ſaue for names ſake) many could be content to be without it well enough. And as for ſuch, their diſgrace is as farre aboue theſe ſouldiers of Gedeon, as their ſinne: for theſe were onely ſent backe: but the other the Lord vomits out of his mouth. Some there are (through Gods goodneſſe euen as Gedeons three hundred) who looke to the Spirit, (and good cauſe, for it is the temper of a Chriſtian) but alas how few? Beſides that, the diuell in ſtead of this grace, brought in a franticke ſort of furious perſons, whoſe zeale is to depart from the Church.
            Now (to returne to the ſtorie) wee haue heard how two and twentie thouſand were ſent backe, and that there were but ten thouſand left to goe 
                  Doct. 2. againſt more then an hundred thouſand: and yet that the Lord ſaid, that euen they were too many: this teacheth, that he would haue vs to learne, to depend on him without meanes, (if hee ſee it to be expedient to be ſo, but not otherwiſe) and by thoſe which are very weake: and yet he would haue vs to be perſwaded, that he regardeth and ſeeketh our good, euen when hee doth ſo. But of this before.
            He ſaid moreouer to Gedeon, that hee would trie theſe ten thouſand for Verſe 4. him, and ſhew him who were fit, that he himſelfe might ſee it. For men are dull and dimme eyed to behold Gods ſecret power and will to doe them good, if he giue them not eyes of faith to behold them. And why ſhould it ſeeme ſtrange that the Lord ſhould doe more then wee can ſee? and if wee ſhall ſee no likelihood thereof, his power and goodneſſe is the more to bee admired and magnified, who ſheweth it ſo manifeſtly in our weakeneſſe, euen when men ſee not how. As who ſaw, that mightie Pharaoh, Siſera, and the Midianites here ſpoken of, were like to be brought to ſuch a downfall as they were? but it was enough that God had ſaid it. And therefore our

Sauiour, Matth. 4. tels vs, Man liueth not by bread onely, but by the word of God: 
               Matth. 4. 4. and in like manner, man thriues not by his wit, prouidence, care onely, but by the bleſſing of God: No, his riſing early, and his late going to bed, and Pſal 127. 2. eating the bread of ſorrow ſhall not auaile to maintaine him, if God plucke backe his hand from bleſſing it. His apparell heates him not of it ſelfe, but by the power of the word and promiſe. Indeede the outward meanes men ſee, taſte, and handle, and therefore in a groſſe manner reſt in them, and diſcerne no ſuperiour power of God in them, much leſſe beleeue, that it can worke without them: ſo that if meanes faile of health, ſafetie, and ſucceſſe, they giue ouer hope: eſpecially if they ſee that ſome great outward barre and let ſtops their way: whereas yet the three children tell the King of Babel, That they beleeue the God whom they ſerue can deliuer them, not onely without meanes, but contrarie to meanes. Doubtleſſe in the Scripture wee haue a watchword giuen vs of this ſinne, euen in the matters of ſaluation it ſelfe. For although none but the ſeede of Abraham ordinarily were elected and ſaued (though extraordinarily ſome were) before the comming of Chriſt: yet they who onely relied vpon theſe outward meanes, heard this ſpoken to them: Say not within your ſelues, we haue Abraham to our father: for God is 
               Matth. 3. 9. 
               able of ſtones to raiſe vp children vnto Abraham. But becauſe men ſeparate (in the matter of happineſſe) the true meanes appointed by God from the end they deſire: I meane faith, repentance, humiliation, from election and ſaluation: it is iuſt with God alſo to meete with them in kinde, and to ſeparate their carnall ends: I meane wealth, proſperitie and the like, from the meanes which they vſe vnlawfully, and to his diſhonour.
            And further in that Gedeon was told, that hee muſt take none but thoſe 
                  Doct. 2. whom God appointed, and thoſe hee muſt take: it teacheth vs that Gods word muſt direct vs in all our actions both for peace and warre, be the ſame neuer ſo meane and baſe: and that whatſoeuer face wee ſet on matters, yet if that be not the light to our ſteps, we walke but in darkneſſe. Now then, we who take in hand ſo many things in the day, and ſo throughout our life, how can wee chuſe but ſerue him after our owne fantaſies, if wee haue not Col 3. 16. that light plentifully dwelling in vs to guide vs? Wherein it is no hard thing to ſee, that God hath much againſt vs, and that oft times, when we be at the beſt, ſeeing no man call tell the errors of his actions and life, or how oft hee Pſal. 130. 3. Pſal. 19. 12. offendeth. So that if hee ſhould looke ſtraightly what is done amiſſe, who ſhould be able to ſtand before him? Here I will ſtay for this time.
         
         
            
            
               THE FORTIE SIXE SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  HEere the Lord ſhewes Gedeon who they were that Verſe 5. 6. ſhould goe with him to the warre, when they were led to the waters, and thoſe were three hundred which lapped water out of their hands: for theſe were induſtrious and fit for their buſineſſe more then the other that drunk kneeling downe, who were like to haue been an vnprofitable burden to the reſt by their multitude, and might haue giuen aduantage to their enemies by their vnreadineſſe and delay, if occaſion ſhould haue been offered. And the thing that the Lord teacheth vs hereby is this: that although he wil haue none to truſt in themſelues, yet he would haue them ingenuous and induſtrious men, fit for that which they are imployed about, which thing is requiſite in all callings and buſineſſe for men to bee willing, diligent, and skilfull about that they profeſſe, and take in hand, that with good conſcience all may be performed: ſo the contrary of Chriſtians is to be auoided, whether miniſter, magiſtrate, or priuate perſon, the husband diligent handed, the wife huſwifely: none lazie, idle, careleſſe. But of this I ſpake more in the ſtory of Othoniel and Caleb, before chap. 1.
               Here the Lord ſaith, that by thoſe three hundred men, hee would deliuer Verſe 7. Iſrael: which was another ſtrong confirmation of Gedeons faith: for by this he was perſwaded to obtaine that which hee had already begun to belieue. And this ought to bee well marked of vs, as the thing which wee haue great Note. need off. For who can ſo ſtedfaſtly belieue, as he ought, and hold conſtant therein? but by daily and continuall meanes, the Lord doth much reuiue and quicken our faith, to hold on our hope and confidence: which two graces wee muſt haue well ſetled in vs, and as faith is ſtrengthened in vs, ſo are theſe two. The excellencie of hope is ſeene in the epiſtle to the Corinths in theſe words: God who hath deliuered vs from ſo great a death, and doth deliuer 
                  2. Cor. 1. 10. 
                  vs, in him we hope alſo, that he will deliuer vs.
               
               The Price and worthines of the other, is to be ſeene clearely in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, thus: Caſt not away your confidence, for it hath great recompence 
                  Heb. 10. 32. Note. 
                  of reward: theſe two (faith and confidence) make their whole life ſweet and ioyfull, who had them both, as Dauid who ſaid of confidence (which is the fruit of faith, My heart is fixed, I will ſing and giue thanks. The vſe hereof, is this, that wee looke well to it, that wee find our part in theſe by oft hearing, and all manner of repetitions and experience of Gods promiſes, concerning his fauour from time to time toward vs, and therewith to marke our often

faintings, doubts and feares, yea, and that about one and the ſame action, that we may ſee cauſe the better to fortifie our ſelues againſt them. But alas few marke any ſuch thing, I meane euen of thoſe, who may take good thereby, (for all are not capable of it) but ſhrinke at the hearing of any hardneſſe comming toward them, and ſo gather no experience of their faith, hope and confidence againſt new trials to come: or of their weaknes, but impatiently Note. goe vnder their afflictions, and ſo are more ready to faint vnder their burdens afterward.
               It was Gods great mercy, that theſe three hundred did ſo willingly and Verſ. 8. The ſenſe.
                   readily follow and obey Gedeon, according to the word of God to him, which they alſo heard, I grant: but yet had not God perſwaded them inwardly beſides, they would haue departed with the reſt 31700. and would haue both grudged at the liberty of the other, who were diſmiſſed, and haue refuſed to beare the burden alone, yea they would haue forſaken him, if they had not looked vnto God. Where we ſhould note, that in doing our duties Doct. required by God, we muſt not regard the forwardneſſe or backwardneſſe of others ſo much, nor what they doe: but what it is that God looketh for at our hands. Thus Caleb and Ioſuah encouraged the people to goe forward againſt the Canaanites, not looking at the backwardneſſe of the other ſpies. For as Gods word and authoritie haue inough in them to perſwade vs, ſo if Numb. 13. 28. 29. 33. we looke any other way, as to mens example, or to the iſſue, or our own conceits and diſcouragements, wee may bee ſure they will eaſily coole and diſmay Note. vs. Therefore (I ſay) the practiſe of theſe, diſcouers a great ſinne in many: who if they haue a burden laid vpon them, grudge that any other ſhould be free: but in matters of priuiledge and honour, grudge that any ſhould be their partners. Both theſe we ſee exemplified in the Apoſtles of Chriſt and the diſciples of Iohn. The Apoſtles ſeeing one caſting out of diuels, who was none of their Maſters followers: had indignation and complained to our Sauiour. They thought none but Chriſt and themſelues worthy of ſuch an office. So Iohns diſciples grudged at Chriſts, becauſe they faſted often, but Chriſts faſted not. They thought they had wrong in that others were Note. not held to it, as hardly as they. The cauſe of the former is eſpecially pride and vnthankfulneſſe: of the latter either ignorance, or that which is worſe, euen boldneſſe therewith. And we ſee that he is a rare perſon, who can with equanimitie endure that any ſhould excell him in gifts of body, mind, eſtate, or grace, with the bleſſings accompanying them. Nay many, of a melancholike and fooliſh nature, becauſe themſelues are giuen to penſiuenes, ſadneſſe, &c. enuy and cenſure ſuch as take more libertie in mirth, recreation, company or diet: though (as Paul ſaith) they may both pleaſe God, without condemning on another.
               This diſeaſe of looking narrowly to other what they doe, and not to God what hee requireth of our ſelues, (for it is a mixture of many humors, ſelfeloue, curioſitie, diſtruſt and others) this diſeaſe (I ſay) wee may ſee to haue been in Peter, who looking to Iohn, (to whom Chriſt ſaid nothing when hee had laid an heauie burden vpon Peter himſelfe, asked Chriſt, ſaying: Master, 
                  Iohn 21. 21. 
                  what ſhall this man doe? The like is to bee ſeene in them, mentioned in the Goſpell, when they ſaw other more fauourablie dealt with, then themſelues ſaid grudgingly, We haue borne the burthen of the day, &c. So the elder brother

of the prodigall repined to ſee him ſo well entertained. So that there being many as by theſe we may ſee, ſo ill minded this way, we may boldly ſay, that it is a ſingular grace of God in all our duties throughout our life, to ſhew forth indifferency and charitie: as alſo to regard what God ſaith to vs, and not to looke to men what they doe.
               But where is this to be ſeene? in a very few: as for example in the Miniſters, when Chriſt ſaith to them (in ſpeaking to Peter) If thou louest me feed my 
                  Iohn 21. 15. 
                  ſheepe and my lambes, and be diligent therein. If here and there one or a few regard it, yet how do the moſt caſt their charge behind them, and looke at them that take their eaſe, whatſoeuer their words be that they loue him? So that the force of the word is not ſo much to draw them, as example to withdraw: magiſtrates, houſholders, husbands, wiues, and all that profeſſe the Goſpell, ſhould follow the example of theſe three hundred in their ſeuerall eſtates and callings. But it is ſo farre off from that, with the moſt, that if any other, (and ſpecially if he be of their owne condition and degree) ſhal make conſcience of this dutie more then other, he ſhall be readie to bee ſhaken vp and reuiled, as one that cannot be content to doe as other doe, when yet all may ſee in theſe three hundred how their example is ſet forth to their perpetuall commendation, in that they went not after the other their brethren, but obeyed the commandement of the Lord, in following after Gedeon. And whatſoeuer become of ſuch as are led by the examples of men, and follow their owne deuices, leauing the plaine way, wherein God hath ſet them, (whoſe ſinne in due time ſhall find them out) the other ſhall be knowne by this marke, to be the Lords, that they forſake all by-waies, and depart from euil with Iob, to, teſtifie that they feare him. The example of Ioſhua is worthy Iob 2. 3. our imitation in this point, who profeſſed for himſelfe and his, that they would ſerue the Lord, let the reſt do as they liſted. As if he had ſaid, It ſhould Ioſhua 24. 15. be their beſt way to ſerue the Lord as himſelfe did, if they regarded their owne proſperitie and welfare: but if they were ſo wilfull, as to forſake their owne mercy, he and his had learned to follow a better Maſter, and was reſolued Iona 2. 8. to conſult neither with fleſh nor blood, neither cleaue to lying vanities, but make ſtraight ſteppes to the commandement of God. Indeed if we Exodus 23. 2. ſee others readier then wee, in dutie doing, willinger to beare reproofe, forwarder in well doing, in mercie, loue, meekeneſſe, zeale, ſtronger then we, to endure affliction, or any burden which is vnwelcome to fleſh: then doe wee as they doe: yet looke we not ſo much at them, as at Gods will in their obedience. But in euill follow not the multitude: for the moſt are alwaies worſt: and the beſt differ and varie among themſelues: ſo that except men will goe by a leaden rule, the word of God muſt bee the eternall and vnchangeable canon of dutie. Which canon when it ſhall iudge the actions of men either approouing or condemning them, it ſhall bee but follie for them to run into the croud (as we ſay) and ſhroud themſelues vnder the couer of others: whoſe company ſhall aggrauate rather then extenuate their puniſhment. But of following examples, I haue ſaid before.
               
                  
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 9. And the ſame night the Lord ſaid to him, Ariſe, get thee downe vnto the hoaſt: for I haue deliuered it into thy hand.
                     
                     10. But if thou feare to goe downe, then goe thou and Phurah thy ſeruant down to the hoaſt.
                     
                     11. And thou ſhalt hearken what they ſay, and ſo ſhall thy hands be ſtrong to goe downe vnto the hoaſt. Then went he downe, and Phurach his ſeruant vnto the outſide of the ſouldiers that were in the hoaſt.
                     
                     12. And the Midianites and the Amalekites, and all they of the Eaſt lay in the valley like graſhoppers in multitude, and their Camels were without number, as the ſand which is by the ſea ſide for multitude.
                     
                     13. And when Gedeon was come, behold a man told a dreame vnto his neighbour, and ſaid: Behold I dreamed a dreame, and loe, a cake of barly bread tumbled from aboue into the hoaſt of Midian, and came vnto a tent, and ſmote it that it fell, and ouerturned it, that the tent fell downe.
                     
                     14. And his fellow anſwered, and ſaid, this is nothing elſe ſaue the ſword of Gedeon the ſonne of Ioaſh a man of Iſrael: for into his hand hath God deliuered Midian and all the hoaſt.
                     
                     15. When Gedeon heard the dreame told, and the interpretation of the ſame, hee worſhipped, and returned vnto the hoaſt of Iſrael, and ſaid, Vp: for the Lord hath deliuered into your hand the hoaſt of Midian.
                     
                  
                  NOw when the Lord had taken away the ſtrength and power of Gedeon 
                     The ſumme of theſe verſes. from him, I meane, his whole armie well nigh, hee knew full well that this would worke mightily vpon his weakneſſe, to diſmay him: and therefore in this ſecond part of the Chapter it is ſhewed, how God after this, incouraged him, and prouided to remedie that his weakneſſe. And that was in a ſtrange manner done, euen by his enemies. For God bidding him goe downe to the Midianites tents, did there, by a dreame of one of them, and the interpreting of it by another, ſhew Gedeon, that hee ſhould haue the victorie ouer them. Which when hee heard, hee was anew confirmed in his faith concerning the victorie, notwithſtanding the ſmall number of men which he had with him.
                  And firſt here let vs ſee how God bringeth Gedeon neerer and neerer to 
                        The ſenſe and doctrine of verſ. 9. the brunt and triall: for now he will haue him goe to the very campe of his enemies, which to doe, was to come neerer to danger, then all that had gone before. But ſo did the Lord alſo adde new comfort vnto him, as his triall Note. was greater. For hee ſaith: I will deliuer them into thy hands, though the danger and feare that might be like to ariſe to thee thereby, may ſeeme greater now, then it was before. And it may appeare by the next verſe, that Gedeons feare was greater, and increaſed: for the Lord ſaith, If thou feare to goe downe, &c. And this ſheweth vs, that ordinarily the neerer a triall in any ſore affliction that we feele, doth come toward the iſſue, the more it worketh vpon vs. The reaſon is, becauſe while affliction is a far off, the ſenſe is not prouoked by the imagination of it ſo much, as whē it draweth neere, and threatens vs. But then commonly the minde multiplieth the greatneſſe of it, by

feare. As the Diſciples were not greatly troubled for their Maſters departure, Iohn 14. 1. till they ſaw there was no remedie, but they muſt needes forgoe him. Which teacheth, that when any ſuch feare hangeth ouer vs, we ſhould not onely from the firſt hearing of it, frame and ſettle our hearts againſt ſudden diſtemper, and aggrauating of it by our fooliſh conceits, to bee patient and willingly ſubiect to the hand of God therein, and to weigh our owne weaknes, that as wee may wiſely beware of fainting, ſo wee may pray to God for ſtrength: but alſo daily, and oft continue ſuch exerciſe, and the neerer the iſſue, the more feruently, (like to our Sauiour in his agonie and feare, before the comming of Iudas and the reſt to take him) as feare indeed will then be readie moſt of all to aſſault vs.
                  And if we faint then, we may know our ſtrength was neuer great. For as Prou 24. 10. Iames 1. 4. patience ſhould haue her perfect worke to helpe vs beare affliction vnto the end, when it is come vpon vs: ſo wee ought to giue patience the perfect worke before it come, in keeping downe painful feare of it, till it come. And Note. by all that hath been ſaid of this matter here, and in the former proceſſe of the hiſtorie, we may ſee, that wee muſt oft and much be ſtrengthened both againſt the feare that riſeth before the trouble come, and the ſmart that it cauſeth when it is come, till the danger be paſt and ouer. And it is a good ſigne that affliction when it commeth, ſhall not much diſguiſe and aſtoniſh vs, when we weaken the terror of it after that manner, and by often meditating of the certaintie of our deliuerance there from, and preparing for our affliction accordingly, before it come: otherwiſe it will come vpon vs as an armed man, againſt whom there is no reſiſtance.
                  And ſeeing God fortified Gedeon with a new promiſe of his helpe, euen when he ſhould goe downe to the armie of his enemies, as hee came neerer Doct. 2. in verſ. 9. the perill: ſo we may learne, that as trouble ſhall ariſe to Gods people, euen ſo ſhall their comforts alſo increaſe. According to that of the Apoſtle, God 
                     1. Cor. 10. 13. 
                     is faithfull, who will not ſuffer you to be tempted aboue that ye be able, but as your troubles encreaſe, ſo ſhall your conſolations, and hee will giue the iſſue with the temptation, that ye may be able to beare it. And though it be one and the ſame word and promiſe, yet it hath force at one time as well as at another, to ſtrengthen vs, if wee haue faith to lay hold on it. Such is the Lords dealing with vs, to minſe our meate for vs, when our diet likes vs not: this coſt he is willing to be at: So that we neede not complaine in ſuch manner: Oh this trouble is intollerable; it will draw foorth the heart blood, I ſhall ſinke Note. vnder it, &c. For it is not required of vs to ſtand by our owne ſtrength, but to deriue it from Chriſt our head, in whom all the promiſes of God are ratified. And this in the loſſe of friends, goods, or life, or in the likelihood thereof, or in any other affliction, is euer a fit remedie to ſtay vs vp and comfort vs. So that I cannot tell what we would looke for at Gods hands more, vnleſſe wee would deſire Angels from heauen to certifie vs of his minde, which he alloweth vs not in this age to looke for. But becauſe this hath been oft entreated of before, I ſpare needleſſe repetitions.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FORTIE SEVENTH SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               THere is yet (as the text ſheweth vs) another triall of Gedeons 
               Verſe 10. faith before the victorie: namely to ſend him to the Midianites only with his boy. Oh how many had there been before? But God will haue vs to know, that the triall of our faith, is much more precious, then the 1. Pet. 1. 7. gold that periſheth, and therefore ſendeth vs many trials, as he did to him, that although there ſeeme to be no great matter in them, yet indeede to him that weigheth it aright, it is found to be farre otherwiſe. For both we ſee thereby, our weakneſſe, which Note. we ſhould not otherwiſe thinke to be ſuch as it is, and by little and little wee grow out of it, and gather experience, and hope againſt it, which in time are Rom. 5. 4. greatly to our comfort. And ſurely if Gedeon had ſo many trials in one duty doing, let not vs plead for exemption from many, though we haue alreadie endured ſome, and although wee can ſay, others are free, or haue but few in compariſon of vs. But to proceed to another point. It is happie for vs, that the Lord, who diets vs with this ordinarie, vndertakes as well to bring vs ſafely through our trials, miniſtring as much grace, as affliction, as hee did Verſe 11. Doct.
                here to Gedeon: ſo that wee rather ſhould ſay; Since thou giueſt ſhoulders Lord, lay on what burthen thou pleaſeſt, thy will bee done: Rather, I ſay, then to compare the irkſomnes of the trouble, with the pleaſure and eaſe of the contrary: which will make vs wearie of trials, and like the Iſraelites in the wilderneſſe, to long and linger after daintines and Quailes.
            We ſee the couetous man is neuer ſatisfied with gold: but triall ſerues to bring in a commoditie of greater price, as I ſaid before. Gold can ſerue but to feede and apparell vs, except wee abuſe it to the pride of life, to make vs thinke our ſelues in a fooles paradiſe by enioying it: but this ſerueth to encreaſe our ſpirituall treaſure, (if we be wiſe to vſe it in kind) both to purge the droſſe away which cleaueth to our faith, meeknes, and patience: and to adde to the meaſure of it alſo, ſo that whatſoeuer good thing we enioy, we ſhould neither haue it in the kinde, nor in abundance and ſtore, but through much triall. Therefore rather let vs learne to count it great ioy, (as S. Iames ſaith) when many trials fall vpon vs: then ſnuffe againſt God, as if we cared Iames 1. 2. Note. not how little grace we had, ſo we might haue eaſe therewith: as the ſluggard in Eccleſiaſtes, who ſaith; A morſell with idleneſſe is better then plentie Eccleſ. 4. 6. with labour. I confeſſe indeed, this is an high degree to ioy in affliction, which is ſo grieuous in it ſelfe, and not ioyous: a greater matter then to ioy, (I ſay not in health, riches and proſperitie, which euery foole can doe) but

euen in hearing the word, or obeying it in many particular duties thereof. Howbeit we want not examples of ſuch as haue found ioy in their trials, I Rom. 5. 3. ſay in them (for he that lookes for ioy after them, muſt alſo finde ſome in them) I meane by hope: as Paul by name, who profeſſeth no leſſe of himſelfe: 2. Cor. 121 and Dauid with many others. Yea and wee alſo muſt learne to ſay; Lord thou teacheſt me an hard leſſon to account affliction matter of great ioy: but ſeeing thou ſaiſt there is ſweetnes to be gotten out of this bitternes, (as hony out of the carrion of a lion) therfore I will ſtriue to beleeue it: and that I am as precious in thine eyes, and as deare to thee, euen in affliction, Note. as in peace & freedom, and that I ſhall gaine more by it, then by all my iollitie and eaſe, in which I ſhould haue lien ſtinking, if by trials thou hadſt not kept my faith occupied & liuely. For though faith wāts not matter enough to work vpon, euen when we are at the beſt, and freeſt from trials, yet ſuch is our ſottiſhnes, that promiſes ſeeme not ſweete or ſauourie to vs, except we be driuen to ſeek after them by trials & troubles, but then oh how welcom?
            Th
                  •
                ſending him to the campe of the Midianites ſo nakedly and vnfurniſhed, what could it promiſe in likelihood and outward ſhew, but deadly danger? But heare the reſt of Gods words to him; Thou ſhalt (ſaith hee) heare what they ſay, and thou ſhalt be confirmed thereby, and after thou ſhalt goe into the hoaſt of the Midianites and feare and diſmay them, till they be vanquiſhed. By this wee ſee, that wee haue great cauſe to beware, 
                  Doct 2. that we take not ſome part of Gods word, and leaue the other, leſt wee depriue our ſelues vtterly of the whole, and all benefit thereof: as Gedeon (we ſee) had done, if he had taken one part of Gods ſpeech to him, and left the other. And this thing is too commonly offended in, not only by ſubtill Sophiſters, whoſe ſinne is the greater, becauſe they ſinne of knowledge, but alſo by weake Chriſtians: who through feare and want of experience, doe draw againſt themſelues the threats and commandements to wound them, but the promiſes of God (which by his owne appointment are ſet downe to their comfort properly) thoſe (they ſay) belong not to them. So what a corraſiue were it to a Chriſtian, if hearing this, that, All who will liue holily in Chriſt Ieſus, muſt ſuffer affliction, &c. he ſhould goe away (as hee in the Goſpell) heauie and ſad, ſaying: This is an hard ſaying, who then ſhall be ſaued? 
               2 Tim. 3. 12. But God be thanked if the promiſes be added to the charge, the heart will be well eaſed, and the burthen in great partalaied. And doubtleſſe the diuell himſelfe would wiſh a Chriſtian no greater miſchiefe, then he cauſeth to himſelfe by this ſeparating of thoſe things which God hath ioyned together. But of this point reade more in the former chapter in Gedeons reply to the Angell. And there is as great cauſe that we take heed of ſeparating the word of iudgement and puniſhment from the word of precept and commandement, as the promiſe: for as this cauſeth men to ſtumble where they need not, and plungeth them into feare and deadly deſpaire, ſo the other ſtrengthens them as much in their boldneſſe to offend. As wee ſee Eue, by diſioyning the puniſhment threatned vpon her eating the fruite, was the more prouoked to attempt the ſinne. Geneſ. 3. Geneſ. 3. 6.
            
            More particularly we may here ſee, that God doth ſo order things according to his owne good pleaſure and purpoſe, that hee maketh his to finde 
                  Doct. 3. matter of ioy, where (in ſenſe and reaſon) ſorrow onely and terror can bee

found. He fetcheth light out of darkneſſe, ſweetnes out of bitternes, and out of trouble peace. For what might Gedeon looke for by going to the campe of his enemies ſo nakedly, but diſcomfort and hazard of his life at leaſt, if he had not been ſlaine alſo, and cut in a thouſand pieces? Yet God intended (and ſo brought to paſſe) that he and all the people ſhould liue and be comforted, by hearing there that which did cauſe it. For example, what might Abraham haue looked for when the Lord bad him goe from his friends and Geneſ. 12. 1. countrey to a place that he knew not, neither had any thing in it, but was a meere ſtranger therein? was not that ſpeech of the Lord full of diſcomfort at the hearing of it? And yet we know, that he obeying him, was not onely furniſhed there, to be able to maintaine a mightie familie, euen three hundred and eighteene perſons, but alſo his ſeede grew and was multiplied as the duſt of the earth, and he was made the father of all beleeuers that ſhould come after, and of whom, after the fleſh, Chriſt ſhould come.
            The like may be ſaid of Moſes ſending away from the houſe of Pharaohs 
               Heb. 11. 24. daughter, where he had been brought vp ſo daintily, to goe ſuffer affliction with the people of God in the wilderneſſe. And yet what a rare inſtrument did he make him, to worke the greateſt deliuerance for his people that euer was heard off to be wrought by a meere man? Euen ſo, learne and know we, that the Lord doth oft turne the greateſt troubles of his, to their greateſt benefit Note. and good, if they waite patiently vpon him, yea he giueth them farre aboue that which they looke for, inſomuch as if it were poſſible for them to be brought euen to hell, this were but to raiſe them vp vnto heauen, as they who haue any experience can tell: and Iona out of the fiſhes bellie teſtified in the middeſt of extremities and anguiſh; who out of his greateſt feares and ſorrowes was exalted to greateſt hope and reioycing, as his heauenly and admirable zeale in promiſing to praiſe God doth aboundantly ſhew. It is ſaid alſo here, that he and Phurah his ſeruant went to the ſide of the camp: Ionas 2. 9. wherein his faith doth liuely ſhew it ſelfe, and that he minded and beleeued what God ſaid, rather then that hee feared the danger that he went in. And this, indeed, is that which I haue ſo much beat vpon in this ſtory, and in a Doct. 4. in verſ. 11. word, which we ſhould all doe: that is, truſt God whom we ſee not, and not eie, and looke too narrowly to the lets that are in our way, to feare and draw Note. vs to vnbeliefe: as we read how Iehoſophat did, not onely himſelfe belieeue, as he was willed to doe, but with great courage exhorted alſo his people to 2. Chron. 20. 15. doe the ſame in the ſore danger they were in by the Moabites and Ammonites, and was thereby deliuered: and ſo did our Sauiour to his diſciples Iohn 24. 1. when they were greatly grieued for his departure, ſaying: let not your harts be troubled; ye beleeue in God, beleeue alſo in me.
            Now in that it is ſaid that the Midianites, and their helpers lay as graſſehoppers Verſe 12. on the face of the earth, the meaning is, they were farre and wide ſpread, for ſo the word ſignifieth, Geneſ. 25. meaning that they occupied a great ſpace of ground, and that they were a mightie number. In which ſenſe Geneſ. 25. 8. it is ſaid in Ioſhua, that Iabin got an armie, as the ſand of the ſea. And how could this but aſtoniſh Gedeon yet againe, when he beheld the multitude of them, but that his faith vpheld him ſtill as before? Where we are againe, much like as in the former point, to learne, that ſuch troubles and trials muſt Doct. we ſuffer and looke for, from which, we can in ſenſe and reaſon looke for nothing

but diſcomfort and vtter vndoing: and out of the which in the iudgemen of man, we ſee no way or helpe to get out and be deliuered.
            And who of Gods deare children haue not ſo felt and found it, in one trouble or triall and other, and at one time or other? When God had promiſed the land of Canaan to his people, yet before they poſſeſſed it, when they ſent thither to ſearch the land, & to ſee what it was, and whether the people therein were ſtrong or weake, many or few, they receiued ſuch diſcouragement by the anſwere that was brought backe to them, that they had neither helpe nor hope, euer to enioy it. Againe, what was Dauid to Goliah? or Sampſon 
               Numb. 13. 28. 1. Sam. 17. 50. Iudg. 16. 30. to ſo many Philiſtines? Or what was our Engliſh Iſland to the Spaniſh forces, and to ſo many nations as haue riſen againſt it in times paſt, the Pope himſelfe being the chiefe ſetter on? and yet God fought for vs againſt our enemies.
            And to ſhew it in another inſtance, Oh how many thrice happy people, haue yet oft feared and almoſt ſaid, there is no hope nor helpe for them in God? but reſolued with themſelues for the time, in their feare and weakeneſſe, that they could not eſcape condemnation and vtter abiection from God? yea and they would haue yeelded themſelues willingly to the paine of the damned ſome hundreds of yeeres (ſuch was their deſperate eſtate) ſo as they might haue been recouered, and ſaued afterward: as I my ſelfe haue heard ſome of them ſay little leſſe in their deſpaire, who yet (God haue the glory) haue well outgrowne the ſame, and haue been reſtored to comfort. Other of Gods deare children after ſuch plunges and deliuerances out of them, haue after met with other trials, which haue been to their ſight as the ſea, bottomleſſe: and haue conſtrained them for the time, to breake out, and Note. ſay, that all good daies were gone from them, who yet haue liued to ſee better then they had euer ſeene before. What ſhould I ſpeake of particulars, which were infinite? And all ſuch God hath ſeene good to exerciſe vs withal, to appall and pull downe the pride of our hearts, (who do ſo ſoone forget our ſelues) but not to diſmay vs, ſeeing, if it be not long of our ſelues, we may ſtill find redreſſe of all ſuch feares from aboue.
            Now followes the dreame, that one of the Midianites dreamed, and told Verſ. 13. 14. The opening of them.
                his fellow, namely, that a barley loafe tumbled into the hoaſt, and came into a tent, and ſmote it, that it fell: and the anſwere of the other, as the interpretation of it, that it was the ſword of Gedeon, and that God had giuen the Midianites into his hands. This was that dreame and interpretation, which the Lord ſent Gedeon thither to heare, (for ſuch meanes it pleaſed him to vſe to confirme him yet ſtill:) where firſt we ſee, that God gaue diuine dreames to Doct. out of verſe 13. 14. thoſe which were enemies of godlineſſe, and to a nation which afflicted his people: as he did to Pharaoh, of ſeuen leane, and ſeuen fat kine, that were wel Geneſ. 41. 1. liking, and ſo he did to his Butler and Baker: and after that to Nebuchadnezzar, who had led away Iuda captiue, aſwell as to Ioſeph, Iacob, and other holie Geneſ. 40. 5. men. But this was here more ſtrange, that neither Ioſeph nor Daniel, no Prophet of God, I meane, interpreted the dreame, but a common ſouldier. Hee Dan. 2. 1. gaue then we ſee, a true dreame, and the interpretation thereof vnto the wicked. But as the Lord gaue Saul a new heart, viz. of courage and gouernment, 1. Sam. 19. 23. and to Iehu of zeale, for certaine ends and actions concerning his own glory, and the good of others onely, and thoſe ends being accompliſhed, the 2. King. 10. 11.
               
gifts ceaſed, becauſe they were but common gifts: euen ſo theſe two ſouldiers were made Gods inſtruments to confirme Gedeons faith, and conſequently fitted for the purpoſe: which being performed, they ceaſed to dreame diuine dreames, or to interpret them diuinely.
            By this we ſee, that he beſtoweth excellent gifts and graces vpon the bad, aſwell as vpon the good, which gifts either are meerely naturall and ordinarie, or ſupernaturall and extraordinarie. Naturall and ordinarie, as induſtriouſneſſe, wit, policie, ſtrength, for the attaining of learning, skill, wealth, credit, and the wel gouerning and defending of families, ſubiects and commonwealths. Supernaturall, as enlightning and knowledge by the word, and ſpecially of the law terrifying, and the Goſpell generally working a confuſed ioy and vaniſhing faith in them. Extraordinarie, as the gift of miracles, tongues, and the like in the infancie of the Church were. Theſe he giueth to many more then hee giueth faith vnto or regeneration, euen as the viſible meanes leading thereto, as Baptiſme and the Miniſterie, are common to both. And why? becauſe the ſubordinate ends for which theſe gifts ſerue, are more generall, then thoſe which the ſpeciall gifts ſerue for. Therefore we ſee, that many are well fitted for naturall, ciuill, morall, and (miniſterially) ſpirituall and diuine ends, who yet are no more fit for the maine end of all, I meane for godlineſſe and ſaluation, then if they wanted the other: becauſe the ſpeciall end is not ſo large and vniuerſall, as the common end is. Yea doubtleſſe, the wicked are oft times endowed with common gifts in a farre ampler and more glorious manner and meaſure, then the godlie: the Lord heaping hot coales vpon their heads, and clearing himſelfe from the blame of their condemnation: ſeeing that he who beſtowed vpon them ſo liberally in the one kind, would not haue denied them the other which accompanie ſaluation, if they had humbled themſelues to the ſeeking after them, and not reſted in the outward priuiledges, as they who boaſted of the Temple, the Temple, whereas in the meane while. There came from the 
               Luke 10. 20. 
               North, Eaſt, and all quarters, and ſat downe with Abraham in the kingdome of heauen, and themſelues, who boaſted of the Temple, and were the children of the kingdome, Chriſt ſaith plainely, were caſt out, and excluded. But of all ſuch gifts, we may ſay, that ſeeing they are not the peculiar gifts which are proper to Gods owne children, but thoſe that are common to one and other: it may be ſaid to them, as Chriſt ſaid to the diſciples, when they reioyced ſo greatly that the diuels were ſubiect to them, and caſt out of men by them: Reioyce not, that the diuels are ſubiect vnto you, but for that your names are written in heauen: ſo they who haue but knowledge of the Scripture, in the letter only, with memory and ſpeech to carry away and vtter it, hearing the ſame ioyfully ſometime, and are but reſtrained from ſome outward euils, let them not glory, and reſt themſelues therein, without ſanctification and faith vnfained, that ſo their reioycing may be ſound, and not to be taken from them, elſe let them feare, leſt it be anſwered them, as it was to them that pleaded their great workes of preaching and miracles: Depart from me, ye are workers of iniquitie, I know you not.
            
            And therefore it followeth, that the benefit of that dreame redounded to 2 the people of God, and not to them that dreamed and interpreted the ſame. Euen as the excellent gifts of an vnſanctified perſon publike or priuate, may

poſſibly doe. Neither can any gifts of God that the vnrighteous haue, profit them to ſaluation. They haue no vſe of their knowledge, they are not the better for their hearing, and prayers, they loſe all their coſt and tr
                  ••
               ell that they beſtow in ſeruing God: howſoeuer like dumbe pillers they may direct others in the way, not ſtirring themſelues. For they delight not therin, but draw neere him with their bodies, and ſerue him with lip-lab
                  ••
               r Matth. 15. 3. but their hearts are farre from him; and therefore in vaine doe all 
                  〈◊〉
                worſhip him. Which ſhould make them looke about more ſeriouſly, till they can proue, that they doe more then ſay, Lord, Lord, but that they endeuour aboue all things to doe the will of the Lord. How much more vaine Matth. 7. 21. is it then to truſt in riches, which of all common gifts are commoneſt, and therefore furtheſt from commending the poſſeſſors of them to God.
            Laſtly, let vs marke, that God doth his people good by things which are 3 of no reckoning nor account, (when yet the beſt things that the vngodly haue, cannot profit them) as the dreame and interpretation of it, which indeed was an excellent gift: yet in mens account a meane thing, and for all that, as meane as it was, by that did God quicken Gedeon, and comfort him. Euen as wee ſee heere, God vſeth the meaneſt things (as men iudge of them) and things that are nothing worth for the welfare of his ſeruants. So God did by the Manna, (an vnlike thing, and of meane account) Exod. 16 35. nouriſh and preſerue the liues of his people: ſo by foure leprous perſons, that were ſhunned and loathed of al, he ſaued all the people; and ſo he ſaued 2 King. 7. 6. 1 King. 7. 6. the Prophet aliue and fed him by Rauens: theſe were great matters by baſe and weake meanes.
            And why this? becauſe, as Iob ſaith, euen the ſtones of the field ſhall be in Iob 
                     •
                  . 3. league with thee, and the beaſts thereof at peace with thee. This doctrine ſeemeth after a ſort contrary to the former: to 
                  〈◊〉
                that the wicked may not take comfort in the gloriouſeſt things concerning this preſent life, and yet the meaneſt things in this world through Gods goodneſſe, ſhall ſerue for the benefit of the godly, but both may ſtand well together. And to ſay a word or two more of this, what is meaner in the account of the Heathen; then water, bread, and wine, being of their owne nature, common creatures, and yet what great matters are wrought by them in Gods people?
            So to behold and view the creatures and workes of God, which all may doe, what great matter is it thought to be? and yet what ſweet meditation haue Gods ſeruants thereby to their comfort? Lo then, how they are bleſſed in all parts of their liues who feare God; and that they may find in all things; if they ſift and fearch them throughly, and marke what God promiſeth accordingly. And when all this is ſo, yet in the meane while, there is no peace to the vngodly, neither is any creature at league with them, but Eſa. 48. 22. may and ſhall (when God will) annoy them.
            This was manifeſt in Iezabel, whoſe neere attending ſeruants & eunuehes 2 King. 9. 33. caſt her downe headlong on the ſtones out of the window. This is the ſecret hand of God, but not perceiued. And as for that which hath been ſaid before of the dreame, it is not ſaid to the end we ſhould attribute any thing vnto dreames, now common with vs and naturall, although God had ſaid of that dreame, that Gedeon ſhould be comforted by it.
         
         
            
            
               THE FORTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  NOw followeth the fruit of all this, namely, Gedeons thankes to God with reuerence, and how he was hereby much reuiued Verſ. 15. himſelfe, and ſurred vp his ſouldiers to be ſo likewiſe. Heerein wee may (notwithſtanding the imperfections that wee haue heard of him,) clearely ſee his faith, both in that hee went to the hoaſt when God willed him, beleeuing that hee ſhould bee comforted thereby, and now the more when hee had ſurer hope thereof by the interpretation of the dreame, as God had told him before: for hee was now cheered, and beleeued further. Thus it behoueth vs to grow to beleeue and Note. reioyce in that which ſometime wee could not: and that faith in one promiſe may bring and breed it in another, that ſo it may be confirmed in vs, as it was in him, that ſo wee being rooted in faith, wee may, as the Apoſtle willeth, grow and abound therein with thankeſgiuing. Coloſ. 2. 7.
               
               And beſides, we may learne, that our thankes ought to be renued for benefits as they are daily beſtowed vpon vs, (euen as wee made prayers for 2 them before) as well as benefits paſt. And this is not to bee neglected as a thing little worth, but to bee duly and ſpeedily regarded: euen as all other duties are to be done in their time and ſeaſon, and not poſted off and omitted for euery trifle: for herein Gedeon hath giuen vs an example. As ſoone as he receiued the promiſe of victory made him of God by the interpretation of the dreame, hee returned beleeuing it, and gaue praiſe to God for it, and that by and by, and delayed not. But herein we come farre ſhort of him, and alſo in taking the opportunity to doe all other duties ſpeedily and in ſeaſon. What time is fitter to record Gods mercies then in the morning, after we be perfectly awake, both in conſidering our preſeruation in the night paſt from the dangers thereof, and that his goodneſſe is renued vpon vs ſtill for the Lam. 3. 23. time to come, to guard and bleſſe vs as in former times: now therfore what time I ſay is fitter then it, to ſtirre vs vp both to thankes, and alſo to renue our ſuites to the Lord for continuance of his fauour? But who watcheth to take this opportunity hereunto, but letteth it paſſe rather through ſloth, worldlineſſe, frowardneſſe, &c? And the ſame I may ſay of our careleſneſſe in other Note. things; when we haue both leiſure and opportunity to renue our couenants with the Lord, and to bee armed and reſolute throughout the day, againſt euery euill and prouocation to ſinne through the day, that ſo wee might walke at liberty and in peace: yet who regardeth it, but rather trifleth out the time any way, or elſe doth worſe, rather then to ſet his heart the beſt way? But of this duty I haue elſewhere ſpoken more largely.
               
                  
So wee may note the property and force of faith, to wit, to cheere the heart, and to quicken and ſtrengthen it, ſo farre as in the meaſure of it, it layeth hold of that which it receiueth, and is promiſed, as I ſaid before. And laſtly, how experience imboldeneth vs, and cauſeth vs to prouoke others to beleeue, and ſerue the Lord together with our ſelues, and to make them ſtrong, cheerefull, and comfortable alſo: and this is the end of our experience, and the vſe that wee ſhould make of it toward others, and it pleaſeth the Lord well, that wee ſhould doe ſo, as wee ſee Gedeon did to his few ſouldiers.
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 16. And hee diuided the three hundred men into three bands, and gaue euery man a trumpet in his hand with emptie pitchers, and lampes within the pitchers.
                     
                     17. And he ſaid vnto them, Looke on me, and doe likewiſe, when I come to the ſide of the hoaſt: euen as I doe, ſo doe you.
                     
                     18. When I blow with a trumpet and all that are with me, blow ye with trumpets alſo, on euery ſide of the hoast, and ſay, for the Lord, and for Gedeon.
                     
                     19. So Gedeon and the hundred men that were with him, came vnto the outſide of the hoaſt in the beginning of the middle watch, and they raiſed vp the watchmen, and they blew with their trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands.
                     
                     20. And the three companies blew with the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held their lampes in their left hands, and their trumpets in their right hands to blow withall, and they cried, The ſword of the Lord and of Gedeon.
                     
                     21. And they ſtood euery man in his place round about the hoaſt: and all the hoaſt ranne, and cried, and fled.
                     
                     22. And the three hundred blew with trumpets, and the Lord ſet euery mans ſword vpon his neighbour, and vpon all the hoaſt: ſo the hoaſt fled to Beth-b
                              •
                           ſhittah in Zererah, and to the border of Abel-meholah vnto Tabbah.
                     
                     23. Then the men of Iſrael being gathered together out of Nephtali, and out of Aſhur, and out of all Manaſſeth purſued after the Midianites.
                     
                  
                  NOw after theſe many trials followeth the iſſue, and that in manner here The ſence of theſe verſes. ſet downe. For firſt Gedeon made haſt, and by that meanes came vpon the Midianites, ere they were aware, and deferred not the time, in the middle watch, which was a little after midnight: for ſo it much behoued him to do, to come vpon them in the fearefull time of the night, and in the deep darke, when Gedeon and his men could not be ſeene, how few they were. In which his ſo comming, hee willed his men whom hee diuided into three bands, to take emptie pitchers with lampes in them, and trumpets in their hands: that after the blowing of them, and flighting and frighting of the enemies with the ſtrange and vnlooked for noiſe thereof, they might breake the pitchers alſo, by the hearing of the which, it might ſeeme to them that their ſpeares were broken with fighting, and then the lampes ſuddenly appeared, aſtoniſhing the Midianites, and giuing light to themſelues. Thus did he, and his ſouldiers did likewiſe, though that all this which they did, might haue been thought to bee to ſmall purpoſe. But the

effect thereof, by the onely wiſe and wonderfull gouernment of the Lord, was this, that one of the Midianites ſlue another, broke their aray and fled away, crying, much like that which was done, chap. 3. And they that were Chap. 3. 27. ſcattered, and not ſlaine, were purſued by the Iſraelites, and taken. Now as there are in theſe verſes three things in generall, to wit, the direction that Gedeon gaue his men; then their following it; and laſtly, the effect that enſued, ſo let vs conſider them in particular.
                  And firſt to begin with theſe three verſes together, let vs note, that Gedeons 
                     Doct. verſ. 15. 16. 17. ſpeed that he made in taking the opportunity and fit ſeaſon, to doe the things that we haue heard, teacheth all Chriſtians to doe the ſame: namely, that they take time in euery thing that they go about, while it is ſeaſonable, for afterwards it will be too late. In time reape and ſow, and doe thy buſineſſe, eate in time, ſleepe and trauell while it is light, as our Sauiour directeth, Eccleſ. 9. 10. ſaying: Are there not twelue houres in the day? So in all duties of Chriſtianity, Ioh. 11. 9. in giuing to the poore, doe it in his need, in ſeeking the Lord, goe about it while he may be found, ſo in auoiding and forſaking ſinne, reſiſt it in Eſa. 55. 6. the beginning; and helping to puniſh wickedneſſe, and preuenting Gods wrath, doe all accordingly, in fit and due ſeaſon. There was a time, when the rich man might haue ſuccoured Lazarus, and that was, while hee lay at his gates: but when Lazarus was dead, the time was gone. Luk. 16. 25.
                  
                  So there was a time wherein the fiue fooliſh Virgins might haue prouided oyle for their lampes: that was, before the bridegroome came: but Matth 25. 12. when he was come, and the doore was ſhun, the time was paſt. So there is a time in which men may repent, that they may be ſaued: that is, while God ſendeth his meſſengers to call them; but when they let the ſeaſon paſſe in the daies of their youth: after, when the time of age, ſickneſſe, and death Eccleſ. 12. 1. commeth: a thouſand to one if the time be not gone, and that it be not then too late. For beſide that there are many things in the way to hinder: this is none of the leaſt, that late repentance is dangerous. Oh what hath been loſt by paſſing by the fit time and ſeaſon, the lamenting it deepely by our Sauiour in the people of Ieruſalem doth ſhew, when hee ſaid: O if thou had eſt 
                     Luk. 19. 42. 
                     euen knowne at leaſt in this thy day, thoſe things which belong to thy peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes.
                  
                  Therefore Saint Paul told the Corinthians, This is the acceptable time, (that is, while they might heare him) this is the day of ſaluation. Sutable here unto 2. Cor. 6. 2. is that of the Apoſtle, Epheſ. 5. Redeeme the ſeaſon: by which exhortation he Epheſ. 5. 16. teacheth, that although no time ſhould bee ſpent vnprofitably, yet ſeaſons, (which are times hauing ſome ſpeciall fitneſſe in them aboue others, to doe or receiue good in) muſt more carefully be obſerued; yea redeemed, that is, dedicated to holy vſe, by forgoing ſomthing pleaſing to the fleſh, to purchaſe them. For not onely workes vnlawfull and needleſſe, but euen lawfull and in their time, neceſſary, muſt giue place to fit ſeaſons: becauſe then God offereth occaſion of ſome ſpirituall gaine, which at other times cannot bee obtained. As the Sabbath is a ſeaſon for inſtruction and edification, one day of ſeuen: the other ſixe haue not, but by occaſion, the opportunity which that hath So when God ſendeth publike or priuate iudgements vpon the land, or any perſons, that is a ſeaſon of faſting, humiliation, renuing our couenant: and contrariwiſe ſpeciall bleſſings and deliuerances are opportunities

of thankſgiuing, and reioycing. In which and all others S. Iames teacheth Iam. 5. 13. vs what to do: Is any man afflicted? let him pray: ſo, is any merrie, let him ſing: for theſe are occaſions worth the taking, and not alway occurrent: therefore as God diſpoſeth of vs, ſo let vs apply our ſelues, and improue the ſeaſon to the beſt vſe, and ſuffer not our ſelues to vaniſh away, and abuſe it, through our follie and vnſeaſonableneſſe: which ſione is more common, euen among the better ſort, then they ſuſpect, to ſuffer themſelues to paſſe ouer the beſt occaſions vnfruitfully. Whereas alas, how ſhall they ſpend their whole time well, who ſpend their beſt ſeaſons badly? As wee know, in the morning, both body and mind is in beſt time for meditation, or any fruitfull exerciſe: if that periſh without fruit, how can the whole day after for the moſt part, be otherwiſe then barrenly and weariſomely paſſed? Men worke vpon their trades ordinarily we ſee: but if their trades bee vp, that is, the wares which they make doe take a great price, and are quicker of ſale then at other times: how will they beſtirre themſelues, and ſet euery one on worke whom they can come by, riſing early, going late to bed, and in a word, how vnwearied are they? It is their ſeaſon they ſay. What buſineſſe will not the houſholder lay aſide on the market day? why? that he may vſe that ſeaſon to furniſh himſelfe for the whole weeke with prouiſion? what thinke we? will the Merchant game, play, drinke, ſleepe, or trifle out the ſeaſon Matth. 13. 45. of his merchandiſe, when hee is come to the place of trafficke beyond ſea? No, all muſt yeeld to the ſeaſon, hee neglects his pleaſure to redeeme that. And if we faile in well vſing the ſeaſons which offer themſelues, what likelihood is there, we will ſhew our ſelues wiſe in procuring ſeaſons to our ſelues? As the truth is, an eaſie thing it were to doe, if wee were not vnſauory, and vnwilling to heare of any thing more then ordinary. But ſomewhat to this effect i noted before in Gedeons deſtroying Idolatry.
                  Alſo this carrying of pitchers in their hands, as Gedeon willed them to do: 
                        Doct. 2. a few vnarmed men, (euen three hundred) againſt ſome hundred thouſand, well prepared ſouldiers, what an vnlikely matter was it, that they ſhould effect any thing thereby? But wee ſee what a wonderfull victory it brought. The like may bee ſaid of Ioſhuas compaſſing the walles of Iericho, Ioſh. 6. 20. ſeuen daies, with blowing trumpets of Rams hornes: and yet ſeeing the Lord promiſed, and he beleeued it, the walles of the city at the appointed time fell downe. By both wee learne, that though the meanes bee neuer ſo weake, to effect any good at all, yet if God direct vs to them, and promiſe to worke bv them, it behoueth vs to looke vp to him, as Gedeon heere did, and wee ſhall ſee the power of God in vſing them though they bee weake: for though they ſerue not for one vſe, which carnall reaſon doth onely looke to, yet they ſhall ſerue for another, which God euer intendeth by them.
                  Euen as heere wee ſee, that although theſe meanes heere vſed by Gedeon and his ſouldiers, ſerued not to beate downe and deſtroy their enemies: yet we ſee that they ſerued to terrifie, affright, and ſcatter them, and to ſet one of them againſt another. And yet our carnall reaſon, if wee truſt not to weapons in warre, ſcoffes at our faſting and prayer, by which Iehoſaphat got great 2. Chro. 20. 3. 17. victory, and Heſter the Queene preuailed againſt that wicked Haman in a moſt great difficulty. So preaching is fooliſh to reaſon, and humane wiſdome Heſt. 4. 16. compared with 7. 10. for bringing men to Chriſt. But reade 1. Cor. 1. what the Apoſtle

there ſaith, to wit, That we muſt become fooles that we may bewiſe: while yet the 1. Cor. 1. 26. wit of man deuiſeth another way, and moſt fit to deceiue himſelfe: as for example, if he be predeſtinate to ſaluation, he ſaith he ſhall be ſaued, though he neuer heare ſermon. And euen ſo men ſpeake of watching ouer their liues, praying, and the worſhipping of God in their familie, and the like; that they are more then need to be vſed. So they perſwade themſelues that policie, toile and labour are all in all, to bring Gods bleſſing vpon them, in all that they ſet their hands vnto, though the Prophet in the Pſalme haue taught the contrary, ſaying: Except the Lord build the citie, the labourers toile 
                     Pſal. 127. 1. 
                     themſelues but in vaine. But of this hath often been ſpoken.
                  And here we are further to marke the benefit of good example, and how 
                        Doct. 3. it preuaileth oft times with inferiours: Gedeon here bids his ſouldiers doe, as they ſaw him doe, ſo that he went before them. As all heads and ſuperiours ſhould likewiſe doe, that they may propound their own example in al good duties. Hence it was, that our Sauiour Chriſt waſhing his Diſciples feete, propounded the ſame to them to be followed, and that ſo they might in humilitie ſerue one another, (as they ſaw him their Maſter to ſerue them) and not to ſet vp themſelues aloft, as they began to do, and aske, which of them ſhould be greateſt. And when the inferiour cannot obiect that the ſuperiour Ioh. 13. 14. doth not ſo himſelf as he requireth of the other, in a dutie common to both, it is a worthie thing.
                  This is to be applied to the reformation of faults, and the doing of dutie, by word or deed, either in familie or otherwiſe. And therefore it is a ſoreaccuſation againſt ſuch as being to giue light to others, take no heede or care themſelues, or very ſlight care, how they walke, among and in the midſt of thoſe, whom they are to giue light vnto. Parents and guides in families, beſide that they doe for the moſt part little reproue the faults and ſins of thoſe who are vnder them, vnleſſe it be for and about their owne aduantage, haue ſmall care commonly, of their owne behauiour in their ſight, but wil braule and ſcold, contend, and raile, and liue in other ill courſes among them. And Note. it were heartily to be wiſhed, that ſome who are in greater place, and whoſe authoritie reacheth further then priuate mens, did not commit the ſame faults, which they are ſued vnto to puniſh in others. Oh how much it were to be deſired that the elder and younger might ioyne and accord together in the worke of the Lord: as wee ſee and approue this mutuall conſent and ſweete harmonie in Gedeon and his ſouldiers: I ſay oh that the ancienter in yeeres, gifts, profeſſion and authoritie, (whom it beſt becommeth and concerneth moſt) would incourage and hearten forward the younger ſort, to heare the word, to be zealous againſt ſinne, to be innocent, humble, dutifull, Tit. 24. ſober, companions of the good, abſtainers from ill companie, and in a word to beleeue in the Lord, to cleaue to his promiſes, to ſubmit themſelues to his gouernment in the whole courſe of their life: ſaying to them as Gedeon here ſaith, As ye haue ſeene me doe, ſo doe you. Thus Dauid calleth vpon the people, Come, hearken vnto me, my children, and I will teach you the feare of the Lord 
                     Pſal. 34. 11. by mine owne experience. For thus and thus long haue I ſerued him, and I repent me not, that I haue ſpent my life in the worke of ſo good a Maſter. Oh how the experience, confidence, cheerefulnes and courage of one aged ſeruant in Gods houſe, animates and puts life into many young beginners

and hearers, who (alas) though they be zealous, yet are raw and rude, ignorant and vnexpert, and know not what belongs to ſuch a trade and profeſſion: Note. as how many diſcouragements, feares, baites, offences, prouocations to wearineſſe and apoſtacie they are to meete with, ere their courſe be finiſhed. And what a commendable thing is it, that the younger nouices will yeeld themſelues to their ancients, learne by their inſtructions, be perſwaded by their exhortations, and follow their examples (ſo farre as they tread in the ſteps of Chriſt) with all meeknes and teachablenes, without prefidence 2. Cor. 11. 1. and conceitednes? Oh if it were thus in townes and places, what an heauenly order ſhould we ſee in ſtead of boldnes, prophanenes, and looſenes in all ages and eſtates? For though there be examples giuen, and followed, yet it is by ſuch as are the diuels trumpeters, who leade others after them to inordinate courſes, vncleannes, riot, lying, ſcorning them that be better then themſelues, which indeed are liker Abimilecks troope, then Gedeons. But as for good examples, where ſhall we finde them? who looks to this, to liue Note. ſo in the former part of his life, that he may be a preſident in the latter? And if ſome one odde man be found among an hundred, how doe the multitude of inferiours diſdaine him, and winde him about their fingers? But of examples I haue alſo ſaid ſomewhat before.
                  We haue heard what Gedeon bad his men doe: now followeth what he Doct. verſ. 18. bad them ſay, that was this: [For the Lord, and Gedeon] his meaning was, that he would haue them boldly and without feare proclaime and ſay one to the heartning and incouraging of another: that the victorie ſhould bee the Lords as the author, and Gedeons as the inſtrument. Thus teaching vs, that as wee ſhould bee examples in our liues to other, ſo wee ſhould in our words exhort and perſwade, as occaſion ſhall be offered, to beleeue the promiſes of God before they be fulfilled, as Gedeon did here his ſouldiers, to beleeue that God would giue them the victorie. Thus did that worthie King Iehoſaphat ſtirre vp and incourage his people, the men of Iudah, to beleeue 2. Chro. 20. 20. the words of Gods Prophet, which had brought tidings to him of deliuerance from the Ammonites, Moabites, and them of mount Seir.
                  And this hope wee ſhould haue our ſelues, by long proofe of Gods promiſe keeping, that wee may thereupon reſolue them (ſo farre as wee can preuaile with them) that there ſhall not a iot of all that God hath ſpoken, fall to the ground: but as our fathers truſted in him, and were not confounded, ſo neither ſhall they be diſappointed nor aſhamed, who truſt in him to the end of the world. And when wee haue the like incouragement our ſelues from other, we ſhould no leſſe be confirmed and ſtrengthened, that when they Matth. 5. 17. can ſay to vs, heauen and earth ſhall periſh, but one title of Gods promiſe ſhall not faile, we may reſt and be ſatisfied. Oh happy are the people, whom the Lord when he commeth, ſhall finde to haue been thus exerciſed.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FORTIE NINTH SERMON ON THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH CHAPTERS OF the booke of IVDGES.
            
               NOw further are laid out, after Gedeons aduice to his ſouldiers, and the propounding of his owne example vnto Verſ. 12. 20. them, his induſtrious attempt in his going forward to the Midianites campe, and what hee and his men did together in the way thither, and what ſucceſſe the Lord gaue thereto. The firſt of theſe two is ſet downe in this 19. Verſ. 19. 20. and 20. verſes, the laſt in the 21. and 22. His companie was diuided into bands, to the end that they might come vpon their enemies on euery ſide, and amaze the whole campe with ſudden feare. Then he choſe for his purpoſe the fitteſt time of the night, the middle part thereof, when the enemies being in a dead ſleepe, were, with that ſudden feare, the more throughly aſtoniſhed. For the noiſe of the trumpets, with the mightie crie, made by the men, and the breaking of the pitchers, with the light appearing, did not onely aſtoniſh them, but likewiſe ſo troubled them, they being ſcarcely awaked out of their ſleepe, that they could not conceiue what it ſhould meane, but thought that many and great hoaſts were ruſhing into their campe, as the Aramites did, into whoſe camp the lepers came. 2. King. 7. 6. 7. And the Lord with all this ſtriking them with a kinde of madneſſe, they tooke their owne fellow ſouldiers for their enemies, and ſo moſt miſerably ſlew one another, the Ammonites and Moabites ſtood vp againſt them of mount Seir to deſtroy them, though they were their fellow ſouldiers: as we ſee alſo in the campe of the Aramites, into which the lepers came. 2. Chro. 20. 23.
            
            This kinde of aſtoniſhing the enemies by Gedeon, who was directed by God therein is worthie to be noted of vs: to teach vs, what kindes of terrors and vexings of a rebellious people the Lord hath in a readines to feare them, yea and that when men thinke themſelues beſt fenſed againſt them, out of feare of them, and furtheſt off from falling into them. Zimri and Cosbi were ſlaine ſuddenly and fearefully: Chorah and his companie were Num. b. 25. 8. ſwallowed vp of the earth, when no likelihood could be ſeene thereof, till it Num. 16. 32. came. The men of Ziklag wallowing like beaſts on the ground drunken, were ſlaine by Dauid when they looked not for it. Abimilek by a piece of 1. Sam. 30. 17. a milſtone receiued his deadly wound, and Abſolon hanged by the haire of Iudg 9 53. 2. Sam. 13. 14. his head on an oke. Thus I might goe on infinitly. God hath many waies to ſcourge his enemies, as he hath to deliuer and comfort his people, There is no peace to the vngodly, ſaith God. Oh then how fearefull is it to be a wicked man? for if Gods anger be kindled but a little, how happie are all they that Eſay. 48. 22. feare him? for if he haue a controuerſie with men, and be againſt them, oh Pſalm. 2. 12. what terrors are euery while like to fall on them, till they be confounded

of them? Some will obiect, that for all this, many wicked perſons walke ſecurely, and are as merrie and void of feares, as the beſt of them all. I anſwer, firſt although God meetes them not with ſuch bodily feares as here he amazed theſe heathens withall, yet there is that within them commonly, which euen in the middeſt of their merriments cauſeth their hearts to be heauie, and preſage no good vnto them at length. This I ſay of ſuch as are not hardned. And who can expreſſe the bitter ſorrowes and checks and feares which they feele, who carrie an ill conſcience about them? which purſues them both ſleeping and waking, and not at Church onely, but euen in their callings, companies, feaſtings, pleaſures, when others thinke full little of it, and themſelues wiſh they could make truce for the while therewith, that it might then be furtheſt off. So that a poore Chriſtian would not willingly change ſtates with them, to haue their greateſt glorie, except he might bee free from their troubled conſcience: which is like to the hand-writing vpon the wall of that wofull Belſhazzar. And this is their portion, euen tempeſt, Dan. 5. 6. fire, ſnares, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, euen a ſauour of hell, before they come there. As for thoſe that haue learned how to ſtrangle their conſcience, and ſmother it, or who are waxen hardned: let them know, that there is no peace belonging to them, though they ſtop their eare from hearing of terror. And when God ſhall quicken, and rouze vp their conſcience, woe be to them, for it ſhall roare vpon them as a lion, and yet God is greater. Therefore if any ſuch ſhall ſeeke how to be freed from this horror, let them make 1. Ioh. 3. 20. their peace with God, and ſo their conſcience ſhall turne to be their friend: but the reſt may heare this doctrine, as Nabal heard Abigails newes, to their confuſion.
            It further appeareth by the effect what theſe fearefull meanes wrought, Verſ. 21. 22. which the holy ſtorie ſetteth downe in this verſe, that the whole campe was aſtoniſhed, feared, cried out, and fled. In which caſe let no man thinke that theſe meanes alone, and apart from Gods work, had any great force to feare, eſpecially to hurt the enemies: for what was there in the blowing of the trumpets, the breaking of the pitches, or in their lampes, to the getting of the victorie? But the Lord put to his hand, and helpe, whereby the enemies were daunted, and ſet beſide themſelues, or elſe, all that was done, had been but ridiculous. And he that made Goliahs head to be cut off with his owne ſword, he wil ſtill bleſſe the vnlikely meanes (as the world accounteth them, yea and fooliſh alſo (of our prayers, ſinceritie, patience, hope and the like, to bring great things to paſſe, yea and faith to ouercome the world, without the which, what are all other things whatſoeuer? Still I ſay therefore, as I ſaid before, bleſſed is the people whoſe God is the Lord Iehouah. But of this, occaſion hath been offered to ſpeake almoſt in euery Chapter.
            In the 20. verſe, in that the people of Iſrael in their crie and noiſe that they made, vttered theſe words [The ſword of the Lord, and of Gedeon] therein they 
                  Doct. 2. in verſe 20. that was omitted in due place.
                teſtifie, that God was the chiefe cauſe, and Gedeon as the inſtrument appointed to bring that worke to paſſe. Not as if they would deuide the victory betwixt God and him, (betweene whom there was no compariſon) but to ſignifie, that as God was the chiefe and principall worker, ſo it pleaſed him to vſe Gedeon as his inſtrument to effect it. The ſame it behooueth vs to do: aſcribe we to God the glory of all the good we doe, yea and of our ſaluation

eſpecially, which we ſeeke, but know we that as Gods inſtruments, we are to worke it on in feare and trembling, and to giue all our diligence, as the Apoſtle Phil. 2 12. 2. Pet. 1. 10. exhorteth, to make our calling and election ſure. And ſo in all duties of faith that we performe; acknowledge we, that we receiue all gifts and abilitie to thinke and to doe, that which is good, and our ſelues to be Gods workemen and labourers, vnworthy to be imployed by him, euen as we ſee it to bee an honour to be in a Kings ſeruice. And further by this, let all captious cauillers take their anſwer, who ſay, that the people who depend vpon their Miniſters, make them their God. Be it knowne to all ſuch, that as they deteſt ſuch blaſphemy, ſo yet to the ſhame of all ſuch ſcorners, they honour them vnder God, as the inſtruments of their ſaluation, and acknowledge them, as here Gedeons ſouldiers do him, to be the hand which God putteth the ſword of his ſpirit into, for the conquering not of mens bodies, but their ſoules, and the bringing into ſubiection the thoughts of their hearts, yea the whole powers of ſoule and body, to the obedience of Chriſt. In which reſpect Salomon 
               2. Cor. 10. 4. praies that Gods Prieſts may bee clothed with ſaluation. And Paul doubts not to ſay vnto Timothy, He ſhould ſaue himſelfe, and others. For more particular application of this doctrine, reade verſe 2. of this Chapter. 1 Tim. 4. 16.
            
            This victory is remembred and made mention of in the Pſalme, where 
                  Doct. out of all theſe 4. verſes. Pſal. 83. 9. it is ſaid: Doe to them, as vnto Midian, and as vnto Oreb and Zeeb. Which teacheth, that this ſtory, and ſo other in the bookes of canonicall Scripture, is diligently to bee remembred, that wee may haue vſe of the diuers good things that are in it, that through the Scriptures wee might get knowledge, experience, conſolation and hope: as to pray as Gedeon did in danger and Rom 15. 4. diſtreſſe, to hope, and waite for the like ſucceſſe, in our ſeuerall neceſſities, which God will as ſurely doe and performe to vs, as he did here to his people, hauing made the like promiſes thereof vnto vs, as vnto them. And through the writings of the Euangeliſts and Apoſtles, wee ſhall meet with quotations of Scripture out of the old teſtament, as it were ſetting a ſecond edge vpon them, and teaching the reader with what regard and obſeruation he is to reade them. As our Sauiour doth in recording the hiſtory of Lots wife; and in ſpeaking of the propheſie of Daniel touching the pollution of Luk 17 32. the Temple by the abomination of deſolation, and diuers ſuch like places: beſides the fulfilling of the propheſies of the Meſſias, and other things to come to paſſe in the Church ere the ſecond comming of Chriſt. For to this Matth. 24. 15. end, the holy ſtories are written, as well as the other books of the Scripture, I meane for our inſtruction, edification and comfort. As Dauid mentioneth Rom 15. 4. this ſtory, ſo doth Eſay, ſpeaking of Zenacherib, God ſhall (ſaith he) raiſe vp a 
               Eſay 10. 26. 
               ſcourge, like that of Midian. And ſo it came to paſſe, as he propheſied, for the whole armie of that King was ſlaine by God, euen as this of the Midianites.
            Now followeth another thing mentioned in this verſe, that is, when the Verſ. 23. moſt of them were ſlaine, the Iſraelites with Gedeon purſued and followed after the reſt: where note his wiſedome in foreſeeing and preuenting danger to come. When he had ſcattered them, they might haue gotten ſtrength againe afterward, and ſo haue troubled them as before, (as another Iabin King of Canaan aroſe) which he preuented. And in warre this is meet to be Iudg. 4. 2. done againſt the enemies both bodily and ſpirituall. Satan being throwne out, laboureth, as our Sauiour ſaith, to enter in againe. This is alſo neceſſarie Matth 12. 45.
               
in euery calling, to be prouident to keepe away danger by wants and oppreſſion concerning both body and ſoule.
            It is great wiſedome, to follow herein the vniuſt Steward, namely in prouiding Luke 16. 8. for the time that ſhould come after: and to follow the example of the fiue wiſe virgins, who ſo prouided oile for their lamps, that when the other fooliſh, for want therof, were ſhut out at the bridegroomes comming, Matth. 25. 10. they entred in with him to the wedding. So wee ſhould deale ſurely to preuent diuel and world, and al offences, that might break out from vs through our owne corruption, and not to be ſo fooliſh, as to bring needleſſe ſorrow vpon our owne heads by neglecting any meanes that might remoue it. Yea and one Chriſtian with another muſt be faine, and is forced to deale circumſpectly, there be ſo many weakeneſſes in vs, and ſhifts to deceiue, leſt they breake off their fellowſhip. Wee ſee daily to what perfection men haue brought their trades, and how eaſily they thriue, through carefull marking and remoouing the ſeuerall inconueniences thereof, and vſing the beſt prouidence, Note. and all opportunities making for their gaine, which their predeceſſors knew not. But alas how raw and rude, yea what bunglers are men in the trade of all trades? who beates his braines to attaine to a gift, readineſſe and dexteritie therein?
            Who ſeekes to bring the excellencie thereof into the view of the world, or vpon their owne proofe and experience to teach others, the next and directeſt way both of being and walking as a Chriſtian? And why? becauſe men are not wiſe to follow this trade without breakings off, and many onſets and turne-againes: they neither will ſearch out and vſe the beſt meanes which may make them expert, and bring in gaine, nor will learne wiſedome to preuent diſaduantages, annoyances, temptations, and therefore their worke goes not forward, their skill in this trade comes not to ripeneſſe. For behold, while they thinke they ſerue God commendably in ſome duties which they apply their mind too, there growes in them noiſome luſts, vnſeene, vnrepented off, and theſe make them new to begin, and ſet them ſo much behind hand againe, that they almoſt deſpaire of euer recouering their forwardneſſe neglected.
            The Beniamites we reade in the 20. of this booke, met their brethren in Iudges 20. 40. the field ſtoutly: but lo, the euill was behind them, and that they were not aware off, till the flame and ſmoke aſcended, and then all their courage was cooled. To teach vs (if we will proſper) to make cleane worke before vs, and leaue not ſomething vndone, through ſloath, which will coſt vs double and trebble afterward. And if we bee wiſe, let vs learne with Gedeon how to vſe and keepe the victorie as well as how to get it: how to clenſe out that euill which we are prone to, as do ſome duties which we like; leſt according to the prouerbe: He that flieth and eſcapeth, will returne and fight againe; whereas we might haue ſlaine him right downe at the firſt, and been paſt all danger.
            Furthermore, it is to be noted as commendable in Gedeon, that when he 
                  Doct. 2. had gotten the victory, hee was willing that other ſhould haue part of the glory thereof: to wit, theſe other tribes, Nephtali, Aſhur, and Manaſſe, who yet could helpe but little, comming after Gedeon had gotten the victory with great danger. Which example of his, ſhould teach vs to vſe the gifts of

God, not ſo that we ſhould ſeeke glory by them, but to deſire that other alſo might exerciſe and haue vſe of their gifts to the benefit of the Church: we of the Miniſtery eſpecially ſhould doe this; that wee may bee able to ſay as Moſes ſaid, Would to God that all his people could propheſie: yea and to this end Numb. 11. 29. let vs rather in giuing honour, euen ſtriue to goe before each other, yea the meaneſt, who may ſooneſt and eaſilieſt thinke themſelues neglected and deſpiſed. Excellent therefore is the practiſe of Chriſt and Iohn Baptiſt, who though they were both admired by diuers ſorts of people, and that in ſuch wiſe, that there was carnall emulation betweene the Diſciples of both; yet alway they ſo carried themſelues, that the one honoured the other, and both fulfilled all righteouſneſſe.
            Yea Iohn in the middeſt of his flouriſhing, yet ſtill acknowledged himſelfe Ioh. 3. 30. but the ſhadow, and Chriſt the ſubſtance; himſelfe the herold, and Chriſt the Prince: I muſt decreaſe (ſaith he) and Chriſt encreaſe. Which example of his, if his ſucceſſors had as well regarded, Satan had not ſo ſoone corrupted the miniſtery of the Church with ſchiſmes and factions, which are but the fruits of pride and arrogancy.
            And if we can grow, or cauſe by our example and gifts, other to grow in grace, let vs not with the Diſciples, contend who ſhall bee chiefe and greateſt. But we though we haue theſe gifts and the like to glorifie the giuer, and to reſtraine and hold our ſelues from this vaineglory, yet wee gape for that by Satans deluding of vs (lamentable to behold) ſo that when wee haue not praiſe of men, (who ſhould looke for that from God) if (I ſay) we cannot get that, we leaue off labouring and ſit ſtill: and for this very cauſe, ſome, as well in the miniſtery, as the people, doe part and breake off their fellowſhip one with another. But of this ſee ſomwhat before, in the eighth verſe of this Chapter.
            
               Verſ. 24. And Gedeon ſent meſſengers to all mount Ephraim, ſaying, Come downe against the Midianites, and take before them the waters vnto Bethbarah, and Iordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered together, and tooke the waters vnto Bethbarah and Iordan.
               
               25. And they tooke two Princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb, and ſlew Oreb vpon the rocke Oreb, and ſlew Zeeb at the winepreſſe of Zeeb, and purſued the Midianites, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gedeon beyond Iordan.
               
            
            IN this verſe the holy ſtory ſheweth, how Gedeon ſent to all the inhabitants Verſ. 24. of mount Ephraim to meet with the Midianites, and take vp the paſſages, where they went ouer the waters, euen to Bethbara or Bethabora, and Iordan. And the men of Ephraim did ſo. And ſo hee made them partakers alſo of the honour of the victory, as he did the other tribes. This is the ſumme of this verſe. And to make our vſe of it, it were to be wiſhed, that we in this our age did as theſe did: that in all ciuil actions religion did guide vs, that where helpe is needed, and required by one of another, that it were likewiſe willingly and readily performed; as namely in aiding the widowes and fatherleſſe, the poore, and the oppreſſed
            And much more it were to be wiſhed, that we were ſo ioyned together in the Church, that if there were any excellent and profitable matter begun,

that we were willing to haue other coadiutors and fellow labourers to the finiſhing and perfiting of the ſame: but wee rather oft times (which is greatly to be lamented) and our ſinnes iuſtly deſeruing the ſame, doe hinder one another: whereas both they ought to bee regarded, who haue a good mind to the worke of God, and doe labour in it, (though they bee not equall with ſome other,) euen for that which God hath inabled them, and which they are fit to doe: and alſo they in humility ſhould reuerence their elders in gifts and yeeres, and be readier to learne of them, then to pearke ouer them.
            Which ſinne in the forwarder ſort both of Miniſters and people, and in the ancienter and younger ſort of both, being ſuffered to grow for want of loue, ſo that the one doth not his dutie toward the other, hath cauſed the Lord ſeuerely to puniſh it in both, that being diuided, they are thereby ſeebled, and the good which they did is hindred and croſſed; and not only ſo, but alſo that is verified which Saint Paul writeth to the Galathians, that one 
               Galat. 5. 15. 
               biting and deuouring another, they be conſumed one of another, at leaſt, by a third ſort, but yet through their fault and procuring. But of this I haue ſpoken in the firſt chapter.
            Ephraim tooke two Princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: whoſe puniſhment Verſ. 25. by the iuſt iudgement of God was agreeable to their ſinne. The one, namely Oreb, was ſlaine on a rocke and mountaine, called by the ſame name, Oreb: where they had conſtrained the people of God to hide themſelues, and where they had ſought them to kill them The other, that is, Zeeb, was ſlaine at the threſhing place or winepreſſe called Zeeb: for thoſe places they ſpoiled of their victuals and famiſhed them. Where it is manifeſt, that God forgetteth not, neither winketh at the cruelty of his enemies, but in due time and place will pay them home, ſo that all that will, may ſee, that God hath not left them vnrecompenced.
            And that either with the ſame puniſhment as he did Adonibezek, or at the ſame time, as he did Iudas, who betraying his maſter to death, died firſt himſelfe: or as heere he did to Oreb and Zeeb, euen in the ſame place where they did the miſchiefe: and as among vs the wilfull murtherers ſuffer, and are made ſpectacles by hanging in chaines, to all that paſſe by, neere the place where they committed the murthers: or if none of theſe waies hee puniſh them, yet ſome other ſuch, that may be as a ſigne to all, that God will be reuenged on ſuch as they be. For why, as the blood of Abell, ſo doth theirs Gen. 4. 10. cry for vengeance: woe therefore to bloody perſecutors, and cruell perſons, for God and their ſinne ſhall find them out. Therefore let them know this that fall into the hands of ſuch, leſt they ſhould bee diſcouraged. And leſt we ſhould thinke that theſe Princes did but fight for themſelues againſt the Iſraelites, as in warre men doe, reade of their malice and cruelty, in the Pſal. 83. 9. 11. 12. Pſalme 83. But for Gods iuſt puniſhing of his enemies, according to their ſin, I haue ſaid enough in chapter 1. of this booke.
         
         
            
            
               THE FIFTIETH SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Then the men of Ephraim ſaid vnto him: why hast thou ſerued vs thus? that thou calledſt vs not when thou wenteſt to fight with the Midianites: and they chode with him ſharpely.
                  
                  2. To whom he ſaid: what haue I now done, in compariſon of you? Is not the gleaning of grapes of Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer?
                  
                  3. God hath deliuered into your hands the Princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to doe in compariſon of you? and when he had thus ſpoken their ſpirits abated towards him.
                  
               
               
                  AFter the admirable victory that God gaue to Gedeon, as hath been largely ſhewed in the former Chapter, now in this followeth 
                     The ſumme of the chap. and parts 3. the purſuit of the reſt of the Midianites by Gedeon; but firſt another thing by occaſion of that victory, is heere ſet downe; and that is, the Ephraemites quarrelling with him. The ſumme and parts of this Chapter (to ioyne them together as they may well and conueniently be) are theſe: The firſt is, the contention of the Ephramites with Gedeon, for not calling them to the warre, to verſe 4. The ſecond point in this Chapter is, that the men of Succoth and Penuel denied victuall to Gedeon when hee purſued and followed after the reſt of the enemies, and their puniſhment, together with the putting to death of the two Princes of the Midianites, Zeba and Zalmunna, to the 22. verſ. The third containeth certaine perticulers concerning Gedeon, as the offering of the kingdome to him and his ſonnes by the Iſraelites, and his refuſing it: and of Gedeons Ephod, and the danger that came thereby: whereto is to be added the ſinne of Iſrael, to the end of the chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  TO begin with the firſt part, it is ſaid, that the men of Ephraim contended 
                        The ſumme of the 3. firſt verſes.
                      ſore with Gedeon, and fell out with him, for that he called them not to the battell againſt the Midianites, as appeareth in the firſt verſe: whereto the milde anſwere of Gedeon is to bee marked, which is ſet downe in the ſecond verſe. And thirdly, how they were appeaſed by it, as wee reade in the third. Of theſe let vs heare more perticularly as they lie in order.
                  And heere firſt, ſome man might thinke it an vnſeaſonable accident that 
                        Verſ. 1. the vnfolding of it.
                      befell Gedeon euen in the chiefe ſpring of his glory; I meane, that in the very necke of the victory ſhould come vpon him ſuch a croſſe blow, as to turne the ſolemnity and honour of his great acts, in ſubduing the Midianites into

reproch and abaſement. But the moſt wiſe God who beſt knoweth how to keepe his owne children in compaſſe, and ſeeth what corruption they carry about them, by meanes whereof they cannot beare any great bleſſing, or proſperity, without ſwelling, and pride; he (I ſay) doth commonly ſo diſpoſe Note. of them, that with rare and ſpeciall liftings vs, and heightenings of Doct out of verſ. 1. them, either in grace, wealth, honour, and ſucceſſe, or the like, hee matcheth and mixeth ſome great coolings and buffetings of them, to keep them from falling dangerouſly, in ſo ſlppery a place as they ſtand in. Of Gedeon we cannot certainly ſay any thing to his iuſt reproofe in any groſſe manner, but of great infirmities of his wee haue heard; and therefore doubtleſſe hee being a man) hee had that in him which might haue puffed him vp vpon ſo great ſucceſſe, if God had not by this great and vnwelcome croſſe, preuented it. So Iphta comming freſh from a great conqueſt, was ſuddenly quailed Iudg. 11. 35. by his onely daughter. And Iob in the middeſt of his flouriſhing and proſperous eſtate, heares all at once, of his children and ſubſtance deſtroyed and ſpoiled. Likewiſe Dauid had few victories, but the Lord ſent him a cooler vpon them, the rebellion of Abſolon, the curſing of Shemei, the inſurrection of Sheba, the death of Ammon, the ſlaughter of Abſolon; which (doubtleſſe) were enough to purge out any ſuperfluous humour which might riſe vp in him, and ſo to keepe him ſober, temperate, and within holy compaſſe. It is not ſo ſtrange that the Lord ſhould thus phyſicke his ſeruants, being already Note. ſurfeted with exceſſiue and ſinfull abuſe of their proſperity: but it is his great mercy that he ſhould ſo diet them with theſe potions, that they may preuent ſurfeting. The reaſon is, becauſe firſt it is the wiſedome of the ſame Phyſitian to giue preſeruatiues, as well as purgations. And againe, ſinne is eaſilier kept out from entring, then thruſt out of doores being once gotten in: which the Lord foreſeeing, rather chooſeth with a little hardſhip to the patient, then by violent and extreame courſes, to preuent matter of diſeaſe rather then to heale the diſeaſe. And the truth is, it is eaſier for a man to bee dieted then purged: I meane to beare an affliction which commeth before the ſpirit and conſcience is wounded by a ſinne, then which followeth ſin, as the deſerued puniſhment of it. But for the point in hand, let vs by this firſt learne, what a leaud nature there is in vs, that wee cannot haue a little health and welfare, but preſently we diſtemper our ſelues, ſo that wee muſt be faine to be phyſickt, leſt wee ſhould endanger our life: I meane, wee can enioy no good bleſſing, but we forget our ſelues, and cauſe the Lord to allay the ſweetneſſe of it with ſome bitterneſſe, except he will ſuffer vs to be turned quite ouer with it. Againe, when we enioy any bleſſing, let vs not meaſure the ſame by the pleaſure and content which it giues our nature, (for euen in that is a ſting which will ſecretly hurt vs) but by the ſober, humble, Note. and thankfull affection wherewith wee imbrace the bleſſing. And let vs know that then onely we enioy it in kind, and entier, otherwiſe by halues, and ſcarce that. And when we ſee that God ſauceth our dainties with ſoure hearbs, let vs be thankfull to him, and ſay, Lord I had elſe fed too much of this diſh, till I had ouerlaid my ſtomacke, euen as children, who finding hony, eate too much of it; therefore bleſſed be thy name, who ſuffered me not to be ſicke of it, rather then if thou ſhouldeſt let me alone, then I ſhould bee prouoked to vomiting, which were worſe. And this bee noted of the Lords

ordering the action of theſe Ephramites, for Gedeons good.
                  Now yet theſe Ephramites ſhew many foule faults in this action of contending The faults of the Ephramites in this firſt verſe, and firſt their vnthankfulnes. with their gouernour and deliuerer of them, as vnthankfulnes, expoſtulating with him without a cauſe & then their diſſimulation, who faine themſelues to haue been willing to haue gone to warre with him, and yet would not, when they might haue done: and when did they this? euen when they ſaw the danger of the warre to bee paſt and ouer, and that now honour was giuen to Gedeon for that which he had done: whereas they had been as ready (if hee had loſt the victory) to haue (much more) caſt that in his teeth.
                  To proſecute theſe a little more particularly: their vnthankfulneſſe firſt Doct. 2. verſ. 1. was great, and the iniurie which hee ſuſtained thereby, who ought to haue been much honoured of them for his induſtry and labour, and highly accounted off by them for the ſame: but if ſo be their vnthankfulneſſe was ſo great towards him in this, what manner of behauiour (thinke wee) would they haue vſed if they had ſuſtained any wrong or violence at his hands, who deale thus vndutifully, nay rudely, and rebelliouſly with them, and yet hauing receiued ſo great a deliuerance by his meanes? and ſo picking matter of quarrell out of a good turne and benefit? But as we may note the vnthankfulneſſe of men when yet they haue iuſt cauſe to ſhew the contrary duty, (as may be ſeene in many, and namely in Abſolon to his father, whom when hee had deliuered from death iuſtly deſerued, hee ſought his fathers life, and to get away his kingdome alſo from him:) ſo wee may by this vnkind recompence they gaue to Gedeon for the famous act that hee wrought for their eaſe and peace; wee, I ſay, who ſhall gratifie men, may learne our duty thereby, and that is this, that we were not beſt, neither ought wee to looke for our reward and commendation for well doing any manner of way from men, but to reſt in this, that God knoweth our workes, and it is enough, that we are ſure, that from him we ſhall receiue our reward: according Reuel. 2. 2. to the words of the Apoſtle, Be ye ſtedfaſt (my beloued brethren) and 1. Cor. 15. 58. vnmoueable, alwaies abounding in the worke of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord.
                  But as for men, they oft times diſgrace that which is well done of vs, and reuile, yea and hate vs for it: as Eliab did Dauid, for ſhewing himſelfe forward 1. Sam. 17. 28. againſt Gods enemies the Philiſtims, and by name their great champion Goliah, for the which hee ought to haue been encouraged rather, and highly commended of him. So Ioſeph, who had preſerued the land of Egypt both for the time of the famine, and long afterwards: yet of that King Pharaoh, who roſe vp in the land ſome yeeres after; of him, I ſay, Ioſeph was not Exod. 1. 8. knowne nor regarded: for ſo the text ſaith, There came another Pharaoh, who knew not Ioſeph, though his welfare aroſe by and from him vnder God, as wel as his predeceſſors that liued before him did. But eſpecially this was verified in our Sauiour Chriſt, who being the light of the Gentiles, and the glory Luk. 2. 32. of his people Iſrael, was for the vnthankfulneſſe of the people, and their ſpitefull dealing againſt him, was faine, I ſay, to anſwere them thus: Many good workes haue I done among you, for which of them doe you ſtone me? In Heathen Ioh. 10. 32. ſtories we reade of the ſtrange ingratitude of people to their victorious gouernours, eſpecially Grecian and Romane: one of whom being dead,

had this vpbraiding epitaph engrauen, O vnthankfull countrey, thou ſhalt not ſo much as haue the honour of my bones. But that men liuing in the Church ſhould ſhew ſuch brutiſh ingratitude, who ſhould beleeue it that ſees it not? Moſes, the conducter of the people out of Egypt, was neuer quiet from the conſpiracy and murmurings of them againſt him. The Prophets and Apoſtles Matth. 23. 37. for their painfull propheſyings and trauels in preaching, what reward found they? So theſe Ephramites, how recompenced they Gedeon for his labour and paines? And the other Iſraelites alſo, looke in the end of his ſtory. And ſo, if the worthy ſeruants of Chriſt in the magiſtracy and miniſtery, find the like greetings, courteſie, thankfulneſſe, at their hands who ſhould be their beſt fauourers and encouragers againſt their aduerſaries, yea if they find the people whom they gouerne and teach and vpon whom they beſtow their liues and ſtrength (as the candle that giueth light till it die and goe out,) to requite them with ſmall reuerence, leſſe countenance Note. or maintenance, and leaſt of all with any fruit in true piety of their godly care and labour, in ſeaſon, and out of ſeaſon beſtowed among them: what vſe ſhall they make hereof? Shall they deſiſt from their good beginnings, and giue them ouer to ſuch as may bee like to teach them by fearing them, who would not learne it by loue, to make more account of them? No: but firſt let them looke vp to God, and acknowledge his iuſtice in ſo trying them, and puniſhing ſome ſinne in them; and then anſwere themſelues as the Prophet Eſay: I haue laboured in vaine (to manward) but my reward is with 
                     Eſa. 40. 10. 62. 11. 
                     God: and therfore I muſt not forſake my ſtanding, nor leaue my calling, but hold out with courage and conſtancie vnto the end, but more fully of this in the ſtory of Iephta.
                  
                  Now then the vſe of this is, and ſo let vs take it, that we bee not diſcouraged from conſcience and conſtancy in the ſeruice of God for the diſcourteſies, and ill dealing of men, for of God we are to looke for our reward. And yet I muſt ſay, that without eſpeciall grace, it is hard to doe thus, and to reſt contented with this, that God is a plentifull rewarder of all that ſeeke, and come to him; and withall to beare the indignities that are offered vs of men. Secondly ſeeing the world dealeth thus vnkindly with Gods ſeruants, Heb. 2. 6. let their brethren that feare God, bee encouragers and comforters of them, that they may hold on in their good courſe: for they are but men, and therfore they haue need of encouragement, and their weakeneſſe requireth that they ſhould bee ſo dealt with. And let all ſuch as liue in their places of Miniſters or profeſſors with any freedome this way, much more with a Note. good liking and mutuall conſent or encouragement, bee highly thankfull to God for ſuch vnwonted fauours, and friendly dealings of men with them, as knowing that it is not the portion which the moſt in the world find or enioy, but a peculiar indulgence and fauour from God, which ought to ſtirre vp in them aſtoniſhment at Gods kindneſſe to them therein, and not pride and inſolencie. And for the ſin I now ſpeake of, let vs count this vnthankfulneſſe, and the taking in ill part the good actions of Gods people, let vs (I ſay) count it for a bitter fruit of a naughty, proud, and cancred heart, whereſoeuer wee meete with it or behold it, and thereafter let them thinke of themſelues, who ſhew and offer it.
                  Now further note another of the faults of theſe Ephramites againſt Gedeon: 
                     
                        A 2. fault of the Ephramites, to wit, enuie.
                     
                     
and that is, that they enuied him for the honour he got by the victory. Whereby though they ſuſtained no hurt, neither were the worſe but the better, yet they could not beare it, that Gedeon ſhould haue the glory of it: where we may ſee a foule property of enuie, and what it is. It is a greefe and Enuie, what? ſadneſſe for the proſperity of other: and namely, of ſuch as bee our equals. For the poore man enuieth not the King; hee may bee grieued that he himſelfe wanteth ſuch good things as the King hath, but that is not enuie. And by this we may note the difference betweene hatred and malice on the one ſide, and this enuie on the other: to this end, as wee haue heard of the one, ſo we may in a word of the other. Hatred therefore is a greefe conceiued againſt one for ſome cauſe, at leaſt, as we thinke; as Ahab hated Micaiah, becauſe 1. King. 22. 8. hee did not propheſie good to him, but euill, as he tooke it, and the ſame appeareth alſo by the contrary, out of theſe words in holy Scripture: They hated me without a cauſe.
                  
                  And when I ſay, enuie is a greefe at our equals for any eminency, or proſperity that they haue aboue vs; I meane ſuch as are in kindred, eſtate, yeeres, dignity, or in gifts like vs. And the cauſe of this enuie is not for that wee are troubled as though any hurt or danger were comming towards vs, from them whom we enuie, (for that is another affection, to wit, feare,) but for that through a cankred ſtomacke we cannot beare it, that ſuch an one as is Note. no better then our ſelues, ſhould bee lifted vp ſo high, and commended ſo farre aboue vs. And is not this a curſed mind in vs, that wee cannot bee willing that another ſhould fare well, we being neuer the worſe, and that wee ſhould haue an euill eye at that, for the which we ſhould reioyce? for ſo Mary 
                     Luk. 1. 41. 42. and Elizabeth did mutually reioyce one for the welfare and bleſſing of God to the other.
                  And ſo much the more deteſtable is this affection, that whereas ſome other, being partly naturall, nay bee taken in the good part, this is euer euill: for it is a meere corruption, and contrary to loue, for loue enuieth not: and 1. Cor. 13 4. 
                     Paul more plainely forbiddeth it to the Galathians, where hee alſo ſheweth the cauſe of it; namely, [Deſire of vaine-glory.] For ſo he ſaith; be not deſirous Galat. 5. laſt. of vaine glory, prouoking one another, enuying one another. Which heere is to be ſeene in the Ephramites, who deſiring the glory of the victory themſelues, did enuie Gedeon for it. This affection ſheweth it ſelfe in all ſuch things, as we deſire to excell in: yea in the beſt, euen the gifts of the ſpirit, for therein, we would haue none to be in account aboue vs: as appeareth in them that preached Chriſt of enuie: and him that repined at his fellow, for Philip. 1. 15. that comming at the eleuenth houre, hee had his pennie as well as himſelfe. Matth. 20. 12.
                  
                  Now though we are not the worſe for the proſperity of other, neither doth it diminiſh any thing from the good of our eſtate; yet the enuious man thinketh, that the gifts that are in himſelfe are darkened and blemiſhed thereby, vnleſſe he haue eſpecial grace to abate and mortifie ſuch thoughts. Therefore to aggrauate this ſinne, know we, that as the enuious is ſad by the proſperity of another, ſo (which is worſe) he is made ioyfull by his diſgrace and abaſement: as the Phariſies were, in and for the crucifying of our Sauiour, and Ioſephs brethren, when they had ſold him. Yea ſo curſed an humor is enuie, and ſo oppoſite to loue, that whereas hee who loues vnfainedly

would part euen with the moſt precious iewell for the ſake of that which it loueth: the enuious perſon would willingly pull out one of his owne eyes, vpon condition he might loſe both his, at whom he grudgeth. So that not vnfitly Pauls ſpeech of fornication may be applied to enuie: Other ſinnes are without a man: but the enuious ſins againſt his owne body, and the health and proſperitie thereof: God iuſtly plaguing it in the kinde, in that whiles it pines at the eminencie of another, it reflecteth and beateth backe the hurt vpon it ſelfe, and feedeth vpon the moſt precious ſpirits of the ſoule and life, and conſumeth them: ſeldome doing any harme to the other, while it fretteth out the very heart blood and bowels of it ſelfe. This enuie is remedied by ſhaming our ſelues for that wee cannot abide that our brethren ſhould haue and doe good with Gods gifts to other: conſidering alſo that thereby we hinder Gods glorie. Alſo we ſhall looſen the rootes of this enuie, if we thinke meanely of our ſelues, and that God is onely wiſe, who denieth for iuſt cauſe, that vnto vs, wherewith he bleſſeth others. And thirdly, this ſhall helpe to weaken it, if wee conſider that God hath rather deſerued infinite thankes of vs, for granting vs other bleſſings, which thoſe (perhaps) may want, whom in other reſpects wee enuie, (for it is his great mercie that Lam. 3. 22. wee be not conſumed) the one wee will not ſee, the other wee behold too much. Whereas our eye ſeeth not the worſe, becauſe anothers ſeeth better: how much leſſe if in another kinde we ſee as well? Doth the foote enuie the eye becauſe it ſeeth, or the eye the foote becauſe it goeth? But of the contrarie vertue I ſpake before twice, in Gedeons ſouldiers, and Gedeons communicating with Nephtali and Ephraim the victorie.
                  And becauſe I now ſpeake of the Ephramites, I thinke it not amiſſe to 
                        A third ſinne in them, the ſin of their fathers. Doct. 4. adde this of them, that their father Ephraim the younger being preferred by Iacob before the elder brother Manaſſe, the ſtocke and ofſpring of them exalted themſelues ſince from age to age, and are noted for it oft times in the hiſtorie of the old Teſtament. As in Ioſuah we reade: they among other, were diſcontented with their portion. So in the twelfth of this booke, the poſteritie of them contended with Iphia for not calling them with him to battell againſt the Ammonites after he had ouercome them: euen as theſe Ephramites did here with Gedeon. So Eſau himſelfe deadly hating his brother, deriued this ſinne to his poſteritie the Edomites, ſo Ahab did Idolatrie to the generations that came after him.
                  And hereby we may learne, what force ſome blemiſhes and corruptions in a ſtocke or kindred haue to infect almoſt the whole poſteritie: God iuſtly thus puniſhing the ſinnes of the fathers vpon the children to many generations, puniſhing (I ſay) ſinne with ſinne. As for example, if a kindred bee proud, haughty, ſtomackful, boaſters, giuen to adultery, hollownes of heart, flatterie, lying, mocking, ſtealing; the reſt of the ſame ſtock, that are not guided by grace, are for the moſt part, ſuch. Euen as bodily diſeaſes runne in the blood to the poſteritie. And as wee ſee that a noble ſtocke ſtained with treaſon, may eaſiler be reſtored in blood ciuilly by the indulgence of the Prince, then reformed naturally and reduced to loyaltie and fidelitie: ſo the truth is, the moſt forcible meane of all outward meanes is ſcarce able to expell this 
                        •
                     eint: onely grace can doe it: although euen grace it ſelfe often times can ſcarce roote it out ſo, but that ſome ſprigs or other of the old ſtock

will appeare, when it is grafted in another ſtocke.
                  And yet one thing more note in theſe Ephramites, namely, the ſlights, 
                        Their fourth ſin, ſl
                              •
                           ghtnes and ſubtiltie. Doct. 5. ſubtilties, doublenes and hollownes that lie hidden in mens hearts, till they haue occaſion to ſhew them, or grace to repent of them. Theſe would now ſeeme to haue had great iniurie that they were not called to the battell, whereas it was their owne ſin that they went not, for they did forbeare for feare of danger, & were willing to ſtand by (as it were) lying in the winde to waite for the iſſue. So that if Gedeon and their brethren the Iſraelites that ioyned with him, had loſt the day, then all the blame ſhould haue bin laid vpon them by theſe Ephramites: but now they had got the victorie by Gods direction and bleſſing, they complaine on the other ſide, that they had iniurie thēſelues, for that they were not (as they ſaid) bidden to helpe in the battell.
                  Wherein wee may behold deepe ſubtiltie and hypocriſie, and how farre all ſuch are from ſimplicitie and plaine dealing, that according to the prouerbe, howſoeuer the world goe, they will ſaue one, and howſoeuer it fall out, they will prouide for themſelues. Such a one was the harlot that pleaded before Salomon againſt her fellow: and they in the twelfth of this book, 1. King. 3 22. Iudg. 12. 1, 2. where Iphta being ſet vpon by the Ammonites, he ſought aide at the hands of the men of Ephraim, and they would not help him: and afterward, when he fighting againſt the Ammonites preuailed ouer them, the Ephramites came to make warre with him, becauſe he called them not to goe with him againſt them. A ſinne now adaies in common practiſe, namely in bargaines, where gaine is not ſo certaine, there they play on both hands cunningly: for they will ſo couenant in generall and doubtfull manner, that if it hit and fall out well, it ſhal be a bargaine, and they will be readie to challenge and make claime of it, how ſlightly ſoeuer the couenant was made: but if it fall out ill, and againſt them, then they picke a quarrell, and ſay, they meant not ſo as the other taketh it.
                  And therefore ſuch will not make their bargaines plaine, nor their couenants ſure and certaine, but ſlightly conclude, as though they agreed in one; and depart one from another, breaking off with ſuch like words: (we ſhall agree) vpon which vncertaine termes, let no man that loueth his peace, buy, Note. ſell, or deale (as this world goeth) except hee be willing to ſtand to the hardeſt, and to take all meaſure that ſhall be offered him, willingly. In partnerſhip alſo, there are many ſecret and ſubtill deceiuings one of another, when yet all good ſhewes of equitie ſhall be ſeene, and it ſelfe to the full pretended.
                  Like vnto theſe are all ſuch as promiſe great friendſhip to a man, but if they perceiue their betters brooke not the perſon, but frowne vpon them that ſhew any kindneſſe to him, then they muſt, in a diſhoneſt manner, finde ſome fault with him alſo, and alleage: that they cannot therefore ſhew him the kindnes, nor doe that for him, that they had promiſed. Is this to prouide things honeſt before men? Is not ſuch dealing apparent diſhoneſtie? So in aduerſitie and diſgrace, right good men ſhall be iuſtled to the wall, who yet if they be againe reſtored to their former eſtate, and accounted of, and in fauour with their betters, they ſhall be ſought vnto and regarded, as Iphta was. In all theſe and the like, there is this diſſembling to be ſeene, which was in theſe Ephramites: a manner of dealing contrarie to ſimplicitie and plainneſſe,

and from good Chriſtians, as a maine blemiſh, nay as a ſtaine, vtterly to be remoued and abandoned. And this is bad enough euen in ciuill dealings; but when it appeares in matter of religion, farre worſe, and by infinite degrees to be deteſted, whether it be ſhewed toward God or men. I meane, when as in a ſubtill & politique manner, (not of feare and frailtie, for then it is not ſo groſſe, though euill) men will abſtaine, and conceale their affection to the Goſpell, till they ſee whether the time bee like to fauour or Note. frowne vpon them: in the meane while carrying ſuch a darke and ambiguous countenance, that no man can tell what to make of them. And yet he that cannot carrie the matter thus, but plainly bewray his opinion and iudgement, is counted a foole, and ſhiftleſſe perſon: as indeed hee is to the world-ward, if there were nothing elſe to be regarded. It is as poſſible to make a true cognizance for theſe temporizers, as a coate for the Moone: for they ſerue their belly, their ambition, their purſe, and as theſe leade them, ſo they follow: God they ſerue none, for their religion is onely a ſtalking horſe for them, to play their part the more cunningly till their turne be ſerued. The ſame I ſay of the committing this ſin toward men: what is more odious in a man, then when he ſhall promiſe, and pretend all loue and faithfulnes to his neighbour, and yet meane and intend no ſuch thing, but practiſe the contrarie.
                  Now Gedeons milde anſwere followes to be conſidered which he maketh Verſe 2. to this quarrell and expoſtulating of the Ephramites with him: who if hee had anſwered their fooliſhnes with the like, and had giuen them as good as they brought, what a broile (thinke we) would there haue been betweene them? But in that hee did not defend his doing by anſwering that hee was ſtrong enough of himſelfe, and had no neede of their helpe, which had been like to prouoke them the more againſt him, neither commended his owne labour, care, and induſtrie, which they could not willingly haue heard, neither yet did vnuizer them, by telling them, that they quarrelled without a cauſe againſt him, who had ſought their helpe, nor any way exaſperated them; but contrariwiſe, yeelded as much to them as with truth and good conſcience hee might: neither did hee interpret their contentious words to come of bitter enuie, as they gaue him cauſe, but rather hee hath left a moſt commendable example of a meeke and patient ſeruant of God, and reſpects all theſe of honeſt and lawfull emulation; it teacheth right worthie matter and doctrine vnto vs.
                  Namely, how wee ſhould deale with ſuch as are inſolent, contentious, fierie, and ſuch as thinke, though neuer ſo vntruly, that they haue wrong at our hands. And that is, that in ſuch caſes we muſt be well ſtaied: & ſee, that we giue men their ful due, to wit, not to croſſe, prouoke, and exaſperate thē, Doct. but rather to ſeeme not to ſee the roote of bitternes that breaketh out of them, but to containe our ſelues till a fitter time, (ſeeing they are not then in caſe to be told of it) and we are to make the beſt of euery thing, aſſwaging them with gentle anſwers, eſpecially if we be but their equals or inferiours, and in one word, not to anſwere a foole according to his fooliſhnes, that is, Prou. 26. 2. to giue as ill meaſure as he bringeth; leſt wee be like him, but to remember that which we are taught in another place of the Prouerbs, namely, that it is a mans glorie to ceaſe from ſtrife, and to conſider and alwaies bearing this

in minde, that he is better that can rule his owne heart, then he that ſubdueth Prou. 16. 32. a citie.
                  For except we thus giue place to ſuch, many euils are like to follow, and fall out againſt vs, in Church and Common-wealth, in familie, and in the courſe of our life, which yet hereby may, and will (no doubt) for the moſt part, bee auoided, or at leaſt wiſe bee ſmaller and fewer. Therefore let the yonger ſort herein learne to yeeld to their elders, and the inferiours to their betters, though they deale not with them as they ought and ſhould, ſeeing wee ſee here that Gedeon and afterward Iphta being ſuperiours, did forbeare to deale with their inferiours, as they might haue done, and were iuſtly prouoked to doe. Yea, and let one learne and take out this leſſon toward another, after the manner that I haue ſet downe, as husbands, wiues, maſters, ſeruants, and other, that peace with holineſſe may be preſerued among them. Heb. 12. 14. And yet who is he that ſheweth foorth this meekneſſe and wiſedome? But (as is to bee ſeene in the common iarrings and quarrels of men) the moſt count it their glorie (and boaſt of it afterward) when their words bee fierce and more ſtinging then their fellowes, and come out of a furnace ſeuen times hotter then his? What (ſaith he) did he thinke I would turne my face for him, or be put downe with words? No, I trow I gaue him the full meaſure that hee brought, yea tenne for one, I ſpared him not a whit. Loe, how fooles ſome out the froth of their owne ſhame. Whereas Salomon ſhewes them their faces in a glaſſe who doe ſo, when he ſaith: An angrie man ſtirs 
                     Prou. 19. 22. 
                     vp ſtrife, and multiplieth tranſgreſsion, Prou. 29. It were indeed an honour for a man to depart, and ſay, I ſee he was not in frame to be anſwered with angrie words, I therefore durſt not ſtriue to outſhoote the diuell (as it were) in his owne bow. That which hee thinkes be commeth him, I count it my reproch, who profeſſe to fight againſt my corrupt nature. Therefore let the dead burie the dead, I meane, they that be fit for nothing elſe, let them giue taunt for taunt, and ſcorne for ſcorne, (they are free from righteouſneſſe, and bondmen to their owne luſts) but I haue learned rather to repay good for euill, then euill. But yet this is not ſo to be taken, as though in all things we ought to yeeld to froward and peeuiſh perſons, but in our owne priuate caſes onely, and when we lawfully may, but in no caſes or matters that are contrarie to Gods will, or preiuditiall to his honour. As for example, if theſe Ephramites would haue ſet vp Baals altar againe, it had in no ſort been tollerable that Gedeon ſhould haue borne it at their hands, much leſſe haue yeelded to them, or we in any ſuch thing. And this be noted by his anſwer. A worthie example whereof wee haue in Paul, who reſiſted Peter and gaue Galat. 2. 11. him no place in the point of colluſion with the Iewes.
                  Now followeth the fruite of that his meeke and milde anſwere vnto Verſ. 3. them, to wit, that their anger was thereby alaied, which agreeth well with that of Salomon in the Prouerbs: A milde anſwere putteth away anger: and againe, A meeke tongue breaketh bands. The ſecond blow makes the fray, as Prou. 15. 1. and 25. the prouerbe ſaith. The reaſon thereof is double: Firſt, becauſe wrath wanteth matter to worke vpon, if it be not oppoſed. Secondly, meekneſſe ſhameth anger, euen as humilitie makes pride to hang downe the head. And he muſt be ſome odde man for rage and fiercenes, who is otherwiſe. Thus Dauid by Abigails mildnes, was ſtaied from the bloodie attempt which Nabals
                     
boyſterous roughnes prouoked him vnto. Such a grace is this meeknes and mildnes, that Chriſt pronounceth them bleſſed that haue them. He Matth. 5. 5. Matth. 11. 29. Philip 2. 7. Actes 8. 32. Numb. 12. 3. wils vs to learne of him to be meeke: who, as the lambe before the ſhearer, ſo opened hee not his mouth. Thereby Abraham preuailed with Lot: and Moſes ſo excelled in this vertue, that he was ſaid to be the meekeſt man vpon earth. Contraries are cured by contraries, as wee know, and Phyſitians cure not hot agues by inflaming, but by aſſwaging: the skilfull Fencer doth ſcape many a blow, and foile his aduerſarie by declining and giuing backe, and not by oppoſing his body or weapon vnto it. Cannon ſhot batters Note. downe caſtles and walls, which yeeld not: but rebound from the ſoft packe of wooll, that giues place and reſiſts not. The lightning paſſeth by ſlight and ſlender obiects, but conſumes and deuoures the ſolid and well compact ſubſtances.
                  And ſo all that haue experience may ſee, what fruite wee might reape of this yeelding, and what a good name and report (which is better then ſiluer) it would bring to vs, as by the ſcripture now cited, appeares, beſide many Prou. 15. 1. other worthie fruites, if we did regard to practiſe it. Yea doubtleſſe, and by this meanes wee might euen open the mouth of our hotteſt aduerſarie, (when his heate is ouer) to commend vs, and confeſſe his owne folly, and our great wiſedom, in ſtopping much ſinne thereby, and ſo he might learne meeknes of vs, as Dauid bleſſed Abigaile. But now meane and inferiour perſons 1. Sam. 25. 32. will not ſtoope an inch, no not to that equanimitie, wherewith great and worthie perſonages haue been furniſhed. The wife oft times ſhall bee found iuſtly conuicted of the crontrary fault of ſhrewiſhnes and ſnappiſhnes: the ſeruant ſtout and ſturdie will giue no place to his maſter, few will learne this meeknes. Which cauſeth them to finde the like that they offer to other: euen rough, curriſh, and vnkinde dealing, which filleth the world with contention and vnquietnes. Whereto I grant there are many prouocations, but we muſt obey the Lord in this, that wee ſhould ſhew all meeknes Tit. 3. 2. vnto all men. But ſome will ſay, That it booteth them not to vſe meeknes either in words or deedes toward ſuch as are vnreaſonable perſons, who Obiect. the gentlier they be entreated, the more they play vpon the aduantage, and inſult ouer others: yea the yeelding to their furie, is the incencing of them, and addeth oile to the flame. I anſwere: Roughnes towards ſuch bad and Anſw. baſe natures is more meete, then kindnes: ſo a man keepe his meaſure, and vnder colour of reſiſting ſin in another, diſobey not God. Thus Eliſha willeth the elders to anſwere Iehorams ſeruant. But if the perſons be ſuch as we 2. King. 6. 32. cannot ſafely ſo controll (though lawfully) let vs ſay with that good Prophet: The Lord ſee it and iudge, and the Lord rebuke them. Aſſure we our ſelues, God hath waies enow to hamper and tame ſuch wolues and tygers. Iulian vſed to ſcoffe at the Chriſtians thus, Oh your Maſter Ieſus of Galilie bids you turne the other cheeke to him that ſmites you, &c. but God made him yeeld, and ſay: Thou art too hard for me, and haſt gotten the vpper hand, O thou Galilean. And what was the end of him who pluckt his fellow by the throte, and Matth. 18. 28. would not heare his meeke plea? Such is the end of all rough, boiſterous, and proud ſpirits. But ſo much ſhall ſuffice for this time.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTIE ONE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 4. And Gedeon came to Iordan to paſſe ouer, hee and the three hundred men that were with him wearte, yet purſuing them.
                     
                     5. And he ſaid to the men of Succoth: Giue I pray you morſels of bread vnto the people that follow mee (for they be wearie) that I may follow after Zebah and Zalmunna Kings of Midian.
                     
                     6. And the Princes of Succoth ſaid: Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna, now in thine hands, that we ſhould giue bread vnto thine army?
                     
                     7 Gedeon then ſaid: Therefore when the Lord hath deliuered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine hand, I will teare your fleſh with thornes of the wilderneſſe, and with briers.
                     
                     8. And he went vp from thence to Penuel, and ſpake vnto them likewiſe, and the men of Penuel anſwered him, as the men of Succoth anſwered.
                     
                     9. And he ſaid alſo to the men of Penuel, when I come againe in peace, I will break downe this tower.
                     
                     10. Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hoſts with them, about fifteene thouſand, all that were left of all the hoſts of them of the Eaſt: for there were ſlaine an hundred and twenty thouſand men that drew ſwords.
                     
                     11. And Gedeon went through them that dwelt in Tabernacles on the Eaſt ſide of Nobah and Iogbehah, and ſmote the host; for the hoſt was careleſſe.
                     
                     12. And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, hee followed after them, and tooke the two Kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and diſcomfited all the hoſt.
                     
                     13. So Gedeon the ſonne of Ioaſh returned from battell, the ſunne being yet hie.
                     
                  
                  
                     IN this ſecond part of the Chapter, the holy ſtory, (after the former digreſſion of the Ephramites contending with Gedeon) 
                     
                        The ſenſe to verſ. 8. proceedeth orderly to ſet downe the end of the battell what it was, namely this: that when the Midianites and they of the Eaſt, had ſlaine one another, the reſt that remained fled away, that is, fifteene thouſand men: and Gedeon purſued them ouer Iordan. And his three hundred men being wearie and faint, hauing laboured all night, he comming to Succoth, the city of Succoth, I meane which was in the tribe of Gad, (for there was another place called Succoth in the deſert, mentioned in the 6. of Numbers,) and of them hee asked ſomewhat to refreſh his ſouldiers. The men of Succoth who ſhould haue helped, and gone with him to purſue the Midianites, being Iſraelites and neighbours, moſt

vnkindly denied to giue them their brethren ſo much as bread, but anſwered Gedeon contemptuouſly. For the which cauſe hee threatned them, when he ſhould returne with the victory, which hee nothing doubted of, (and ſo he tels them) to deale with them thereafter, euen to teare their fleſh with the briers of the wilderneſſe.
                  Heere in that Gedeon followed after theſe fifteene thouſand of the Midianites Doct. verſ. 4. that eſcaped, when the greateſt number of them were ſlaine already, he ſhewed his wiſdome and godly care that he had in preuenting euill and danger, that might haue come vpon the people afterward. For thoſe fifteen thouſand, if they had been ſuffered to runne away without his purſuing of them, they might, and (no doubt) would haue renued their power, and haue come againſt them againe afreſh, which yet now Gedeon wiſely preuented. Which teacheth vs a ſingular good leſſon, that when wee haue well diſcharged a dutie enioyned vs, as Gedeon had done; yet that this is not all; but we ought to labour to hold that which we haue receiued, and wiſely as we may, to preuent whatſoeuer might ſtand vp in our way to fruſtrate the ſame, (and ſo cauſe vs to loſe all our former labour, and the fruit of our hope:) euen as Gedeon did heere in purſuing them that were fled of the Midianites.
                  The inſtances wherein this might bee laid out, are innumerable: I will onely alleage two or three briefly. As if a man ſhould enter league of ſound friendſhip with another neuer ſo ſtrongly and entirely, and in moſt ſolemne manner, (as Dauid and Ionathan did betwixt themſelues) whereby one 1. Sam. 18. 3. doth repoſe himſelfe and reſt vpon the other: yet if they do not renue their couenant of loue oftentimes, as they two did, and confirme and ſtrengthen it, againſt all that might annoy or breake it off, there wil fal out ſo many occaſions as will weaken, yea and make it vtterly void. Alſo ſuch reports will be carried to and fro betwixt them, through abſence one from another, and ſuch ſtrangeneſſe will ariſe thereby, but eſpecially ſuch conceits, tetchines, taking things in ill part, and raſh iudgings: that the former kindneſſe will be forgotten, and the league which was ſo ſoundly made, as if it had neuer been, will be broken off. And let this which I ſay bee vnderſtood of the couenant that is made in marriage it ſelfe, ſo farre as theſe things now mentioned, may fall out therein; ſo that teſtimonies of true loue mutually declared, euen betwixt couples, had need to be daily ſhewed in ſtead of renuing of their couenant, or elſe their loue will fall to the ground.
                  Alſo to paſſe to another inſtance, if a man (yea let him bee a good man) entring into the affaires of this world, and diſliking the bad courſes which are taken by men commonly to get wealth, doe purpoſe againſt them all, and that heartily, and diſlike the ſame, yet let him not look daily to performe that which he hath purpoſed, and ſtand firme therein, let him not watch and pray againſt all prouocations to the contrary, and diſgrace in his owne eyes Note. all vnlawfull courſes and dealings which may bring in commodity, and contemne filthie gaine, and feare danger to his ſoule by his vſuall and many dealings in the world, (yea though they be lawfull) let him not (I ſay) thus go to worke, and looke to himſelfe, he is (without queſtion) like to grow to the ſame point that the moſt are at, to wit, to become a worldly minded man, as the moſt are, and drowne his religion in earthlineſſe.
                  
                     
And the ſame I ſay of him, who in his ſicknes hath made many great promiſes to amend his life, (if he recouer) and neuer to liue ſo badly afterward, as he had done before: I ſay, if hee renue not his couenant with the Lord from day to day, remembring and conſidering to whom he made that promiſe, Note. and in what earneſt maner: this man ſhall reuolt from his good mind, and fall to his old byas againe. For though he hath purpoſed with Dauid, 
                     Pſal. 119. 106. A ſonilitude.
                      yea and ſworne; yet ſhall he not with him keepe his righteous iudgements: for he hath neglected his care, and therefore he faileth of his purpoſe. For as he who keepeth not an houſe in reparation, when there is a ſmall breach, muſt be at a pounds charge, where a ſhilling would haue ſerued, if it had bin taken in hand in time: ſo wracke and ruine ſhall befall him in his good purpoſes, who doe not looke daily and carefully to the maintaining of them. And by this that hath been ſaid of the point in hand, we may iudge of all other inſtances, that when we haue done our duties well, as Gedeon did heere, yet if we do not with him preuent after dangers, wee loſe the fruit and hope of our former labours. All this that I haue ſaid of this matter is the better to be marked, becauſe ſuch care from thing to thing in our liues, is the vpholding of the practiſe of Chriſtianitie. More of this point I haue ſaid vpon the like occaſion before in chap 7. verſ. 23.
                  Another thing here in Gedeon is worth the marking, that he followed after the reſt of the Midianites, whereas he might haue bin like to haue neglected 
                        Doct. 2. that worke, as needfull as it was, and to haue been reuenged vpon the Ephramites, who had ſo vniuſtly prouoked him, (and ſo hee would haue done, no doubt, if he had been an hot and haſtie man, giuen to his appetite) and to follow priuate affection, as moſt men are giuen to doe. But he counted it a ſmaller matter to croſſe his owne corrupt nature, then to leaue the purſuing of the common enemie. Where wee are taught, that if wee may haue peace in the land, (as Gedeon ſought by vanquiſhing them that remained of the Midianites and were fled;) for the obtaining of it, we ought by all meanes to maintaine peace priuately at home with our neighbours, yea and gladly take all occaſions to the procuring thereof, as Gedeon did with the Ephramites. The reaſon is, for that the maintaining of peace and agreement at home in priuat, requireth neither loſſe of our liues, goods, or religion, but Note. onely of our will and corrupt affections, (or the forgoing of ſome ſmall thing for peace ſake, which we may lawfully yeeld vnto:) and we are not debters to our rebellious nature, but ought to be profeſſed enemies againſt the ſame. Rom. 8. 12.
                  
                  Againe, while we haue peace abroad, from ciuill and forraine diſſention, Oh what a benefit it is, as we may ſee by that which we reade of in the firſt booke of the Kings, that in the daies of Salomon, euery one liued ſafe vnder his vine, and vnder his figtree? As on the contrary, when there is warre or 1 King. 4 25. perſecution, Oh what feare and danger is there? what ſpoile of men and goods is there? yea, what hauocke of all things? Therefore I muſt needes ſay vnto you, that cannot loue your enemies, but boile and ſwell one againſt another, and to you that may liue quietly euery day in the weeke, who yet Note. ſcarcely do it one: that you haſte warre vpon your ſelues, yea you long and groane for it, or for ſome other plague, and if the Lord would (as it were) winck to allure you neerer to him, yee your ſelues tempt him to lay load on

you: and to ſuch I ſay with griefe, you cannot tell what it is to inioy peace, and make vſe of it.
                  Whereas if you did well conſider it, yee would ſeeke, yea and inſue after peace, ſo far as ye might attaine it with holineſſe, and by no meanes ſuffer it to go from you: and ye would not ſo yeeld to your luſts and carnal affections, Heb. 12. 14. in fauouring, nouriſhing, and ſatiſfying whereof, ye depriue your ſelues of the ſweete and infinite fruits of common peace. But if this diſtemper and vnrulineſſe be found in a familie, betwixt husband and wife, or other parts of the familie, it is more to be bewailed; what did I ſay? nay monſtrous. Oh what good might be done in this time of peace, as the Churches did find in Act. 9. 31. the Acts? And this ſhould we doe, if we were wiſe: for ſo God commandeth: As much as in you lieth, haue peace with all men. Yea though it coſt vs Rom. 12. 18. ſomewhat, as Abraham with loſſe procured it betwixt Lot and himſelfe. And Geneſ. 13. 8. if any ſuch be vexed by ſtrangers, and diſquieted by them, let them conſider, that it is iuſt with God to puniſh them ſo, who haue broken peace, yea and deſpiſed it with neighbours, kindred, and wife at their owne home.
                  And in that it is ſaid here, that they laboured til they were faint and wearie, 
                        Doct. 2. we ſee that the earneſt following of our duties will make vs oft times neglect and forget our ſelues, and out bodily eaſe, as they did. So the woman of Samaria was ſo rauiſhed with Chriſts ſweet communication, as ignorant as ſhe was, (when he firſt met her at the well) yea ſaucie and ſcornefull, Iohn 428. that for the great defire ſhee had to heare him, ſhe forgat her ſelfe, and neglected the care of her bodily buſineſſe. And Abrahams ſeruant ſo minded Geneſ. 24. 23. the dutie which was enioyned him of his maſter, that although hee had need, hauing trauelled farre, yet hee would not eate, till he had diſpatched that which he went about. Thus Peter, Actes 10. through the heauenly intention Act. 19. 10. of his mind, ouercame his hunger, ſo that before any thing could be made readie, he was in a traunce. And ſo Paul, whoſe watchings and faſtings are in other places ſet downe to haue been ſo many, did neglect his ſleepe and repaſt at Troas, through that feruency of ſpirit, which cauſed him to preach till midnight, and at Epheſus did vſually for three yeeres exhort them in the night, as well as in the day. But aboue all our Sauiour Chriſt, who through his earneſtneſſe and zeale, did many times, as in that holy ſpeech and communication with the woman, Ioh. 4. forbeare his meate, and forget to eate: alleaging that he had meate to eate which they knew not of. Iohn 4 31. verſ. 34.
                  Euen ſo our minds being ſet ſeriouſly vpon our duties, as prayer, reading, good company, the following of our calling, &c. we do not at all many times, or very little mind other things belonging to our bodily welfare; and it is our crowne ſo farre as we can by good occaſions remember that with Gedeon we haue done ſo. Indeed in and about play, pleaſure, and ſeeking after the commodities of the world, the caſe is cleare, that too too many haue ſwet, and doe continually forget and diſguiſe themſelues, ſo that neither cold, hunger, heate, or vnſeaſonableneſſe can hold them backe, or hinder them. But in Gods matters, as his worſhip, and in things which tend to our owne ſaluation, and the hunting and purging out of ſome ſpeciall ſinnes, alſo in furthering and bringing on one another to faith and good duties, Note.
                     
and ſo ſeeking how to do moſt good to the poore members of Chriſt, Oh how few are to bee found to doe thus? who yet neither ſpare labour, time, coſt, or any thing elſe about their owne matters: whereas we ſhould bee ſo taken vp with Gods matters, that our owne, euen lawfull, might bee moderated at leaſt. Thus Marie ſat at the feete of Chriſt, and through her attention to his preaching neglected the leſſe neceſſarie work of preparing for him. Now though euery example bee not a law to bind euery man to the like: yet where we ſee it ſo agree with the doctrine of the word, as here; ſuch examples muſt be our inſtruction, and we may well gather, that there is a ſingular affection of loue to God, and ioy in his ſeruice where it is ſo, which concernes vs much to follow. And much more we may conclude, that when men (in hearing the word, or prayer, &c.) doe ſo wander, and are ſo weary, that euery minute is an houre vnto them, and euery houre ten, till al be done, and ſome wil not endure out the whole time, but depart, to ſerue their appetite, or follow their worke, theſe (we may be ſure) are little affected with the action: ſince other things are predominant with them, which will not giue place, euen when the moſt religious duties are in hand.
                  The man of trade muſt looke to this, yea the worſhipfull, and all eſtates that feare God, to the end that of meere conſcience they may obey God in their ſeuerall callings and places. Thus Ioſhua went all night long to helpe Ioſhua 10. 9. the Gibeonites: and Gedeon was neither by hunger nor wearineſſe held backe from purſuing after the Midianites. The vſe hereof is, to warrant our ſelues that our greateſt delight be in ſeruing the Lord in one part of our life as in another, as in the chiefeſt to God, ſo next in the particular duties of our callings painefully in euery eſtate and degree, and faithfully, and ſo to take our reſt, refreſhing, and recreation, which yet ſhould follow and come after theſe, and not goe before them.
                  
                     Gedeon being wearie, and his men; asketh but bread of his owne countrey Verſ. 5. men, for whoſe peace he purſued the Midianites, as well as for his own: his reaſon was twofold, one becauſe they were wearie; the other, becauſe they purſued their enemies, for the ſafetie of Iſrael Gods people. In this neceſſity and diſtreſſe of theirs, though otherwiſe they wanted not, we may note, that it may poſſibly be the caſe of any of Gods people to be deſtitute of neceſſaries for this life, & to be brought into ſtreights both by wāt of food, Doct. and alſo by other calamities. Dauid in his fleeing from Saul, was ſo diſtreſſed (he and his men) for victual, that he was faine to eate of the Shew-bread, which (out of the caſe of neceſſitie) was vnlawfull for any ſaue the Prieſt to eate of, as appeareth in Sam. 21. Ionathan and the people with him, were euen 1. Sem. 21. 3. readie to faint, and yet might not without perill of their life taſte ſo much as a little honey with the top of his ſpeare to ſaue and preſerue life. And if it were but euen ſo with vs as it was with him and Gedeon, that but a whole day or two wee wanted food and reliefe, we ſhould find it (as ſmall a matter as it is thought to be) as much as life is worth. Daily experience ſheweth vs the ſame, that it falleth out both by ſea and by land to be the caſe of many, who yet were of good wealth, and not likely to come into ſuch need and want: and yet ſo wee ſee it to come to paſſe. One reaſon is, becauſe all things in this preſent world are changeable, and beſides God will correct ſome this way, and trie others, as he did Iob.
                  
                  
                     
The vſe hereof is, that wee ſhould not pleaſe our ſelues in any thing of what account ſoeuer it be, neither reſt, depend, or take too much comfort in our outward preſent eſtate, of health, wealth, wit, learning, worſhip, credit, &c. And further, that wee ſhould be ready to helpe ſuch as ſtand in need, (and ſeeke it at our hands) with theſe tranſitory comforts which God hath giuen vs. As our Sauiour ſaith: Make yee friends of the vnrighteous Mammon, 
                     Luke 16. 10. 
                     that when ye ſhall want, they may receiue you into euerlaſting habitations. And not to grudge at it, (as many doe) but to be mercifull and ready thereto Phile 7. Matth 7. 1. ſam 2 13. with chearefulneſſe: for with what meaſure we meate, ſhall be meaſured to vs againe, and iudgement ſhall bee without mercy to them that ſhew none. And this chiefly ſhould bee done, when the poore want worke, and corne, and ſuch like neceſſaries: remembring how Nabal ſped for his churliſhnes. But of this point by the way, ſeeing I ſhall meete with the like againe.
                  Out of their reaſon in that they were faint with following the Midianites 
                        The 1 reaſon. Doct. 2. all night, we may note, that the neede that commeth of faintneſſe or labour in any of our brethren, is an honeſt cauſe for them to ſeeke, and aske, and for vs to relieue them, euen as other neceſſitie is, that God laieth vpon them, as ſickneſſe, age, &c. But yet for all this, the want that commeth of idlenes and of liuing without labour, is not ſo to be counted of, as ſhall be further ſhewed in the next point. But the relieuing of them that are poore indeed, is laid vpon vs by the Lord, telling vs, that wee ſhall haue them alwaies among vs, Deut 15 11. that we may doe good vnto them: and that if wee haue this worlds good, 1. Iohn 3. 17. and ſee our brother hath need, and ſhut vp our compaſſion from them, the loue of God dwelleth not in vs. Which words of his, with ſuch like, ſhould be as a mallet to break our hard hearts, who in ſo great need as is to be ſeene in our townes, are little mooued to compaſſion towards the needy. And as God furniſheth vs euery yeere with new ſtore, ſo wee ſhould hold on in mercy ſtill, as long as we remaine among them. Me thinkes we ſhould readilie and willingly giue at Gods commanding, ſeeing he maketh vs able ſo to doe, in whoſe hand and at whoſe pleaſure it is, to take from vs, and giue to them, that ſo wee might bee driuen to ſeeke to them for reliefe, that before ſought it of vs. To the iuſt reproofe of ſuch I ſpeake it, who thinke all too little for a few bellies, not feeling other mens wants, for getting the fearefull ſentence pronounced againſt them that omitted this mercy and compaſſion, as well as to them that wrought iniquitie: Goe ye curſed into euerlaſting fire, 
                     Matth 25. 42. 
                     for I was hungry, and ye gaue me no meate, I was naked, &c.
                  
                  Out of the other reaſon, that they fought for the ſafety of Iſrael, wee are 
                        The ſecond. Doct. 3. further taught, that they ought to haue reliefe alſo, (euen as I ſaid before, it is lawfull and honeſt for them to aske it) who haue been imploied againſt Gods enemies and ours, to defend vs from their rage and tyranny. Conſidering that they carry their life in their hands, and are in danger of ſpending their blood in the cauſe of God, and the peace of the land, whileſt wee may ſit quiet at home, and liue free from ſuch feare. So that although the perſons themſelues be leaud, yet in regard of their ſeruice, we ſhould ſee them prouided for: as Paul teacheth ſaying: Doth any man goe on warfare at his owne 
                     1. Cor. 9. 7. 2. Sam. 17. 27. 
                     cost? 1. Corinth. 9. And it is our ſinne if they haue it not, or if they ſhould be driuen to goe about to begge, and ſo to become rogues, for that is contrary to Gods commandement, who ſaith: There ſhall be no beggar in Iſrael. And

as good order is taken to cut off rogueing from place to place, without any certaine habitation, by ſetting the poore on worke, and miniſtring to their neceſſities that which they want, not being able to maintaine their charge by their labour, (which good order of all faithfull Chriſtians is to be vpholden) ſo it is a great ſinne in many, who in ſtead thereof, doe nouriſh them that are rogues indeed, notwithſtanding it bee ſtraightly commanded, that hee who will not labour ſhould not eate: and who will ſooner be moued 2. Theſ. 310. with compaſſion toward them, then toward their pooe neighbours, whoſe need they behold daily with their eyes. But more of this in the men of Succoths anſwer.
                  The anſwere of the Princes of Succoth heere followeth, with Gedeons 
                     Verſ. 6. words to them againe. And it is like that his ſuite was carried to them, and their anſwere returned to Gedeon by meſſengers, which ſheweth that it was the fault of them, and not the peoples, to anſwere Gedeon after that manner, not only to denie them very bread, but to giue them alſo rough and ſcornefull words. And therefore Gedeon, not vpon any priuate reuenge, but as one that had authoritie to doe it, (ſeeing the fault redounded to the hurt of the Common-wealth, and was not committed onely againſt Gedeon and his men) anſwered, that he would be auenged of them. If they had been wiſe they would both haue relieued them, and alſo in ſo good a cauſe, if neede had been, haue gone with them. But let vs examine the words: Are Zeba and Zalmunna in thy hands alreadie? As if they ſhould haue ſaid, if they were, they would haue giuen them: but that was no thanke to them, but their owne benefit, credit and honour: but ſeeing they were not in his hands, they vncourteouſly and barbarouſly denied it to them being their brethren, Doct. verſ. 6. and in ſubtiltie they did it, leſt they being ouercome of the Midianites, they ſhould haue been hardlier dealt withall by the Princes of Midian, hearing that they had relieued their enemies.
                  And this ſubtilty ioyned with ſelfe-loue, are the two ſtrings to mens bow by the which they ſhoote out the moſt of their actions as arrowes. For the good the moſt doe, it is not done for the commandement nor for conſcience Note. ſake, but of ſelfe-loue for their owne priuate benefit, hoping to be gainers thereby, which may be done by the heathens for any religion or feare of God that is in it: or when they hold back the good, which in conſcience they ought to doe, of an euill minde they hold it back: as theſe men of Succoth did; for feare, leſt if they ſhould doe it to ſome, they ſhould fare the worſe at the hands of other, as theſe men of Succoth here did. A like point whereunto, I obſerued in the men of Ephraim.
                  And hereby wee may ſee, what barbarous rudeneſſe was in theſe, who 2 yet were brethren and countrimen to the Iſraelites: that to Gedeon their gouernour, by whom they were vpholden in peace, and who now was in the middeſt of this laſt worke of purſuing the Midianites, and reſcuing of Iſrael, they ſhould ſhew themſelues ſo barbarous and voide of all humanitie. Which was as if when the houſe top is on fire, they in the nether part ſhould lie ſtill, as though the fire could not hurt them: or as if a man ſtanding vpon the onely bough of an high tree, and thereby only kept from danger of falling, ſhould with his hatchet cut it downe, and by the fall of it breake his necke. This rudeneſſe and irreligiouſnes is in many brutiſh people at this

day, who are not onely no helpers in the wants and neceſſities of Gods people, either for ſoule or bodie, but hinderers, yea and gripers of them. Senſeleſſe bloks they are, who can neither heare, ſee, nor ſauour any good towards any: but as Nabal, who not only gaue not any thing to Dauids men, but rated them, and railed on them, thereby caſting a miſt (as it were) vpon his vnmercifulnes, that it might ſeeme the more tollerable.
                  And this we may further note here, in that they by their falſehood, ſubtiltie, 3 and daſtardlineſſe ſought to ſaue their liues, that wee might not marueile, when we ſee, that ſome are readie to betray, forſake, yea and lend their helping hand to perſecute their natiue Prince, countrey, and brethren, yea and religion it ſelfe, and all for the broken and ſhiuered hope of a tranſitorie life and ſafetie, which yet they miſſe alſo oft times, as is to be ſeene in that ſpeech of Mordecai to Heſter: If we remaine in this danger, doeſt thou looke to beſafe? For why, God reuengeth ſuch falſehood and cowardlineſſe, as our Sauiour ſaith: He that will ſaue his life ſhall loſe it. The vſe here of is, that though Matth. 10. 39. life be ſweete, yet it is not to be preſerued by ſubtiltie, falſehood, and prepoſterous feare, when the Lord will haue it to bee brought into triall, and requireth Note. it at our hands. Euen ſo in all other things, ſubteltie and daſtardlineſſe is to be auoided, and ſimplicitie and courage is to be practiſed. Of this more (God willing) after, in the conſpiracie of the men of Schechem with Abimilek.
                  
                  Now Gedeon threatneth the men of Succoth for their barbarouſnes and Verſ. 7. boldnes towards him their deliuerer, (as they had iuſtly deſerued) euen to teare their fleſh with the thornes of the deſert. The which he iuſtly did, being their Magiſtrate: for our Sauiour teacheth, that hee who ſcorneth but his brother or neighbour, is worthie of the higheſt degree of puniſhment. And much more this which was committed againſt the gouernour, might be thus met with, and requited, he not threatning them in wrath, but vpon good conſideration. I will deferre ſpeaking of the puniſhment, till the inflicting of it be mentioned: but let this be marked, that Gedeon did euen then ſpeake of preuailing againſt Zeba and Zalmunna without feare, as if he had alreadie ſubdued them: therefore he ſaith, When the Lord hath deliuered them into my hands, (as not doubting but that he would) then I will teare their fleſh with briers.
                  
                  In the meane time here let vs marke, that hee left not off the greateſt and moſt neceſſarie dutie which muſt of neceſſitie preſently be done, to wit, the purſuing of the Midianites: for the other, namely, the puniſhing of the men of Succoth, which was to be done alſo, but might better bee deferred. This wiſedome and diſcretion is to be learned of vs, that of duties to be done of vs, or euils to be auoided, with the danger and puniſhment that followeth Doct them, that be firſt done in both, which of neceſſitie muſt be firſt, and yet the other not neglected nor omitted, but in due ſeaſon regarded alſo.
                  Inſtances may be theſe, as there bee many other: to viſit parents in great ſickneſſe, which requireth preſent duty without delay, is to be preferred and performed, rather then to iourney about profit, though lawfull alſo, which may as well be done another time. Alſo to preferre hearing of a Sermon before common buſineſſe, if it be not to our greater hurt, &c. And this I ſay further, that not onely common actions muſt giue place to ſeaſons, but euen

one ſeaſon to another. In which our beſt rule is, that wee preferre that ſeaſon, which occaſioneth a worke of preſenteſt vſe: although ſome other dutie of an higher nature offer it ſelfe. Yea and here obſerue, that euen a ciuill ſeaſon may ſometime bee preferred before a religious. As for example, It falles out that a man is offered ſome fauour, and hope of releaſe out of ſome trouble which he is in, or reconciliation with his aduerſarie, (mightier then himſelfe) if he will vſe ſome preſent helpe, which elſe he cannot enioy: or it may be he hath a ſumme of money to pay vpon a ſet day, and that vpon a great forfeiture: or he is ſent vpon an errand of life and death: ſay it be to fetch the Chirurgian to let his maſter or parent blood, being in a deſperate caſe otherwiſe: or is commanded to ſerue the Prince, &c. Againſt theſe commeth ſome other opportunitie, as of hearing the word, of prayer in familie. Theſe bee all neceſſarie in their kinds, and due times, but in no wiſe ought to iuſtle aſide the other, more needfull to be done at that time, and theſe may be attended vnto, when leiſure from the other will giue leaue: the other are as the tide, which ſtaieth for no man. Therefore we muſt beware, leſt through our ignorance) though cloaked with honeſtie) or neglect, eſpecially wilfull contempt, we leaue the greater for the leſſer. Which cauſeth to the partie ſo offending, ſhame and ſorrow oft times. As, how ſhall he anſwere his follie, who neglecting the Phyſitian in the caſe before ſaid, ſhall thereby finde his wife, father, or maſter, dead, or paſt recouerie? Such caſes may be: and by one wee ſhould meaſure the reſt. Paul, vpon this ground, omitted the opportunitie of doing good in Aſia, Act. 20. and 21. that hee Act. 20. 16. and 21. 13. might goe to Ieruſalem. Let vs not be ouer much iuſt, Eccleſ. 7. He that wringeth the noſe, forceth blood, Prou. 30. Now to this I will ioyne a caueat, and that is, Prou. 30. 33. That vnder colour of preferring the greater dutie, wee take not occaſion to neglect the ſmaller afterward; which if we doe, wee ſhall bewray our ſelues rather to be ſubtill ſhifters and diſpenſers with our duties, boldly and looſely, then wiſe redeemers of the time. As for example: If the publike worſhip of God fall out vpon the time of our ordinarie priuate worſhip; let this yeeld this to the other: howbeit ſo, that wee readily returne to the priuate againe in his due place and time, and not pretend our diligence one way, to colour our negligence another way. A feaſt is better then an ordinarie: but the feaſt may better be ſpared, then a man ſhould be depriued of his ordinarie, and ſo ſtarue, all the weeke after. This I adde, becauſe ſo prepoſterous is our nature, that whereas one dutie ſhould make vs fitter for another, wee rather neglect the one for the other; as hearing for conference, meditation, or prayer. We ſucke poyſon out of ſweetnes, and waxe the more auke and vntoward, yea wearie of priuate, becauſe wee thinke wee haue ſufficiently quit our ſelues in the publike dutie, either of preaching or hearing. In like manner, it is not vnlawfull for a man to preferre the companie of the choice ſeruant of God either one or more (when we may haue the benefit of thē) before our callings, or attending to our families: but to bee carried ſo after this, that we ſhould grow to diſtaſte and neglect our callings, or the duties of Gods priuate ſeruice, is moſt inconuenient, yea argueth that ye diuel hath blinded vs with deluſion ſtrongly, either through our ignorance & ſimplicitie, or (which is worſe) becauſe we are weary of the moſt neceſſary dutie for continuance, vnder colour of our zeale for thoſe which fall out ſeldome.
                  
                     
Now as he preferred not the leſſe needfull dutie before that which was more needfull, ſo hee did not leaue it off (I meane the purſuing of the reſt of the Midianites) though hee might eaſily haue been diſcouraged by the vnthankfulneſſe of his brethren, and their ſcoffing at him, as many would haue done in ſuch a caſe. For mens vnthankfulneſſe and diſcouraging of vs with ſcoffes, doth cauſe vs many times to breake off good beginnings, whereas he was neither by the men of Ephraim, nor by theſe of Succoth, put out of his courſe. It ſhould teach vs, when we haue our warrant from God, for that which we goe about, or auoid, then not to regard, or ſo to regard temptations and diſcouragements, that we be hindered and broken off from our good courſe by them. As neither Eliſha was by mocking, Note. 2. King. 2. nor our Sauiour, or his Apoſtles by the oppoſition they found. 2. King 2. 25. Nay rather they were incouraged. For ſo Paul was by the diſſwaſiues of others, Actes 21. and Dauid by Michols ſcorne: and wee ought likewiſe ſo to Act. 21. 13. 2. Sam. 6. 22. be, when we ſee feweſt countenance or aſſiſt vs; ſaying as he did, I will yet be more vile for the Lords ſake, and then our reward ſhal be more then common. And as for this that we ſhall be counted medlers, and buſi-bodies, I anſwer: let God be more with vs then men by whoſe commandement we do meddle, (as they call it,) and be we aduiſed and perſwaded before, what ground we haue, that ſo we may reape the good and comfortable vſe thereof, and receiue the fruite of the promiſe. And this of the men of Succoth.
               
            
         
         
            THE FIFTIE TWO SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw I will goe forward with the reſt of the text that remaineth, Verſ. 8. from the eight verſe in theſe words: [And he went thence to Penuel] and ſo forth, as they are to be read before the laſt Sermon. Here we may ſee another diſcouragement and repulſe that Gedeon ſuſtained by the men of Penuel: for he being with his ſouldiers faint and weary, was denied bread not only by thē of Succoth, as wee haue ſeene, but by the men of Penuel alſo, as appeareth in this verſe. For to them he went in the faintnes and wearines of himſelf and his ſouldiers, and had the repulſe: whereby he might eaſily haue been tempted, and brought to thinke and feare, that God did not approue of his iourney, but did ſet himſelfe againſt him. For ſo Note. we are wont to conclude by the ill ſucceſſe we haue euen in good attempts, eſpecially when the lets be forcible, many and diuers, and one in the necke of another: as Iobes afflictions were, when among hard meſſages brought to him of other calamities that were befalne him, this was one that the fire

of God was fallen from heauen, and had burnt vp the ſheepe and the ſeruants, as if God had been againſt him. So that we may learne by this, that things ſometime may goe ſo contrary to our deſire, liking, and expectation, and that in duties which God requireth, and will haue to be done of vs, as if he were not with vs, but againſt vs, yea as if hee would croſſe vs in them of ſet purpoſe. Our dutie here is to looke what God bids vs doe, as the man of God ſent from Iuda ſhould haue done, who was drawne by the old Prophet of Bethel contrary to Gods commandement, to eate there. But indeed the caſe is not alway alike, when ſuch difficulties befall vs: for ſometime we 1. King. 13. 19. may more clearely ſee cauſe thereof, then at other. For it may bee the ſame mans caſe, at one time to doe a good action, yet in an euill and inconuenient manner: and at another time to be well occupied, and take a good thing in hand, and doe it in a good manner: in both kinds it may fall out, that he hath many diſcouragements. If things ſucceed not with him, whē he goeth about them in the beſt manner, that is, the latter of theſe two; What then? may not the Lord trie his faith and patience, by ſo croſſing him? And in the firſt kind, much more I may ſay, what maruell, if the Lord croſſe him, when he hath done a good thing in a bad manner, to the end he may call himſelfe to a more due examination of himſelfe, and amend that which was amiſſe, ere he take in hand ſuch holy duties? It was Gods wil that the eleuen Tribes ſhould fight againſt Beniamin: but were they perſons for their true repentance Iudg. 20. fit for that buſineſſe? yea and for all their zeale they wanting the principall; to wit, faith; that God would bee with them, did they not goe to worke amiſſe? was there not great cauſe therefore why the Lord ſhould fight as faſt againſt them (to driue them to repentance for their reuoltings from him) as they fought againſt Beniamin? And to teach them that they wanted meekeneſſe, loue and diſcretion to temper their feruent reuenge withall, that ſo they might doe the holy worke of God in an holy manner? Therefore in ſuch a caſe let men be contented, nay glad, if God croſſe them, that they may the better ſpie out what poyſoneth their beſt duties and deſires, as pride, raſhnes, boldneſſe, and learne hereby, meekeneſſe, humilitie, repentance, feare, &c. for God doth iuſtly ſuffer many diſcouragements to be vpon ſuch, (as he did alſo oft times deale ſo with the Iſraelites going vp to Canaan out of Egypt, Exod. 3.) that they may ſtay their courſe, in any euill Exod. 3. 19. attempts, and proceed more aduiſedly and commendably in their doings. But it falleth out ſometime, as I ſaid before, that ſore and great difficulties ſtand vp in mens way, not vnlike to Gedeons: wherein the Lord deales with his, as if he ſending them on a iourney, would make heauen and earth to be againſt them in their trauels, which is greatly to their admiration and aſtoniſhment. As who would haue ſaid that Dauid had been choſen of God to be king, when yet the promiſe thereof, was oft renued and confirmed to him, ſeeing his diſcouragements were ſo many and ſtrong that he met with? whereas Saul came to his kingdome eaſily & without trouble? And in ſuch caſes, wherein we haue ſo much to diſmay vs, yet Satan is euer at hand alſo, to worke vpon our weakenes, and to ſet vs much more backward; eſpecially when wee ſhall bee brought to thinke, Gods deeds ſeeme contrary to his words and promiſe, as the death of the Shunamites child, which yet had bin giuen her as an vnlooked for bleſſing.
            
               
Now when it pleaſeth God to trie vs, by ſeeming to ſet ſuch barres in our waies, few of vs are wiſe inough to ſee, or at leaſt, rightly to conſider, why it is thus with vs, and why God ſuffereth things ſo to trouble vs: but as though wee had thereby iuſt cauſe to complaine of his doing, and to expoſtulate Note. with him; we begin to doubt how he wil make good his promiſe to vs, and whether we may go forward in the good courſe in which we haue begun: yea, and we are impatient (perhaps) or much diſquieted at the leaſt, (if we doe not alſo fret and fume) and ſo are diſcouraged from our good beginnings. Whereby we may ſee our froth rather then faith, which ſeemed before to bee good ſubſtance, and feele the ſtinch of our vnſauourie hearts, which vpon ſmall occaſion caſt out ſuch euill ſmelles. And yet herein wee differ from Gedeon, that, as he was found in his diſcouragements and croſſes to be of farre greater courage and confidence then wee; ſo his triall was in great matters, and ours but in trifles for the moſt part.
            And not onely when wee bee croſſed and hindred in good actions we do thus, but if we haue but ſome one let in our way, as euen in our common buſineſſe, ſuch diſtemperature, as I haue ſpoken of, ſhall poſſeſſe vs: or if we haue loſt ſomething, though of ſmall valew, yea though it be but only miſſing and out of the way: or if we be hindred by the weather which is ordinary, or (as oft it falleth out) through our own raſhneſſe only, as when we Note. 
               
                  〈…〉
                ſtumble and hurt our foot againſt a ſtone, what ſhould we then bee like to do, if in going about any duty, we ſhould haue ſo many and great lets in the way, and croſſings of vs, as may eaſily meet with vs, and thoſe alſo as it were ſent from God to reſiſt vs? It is therefore the ſingular and onely grace of God to inable vs to belieue and bee perſwaded, that hee doth oft times ſuch things to trie vs, and that we may ſhew foorth the grace of faith and patience that is in vs; and therefore we are to hold our peace, ſeeing he hath done it. And ſuch hinderances and croſſings fall out ſometimes, when we are going to prayer priuately, or in our familie, or to the hearing of the word preached, or to receiue the ſacrament, &c. from which no wiſe body will ſay, we ſhould be withdrawne by any pretence, as though wee pleaſed not God therein, ſeeing euen in them ſome lets do riſe vp in the way to hinder vs. And the like we may obſerue in thoſe diſcouragements which are from within our ſelues. For example, when a Miniſter in his courſe of preaching, ſhall find ill meaſure at the hands of others, whoſe good he moſt ſeeketh, while they ſee not the purpoſe of God toward them; (as Moſes did by the Iſraelites when he was firſt ſent vnto them, Exod. 6.) or if they ſhall Exod. 6. 9. but deſpiſe Gods prouidence toward them, as the Phariſees are ſaid to haue Luke 15. 12. done, how (thinke we) is this like to worke vpon him? or (which is more) if he ſhall feele within himſelfe great vnfitneſſe, as Moſes did, Exod. 3. and Exod. 3. 10. ſome vnwillingneſſe, deadneſſe, drouſineſſe, or want of aſſiſtance from God in diſcharge of the worke of his miniſtery, (all which are great dampings to a man, who hath vſed the beſt meanes to furniſh himſelfe both with knowledge and conſcience) and yet euen the beſt ſometimes haue the proofe hereof in themſelues. What thoughts (thinke we) are like to ariſe in him in ſuch a caſe? Therfore if a man looke not for theſe, and if he be not reſolued before hand, that ſuch quailings of him may fall out, and alſo if hee be not armed againſt the temptations which may ariſe therefrom, it is wonderfull,

how the diuell may weaken his faith, and zeale, and ſlacken his purpoſe of diligence in the Lords worke. But on the other ſide, if in ſuch a caſe hee be able to ſtay himſelfe by conſidering that ſuch trials are vſual (more or leſſe) to the beſt ſeruants and Miniſters of God, (and alway haue been) who haue their ebbings aſwell as their flowings, (as Eliah, Paul, yea our Sauiour himſelfe had ſtrong diſcouragements,) what a ſingular benefit is this? Much more, if he hauing ouercome the firſt onſet, ſhall in the ſecond place meditate of the end which the Lord hath in abaſing him thus, (he being occupied in Gods owne worke) and that is, that hee may teach him humilitie, yea how to flee out of himſelfe and depend immediatly vpon the Lord for ſufficiencie and aſſiſtance; and not truſt to his own wit, ſtudy, memory, tongue, or gifts, (which others make their onely refuge, and therefore are often diſappointed) oh what gaine ſhall he reape thereby, and ſay with Paul, I am neuer fitter for Gods ſeruice then when I am loweſt in mine owne opinion: hereafter therefore if I boaſt, I wil boaſt of mine owne infirmities, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, in which the glory of God is moſt perfected and aduanced. 2. Cor. 12. 9. Verſ 9.
            
            
               Gedeon receiuing the like diſcourteſie and rude anſwer of the men of Penuel, as he had before of the men of Succoth, doth in like manner threaten them the throwing downe of their tower in which they ſo much gloried. And this threatning, ſeeing it was afterward put in execution, was a croſſe and diſcommoditie: which they did needleſly and by their owne ſin bring vpon themſelues. By which we may ſee, that many are authors and cauſers of their owne ſorrow and trouble, which need not haue been, and that by their ſinne, as ſtoutneſſe, wilfulneſſe, ſtiffeneckedneſſe, and other vndutifulneſſe, and rude behauiour, they doe (I ſay) bring vnſeaſonable affliction vpon themſelues, euen as theſe men of Succoth and Penuel here did. Wee know that peace with men, to liue without feare by them, is a great benefit, and ſoone loſt, and hardly recouered, men being wolues and lionlike one to another, eſpecially if they be prouoked, and moſt of all, when they haue authoritie and ſuperioritie one ouer another, and ſo may iuſtly vexe them who ſhal fal into their hands, by their wicked deſerts and leaud behauiour. Therfore all ſhould take heed how they prouoke one another in the leaſt maner, Gal. 5. laſt. as theſe did here.
            But lamentable it is, that the moſt men make breaches of their peace, and loſſe of their commodities, by rigour, crueltie, and by an high mind, and proud heart, not bearing the leaſt iniurie, but bending themſelues by and by to reuenge, looking for all good meaſure to bee offered them by others, but yeelding little or no kindneſſe againe: which peruerſeneſſe is alſo euen betwixt many couples in the married eſtate, which cauſeth continuall iarring and vnquietneſſe, whereas peace (a man would thinke) were fitter to be ſeene both betwixt them and all other, whom I ſpeake of. Which they are commanded to ſeeke with all men, as much as in them lieth, yea and to purſue and follow it, though it flee from them, yea and to buy peace, though it Heb. 12. 14. coſt them ſomewhat, but not to ſel it at any hand, much leſſe for trifles. Thus Abraham bought his peace of Lot. And let men learne to this end to know and conſider what they are; to the pulling downe of their pecocks feathers, Geneſ. 13. 9. euen earth, earth, earth, and if they bee weighed in an equall ballance, farre worſe then nothing. But of this I ſpake in verſe 4. of this Chapter.
            
               
               Gedeon goeth forward after the reſt of the Midianites, and findeth them Verſ. 10. 11. 12. 13. The clearing of theſe verſes.
                reſting themſelues in Carkor which was in the precinct of the Iſraelites, from whence they hoped to paſſe after that night, and ſo to eſcape. But Gedeon came vpon them on the backſide of theſe two cities, Iogbeah in the Tribe of Gad, Numb. 32. and Nobah in the halfe Tribe of Manaſſeh being Numb. 32. 35. & 32. 42. hard by, Num 22. And ſo the two Princes were ſuddenly ſtricken with aſtoniſhment and feare, and flying were taken, and the hoaſt ſmitten and ſlaine: with whom were many hangbies, as ſcullions and ſuch like that followed the army. And in that it is ſaid, that hee returned backe with the two Princes when the Sunne was riſen, it appeareth that the warre betwixt them was begun in the night, and in the ſame night was ended.
            By this latter victory of Gedeon, it is manifeſt, what great things through Gods bleſſing are brought to paſſe by faith, and the diligence, and vnweariedneſſe of men in their callings. This is the maine point contained in theſe Doct. out of all theſe verſes. verſes. Whereas delay and ſloth (for I put them together to ſhew what delaies I meane) are alwaies dangerous, euen as here if Gedeon had tarried to reſt himſelfe but one night by the way, hee had loſt all his labour, and the fruit of it, to wit, the deſtroying of theſe Midianites. So God to the diligent hath promiſed his bleſſing, and good ſucceſſe as Gedeon here found it. The men of Succoth and Penuel laughed him to ſcorne, but hee looked to God, and had an eye to his promiſe, which was, that he would giue them into his hands: and yet (as we ſe
                  •
               ) he was neuer awhit the bolder to preſume therof, without diligent vſing of the meanes. It was as vnlike, (nay much more vnlikely) that Dauid ſhould haue ſmitten downe Goliah, that Noah ſhould 1. Sam. 17. 51. Heb. 11. 7. haue ſaued the world by the Arke: and many other ſuch things to haue bin brought to paſſe, as the conquering of the Nations by Ioſhua: but they all, Ioſhua 10. &c. when they belieued God, that he would doe that which he promiſed, went to worke with great care and diligence to ſerue Gods prouidence, ſeeing he wrought by meanes (as he doth ſtill) and ſo they preuailed, and obtained that which they ſought.
            And this was the power of God through faith, they truſting and reſting in him through the Mediator to come, ſo it is no leſſe in vs, (for I will briefly apply it againe, though I haue ſtood largely on this point before, a new occaſion being offered) that we outgrow many lets and diſcouragements by the ſame our faith, though wee bee priuie that there is otherwiſe nothing in vs, and that (when ſometimes it hath ſeemed to vs almoſt impoſſible) the Lord hath done much for vs, and wrought great things by vs, while wee haue, although but weakely and poorely gone to work, whether we reſpect our faith, or our labour, which is the fruit of it. And we hauing been diligent to approoue our ſelues in both; we haue found the truth of that Scripture 1. Iohn 5. 4. verified in vs, which ſaith, that faith ouercommeth the difficulties that are in the world; and haue growne to the contempt of many ſinnes, and the ſubduing of them, in great meaſure, which had ſometime preuailed againſt vs; and to be better heartned againſt afflictions, and to get ſtrength of hope Note. Rom. 5. 4. by experience for the time to come. But to ſee how ſoone Moſes, Ioſhua, and Gedeon here grew ſtrong in faith, as in a few daies, which we are going about many yeeres, this ought as to humble vs, for that we are ſo farre behind them, ſo to incourage vs, looking duly vnto this, how graciouſlie God

aſſiſted them. And ſo (to apply this to the Sacrament) we haue communion with God and with Chriſt therein, and are much confirmed thereby in the couenant he hath made with vs, by our diligence and faithfulnes in preparing our ſelues thereto, which they that beleeue not think abſurd, and more then needs, to looke after. And to conclude this point (ſeeing I haue ſhewed the neceſſitie of it, and the euill and hurt that falleth out on the contrary, I meane by looſenes, idleneſſe, and vnbeliefe, in Chriſtians, by many occaſions heretofore) this I adde, that the cauſe of ſo great difference in the degree and meaſure of grace and goodneſſe, which wee obſerue in many profeſſors, is this, that ſome are painfull in hearing, vſing good companie, marking, with their hearts deeply ſet vpon the ſame, remembring, and making vſe of their knowledge, watching thereunto with prayer, &c. whereas others Note. comber thēſelues ſo much with other matters, that there is no roome or leiſure left for theſe. They looke to thriue ſpiritually, whether they take paines or no, ſleeping or working. It is a true ſaying of a Father, fit to be vrged vpon ſuch: He that made thee without thee, will not ſaue thee without thee. He will not ſaue thee for thy labours ſake, but by thy labour. They that gathered more Manna then their fellowes, got nothing thereby: but it fareth otherwiſe here: gather much and haue much, labour little and haue little, euen as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of another thing on the contrary, he that ſoweth ſparingly, ſhall reape ſparingly. As we mete to the Lord, ſo will he meaſure out to vs againe. He that laboureth not, eate
                  ••
                not: but he that laboureth much, enioyeth the fruite thereof: ſome thirtie, ſome ſixtie, ſome an hundred fold: euen as his diligence is. Oh it is ſtrange to ſee how men ſet themſelues to work in earthly buſineſſe, wherein yet they haue no abſolute Note. promiſe of thriuing, becauſe faith the chiefe help is wanting, but here where the Lord hath tyed himſelfe to bleſſe their labour with abundance, men haue no liſt to ſtirre. A mediocritie of wealth contenteth few, and that maketh them ſo endleſſe and reſtleſſe in their deſires and traulles: but the commonneſt meaſure of grace pleaſeth them beſt, becauſe that is gotten with leaſt trouble. It is fearefull that men ſhould doe ſo much for the fulfilling of their luſts: and ſo little that they might excell in goodneſſe. But their reward is thereafter. And in the meane ſeaſon God puts as great difference betwix ſuch, as there is betweene Alexander, Caeſar or the like Captaines (who were vnwearied alſo in their conqueſts) and Gedeon, or others like, who fought the Lords battels, and laboured therein by faith in his promiſes. Now it followeth.
            
               14 And tooke a ſeruant of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him, and hee wrote to him the Princes of Succoth, and the Elders thereof, euen ſeuentie and ſeuen men.
               
               15 And he came vnto the men of Succoth, and ſaid, Behold Zeba and Zalmunna, by whom ye vpbrayed me, ſaying, Are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna already in thy hands, that we ſhould giue bread vnto thy wearie men?
               
               16 Then he tooke the Elders of the citie, and thornes of the wilderneſſe, and briers, and did teare the men of Succoth with them.
               
               17 Alſo he brake downe the tower of Penuel, and ſlew the men of the citie.
               
            
            
               
NOw in theſe verſes following it is ſhewed that when Gedeon had taken Verſ. 14. 15. 16. 17. the Princes of Midian, and was returned to Succoth, he ſeeks diligently to know the names of the chiefe men and Elders thereof: and he brought and ſhewed the Princes Zeba and Zalmunna vnto them: for hee kept them aliue, not to make his boaſt of them, but that he might ſhew them that God had deliuered them into his hands, as hee made no doubt thereof before, that ſo they might be the more aſhamed and accuſed for that which they had done to him and his men, in denying them bread. And thereupon hee did vnto them as he had threatned, for he tare their fleſh, to wit, of them of Succoth, with the thornes and briers of the wilderneſſe: and then ouerthrew the tower of the men of Penuel, and ſlew the citizens, either becauſe they inſulted more arrogantly then the men of Succoth did, or elſe becauſe they reſiſted Gedeon, truſting in their tower, and ſo were ſlaine. Whether they of Succoth died by the paine & puniſhment, (as it is moſt like) or whether their fleſh was onely torne, and yet life remaining in them, though the ſtorie doth not declare; yet we cannot be ignorant, how ſore and extreame the paine was. What kinde of execution was done vpon the men of Penuel themſelues in putting them to death, the ſtorie ſetteth not downe, but as it is ſure they were ſlaine, ſo it is (not without good probabilitie) that the other were torne to death alſo.
            
               Gedeon meeting this young man, cauſeth him to ſet downe the names of 
                  The cleering of verſe 14. the chiefe Elders and gouernours of Succoth in writing, (as it might be the names of the Aldermen and citizens) for he would not truſt his owne memorie in ſo waightie a matter. And this hee did, becauſe hee would not flie vpon any in raſhnes and anger, and would be ſure by that his aduiſed deliberation, to puniſh onely thoſe who were guiltie, and thoſe were the ancients of the citie. As Salomon alſo was very attentiue in hearing the cauſe of 1. King. 3. 23. Doct.
                the harlots. To teach vs our dutie in this point, that when any fall into our hands to be corrected by vs, wee doe not at any time haſtily in an angrie mood, and without due conſideration, vſe correction, but weigh the cauſe rightly, and not reuenge our ſelues, by ſatisfying our brutiſh affections vpon the perſons: yea and to let them alſo ſee iuſt cauſe why they be corrected. And in this wee reſemble the Lord himſelfe, of whom Abraham ſaith, It is farre from the Iudge of the whole world to deſtroy the righteous with the wicked. 
               Geneſ. 18. 25. Geneſ. 18.
            It is an hard thing to be ruled by the word of God in correcting others, whereas fleſh looketh to nothing, but to the will and reuenge of it ſelfe, and not to the bettering of the partie, and the good example of other, and diſcharge of a good conſcience before God. Therefore S. Paul hath giuen a Col. 3. 21. good rule to all by teaching one kind of correcters, namely fathers, that they ſhould not be bitter to their children: euen as Achan in a waightie caſe was wiſely handled, and kindly dealt with by Ioſhua in a matter of life and death, Ioſu. 7. 19. and was regarded in, and concerning his ſoule, when ſore puniſhment was inflicted vpon his bodie. Sundrie waies doe men ſhroud this curſed humour, vnder the falſe habit of zeale or lawfull ſeueritie: ſometime to couer their ambition, as Iehu in killing Ahabs poſteritie; ſometime couetouſnes, as Saul in ſlaying ſome of the Amalekites: ſometime pride and reuenge, as the Iſraelites in warring vpon the Beniamites. All of them failed of the ground,

end, manner or meaſure in executing the correction: all which being neglected, and not obſerued, doth marre the action, be it neuer ſo lawfull in it ſelfe and neceſſarie. As when the offending partie ſeeth not the cauſe of his correction, or is cruelly handled by the correcter, who maketh nor the end of his correction or puniſhment to be the ſauing of the partie, and to make the ſinne odious that he is puniſhed for, and the ſame an example to other. And here is iuſtly condemned the doing of them who ſay, they cannot correct Note. but in anger, and while their hearts are exaſperated againſt the partie, is if they ſhould ſay, they can neuer doe it rightly or without ſinne, whereas God ſaith, Be angrie, but ſinne not: for anger doth nothing well. Although Epheſ. 4. 26. what neede the word of God or the examples of the Saints bee vſed to ſhame them, whom heathens may ſhame? Of whom ſome preſcribe rules to ſuch as are angrie, how they may bridle anger from r
                  •
               ſh outrage: and one among the reſt told his ſeruant, I had ſurely beaten thee, but that I was angrie. This doctrine is to be applied to Magiſtrates, Parents, Schoolemaſters, and other ſuperiors, namely ſtep-mothers, and ſuch as haue rule ouer poore orphanes, or any other, whom it little becommeth to excuſe their own corruption by the fault or deſert of the partie guiltie: who though hee haue but his due, yet the puniſher being no fit perſon to reuenge by his intemperate heate, may deſerue a greater puniſhment at Gods hand, euen of a murtherer (in heart) of his brother. And we ſee the effect of ſuch ſeueritie, is to make the partie corrected to contemne it, and waxe deſperate, not penitent, which is the peruerting of the right end of correction.
            By Gedeons ſhewing of theſe Princes to the men of Succoth and Penuel, Verſ. 15. to their ſhame and aſtoniſhment (who thought they had been farre enough out of their hands, and therefore ſcoffed at his purſuing and following after them) I ſay, by this, wee may note how God oft times turneth the taunts, flouts, threatnings, curſes, and iniuries which the wicked doe vexe Gods children withall, he turneth them to their owne ſhame and euill, and to the comfort of his owne people ſo abuſed and wronged by them: as here theſe mocked Gedeon, liuing and walking according to the life of faith, and going about the Lords worke carefully: who now hauing ouercome the Midianites thereby, theſe wicked mockers are put to ſhame and paine, yea and to death alſo. And in like manner it fell out to Shemei when he had curſed Dauid, to Zenacherib ſcorning at Ezechia, for truſting in his God, yea and for blaſpheming God himſelfe, alſo to the Phariſees who ſcorned Chriſt vpon the Croſſe, but after his reſurrection were abaſhed, and to Haman deadly hating Mordecai the faithfull ſeruant of God. Now if this appeare thus often times euen heere in this world, how much more at the comming of the ſolemne and great day, when God ſhall iudge them? For when they ſee the Lord with draw himſelfe from his people neuer ſo little, (wherein hee doth no more then he did to his only ſonne in whom he was well pleaſed) o
                  •
                behold them in ſome diſgrace and abaſement in the world: then they inſult and crow ouer them, as the Babylonians and curſed Edomites did ouer the Iewes in captiuitie: but when as beyond expectation, they ſee them deliuered, Pſal. 137. 3, 7. yea and that the Lord graceth them, giues them fauour, reſtores them to libertie, and bleſſeth them with many benefits; then I ſay, they turne their ſcornes into admiration, and are aſhamed of their vnreaſonable diſgracing Note.
               
them. But further, if (beſides this) the Lord ſhall pluck themſelues downe, and humble them by the like afflictions, then they wiſh themſelues in their caſe euen with the hardeſt and worſt conditions.
            So that we haue good cauſe abundantly to be contented to ſeeke to liue by faith in the ſonne of God, truſting in, and cleauing to him and his word aboue all other things, eſteeming our ſelues farre more rich thereby (euen when wee are counted moſt fooliſh and vile of the ſcornefull world) then they in their floriſhingeſt eſtate and condition: for why? we reſt on God, and waite by hope, hauing him on our ſide, and are not diſappointed: they Pſalm. 20. 7. caſt all (as the deſperate Dicer) on blinde hope, likelihoods, and haphazard, and ſo are deceiued of their expectation. They haue a time of boaſting and Note. glorying, which deceiueth them, and maketh them thinke, that their iollitie and proſperitie will laſt alwaies, when yet it changeth as the weather, and continueth not in one eſtate, and they haue no wiſedome to conſider it, or their end which ſhall be worſt of all. Gods people haue a time of mourning, Pſal. 126. 6. but the end ſhall be reioycing: as here Gedeon bringeth before his vpbraiders Zeba and Zalmunna with triumph and glorie.
            And with this we may alſo ſee, that the euill which they either doe not once dreame of, or which they thinke to be farre off from them, and make a mocke of it, is neere vnto them. According to that which the Apoſtle ſaith to the Theſſalonians, When men crie peace, peace, then commeth ſudden deſtruction 
               1. Theſ. 5. 3. 
               vpon them, euen as the ſorrow of a woman at her trauell. Chorah and his companie, Benadad with many other are examples hereof. So that there is no heed to be taken how iocond they be, when they be aloft, or haue their hearts deſire, neither neede any to be afraid at the beholding of their greatnes, for why euen while it abideth, it is departing, and while it ſtandeth, it is Eccleſ. 5. 8. in falling, for when they be at their beſt and greateſt, there is a greater then they, who is working their ouerthrow. But who is warned by others woe? But of this briefly, becauſe often.
            
               Gedeon hauing well ſhamed theſe men of Succoth and Penuel, doth to Verſ 16. 17. them now as he had threatned, verſe 7. and 9. that is: he to
                  •
               e the fleſh of the men of Succoth with thornes, and caſt downe the tower of the men of Penuel (euen their ſtrong hold that they gloried in) he caſt it downe (I ſay) to the ground and ſlew them. And might not both theſe puniſhments haue been auoided, thinke we? Yes, and ſo had been but for their owne ſinne: I meane their vndutifulnes, boldnes, ſtout and ſturdie ſtomacks, and their ſlineſſe, hoping if Midian had preuailed, to haue gained by their vnnaturall dealing with their brethren, denying bread vnto them.
            Oh therefore how lamentable is it to ſee, how men bring ſhame, ſorrow, Doct. and deſtruction vpon themſelues by their wicked qualities, and bad behauiour, as wilfulnes, proud ſtomackes, crueltie, curriſh and vnkinde dealings, and ſuch other, without the which they might haue enioyed their peace and welfare euen to their hearts deſire, and good contentment, yea and the Note. fauour of God alſo: for it is nothing but mens ſin that keepeth many good things from them, and heapeth many contrarie euils vpon them. As Achan by ſtealing, Dathan by rebelling againſt Gods faithfull ſeruant Moſes, and Iſrael by oft reuolting from God, and falling from their couenant, whereof this booke is too plaine a proofe againſt them.
            
               
So ſome among vs, are vndone by their idlenes, vnthriftineſſe, and needleſſe ſpending, ſome by their vnfaithfulnes, and deceitful dealing, loſe their credit, and being no more truſted, come to naught: ſome by their oppreſſion ſundry waies, are on their death bed ſo terrified, that whereas by making reſtitution of a ſhilling, noble, or a pounds valew, while it ſhould haue been done, it might haue brought great eaſe to them: they would now in Note. their terror reſtore ten for one, and yet cannot be quieted neither. So ſome for adultrie are brought to ſhame, and to worſe ſhould bee, if they had their due: and other by ſpitefull, malicious, and reuenging ſpirits, make themſelues odious to all, and they procure ſmall ioy to themſelues. And to adde ſomething touching the particular ſinne of theſe men, which was politike ſhifting and ſubtelty in playing the Newters, while the battell depended in an vncertaintie of iſſue: this I ſay, that of all other kind of offenders, theſe ſlie and wily companions are leaſt pitied of men, when the Lord entrappeth them in their owne ſnare. Sooner would a man let looſe a Lion (if he durſt) out of the pit, or the danger wherein it is, then the Foxe: becauſe (beſides the hurtfulneſſe) it hath ſo many ſhifts to conueigh it ſelfe from danger, and is ſo hardly catcht. Who pitieth theſe men of Succoth and Penuel? becauſe they in ſeeking by ſubteltie to preſerue their liues, iuſtly were beaten with their owne rodde, and loſt them. Whereas he who falles into danger either in a good quarrell, or in his ſimplicitie, is either ſaued by God, or pitied in his ruine by men. And is not this a double miſerie, when men are in diſtreſſe, to heare others ſay of them, they are well ſerued? Heathens haue obſerued this cowardly ſubteltie (for who is more ſubtill, then hee that is moſt fearefull) to be euer vnproſperous: and ſeldome euen in forren diſſentions of Kings and States, haue they ſped well, who haue held off, and plaid the ſpectators of other mens ſucceſſe. For whoſoeuer hath got the vpper hand, they haue ſmarted: if they whom they denied to ſuccour, they are made the prey of them whom they forſooke: if the other, yet they ſmart alſo, in that they did onely forbeare for their ſakes, and not actually helpe. So vnnaturall is it counted, in a common calamitie, to betray one enemie to another, or not to helpe when we are able. Which I ſpeake not to excite men to parts taking alway, in other mens iarres: but to ſhew how iuſtly theſe were handled for their craftineſſe, in denying helpe, not to ſtrangers, but their owne captaine. And euen ſo, how odious doth God make Newters and Temporiſers in religion? they are hated of Papiſt and Proteſtant, and are as curſed, as he that is hanged betwixt heauen and earth. Touching the vſe of this, and how to abhorre this ſinne, reade before in the 2. doct. of the 6. verſe.
            And theſe with like puniſhments for the like iniquities, doe not light vpon other that are plaine, vpright, mercifull, and in a word, religiouſly circumſpect in their carriage, and who make conſcience of their waies. I doe not deny, but that the beſt doe oft meete with ſharpe perſecutions, but they are for good cauſes: or elſe their troubles be but fatherly trials and corrections, for their good: ſo S. Peter ſaith, If ye ſuffer for righteouſneſſe ſake, bleſſed are yee: 
               1. Pet. 3. 14. 17. And againe, If the will of God be that ye ſuffer, it is better that ye ſuffer for wel-doing then for euill. So that we ſee, ſuch haue to beare off the ſharpenes and painefulneſſe of their ſufferings, by their reioycing in the Lord, and by the bleſſed

eſtate that they are in: whereas the other haue their puniſhments, as forerunners of greater, euen here before hand, as the Apoſtle ſaith. Indeed full often (I confeſſe) they ſhelter themſelues to men-ward by their greatneſſe, and ſhift well inough when meane perſons go to wracke. According to the prouerbe, Great men dote, and poore men ſmart. But when God (who is higher then they, as Salomon ſaith) calleth thē to account, (as being their only competent Iudge, when they haue broken through other iudgements, by fauor, feare or bribes, as great flies breake through cop-webbes) then they meete with their match. As alas who ſeeth not what waies there are to bring this about? As diſpleaſure of prince, factions and partakings, treacheries challenges, and highneſſe of ſpirits. As our owne Engliſh Chronicles for theſe 2. or 300 yeeres, plentifully witneſſe. Now if the Lord ſpare not great ones; let all fawning flatterers who ſeeke to ſuch, and willingly offer themſelues as inſtruments of oppreſſion, cruelty and wrong, becauſe they looke to be ſafe vnder their wings from puniſhment (as Ziba and ſuch like) let ſuch feare I ſay: for their patrons ſhall not ſhelter themſelues, howſoeuer they (no doubt) thinke otherwiſe. And this be ſaid of this point, for the fuller handling of that which I noted vpon the 9. verſe to the ſame purpoſe.
            And here we may more particularly marke by the executing of puniſhment vpon theſe chiefe men of the citie, rather then vpon the common citizens, that as the greateſt in place and authoritie haue many priuiledges aboue Doct. 2. in verſ. 16. 17. the meaner perſons, both in credit, wealth, eſtimation, and commanding others: ſo the Lord brings them foorth to the terrour of inferiours, and they lie open to greater danger, hurt and loſſe thereby, then others doe, and in time it breaketh out and appeareth, if they doe ill behaue themſelues in their places. This is a great cauſe why men who are aboue other, ſhould carrie themſelues humbly and not proudly, as too many of them doe: and alſo looke well to themſelues in euery part of their dutie: for a time will Note. come when they ſhall pay for all, and when their eſtate ſhall be ſuch, as the meaneſt vnder them, would be full loth to be in their roome. And to ſuch I ſay as Dauid in Pſalm. 2. Be wiſe now therefore, ſerue the Lord in feare: and kiſſe 
               Pſalme 2. 10. 
               the ſonne, yee mightie ones, leſt he cruſh you in peeces: Happie then are all they that trust in him, if his wrath be kindled. Alſo the inferiors ſhould here learne, not to murmure againſt them, becauſe they are ſo farre aboue them, for they ſometime goe vnder more ſore and heauy puniſhments, then they themſelues doe: yea and though they behaue themſelues commendably in their places, yet God oft correcteth them more then ſome others, leſt they ſhould kick vp their heele againſt him by meanes of their wealth and greatneſſe: as it is too common a thing for ſuch to do. So that as God hath his number among all eſtates both high and low; ſo he nurtureth them all by afflictions according to his heauenly wiſdome, that they may ſafely in their appointed time be gathered to their fathers. But here being a fit place to make an end, I will ſtay for this time.
         
         
            
            
               THE FIFTY THREE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 18. Then ſaid he to Zeba and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye ſlew as Tabor? And they anſwered, As thou art ſo were they: euery one was like the children of a King.
                  
                  19. And he ſaid, They were my brethren, euen my mothers children: As the Lord liueth, if ye had ſaued their liues, I would not ſlay you.
                  
                  20. Then he ſaid to Iether his firſt borne ſonne, Vp, and ſlay them: but the boy drew not his ſword, for he feared; becauſe he was yet but young.
                  
                  21. Then Zeba and Zalmunna ſaid, Riſe thou, and fall vpon vs: for as the man is, ſo is his ſtrength: And Gedeon aroſe, and ſlew Zeba and Zalmunna, and tooke away the ornaments that were on their Camels necks.
                  
               
               
                  NOw after all this was done, it followeth, (according to the The ſenſe. diuiſion of the Chapter in the beginning of it) how Gedeon executed puniſhment vpon the two Kings of Midian: whom after hee had ſhewed them to the Princes of Succoth and Penuel, hee purpoſed to puniſh. And firſt, ſeeing they were great men, he ſhewed courteſie to them, in entring ſpeech with them, though hee needed not ſo to haue done. And he asked what manner of men they were, whom they ſlew at mount Tabor: they anſwered, they were like him, and ſo goodly and well fauoured, as if they had been a Kings ſonnes. Whereby it appeareth, that Gedeon was a man of ſingular fauour and perſon. When thoſe men were ſlaine the ſtorie ſetteth not downe, but ſeeing the Midianites inuaded the land of Iſrael in the harueſt time euery yeere, it was like that then they did it. He anſwered, if they had not killed them, he would haue ſaued them aliue. And he commanded his eldeſt ſonne to fall vpon them, but he durſt not, being yet young: and they likewiſe ſcorned that, and bad him doe it himſelfe. So Gedeon did it.
               This enquiring into the act before mentioned by Gedeon, was, that they might ſee, that they iuſtly ſuffered. For, notwithſtanding this, he might and ought to haue put them to death, for that God had appointed them thereto, being grieuous enemies of the Church: and the killing of the other two princes Oreb and Zeb (who yet ſlew not his brethren) is commended in the Pſalme; therefore he ought to haue ſlaine them euen for that cauſe. This Pſalme 83. 2. ſpeech of his therfore, that he would not haue killed them, but for that they ſlew his brethren, though pitifull, yet was ſudden and paſſionate, and cannot be iuſtified. So that howſoeuer they might haue pleaded for themſelues otherwiſe: ſure it is their mouthes were ſtopped that they could aske no fauour,

in this reſpect ſeeing they had ſlaine his brethren: and his enquiring into that action was commendable in him, if he had proceeded no further, nor ſo diepely engaged himſelfe by oath.
               This is one thing that is here to bee noted, that as Gedeon did it is meete, Doct. verſ. 18. that all who are to be puniſhed, ſhould ſee iuſt cauſe thereof, by examining them, and to cleare other, who haue been ſuſpected: as was done by Ioſhua at the commandement of God to Achan, and ſo the innocent ſhall haue no cauſe to complaine. It is good therfore in reſpect of them, that they may not feare, they ſhall bee purſued without cauſe: and alſo let the guiltie ſee, how they ſhall be dealt with, to wit, that they ſhall be brought to ſhame and puniſhment openlie. But here partialitie muſt be farre off, and anger, and al euill affection remooued.
               And this is to be ſpecially conſidered of all ſuch as ſhall execute puniſhment vpon malefactors, or vſe correction towards ſeruants, children, or ſuch like. And as for ſuch, whoſe ſinnes are manifeſt to themſelues or other, and yet not puniſhable by mans law, God will meet with them, and come againſt them in his good time, their own conſciences giuing them to vnderſtand, that they doe that which is wicked in his ſight, and that they ſhall bee iudged for it, if they ſpeedily repent not. But of this I haue ſpoken more largely in his enquiring of the Elders of Succoth, as touching their fact in ſlaying them at Tabor in their iollitie, more (God willing) ſhall bee ſaid in the next replie of Gedeon.
               
               Their anſwer, that they were goodly men, as if they had been the ſonnes 
                     Doct. 2. of a King, doth teach vs, that many for all their outward prerogatiues that they haue aboue other men, in fauour, birth, manhood, or honour and wealth, yet haue no hold of them, yea rather, they are depriued of them in an houre, though they hoped and pleaſed themſelues in looking for the continuance of them for many yeeres, as may be ſeene in theſe that ſlew and were ſlaine. So was Siſera ſoone cut off, and Eglon, Iezabel and many others. For they lie open to many more dangers, then meaner perſons, eſpecially being wicked, as I haue ſaid. All that are wiſe therefore, will beware how they pleaſe themſelues, or reſt in any earthly thing here below, but vſe it ſoberly for their owne and the good of others; being like in this changeable world, to change alſo, and that daily, and their pompe and glory to turne to vanitie: and in the middeſt of all painted felicitie of this world, happy is he onely, who glorieth and reioyceth in the Lord. Which doctrine (I confeſſe) is often iterated, but when I conſider the great neceſſitie thereof, and how contrary the moſt mens practiſe is thereto: I conclude, that it is the wiſdome of the Spirit of God to giue occaſion of the ſame almoſt in euery ſentence, ſometime and oft in ſome chapter, to the end that the commonneſſe of the ſin might bee ſomewhat checked by the often repeating and reproouing therof. And ſo it becommeth them that are wiſe to iudge, and prepare their appetite where the holy Ghoſt hath prouided ſauoury meate and inſtruction, and not to be wearie of hearing, where he is not wearie of teaching.
               And here (as the fitteſt place) let vs behold theſe deſperate Princes, how they are brought forth to their anſwere for a fact which they little dreamt they ſhould euer heare of againe, or anſwer too: namely, for killing of thoſe men whom they ſlew at mount Tabor. Tuſh, they in their iollitie had put them

to the ſword, with the reſt of the company, no reſpect had of perſons (nay it is like the rather, becauſe they ſeemed to bee of note and worth) and all to make boaſt of their gallant ſpirits, victorious, braue, and proud ſtomacks: not vnlike to him, whoſe glory it was to cut off the thumbes of ſeuentie Iudg. 1. 7. Princes, and put them like dogges vnder his bord to gather crummes. As touching the abuſe of mens proſperitie I haue oft ſpoken, and of the right vſe thereof: but here one word (more particularly) let me adde to warne men, how they ought to demeane themſelues in their places, when by reaſon either of their great ſucceſſe, vnlooked for preferment, or what other occaſion ſoeuer their corrupt fleſh might take to forget themſelues: I ſay, let men beware what they do in their iolly, luſty, or merry moodes, when they 3. Doct. ver. 18. thinke they haue the world in a ſling, and none may controll them: euen then, I ſay, let them controll themſelues, and take heed leſt any inſolent, diſdainefull, cruell, iniurious, words or deeds, breake out of the ſuperfluitie of Note. their pride and brauerie: which hereafter either God or man might bring forth againſt them, when they ſhall bee abaſed and in meaner condition. Which counſell I giue not to them who are in theſe pangs, (for I know it little bootes to tell a drunken man, You haue done that in your drunkenneſſe which you will repent of being ſober) but to arme men both againſt all ſuch vnlawfull occaſions, as the moſt ſeeke after, to the end they may vtter this ſtomack of theirs, as gaming, drinking, challenges, quarrels, contentions and ſuites of law, &c. as alſo againſt the corrupt abuſe euen of lawfull bleſſings, which (if a man be not very warie) will tickle and pricke him forward at one time or other, to ſome odious carriage of himſelfe, which afterward may be remembred againſt him to his reproach, loſſe and ſhame, yea ruine, as heere we ſee in theſe. Euen Heathens haue prudently obſerued this, That a wiſe man will carrie himſelfe no otherwiſe being proſperous, then as one who conſidereth, that one day he may be miſerable. And indeed ſuch iolly fellowes had need of this warrant euen to man-ward, that they ſhall neuer fall nor decay in their eſtate; ſeeing that elſe, who ſeeth not what fruite they reape of their ſcorne and pride, to wit, that being vnderfoot all men reioyce in their ruine, and make them their paſtime, few or none pitying them, or taking their part: whereas others are lamented and reliued in their miſerie. Who pitieth Herod eaten vp with wormes, becauſe he would ſo proudly exceed the bounds of man▪ and be counted a God? Haman was hanged vpon the gallowes: who readeth it not with ioy, rather then is grieued at it? becauſe (while hee was aloft) he made himſelfe the terrour of the Church for his crueltie? How ſhould Iob haue anſwered it in his affliction, if hee had vſurped ouer his vnderlings, Iob 31. 13. 14. being in proſperitie? When Dauid ſent meſſengers to Hanun to 2. Sam. 10. 4. comfort him, he cuts off their garments by the middle, and ſhaues them, and ſo ſends them backe to their Maſter. But the time came, when hee repented him of that iolly defiance. Tuſh, ſaith Sheba, who is Dauid, and who is the 2. Sam. 20. 1. Iudg. 9. 28. ſonne of Iſhai? Who is Abimelech ſaid Gaal? A baſe fellow, I defie and ſcorne him and his: but ſoone after, he wiſht that vnſaid againe, and ſo did the other. And thus of theſe now mentioned, together with Adonibezek, and them of Succoth and Penuel, let this ſuffice that hath been ſaid. Therefore as for all deſperate and prophane wretches (whom nothing but the halter, or ſtabbing, or ſuch like deſerued plague of God befalling them, will

perſwade the truth hereof) let them goe as they are. But let all Gods people (who are to looke at God aſwell as men) beware eſpecially, that they forget not themſelues this way: but walke humbly, with due weighing their owne vileneſſe, and the changeableneſſe of all things here below; elſe euen Eſay 39. 6. they may fall, as Ezechia did.
               As Gedeon did heere, ſo it is lawfull for vs to proſecute our brethrens Doct. verſ. 19. wrongs, as murther, yea it is meet ſo to doe, as in the booke of Numbers appeareth, and this, not onely in a priuat reſpect for that we are their fleſh (in Numb. 35. 31. which kindneſſe is to be ſhewed to them) but alſo, (and much more) in the publike behalfe of Church and Commonwealth: both which it much concerneth, that ſinne be not vnpuniſhed. This the Lord requireth, as by Salomons 
                  1. Kings 2. 31. words may bee gathered, which hee ſpake of Ioab, ſaying: let him bee ſlaine, that euill may be remoued, and wee may not bee guilty of the innocent blood, which he hath ſhed. But to returne to the point in hand, as it is good to reioyce with out friends, and liue together with them for our mutuall good: ſo is it alſo a token of our vnfained loue toward them, to purſue their wrongs being dead. And this were highly commendable if it were done according to Gods law. But as it is commonly gone about, I meane, ſo that fleſh and blood with carnall reaſon doe rule, as it highly diſpleaſeth God, ſo likewiſe it marres the action, as in the next point ſhall appeare. And namely to purſue any for them, when they ſuffer for their deſerts, as the moſt doe: or when they be hurt by them, with whom they were companions in euill: and therfore iuſtly ſuffer at the hands of one another: although the Magiſtrate is to puniſh the offendor euen in that caſe alſo: as when drunkards or quarrellers ſhed the blood of each other. And as the Lord himſelfe hath put a difference betwixt caſuall or vnwilling killing, and wilfull murther: Ioſhua 20. 2. as appeareth by his appointing in each Tribe, cities of refuge, for the ſafegard of the innocent: ſo he is farre from iuſtifying any ſuch cruell pitie, as this, to ſpare the guiltie murtherer: but will himſelfe as well plague them, that ſhall ſeeke to ſtop the due courſe of iuſtice againſt ſuch, as alſo find out the murtherer himſelfe, (notwithſtanding the ſecrefie wherewith much villanie is cloaked) at one time or other. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and 
                  Exod. 21. 24. 
                  he who ſheddeth blood, his blood ſhall be ſhed. For the blood of the ſlaine crieth ſtrongly in the eares of the Lord, as that of Abel, and as the widow, who Luke 18. 5. by her importunitie compelled the Iudge to heare, and doe her iuſtice of her aduerſarie. And this further condemneth the deadly reuenge which is betweene many, not perſons onely, but families and kindreds alſo, who vpon ſuch murthers, band themſelues, and take parts each againſt other irreconciliably, more fit for Pagans indeed then Chriſtians, who ſhould be ioyned together in loue, rather then diuide themſelues into ſworne brotherhoods in miſchiefe, like thoſe two, Simeon and Leui. Laſtly, it bewraieth the leaudneſſe of the Romiſh pretended pitie and mercifulneſſe (not in protecting the guiltleſſe,) but in ſauing the vileſt malefactors from the hand of the lawfull Magiſtrate, whom God hath appointed to be the terror of ill doers, and not the mocke and may-game of ſuch ſhauelings. For if they being purſued, can get into thoſe Temples (or rather dennes) of theeues, they are reſcued (as in Sanctuaries) for feare of law and puniſhment.
               Againe, in that Gedeon ſaith, and ſweareth to it, that hee would not haue

killed them, if they had ſaued his brethren aliue, who ought to haue done it, for purſuing the people of God, (neither had he authoritie to ſaue them, though hee had to deſtroy them:) and the Holy-ghoſt commendeth the act: it teacheth, that it is a very hard matter to doe good actions aright, but that they will one way or other be blemiſhed and obſcured: euen as Iephtahs courage & conſtancy in warring againſt the Ammonites was much daſhed Iudg 11. 30. by his vnſeaſonable & raſh vow. And ſo particularly through our haſtines, boldnes, blindnes, or the like corrupt humours, many good actions do loſe their beautie. Which thing as it is with great regard to bee looked to of vs, ſo it teacheth, that we muſt not cleaue to al the examples of Gods ſeruants, without reſpect and difference, nor follow them, becauſe they did them, but examine their grounds, and how they did them, following them only ſo far 1. Cor. 11. 1. as they haue obeyed the Lord: for therein onely they are preſidents for vs to follow, where their doings are examples agreeable to the rule that ſhould guide vs: for that is to be looked vnto which is Gods, not mens. And further it ſhould teach vs more ſpecially, to examine our actions, the manner, end, affections and minde wherewith they be done; which is the thing that I doe here aime at to lay foorth: for thoſe things which wee doe in ignorance and darkneſſe, wee haue not onely no comfort in them, neither learne any experience by them to be better directed afterward; but contrariwiſe we haue much to grieue our hearts and to accuſe vs therby. And this I adde the rather, becauſe wee ſee that Gedeon ouer-ſhot himſelfe in this, who yet moſt worthily tempered wiſedome and equitie with ſeueritie in the puniſhing of the men of Succoth and Penuel. Now becauſe few of Gods children will beleeue this, therfore they ſee not, that the moſt offences that they commit, are abuſes of good duties. They dare not ſin groſſely, and ſo long they think all is well: but when they are about good actions, they are ſoone ouer-ſhot: and why? They are there where they ſhould be (being ſo occupied) Note. they preſume and ſuſpect no danger: euen as the traueller riding in a moſt ſtraight path or rode, hedged in on both ſides, ſo that hee cannot goe amiſſe. But oh ſillie man conſider, thou beareſt about thee a bodie of ſinne, an euill heart, euen in a good heart: what wonder then if much euill cleaue to thy beſt actions, when no other thing is looked at, but the good? when the hypocriſie, ignorance, boldnes, pride, and other corruptions thereof lieth vnſeene, vnpurged: nay when a corrupt humour ſets a man on worke to doe a good dutie, that it may lurke vnder the vizor thereof: as anger and malice, vnder zeale and holy reuenge, which is as odious as Nadab & Abihu 
                  Leuit. 10. 1. their offering Incenſe with ſtrange or common fire. Is not hearing, prayer, a good action? Yet our Sauiour ſaith: Take heede how ye heare: Paul ſaith, Luke 8. 18. Epheſ. 6. 18. 
                  Watch your ſelues in prayer, Epheſ. 6. For if yee looke not narrowly to your ſelues in theſe, keeping your ſelues attentiue, reuerent, confident, humble, feruent, throughout them; the diuell will watch you ſo, that as good neuer a whit, as neuer the better when all is done. And if this be ſo, euen in things religious, how much more in thoſe which are indifferent? For vnder this pretence, That to be angrie, merrie in companie, to eate, drinke, recreate the body, &c. are things neither good nor euill in nature; who forgets not this, That theſe all, change their nature when they come into action, and cannot be indifferently done? They are good or bad according to the manner of

doing. Therefore though anger be not euill of it ſelfe, yet the Lord iuſtly challengeth Ionah, ſaying, Doeſt thou well to be angrie? meaning, ſo corruptly Ionah. 4. 4. and carnally. Therefore, as eaſie a worke as men thinke it, to carrie themſelues aright in all theſe: yet let them know, that if in any of them they tranſgreſſe the rule either of pietie, loue, or ſobernes; the goodneſſe, or indifferencie of the worke, ſhall not ſaue them harmeleſſe. For inſtance, if in their zeale, they neither aime at Gods glorie, nor the reformation of the partie, nor the moderation of the affection: their zeale is folly, rage, error, or any thing rather then holy zeale. But of this point I haue ſpoken in this booke often, and ſhall ſpeake afterward, if God will. Let me adde this caueat to the Miniſters, that in all their teaching, eſpecially in the doctrine of theſe duties, they beware leſt they teach men their libertie (which they learne too ſoone of themſelues, and catch greedily from them) and be large therein: but ſlight and ſhort in teaching the rules before named, to reſtraine the abuſe thereof: rather be they ſhort in the former, and warie and large in the latter, to cut off all lewd pretences. As wee ſee Paul doth, for hauing ſaid, Be angrie: fearing he ſhould haue diſciples too many: he ſtraight way Eph 4. 26. addeth, [but ſinne not] and this cuts the combe of the Libertine. So doth the wiſe Preacher, Eccleſ. 11. Reioyce young man, and take thy pleaſure, &c. But know that for all this thou ſhalt come to iudgement. Now if the beſt be ſubiect Eccleſ. 11. 9. to theſe failings, what ſhall be ſaid of the worſt? Surely no wonder, if they regard not at all, whether it be good or bad they doe, but runne to their obiect, as the fiſh to the baite? Or if they doe enquire, then they doe it after the fact done, as Salemon ſaith of the ſacrilegious, which bewraies a vile minde. Prou. 20. 25. For if they deſire to heare it be well, what a prophanenes is this to deſire that Gods rule were crooked, ſo their doings be ſtreight? But if they thinke otherwiſe, they make the Miniſter of God a ſtale, and as for God himſelfe, they make him a God of cloutes, who muſt take their frothie repentance and ſatisfaction in good part, be it what and when they pleaſe: but for themſelues, they will be on the ſureſt hand with him, firſt to ſatisfie their deſire, and to inquire aftewards, whether they did well or no. Againe for good duties, they cannot doe them well, themſelues being euill: as for indifferent: Luke 6. 46. though they ſay, Let vs alone, if we know we may doe them, wee will take order good enough for the manner and end. For like fooles they runne into the contrarie extremitie, or elſe into monſtrous exceſſe in the vſe of the libertie. So that truly it is ſaid of ſuch, They are ſet in ſlipperie places: for they delight moſt of all to ſet their foote on the brinke of the ditch or riuer, who ſeeth not with what danger? but they loue not to walke vpon plaine ground, which they might doe ſafely: and ſo they ſlide ſuddenly, and in the end periſh remedileſly.
               
                  Gedeons mouing his ſonne to fall vpon the two Princes, was to traine him Doct. verſ. 20. to be acquainted with purſuing ill cauſes and perſons aſſoone as he grew fit for it, and not to teach him from his vouth to bee cruell. For that quickly pricks which will be a thorne, of it ſelfe, and needs no ſharpning: either this or any other ſinne. By this example (well approued by the beſt rule) Chriſtians ſhould frame their children betimes, and as their yeeres will permit, to diſcerne good from bad: and beware how they vſe their tongues, or behaue themſelues in the ſight or hearing of their children, euen when they

are moſt tender: ſeeing they are apprehenſiue enough of that which is Note. lewd, and eſpecially when their parents ſhall ſtrengthen their inward proneneſſe to euill by their authoritie: as (God willing) ſhall better appeare after in chap. 17. 2. As for this action of his, howſoeuer it may ſeeme crueltie to ſuch as cannot iudge, yet it was pietie and obedience to Gods commandement. And youth in this age, had need in all wiſe manner to be moued, and (if it may be) perſwaded, to the embracing and following of good inſtruction, and religious walking, they being ſo ſoone poſſeſſed by ill education and companie, of the ſinnes of the time, as neuer more in any age or memorie then in this.
               Although the act was good, that he was vrged to, yet feare and modeſtie 2 in him being ſo young, was commendable: for there muſt be time to ſettle youth euen in that which is good, which takes not roote eaſily, much leſſe growes to bring foorth fruite, eſpecially when there is ſome ſhew and appearance of euill in it. As in Gedeons ſonne vnexperienced in theſe kindes of manhood and courage, the falling vpon two valiant Princes by him a boy, it was to be commended that he feared to doe it. His father did well in vrging, but tendernes excuſed him, in not obeying. His example may worthily ſet to ſchoole too many youths too bold of their owne accord, without inſtigation, to attempt and ſet vpon not doubtfull but vile actions of theft, whoredome, drunkennes, ſwearing, ribaldrie and the like, odious both to God and man, as breaking all bounds of modeſtie, feare, and baſhfulnes: the enioying of the which are comely ornaments in youth; and doe ſtand them inſtead, while yet religion is to ſeeke with them, to keepe and holde them backe from great and ſhamefull euils, as bold fellowſhip with lewd huſwiues and companions. And here iuſtly may we take vp a lamentation ouer our times, for the want of ciuill and godly education of youth: whereby ſinne hath now ſo got the vpper hand, that the boldnes which wee haue ſeene in growne ſinners, men of ripe yeeres, with aſtoniſhment, wee behold now with execration, euen in children and youth, new come out of the ſhell. And while parents (guiltie of the ſame, or at leaſt irreligious) doe in particular neglect the care of ſuch their children, by diſſwading, and diſcouraging them from the ſinnes of the time, and by good education keep them from them, behold the diſeaſe groweth, ere they bee aware, common and deſperate: and thoſe parents are ſo few that ſhew their care this way, that it were well if religious parents often times did not nouriſh and winke at ſuch euill qualities in their children.
               Now when theſe two Princes ſee the youth fearefull, they (as men impatient of further delay) prouoke Gedeon himſelf to fall vpon and ſlay them, and ſo rid them out of the way. And they deſcant vpon the youths tendernes, as if Gedeon had not been well aduiſed what he did. The child (ſay they) doth according to his age: he is not fit for ſuch a worke. The like diſcourſe they make before, in their anſwer to Gedeon; They were like thee (ſay they) like the children of a King. Of both theſe together, becauſe they bewray the ſame ſpirit and nature in them. Firſt then in the 18. verſe they denie not the fact, but deſcribe the perſons whom they ſlew, that they were Princes fellowes, as I haue ſaid, and all to declare the greatnes of their courage and ſtomack: but they abaſe not themſelues ſo low as to aske pardon, neither to craue any

fauour. And by this we may ſee, what are the props whereby wicked and deſperate men ſtay vp and hearten themſelues in their miſeries and extremities: their props are prophane and diueliſh magnanimitie, and a deſperate loftie ſtomacke, which they call a braue minde, which will yeeld itſelfe for no fault, neither bluſh, or ſeek any fauour, through a ſenſeleſnes of Gods wrath. And to ioyne therewith this ſecond reply of theirs in this verſe, they bewray the ſame here alſo, when they ſay, Fall thou on vs, or, diſpatch vs with thine owne hands. And this I note of them not ſo much to their ſhame (who being Heathens, what wonder though they were no better reformed) as to the ſhame of ſuch as come after them, who being in the Church, ſhould be better, but yet are led by their ſpirit: who are ſo blinded and hardned by the diuell, that they thinke it an ornament to them, and a chiefe point of manhood, to ſhrinke for nothing, but to beare off all by the head and ſhoulders, as they ſay, and to ſeeme to men to ſet light by a violent death, as appeares in them who deſperatly caſt themſelues off the ladder into hell, if God bee not mercifull: which contempt of death is yet contrary to their owne nature, and feeling within them. And this ſinne reſteth not in theſe only of the worſt and moſt proiected ſort, but reacheth to many profeſſors: who if they haue done euill, yet ſet a good face, I meane, a bold, on it; but relent not in any wiſe, nor will be knowne to be ſuch as they are, and know themſelues to bee: of which ſort wee finde Gehezas the ſeruant of Eliſha the Prophet to haue been, who when his ſinne was couertly bewrayed by his maſter, (ſaying, From whence commeſt thou Gehezai) anſwered boldly, and 2. King. 5. 25. that with a lie, Thy ſeruant hath been no where, meaning but where he ſhould be, to wit, about his buſineſſe. This diueliſh ſhameleſnes and hardning of heart is euer by the ſeruants of God to bee turned into relenting, melting, and meeknes of ſpirit, or elſe they may bee ſure, with the wicked to meete with much ſorrow. Of which point more hath bin ſaid elſewhere, chap. 2. and therefore I touch it here but by the way.
               As touching Gedeon, he (as became him) diſpatched them, wherein (ſetting aſide the fault before mentioned) hee executed the vengeance of God vpon them being the ring leaders, as before hee had done vpon the other multitude of the Midianites. And thus wee ſee a goodly end to the people of God of this ſore affliction, if wee view the whole, both miſerie and deliuerance out of it, and the ouerthrow of their enemies, as it hath been ſet downe from the beginning of the ſixth chapter vnto this place. Let it teach vs thus to view and conſider Gods great workes both in his viſitation and chaſtizing his people, and alſo their behauiour vnder them, with his reſtoring them to their liberties againe, and his bleſſing of them. Theſe are the treaſures and riches that we ſhould ſtore not our bookes onely, but our memories alſo with, that out of them all we may learne the better to marke and obſerue throughout our liues Gods dealing with vs, and how wee in faith, Note. hope, and patience, may bee like the beſt of Gods ſeruants, and enioy the things promiſed, as they did, til we may with Paul learne by our experience, that hope ſhall not make vs aſhamed: but beleeue for all times to come, that God who hath, and doth, he alſo will deliuer vs vnto the end.
               Now laſtly in this ſcripture it is added, that Gedeon took of the ornamēts, which were in forme and ſhew goodly to looke vpon, and coſtly, as was fitting

for Princes, which were the furniture of their Camels: theſe ornaments (I ſay) with whatſoeuer elſe was of price, Gedeon tooke away: which could not be of ſmall price and valew. Whereby, as we may ſee that God plucketh the prey out of the teeth of the wicked, (when he pleaſeth) and giueth it to the righteous, as Dauia ſpeaketh in the Pſalme, and as is to bee ſeene in the Pſal. 3. 6. 2. King. 7. 16. 2. booke of Kings, chap. 7. how he relieued his people in their famine and diſtreſſe, with the ſpoile and goods of his enemies the Aramites: ſo by this which God did here to Gedeon, that ſcripture is verified, which ſaith: Firſt ſeeke the kingdome of God, and his righteouſnes, and other things ſhall be added to 
                  Matth. 6. 33. 
                  you. For while Gedeon in the ſimplicitie of heart, and deſire of obeying God, did purſue the enemies of his people, intending that buſineſſe wholly, and not minding earthly profit at all, behold, euen that alſo befell him, and was brought to his hands. And it is as eaſie to ſee and behold at this day, as it ſhall be alwaies found true, that while Gods ſeruants in all conditions and degrees, ſeeke the Lord with all their heart, he prouideth other neceſſarie Geneſ. 28. 21. helpes for this preſent life, which they doe not ſo much ſeeke after. As Iacob, when he had renued his couenant with the Lord in his iourney to Aram, Geneſ. 32. 10. confeſſeth at his returning home how liberally God had prouided for him. Oh how many may witneſſe the ſame? For why? as the Lord is true of his promiſe, ſo he is a plentifull rewarder of them that ſeeke him. And as he regardeth Hebr. 11. 6. ſuch not meanely; ſo hee dealeth iuſtly with thoſe that are vnfaithfull and worldly minded; that whereas they might ſeeme by their greedines and their vnwearied following their commodities (with the caſting of care of things heauenly) to get all wealth into their hands, they oft times attaine not that which they purſue, and thoſe that doe attaine it, haue got but the winde in their fiſt, euen nothing, who ſee they cannot hold it, when Prou. 23. 5. they moſt deſire it. And this is to teach vs contentment in a godly eſtate, yea thankfulnes, and not to haue our teeth watering after the dainties of the other. A diſh of greene hearbes is better in ſuch a caſe, then a ſtalled oxe. Prou. 15. 16. 17. and 16. 8.
               
               
                  Verſ. 22. Then the men of Iſrael ſaid vnto Gedeon, Raigne thou ouer vs, both thou, and thy ſonne, and thy ſonnes ſonne, for thou haſt aeliuered vs out of the hand of Midian.
                  
                  23. And Gedeon ſaid vnto them, I will not raigne ouer you, neither ſhal my child raigne ouer you, but the Lord ſhall raigne ouer you.
                  
               
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  IN this laſt part of the Chapter follow certaine particulars concerning 
                        The ſenſe and doct. of verſe 22. 
                     Gedeon, and the firſt that is ſet downe, is the offering of the kingdome to Gedeon and his poſteritie, by the men of Iſrael, and the reaſon which they render of their ſo doing: with his refuſing it, in theſe two verſes. The generall act of the people was good, in that they ſhewed themſelues thankfull to him, for the great deliuerance which they had obtained by him (as Gods inſtrument) out of all the oppreſſion of the Midianites, their enemies. And it bindeth all to the like dutie, when they haue receiued kindneſſe. So both kindred, towne and countrey ought to ſhew kindneſſe to him and his, by whom they haue receiued ſome great good and benefit. Thus did Pharaoh
                     
aduance Ioſeph, and his brethren, and father, for that hee had preſerued his land in the famine, and it was complained of, that there aroſe another Pharaoh 
                     Exod. 1. 8. afterward, who did not know him. And Dauid remembred Ionathans 
                     Geneſ. 47. 6. kindneſſe to him after he was dead, in doing good to his. 2. Sam. 9 7.
                  
                  This cauſed Salomon to vtter this prouerb: Thine owne friend, and thy fathers 
                     Prou. 27. 10. 
                     friend for ſake thou not. And ſo, (to deſcend to ſmaller kindneſſe betwixt one neighbour and another) this thankfulneſſe ought to bee ſhewed, that while both it and the fruit of it bee continued betwixt them, there may bee peace and good will, which otherwiſe (for the moſt part) is baniſhed from men, vnleſſe it be couered with diſſimulation. For while the one ſcorneth to owe any thing to the other, profeſſing that he can liue without him, and the other is backward in loue, whereby he might winne his neighbor: what is nouriſhed betweene both, but ſtrangeneſſe, ſuſpition, vncharitableneſſe, diſcord, and ſuch curſed effects and fruits thereof? And now laſt of all in this matter, if thankfulneſſe bee due for outward fauours and good turnes, how much more ſhould it bee ſhewed for the greateſt of all, as when one man hath by his induſtrie, labour, and loue, bin the inſtrument and meane, of the ſaluation of many? In which reſpect Paul wrote to Philemon thus: I will 
                     Philem. 19. 
                     not ſay (though he might) that thou oweſt to me euen thine owne ſelfe. And ſo other ſuch may ſay, who haue receiued the like kindneſſe by any of vs, as to be deliuered from the wrath to come by our teaching, though it little appeare by the requital of loue and kindneſſe againe, I meane to procure their ioy who reclaimed them; by being ſhining lights afterward. But this hath been ſhewed at large verſ. 1. before.
                  Now as I haue ſpoken of the generall act of the Iſraelites toward Gedeon, 
                     2. Doct. ver. 22. which all may ſee to haue been commendable, in that they were thankfull, (though not without ſome weakenes) ſo yet their particular act in offering the kingdome to him, as farre of from allowance in them, that it was vtterly vnlawfull: for it was not in their power, and therefore they offered that which was not theirs, as ſhall better appeare by Gedeons anſwer in the next verſe. We ought by this to beware, that we be not liberall of another mans right and good, in giuing that which belongs not to vs. As many loue for name and credit to be liberall, but it ſhall be of ſtolne, or (which is all one) of other mens goods. Euen ſo, (to ſhew it in another kind) neither may any man giue his ſoule to the diuell, as witches and coniurers, and many other though not ſo apparantly doe; for they are bought with a price: nor our bodies to be defiled, for they are redeemed, and made the Temples of the holy Ghoſt. This needs no long ſtanding vpon: but by this we are taught, that as their ſinne is great, as oppreſſors, gripers and gameſters, who inioy to their owne benefitill gotten goods, and reſtore them not; ſo neither ought we to receiue of any man that which is not his owne, but ill come by, if wee certainly know it. Otherwiſe the receiuer is excuſed, who in his ſimplicitie doth preſume charitably, that to be of the giuers proper goods, which hee knoweth not certainly to haue been badly gotten. Neither ſhall the ſimple affection of the receiuer, acquite the ill conſcience of the giuer, whoſe ſinne herein is double, both that he hath attained his wealth vnconſcionably: and then plaid the part of Achan, in couering his ſtealth, what though it be vnder the faire pretence of religious and deuout liberalitie? Doubtleſſe if Ananias
                     
were guiltie of ſacriledge, for detaining to himſelfe a part of that which hee Actes 5. 3. had alienated from himſelfe, and conſecrated to the Lords vſe: how much more they who firſt rob others, and then feed the Lord with the ſpoile, as Lions doe their Whelps of that which they haue ill gotten? It is the caſt of many caterpillars, when they haue ſucked and drawne the blood of others all their life, like horſleaches ready to burſt, they will ſatisfie for their villany, by paying the tithe or ſome ſhred of their vnrighteous Mammon to the vſe of the Lord, or the Church: whereas this ſanctifieth not the reſt, that is behind, but maketh all their goods execrable to them and theirs, till reſtitution be made either in kind, or to the poore (the true heires of ſuch goods) if it cannot otherwiſe be, to the pleaſing of God, as a fruit of their vnfained repentance So no man ought to buy or hire that which is paſſed ouer to another before, nor couet wife, ſeruant, goods, of another mans (for that is nothing elſe but a taking of his right from him) nor to receiue ſtolne goods for their aduantage. So neither ſhould the Pope vſurpe dominion: S. Peter 
                     1. Pet. 5. 3. (whoſe ſucceſſor he ſaith he is) forbidding dominion ouer the flocke, for he hath no ſuch authoritie, as neither hath the beſt miniſter of Chriſt.
                  
                     Gedeon anſwereth, God ſhal raigne ouer them, (an holy ſpeech) for where Verſ. 23. ſhall they be found that will refuſe a thing much leſſe then a kingdome being offered? nay, how greedily would many haue faſtened vpon a matter of ſmall valew, being offered them, as the kingdome here was to him? But ſome will aske, Might not God raigne ouer them though hee had alſo? I ſay, Yes. Neither was he of the Anabaptiſts opinion, who thinke that ſuch ciuill gouernment and ſubiection of people to Kings repugneth to Chriſtian liberty. And God raigned ouer his people, when yet Saul, and after him Dauid raigned ouer them alſo: but his meaning was, that the order that God had ſet (of gouerning by ſuch as had no continued gouernment,) ſhould ſtand, and not be peruerted by or for him or his: but contrariwiſe, to his power he would hinder it. And God raigned indeed in the Commonwealth of the Iſraelites, which floriſhed in Gedeons time, wherein the Elders were choſen by common conſent, ſome eccleſiaſticall to giue the meaning of the law, and others ciuill and temporall, as men call it, to rule the people thereby: in which office if they did not well carrie themſelues, they were both puniſhed and put from their places. And if any warre fell out, the Lord himſelfe ſtirred vp Guides and Iudges, and they were not choſen by men, as appeares both by Chapter 1. 1. and after neither did their children ſucceed them: and thus the Lord both in peace and warre ruled ouer them, and ſo Gedeon meant, that the office of the Iudge was no ordinary magiſtracy, ſuch as the King is: but a temporary and occaſionall, much like to the Dictatorſhip of the Romans, in reſpect of the vſe wherto it ſerued: although otherwiſe of diuine election, immediatly, not by men. By this anſwere, the ſingular modeſtie, and the religious ſtaiedneſſe and good gouernment of Gedeon appeareth: who hauing occaſion ſo fairely offered of poſſeſſing and inioying the kingdome, refuſeth it as reſolutely, as they offered it earneſtly. Hee is indeed the ſtrong man, who ſtandeth out ſtoutly, when the brunt commeth: now Gedeous ſinceritie and courage is tryed: and now he plaieth the part of a truly heroicall captaine, in reiecting the tentation that was ſet before him. Which of how great force it was to batter and beate him down

flat, although meane perſons cannot eaſily conceiue, whoſe thoughts reach not ſo high, yet by the comparing of great things with ſmall, may wel ſeeme to be forcible, ſeeing that a little preferment, fauour, commendation or reward Doct. verſ. 23. doth ſo bleare the eie, and choake the conſcience of many profeſſors, as if it were a petty Paradiſe. In one inſtance conſider of that which I ſay: Gedeon refuſed a whole kingdome, when it was offered him: and the moſt deſire vnlawfully a ſmall commodity of their neighbours in compariſon of a kingdome, as his houſe and ground, wife and ſeruant, when they be denied them. And yet many a bold perſon would bee ready to ſay euen of Gedeon, He was a foole to refuſe and neglect ſuch an aduantage. Doubtleſſe Note. he did it not for any feare, or conſcience of his owne inſufficiency: hee had been a man fir for the place, if the office had been lawfull for him. But the reſpect he had to Gods commandement, was the meere cauſe that mooued him to denie and refuſe. A worthy paterne indeed of a man truly fearing God, and making conſcience of offending. And ſo it be commeth vs, both in ſinnes of the groſſeſt kind, as adultery, murther, oppreſſion, (from which the feare of God doth beſt and moſt ſafely keepe vs, as Ioſeph ſaith) and alſo Geneſ. 39. 9. in the matter of a mans priuate gaine, yea and that in the higheſt degree of a kingdome: it becommeth vs (I ſay) to keep our conſciences pure and good. And yet for the ſmalleſt of theſe many a man, otherwiſe vertuous, would (as the cōmon ſpeech is) ſtraine a ioynt, and think, that for a kingdom he might venture to diſpenſe with equity & conſcience. And doubtles it is a great trial of a man what grace is in him, when a matter of commodity, promotion, honour, or the like, of the greateſt valew, cannot ſurpriſe the conſcience; ſo neere is euery man to himſelfe; and indeed (when theſe temptations aſſaile) vtterly vnlike himſelf at other times. This example of Gedeon moſt properly taxeth ambitious and aſpiring ſpirits, as wel Popiſh as other, ſuch as Abſolons was, not of immodeſty onely, but of inſolencie alſo, and intemperance, the cauſe of all confuſion in euery ſtate, eſpecially being ioyned with diſcontentment and emulation. But it were to bee wiſhed, that men of greater hope, had but a little meaſure of Gedeons grace, and were not rather led by the ſpirit of theſe whom I haue mentioned, to wit, that in meaner matters, and of leſſe valew they did not hardly containe and keepe themſelues within compaſſe from coueting and laying claime to other mens commodities, for the ſupplying of their owne wants, and to ſeeke increaſe of that which they haue, and not to looke after any thing which tends to the loſſe or hurt of other, but that they liued contentedly with that which is theirs, who ought in ſo liuely a glaſſe as this, to behold how honourable a grace this was in Gedeon to reſt ſatiſfied in his eſtate, as thinking that beſt befitting him, which hee might enioy with Gods good liking, and the quietneſſe of his owne mind: and as for other endleſſe wiſhing or coueting, to inhaunſe himſelfe, (which is moſt mens ſinne) hee had got the victory ouer himſelfe in that behalfe, which I thinke was a greater honour to him then all his conqueſt ouer the Midianites: it being an ouerruling of himſelfe, and of his vaineglorious affection. But to the ſhame of many Proteſtants, I will adde one example, euen an Heathen might ſet vs to ſchoole in this dutie: who hauing ſubdued his enemies in battell, and returned home with triumph, was preſented by ſome with a great maſſe of gold: but he repelled thē with

this anſwer; I had rather rule them that owe the gold, then be Lord and owner of the gold only, or rather to be a ſeruant, ruled and poſſeſſed by it. Oh well were it for vs, if the holy gouernment of our harts and affections were ſo pretious to vs Chriſtians, as it was to many of them, who were Heathen: whereas they were drawne by a pride and ambition of praiſe, or at leaſt bare loue of vertue, to contemne ſuch offers, but we by religion, and hope of a farre greater matter, then the greateſt earthly kingdome.
                  And this alſo more particularly teacheth, that all muſt endeuour in their 
                        Doct. 2. callings and places, that God may raigne, as in all his heauenly ordinances, ſo eſpecially in this of gouernment in Church, land, citie, towne, houſe; for that (I ſay) onely muſt ſtand, and all that is oppoſite muſt fall, Pſalm. 2. Religious Pſalm. 2. 1. gouernement is to be ſought for, yeelded vnto, and imbraced, and not the contrary: but the limites and bounds of Gods holy word kept and preſerued, which neuer repugneth to ciuill gouernment of the lawfull Magiſtrate, but confirmes it rather: ſo that God may bee obeyed, and equitie and iuſtice maintained, for the preſeruation of outward peace and order in all things. And ſo I might ſay particularly of euery condition. But alas, what care is there had of this? but it is rather iuſtled aſide at mens pleaſure. For though wee pray daily, that God may bee glorified by the comming of his kingdome, and the guiding vs to the doing of his will: which if it might Note. take place, what a bleſſed thing were it to ſee the ſuperiors and inferiors, in all degrees and eſtates, liue together vnder the gouernment of one God, and mutually commanding and obeying each other in the Lord: yet wee ſee the quite contrary in mens practiſe. True it is, that the law of man ſtoppeth much diſorder: and how could men inioy any ſafe and peaceable dwelling without it? but while the Lord is ſhut out of the conſcience, the word and faithfull Miniſter of God deſpiſed, and in many places none at all to awake and prepare the people for the life to come, and the ordinance of God in Magiſtracie, which ſerueth to backe and authoriſe the Word, and to vphold other good order, little to bee regarded, and alſo little put in practiſe to reſtraine euill, but Atheiſme, prophaneneſſe, and other great ſinnes ſlightly puniſhed, &c. behold, euery man runneth his owne courſe, and being wedded to his owne wilfull humour, without feare of puniſhment, walketh in his frowardneſſe, atheiſme, prophaneneſſe, ſcorne of religion, crueltie, oppreſſion, contempt of the Sabbath, ignorance, &c. ſaying as they in the Pſalme, Our tongues are our owne, wee will doe as we liſt, who ſhall controll 
                     Pſalme 12. 4. 
                     vs? Surely none, but ſinne and the diuell, rule and raigne at their pleaſure, where the Lord by his word doth not, but is iuſtled aſide: but let vs mourne for thoſe things, till the Lord amend them: but in the meane ſeaſon, let vs be ſure that we be guided by him ourſelues in our whole courſe, or elſe hold our peace of and concerning others. But I paſſe now to the ſecond thing concerning Gedeon.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTIE FOVRE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſ. 24. And Gedeon ſaid vnto them, I would deſire a requeſt of you, that you would giue me euery man the earings of his pray; for they had golden earings becauſe they were Iſma
                        •
                     lites.
               
               25. And they anſwered, We will giue them. And they ſpread a garment, and did caſt therein euery man the earings of his pray.
               
               26. And the weight of the golden earings that he required, was a thouſand and ſeuen hundred ſhekels of gold, beſide, collors and iewels and purple rayment that was on the Kings of Midian, and beſides the chaines that were on their cammels necks.
               
               27. And Gedeon made an Ephod thereof, and put it in Ophrah his citie, all Iſrael went a whoring there after it, which became a ſnare vnto Gedeon, and to his houſe.
               
            
            
               NOw after this victory ouer the Midianites, Gedeon deſires The ſenſe. to leaue a monument and memoriall of is thankes to God for the ſame, and for the great deliuerance of Iſrael. And thought it meet, that it ſhould be of ſome valew and price; and therefore he ſeeing the people ſo affected to him, that they could willingly haue agreed to make him their king, hee thought they would not ſticke at a ſmaller matter, but yeeld it to him: eſpecially, ſeeing it was not for his owne priuate, but for their common benefit: and the thing that he asked of them, was their eareings, which were coſtly, which he obtaining of the people, made of them a Prieſts vpper garment, of great valew and richly ſet forth, called an Ephod, which was to be worne vpon their other apparrell: and this was the monument which he would haue remaine as a token of his thankfull heart. But it being ſet vp in a place of his citie Ophrah, becauſe of the forme, and coſtlineſſe of it, and for that it pertained to the Prieſts in the ſeruice of God, and to religious vſe, it grew to be worſhipped, which (through Gods iuſt iudgement iuſtly puniſhing Idolatrie in the poſteritie following, was the deſtruction of Gedeon and his houſe; ſo eaſily and ſoone did idolatrie and ſuperſtition ariſe vp among them againe.
            Here firſt his thankfull mind is to bee commended, and imitated of vs: Doct. verſ. 24. thus ought our hearts in all benefits which we inioy, leade vs vnto God the fountaine of each good giuing, as Saint Iames ſaith. But this point hath been Iames 1. 17. largely handled: reade notes vpon the 5. chapter, and elſe where by occaſion of the like Scripture.
            Againe, we may learne here, that when we are willing to pleaſure one another Doct. verſ. 24. 25. 26. without taking any gratuitie againe, (which few will doe) wee may

be the bolder to ſue for ſomewhat to bee put to good vſes, as Gedeon intended here to doe, (though hee was deceiued) asking their earings to make a monument of thanks to God: eſpecially, I ſay, when wee haue refuſed to take to our owne priuate vſe, the commodity which hath been offered vs, (when it hath been thought we haue deſerued it) as Gedeon here did: in ſuch a caſe we may deſire ſomewhat to bee imploied of the ſeruice and glory of God by them that offer it vs: as to the relieuing of the poore, or other good ends. And in this alſo hee deſerued commendation, and was, and is to bee followed of vs. And as the people yeelded to him to a good vſe and end, ſo all good Chriſtians ought with all readineſſe to doe the like toward the relieuing and helping of the needy, by lending, giuing, or any other friendſhip yeelding, conſidering that Saint Paul ſaith, that free giuing and liberalitie hath great force to worke on men: for a bountifull perſon (ſaith he) it may be ſome man will die; and ſo if one did much good by bodily helpe in Rom. 5. 7. comforting the needy and poore, he might be like to doe good by exhortation alſo: both which duties of loue it were to bee wiſhed might goe together, for thereby moſt good were like to be done. And ſo doing, we ſhould moue ſuch as thinke themſelues beholding to vs, to ſhew themſelues thankfull to God alſo, ſo bountifull to them that were in penury and want. And doubtleſſe if the honouring of our God were all in all with vs, and predominant in vs, this we ſhould mind and aime at in all our actions, to purchaſe this glory to him, to whom we are ſo infinitely beholding for all that we inioy. The Angell that appeared to Manoah, though he refuſed to eate, yet willed Iudg. 13. 16. Eſter 7. 2. 3. him to conuert the gift, into an holy preſent, or ſacrifice to God. Aſſuerus, to declare his loue to Heſter, promiſed to giue her what ſhe requeſted, euen to the halfe of the kingdome: but ſhe was content to reſigne her hope and aduantage that way, and turned the fauour ſhe found with the King, to the aduancing of Gods worſhip in and by the deliuerance of the Iewes from the miſchiefe of Haman. Good Nehemia, Butler to another King, finding Nehem. 2. 5. him enclinable and fauourable to himſelfe, and pitying him in his heauineſſe: preſently offereth to him the cauſe of the Church of God, to conſider of, and deſires that he may by his meanes be comforted in the reliefe of his countrimen the people of God. So Daniel hauing ſundry rewards offered Dan. 5. 17. 20. him for his good ſeruice by Nebuchadnezzar and Darius is content to to part with them all, ſo that the King wil acknowledge the Lord Iehoua, the author of thoſe gifts which he ſo admired. And reaſon there is hereof: for Exod. 32. if Paul and Moſes engaged their ſaluation, for the procuring of honour to Rom. 9. 3. God in the ſaluation of the Church: how much more are wee bound to ſeeke it by the forgoing of ſuch a fauour as we may well be without, and need not accept of? Beſides, this wiſdome ſhould be in all Chriſtians, to vſe euery opportunity they may to the poore Church of God, eſpecially ſeeing ſuch occaſions befall not often, nor to all ſorts of men, in this kind. And further they had need of good diſcretion who ſhould perſwade men to conuert that ciuill kindneſſe which they offer them as friends, to a religious vſe, as Chriſtians: ſithence they may thinke it either vnſeaſonable, or meerely loſt which they are drawne to beſtow vpon ſuch matters, except themſelues be firſt perſwaded to the loue of religion, and delight in the Saints of God, Pſal. 16. 2. as Pſalm. 16. Therefore to knit the next verſe and the ſumme thereof, with

this which belongeth to the ſame end, let both ſorts learne their dutie. They who benefit others without hope of requitall, let them not doe it to make others obliged and bound to them, as ſeruants and vnderlings; but vſe all the intereſt, credit, and loue they haue in and with them, (if they haue opportunitie) to perſwade them to loue and good workes, and to draw them to God, if they bee ſtrangers; as the truth is, at the firſt, ignorant folke are more drawne by ſuch inducements, then otherwiſe: or if they be alreadie Chriſtians, let them labour to draw them neerer, as I haue ſaid: ſaying thus euery man to the other: If I may preuaile with you any thing, or ye would gratifie me, preferre God and his fauour yourſelues, and exhort other to do ſo, and commend godlines alſo to them, and the poore members of Chriſt, to make much of them, and to be their delight, who excell in vertue, before all earthly commodities: as for your gratuitie, let the needie and diſtreſſed be partakers of it, and let them take my part, who ſhall bleſſe God for your pitie and bountie to them, and they ſhall yeeld you a tenne fold better requitall then I, being but one, can doe. And this bee ſaid of them who pleaſure other without looking for any requitall againe. The other who receiue benefit, and acknowledge that they haue been pleaſured by them, and that they owe a duty againe: if their offer be not accepted by the partie, let them not then fooliſhly draw backe their hand altogether from euery good vſe, ſaying; Seeing hee will not receiue this of me, I am diſcharged, and free from vnthankfulnes: as for others, I regard them not. For this ſauours of a ſiniſter meaning, not of a chearefull and heartie thankſgiuer, ſuch an one as that good Naaman was, 2. King. 5. and theſe here mentioned, who readily 2. King. 5. 15. anſwere to Gedeon, asking of them their earings to a good end, as hee intended it, wee are willing to giue that to thee, which thou askeſt to a good end and purpoſe: for it is like he told them, that he asked them not to his owne behoofe.
            
               Gedeon did well to ſet vp a remembrance of Gods kindneſſe, as Iacob left a Verſ. 27. Geneſ. 28. 18. memoriall of Gods appearing to him, when hee went into Meſopotamia, changing the name of the place, and calling it the houſe of God: for there the Lord had promiſed him ſafe deliuerance from the wrath of his brother Eſau, and to be with him whither he went, and to bring him ſafely backe againe: euen the like mind did Gedeon ſhew here, deſiring to keepe a remembrance of Gods deliuerance there. But in making the Ephod, which was the ſigne thereof, Gedeon was very vnaduiſed, and dealt without due and good conſideration. For in ſo weightie a caſe as that, and of ſo dangerous conſequence, it had been meete that hee had firſt conſulted with the Lord about it, and ſo (according to the reſolution hee ſhould haue receiued from him) to haue done: to wit, to haue abſtained from ſuch a worke: as vndoubtedly he muſt and would haue done, if God had bin conſulted with, and might haue ouer-ruled. And this is the fruite of raſhnes and careleſnes, whereas a ſmall matter might haue preuented all. It was, I ſay, no better in Gedeon then inconſiderate, though his meaning were good. For God ordained not the Ephod to ſuch an end, but onely for the Prieſts to weare in the Tabernacle when they offered ſacrifice: and permitted it not to men to follow him therein, neither to make one for ciuil vſes. It is charitably to be thought that Gedeon committed not Idolatrie himſelfe, who had throwne downe

the Altar of Baal before with deteſtation, and cut downe his groue: but howſoeuer it was, as it is not certaine to vs; yet ſeeing hee did otherwiſe in ſetting vp the Ephod, then God had commanded, hee fell into a kinde of Idolatrie, or was at leaſt a great occaſion thereof, and ſo the Lord being offended, puniſhed his iſſue and poſteritie, rewarding them both with the vnthankfulnes of the people, and alſo with the crueltie of Abimelech.
            
            So that though Gedeons meaning was otherwiſe, yet this diſpleaſed the Doct. verſ. 27. Lord which he did, for that he conſulted not with him in that ſtrange work which he tooke in hand. Therefore we ſee that it is not enough to haue a good intent (as they call it) in that which we do to ſerue God in, but knowledge muſt goe before out of the word, to warrant and vphold vs in our attempts and doings. For whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne: and wee are happie Rom. 14. 23. when we do good things, but ſo, that we firſt know them to be ſuch indeed, and not otherwiſe: for Iſrael had a zeale, but not according to knowledge. Rom. 10. 2. 1. Sam. 
                     •
                   5. 
               Dauid would haue builded God an houſe, then the which who could haue gone about a better thing in all mens account and iudgement? But God reproued him by Nathan, and yet he himſelfe conſented to him at firſt, vpon the like good intent.
            So, many haue ſince the daies of Queene Mary, and ſome ſtill doe of a good intent, enter into the Miniſterie, though many other intend nothing but to inrich themſelues with liuing: whom the Lord alloweth not by his word, they being not able to feede his people with the foode of life. So wee reade that Saul ſaued the fatteſt of the cattell (as he ſaid) to ſacrifice, contrary 1. Sam. 15. 22. to the word of the Lord; which if it had been ſo, had been bad: but that was onely a falſe pretence to couer his couetouſnes, and diſobedience to the commandement.
            Then Samuel reprouing him, was faine to anſwere him: Hath the Lord as great pleaſure in burnt offerings and ſacrifice, as that his law ſhould be obeyea? Therfore good intentions (corruptly ſo called) cannot bee accepted of him, except they be directed by knowledge.
            Of ſuch intents aroſe moſt parts and points of Poperie: the orders of Monkes, the worſhipping of the Sacrament, canonicall houres, free will, reliques, prayers to Saints, &c. Of all the which, and the like, the Lord ſaith, as he did by the Prophet Eſay in the like caſe, Who required theſe things at your 
               Eſay 1. 12. 
               hands? And in another place, In vaine doth this people worſhip me, teaching for 
               Eſay 29. 13. 
               doctrines, the precepts of men. So that by all which hath been ſaid, it is manifeſt how prone and readie wee are to Idolatrie and ſuperſtition. And what other thing doth this teach vs, but that it is a myſterie to ſerue God aright 1. Tim. 3. 16. and religiouſly: and that cannot ſtand with the common practiſe of men in the worſhipping of God, who receiue not the word in the power thereof, to work vpon them effectually, and ſo as they may be caſt into the mould thereof, but for faſhion and orders ſake.
            Againe, Gedeons ſetting vp the Ephod, was the occaſion of the peoples 2 falling to commit ſpirituall fornication with it, through his letting it alone, and they worſhipped it, as their fathers did the braſen Serpent: which therfore Ezechia commanded to be taken downe. Gedeon had done well therefore, if he had ſo ſerued the Ephod alſo, when he ſaw ſuperſtition to ariſe by occaſion of it. And this is the beſt fruite and ſucceſſe of blinde and ignorant

deuotion, that it draweth ſome miſchiefe alway with it, as the groſſe abſurdities in Poperie, of which I ſpake, aroſe at the firſt vpon ſuch beginnings. So that the thing which in theſe caſes is to bee done, is, that all ſuperſtition and implements thereof be held out of the Church of Chriſt: but if any of them haue been ſuffered to remaine, the next is, that as ſoone as may be, they be remoued. And as for Gods ordinances, they ought not to bee turned from their kinde and right vſe of ſeruing him in ciuill caſes, (as the Ephod was appointed by Gedeon) as to make playes of them, or offer them any ſuch abuſe: as the Word and Sacraments. But I paſſe to another thing concerning the people.
            Laſtly, in that ſundry of the people fell to Idolatry with the Ephod, who had before worſhipped God aright, with an vpright heart; and a plague of 3 God fell vpon them for it, note we, that they who after they haue receiued the knowledge of the truth, doe fall to Idolatrie, doe neuer eſcape deſtruction, if they lie ſtill therein, or ſome fearfull plague, although they riſe out of it againe, and depart from it. Salomon was a witneſſe hereof, both in himſelfe, and in his poſteritie, whoſe puniſhment is famous for harkning to his idolatrous wiues. And the Lord profeſſeth himſelfe in that caſe to be iealous, as a man that taketh his wife in ſpouſe-breach, who (moſt certainly) will not ſpare the offender. Prou. 6. 34.
            
            
               Verſ. 28. Thus was Midian brought low before the children of Iſrael, ſo that they lift vp their heads no more: and the countrey was in quietnes fortie yeeres, in the daies of Gedeon.
               
               29. Then Ierubbaal the ſonne of Ioaſh went and dwelt in his owne houſe.
               
               30. And Gedeon had ſeuentie ſonnes, begotten of his body: for hee had many wiues.
               
               31. And his Concubine that was in Shechem bare him a ſonne alſo, whoſe name he called Abimelech.
               
            
            IN theſe foure verſes another thing concerning Gedeon is ſet downe: and firſt it is ſhewed, how Midian for a
                  •
               h 
                  •
               he multitude and glorie thereof was The ſenſe of theſe foure verſes. brought low: whereby may be noted the ſorrow of ſuch of them as liued, and the ſhame and confuſion both of the liuing and the dead, with the fruit thereof, to wit, a finall ſuppreſſion of that enemie, and a long peace of fortie yeeres reſtored, all the life of Gedeon. Secondly, three more particulars concerning Gedeon are added: The firſt to his commendation: that hauing done the ſeruice for which the Lord extraordinarily called him, he willingly yeelded himſelfe to a priuate life againe, as he profeſſed againſt the contrarie, verſe 22. The two latter were to his blame. Firſt his polygamie in verſ. 30. Secondly, his yeelding to the vnlawfull deſire of his Concubine of Shechem, and making way thereby to the miſchiefe that inſued.
            For the firſt of theſe, the text ſaith, Midian was ſubdued and brought low, Doct. verſ. 28. &c. which being vnderſtood of the multitude of them, teacheth, and proueth, that we ought to looke alwaies to the end of things, and not to the beginnings, and floriſhing eſtate of them, and this to doe, the Scripture calles ſound wiſedome. Thinke we of the godlieſt, and things of greateſt account, pleaſure, pompe, dignitie, wealth, buildings, purchaſes, ſolemne marriages,

or ſuch like, I grant that the moſt men reioice and pleaſe themſelues in them vainely and fooliſhly for the time, as if they had gotten a paradiſe; but when all may ſee them to fade daily with the enioyers thereof, and change to corruption, no wiſe man can or dare pleaſe himſelfe or reſt in them, as if they could make him happie; but as he ſeeth the end will be therof, ſo he will enioy thē from God, as things decaying and tranſitorie. What then? ye will (perhaps) ſay, ſhall he not be glad of, nor delight in them till he doe forgoe them, and till an end of them come? I anſwere, that I ſay not ſo. But hee ſhall know what the end of them all will be before it come, by the manner Note. of vſing them. For he that ſeeketh by all theſe, to be more fruitfull in dutie doing to God, and in workes of loue to men, and not to take boldnes to ſin the rather by occaſion of them, this man may know that the end ſhall bee good, and in reſpect thereof, hee may vſe them all comfortably, ſeeing hee vſeth them warily and aright, as God directeth him, for in that he doth ſo, God alſo bleſſeth him exceedingly, which bleſſing few attaine thereto.
            The Lord is brought in by Moſes in Deuteronomy bemoning the want Deut. 32. 29. of practiſing this point of wiſedome in men, ſaying, Oh that my people were wiſe, and would conſider their end. And the Apoſtle asketh this queſtion of the Romanes, what fruite or pleaſure they euer had in that, which in the end Rom. 6. 21. brought ſhame to them? The wiſe & the fooliſh virgins giue cleere proofe Mat. 25. 3. 4. &c. vnto this: the fooliſh contenting themſelues to bee without oyle in their lampes, that is, to walke ſecurely, were therefore ſhut out: the wiſe waiting with oyle in their lampes, till the Bridegrome came, and therefore thus watching to the end, were taken in, and receiued readily. Looke vpon Abſolon for all the aduancing of himſelfe, and on Adonia: looke vpon Baltazar 
               2. Sam. 18. 17. 1. King. 2. 25. Dan. 5. 6. for all his iunketting with his choice companie in the holy veſſels of the Temple; and vpon Haman though he onely was bidden to the banquet with the King by Queene Heſter, and for all his other honour that hee had, Heſter 5. 11. compared with 7. 9. (which yet he himſelfe did not a little boaſt of) was not the end of it greater ſhame, then the beſt of it was glorie?
            Looke vpon the young man to whom Salomon ſpeaketh, who reioyced, Eccleſ. 11. 9. as if he ſhould neuer be old, nor mee
                  •
               e with worſe cheare, then iollitie and mirth: was it not told him, he ſhould come to iudgement? And what better end of his delicious life found the rich man in the Goſpell, then torments? And Luke 16. 25. thus I might heape vp examples infinitly, both out of the Scripture, and out of our own experience, of them who had gotten much here, and they were many in number in al ages that did thus, as the Midianites (of whom I now ſpeake) and were for their greatnes, and in their time, the talke of the world, yet hauing no ſure hold of heauen, nor part in other happineſſe then tranſitorie, came to naught, and were worſe then nothing; ſo as one may ſay of them, as Chriſt ſaid of Iudas, It had been good for them that they had neuer been borne. Therefore I conclude: bleſſed is the man that hath an eye to the end of his actions, and of all things which he beholdeth here vnder the ſunne: and ſo dealeth, that hee may finde and enioy thereby a good end of his life: therfore when the holy Ghoſt to the Hebrewes commended the faith of ſome, he willeth the reader to conſider what hath bin the end of the conuerſation 
               Hebr. 13. 8. 
               of ſuch. And the Pſalmiſt ſendeth vs to the end of the godly; Marke (ſaith he) the end of the righteous, for the end of him is peace. But for theſe that Pſal. 37. 37.
               
will be merrie otherwiſe, howſoeuer they goe to worke, their end will be in Note. heauineſſe, according to the words of our Sauiour, Woe be to you that now 
               Luke 6. 25. 
               laugh, fow ye ſhall howle and weepe.
            
            Now that it is ſaid here, they had fortie yeeres peace after this ſubduing 
                  Doct. 2. of the Midianites, it was a great benefit that God beſtowed vpon them: and ſo all that enioy it, or a great part of it, ſhall ſee cauſe to ſay, if they reade and conſider the bondage and woe that men are in to enemies and ſtrangers. Deut. 28. 48. Therfore we ſhould carefully looke what good may be done in ſuch times Note. of libertie and freedome from great diſturbance, eſpecially that when wee haue generally peace in the land, there be no priuate breaches with neighbours at home, nor in familie; but a quiet life with both; and the peace of a good conſcience to Godward, chiefly and aboue all things procured. Looke of this at large in chap. 5. and elſewhere.
            Now that which followeth concerning Gedeon, in this verſe is this: that Verſ. 29. it is ſaid, after this victorie, Gedeon liued (after a ſort) a priuate life, to proue and make it manifeſt that he deſired not, as he had told them before, the empire, contrary to Gods ordinance. So it is with ſome offices among vs annuall, or temporarie. If hee had in this priuacie liued idlely, or wickedly, as one that had done enough before, and now waxt weary, it would haue been ſet downe as other faults be. That which wee haue to learne by this, is; that we ſo vſe authoritie, countenance, preferment, or any ſuch libertie which is Doct. more then common, that we remember it muſt be laid downe againe, and haue an end, and that alſo (perhaps) in this life: and therefore, that we ſwell not, neither be puffed vp thereby, neither forget what wee haue been: for that, and ſuch like promotion or aduancement is but borrowed. And nothing is more common then to ſee age abaſed and in little regard: ſo that, The minde (as the ſaying is) is all in all: yea ſuch as the minde is, ſuch is the man. For elſe, what ſhould be the priuiledge of a godly man in reſpect of other, both in life and at death? Some may better haue thouſands (and vſe them more ſoberly) then ſome can hundreds. He that makes his proſperitie his heauen, cannot but thinke the contrarie to bee his miſerie and vndoing. But he that neuer ioyed too much in that he had, neuer laid it too neere his heart, when he loſt or for-went it. It is the ſpeech of a foole to ſay, It is moſt miſerable to haue bin happie. A wiſe man is neither ſo lifted vp with inioying that which he knoweth is vaniſhing and mutable, as if it were happines: nor ſo deiected in the forgoing it, as if he had loſt it, and as if his hope were paſt. The immoderate deſire of the minde is like to him who hauing vſed his body to a plenteous and delicate fare, being afterward compelled to ſtreighter allowance, pineth: and by the alteration of a full, fat, comely and ſtrong body, into a thinne, meager, pale, and decaied; ſheweth that the change of his diet hath made him vnlike himſelfe. Whereas the ſober minded reſembleth him, who tieth himſelfe to an ordinarie, as moſt agreeable to health and ſoundnes: and although hee come to an extraordinarie diet, yet he is a law to himſelfe, he eateth no more of many, then he did before of a few diſhes: So that as the one mendeth him not, ſo the other appaireth him not. Thus ſaith the Chriſtian with the Apoſtle, I haue learned to abound, 
               Philip. 4. 12. 
               I haue learned alſo to want: in diuers eſtates to be the ſame, euen contented and thankfull. A rare portion aboue al earthly treaſure: and ſuch as he needed

not be aſhamed to confeſſe, he had learnd, for he was borne to no ſuch priuiledge, as he was to be a free citizen of Rome, as he told Lyſias, but was taught it by the Spirit of God only.
            Wee haue great need to note this: for many by office, place, authoritie and ſuperioritie in Miniſtery and Magiſtracy, haue, and doe daily forget themſelues, and eſpecially if great wealth accompany the ſame, yea ſometime where there is no great matter in the perſons to cauſe it. And therefore when God ſhall blow vpon their eſtate, and caſt it downe, and they be conſtrained to come to abaſement, and to their old condition againe, wherein they once liued, they ſcorne and caſt it off, and ſhift by vnlawfull meanes to wind themſelues out of it, by running into debt with other men, neuer meaning to pay, as both appeareth in many Seruingmen and Souldiers that haue been of any place, and other better borne then the common ſort, and many more, who ſay with the Steward; Digge I cannot and to begge I am aſhamed, 
               Luke 16. 3. and liue I muſt ſome way or other, but they will neuer fall to worke, or to the doing of any thing beſeeming them for their maintenance, but hunt after pleaſure, harlots, dice, cards, robbing, and couſening the ſimple, and beguiling ſillie maides or matrons, to enrich themſelues, &c.
            And againe, this ſheweth the follie of ſuch great perſons, as truſting to their greatneſſe and wealth, as to a ſtrong hold, prouide as little for their owne changes, as for the hardneſſe which may befall their children: but bring them vp in all ſoftneſſe and delicacie, not ſo much as inuring them to any labour, or exercizing their bodies or wits to induſtrie and action: wherby it commeth to paſſe, that if their eſtate decline, they are left deſtitute and ſhiftleſſe: and vrged by an vnhappy neceſſitie of their owne procuring to vſe indirect meanes for maintenance.
            Another thing concerning Gedeon followeth, and that is, the ſetting verſe 30. 
                     •
                  1. downe of his many wiues, which was his great blemiſh. And it teacheth vs, that as well the faults and blemiſhes of Gods ſeruants are ſet before vs in the Scriptures, as their vertues: in which reſpect the Scriptures are vnlike to other ſtories or writings of men, carried partially through hatred or flattery to obſcure the truth. So are Dauids, Sampſons, and Peters; and the faults and infirmities of ſundry other approoued ſeruants of God: which (yet) is not done by the holy Ghoſt, that wee ſhould ſeeke libertie to follow them, for many ſorrowes ſhall be to ſuch, but to teach, that wee, euen the beſt, ſhould ſuſpect Pſalme 32. 10. our ſelues, being full of ſelfe-loue, to hide and winck at our corruptions and bad qualities, and therfore to keepe with all diligence our hearts, which we are hardly brought to doe, though they be out of meaſure deceitful, neither can we abide to be reprooued and ſhamed for the ſame.
            But ſeeing God hath for ſundry cauſes, and in diuers reſpects left the infirmities Why the blemiſhes of Gods ſeruants are ſet downe in Scripture. And they are three. The firſt. and blemiſhes of his ſeruants in ſcripture to be knowne of vs, I will briefly note and ſet downe ſome of them, hauing ſo good and fit occaſion offered, that ſo we may profit by them accordingly. He hath done it partly for our benefit, and partly to teach vs our dutie. Our benefit thereby is twofold. One, that if at any time we ſhould fall into ſome grieuous ſinne, and deſpaire of Gods mercy thereby, yet that wee may ſtay and vphold our ſelues by the examples of Gedeon and other ſuch, who fearing God, did yet fall dangerouſly, and recouered themſelues againe: that we, knowing that,

may in the like caſe receiue hope of pardon likewiſe, if we call our ſelues home againe by repentance.
            For in ſuch caſes when we are exhorted by Gods faithfull miniſters not to caſt away our confidence though we haue ſo offended, wee are ready to obiect thus: Oh there were neuer any of Gods children that fell ſo, and offended as we haue done, ſo that we may iuſtly feare, there is no remiſſion nor pardon for vs to be hoped for. Therefore when wee ſhall heare of the Note. infirmities of the godly, the cleere knowledge of this, much auaileth to ſtay vs from diſpairing. This is not therefore to imbolden vs by their example to ſinne, though we do yet ſtand by the grace of God, free from reprochfull euils, but to vphold vs, if we haue alreadie fallen dangerouſl
                  ••
                that wee faint not altogether. I ſay, it ſerueth for preuention of deadly 
                  •
               eare after ſinne, not to cauſe preſumption in ſinning. For if any will abuſe this knowledge to licentiouſneſſe, hoping for pardon as they heare that others haue obtained it, when they had ſinned in like manner as they themſelues haue done, let them know that God will meet with them, as their boldneſſe requireth, with terrors within, and ſhame without, till they ſhal wiſh that they had bin better aduiſed. And as they may iuſtly complaine that they ſinned more wilfully and purpoſely, then the Saints of God did, (to ſpeake of many of them) ſo they may feare that they ſhall not ſo eaſily find mercy and forgiueneſſe, as they found. And this is one cauſe that concerneth vs much, why the Lord hath left the faults of the godly manifeſted in Scripture, as wel as their vertues. Another is, that wee hearing how ſome rare people in ages paſt The ſecond cauſe. haue falne, we ſhould be more ſuſpicious of our ſelues, and more wary that wee ſlip not into the common euils of the time wee liue in, ſeeing wee are Note. much weaker in faith and grace then they were, and therefore are like more eaſily to forget our ſelues, and to fall grieuouſly, vnleſſe we count it our happineſſe (and oft tell it to our ſelues) to labour and endeuour by all meanes to perſeuere in vprightnes vnto our end: and therefore wee are like to find it as hard to recouer our ſelues againe. And indeed the bitterneſſe which they taſted in their falles, were enough to deterre vs from following them, though we were ſure to ſpeed at length aſwell as they. But few looke at the bitter, but at the ſweet onely, and ſo are deceiued.
            Another cauſe why God hath made knowne the blemiſhes of the faithfull The third. that liued in former times, is, to teach vs our duty towards our brethren, that if we heare any of them to haue falne into any grieuous offence, and afterward when it commeth to their remembrance, that they take ſuch a deep conceit for ſo diſpleaſing God, and lay it ſo neere their heart, that they feare it cannot be forgiuen them, I ſay, when it thus falleth out, we are taught by this our dutie; and that is, to incourage and helpe to vphold them in meekneſſe, and with our exhortings of them, and perſwaſions to riſe vp and returne againe, to comfort them alſo when wee ſee them repent, and to beare with their infirmities, and not to condemne and forſake them, good things being found in them, remembring our ſelues who would be glad to be helped vp, when we haue falne, rather then to be ſhamed, forſaken, and left to our ſelues. To this end is that of the Apoſtle, Brethren, if any be fallen by infirmity, 
               Gal. 6. 1. 
               you that are ſpirituall, that is, indued with more grace, and ſeaſoned with more fruites of Gods ſpirit, reſtore ſuch an one, that is, doe your indeuour with

meekeneſſe to raiſe him, conſidering your ſelues.
            
            The vſe, in generall, of this whole diſcourſe, is, to bee afraid to offend, ſeeing wee bee ſo vnwilling to heare of any rebuke for the ſame, and not to be bold to ſinne by authoritie of the fathers, ſeeing we are not willing to take Note. part with them in their puniſhments, but as ſhame and ſorrow are vnwelcome to vs, ſo let the ſinnes be alſo that bring them. For they quench faith, weaken grace, and looſe our good name, beſide the hindering of many duties. The Lord ſpeaking of his faithfull ones, ſaith: If they ſinne, I will correct 
               Pſalme 89. 31. 
               them, &c. but my louing kindneſſe I will neuer take from them. If then he meane not to forſake them, good cauſe why hee ſhould puniſh and correct them, that ſo they may be ſtopped in their bad courſe, and driuen backe againe. As Saint Paul to Timothy ſaith, I am perſwaded that the Lord had mercie vpon 1. Tim. 1. 15. me, as well for other mens example and benefit as mine owne. And thus by ſuch examples duly conſidered, and by the Scripture, wee haue conſolation and hope. So that farre be it from vs to ſay: [Nay, if hee be fallen, let him ſhift for himſelfe, I had better opinion of him then hee deſerued, now I ſee, he is an hypocrite, a Demas, a reuolter.] But oh man, is this the way for thee to procure to thy ſelfe compaſſion from others, if thou ſhouldeſt fall ſo, and hadſt the like need? If thou ſayeſt; God forbid I ſhould ſtand in ſuch need. I anſwer thee: Thou ſhalt doe wiſely in preuenting ſuch an occaſion: but that is not done by an high-minded conceit that ſuch a thing ſhall not befall thee, but rather by feare of thy ſelfe, and thy frailtie. Neither by thy tenderneſſe to others ſhalt thou be made the more ſubiect to fall, but the more watchfull againſt falling. But leſt thou ſhouldeſt ſay, I ſhall not fall, heare the Apoſtle ſaying, Leſt thou thy ſelfe be preoccupated, and doe the like.
            That Gedeon had fallen wee haue heard: now it followeth, that wee ſee how. One of his particular blemiſhes was, that he had many wiues: as for 
                  Doct. 2. the mentioning of his ſonnes, it was of it ſelfe, neither with him, nor againſt him, but is ſpoken of, to make way to the next chapter. But poligamie, that is, the hauing of many wiues, was againſt the firſt inſtitution. For though the Iewes did vſe it, yet our Sauiour rebuketh it, and ſaith, it was not ſo from Geneſ. 2. 24. Matth. 19. 8. Deut. 17. 17. the beginning: and God forbad it the Kings themſelues, (who might inioy the greateſt liberties) and why did he ſo? euen becauſe it turned their harts from God. For ſuch hunt after pleaſure, and forſake the Lord, which may be done alſo in ſingle marriages, (I confeſſe,) but much more in poligamie 1. Cor. 7. 33. being vnlawfull. For they who are giuen ouer to ſuch licentiouſneſſe, or to any other like courſe, it beſotteth them, and maketh them drunken therewith, in ſuch ſort as they become impotent to all that good is. Beſides the inconueniences which haue accompanied Polygamy, diſagreement, iealouſie, hatred. So that God is diſpleaſed highly at the hauing of many 1. Sam. 1. 6. wiues.
            But ſome will obiect: What is this to vs, who abſtaine from many wiues and are prohibited by law ſuch licentiouſneſſe? I anſwere, yes very much: For this is not only true in Polygamie, that mens harts be ſtolne from God, but in ſingle and lawfull marriage alſo, the ſame may bee, (as I haue ſaid before) yea and moſt certainly will be, if men giue themſelues the bridle, and conſider not one end thereof to bee the reſtraining of them from ſtrange luſts, and to liue holily, ſo as they be made more fit by their marriage to their

ſeuerall duties, which the moſt doe not regard. For they who by their vnſeemely ſpeeches and offenſiue behauiour towards other women, doe too apparantly teſtifie, that they liue vnchaſtly in marriage, and offend God grieuouſly thereby, much more would bewray their leaudneſſe and badnes that way, vncleanneſſe of body alſo, but that either they are reſtrained by law and ſhame, or elſe their married eſtate is mixed with many fearefull and great troubles, which doe any their luſts, in ſomuch as many who would giue ouer themſelues as farre as the worſt; dare not, ſeeing they are ſo cooled and held downe by afflictions. They are wiſe that vſe their marriage as an helpe, whereby they hold neerer to God, and become more dutifull and they that doe otherwiſe, if they be the ſeruants of God, ſhall eaſily ſee their abuſing of it by awkneſſe in Gods ſeruice, and vntowardneſſe to all good duties: but if they be wicked and vnconſcionable, they make that eſtate of marriage ſutable to their other parts of life, that is to ſay, all naught.
            In that it is ſaid further of Gedeon, that hee had a concubine in Sechem, Verſ. 31. that was another of his blemiſhes. Whereby as by other we may know, that they were vſed of men then, as well as wiues. They were inferiour to their wiues, and had no ſuperioritie in the familie, but were as ſeruants. Which was euill alſo euen as Poligamy. In Malachie we reade, that they who after Mal. 2. 15. the captiuitie had put away their wiues, and married ſtrange ones, who alſo obiected, that a man of God did ſo, namely Abraham, wee reade (I ſay) that they were anſwered thus: that he ſought a godly ſeed, and did it not of lightneſſe, or wilfulneſſe, ſo that although it was not according to the firſt inſtitution that he did, yet in as much as it was not reuealed ſo clearely to be ſinne in thoſe former times in which he liued, as it was ſince, it was no iuſt defence for thoſe, who comming after them, did it to ſatisfie their luſts when they had more light about the will of God, and knowledge of the ſinne it ſelfe, and alſo what an euill end did follow it. And the ſame teacheth vs, who Doct. haue a rule to guide our actions by, that wee may in no wiſe follow examples, no not of the good who haue done againſt thoſe rules, but to try them by the rules, as Paul requireth it of the Theſſalonians, Trie all things, and hold 
               1. Theſ. 5. 1. Cor. 11. 1. 
               that which is good. And he willeth the Corinthians, that no man follow him, but as he followed Chriſt: as hath been noted largely before.
            We are alſo here to conſider one fruite of his taking of that concubine, 2 euen by the name that ſhe cauſed Gedeon to giue the ſonne that hee had by her, to wit, Abimelech; which is as much as to ſay [My father is a king,] who kindled in him thereby the flame of bearing rule, to play the Tyrant, and to challenge the kingdome as due to his father, which yet hee refuſed both himſelfe, and alſo that it ſhould be giuen to his ſonnes. But what better fruit might be looked for, when Gods ordinance was broken? (See the like in Salomon, 1. King. 11.) And yet this ſhe did who might worſt haue done it, 1. King. 11. 3. 4. cauſing Gedeon to giue him the name of the Philiſtime Kings, who plaied the right part of a Philiſtime when he grew vp, and roſe to place. For as it is cleare by the next chapter, that ſhee was a wicked woman, and of bad kindred, and had induced and trained Gedeon to her deſire before, ſo there was none found like to that Abimelek her ſonne, that we reade of in his time, neither could be much worſe then he, either before or after him.
            Let this be a watchword about names giuing: for they that are naught,

will take euery occaſion to increaſe their ſinne, euen by occaſion thereof, that if any of their name haue been noted aboue other for ſome bad qualitie, as ſtoutneſſe and ſtomacke, bragging and boaſting, pot-companionſhip, or ſuch like, oh they muſt vphold the name, (though it be but a ſhaddow, as Abſoloms pillar,) and ſo be ſutable to their name, if it occaſion them euill, and to keepe aliue the bad practizes and courſe of them that bare that name before them. Euen ſo names more aduiſedly and wiſely giuen to children (as I haue taught in another place) are good occaſions to prouoke them to their duties.
            Beſides, we may ſee what men get, who are of any good note, by entring 3. Doct. verſ. 31. into ſo neere a league, and hauing ſo inward acquaintance with ſuch dames and mates, which though it were in ſingle and lawfull marriage, yet it threatens as farre as man may iudge, an extinguiſhing of the good ſparkles of grace in them that are ſo matched. Which ſhould cauſe the ſeruants of God to linke themſelues in marriage with women, more like to themſelues in religion and good behauiour. And for them for whom it is too late to giue this warning vnto, (who are too many) let them yet receiue and imbrace this inſtruction that is giuen them in the ſecond place: that is to ſay, how they take counſell of ſuch wiues or ill companions (in caſes doubtfull and and dangerous,) as are malicious, high-minded, quarrellers, contentions, waſpiſh, couetous and gripers, or in a word, voide of true religion. Sampſon may be an example to all, both of hearkning too farre to ſuch, and ſo Gedeon may be alſo, and likewiſe of opening and telling that ſecret which is not meet to be imparted vnto them, which Sampſon did to his great reproch and abaſement. But here an end of this ſeeing of both theſe laſt points I haue intreated purpoſely before, out of the former hiſtories.
         
         
            THE FIFTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſe 32. So Gedeon the ſonne of Ioaſh died in a good age, and was buried in the ſepulcher of Ioaſh his father in Ophrah, of the father of the Ezrites.
               
               33. But when Gedeon was dead, the children of Iſrael turned away, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal berith their God.
               
               34 And the children of Iſrael remembred not the Lord their God, which deliuered them out of the hands of all their enemies on euery ſide.
               
               35. Neither ſhewed they mercie on the houſe of Ierubbaal or Gedeon, according to all the goodneſſe which he had ſhewed vnto Iſrael.
               
            
            
               NOw together with the Chapter, the holy ſtory maketh an end of The generall ſumme. 
               Gedeons acts: and maketh mention of his death and buriall, and ſheweth what the people of Iſrael did afterwards. In this verſe it

is ſaid, he died in a good age. For ſeeing ſome of his faults haue been ſpoken of, to leaue them ſo, would haue bred ſome doubts, he hauing done many good things, therefore his end is here ſet downe, to ſhew, that both hee had the bleſſing of old age granted him, and alſo that it was bleſſed with many good things by God vnto him. The ſame that is ſaid of him, is Geneſ. 15. 15. Geneſ. 25. 8. ſaid of Abraham: that he ſhould die in a good old age. Which ſpeech here applied to Gedeon, and affirmed of him, though it be not to be drawne ſo farre as to prooue he died godly, but onely noteth fulneſſe of daies, and 1. Chro. 29. 28. proſperitie in this life, yet it is cleare that he died ſo, and obtained eternall life after, in that he is reckoned among the faithfull in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. Heb. 11. 32. Which is to good purpoſe to bee ſet downe, he being (though a godly man, yet) blemiſhed, that thereby we may know he repented.
            By this we are taught that we muſt ſtabliſh our faith, hope and other graces Doct. verſ. 32. of God begun in vs at our firſt conuerſion, that wee may bee rooted, grounded, and ſetled therein, as the Apoſtle willeth the Coloſſians, and that Coloſ. 27. ſo the neerer we are the graue, the more glorious and fruitful our profeſſion may be, and in our age we may more flouriſh then in our youth: which is a Note. thing not eaſily found nor obtained. Therefore the Apoſtle Saint Peter alſo 2. Pet. 3. 17. exhorteth, ſaying: Take heed, that ye be not led away from your ſtedfaſtneſſe; and ſheweth how that may be like to be, euen by the error of the wicked. For by beholding how they walk, who haue no feare of God at all, and by harkning to their ſubtill counſell, and poiſoned perſwaſions, we ſhall find to our coſt, that there is no ſmall force to draw vs after their curſed example, wheras we were in a good courſe before. If Gedeon ſo mightily and oft aſſiſted and helped, did yet fal in ſuch manner as we haue heard, what may we look for in ſo many and ſo variable caſes through out our whole liues? It is well ſeene in this age, what need they haue to profit by this doctrine, who ranne well ſometime, as the Galathians did, but yet haue ſuffered themſelues to Gal. 5. 7. be letted, ſo that they obey not the truth, which they began and profeſſed commendably to doe.
            Many faults both to the wounding of the conſcience, and the offence of men, prouoke God daily in his owne children, and make faith to ſeeke, and hope to waxe faint, for that we doe not labour carefully to bring forth fruit plentifully thereof, and to hold out with all poſſible endeuour the profeſſion of our hope with ioy. And if we haue trode awry, and begun with the wiſe virgins to ſlumber, yet through due and continuall attending vpon Matth. 25. 5. God, and daily and oft repairing and drawing neere to him, wee ſhould not ſleep therein, but make haſte ſpeedily to come home againe vnder the Lords wing and protection, where only true ſafety and good being is to be 
                  •
               ound: and that the rather, ſeeing the poore chicken and bird void of reaſon, after the leaſt ſtraying, longs by & by after the damme, and to be vnder her wing: and ſay wee therefore euery one with the Prophet to the Lord, O forſake me not ouer long: and euer and anone looke wee that all be well with our ſoule, Pſalm. 119. 8. that there be peace betwixt God and vs, and that our faith and repentance waxe not ſtale, nor loathſome to vs. And make wee no haſte to ruſh into Note. ſhamefull and reprochfull ſinnes, for neither is the burthen and ſhame of them eaſily borne, nor the getting out of them; and the recouering of our

ſelues againe from vnder ſuch bondage, eaſily obtained, when wee be once fallen into them; whereof, by many occaſions much hath been before ſpoken.
            And hereafter the long mentioning of Gedeons acts followes his death: 2 To teach vs, that to be the end of all fleſh, whether the life be ſhort or long, as Dauid alſo witneſſed in other words, ſaying; I goe the way of all the world. 
               1. King. 2. 2. And great incouragement wee haue to prepare and haſte for death, if wee haue learned aright to dye, ſeeing with our being with Chriſt, which is beſt of all, there are with infinite other vnutterable prerogatiues, ſo many excellent and holy ſeruants of God gone before vs thither, to welcome vs. Of which point, ſee more by the like occaſion of Ioſhua and others, in the former proceſſe of this booke.
            Now the laſt of the things that followed after the death of Gedeon, is this, Verſ. 33. 34. to wit, that the people of Iſrael (for all that wee haue heard God did for them) fell againe to Idolatrie, and that moſt ſhamefully. And by this we ſee Doct. what fearefull things follow the taking away of good gouernours which maintaine true religion. For they by their authoritie haue contained and held the people within compaſſe, who being dead, they fall away. Pray therefore earneſtly for them, and make we vſe of their liues, that we may leade 
               1. Tim 2. 2. 
               a godly and peaceable life vnder them. For contrariwiſe when other that know not the Lord, riſe vp in their roomes, the people ſhall haue ſorrow their bellies full. The like may be ſaid of godly preachers and parents, what a loſſe it ſhall bee to the people of God, whom they ſhall leaue behinde, to forgoe them. But of this at large in the ſecond Chapter.
            Their ſins were theſe two: One, that they tooke Baal-berith, as they called 2 him, for their God: the other, that they forgot the Lord their God. This Idoll they called the Lord of league, whoſe Image they ſet vp. Herein conſiſted their worſhipping of him, that they acknowledged the good things that they receiued, to bee giuen them of him, and the remouing of their troubles to bee from him alſo. And to aſcribe theſe to a ſtocke, what was it but to goe a whoring after it, as here it is ſaid they did, from the true and liuing God? And hauing ioyned themſelues to him, they forſooke and forgot the Lord God, who had done all good things for them. And this and no better is the worſhip and ſeruice which our deuouteſt votaries in popery doe giue vnto the Lord at this day, as to him that will compare the religion of the one with the other will eaſily and ſoone appeare. See ſomewhat of this their ſinne in Chapter 2. 11. 13.
            Furthermore, this example teacheth how inconſtant we are in all good beginnings and courſes, and how ready wee are to decline and turne away from thence, euery one to that whereto his falſe and deceitfull heart carrieth him: whether to Poperie or any other looſe and vnfaithfull ſeruing of God in hypocriſie: as to ſay, Lord, Lord; and to draw neere to him with the body, the heart being far from him: while no conſcience is made of dutie Matth. 7. 21. Matth. 15. 8. towards him. Whereas the only forgetting of the kindnes of the Lord our God, who onely hath fed, preſerued, deliuered and inlightned vs vnto the life to come, and who (in one word) hath been all in all vnto vs, I ſay, this onely forgetting him, and the ſuffering of his benefits to ſlip out of our

mindes, is ſinne of it ſelfe moſt grieuous and great, without the other, as we Note. haue ſeene chap. 2. 2, 3. and in this chapter alſo I haue ſaid the like of this point, verſ. 27.
            The vnthankfulnes of the people towards Gedeons poſteritie is ſet downe Verſ. 35. in this verſe, which is further expreſſed in the next chapter: as in this, that they ſuffered his ſonnes to be ſlaine: their ſinne is aggrauated hereby, that he had done ſo great things for them, as to deliuer them out of ſo fearefull bondage, as we haue heard they were in to the Midianites. But in this they did like themſelues. For (not to repeate that which I haue ſaid hereof twice in this chapter, verſ. 18. 22.) we may be ſure of this, (as we ſee here in theſe) that they who are vnfaithfull and vnthankfull to God, are not to be truſted that they will deale better with men. This both the heauenly order of the law of God teacheth, and many examples alſo. As Abraham ſaid; I ſaw that the feare of God was not in this place, and therefore what truſtineſſe is to bee Geneſ. 20. 11. looked for to me of men? And likewiſe that example of the vnrighteous Iudge ſheweth as much, that neither feared God, nor reuerenced man. This meaſure Luke 18. 2. our Sauiour found among his owne countrey men, when he had done many great good workes among them, yet they would haue ſtoned him Ioh. 10. 32. for them. And why? for they were not faithfull to God. Doe we our duties therefore of conſcience to God, that ſo wee may not faile toward men. For otherwiſe from vs nothing is to bee looked for, but vnfaithfulnes to men, and euill example, vtterly vnbeſeeming vs, when time ſhall ſerue to bewray and ſift vs: which (as the prouerbe ſaith) is the mother of truth, and reuealeth that which was long hidden.
            Now to end the chapter with the anſwere of an obiection. It is marueiled Obiect. at, that God ſuffered this Idolatrie and ſuperſtition ſo long vnpuniſhed. For ſuch as obiect thus, thinke that it fell out a little after the victorie, as it is ſure Gedeon asked of the people the earings that made the Ephod, by and by after the victorie, whereas yet Gedeon continued fortie yeeres after this. But it is anſwered by S. Auſtine, who in ſuch a caſe, being no article of our faith, Anſw. may haue his iudgement approoued, and receiued, being likely; and not being anſwered by the Scripture. He ſaith, that though the gold was gathered ſoone after the victory, yet the Ephod was not made by and by, but long after, to wit, about the end of Gedeons life. Or if it were made ſooner, yet it was not abuſed till toward his death. But of vncertainties we are not to ground any inſtruction, and therefore here an end.
            
               THE FIFTIE FIVE SERMON IS CONtinued on the ninth Chapter of Iudges.
               
                  Verſe 1. Then Abimelech, the ſonne of Ierubbaal, went to Shechem to his mothers brethren, and communed with them, and with all the familie and houſe of his mothers father, ſaying,
                  
                  2. Say, I pray you, in the audience of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you that all the ſonnes of Ierubbaal, which are ſeuentie perſons reigne ouer you, either that one raigne our you? Remember alſo that I am your bone and your fleſh.
                  
                  3. Then his mothers brethren ſpake of him in the audience of all the men of Shechem
                     
                     all theſe words: and their hearts were moued to follow Abimelech: for ſaid they, he is our brother.
                  
                  4. And they gaue him ſeuenty peeces of ſiluer out of the houſe of Baal-berith, wherewith Abimelech hired vaine and light fellowes which followed him.
                  
                  5. And he went vnto his fathers houſe at Ophrah, and ſlew his brethren, the ſons of Ierubbaal, about ſeuentie perſons vpon one ſtone: yet Iotham the youngeſt ſonne of Ierubbaal was left, for he hid himſelfe.
                  
                  6. And all the men of Shechem gathered together with all the houſe of Millo, and came, and made Abimelech King in the plain, where the ſtone was erected in Shechē.
                  
               
               THe ſumme of this Chapter I will firſt ſet downe, as vſually I doe, together The ſumme and parts of this Chapter. with the parts of it, which are three. The firſt this: namely, how Abimelech ſeeking the kingdome, and hauing got the men of Shechem on his ſide, killed all his ſeuentie brethren, except one: and this to the ſeuenth verſe. The ſecond, the heauie prediction of his ouerthrow by that one brother Iotham, who eſcaped his bloodie hands, which denounced deſtruction to him, and to the men of Shechem. And this to the 22. verſe. The 3. is, how that which was threatned & foretold by Iotham, the ſon of Gedeon, remaining aliue, came to paſſe, and was fulfilled, concerning the ruine and ouerthrow of Abimelech, and the men of Sechem, and that by the mutuall hatred and vexations that aroſe betwixt them. And this to the end of the Chapter.
               Thus the Chapter being deuided, I will firſt ſpeake of the former part of it, as it lieth in order, and handle the other two in due place.
               
                  The firſt part.
                  WE are to conſider in this firſt part, how Abimelech after the death of his father, wounde in with the men of Shechem, to make him king, and for this purpoſe ſlew all his brethren ſaue one; and this to the 7. verſe.
                  And for the effecting of this, it is ſaid here that this Abimelech went to his mothers kindred: for he ſaw it was loſt labour to attempt ſo horrible a fact by his fathers friends helpe, or any other: and by his ſubtiltie, and flatterie, he wonne their hearts to be willing to hearken vnto him; they nothing reſpecting the common benefit of the land, but their owne priuate commoditie: and ſo helped him forward by money, which much aduanced his purpoſes: and thus being fleſhed (for the more ſecure enioying of his will) he was inboldened to kil 70. perſons ſaue one, of his brethren, and then (as they thought) the coaſt being cleare, theſe Shechemites went about to make him King, and performed it accordingly. And thus the houſe of Gedeon was ouerthrowne, and moſt deteſtable vſurpation, and tyranny by Abimelech, came in.
                  Here firſt we may note by Abimelechs going to his mothers kindred to Doct. in verſ. 1 further him, when he went about this miſchieuous intent, in ſeeking to be king; we note (I ſay) the caſt of wicked men in the compaſſing their deſires; that is, when they intend any euill, they wil repaire to ſuch places and companies, as they thinke are for their purpoſe, and (if they haue conuerſed with better before) yet they then take no more pleaſure in their company any longer. Not that they neuer goe to bad company, but when they goe

about ſome eſpeciall euill. For it is their meat and drink, and paſtime to conuerſe with ſuch as they themſelues are, (as neere as may be) cont
                        ••
                     nally; but if they be forted by education, cohabitation, or other occaſions with better then themſelues, (as it comes to paſſe oft times) yet euen there, if they grow to affect, and ſet their hearts on ſome particular more miſchieuous practiſes then they were wont in times paſt, they will (if it be poſſible) giue them ouer, as no companions meet for them, and breake out to other companie, and conuerſe with thoſe that bee of their owne diſpoſition, and like themſelues. The reaſon is, they be not onely more wearie of the good company that they were in, then they were before; but they ſee, that they cannot follow their bad purpoſes ſo currantly while they bee among them, neither looke they for any aide thereto at their hands, as they doe by the other: but know, that they ſhall bee ſuſpected, diſſwaded, hindred, and broken off by them from their ill purpoſes. And what maruell? for this changing of company, as the good for the bad, ariſeth vpon ſmaller occaſions, then vpon the minding and intending of ſuch miſchiefe, as this Abimelech here went about. For they in the ſixth of Iohn, when they had taken a pritch againſt our Sauiour, Iohn 6. 66. it is ſaid of them, that they walked no more with him, and much more and ſooner men doe this, when they purpoſe wickedneſſe. Abſolon therefore 2. Sam. 15. 10. when he intended to rebell againſt his father, got him away, and gathered companie fit for ſuch a purpoſe, his fathers houſe was a priſon and weariſome vnto him. And Iudas, when he went about to betray his Maſter, forſooke and left the company of him, and the Apoſtles, and went to the Phariſies, the moſt deadly enemies of Chriſt, and lincked himſelfe in with them. But moſt clearely we ſee this in the like fact of Adoniah, 1. Kin. 1. reported by Nathan to Dauid in this manner: Me (ſaith hee) thy ſeruant, and Zadocke the 
                     1. King. 1. 25. 
                     Prieſt, and Salomon thy ſonne, he hath not called: (why? they were not for his tooth) but Ioab the captaine, and Abiathar the Prieſt, and ſome of his younger brethren, men fitter for his ambitious humour: them hath hee called; crie before him and they ſay, God ſaue King Adoniah. And euen ſo it is ſtill at this day, as I haue ſaid. For there are many bad mixed with the good, and company with them in ſiniſter reſpects, for ſome benefit they looke for, or credit thereby, or for their ſafety, who yet when they ſee their time, wind out from them, and ioyne to other companie, much like to Simon Magus, when he ſaw the Apoſtles were not for him. And it is an ill ſigne when they doe ſo, I meane, to forſake the ſocietie and fellowſhip of good people, and company with the bad. For though there was no great hope of ſome of them, when they were at the beſt, and when they were by meanes of their calling and imployments ſorted into the company of the godly, becauſe they had no pleaſure nor delight in them, but rather their hearts were farre from them, euen then, when in place they were moſt neere them: yet they were in the way all that while, to good, and to be wrought vpon, or drawne on, one time or other, while they abode in ſuch places and companies, if God had been pleaſed to worke in them: but when they leaue, and forſake them, and ſo bewray themſelues in their colours, though they ſhould meane no worſe; then their woe commeth vpon them, and they wrap themſelues deepely into miſchiefe and miſery, with little hope of recouery, or getting out againe, yea, or being ſtopped in that their bad courſe.
                  
                     
And yet this I ſay, that ſuch as keepe company with thoſe that are religious, and take no good by them, they are deepely bewitched, couering their hypocriſie, with the cloake of good companie: as Chriſt told them, who anſwered Luke 13. 26. him, that they had eaten and drunke in his company: although for the moſt part, this prooueth true of them, that if a man once ſpie out their leaudneſſe, and will not allow them in their euill courſe, but tell them of it, they will away from them, if they can, forthwith, and count them their enemies. But, as they are wearie of ſuch without any iuſt cauſe, ſo they muſt know, that they from whom they depart, are wearie of them for good cauſe; and deſire, (if they may doe it lawfully, and can haue no good hope to reclaime them) to depart from them alſo, as Moſes did, (when hee was able to iudge Heb. 11. 24. what hee did) from the houſe of Pharaohs daughter, and as Salomon counſelleth vs to doe in a caſe much like, ſaying: Seeſt thou a man in whom Prou. 14. 7. there are not the lippes of wiſdome, depart from him.
                  The vſe that the godly ought to make of this, is: to learne of ſuch as are wiſer in their kind then we are in ours; that is, alwaies to be carefull to vſe, and delight in godly company, as they doe in the contrary; and by no meanes to depart from, or forſake it; whereby not onely we may ſhew and giue proofe, that we our ſelues not only warpe not, neither imagine, nor ſet our hearts on euill, while we company with, and cleaue faſt to them that are good: but alſo that through their godly inſtructions, counſell, reproofe, and example, wee ſeeke to get all poſſible good by their company. And if we ſhould at any time decline by ſome occaſion, yet that we labour to bee brought backe againe into the right way, and ſo continue therein: and as for the fellowſhip of the leaud, let it be to vs more odious, then ours can bee Pſalm. 15. 4. to them, as I haue noted. The bad alſo may make their vſe and profit of this doctrine, in this manner, let them that be not wholly paſt hope, but walking vp and downe, as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, in the counſell of the vngodly, as yet Pſalm. 1. 1. vnreſolued what to do, let ſuch (I ſay) if they haue any care of themſelues, draw and gather to good company. For want whereof, and by the contrary, they grow to be leaud perſons, as drunkards, whoremaſters, theeues, idle ones, and ſuch like. For, as I haue noted, that a bad man, that hee may the better doe euill, departeth from the good: ſo it is true alſo, and much more that becauſe a man draweth not neere the good at all, therefore he is the eaſilier carried to that which is naught. And as they are iuſtly to be ſuſpected to be badlie diſpoſed, who caſt off good company, which they haue ſeemed to imbrace: ſo they are to be pitied, and exhorted to the frequenting of the good, who, for want of it altogether, haue fallen into bad company, and bin ſeduced thereby. Both are faultie, though the former more then the latter. For the latter would be glad (ſuch as are of the ſimpler ſort of them) to bee aduiſed, and profit much by wholeſome counſell: the former who haue enioyed it already, are wearie of it, and ſeeke to ſhake it off: the latter, although they are flexible, and eaſily drawne away by ill example: yet they contriue not miſchiefe of themſelues for the moſt part: whereas the former, through a ſecret lingring after their luſts, doe not need others (alwaies) to call them on, but they themſelues rather poyſon other, and like Abimelech, draw others to them: no companions proouing ſo leaud, as they who breake from the good.
                  
                     
Thirdly, let them that are among the good (ſo placed by Gods prouidence) acknowledge it to bee a great mercie: and beware of that ſubtiltie and falſehood of heart, whereby they depriue themſelues of the fruit of it. Let them ſay thus: If credit, gaine, commendation, or fauour (all which I may obtaine by the cleauing to the godly) ſeeme ſo much to be deſired: how much more deſirable is that, for which a good man himſelfe is to bee deſired, I meane, his grace? which as it may well goe with the other, ſo it will make his companie to be alway precious, and much eſteemed. Contrariwiſe, what is it that makes a man count good men odious? Surely a bad purpoſe of miſchiefe leſſe or more: this is that which makes him to be rather where his heart is, and whither his luſt carries him, then where his bodily preſence is. Conſider then what an odious thing is that, which cauſeth ſuch odious effects? It is a foule part to depart from the good. How much more to flee to the other aduerſe partie, I meane the tents of the vngodly? and moſt of all, that which cauſed both theſe, a luſt of the heart after their bad qualities. Indeed, for the deſire of a man (be it good, or euill) a man will 
                     Prou. 18. 1. 
                     ſeparate himſelfe: meaning from all which might hinder it. Gehazi, for his couetous deſire, will withdraw himſelfe from his maſter: Demas from Paul, &c. Yea ſurely, for his ſins ſake a man will deuide himſelfe from father, mother, kindred, as Chriſt ſaith. Is not this odious? much more odious then is that for which a man wil do thus. Again, there is great cauſe of this meditation, becauſe ſome (not knowing thēſelues to be ſo euil, as indeed they be) ſuſpect not the temptation to euill, ere it aſſaile them; and therefore are no ſooner tempted, but they are alſo foyled. Hazael, when he came to the Prophet 2. King. 8. 13. 
                     Eliſha did reuerence and acknowledge him ſo farre, as hee ſaw well inough what good he might haue taken by him, and at that time he framed himſelfe to diſlike that euill which the Prophet told him he ſhould worke, yea, he deteſted it: but when afterward he plaied the cruell Tyrant againſt the Church of God, he ſhooke off all due remembrance of him, and of his owne words to him, which were good then, euen as many doe in the like caſe. No wonder, for he was falſe-hearted, and neuer loued him ſo, but hee might hate him as much, when time ſerued.
                  Laſtly, as for ſuch as will boaſt that they are for all companies, good and bad; and can apply themſelues (like that fiſh) to all colours, and keepe their bad purpoſes to themſelues, let ſuch impious fellowes (farre worſe then the former) feare leſt he that found out Abimelech for his ſinne, will not let them eſcape ſcotfree for theirs, which are not inferiour to his. Touching the infection of bad company, more elſewhere ſhall be ſpoken in a fit place.
                  This ſonne of the concubine, ye haue heard, went to, and among them Verſe 2. with whom he was likeſt to preuaile, and to this end, that he might be made King: the which his father vtterly refuſed for himſelfe, and his; and yet this monſter, borne out of time, regarding neither God, nor father, moſt impudently ſought the kingdome againſt his will and liking, yea and againſt all right. Now it followeth, what his deuice and reaſon to them of Shechem, was to get it. One was this: that it was better he alone ſhould be King then ſeuenty of his brethren. But it might haue been anſwered, that it was neither needfull, nor lawfull, that hee, or they, ſhould reigne ouer the people. His ſecond deuice and ſhift was, not for the publike, for that hee was neere

them and their fleſh. The third was, ſeeing he would (he told them) bee for their priuate benefit: for that he pretended to them, that he being of their kindred, hee would chiefly ſeeke their peace, profit and preferment. All which was but couſonage, ſubtiltie, and flattery.
                  Here in that this wicked inſtrument, the ſonne of a good man, roſe vp to 
                        Doct. 1. attempt, and worke the miſchiefe which his father abhorred, wee may ſee, what wicked poſteritie come oft times of a godly ſeed, and how vnlike the parents in goodneſſe: whereas one would thinke, that they ſhould rather labour to reſemble, and to be like thoſe their godly parents at the leaſt. The generation after Ioſhuahs time, degenerated from that which was before it. Ely, Samucl, and Dauid, moſt of the good Prieſts, Prophets, Kings, had wicked children, euen as is to be ſeene in all ages. The reaſon is; firſt, the want of good education, when they are vntaught, and ill gouerned. Secondly, as the beſt corne breedes chaffe, ſo the godly beget their children not as they are godly, but as they are men naturall and ſinfull: neither is Gods grace tied abſolutely to them, for their parents ſake. Thirdly, pride, ſtubbornneſſe, wilfulneſſe, and ſeeking of libertie in youth; and among the reſt, this is not the leaſt, the multitude of bad example, I meane which are fit enough to poyſon the beſt natures, though they haue both inſtruction, and outward gouernment. So that many leaud youths are trained vp at the great coſt of their parents, who yet loſe all, and their hope alſo, their children not walking in their ſteps.
                  Oh what multitudes are there of ſuch in our age? In which (yet there is more done for making them good, (eſpecially in ſome places) then hath been in former times, though they are rare, who offend not herein euen in the ſight of others. A thing much to be lamented, to ſee ſo many youths vnlike their good parents: but where none or weake meanes are vſed to make them better, it is not to be marueiled at. The woe to both, is not knowne cō
                     monly, Note. til it be ſo felt, that it is paſt remedying. The beholding of the contrary, as it is rare, ſo it is goodly and beautifull. But it is a great cauſe, why the death of childrē before they come to proofe, ſhould be borne patiently, ſeeing it is not to be doubted, but that moſt of them are taken away at the beſt, and who knoweth to what woe they might be brought, if they ſhould liue? It is to be lamented that the examples of good parēts being ſo few, yet euen of theſe few, few (to ſpeake of) preuaile with their children: from whence the common complaint of all ſorts is, as theirs to Samuel. A good father: but 2. Sam. 8. 5. the child walkes not in his ſteps. For the infinite bad parternes of gouernours, are generally embraced: none fearing to follow where they haue led the dance, no, though it bee to deſtruction, as if all the beaſts of the forreſt ſhould each follow the tract of his fellow, to the den of the Lion, becauſe till they be within the den, and paſt recouery, there appeares in the footſteps no danger. It is ſaid of Iacobs ewes, that beholding the pilled roddes laid in their water-troughes, they conceiued particoloured lambes forthwith: and ſo a man would thinke that ſo neere and domeſticall examples, as good parents are to their children, (who are nouriſhed by them, grow vp with them, and are warmed by their heate, as Nathan ſpeakes of the poore mans 2. Sam. 12. 3. ſheepe: yea haue the benefit of the familiar inſtruction, and conuerſation, of ſuch as are of their owne diſpoſition, and nature:) a man would thinke, (I

ſay) that ſuch ſhould take after them in grace, as they doe reſemble them in their viſage, or naturall properties. A man would thinke, that they ſhould (as it were) through a mutuall feeling of the ioy which a good parent hath of a wiſe child, and of the ſorrow by the contrary: that they ſhould alſo reioyce in following their goodneſſe. Thus wee might thinke, and thus it ſhould be, if God in his ſecret iudgement had not prepared ſome (euen of them alſo) to the euill day. It is ſaid of Elie his children: they hearkned not 1. Sam. 2. 25. to their father, becauſe God had determined to deſtroy them; to wit, for the in expiable offence they had cauſed to the people by their polluting the holy things of God. And ſo alſo, it is pitifull to thinke that the other ſort, the poſteritie of bad parents, dare venture ſo confidently to goe where their anceſtours haue gone; as it were taking ſinne by tradition from them, yea filling 1. Pet 1. 18. Matth. 23. 32 vp the meaſure which they attained not to, as our Sauiour ſpeaketh This in a manner, is generally ſeene: and where it is in a few otherwiſe, there another father, euen the Father of Chriſt hath reuealed it from heauen, fleſh and blood hath not taught it. And this dregge of Poperie is naturall, without teaching: to make it a ſtrong piller of a mans religion to do
                        •
                      as the forefathers haue done. In the ſtory of the Church it is reported▪ that a certaine Heathen Prince hauing receiued ſo much light of true religion, that hee was content to bee baptized: yet when hee came to the water, ſtopped, and asked the Miniſter this queſtion: Whether haue more of my anceſtors (being vnbaptized) gone to heauen, or hell? To hell, ſaith the Miniſter. So will I then, ſaid he, and refuſed Chriſtianitie vrterly. Yea doubtleſſe, nature teacheth no better then this, euen rather to go to hell with the parents, then to heauen without them. Both theſe, I ſay, are lamentable: as for the vſe that both ſorts are to make thereof, I ſhall not need to inſiſt vpon it here, hauing oft vrged it in other places.
                  Now of his ſhifts, which I will put together for breuitie ſake, matter ariſing The vnfolding of the ſecond verſe. ſo plentifully. And marke by what fraud he goeth about it, inſinuating with them, that it he be not King ouer them, then his ſeuenty brethren muſt reigne together. But that he thought they would neuer allow, or conſent to. Secondly, where hee telles them, it were better be ſo, that he reigned; it was vntrue alſo, for that is beſt alwaies that God appoints, who did deteſt this. Thirdly, in that he ſetteth out himſelfe, as though hee ſhould ſay, who is firter for your benefit then I? they ought to haue knowne, that in creating of Magiſtrates, the publike, and not the priuate commoditie is to be reſpected.
                  That which we haue tolearne hereby, is this: that all ſhifts and ſubrile 
                        Doct. 2. practiſes are ready at hand with them that intend miſchiefe: and that which they goe about, is by lying, cogging, and falſhood. But as for the Lord in their dealings, he muſt ſtand by, and a ſame off. The reaſon of both is, the Ierem. 17. 9. heart of men is euill aboue meaſure, and is deepe, and hath many abominations in it. They deuiſe, and goe to worke without him, and we ſee likewiſe that thereafter they proſper. To theſe way bee added other, and ſome that profeſſe the Goſpell, who ſhould be aſhamed to be found ſo groſſely to degenerate, as to vſe like practiſes to the other, though they be couered with ſome fairer ſhewes, who caſt off God and ſay in their hearts, depart from vs, Iob. 21. 14. we deſire not to haue acquaintance with thee. Theſe ſhal one day know and

that to their coſt, that they ſhould haue been examples vnto other in good life, as they did profeſſe, without which they ſhall ſurely come to naught. Beſides the ſubtiltie of the hart, there is another cauſe of this, euen the craft of Satan, (who rules in his children) teaching them how to contriue, and warpe all ſubtile ſhifts, and policies, both to atchiue their euill purpoſes, and to defend them being brought to paſſe: And ſome of his ſchollers finding this trade to follow their hand, as they deſire, make it their chiefe worke, to inuent euill and miſchiefe, and excuſes to couer it withall: they are not where they would be, if they be otherwiſe occupied. Our mother Geneſ. 3. 12. 13 
                     Eue learned it from the beginning, of him the father of ſhifts and lies, (for they goe together) for her poſteritie: though ſome ſeeme to haue it entailed vnto them, aboue others. As, who almoſt, can be ſo ſuddenly come vpon, but he hath a ſhift in readineſſe? and though all bee not a like plauſible, yet (as the prouerb is) a bad one is better then none at all. By this let none thinke that all policie is forbidden: for Nathan and Bathſheba had plotted a wiſe courſe, but that was to the great good of Church and Commonwealth, & that by honeſt meanes, againſt Adoniah, as appeares by 1. King. 1. 1. King. 1. 12. and the ſubſtance of the deuice was true, holy, and to a religious end, for it tended to ſerue Gods prouidence. But their practiſe warranteth not Abſolon, Adoniah, or any ſuch as they, whoſe policie is wicked and curſed: much leſſe the helliſh plots of Ieſuites, and Papiſts, for the bringing to paſſe their deſignes, the ſetting vp, or tolleration of their idolatrous religion, though holineſſe, and the Catholike cauſe be ſtill pretended, and authoritie of their ſupreame Vicar. The titles are goodly, but the boxes are full of curſed drugges and poyſon, as lying, ſlander, calumnies, treaſon, murther, cōfuſion: all badges of the prince of darkeneſſe, whoſe Vicar he is. Salt is good: but if it hath loſt his ſauour, it is good for nothing: Wit and ſpirit, preſent ſpeech and Matth. 5. policie are good, but if they bee poyſoned with thoſe ingredients, they loſe their ſauour, grace and beautie, and are good for nothing, but to be vſed as proppes of the diuels kingdome. Better were it for the cunningeſt craftes man in this trade, to be defeated in all his purpoſes, and to be conuicted and take ſhame of them, then by ſuch meanes to compaſſe them, or being compaſſed, to bolſter them. Neither is there any counſell againſt the Almightie: his hand ſhall find them out at length, and countermine them, as (bleſſed be his name) hitherto hee hath done, euen the deepeſt and furtheſt fetches of them. Let all ſorts learne by this, and namely the ſimple hearted, to Reu. 2. 24. thank God that he is no more acquainted with the depth of Satan, I meane either the depth of ſinne, or the depth of ſubtile practiſes and ſhifts thereof: and they who are more ready wittied, let them turne it from playing the aduocate to ſuch a fruitleſſe client, and ſubmit it to the ſimplicitie of the word, to be guided thereby: which (when all is done) will prooue the ſafeſt, when the other ſhall be as Adams figge-leaues.
                  Now behold here in theſe men who were of his mothers kindred, how ſoone they hearkened vnto this corrupt motion of that Abimelech, and ſo Verſe 3. approued of his deuice and ſuite, that they durſt propound it to the reſt of their neighbours, which was too ſhamefull for themſelues to open their eares vnto: Like vnto whom is that practiſe of thoſe Courtiers of Dauid▪
                      
                     
                        •
                      the aduancing of Adoniah, among whom were alſo many of his brethren 2. King. 1. 9.
                     
and kinsfolke. By this we may ſee how kindred are blindfolded to beare one with another; breaking through ſhame, modeſtie, yea and honeſtie alſo; regarding no other thing but this, that they are their fleſh, and they take part with them, be the matter that moues them neuer ſo bad. For example, how are parents blinded in their children, and carried by them almoſt to any perſwaſion: and that without all Chriſtian wiſedom or regard? being ſometime incenſed by them againſt thoſe that are good; and yet not reprouing, but winking at their childrens faults, and giuing them their will ſo farre till themſelues bluſh, & ſmart for it, to ſee to what boldnes they grow thereby, nor taking it in any manner contentedly, if their children though neuer ſo iuſtly be called to their anſwere for their doing, and corrected: but reuenging it rather, and that with ſpitefulnes. Euen ſo, what diſorders are faine to be ſuffered in townes, while euery one (forgetting the Apoſtles ſpeech, that it is an higher degree to back a ſinner, then to commit ſinne) holds with his Rom. 1. 32. owne kindred, ſo that none muſt ſtirre againſt them, but the towne is diuided into factions, and parts taking for their cauſe, (and ſo it is alſo betwixt carnall friends) where as kindred (being neerer to a man then other good acquaintance, or companie) ought to bee the firſt that ſhould bridle, controle, and helpe to hold vnder their kinsfolke from ill rule and diſorder: and as for friendſhip, men ſhould reach it out, and ſhew it, but according to conſcience, not daring to abuſe the bond of nature, to brotherhood in euill. The which produceth dangerous effects both to the partie wronged, the parties defended, and alſo the parties themſelues who countenance them: as here, both the whole common-wealth, Abimelech, and the Shechemites ſmarted all by this confederacie. And the greater, and the more authoritie ſuch friends, kindred or parents be of, the more this doctrine toucheth them: For as a common towneſman may doe in a towne, ſo a great perſon may doe in a ſhire, a Prince in a kingdome: euen ſet all in a combuſtion for a few malefactors ſake, as the Beniamites, chap. 20. did for the defence of thoſe Sodomites Iudg. 20. of Gibeah. Let theſe therefore learne of the common ſpeech, [Vſque ad ar as] that is, as farre as in conſcience I may, I will doe the part of a friend vnto you, and of a parent: but if ye draw me beyond that, I leaue you: neither will I (to pleaſure you) make God my enemie. Depart from me: yee ſhall finde no aide at my hands, yee adulterers, riotous, ill companions and Pſal. 101. 6, workers of iniquitie. And let all ſorts take their leſſon, if not from the holy Ghoſt, yet from an heathen, who ſaw cauſe of preſcribing this rule, That eſpecially this muſt be lookt to, leſt a man commit any thing iniurious, or vnlawfull for his friends ſake: as he that profeſſed he would burne downe the Tower of Rome, if his great patrone willed him ſo to doe. Such amitie fitteth Robbers and Traytors, better then Chriſtians. Who ſhould duly weigh, whether the matter bee ſuch as will ſtand with their profeſſion, credit, and equitie: otherwiſe to betray them is faithfulnes, and to puniſh thē, and (as the law was) to caſt the firſt ſtone at them, is good ſeueritie, rather then to betray good order, the towne, or Common-wealth, by their ambition, or iniuſtice. Men will admit of this in generall, and ſay, God forbid elſe, but when it comes to the puſh, they ſhew they haue the ſame diſeaſe which the other haue; (as theſe Shechemites had the ſame ſore which Abimelech had) and ſo are loth to ſmart for them, but rather ſmother their

owne ſinnes, in other mens. But of this I ſay the leſſe, becauſe the two next points aime at the like end, and may ſerue as an inlargement hereof.
                  But (to paſſe from theſe) wee may ſee here as great a fault in the men of Verſ. 3. 4 Shechem; as we haue ſeene in the kindred of Abimelech. They who ſhould haue trembled at the hearing of ſuch a matter propounded, being ſo monſtrous, and horrible; and ſhould haue carried it to them that were in authoritie: behold how they applaud and like of it; yea and procured money alſo to the furthering of it: which, all wiſe men ſee, was done of them in great lightnes, and raſhnes at the leaſt: yea, that was one of the ſmalleſt euils in their hearkening to them. And by this note the ficklenes of the multitude, Doct. how eaſily it is to bee carried euery way as with a blaſt, neuer weighing or conſidering what ſound reaſon leadeth them to in their doings, much leſſe aduiſing with the word of God.
                  A cleere and notable example of this ficklenes and lightnes, wee haue in Luk. 19. 38. compared with 23. 13. 18. the Goſpell, of them that one day honoured Chriſt, and ſet him vp, crying Hoſanna, before him, and bowing to him as a King: but a few daies after, when the Iewes and Phariſies roſe vp againſt him, they cried in another 
                        So in the former chap. verſe laſt, compared with the 22. manner, Crucifie him, crucifie him. So that wee ſee how ſuch are not to be reſted in, who though they hold with religion, as other doe, and good order in words, yet except they be ſeaſoned with ſound and ſauing knowledge, and grace to gouerne themſelues in the courſe of their liues, it is nothing. 
                        Compare (for another proofe hereof) 2. Sam. 19. 43. with the 20. 2. But ſuch as giue themſelues to ſobrietie & ſtaiednes, are highly to be eſteemed, & ſo vſed with all good diſcretion; conſidering how ſoone fleſh may be puffed vp, and ill counſelled, yea & they are to be incouraged to ſuch ſtaiednes and conſtancie, in a Chriſtian and well ordered courſe: which they that are fickle, not regarding, but holding on in their inconſtancie, they may reade their deſtinie, that as miſerable as they are alreadie, they ſhall daily waxe worſe and worſe, till they dye as they haue liued. But this offereth it ſelfe often: therefore I ſpare any further diſcourſe of it: Here I will ſtay 2. Tim. 3. 13. for this time.
               
            
         
         
            THE FIFTIE SIXE SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to proceed, wee haue ſeene how theſe wofull men of Shechem, who bewraying by the forementioned act of leaning to More of the third verſe. a bad requeſt, the exceeding wickednes that was in them, haue yet branded themſelues with another note of infamie like the former, which doth much aggrauate their ſinne; namely this: that liuing in the fellowſhip of honeſt citizens, who ſhould haue puniſhed euill doers, and haue chaced them away with their very countenance, yet

behold, there were no worſe to be found there then themſelues. They who ſhould haue made the worſt afraid of their iniquitie, by their executing of law and iuſtice vp 
                  ••
                the committers; euen they put the common citizens, and better men then they were, in danger of their liues by their wicked dealing; and did indeede cauſe them both to loſe their liues, by bringing in an vſurper and tyrant, to ſpoile and make hauocke of them. We know next to the Prince in a land, are the Peeres and Nobles thereof: theſe it moſt concerneth to aſſiſt the ſupreme gouernour in the execution of iuſtice and gouernment. And yet we ſee, by comparing this with the Chronicles of diuers lands, that theſe often haue been the forwardeſt in defending the worſt cauſes, in attempting againſt the State, yea and (in the vacancy of the throne and kingdome) to further and helpe forward vſurpers in their vnlawfull claime, againſt the vndoubted heires. Whereby we learne, that there are no Doct. 
                     •
                  . in verſe 3. worſe then ſome of them who liue in ciuill ſocietie with others; who alſo are truſted with the peace and ſafetie of towne and citie, and yet by the iuſt iudgement of God, purſuing them, break out and bewray themſelues ſometime to be notorious offenders, and are brought forth oft times by their due deſerts, to ſhamefull execution with other euill doers; Euen as we reade of one who liued in the tents with other, when Iſrael abode in the deſert, after Leuit. 24.. 4 they came out of Egypt, yet being a blaſphemer, was takē out of the hoaſt of Iſrael, and ſtoned to death, like the worſt malefactors: and ſo ſome (to come to our time) with Ananias are found, though they bee citizens and headborowes, to be forgers, ſacrilegious, &c. Others, of the ſame condition with Achan, prooue arrant theeues, and as he was, are put to open ſhame and reproch, Ioſh. 7. 25. as well as rogues and maſterleſſe hang-bies, and ſome are found with Zimry to be whoremongers, yea worſe then the inceſtuous, and no better Numb. 25. 8. thē Sodomites, and do publikely receiue their puniſhment due thereto. As alſo all the ſpies, being yet choice men among the Tribes, yea of the chiefer Numb. 14 37 ſort of them, yet periſhed for their colluſion and diſſimulation, except Caleb and Ioſhua. Theſe are not light and ſmall matters that ſuch as are ſubſtantiall, and of good reputation among their neighbours, ſhould bee brought forth thus to be ſet on the ſtage to be gazed on with the worſt, who might and ought with the beſt, to haue been purſuers and puniſhers of other euill doers: and their infamy ſhall neuer be put out with God (beſide the ſhame that befalleth them here before men,) without vnfained repentance, which is no common thing, as the world (yet) accounteth it. And to paſſe from theſe, there are otherſome ſo vile, irreligious, and monſtrous in another maner, yea and euen of them who yet beare it out among men, as if they were to be allowed and iuſtified, their ſinnes being not puniſhable by the law of the land, nor to be taxed by the Magiſtrate, ſo that the Lord doth execution vpon them himſelfe, cauſing their prophaneneſſe, atheiſme, and miſerlike worldlineſſe to riſe vp againſt them, and driue them to hang themſelues with their owne halter, as did Ahitophel the great counſeller, and Iudas the Apoſtle, when he became a traitor. Theſe whom I haue now mentioned, and many other of bad note, being found among the ciuiller ſort in cities and townes euery where, who yet ſhould helpe to ſuppreſſe vagarant and vnruly perſons; Oh, what are good, faithfull, and friendly neighbours

worth, and how highly to be accounted of? ſuch I meane, as among whom one may dwell peaceable, and without feare, and in whoſe faithfulneſſe a man may reſt? And as ſuch may much reioyce, though their infirmities hold them vnder, ſo yet they who flouriſh and lift vp their heads on high, and count themſelues the onely happie people, becauſe they are more righteous, as they call it) that is to ſay, counted honeſt, and ciuill dealers, and ſuch as cannot be blemiſhed with any open blot and ſtaine of infamie for oppreſſion, falſhood, vncleanneſſe, and yet void of religion, euen theſe alſo (ſo many of them as will ſhew themſelues wiſe indeed; let them (I ſay) know they are in little better caſe thē the other in Gods account, ſeeing they hate to be reformed. And for all their vaunting themſelues, and the high conceit that they haue of their good eſtate toward God, as if they were the only religious perſons, yet while they ſubmit not their neck to the Lords yoke of obedience, but abhorre and ſcorne ſuch as they thinke go beyond them in ſincere piety, who make conſcience of ſtricter matters, (as the world count them) as idle ſpeech, pride of life, fooliſh reſting, filthy pleaſures, railing, ſlandering, lying, deceiuing, &c. euen they, moſt certainely haue God their aduerſary, and becauſe they repent not, they ſhall likewiſe periſh. Doubtleſſe Luke 13. 3. it were (I deny not) to be wiſhed, that there were no worſe in townes, then theſe of the ciuiller ſort, and it were greatly for the benefit of the commonwealth, that groſſe villanies were rooted out among them, & common vertues practiſed, as the outward worſhipping of God, and peace with men. But yet theſe, (as the Scripture teſtifieth) are farre from happineſſe, as before hath been noted: the which I ſay, partly leſt theſe men ſhould deceiue themſelues and others, with an erroneous conceit of that good which is not in them, (while they ſearch not their hearts, and purge out the filth that is there, and yet glorie of repentance: and partly, that Gods people may ſee cauſe of endeuouring after a further meaſure of grace and true holineſſe; rather then to faint therein, and breake off their good beginnings. And the Lord doth oft times therefore plucke out ſuch whole and ciuell men, (as Note. they loue to bee counted) by the eares from their fellowes, and for the example of many other, he ſuffereth them to diſguiſe themſelues groſſely by falling into the ſinnes for which they haue ſcorned and diſclaimed others, as adultery▪ and boaſted themſelues to be free from them. This (I ſay) God is faine to doe to them: and then they crie out of their hollowneſſe, ignorance, vnbeliefe and euill heart, (being ſo conuicted,) which hath laid them in the dirt. Theſe before were no ſinnes with them, neither would they be brought once to thinke ſo; whereas yet now that they haue committed the groſſer, they accuſe themſelues of ſmaller alſo. Therefore they are happy, who lay the foundation of their peace, credit, ſafety, and true welfare toward God, who lay it (I ſay) deeper, then that ſtorme or tempeſt, wind or weather may caſt it downe: neuer ceaſing▪ till they haue by faith purged out the ſtrength and poyſon of thoſe corrupt and bitter rootes of the euill heart, and by the ſame faith haue obtained and found mercy with God, that they may feare him, and for a good conſcience ſake, goe vnder (if it muſt needs bee ſo) diſcredit with bad men, rather then for credits ſake to ſmother conſcience, which building ſoone

decaieth with the ſandie ground-worke thereof.
            But now to returne to the Shechemites againe, I haue not yet noted nor Verſe 4. ſet downe the particular ſinne, which they added to the reſt, that is to ſay, that they help forward this curſed impe Abimelech to vſurpe the kingdome, by giuing him ſuch a peece of money out of their common treaſurie, which was the houſe of their Idol Baal-berith (of whom we ſpak before cha. 8. end) with the which he was able to hire a band and company of leaud fellowes to guard and runne before, and follow him, as Abſolon did the like, when he tooke in hand ſuch a like worke. Whereby we may ſee to what vſes many Doct. v. 4. put their goods, and how commendably they imploy them, which they are put in truſt with. As for feeding the hungry with them, or cloathing the naked, or pitying the oppreſſed, it is too baſe a matter for them to looke Marke 4. 7. after, though they ſhall know one day, and that to their coſt, that they haue the poore among them, to this end, that they may doe good to them. But the thought of ſuch things is as far from them as the Eaſt is from the Weſt: yea it is death to them to part with the very ſhreds to good vſes: but they Iames 4. 3. empty their purſe to the bottome to beſtow vpon their luſts, in roytous life, in drinking, whoring, and other exceſſe, till they bee brought to a morſell of bread: or elſe they be of another diſpoſition, namely, to gather and increaſe their ſubſtance endleſly, neither they themſelues, nor any wiſe man can tell why: for if they haue poſteritie to leaue it to, (which yet many want) they ſhould leaue them but that which remaineth after they haue done, in their time and place, many good deeds to diuers ciuill and religious neceſſary vſes: and otherwiſe accurſed are they in that which they haue, which for the moſt part doth no other good then the pleaſing of the eie of the owner, while they know many ſmart and are in penury, (that I ſay) nothing of their wicked increaſing of great part of it by oppreſſion, and defrauding of men; whereof we haue too many wofull examples among vs from time to time. The Lord, therefore, hath giuen them no heart to doe good with it, which if they had, they ſhould conſider alſo, that there is ſomewhat elſe to beſtow coſt vpon, as well as vpon themſelues, but eſpecially vpon their luſts: I meane, the worſhip of God, procuring a good Miniſter, relieuing the diſtreſſed, of all kinds, as their abilitie will reach. But they ſhew that God and his word are of meaner account with them then their lothſome luſts. Touching this abuſe of mens wealth and outward bleſſings, ſundry kinds of doctrine haue occaſioned vs to ſpeake before, neither ſhall it bee needfull to make any ſet diſcourſe vpon it in this place. Onely I will adde a word or two touching this. That they tooke theſe peeces out of the treaſury of Baal-berith. Whether they tooke it out of their treaſure, appointed to idolatrous vſes (for it is probable they had ſuch a treaſurie, in imitation of the treaſurie of the houſe of God) or whether their common treaſure, was in ſome place of that Temple, there laid vp as in a ſafe repoſitorie, and free from the violence or ſacriledge of robbers, (of which vſe of temples, eſpecially in times of war and danger of pillage, we reade in Prophane and Eccleſiaſtical writers euery where) of this, I ſay, I will not affirme, neither can I. Only I encline to the former opinion: and do think that they robbed their Temple, to ſupply the want of Abimelech (and ſacriledge may wel ſtand with treaſon and tyranny, which ſpare neither things holy nor prophane.) But vpon coniectures I

will collect nothing. Whether ſoeuer they did, ſure it is, that they thought their Idoll a ſufficient treaſurer and keeper of this ſiluer, (or elſe they would not haue made his Temple the treaſurie) and durſt truſt him with the preciouſeſt things they had: who yet had neither eies to ſee it, or hands and power to defend it from robbers. This is no wonder (may ſome man ſay) that they durſt truſt him with their money, who durſt venture their liues and ſoules vpon his protection, as they in the daies of Eliah. 1. King. 18. did. I anſwer: 1. King. 18. 28. It were the leſſe wonder indeed, if wee ſaw not Chriſtians, worſhippers of God (who profeſſe themſelues to ieopard their ſaluation vpon his promiſe) to be yet farre behind theſe Idolaters in this thing. For they will not venture nor caſt their goods vpon his ſafegard, nor thinke the Lord a meet and truſtie keeper of their wealth; they will put no more in his hands then they are willing to loſe. To ſuch we may ſay: Is he not much beholding to you the whileſt? He hath giuen you liuing Temples, not of ſtone temples, not of Baal, but of his owne making, euen the poore members of the Lord Ieſus; Into theſe he commandeth you to caſt, not your ſuperfluities, but ſome of your ſubſtance: hee promiſeth to be the ouerſeer and ſteward of this treaſurie, he will reckon and returne againe ſuch beneuolence of yours, double and trebble vnto you, yea tenfold, (which is vſe and gaine enough) nay, an hundreth fold, rewarding it with euerlaſting habitations: For why? he hath vndertaken, and is become the Surety (as I haue ſaid) to repay all ſuch loane againe abundantly. But wee thinke theſe to bee but words: and keepe the principall faſt, let the intereſt goe where it will for vs. As for theſe Temples, we count them Sepulchres, deuouring al, asking giue, giue, but neuer returning ought againe: and as they in Eccleſiaſtes, who thinke all loſt and caſt vpon the waters, that is well beſtowed. But theſe Idolaters and their confederates in Baal-berith, ſhall ſtand foorth, and witneſſe Eccleſ. 11. 1. againſt ſuch, to their ſhame.
            Again, when they had thus helped him forward, we may ſee what maner Doct. 2. in verſ. 4. of perſons he hired & prouided to bring his wicked purpoſe to paſſe, to wit, ſuch as were empty, light-headed, and naught worth, and which were lewd and looſe, and were carried headlong to that which they did, and not by ſound reaſon. Whereby we haue a deſcription of ſuch graceles and wicked hangbies, what they are, and wherefore they ſerue; which ſhall be to good purpoſe to note, as for other cauſes, ſo for this one; to wit, that we may ſee what iuſtice ſhould be done and executed on ſuch: who liuing idly for the moſt part, further then they needs muſt muſt worke, ſhould be laid for as of late yeeres they were by that Honourable Counſeller of worthie memorie, and kept from ranging about. But ſeeing they are ſeldome puniſhed, the beſt vſe we can make of them, is to beware of them. Firſt they are, if we will know them, ſuch as haue ſpent all, and liued idlelie, without practiſing any profitable trade or calling: and how haue they ſpent it? full leaudly and badly, in gaming, whoring, guſling, caualering, fray-making, &c. and yet hanging in mens debts. Secondly, they are male-contents both with their owne penury and the welfare of others, yea with the State it ſelfe (often) of the Common-wealth, wherein they liue. Thirdly, they are ſuch as are not to be ruled by reaſon, much leſſe by religion. But their diſpoſition is, to run on head to bee ſet on gadding, rouing, &c. And wherefore ſtay or waite

they? but euen for ſuch troubleſome times as theſe here were? and for ſome tumult and inſurrection, that they may fiſh in troubled waters, deſiring a change of the preſent condition of theſe peaceable times, as a fit occaſion to practiſe and ſet a work this their diuelliſh diſpoſition, which in peace and gouernment, is, as it were empriſoned in them: ſome by ioyning themſelues with vaine and looſe perſons like themſelues, and wandring to and fro, if there be no imployment for them at home, into forren countries, not through a deſire of getting knowledge or experience, much to trafficke for their maintenance, but to trie their fortunes (as they prophanely ſpeake) being wearie of their owne countrey, wherein they are defamed for their leaudneſſe, prodigalitie, and needleſſe debts, or other diſhoneſty: others being readily hired, to ſort themſelues with ſuch as will rifle mens houſes, and companions in helping to make a head, and if none of theſe hit, (as they ſay) nor come to paſſe; then fall they to robbing by the high waies. And ſuch dangerous and diſeaſed members haue there alwaies been, and are in al Common-wealths. In the booke of the Acts, in two or three Chapters, the Acts 17. 5, 8. & 19. 29. 
                     •
                  4. Iewes got ſuch hang bies to make ſtirres and tumults in cities, and then charged Paul to be the author of them; when he yet was in danger of his life by them; and all to make him ſeeme ſeditious, and a raiſer of trouble where he came. Euen ſo ſuch there are at this day, idle companions, who cannot chooſe, but like Vultures and Cormorants, pray vpon other mens goods: who might eaſily haue been ſtaied from theſe courſes while they were young, if they had not been ſuffered to haue their owne will ſo farre, til this trade (as miſerable as it is, yet becauſe it is ioyned with eaſe) waxed ſweete vnto them. And againe, if they had not been ſaued and kept from priſon and correction, when they had ſo iuſtly deſerued it: which correction if the ciuill Magiſtrate, or the Head-borrowes of townes wherein they lurked, had neglected; yet their owne parents and kindred ſhould haue ſeene executed. Deut. 21. 19.
            
            And if ſuch as worke not, ought not to eate, why are they ſuffered, whoſe 2. Theſ. 3. 10. life is idlenes? Let ſuch therefore be purged out from among vs: and in all places let prouiſion be made, that they who are idle and vagrant, be reſtrained, and ſet on worke, (though they haue ſomewhat of their owne) that ſo, (will they nill they) as they will doe no good, they may bee compelled to ſtoope to good order, and be held in from doing miſchiefe at leaſt, that this euil may ceaſe which threatneth ſo great danger to Church and Common-wealth: which (I muſt needs ſay) is hard to doe; conſidering how ſuch perſons flocke together to ſuch places of the land as are populous and frequented, where they may be in harbour and the ſafer from ſearch and puniſhment: but then, that which we cannot amend, let vs lament, and bleſſe God if we be free from ſuch moleſtation in the places where we dwell.
            When this Abimelech ſaw how his bold and ſhameleſſe deuices and attempts Verſ. 5. proſpered, and how he thriued in them, he waxed much bolder, and tooke heart to goe fall vpon his innocent brethren, and ſlew them. And 
                  Compare Act. 12. 2. Eccleſ. 7. 15. herein is verified that of Salomon, Eccleſ. 7. There is a wicked man (ſaith he) who continueth in his malice: meaning, becauſe he proſpereth, and is not reſiſted. Thus Adonibezek, chap. 1. ſtaied not till he had ſerued ſeuentie Princes Iudg. 1. 7. ſhamefully after his cruell humour, but was fleſhed more and more by

his ſucceſſe. O horrible and vnnaturall blood-ſhedding crueltie! Here wee may ſee what monſters are in the world, worthily to be driuen frō amongſt men, and to be made ſpectacles and gazing ſtocks by open and moſt ſharpe puniſhment inflicted vpon them. Such were Athaliah, Haman, and Abſolous. Such were they who wrought that bloodie maſſacre in France, and they who were the chiefe doers in the perſecution here in England, which may be remembred by ſome that yet liue; and they of the Gunpowder-treaſon come nothing behinde, that I ſay no more. But how much more cruell are they who murther many ſoules for want of due foode? But touching the ſinne of crueltie I haue ſpoken in chap. 1. 7. and chap. 8. 20. and forward. There let the reader ſupply this place from thence.
            Many, not ill minded, deſire to know why God doth ſuffer ſuch abominations. Obiect. Anſw. I anſwere, that God knoweth the cauſe, who ruleth iuſtly, and who (as a godly father ſpeakes) ordereth the euill appetites of the wicked, to fulfill his prouidence, though he infuſe not euill into them; as he wrought the ſaluation of his elect, by the fall of Adam, and the treacherie of Iudas: and yet wee are not, neither ought, to bee altogether ignorant why God doth this. Wee are not to appoint the Lord how to gouerne the world, nor by whom, nor how he will be glorified. And he who may marueile that God is patient toward the bad, how can he thinke himſelfe too good to ſuffer for his own deſerts, be the inſtruments neuer ſo euil, when our Sauiour ſuffered for vs without cauſe? But if any of vs bee without danger and hurt by ſuch wicked perſons, who are one of Gods ſcourges to correct vs, let vs reckon it among the great bleſſings of God, and vſe it accordingly.
            But in this verſe let vs proceede further with Abimelech. He conſidered Verſ. 5. doct. 2. that his ſeuentie brethren might be like to hinder and reſiſt him: and therefore what did he? hee reſolued to diſpatch them all, and ſo hee did, except one. The hainouſnes of the fact, deterred him not from going through ſtitch with it: he would not leaue it by halues, nay he could not be quiet till euery obſtacle and hindrance was remoued, and each eye-ſore taken away. It bewraieth a moſt fearfull propertie in the workers of euill: that cannot deſiſt nor leaue of, till they haue brought their vngodly attempts to a full and perfect end: wherein the godly ſeldome match them in contraire actions. A man would haue thought theſe ſeuentie men had been a great blocke in an vſurpers way, to keepe him from proceeding currantly in his bad courſe: and Abimelech ſaw that to, but yet it was not a barre ſtrong enough to keepe him from villanie, but he broke it (as it were) to peeces, rather then it ſhould ſtand vp in his way to hinder him from his purpoſe. For that, he was reſolued to goe forward with: and therefore whatſoeuer oppoſition ſhould come againſt it, hee would beare it downe, as floods and windes pull downe hils, bankes, bridges, gates, trees, and whatſoeuer comes in their way, and yeelds not to them. Woe be to him that meetes a Beare robbed of her whelpes; and yet better ſo, then croſſe an vſurper of his ambitious deſire: although theſe his brethren had not croſt him, but by ſilence and ſitting ſtill. Ambition is a raging monſter we ſee, and although it thirſt after honour, yet ſeldome is it aſſwaged without blood, if occaſion and opportunitie ſerue. Nothing is ſo holy, ſo pretious, ſo neere, which it prophaneth not, defloureth and deſtroyeth not. Euen his owne ſonne, it hee

had ſtood in his way, had taſted of the ſame ſawce, which his brethren did, as it is reported Herod the great did, in the maſſacre of the infants. But it Matth. 2. became him well enough to keepe that to himſelfe by villanie, which hee had inuaded by wickednes before. Euen as his ſucceſſors at this day, theſe Italionated diuels, and diſciples of Machiauel both practiſe and defend, according to his rules, that a kingdome gotten by force, muſt be preſerued alſo by violence. Againe, he that will rule, muſt not ſtand nicely vpon vertues, but (when occaſion ſerues) play both the lyon and foxe, and worke out his enemies by fraud or crueltie, any way, ſo he can doe it. Againe, let them ſtrike once, but (as Abiſhai ſaid) ſtrike home, and kill all at once that ſtand in his way and ſit in his light. For to kill often is odious, but to make a riddance all at once, roote and branch, is with ſuch, policie, and a neceſſitie pardonable. When I thinke of this fact of Abimelech, I could not but thus reſemble it to theſe monſters, who lately offered to giue vs an experiment of the like enterpriſe in their powder-treaſon: which, as no age euer matched, ſo no age ſhall euer forget it, to their eternall ſhame, and the Lords endleſſe praiſe. For as they were Abimelechs in ambition and crueltie, ſo the Lord made them Abimelechs in confuſion. Abimelechs ioy laſted not: theirs was but hope, and yet made them aſhamed. The Lord ſent a ſpirit of diuiſion betweene him and Shechem: ſo hee did betweene theſe, one betrayed the other. So let thine enemies periſh O God, &c. Therefore let all wiſe men (for all Iudg. 5. laſt verſe. are not great ones) circumſpectly take heede and beware what ſinnes they reſolue to commit: for ſurely whatſoeuer they giue ouer themſelues vnto, they will make no bones of the neceſſarie attendants thereof, be they neuer ſo hideous and horrible. As it is hard to ſay, whether this parricide or his ambition were greater, ſaue onely that the former ſerued the latter. Men little dreame how deeply they plunge themſelues, when they vndertake any ſinne: themſelues often are aſtoniſhed at themſelues, but that when they haue begun, they muſt play the men in going forward, and not ſhrink for it. Herod himſelfe was not willing to behead Iohn: but when he had ſaid the word, he muſt not goe backe, (he thought) for his credit ſake, therefore hee went through. Hee might thanke his luxuriouſnes, and iollitie, which cauſed the oath, and the oath the murther. So ſaith the Apoſtle; Becauſe men ſet it downe, they will be rich, they meete with their match, and fall into 1. Tim. 69. many temptations and ſnares, &c. Tuſh, tell not them of trifles, of lyons in the way, they are buſie in purſuing their game, and they will get it, whatſoeuer it coſt them, for they haue ſo decreed and ſet it downe. Well learne to reſolue onely vpon that which is lawfull, and ſo be free from any great inconuenience, and goe through it with commendation: for all other reſolution is diueliſh. I would bee larger in this, but that there followeth in the ſixth verſe a doctrine not much differing from this argument.
            But in this bloodie act of Abimelechs, one of his brethren eſcaped his 
                  Doct. 3. hands: and in that one of them was preſerued from his crueltie, and kept out of his reach, it was done by Gods ſpeciall prouidence, both to hold him in feare, ſeeing hee that was kept aliue, was the lawfull ſonne of Gedeon, and borne of a lawfull wife; Abimelech himſelfe comming but of a concubine: and further, it was alſo a good daſhing of his ioy. And moreouer, wee ſee there was good vſe of the Lords ſauing aliue of that one of his brethren, Iotham
               
I meane, becauſe of the prophecie that he vttered; therein foretelling the deſtruction of Abimelech. To teach vs, that although the committers of euill haue their humors ſatisfied, and their turne ſerued, and things to fall out euen as they would wiſh, yet there is, and ſhall be euer, ſomewhat reſerued to vex and pay them home, euen here in this world, and to giue them a taſte of further torment. For example, who had better ſucceſſe then Haman? and yet by Mordecay (who was of no place to ſtand with, or to croſſe him) how was his ioy quailed by him? rather then there ſhould be none to reſiſt him: yea, and that which was very vnlike to be, came vpon him, for by Mordecaies counſell, and well handling the matter, Haman was ouerthrowne Eſter 7. 10. & 9. 10. with his whole houſe.
            So Herod and Herodias had nothing that troubled them, but Iohn Baptist; and yet when they had taken Iohn out of the way, our Sauiour Chriſt role vp, who (through this that Herods conſcience put him in feare) kept him at Marke 6. 20. that ſtay, that he could not bee quiet. Ahab had been at hearts eaſe, but for 1. King. 22. 8. 
               Eliah, and yet afterward Michaiah vexed him as much. Gehazi ſped well a while; but at length his maſter daſhed all. And all this is a ſauour of their 2. King. 5. 25. woe before it come, vnleſſe they be teared & driuen from their bad courſes thereby, and ſo humble themſelues to ſeeke mercy; as that third Captaine of Ahazijah did to Eliah, ſeeing the danger. And thus God feareth the 2. King. 1. 13. whole rabble of the vngodly, and by other terrors alſo: when his word wil not doe it, his workes ſhall; and euen thereby, I meane by the caſting them downe by the law liuely preached to them, and the feare of death, iudgement day, and hell; hee doth ſo torment many a man, that all his ſhiftes and deuices cannot deliuer him there-from; neither is al that hee hath able to comfort him, and cry downe this voice of the Miniſtery, although it worke no true feare of God in him to repentance, but onely awake and aſtoniſh him. True it is, that ſome, though they bee apparantly croſſed by God, yet they feele it no more then the dead palſey, as we ſee in Nabal. But in that they be hardned, they are in worſe caſe. So then God dealeth thus commonly, that the wicked ſhall haue ſomewhat to make them leſſe eager of their pleaſures; as either paine, ſickneſſe, or ſome ſuch thing, or elſe inward feare, or the like. Although (alas) what although they ſhould neuer be interrupted? they ſhould yet be but caried to hell merrily, when others goe mourning. And when Gods ſeruants fall to the like ſinne, as to neſtle themſelues in the deceiuable inticements of this world, hee giueth them the like medicine to cure them of their diſeaſe, that they ſhal euer haue one thing or other to hold them in vnquietneſſe, and to feare Note. them with: which is euer like to light vpon them, to vexe and ſting them, if they ſhall dare delight themſelues in any euill thing, or to reſt in that which is tranſitory; and ſo goe from the Lord. As the feare of loſing a good wife, their neareſt companion to them, to partake their commodities and delights with them; or their croſſes and decaies in the world, to make them eaſilier borne, which affliction diſquieteth them much, and dampeth all their earthly repaſt. So alſo, he exerciſeth them with weakeneſſe of body, meannes in eſtate, petty loſſes, &c. and al to weane thē from the breaſt (as it were ſucklings) by laying ſuch bitter and diſtaſteful corrections vpon them.
            The vſe of this is, to reſt and ioy our hearts in nothing here below; but to Vſe.
               
ſee, that our delight bee in the fauour and feare of the Lord continually: which is the one thing (though we may make them two) that is neceſſarie. Prou. 24. 27. Luke 10. 42. And if nothing will rouſe vs out of ſpirituall ſlumbering in earthly proſperitie and peace, (wherein to lie ſenſeleſſely and ſottiſhly, is more then to haue one foot in hell already) let this doe it, that wee know not how ſoone wee muſt leaue al, and goe to iudgement, and to the yeelding vp of our account. And yet if the Lord croſſe vs in our enterpriſes that bee euill, we may know the worſt that the meaneth toward vs, is, that he would ſtop vs in our race toward deſtruction and miſery, that it may not come vpon vs.
            When Abimelech had ſo vnnaturally ſlaine his brethren, which ought to Verſ 6. The ſenſe.
                haue ſtricken ſuch a terror into the men of Shechem that they ſhould haue abhorred him, and purſued him openly, calling the reſt of the Tribes to ioyne with them therein, till he had receiued his due puniſhment: he ſo ſubtillie woound in with them, and they were ſo credulous, that they beleeued, for all that hee would deale well with them, as hee had promiſed them; and therefore proceeded (O fearefull to be ſpoken) and vndertooke to make him King: and this they did in a place that pertained to them, none of the other Tribes being either called, or made acquainted with the matter (who yet had a farre greater ſtroke therein then they) which muſt needs raiſe great diſſention and deuiſion betwixt them. But this they regarded not, ſeeing they had taken in hand the effecting of the other.
            Here we ſee, when one ſinne is intended of a man to be committed, it goeth 
                  Doct. 1. not alone, but draweth with it many other, as companions to it. For neither can it be brought to paſſe without the helpe of other, neither can a man take pleaſure in it without the company of other ſinnes. He ſeekes to be King, and how many ſinnes doth he adioyne, to the effecting of it? As he here vſed fraud, flatterie, and couſonage, and roſe vp, and drew after him a band of ſeditious hang-bies; he ſlew his brethren; and when he was made King, what contention did he cauſe among them?
            It is too manifeſt, that ſinne is no ſolitarie bird, nor is euer ſeene out of Rom. 13. 13. company. Euen as S. Paul teacheth to the Romans, how ſtrife carrieth enuying with it; and gluttony draweth drunkenneſſe; and chambering, wantonneſſe. And this is the more to be marked, becauſe wicked perſons alleage for themſelues, when they are reprooued for their faults, that al men are ſinners, yea ſome ſinne groſſely in many kinds, and for themſelues, they ſay, they hope, if they haue done amiſſe, yet they may be borne with, ſeeing it is but one treſpaſſe: and further they will ſay, euery one for himſelfe, Such a man hath this blemiſh, and ſuch a one that: all haue ſome one or other, and ſo may I haue, and what then? But to this it is to be anſwered, where one chiefe ſinne is committed, there are many other as handmaides to accompany it. As in the ſinne of Achan, Dauid, Ananias and Saphira, with many others, is to be ſeene. Therefore if we thinke it be a ſhame for vs, to be charged Note. with many, then take we heed of any one, for it will not goe alone, and if we thinke it a ſmall matter to bee rebuked for one, know we for certaintie, that one will bring and draw many to it: and he only is happy, that wiſely taketh heed of all. But this doctrine I haue handled before: therefore the leſſe ſhall ſerue. Looke backe into chap. 1. verſ. 7.
            Moreouer, let the fooliſhneſſe of theſe men of Shechem, who beleeuing

               Abimelechs faire words, went by and by and made him King, let it (I ſay) teach vs wiſdome. For it is a ſingular good watch-word to all Chriſtians, that we doe not regard ſo much the ſpeeches of vaine and looſe perſons, as Note. weigh and compare their actions one with another, that we may profit by them, and not be beguiled. As the prouerb ſaith; what ſhould I hearken to words, when I ſee deeds contrarie. His were vile and horrible, as they ſaw, therefore they ought not to haue regarded his words. For he that is faultie in a great matter, is not to bee truſted in a ſmall. For example; if (as our text teacheth) a man be vnpitifull to his owne, as this Abimelech was, he will certainly be without pitie and compaſſion to other, howſoeuer for vaine glory he may ſhew pitie ſometime, and in ſome caſe; but that will not hold, neither is it to be reſted vpon: for one ſwallow maketh not ſummer. So if one will contend and fall out with, diſclaime, and deceiue his neere friend, let not a ſtranger truſt him. For though ſuch an one bee now in fauour with him, yet they may twentie waies be eaſily eſtranged one from another, as we ſee it commeth daily to paſſe. So if a man liue not peaceablie and kindly with his wife, hee may ſay what hee will of his agreeing with others, but longer then while his corrupt and inconſtant humor bee pleaſed, he will liue kindly with none. This Dauid aimed at, and meant in his anſwer 2. Sam. 1. 16. & 4. 12. to them that brought tidings of their murthering of Saul, and of Iſhboſheth: for what likelyhood gaue they of any more fidelitie to him, if the time ſhould haue ſerued?
            So to proſecute this point in more particulars, wherein the truth of it doth beſt appeare; let vs not be deceiued, but wiſe; if we ſee, that a man be not faithfull to God, let vs not thinke that he will bee to vs. So if one helpe not his poore neighbour in his need, there is ſmall liberalitie or neighbourhood in him at any time. If a man beſtow not the Sabbath in godly exerciſes and religious duties, it is ſure he doth little that way on other daies: and if he doe; yet it is not of knowledge nor conſcience, whatſoeuer he doth, without which it is nothing worth. So if a man cannot be appeaſed in a ſmall matter, let him ſay what he will, it is ſure, hee will much leſſe bee in a great: and yet men commonly ſay, any thing but this I would doe for you, or could yeeld vnto, when yet a ſmall matter is requeſted of them.
            So, to enlarge the argument from the greater and more likely, to the leſſer: if thou canſt not truſt them, whom thou haſt long knowne faithfull, Note. though thou getteſt many new friends, thou ſhalt neuer be bold ſoundly to reſt vpon them. Alſo if a man will ſeeme repentant, and leaue not an il outward qualitie, he hath not (certainly) yet begun to ſearch and purge his euil heart. If the righteous find much adoe to be ſaued; he is farre from it, that 1. Pet. 4. 18. taketh his libertie at his pleaſure. And who is little troubled about ſeeking aſſurance of his ſaluation? If one day ſpent and taken vp in a godly life bee Pſalm. 84. 10. Prou. 24. 10. ſweet, what were many, may the whole life, if it were paſſed therein? If we faint in afflictions, and yeeld readily to temptations, we may know by that; our ſtrength was neuer great. Againe alſo, (as our Sauiour ſaith) If ye be vnfaithfull in the ſmalleſt things, who ſhall truſt you with the greateſt treaſure? And Luke 16. 11. ſo (to ſay ſomewhat of Gods dealing with vs) if God haue helped vs in the hardeſt, when we ſought to him in feruentnes and truth, he will by the ſame meanes, helpe vs in ſmaller danger. If he ſpare not his owne, (as he did not

the Prophet, who diſobeyed him at Bethel) much harder ſhall the ſtate of 1. Kin 13. 25. 35. the bad be, as Ieroboams was, who hard of the others puniſhment. And if we be ſure, that he hath giuen vs his Chriſt, the greateſt of all gifts; much more will he giue the ſmaller, being ſought with the like mind. Thus we may take good by Abimelechs words, and bee bold to ſay, that hee ſet not more by the men of Shechem, then by his brethren, whatſoeuer he ſaid.
            Now one thing I will adde, or repeate rather, hauing handled it in this 
                  Doct. 3. Chapter more at large; I meane, touching theſe men of Shechem, who went and made Abimelech King, for all the abomination that they ſaw hee had wrought, who ought rather to haue purſued him to the fearefulleſt death, as I haue ſaid. Out of whoſe practiſe wee may clearely ſee, that there are none ſo vile and odious perſons, ſhewing openly their wickedneſſe to the world, but they are applauded and approoued of ſome in their odious and bad practiſes: and none are ſo godly, but ſhameleſſe beaſts there are, who openly wil defame them, and ſpeake maliciouſly of them; yea, (if need be) to their faces. The reaſon is, that they who commend and maintaine theſe vngodly ones, are as vile and bad themſelues as they, as I prooued before out of the Apoſtles words. And for further proofe of this which I ſay, Rom. 1. laſt. let that be conſidered of Iudas, when hee had betraied his moſt kind and louing Maſter, yet how was hee incouraged to it before, and rewarded for it Luke 22. 5. by thē that went then for maſters in Iſrael, euen for the chiefe pillers of the viſible Church, yea, teachers and lights to others? though the fact was afterward cried out of by the traitor himſelfe, ſaying: I haue ſinned in betraying the 
               Matth. 27. 4. 
               innocent blood. And all experience, aſwell as Scripture, prooueth the truth of this point; which ſhewes how full of ſinne and euill doings the times are. And yet they who applaud ſuch, goe for honeſt citizens and townesmen, till they bee bewrayed by the Lord, and till their wickedneſſe breake foorth, euen as the others doth. Which rightly verifieth the prophecy of our Sauiour who foretold, that in theſe latter daies, the abundance of iniquitie Matth. 24. 12. ſhould bee ſuch, that it ſhould cauſe the loue of many to waxe cold. So that I conclude, that they are happy who are wiſe to turne away from, and to abhorre the ſinnes of the times they liue in, but eſpecially, if they abhorre ſin in themſelues ſecretly, that they may be farre from committing it openly, and feare to offend God, for the loue they beare him. But I leaue the reſt to the next Sermon.
         
         
            
            
               THE FIFTY SEVENTH SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſe 7. And when they toldit to Iotham, he went and ſtood in the top of mount Gerazim, and lift vp his voice and cried, and ſaid vnto them: Hearken vnto mee you men of Shechem, that God may hearken vnto you.
                  
                  8. The trees went foorth to annoint a king ouer them, and ſaid vnto the Oliue tree; Reigne thou ouer vs.
                  
                  9. But the Oliue tree ſaid vnto them, ſhould I leaue my fatneſſe wherewith by me they honour God and man, and goe to aduance me aboue the trees.
                  
                  10. Then the trees ſaid vnto the Fig tree, Come thou and be king ouer vs.
                  
                  11. But the Figtree anſwered them, Should I for ſake my ſweetneſſe and my good fruit, and goe to aduance me aboue the trees?
                  
                  12. Then ſaid the trees vnto the Vine, Come thou and be king ouer vs.
                  
                  13. But the Vine ſaid vnto them, Should I leaue my wine, whereby I cheare God and man, and goe to aduance me aboue the trees?
                  
                  14. Then ſaid all the trees vnto the Bramble, Come thou and raigne ouer vs.
                  
                  15. And the Bramble ſaid vnto the trees, If yee will indeed annoint me king ouer you, come, and put your truſt vnder my ſhaddow: and if not, the fire ſhall come out of the Bramble, and conſume the Cedars of Lebanon.
                  
                  16. Now therefore, if ye doe truly and vncorruptly to make Abimelech King; and if yee haue deali well with Ierubbaal and with his houſe, and haue done vnto him according to the deſeruings of his hands.
                  
                  17. (For my father fought for you, and aduentured his life, and deliuered you out of the hands of Midian.
                  
                  18. And yee are riſen vp againſt my fathers houſe this day, and haue ſlaine his children, about ſeuentie perſons vpon one ſtone; and haue made Abimelech, the ſonne of his maid ſeruant King ouer the men of Shechem, becauſe he is your brother,)
                  
                  19. If yee then haue dealt truly and purely with Ierubbaal, and with his houſe, this day, then reioyceye with Abimelech, and let him reioyce with you.
                  
                  20. But if not, let a fire come out from Abimelech, and conſume the men of Shechem, and the houſe of Millo: alſo let a fire come forth from the men of Shechem, and from the houſe of Millo, and conſume Abimelech.
                  
                  21. And Iotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for feare of Abimelech his brother.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     WE haue heard how Abimelech and the men of Shechem proſpered, 
                        The ſumme of this 2 part of this Chapter.
                      and pleaſed themſelues in that which they had done. Now in the reſt of the Chapter, and firſt in this ſecond part to the 22. verſe, is ſhewed that God would haue them blancked and damped in the midſt of

their doings, and firſt by Iotham, one that was reſerued for that purpoſe. Therefore when it was knowne to Iotham, the youngeſt ſonne of Gedeon, (who eſcaped the bloodie hands of Abimelech) that the men of Shechem were gathered together to make him king, hee waited his opportunitie, by Gods directing of him, when they ſhould meete together, and came to a place where hee might be heard of them, and that was mount Gerazim, which was neere to Shechem, on the top whereof hee ſtood, to tell them of their doings, and how they ſhould ſpeed for them. That he came thither by Gods inſtinct, three reaſons doe proue, as alſo Iothams words in the 7. verſe. Firſt, in that he went ſafe away after: which to reaſon was not likely. Secondly, for that it came to paſſe, as hee prophecied. Thirdly, the thing was good, and to good vſe, and not found fault with. His reprouing and denouncing againſt them, for more plainnes he ſet down by a parable, giuing them to vnderſtand a truth by a thing imagined, as by a maner of ſpeech more plauſible and perſwaſiue, then if he had made a direct inuectiue againſt them.
                  Herein firſt let vs ſee the meaning of ſome things in this ſcripture, which The opening of the parable. are hard to be vnderſtood, before we proceed further. In parables, we know there muſt be no preciſe agreement with truth looked for in euery circumſtance, nor ſenſe wrung out of euery word, but the ſcope and ſubſtance muſt bee looked to and regarded. By the oliue therefore, vine, and figtree, briefly, hee meaneth ſuch of Gedeons familie, as might haue been profitably employed. By the Trees ſeeking a king, hee meaneth the Shechemites. By the bramble Abimelech, good for nothing. And as the bramble, which is one of the worſt ſhrubs in the field, ought not to be taken aboue any of the beſt trees, for any principall vſe, but is moſt fit to bee burned: So neither ought Abimelech to haue been preferred before Gedeons ſonnes, who yet would not raigne. Therefore both Abimelech, and they who choſe him, ſhould be, as they had deſerued, euen worthily cut off. In this ſcripture are two things: the one a preface, deſiring to hearken to him: with a reaſon, leſt The parts two of the parable. God hearken not to them: the other, to what they ſhould hearken, to wit, to the laying out of their ſinne, to verſe 16. and to the puniſhment denounced againſt it, to verſ. 22.
                  In that Iotham, when hee knew certainly the premiſſes, being ſtirred vp Doct out of all the verſes generall. of God, went thereupon and told the men of Shechem of their doings, and denounced the iudgement of God againſt the ſame: it teacheth, that it pleaſeth God, who ſet him aworke, and his will is, that iniquitie ſhould be laid open to the committers thereof, and be reſiſted as ſpeedily as may be; and that all, as their place and calling giue leaue, ought to be ready to goe againſt it, and purſue it. The Miniſters by zealous teaching to deface it; the Magiſtrates by puniſhing; the gouernours of families in their places to do both. Theſe are, as they are bound, to preuent and take order, as they can, leſt ſuch euill things ſhould come to paſſe: and ſo to roote out, and reforme, when they are come. For thus both Church and Common-wealth is, and ſhould be preſerued.
                  The vſe hereof, and in a manner of all which in the firſt three doctrines I Vſe. noted, touching the contrarie fact of the kindred of Abimelech, and the men of Shechem, is, that they who doe euill, ought iuſtly to feare, for God hath ſet many to purſue them, yea euen their owne kindred; and though they eſcape one way, they ſhall be taken another. Wilt thou then liue without

feare euery way? feare God then, and doe well: for if ye doe the thing that Pſal. 112. 1. & 8. is good, who ſhall harme you? For the eyes of the Lord (as the Apoſtle ſaith) 1. Pet. 3. 12. 13. 
                     are (as the mothers vpon the child, that it may take no hurt) ouer the righteous, and his eares open to their prayers: and the face of the Lord, euen his anger, is againſt them that doe euill.
                  
                  
                     Hearken] By this ſpeech of Iotham note, that as all inſtructions and warnings Verſ. 7. ſent vs of God, ought to be hearkened to; ſo more particularly, they Reuel 2. 29. Doct. out of verſe 7. Prou. 17. 15. who heare not the crie of the innocent being wronged, ſhall crie themſelues, and not be heard. Note it againſt the monſtrous oppreſſors and hard dealers of our time; who in letting and lending, regard neither equitie, the common benefit of both perſons, nor the caſe of the poore, but wring from them what they can into their own hands, and vſe other as they liſt. Iudgement ſhall be without mercie to ſuch as are ſo mercileſſe. Conſider what Iames 2. 13. Geneſ. 37. 28. a plunge Ioſephs brethren were brought vnto two or three times, for the crueltie they had ſhewed to him moſt vnnaturally; when they ſold him thither, from whence they hoped he ſhould neuer returne to trouble them any more. God and man ſhall leaue ſuch in their moſt miſerable diſtreſſe, as in the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, and in the death of Saul and Iudas we may ſee: but the mercifull ſhall finde mercie. This iudgement of God in meaſuring out ſuch meaſure to the mercileſſe, as they haue met out to other, I haue oft Matth. 7. 2. obſerued to be paid to them who haue been cruell, as to the bodies ſo to the ſoules of men; who for their own pleaſure depriuing many, that were hungrie, Note. of the food of life, haue (for all their bodily abundance) dyed miſerably in darknes, without any comfort or inſtruction.
                  But alas, who beleeueth our report, till he ſee it verified? But men laugh and ſport themſelues in that they haue ſcraped together, wee haue it in out coffers, ſay they, and about vs: and as for God, tuſh, we hope, he will do neither good nor euil, we hope neuer to be put to any ſuch plunge as you ſpeak of: others indeed haue found the truth of this by wofull experience, but as for vs we hope to morrow ſhall be as to day, we feare it not. But oh wretch! what if the Lord in mercie cull out ſome one of many to be a wonder and example to the reſt, ſparing others the whileſt; doeſt thou ſo abuſe this his patience, to thy condemnation? What if thou be that odde perſon whom God will ſet vpon the ſtage? might not Adonibezek haue ſaid as thou? But put caſe thou eſcape this plague from men, is there not a God who can bee cruell with the cruell, as well as froward with the froward? as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh: that is, match them to the full? Wilt thou vrge him to deale with thee as once he did with an engroſſer and griper, arming mice and rats to oppreſſe him by ſea and land, till they had eaten the fleſh from the bones Note. without pitie, as hee had done many mens before? If thou ſaieſt this is rare, and not like to befall thee. Well, yet there is one way behinde, which ſhall ſurely meete with thee: and if thou canſt ſhunne that, then ſay the Scriptures are fables: and that is, when thou art in hell thou ſhalt crie out as Diues 
                     Luke 16. 24. did, for woe and paine, deſiring reliefe: But it ſhall be anſwered to thee, as to him: No; remember, the time was when thou felteſt not the miſerie of the oppreſſed: Now thou crieſt out in thine anguiſh, and none heareth thee. But by diuers occaſions this is ſpoken of and handled in this booke.
                  To conclude therefore, (with a word or two touching another kinde of oppreſſion) I haue obſerued this, that ſome Proteſtants haue dealt hardly

with, and vncharitably defamed others; euen men of the ſame religion, and (which aggrauateth their ſinne) ſuch as they knew durſt not giue them the meaſure backe againe, which they offered them. Now theſe men afterward falling into the hands of Papiſts, (men of another diſpoſition, cruell like lyons, and ſtinging as ſcorpions) haue been ſo vnpleaſingly and deſpitefully handled, by the ſlanderous railings of their Ieſuites and Rabſhakees, who haue vexed euery veine of their hearts: that they would haue bought off the blemiſhes and ſcarres with a price if they could, which the pennes and tongues of their enemies haue defiled thē with; ſparing neither age, perſon, gifts, or place. And al to teach thē to deale gently with the innocent lambe, if they would auoide the tongues and teeth of woluiſh aduerſaries & lyons.
                  Now to come to the parable: By the trees ſeeking a king, was meant, as I Verſ. 8. ſaid, the Shechemites ſlipperines and inconſtancie, who could not be content with Gods gouernment, gouerning them, as he had done, by many, and raiſing them vp a Iudge in their trouble by other nations, to deliuer them: but they would yeeld to be gouerned by one and haue king, (euen as ſometime after the whole nation of the Iewes did follow them in: 1. Samuel 8.) 1. Sam. 8. 5. contrary to that which God had appointed. Which practiſe of theirs teacheth vs, that we ſoone grow wearie of Gods yoke and of his ordinances, Pſalm. 2. 3. by obeying the which yet wee might doe well if wee could ſee, and loth wee are that God ſhould raigne ouer vs. Indeed we ſay, and in words Luk. 19. 14. ſeeme to pray otherwiſe, as in the ſecond and third petition; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done: but who admitteth it? And no marueile.
                  For fleſh is vnruly, and in the moſt there is no worke of the ſpirit, and the operation of it is weake in the beſt of vs, eſpecially as we goe to worke. By meanes whereof, we ſee how ill it goeth with the moſt at this day. For they Note. hauing no more then nature in them, ſeeke libertie to liue as they liſt, and to follow their owne way. From whence ariſe ſo many troubles and garboiles to them in their liues; when yet Gods yoke is the only eaſie yoke, and vnder Matth. 11. laſt verſe. the wing of his protection only is peace & ſafetie. Oh, one day in his houſe, to be nurtured by him, euen in this life, is better then a thouſand in any eſtate of pleaſure whatſoeuer: and yet wee haue libertie to enioy much euen that way alſo. Looke more hereof in chap. 8. in Gedeons anſwere to the people offering him the kingdome.
                  The other ſonnes of Gedeon are compared with Abimelech, as the good Verſ. 9. 10. to the 16. trees are with the bramble. And yet they, who were more excellent then he, would not raigne: much leſſe ſhould Abimelech, who was farre leſſe worthie, and yet he did. By the trees here, and Gedeons other ſonnes, who would not raigne, though they mought, nor the trees, as the vine, oliue, and figge tree, that would not leaue their ſtate for an higher, nor their ſweetnes for any other; all of vs are taught to keepe compaſſe, and to frame ourſelues willingly to abide in the eſtate wherein God hath ſet vs (as indeed the only and beſt eſtate for vs) and not to breake out of our range and compaſſe, to Doct. out of th
                           •
                         former verſes. affect that which is not for vs. And as gifts are required thereto, and calling; ſo we ſhould attend thereupon, and imploy our time on that, for which we are fitted: yea and looke to find moſt ſweetneſſe therein. For as wee are taught to pray for our daily bread, euen that ſucceſſe and meaſure of bleſſing that God ſeeth beſt; ſo that which he ſendeth, wee ſhould hold to bee beſt for vs. A worthy proofe we haue hereof in Dauid, who, though he were

deſigned to the kingdome, yet he profeſſeth himſelf ſo modeſt & ſober minded, that he looked not at any thing too high for him, but poſſeſſed his ſoule Pſalm. 131. 2. in ſilence and patience. Noting by the way, that to auoid this pragmaticall humor and ambition, a man muſt get an humble hart, much occupied about the wel ordering of his owne affections, & finding work enough at home.
                  But the moſt of vs reach at things beyond our compaſſe, or by our wit, policie and skill, thinke to get all into our net; and meddle with thoſe which we are not trained vp vnto; and ſo we ſuffer our gifts to lie a ruſting. Yea ſurely, this is the caſe of the moſt; either they will haue all or nothing, though they beg for their labour. Buſie bodies many are, the priuat man prying into the Miniſters calling, and finding fault with him; but blind and vntoward to ſeeke what is amiſſe in himſelfe: not vnlike to Abſolon, who being a ſubiect, who ſhould rather haue prayed for grace fit for that eſtate, forgets himſelfe groſſely, and pleaſeth himſelfe to thinke how fit he was for an higher, and what he could doe in his fathers place farre better then hee, and wiſheth he were put to the triall, 2. Sam. 15. Whereas, if the foot be vnfit 2. Sam. 25. 4. to doe it owne office, much leſſe able will it be to bee the head of the bodie: and, indeed, ſuch as theſe are euer cenſuring other in their places and callings, as inſufficient, not looking to their owne duties. Let vs leaue (euerie one) this courſe, and haue euer in mind this anſwere of the Vine and the other trees; Shall I leaue my ſweetneſſe, &c. Leſt we be as ridiculous as he, who bearing his head aloft in viewing the ſtarres, fell into the ditch, for want of looking (in the meane while) to his owne ſtanding. Rather let vs bee content, though we haue not as wee would, and ruſh wee not in haſt, and without conſideration to places and changes of dealings for aduantage: but let vs be ſure, that we haue the Lord alwaies going before vs, or let vs looke for it, that he will moſt certainely ioynt vs. Yea let vs count it our chiefe praiſe, to be faithfull in our owne condition and calling: and no diſcredit to bee ignorant and vnfit for anothers, ſeeing the Lord requires no more of any, thē according to that he hath. And yet it is not vnlawful with ſuch reſpects, in the decay of our trades or ſuch like occupying, to enter vpon ſome other dealings for our neceſſary maintenance, (if need ſo require) and to ſhun and auoid idleneſſe: but let them be ſuch as are fitteſt for vs, and likeſt to helpe vs, but with this prouiſo in any wiſe, that they be not too many, leſt wee bee clogged with them, nor beyond our abilitie, that wee bee not caſt behind hand by them. And ſo when we are driuen by neceſſitie, we cannot be charged as many may, I meane theſe banckrouts, and ſuch as are weary of their callings, who being diſcontent with meanenes, aime at great dealings, neuer asking a queſtiō about their ſo vnaduized changes how God aloweth therof; and therfore with the trees they loſe their ſweetnes, (as we ſee by their anſwer, they muſt haue done, if they had left their places) yea, they muſt forgoe it whether will or no, when they make ſuch changes, and cannot keepe it, although they would full faine. But of this point in part ſee chap. 8. 23.
                  We may further learne here by the anſwer which is ſuppoſed to haue bin made by the trees, to wit, that they did ſo contentedly reſt in that eſtate 
                        Doct. 2. of their which God ſet them in, and which pleaſed him, and was profitable to men, we may learne (I ſay) by this, that God hath done much for vs, to whom he hath giuen a ſweet contentment to reſt and abide in our callings, and to vſe them with faithfulnes and diligence. For why? (as I haue ſaid)

there are few that do ſo; and beſide, we are bound in all things to be thankfull: and alſo that is one principall part of our welfare. But we muſt take it thus, that firſt we ſee, we be receiued into fauor with God, and then that we labor to be in deed, and to be counted faithful of him, that ſo we may be put 1. Tim. 1. 12. in his ſeruice, for elſe neither can we walke in our callings aright, neither find this ſweetneſſe therein, that I ſpeake of, but a carnall reioycing, ſo farre as we proſper, and not for that we ſerue the Lord in them. But this I enlarge not, being onely an vſe of the former doctrine, and mentioned therein.
                  Now whereas it is ſaid of the trees, that they ioyed God and men, wee 
                        Doct. 3. muſt know, that the oyle and wine were vſed in the ſeruice of God in the Tabernacle: the oyle many waies, as to annoint Kings, Prophets, and Prieſts, and to burne in the Tabernacle, and to be mixed with offerings: and the fruit of them al, were meat or medicine alſo, and comfort to men. Herein we muſt note the goodneſſe of God in making euery creature to yeeld ſuch vſe and benefit to vs, inſomuch as the vnlikeſt of other are not exempted from doing this ſeruice to vs, no not the Toade and the Spider, with the like of that kind, & yet by ſin they are become noiſome to vs, which before fin cōmitted, were not ſo. This (if we ſhuld go through the creatures) ſerues vs to meditate on, to the admiring of Gods kindnes, wiſdom and power, ſeeing euery creature yeeldeth ſuch variety of helpe to vs for our great refreſhing and comfort. And yet our ignorāce of many excellent vertues and qualities which lie hid frō vs, in many of them, greatly hindereth vs in this dutie, though we ſee inough to ſet vs on work thus to occupy our ſelues about thē.
                  The naked and dead earth, as it appeareth in the Winter time, to yeeld to vs, and to all liuing creatures here below, food and nouriſhment, and to caſe ſuch a beauty into our eyes by the varietie of the furniture of it in the Summer ſeaſon, Oh what an admirable thing is it? The ſunne to giue heate and light daily to cheriſh the creatures, what a great fauour of God is it, as common a matter as we make of it? and ſo we may thinke of the reſt. Theſe are Rom. 1. 19. the viſible things of God, to make him knowne to vs, who is inuiſible. The goodly varietie of meates, drinkes and medicines, which hee hath appointed for our refreſhing, health, and comfort, which not only our owne ſoile, but alſo other countries afford to vs; alſo that he alloweth vs to eate of the Note. Nehem. 8. 10. fat, and drinke of the ſweet, who can thinke of all theſe, but with wondring at the loue of the giuer of them in this his large and free bounty: and eſpecially conſidering, that wee haue peace, health, and other publike and priuate bleſſings with them, as I haue noted chap. 5. And yet who knoweth not, that theſe ſerue vs here only in this temporall life? things eternall are of another kind, and farre more excellent. Yea, and yet that which we ſee in the creatures, is nothing in compariſon of that which ſhould haue been, if the ſinne of man had not blemiſhed and defaced the firſt beauty of their creation. And howſoeuer (in great prouidence) the Lord haue releaſed the curſe due vnto them: yet they come ſhort of that they were, when God ſaw all was good, and ſo bleſſed them. And all theſe his creatures for our need and Chriſtian delight, may we enioy, boldly and without feare, who are his redeemed ones by Chriſt, and ſo reſtored to the right we had firſt in them: and this we may doe with Gods good liking, if we haue learned how to vſe them to their kindly ends, euen to admire at (in our beholding them) the

wiſdome, power, and bounty of the Creator; gathering from that wee ſee, proofes of his mercy, prouidence, and loue to vs, in ſupplying vs with the good things we ſee not. For by theſe (in part) he would haue vs know him: as himſelfe ſaid, Doe yee ſee how the graſſe of the field, the Lilies, and other Matth. 6. 28. plants are cloathed with beautie in their ſeaſons, and beautifie the earth with their leaues, flowers, fruites, the colour, the ſauour, the abundance of them? Then think (ſaith he) much more will he furniſh you, if you can beleeue it. But further, this wee muſt take great heed of, leſt theſe things, being neere and ſenſible to vs, cauſe ſuch a through vewing, and deepe beholding of them, that our affections be ſnared by them, and held from aſcending vp and mounting vp to the Creator: curſed be that view which cauſeth them to be loued with the loue of him that made them, and himſelfe excluded from the heart of him that enioyeth them. Laſtly, this alſo is to bee highly regarded, that we quicken vp our ſelues thereby, to chearefulneſſe in his ſeruice, which is that good and ioyfull hart he ſpeakes of in Deut. 28. breaking Deut. 
                           •
                        8. 47. out into a ſutable fruitfulneſſe in duty toward him, who hath enlarged himſelfe ſo greatly to vs. For elſe, when men ſwimme in bleſſings, hauing corne, wine and oile, or (as the Iſraelites had) the milke and hony of Canaan, in all plentie; and yet either know not God aright, or if they doe, abuſe their liberties, and break out of their bounds; alas, they turne this varietie of Gods bounties and fauors, into accuſations againſt themſelues and puniſhments: they find no ſweetneſſe in them to purpoſe, while they enioy them, and they haſten alſo the remoueall of them vnſeaſonably, and when it ſhall bee full vnwelcome. Only the faithfull poſſeſſe them here, and are led by them to long after the fruition of him in fulneſſe hereafter, who is much more glorious in himſelfe, then in them: and in heauen where his honour dwelleth, then here vpon earth, which is but his footſtoole.
                  By Abimelech and the Bramble, which ſought that they were vtterly 4 vnfit for, let vs marke, that where ambition is, it maketh the vnworthy to take vpon them that, which the more worthy will not, but vtterly refuſe to doe. For this cauſe wee muſt ſearch our ſelues better in this point. For want whereof, the moſt are deadly ſicke of this diſeaſe, and feele it not. It is bred in all by nature to aſpire, both in Miniſter and people. That which a graue and godly man dares not doe in the Miniſtery, that euery youth and bold fellow almoſt dares, for his commoditie, thruſt himſelfe into many preferments, and is not aſhamed. So that which honeſt and ancient inhabitants abhorre, and flie from, as to contend and quarrell, to iudge others, and puffe vp themſelues with a conceit of their gifts, and to thinke other fooles in reſpect of themſelues, that (yet) dare other doe, who in the beſt things come ſhort and farre behind them. The time hath been, when (through a reuerent and high conceit of the worke of the Miniſterie (though erroneouſly and amiſſe, I muſt needs ſay) ſome men altogether with drew themſelues from it, as thinking themſelues wholly vnworthy of it, and ſo buried many a talent in the earth. But that was the extremity of modeſtie: wee complaine in our age of the contrary ouerweening of our ſelues, and vnder priſing of it, ſo that we can eaſily anſwer Pauls queſtion [To theſe things, who is ſufficient?] by another, who is not ſufficient? Indeed, ſince mē looked to the benefit, and not to the burden (which ſo occupieth an honeſt man, that hee

thinks leſſe of the other) and enquired rather into the quantitie of it, rather then his owne qualitie and worthineſſe: while nothing but flouriſhing in apparrell, iollitie, pleaſures, good cheare and booncompanionſhip is thought to be the complement of the Miniſtery, the anſwer (I confeſſe) is eaſie, if the liuing be therafter, who is not ſufficient for theſe? But, Oh Bramble! Matth. 7. 16. where is thy ſweetneſſe? do men gather Grapes of thornes, or figges of 2. Tim. 4. 2. Note. thiſtles? doeſt thou thus teach in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon? is this thy feeding, thy watching, thy planting and watering? Is this to cheare (and not to grieue rather) the heart of God and good men? Oh who ſhall heale thy barrennes? other barren creatures haue been cured by a miracle or art: the wombe, the earth, the waters: and if thou wert an Oliue, a Vine, or Figge-tree, (though not ſo fruitfull) there were helpe for thee, by cutting, digging, compaſſing, remoouing; but being a Bramble, who ſhall make thee fruitfull? Is it becauſe there is no Oliue in the forreſt, that thou exalteſt thy ſelfe? who neither haſt oyle of vnderſtanding, nor oyle of grace (much leſſe thy veſſell full thereof) that of thy abundance others may be refreſhed? Yea, who if thou haddeſt thy due, and the Lords forreſters, thou ſhouldeſt not (I ſay not) haue place aboue the other trees, but not be allowed to ſtand among them at all. But I conteine my ſelfe.
                  In this part following of the parable, Iotham denounceth againſt the men Ver. 16. 17. 18. 19 of Shechem and Abimelech, ſaying: If yee haue done well, in that yee haue done, reioyce: elſe your ioy ſhall God breake off: Let vs by this ſee, that all reioyce in their doings, according to that they are, whether they be good or bad: but let vs be perſwaded, that to be the durable and ſound ioy, which God alloweth, nay commandeth vs in all our doings, (as we ſee Deut. 28. Deut. 28. 47. 2. Cor. 1. 12. and elſewhere) to wit, that which commeth from well doing, and a good conſcience. But all other ioy is either wicked, as Hamans, Adonijas and Abſolons: 
                     Rom. 15. 13. or vaine, and to be repented of; as the young mans in Eccleſ. and is a Eccleſ. 11. 9. compound of bitter and ſweete: but the bitter is durable, the ſweete ſoone vaniſheth, when men are merrie, and in their mirth ſuffer any knowne ſinne, or diſhonour of God among them, their reioycing is not good; but Chriſts 1. Cor. 5. 6. woe meeteth with them, when he ſaith, Woe be to you that now laugh, for you 
                     Luke 6. 25. 
                     ſhall waile and weepe. And when in the common courſe of our life, we are led by the affection of ioy, which hath no good ground nor warrant, ſuch ioy Note. is euill, and ſhall be turned into ſorrow and woe. And yet I deny not, but mirth, yea euen naturall mirth in things tranſitorie and indifferent is allowed, ſo that it be moderated; yea, and eſpecially if it be vſed to nouriſh ſpirituall ioy; to which end it is ordained of God, and for the ſupporting of our greateſt infirmities, euen as all other of Gods earthlie benefits are likewiſe.
                  And by this ſpeech of Iotham, wee gather, that although good and bad 
                        Doct. 1 out of the former verſes, 16 & 19. meete together, and both ſeeme to be merrie in their ſeuerall companie; yet there is a greater oddes betwixt them, then a man would imagine. For the vngodly mans mirth is bred in the tongue and countenance, and therefore is controlled by an heauie ſad heart, which tels him, that if he conſidered aright of the matter, hee hath ſmall cauſe of being merrie, but to turne his meriments into heauineſſe. The godly mans ioy is heartie, entire, ſound, and therefore laſteth: and he cannot checke himſelfe iuſtly, except it be for

that he is not ſo merrie as he ought to be. And (as Iotham ſaith here) the wicked though they reioyce together, yet they adde not each to the other any ſound, but onely frothie and deceitfull ioy by their fellowſhip: the reaſon is, becauſe the ground of it is ſocietie in euill. But the godly, as they ioy in ſecret, both in Gods fauour and their happie eſtate, and in the good duties which they doe, (as appeareth both in their going about them, performing them, and the fruite of both) ſo when they meete together, their ioy Note. is encreaſed and multiplied, euen as mirth is doubled by muſicke and pleaſure. Whereas therefore the Chriſtian complaines of much ſorrow, within and without, his corrupt affections, his looſenes, his croſſes, reproch in the world, bad example, abundance of iniquitie, temptations: let ſuch a man know, that euen this ſorrow of his, is a good ground of his reioycing, ſeeing that his ſorrow is good. He ſorroweth for euill to ſee it ſo to abound, but his ſorrow is not euill. His conſcience ſtill is good, and ſo long his ioy is warrantable: onely the ill conſcience marres this feaſt of a quiet minded and merrie hearted Chriſtian. My reioycing is my good conſcience, ſaith the 2. Cor. 1. 12. Apoſtle. But if a good man will doe as a bad man, his ioy is like his. As for affliction, if it come vpon him in his innocencie, though it may dampe his outward mirth, eſpecially if he be not fitted for it, yet it takes not ioy from his ſoule, but it ſhall returne againe double and treble. For their names being written in heauen, and they knowing it to be ſo, no affliction, no nor the Luke 10. 10. greateſt malice of Satan can blot them out thence: and therefore affliction (to the godly) is compared to ſowing: now we know ſowing is the cauſe of harueſt, wherein is great ioy. Therefore let them beware, leſt by their diſguiſing Pſal. 126. 5. themſelues and wounding their conſciēce, they cauſe not to themſelues needleſſe complainings, feares and ſorrowes, or halfe ioy in ſtead of ſound, and ſo doing, they ſhall not neede to feare that Gods fatherly corrections ſhall hurt them. And if they will ſee good daies, and liue chearefully, let them looke that out of a good heart, they bring foorth no other but good 1. Pet. 3. 11. fruites, to bee reioyced in, and flee euill of all ſorts, yea though the world count them but peazants and meacocks for their ſo doing. The time ſhall Luke 6. 46. come when all ſuch iollie fellowes ſhall ioy as Abimelech and the Shechemites, that is, ſhall ſit downe and put their heads betweene their knees, for ſorrow, ſhame and miſerie, and yet a greater ſorrow is behinde.
                  
                     Iotham in mentioning his father, ſaith that he put his life in danger to deliuer Verſ. 17. 18. the Shechemites: and ſo againe, he requireth of the men of Shechem that they deale accordingly with his poſteritie, that is to ſay, in vprightnes and righteouſnes. Wherein he ſpeaketh as the Scripture doth euery where, that men who haue had good meaſure offered them, and ſtand vpon their knowledge, ciuilitie and honeſtie, and much more their profeſſion, ſhould not behaue themſelues as others, who walke by example onely of the common ſort, and their own ſenſualitie and will. Neither is that any better, that ſome alleage, that they do as much as law enioyneth them, when as yet they may be conuicted of palpable iniurie, and vnthankfulnes. For a good man, if there were no law, will be a law to himſelfe: Oh! how much to be accounted is that faithfulnes, which requites loue with kinde dealing? but it is rare to be found, but yet on the contrarie, that is barbarous to yeeld euill for good, as many doe, and as theſe men of Shechem are heere charged by

                     Iotham to haue done, when yet wee haue learned, that wee ought to render Rom. 12. 21. good for euill. But I referre the reader to the firſt and laſt verſes of the 8. Chapter, wherein I haue more at large ſpoken of this point.
                  Here in that he foretelleth, that one of them ſhall deſtroy another, that Verſ 20. Doct.
                      is: Abimelech the men of Shechem, and they him, euen as it came to paſſe; it may teach vs, that all ill practiſes and doings ſhall haue an euill end. The kingdome, on his part was wickedly ſought, and on their part as wickedly granted; and how could the end be good, the worke being euill, howſoeuer for a time it appeare not? Who were greater or faſter knit in conſent one with another, then Ioſephs brethren, about ſending and ſelling him away far from them, where he ſhould neuer trouble them, as they counted it, and hoped, Gen. 42. 21. any more? But what came of it? were they not after ſtrangled, or rather haltered with that they had done? When there aroſe but a little trouble againſt them, did they not then crie out and confeſſe, that their cruell handling of him, yea and that long after, was the chiefe cauſe of it?
                  So, who are neerer ioyned together then theeues? Yet there commeth a time of pealing one another, wherein they cry out, Oh we are vndone! woe to vs that euer wee were linked in a confederacie together. Who greater friends then the wicked that conſpire together againſt goodneſſe and good men? but when it is bewraied, and they by a greater, and an ouerruling power are called to a reckoning, what deadly hate is there betwixt them, as Matth. 27. 4. we reade of Iudas and the wicked Prieſts? And in ſhew, where is there greater loue then betwixt theſe caualering and drunken companions, who (forſooth) will be called the only good fellowes? Doe they not embrace each 2. Sam. 3. 27. other as Ioab did Abner, in their armes, when they goe about their pot-companionſhip? And yet, ere they ariſe from their ale-bench, one of them ſtabbeth another, as Ioab thruſt Abner thorow with his weapon, euen while he embraced him. Call yee this loue? It is diueliſh loue then, which brings foorth ſuch fruites. Therefore let our beginnings and attempts be alwaies good, yea and well followed alſo; or elſe, let vs neuer looke that the end of them ſhall bee any better: this one thing being excepted, that repentance come in the way, for then it may end well, in that it is repented of: but this is not the thing that the vngodly propounded to be the end of their wicked acts, neither if it were, could they be ſure to obtaine it, for it rarely befalleth ſuch. But reade of this point in the 22. verſe following, which mentioneth the fulfilling of this prophecie.
                  In this laſt verſe, after the ſpeech of Iotham, it is ſaid that hee fled to hide Verſe 21. himſelfe for feare of Abimelech. And no marueile though he fled: for men haue been impatient in hearing rebukes in all ages; euen as there may bee no reproofe, either of mens eſtates or doings, admitted or borne, be they neuer ſo vnſound or wicked: eſpecially by thoſe who are great in the world, for the moſt part. That of Hoſeah the Prophet doth ſufficiently teſtifie Hoſ. 4. 4. it, ſaying: Though by ſwearing, lying, ſtealing, adulterie, &c. the land do mourne, yet let no man reprooue another: meaning, that it ſhould bee in vaine. And our Sauiour foreſaw this, in willing his Diſciples to flee from citie to citie: noting that men would not beare reproofe, but through the Matth. 10. 23. loue of the darkneſſe they were in, they would hate the light, eſpecially to be reprooued, and the meſſengers of God that were the bringers thereof.

Reade how Aſa, a good man, handled the meſſenger of God, Hanani the 2. Chro. 16. 10. Seer, when hee brought his meſſage from God: he was wroth with him, and put him in priſon. Many, who know their owne ſtrength what they are able to doe, becauſe they are of great wealth and authoritie, how iuſtly ſoeuer they are reproued, will not ſee that, but pretend that Preachers ſeeke to bring their necks vnder their girdle, and to dominere ouer them: and that they alleage to be the reaſon, why they refuſe to be reproued by them. But let their conſciences tell them, that they feare them not in that reſpect, they being men of ſmall account in the world: but yet they take occaſion to ſhake off their ſermons or priuate companies, vnder that pretence and colour. But they hope by this meanes, that they may attaine moſt eaſily that which they haue ſought, and doe deſire; to wit, that they may more boldly goe forward in their ſinnes, while there is no man that ſhall haue acceſſe or allowance to tell them thereof. But what followeth ſuch doing, but this; that they goe forward in them ſtill, till they ring in euery mans eare, and are in euery mans mouth to be talked of, and they alſo dye after the ſame manner, that is, without repentance, being bereaued of all their greatnes, and left helpleſſe and hopeleſſe in great baſenes and contempt. Farre are ſuch off from the eſtate of the wiſe, who pray, Let the righteous ſmite vs, that ſo we may not fall into the hands of the wicked, to be bought and ſold of the vngodly Pſal. 141. 5. at their pleaſure. All the world well nigh ſings this note with the Ierem. Hoſ. 4. 4. wicked people of Anathoth, Preach to vs pleaſant things, but let none reproue. For though there was neuer more neede, yet to that point they are come, that euen baſe ones will not admit it, when yet wee ſhould all ſuffer Heb. 13. 22. the wholeſome words of exhortation.
                  The reaſon why reproofe is ſo vnwelcom, is, becauſe the worſe that men are, the more daintie & iealous they be to be handled roughly, or to be told plainly of their faults, and to be drawne out of them: as wee ſee the tendereſt faces can leaſt endure the nipping weather: and the galled fleſh can abide no rubbing. For the truth is tart and bitter to them, few can admit it, except it be tempered with ſome ſweetnes of flatterie: which though a man know it to be dangerous, and as the vipers ſting, killing by ticking: yet men had rather be tickled to death, then healed by corraſiues. We reade of one in hiſtorie, who was cured of an impoſtume by the ſword of his enemie, which opened an iſſue in his fleſh, and let out the corruption. And till the Lord giue wiſedome to ſuch to ſuffer their enemies (for ſo they call the Miniſter, as the Galathians did Paul, for telling them the truth) to wound Gal. 4. 16. them: their owne ſelfe-loue will nouriſh ſuch impoſtumated matter within them, as will breake inwardly (for lack of vent) and deſtroy them. This is an euill ſpirit in men, that neither they will be innocent, (for then they might walke boldly through the pikes) nor yet abide to bee called to queſtion. Prou. 10. 9. Note. They will both deſerue blame with the formoſt, and yet (with the forwardeſt) be reuenged vpon him that ſhall controle them, though it bee by Gods commandement. So that, neither Scripture, Miniſter, no nor God himſelfe, may ſtand vp againſt them: they are lawleſſe and exempted perſons. But oh man conſider, if thine enemie ſhould wiſh thee a ſhrewd turne, he could not inuent a greater then this, that thou ſhouldeſt want an admoniſher to warne thee, by the refuſing of whom, thou more hurteſt thy ſelfe,

then thy greateſt enemie can hurt thee. The Lord threatens it againſt the Iewes, when hee denounceth the moſt ſeuere puniſhments againſt them. Therefore in that thou maiſt be reproued, (eſpecially in publike, where no man is priuie to the matter but thy ſelfe) think it a greater portion, then many (of farre higher place) enioy, and profit thou (if thou be wiſe) by it accordingly.
                  Some might think that Iotham ranne away, becauſe he ſaid more then he durſt ſtand to: but we muſt know, he put his life in Gods hands, and hauing diſcharged his duty, auoided (as much as he could) the lions mouth & danger, being not bound to put his finger into the fire wilfully: and yet (as it is like) not afraid thereof, if God had giuen him into his enemies hands, and called him to ſeale the truth by his blood. And therefore, let none condemne ſuch of raſhnes or cowardiſe, who hauing rebuked ſinne in ſuch as are boiſterous and malicious, ſhift for themſelues, and prouide (as they may) for their owne eſcape and ſafetie. Rather this condemneth the cruell diſpoſition of them whom they reproue, who when they cannot iuſtly conuince ſuch of error or ſlander, raſhnes, or the like; but haue their owne conſcience condemning them for the ſame offences: yet will not ſuffer thoſe to liue by them in peace, who haue done their duties, and diſcharged their conſcience in iuſtly reprouing. How ſhall ſuch be brought to be conuicted, that ſo they may relent and amend, who cannot endure to be accuſed? And it is the mercie of God (conſidering the ſpitefull nature of the wicked) that any godly Iotham or Miniſter of the word may bee ſuffered to keepe his ſtanding, and to awake and admoniſh the vnruly that hee may be ſaued: and is not compelled to flee, and runne away, for feare of his oppoſites, when hee hath reproued them, although hee hath but told them truth for their good and benefit, and that in a kinde manner. If God did not muzzle them, doubtleſſe it were as hard for them, as for Iotham, if euery lewd offender might haue his will, as in ſome places, ſuch beare too much ſway, and deterre the Miniſter (being weake and fearefull) from medling, in challenging the ſinnes of the place, and laying hard againſt the offenders, when yet God hath charged them ſtreightly to denounce againſt them. But why doe ſuch hinder the courſe of their Miniſterie? Verily becauſe they themſelues may ſleepe ſecure in their ſinnes, as Herod thought to doe, when Iohns mouth was ſtopped.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 22. So Abimelech raigned three yeeres ouer Iſrael.
                     
                     23 And the Lord ſent an euill ſpirit betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem, and the men of Shechem brake their promiſe to Abimelech.
                     
                     24. That the crueltie toward the ſeuentie ſonnes of Ierubbaal, and their blood might come and be laid vpon Abimelech their brother which had ſlaine them, and vpon the men of Shechem who had aided him to kill his brethren.
                     
                     25. So the men of Shechem ſet men to waite for him in the tops of the mountaines: who robbed all that paſſed that way by them, and it was told Abimelech.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOw it followeth in this third part of the chapter, how both The ſenſe. 
                     Abimelech and the men of Shechem were deſtroyed; with the occaſions and meanes thereof, which were two: firſt the diſcord betwixt them and diſſenſion: ſecondly open warre both which made way thereunto. Theſe are to the 42. verſe: and the deſtroying one the other to the end of the chapter. For the firſt, it is ſaid that the Lord ſent an euill ſpirit betwixt them, euen the ſpirit of Satan, and therefore there muſt needs be diſcord betwixt them, as in theſe verſes appeares, to the 26. And being thus at diſſenſion, they were prouoked to fight, till each ſlew other, as I haue ſaid. But before I enter into, and lay open theſe things, this is to be conſidered, firſt, that is ſaid here, that Abimelech ruled ouer Iſrael three yeres. Which words are a preparatiue to that which followeth: for thus they are to be taken; that after theſe words of Iotham, thus vttered, Abimelech raigned three yeeres notwithſtanding, and the men of Shechem and he made a ſhift to hold together ſo long. All which while a man would haue thought Iotham his parable had been but a dreame and deluſion: But when three yeeres (a ſhort time to ſpeake of for a King to enioy his crowne) were come about, then the Lords threat began to take effect, (for how ſhould it be otherwiſe?) though a little while it were deferred? Now if the time had been long, men might eaſily haue forgotten Iotham, but being within three yeeres thus fulfilled, who might not remember the prophecie, and note the accompliſhment thereof? Thus the Lord will haue his iudgements ceaſe vpon his enemies: ſo that they who ſee them, may ſay, This is no caſuall miſchance which hath befallen them, but the hand of God purſuing them manifeſtly, for ſuch or ſuch a tranſgreſſion.
                  
                     
It is not ſaid, that hee was Iudge ouer Iſrael, for they were raiſed vp by God, but hee ruled and vſurped, as Tyrants vſe to doe. And to begin firſt Doct. verſ. 22. with his proſperity in that God gaue him this ſhort time to inioy his deſire, and to dominere as he did, it is to teach vs, that he doth for ſome little time, giue wicked men their longed for deſires; and yet not for that he applaudeth them therein, but that they may haue time to repent, and to bethinke themſelues what they haue done, and how they haue gone to worke, and how many waies they haue prouoked God; and that if they refuſe ſo to do, they may ſee that they be iuſtly reiected, and that God had no pleaſure in them, in their greateſt floriſh. Zimry and Cozby, Chorah and Haman, with the Rich man in the Goſpell, and others many, a ſhort time they had to worke, and accompliſh their deſires, and take their pleaſure, and enioy the luſt of their hearts. And indeed ſo ſhort a time had need bee well improoued, while it laſts, for when that time was ouer and paſt, what heare yee, euen this, that their folly, nay their ſhame and madneſſe, was manifeſted and ſpoken of in all places. Neither ſhould their reproch and downefall haue been ſo notable, if they had not proudly paſſed their bounds, and carried themſelues too loftily before. Many waies, wee ſee, God hath to deſtroy ſuch. Sometime he ſuffers them not to plant themſelues at all, but croſſes them in the enterpriſe, as Abſolon and Adonija: ſometimes hee ſuffers them to take deepe roote, and giues them a long time, but it is with much vexation and vnſetling; as Pharao and Ahab. And otherwhiles he lets them flouriſh but a ſhort time, and puls them vp ere they bee halfe rooted, as this Abimelech. Whether he keepes them from attaining that which they ſeeke, or keepes them vnder, or plucks them vp againe, let them learne by them all, that he is wiſe, and knowes how to handle them, and to ſhelter his owne from the annoyance of them. Dauid, Pſal. 37. ſpeaking of this third ſort of flouriſhers, Pſal. 37. 35. 36. whom he compares to the greene Bay tree, (which though it be barren, yet keepes the colour both Winter and Sommer) addeth this, that they are ſuddenly and horribly conſumed: and it is the argument of many Pſalmes, and the ſumme of that which Iobs friends ſo much inſiſt vpon, (though they apply it prepoſterouſly) That the happineſſe of the wicked is ſhort. So that wee muſt not wonder if they plie their worke apace, and take the vttermoſt of their libertie: for the diuell teacheth them ſo to doe; who rageth the more violently, knowing he is tied by a ſhorttether. Doubtleſſe their ſhortiolitie, is the vantage of the Church, which hath many a breathings betwixt whiles, by their diſcontinuance: euen as wee ſee Suſhans perplexitie vnder Hamans malice, was turned into ioy, in his ruine. Naturall Philoſophers obſerue, that the creatures which are moſt noiſome and hurtfull, are ſome way or other ſo reſtrained (either by paucity, ſhort life, or the like) that they cannot doe the harme they would. But if God did not reſtraine men as wel as beaſts, they would waxe more monſtrous.
                  And be we wiſe, though the world bee ſet on wilfulneſſe, and miſchiefe, let not our teeth water after their dainties: the beſt whereof is a ſhort flouriſhing, to tickle fooles with a deſire of the like; but they ſee not their day comming, which vet is at hand, like a whirle-wind and tempeſt to ſcatter their pleaſures and glory; and like a fire to deuoure and conſume all, moſt fearefully: which painted eſtate of theirs, all may ſee to be farre from the

grace which the Lord wiſheth to his people, when he ſaith, Oh, that they were wiſe to conſider their end. And yet the worſt end of the other is not Deut. 32. 29. ſeene. And Gods mercy is great in cutting them off ſo ſoone: who elſe ſhould liue with them, beſides the preuenting of much iniquitie, which would make their account heauier. For all this, one followes the ſteppes of another, and the child, when he comes into his fathers place, beginneth not at firſt, to weigh the ſhortneſſe of his life, how ſoone he ſhall be, as his father is, that is, cut off from al, that ſo he might apply his heart to wiſdome, but taketh poſſeſſion of his place, as if he were riuited into it for perpetuity, Pſalm. 90. 12. and will not ſo much as thinke of any change or remouall from thence.
                  But to goe forward: this euill ſpirit that was ſent betwixt them, being the firſt occaſion of their ouerthrow, was the diuell; by whoſe malice and Verſ. 23. ſubtiltie, ill will and hatred were kindled betwixt them, yea and inflamed: and this, with the breaking their promiſe, doth ſhew vs clearely, that the Doct. league and friendſhip of the wicked is ſoone broken off: For why? it hath no good ground. And although there be ſome outward things which vphold it, as hope of profit, pleaſure, preferment, and the ſeruing one of anothers turne; although (I ſay) theſe and ſuch like, patch vp an agreement betwixt them for a while, yet their hearts are inconſtant, and many things fall out to breed alienation of affection one from another, and a pritch is ſoone Note. taken, many conceits ariſe, and reports are carried betwixt them, and who can reckon vp all: And yet if there were no other cauſe hereof, (as yet there is, for they daube vp their friendſhip with vntempered morter, which falleth away) this were inough that is ſpoken of here, that God can ſend an ill ſpirit betwixt them, euen then, when they are moſt ſtrongly combined and knit together: and cauſe them to breake their promiſe one to another, and iarre and diſagree. And although it bee a great reproch to them, that their contentions ſhould break out and be knowne, (as if both conſent together to ſmite the righteous) and therefore in wicked policie they doe what they can, to hide them; yet otherwiſe they are diuided, and ſtrongly incenſed one againſt the other, which alſo breaketh out ſometime, and ſo confirmeth this truth, that though they ſeemed to be glued in friendſhip and familiaritie together, and make men belieue, that their loue is firme, yet their league is rotten, and they grow to bee at defiance one with the other, and that oft times betwixt themſelues ſecretly, before it breake foorth in the ſight of men. The vſe whereof is, that we make no ſuch wicked and curſed leagues. Vſe. Secondly, that we account no otherwiſe of them where they be made, but as of the Spiders web, ſoone ſwept downe: and thirdly, praiſe God highlie when wee ſee them broken. For that turneth to the great benefit of the Church, and the diuers members of it: as we reade that the diuiſion of the Phariſies and Sadduces turned to Pauls deliuerance from their rage. But let Act. 23. 10. the godly continue their league, that their loue may be ſtrong, as a threefold cord, that is not eaſily broken. Neither let them neglect their mutuall examples Eccleſ. 4. 12. to profit thereby; but rather be aſhamed that heauen ſhould not tie them together faſter, then hell tieth the vngodly: yea, let them bee aſhamed (I ſay) that euen the ſmalleſt trifle and a very conceit of one againſt another, is enough to eſtrange them, as it too often falleth out, and to ſet them at defiance betwixt themſelues, till the wicked laugh them and their profeſſion

to ſcorne: whereas theſe curſed leagues of the malignant hold ſometime longer, though they be bound together with rotten threads, through wicked policie, which out reneweth them, (except the Lord diſioyne and ſeparate them) eſpecially if their concord and agreement be in oppoſing the innocent.
                  And ſeeing God curſeth and ſcatters theſe combinations of the wicked, as faſt as they vnite and ſtrengthen themſelues, as Pſalm. 2. ſaying of them Pſalm 2. 1. as Iacoh did of Simeon and Leui, Curſed be their rage, curſed be their counſell: let Geneſ 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      not the godly ſo much feare their bandings, and faſt knittings of themſelues together, as looke patiently till this curſe, as a moth, conſume them. Iehoſhaphat, 2. Chron. 20. ſeeing Moab, Ammon and Seir confederate to deſtroy 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      him, feared at the firſt: but when he ſaw the ſword of each againſt other, till they had made a riddance of all, he was comforted; euen as that myſterie of the late matchleſſe treaſon, with what deepe ſecrecie was it carried, how ſtrongly complotted, how firmely were the agents thereof vnited? euen as firmely as oth, vow and the Sacrament (abuſed) might knit them: but the Lord (bleſſed for euer by his name) ſent a ſpirit of diuiſion betweene them, they were detected and diſcouered by each other.
                  And in that it is ſaid, that the Lord ſent this euill ſpirit betwixt them, wee 
                        Doct. 2. may note, that though God be not the author of euill (as ſome would (perhaps) be too ready to gather) yet that ſinne which is in the wicked, hidden in their hearts, and neuer ſo ſecret, he bringeth forth at his pleaſure, and lets it breake out at his commandement, ruling, and ouer-ruling the ſame. And they that nouriſh it in themſelues, and doe not giue it a vent by repentance, may euer iuſtly feare, and doe ſometime too truly find, that as water pent in, breakes out violently in ſome place or other: euen ſo the ſinne that is intertained Note. in mens hearts, ſhall one time or other breake out, to their ſhame in their liues. But as the ſtinke of the dunghill riſeth not from the Sunne, no more (aſſure we our ſelues) doth ſinne proceed from God.
                  Alſo by this diuiſion betwixt them, we may note, that when God ſuffers 
                        Doct. 3. diuiſion among the wicked, or an euill ſpirit any way to leade them, it is to puniſh their leaud fellowſhip, and to reuenge the ſinne of both parts, and to make each the others executioner. And yet, Oh what a ſweet libertie it is thought to be, to inioy fellowſhip with ſuch? We ſee that the thatcht houſes A Simile. which ſtand cloſe together, though they fence each other from the violence of weather for a time, yet if one be on fire, it ſerueth but to haſten the conſumption of the other. And ſo there is no knot ſo wickedly knit betwixt men, but (while it laſteth) it bringeth (I grant) ſome benefit to the confederates: but when once the Lord hath diſſolued the band, their greateſt vnion turnes to the moſt deadly enmitie that can be, and is as the diuiſion of brethren, Prou. 18. 19. ſtronger then the braſen barres of a palace or citie gates. And firſt, grudges ſecretly being conceiued, they are nouriſhed by iealouſies and ſuſpitions exaſperated by daily iniuries, till they breake out into hatred, and end in extremitie. Theſe things are commonly ſeene: but who beholdeth Gods iuſtice therein? or is thereby flayted and feared from hauing any thing to doe with ſuch? or made wiſe to lay a better foundation of their amity and friendſhip?
                  
                     
Furthermore, by this, that God would haue the blood of the innocent Verſ. 24. ſonnes of Gedeon reuenged vpon Abimelech and the men of Shechem, hee teacheth vs, that hee will reuenge the innocents cauſe, and ſo he made the blood of Abel cry out for vengeance. The Lord will bleſſe them that bleſſe Geneſ. 12. 3. his, and curſe them that curſe his. And the greater the perſons are, and the wrong that is done to them, the more God will pay them home, who are guiltie of tranſgreſſion and ſpite againſt them. As when the Lords annointed are ſtricken at, as lawfull Kings, and Gods faithfull miniſters; for which cauſe he ſaith, Touch not mine annointed, and doe my Prophets no harme. 
                     Pſalm. 105. 15.
                  
                  Therefore thoſe runnagate Ieſuites, that roote out and kil Chriſtian Princes, and ſubuert kingdomes, ſo farre as in them lieth, hath the Lord branded with a mark of perpetual infamy, and of his iuſt diſpleaſure, at the gallowes; though they being brazen faced, and hard-hearted, cannot by any meanes be brought to repentance. Iudas hath left behind him a ſufficient teſtimony of the wofull eſtate of thoſe that hurt the innocent, his words are theſe, out of deſpaire, and a perplexed conſcience; I haue ſinned in betraying the innocent 
                     Matth. 27. 3. 
                     blood. Therefore he that ſeeth ſo many to ſtudie to hurt ſuch as would liue in peace by them, by murthering, by robbing, or oppreſſing, and vexing the being harmeleſſe, what doe they, but cauſe talke euery where to goe of the Lords threats of reuenging them, and bring them alſo moſt certainely vpon their owne heads, that I ſay no more. But of this point I haue elſewhere entreated.
                  Alſo, in that it is ſaid, that the men of Shechem did ſtrengthen Abimelechs 
                     
                        Doct. 2. hand, by giuing money to hire baſe fellowes to kill his brethren; in that, I ſay, that ſuch as liued in the citie, and ſhould haue helped to ſettle, and ſee good order kept, yet were ſuch euill men, euen incouragers and furtherers vnto murther: we ſee, that there are in cities, and townes, oft-times, vile perſons couered with the vizor of honeſt citizens and inhabitants. For in no worſe account many goe, who bearing office to puniſh and beate downe diſordered perſons and diſturbers, are yet themſelues as bad and noiſome as any other. Which admoniſheth all ſuch, as liue ciuilly in townes, to ſearch themſelues, that they may bee found faithfull alſo, and that they reſt not in the opinion, that is conceiued of them for the place that they are in; who, as we ſee in theſe, may be farre worſe then the baſe ofskourings, which fall into their hands to be puniſhed: but if they keepe from open ſtaines, yet another thing is to bee looked for in them, to wit, that their hearts be good alſo. But of this point I will not here repeate the ſame things which I handled before.
                  This diſſention was ſo hot betwixt them, that it brake into ciuill warre, by Verſ. 25. meanes whereof, none could paſſe in ſafetie. And wee cannot be ignorant, how dangerous thoſe times be. But by this we may ſee, what troubles and dangers (as robbing one another in the high way) one vile perſon, or a few, may raiſe vp: who may be fitly compared to a firebrand caſt into a barne of corne: euen ſuch miſchiefe wrought this Abimelech. Such a one was Abſolom, and thoſe caitiffes who ſlew the two French Kings: and the ſame may be ſaid of the Authors of the Gun-powder-treaſon. No torture can be too great for ſuch. Such deſperate perſons and diuelliſh ſhould bee cut off at

firſt, when they bee found out, and not ſuffered to liue to doe greater miſchiefe. Touching the benefit of peace, and the like publike bleſſings, ſee chap. 5. and elſe where in this hiſtory.
                  
                     Verſ. 26. Then Gaal, the ſonne of Ebed came with his brethren, and they went to Shechem, and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.
                     
                     27. And therefore they went into the field, and gathered in their grapes, and trod them and made merry, and went into the houſe of their gods, and did eate and drinke, and curſed Abimelech.
                     
                     28. Then Gaal, the ſonne of Ebed ſaid, Who is Abimelech? And who is Shechem, that we ſhould ſerue him? is hee not the ſonne of Ierubbaal, and Zebul is his officer? Serue rather the men of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for why ſhould wee ſerue him?
                     
                     29. Now would to God this people were vnder my hand, then would I put away Abimelech; and he ſaid to Abimelech, encreaſe thine army and come out.
                     
                  
                  OF the firſt occaſion of Abimelechs and the Shechemites deſtroying one The ſenſe. another: the next occaſion of the miſchiefes that followed, is here ſet downe, namely this; that they being thus incenſed, one againſt the other, they fall to open warre, and to ſet it forward, there came in the way one Gaal, and the men of Shechem hired him for their Captaine to be for them againſt Abimelech. And by his helpe they went out, and gathered their grapes, which otherwiſe they durſt not haue done, and made merry, and curſed Abimelech. And that boaſter Gaal hardned them againſt him, affirming Thraſonically, that he would put him downe. If the men of Shechem knew him not, as the Scripture ſets not downe from whence he came, but his behauiour bewraied him. If (I ſay) they knew him not, they did fooliſhly, to receiue and reſt vpon him, being a ſtranger, though a boaſter: and if they did know him, what madneſſe was it, to take and truſt in him, though a ſtranger, yet a boaſter? But howſoeuer their ſinne was great, in their intertaining of him, yet indeed, it was of and by God (who hereby haſtned their deſtruction) that they ſhould light vpon ſuch a Captaine; themſelues being ſuch ſouldiers, they might well goe together; and no wonder, if boaſters and the ambitious ſo eaſily accorded, although if they had not been giuen vp to themſelues, they would not haue truſted to him. Thus the men of Shechem prouided for themſelues, and how Abimelech did the like, it followes after.
                  And as the doing of the men of Shechem was fooliſh, dangerous, and Doct. (as it prooued) their ouerthrow; ſo it giueth warning to them that can receiue it, to beware of reſting vpon all rotten holds, and broken ſtaues. Of which ſort there are many, with which, men are deceiued as groſſely, as they of Shechem were by this their folly, to caſt all their welfare vpon a boaſter. The Pſalmiſt mentioneth ſome of theſe, when he ſaith: Some put their trust 
                     Pſalm. 107. 
                     in chariots, and ſome in horſes. The Prophet Ieremie teaching men to ſhunne Ier. 9. 23. the ſawe danger, ſaith, Let not the wiſe man glory in his wiſdome, nor the ſtrong in his ſtrength, nor the rich in his riches, but let him that glorieth, glory in this that hee knoweth me, ſaith the Lord. If we may not reſt on men, much leſſe on weaker

ſtaies, as ſome doe in their preſent eſtate of peace, wealth, habitation, wife, friends, health, and the like.
                  The ſame Prophet ſaith: Curſed is he that maketh fleſh his arme, and truſteth 
                     Ier. 17. 5. 
                     in man, and his heart departeth from God. So the Prophet Dauid crieth out, ſaying: Truſt not in earthly Princes, who cannot ſaue others, nor themſelues. Pſalm 146. 3. And to King Aſa it was ſaid, Becauſe thou truſtedſt in the King of Aram and not 
                     2. Chron. 16. 7. 
                     in the Lord, from hence foorth thou ſhalt haue warre. In God onely our truſt muſt be repoſed, Salomon ſaith, otherwiſe we may vſe mans helpe and other Prou 3. 
                           •
                        . Pſalm. 127. 2. meanes, but all in vaine. And the vſe of this doctrine is, that we ſhould retaine in all dangers and troubles, our hope and confidence in Gods promiſes, and for other ſlippery helpes, our comfort is thereafter as wee reſt in them: and this appeareth more clearely, the greater the matters are, in which we doe ſo.
                  But this doctrine hath been diuerſly occaſioned before. One thing I will adde to anſwere ſuch as might ſay, Theſe Shechemites had no other ſhift now, but to ſhroud themſelues vnder this, or ſome ſuch like defence, who therefore can blame them if they ſought ſhelter againſt a tyrant where they could get it? I anſwer. To ſeeke ſuccour againſt an vſurper is lawfull, ſo the meanes be according: but this vſurper was ſet vp by themſelues, neither did he any greater violence to them, then they to him; and therefore for this, I ſay, they might thanke themſelues, for that they brought wilfull bondage vpon themſelues. Indeed, as the caſe ſtood with them, either they muſt fence their citie and people (whom they had brought into the ſnare being led by them) againſt Abimelech, or elſe yeeld and periſh. But what a curſed thing is this, for the men either to vſe vile perſons to be their patrons in their deſperate quarrels, or elſe to bring themſelues to that point, that they might be come vpon by one that ſought and waited to deſtroy them? Therefore let not men defend their ſins by this plea, that they are driuen to a ſtraight, and haue no remedy, but to fall vpon the ſmaller inconuenience, that they may auoid the greater: For who brought this wretched choice vpon them? God alloweth his children to walke at large vnder his gouernment, and keepes them from ſuch ſtreights as theſe. Who then cooped them into ſo narrow a roome? Surely their owne ſinne: when men haue liberty, they are wearie of it, till they beſtreightned and driuen to their ſhifts. Therefore this defence is as bad as the crime it ſelfe: for if men haue fallen into extremitie by one ſinne, they muſt not redeeme and auoid it by another, nor doe euill that a ſuppoſed good may come of it. What then? Humble themſelues for the firſt ſinne, and caſt themſelues vpon Gods hand for the iſtue and danger, & ſo auoid the ſecond, as Dauids example excellently ſheweth. 2. Sam. 24. 17. For who are they, that hauing ſinned, they ſhould ſcorne to beare the ſhame of it? And eſpecially if the extremitie they auoid, bee but onely a puniſhment bodily: (as cōmonly that is the ſtreight which men ſeeke to ſhun) and they ſin doubly by prouoking God through indirect meanes, and al to ſaue themſelues frō momentany trouble & danger. Indeed of two euils temporall, the leſſer may be choſen to auoid the greater, but not of two euils morall and mortall which are ſinnes, much leſſe when the one is a temporall euill, the other morall. For by this meanes an adulterer may ſay, I haue no way

to ſhift but one, to buy off my ſhame, except I would bee ſhamed for euer. But O thou wofull man; if thou haue deſerued it, beare it; if God haue laid it vpon thee, as the Church did in Micha, ſaying: I will beare my puniſhment, 
                     Mich 7. 7. 
                     becauſe I haue ſinned: and thinke not by ſuch a ſhift to eſcape ſhame being guiltie, vnleſſe thou fall into a greater without recouerie.
                  The Shechemites were ſo afraid of Abimelech, that they durſt not gather Verſ 7. their grapes, which were as their harueſt: therefore they hired this Gaal to helpe them, who was (we ſee) ſedicious, a boaſter and a deceiuer. Now by his conduct they goe foorth into the field, and in great laſciuiouſnes, reioyced, and in their Temple curſed Abimelech.
                  
                  By this, among the manifold diſcomforts in warre, which in other places I obſerue, let this one be numbred, yt men are thereby cut off from the 
                        〈…〉
                     s Doct. of the earth, & from their harueſts, by which they liued all they ere: which being ſpoyled, how farre is their life from death? and yet worſe then death, to lie in feare of it, pinched with penurie. They could not goe out of their doores, nor reape their fruites, till now they made this ſhift by Gaal: and yet neither were they ſafe in their houſes: theſe beſides many like effects of warre moſt frearefull, are at ſuch times brought againſt them, who are by 
                        
                           •
                        
                      warre ſet vpon. So that a man would thinke, that knoweth this, that ſuch as are preſerued from it, and the like ſore oppreſſions, would binde themſelues while they liue, to ſubmit themſelues to God in all dutie, and that moſt willingly.
                  And no doubt ſo would they moſt readily couenant to doe, when they are vnder ſuch oppreſſions, vpon condition, that they might then obtaine a promiſe of deliuerance from them: which ſheweth that there is good cauſe why they ſhould doe ſo: but can we ſay (who marke it) that men doe thus? In ſmaller troubles, we ſee (alas) the contrary. I remember what is ſaid in the Pſalme: when the Lord ſmote the people, they ſought him, yea, they ſought him 
                     Pſal 78. 34. 
                     earely: but what was there found in them when it came to the triall, but falſe heartednes and vnfaithfulnes? which I vtter with griefe, as knowing how commonly this is offended in. And wee that doe but heare of ſuch things, I meane of warre, throughout this booke and other ſtories, and ſee it not, through the long continuance of peace, wee (I ſay) doe not weigh the greatnes of the benefit, ſuch is our vnthankfulnes ioyned with blockiſhnes, but abuſe our peace to ſenſualitie, and thus we deale with God in many other things?
                  But hauing oft obſerued and bewailed this follie in men in other places, and ſeeing it followeth here expreſſely, what they did when they were reſcued by that Gaal, and gathered in their fruites, I will note it from hence. And what was their behauiour therein, thinke we? verilv moſt brutiſh, and vtterly vnbeſeeming ſuch, as had euer ſerued the Lord. For, like mad men, they did eate & drink, and made merrie without meaſure, curſing their enemies, and praiſing their Idols. Which teacheth vs, that it is hard to ſay, whether 1. Sam. 30. 16. the wicked are more to be pitied in their miſeries and calamities, or in their deliuerances out of them. For by them they are held in ſome awe and Note. feare: but when they are ſet free, they are moſt diſſolute and vnruly, and more offenſiue by exceſſe therein, then they are by impatience, and vnquietnes in their calamities. But in both they are greatly to be pitied.
                  
                     
And although their bodily eſtate be to be lamented greatly, yet is it farre worſe with their ſoule, as is manifeſt in their breaking out ſo fearefully and damnably into all manner of ſinne with greedineſſe. Inſtances hereof in all conditions are too many. In ſuch as haue ſome religion, (becauſe they Note. haue no more ſtore of it) who ſeeth not, that they are euer moſt looſe, ſecure, forgetfull, when they are moſt at hearts eaſe? And in the badder ſort it is more manifeſt: who are quailed in their croſſes, and held downe by them from much euill: but if they bee at hearts eaſe, oh the looſenes, ſawcines, quarrelling, laſhing out of needleſſe and great expences; rioting, ſwearing, that may be ſeene in them, and ſcorning thoſe that ſeeke to reclaime them, though they be ſuch as they ought to heare, and whom they owe duty vnto, and therefore ſhould readily heare them, whereas they regard nothing in their proſperitie, but curſe and bleſſe with one mouth, I may ſay (almoſt) with one breath. But to leaue theſe, let the beſt looke well to themſelues herein; I meane, that in both eſtates they may yeeld another manner fruite of their peace and proſperitie, and bee carefull to haue a good conſcience. Of which argument, ſeeing much is ſpoke by occaſion in the former proceſſe of this ſtorie, I ceaſe to ſay any more.
                  To proceed: Theſe two, Gaal and the Shechemites hauing each heartned the other, and helped forward their defiance of Abimelech, by feaſting and iollitie, which are great meanes (yea as oyle to the flame) to prouoke the proud ſtomacke of a man, they now being well heat with meate and drinke, preſumptuouſly aske, Who is Abimelech? We may ſay truly, where Verſ. 28. and when doe the wicked make an end? For they goe from one ſinne to another, as one that runneth downe an hill, and ſtaieth not. Now after all the reſt, they boaſt againſt him, and defie and deface him, and that in his abſence. Which teacheth the vnmeaſurablenes and vnſaciablenes of the wicked Doct. in ſinning, how they goe on from one to another, and neuer are willing to make an end: and in ſtead of repenting for the former, they adde greater ſinnes vnto them: and by that courſe harden their hearts in all manner of euill doing, as they bee able, with greedineſſe, and ſo grow paſt feeling vnto vtter impenitencie.
                  Many, after they haue done euill, haue ſome remorſe, as the brother in the Goſpell, who when he had not obeyed his father, ſending him to work Matth. 21. 31. in his vineyard, but refuſed; hee afterward bethought himſelfe, and went. And the Prophet Ieremy wondred that they who offended, relented not. Ierem. 8. 5. 6. But when men goe from one ſinne to another, and caſt not vp their gorge, it is almoſt paſt hope to reclaime them. Eſau when he had ſold his birthright, the ſigne of eternall life, which one would haue thought had ſinned Gen. 25. 31. fearefully enough in ſo doing; yet he could not ſtay there, but he muſt alſo iuſtifie the wicked fact that hee had done, ſaying: Of what valew is this birthright vnto me?
                  
                  But if this ſinne reſted onely in ſuch as I haue ſpoken of, wee that feare God might be ſure, that it could not be committed by vs: but when we ſee how Peter was taken in this ſnare, to ſinne againe, after he had once or twice denied his Maſter, and that with ſwearing, and curſing himſelfe, if he knew him, and had been ready to haue done it an hundred times more, if occaſion had been offered; how may not the beſt of vs feare the falling into it?

For in thus giuing place a little, and in ſome things taking libertie to goe againſt conſcience, it is the next way to goe further, as wee haue heard. The beſt remedie againſt it, is, while we may to preuent it, and to be ſo farre from ſuch a courſe, that we rather in feare and trembling to make an end of our ſaluation; 
                     Philip. 2 14. but if we haue already fallen, then as ſoone as we can to riſe out of it.
                  Now this Gaal wiſheth that he were king (for we muſt know that all the men of Shechem were not of one minde) and this is the meaning of the phraſe of ſpeech that he vſeth, ſaying: Who ſhall giue this people into mine hand? 
                     Verſ. 29. The like ye may reade in the Pſalme: Who will giue me the wings of a Doue: 
                     Pſal. 55. 6. that is, oh that I had them. Euen the ſame that Abſolom wiſhed in a caſe much like this of Abimelechs: Oh that I were made Iudge in the land. Thus did this 2. Sam. 15. 4. 
                     Gaal: which noteth the pride and ambition that was in this baſe fellow, his boaſting being not farre off. Which ſinnes in him, with the like in Abimelech, brought to paſſe his and the peoples deſtruction.
                  To teach vs to beware of all ſinne, and of theſe particularly, ambitious Doct. pride and boaſting, with the like, in the which is wrapped vp, when they come to their full growth, irrecouerable miſchiefe to the committers and intertainers of them, as all ſinnes doe threaten no better, if they be not ſpeedily broken off by repentance. Whereunto Gods deare ſeruants being ſubiect, Pſal. 32. 10. euen as ſome of them haue tried and found it ſo alreadie, that great ſorrowes haue accompanied them long time, as the fruite of ſuch ſinnes: Dauid, Sampſon and others: ſo we that remaine are taught, if we will be wiſe, to auoid carefully the beginnings and occaſions of euill: ſo ſhall we be ſure to be free from great woe. As for boaſting, it is but the ſuperfluitie of the corrupt and proud ſcornefull heart, ariſing not alway from ſome worthineſſe or eminencie, but a bare windie conceit of ſomewhat which is not. As we ſee in the body when the gall is too full, it ouerfloweth and coloureth the face A ſimilitude. with the excrement of that humour: and when the inward parts are tainted, the outward are full of breakings out and ſores: ſo when pride is at the full, it ſwelleth, and breaking out of the heart, vtters it ſelfe by the mouth and behauiour. But put the caſe there be ſome excellencie in him that boaſteth: doth boaſting beſeeme ſuch a man? nay, doth it not impeach his worthineſſe? Therefore he that will auoid boaſting, let him ſoberly thinke of, and vſe Gods gifts both inward & outward, knowing who he is, whence he receiued them, how naked hee were without them, and while hee hath them, they are but borowed, he himſelfe is naked and deſtitute. Neuer was an humble man a boaſter: except his boaſting were as Pauls, of his infirmities: or of his gifts, to honour the giuer, and diſgrace the enemies of Gods glorie. Touching the particular point of ambition and the preſeruatiue againſt it, let the reader ſee more in the former chapter in Gedeons refuſing the kingdome, and alſo in this chapter in Iothams bramble aſpiring to bee king ouer the trees. Here therefore I end.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTIE NINE SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſe 30. And when Zebul the Ruler of the citie heard the words of Gaal, the ſonne of Ebed, his wrath was kindled.
               
               31. Therefore he ſent meſſengers to Abimelech priuily, ſaying: Behold Gaal the ſonne of Ebed and his brethren become to Shechem, and behold they fortifie the citie againſt thee.
               
               32. Now therefore ariſe by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lie in waite in the field.
               
               33. And riſe early in the morning as ſoone as the Sunne is vp, and aſſault the citie; and when he and the people that is with him ſhall come out againſt thee, doe to him what thou canst.
               
               34. So Abimelech roſe vp and all the people that were with him, by night, and they lay in waite againſt Shechem in foure bands.
               
               35. Then Gaal, the ſonne of Ebed, went out and ſtood in the entring of the gate of the citie. And Abimelech roſe vp, and the folke that were with him from lying in waite.
               
               36. And when Gaal ſaw the people, he ſaid to Zebul; Behold, there come people from the toppes of the mountaines: And Zebul ſaid to him, the ſhadow of the mountaines ſeeme men vnto thee.
               
               37. And Gaal ſpake againe, and ſaid: See, there come folke downe by the middle of the land, and another band commeth by the way of the plaine of Moonenim.
               
               38. Then Zebul ſaid vnto him; Where is now thy mouth that ſaid, who is Abimelech that we ſhould ſerue him? Is not this the people that thou haſt deſpiſed? goe out now, I pray thee, and fight with them.
               
               39. And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.
               
               40. But Abimelech purſued him, and he fled before him, and many were ouerthrowne and wounded euen vnto the entring of the gate.
               
               41. And Abimelech dwelt at Aranna, and Zebul thruſt out Gaal and his brethren that they ſhould not dwell in Shechem.
               
            
            
               IN theſe 12. verſes is ſhewed how the broile grew hotter betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem, & how they warred and fought one againſt the other, whereby their deſtruction drew neerer. And firſt, how Zebul, when he heard of the boaſting of Gaal, ſent word to Abimelech therof: (for hee was his officer to gouerne the citie in his abſence) and he gaue him aduice, what he thought beſt to be done, and that is ſet downe in the foure firſt verſes. In the next foure it is ſhewed, how Abimelech, according to Zebuls counſell, came out with the men that were with

him neere to Shechem, and lay in wait for Gaal and his retinue. And thus the matter went forward of the deſtruction and ouerthrow of the men of Shechem, and of Abimelech, as I haue ſaid, and as in this third part of the Chapter was foretold, and in the verſes following doth clearely appeare. In the laſt foure verſes is ſhewed how Gaal and Abimelech met together, not farre from the gate of the citie, and many of them that followed Gaal were ouerthrowne and wounded, and he himſelfe caſt out of the citie. But now let vs purſue theſe verſes more particularly. Firſt, this muſt be knowne, that as the men of Shechem had hired Gaal to bee their Captaine; ſo Zebul was for Abimelech as a Deputy and Lieutenant ſet there by him, to hold the people in ſubiection from rebellion and mutiny.
            And it is ſaid here firſt, that Zebul could not beare the inſolency of Gaal againſt The ſumme of theſe ſoure verſes more ſpeciallic. 
               Abimelech, both for that he was vnder him, and alſo for that he ſaw the bragging of the other was very ſhamefull & inſolent, but his wrath was kindled againſt him, and hearing the proud words and crackes of Gaal, he was ſore troubled increat, and ſent word to Abimelech thereof. And from hence let ſome thing be noted: By the one, that is, this boaſting of Gaal, which was meere froth and words without ſubſtance, and ſo groſſe, that Zebul being ſeruant to Abimelech, could not beare it, wee may ſee the ſhamefulneſſe of this ſinne of bragging and cracking: which none can abide, nor heare willingly. Doct. out of theſe ſoure verſes. For why? Boaſters doe not conſider how they can make good that which they ſay, but in the pride of their hearts ſpeak ſo, to get praiſe of thoſe who heare them, as when they are vrged to ſtand to their word, then to their ſhame they are driuen to run away, and to goe from their word alſo, as afterwards this Gaal did: or elſe the Lord himſelfe diſableth them to performe that which they boaſt they would doe, as hee did Benhadad, when hee braggingly 1. King. 20. 3. 1. Sam. 23. 7. challenged all Ahabs goods, and as he did Saul, vaunting that he had now Dauid ſafe enough in his hands, when hee was incloſed in a citie that had gates and barres. So that both God and man are enemies to boaſting: man, I ſay, not onely religious, but euen ingeneous and ciuill abhorre it. To ſhame all ſuch delight in it, and to perſwade all that are fit to learne better things, to practiſe lowlineſſe and humilitie in ſtead of ſuch diſguiſedneſſe. And this bee ſaid of Zebuls wrath that it was kindled againſt Gaals boaſting.
            Now followeth the other thing, that Zebul was incenſed againſt Gaal for, 
                  Doct. 2. and that was, becauſe his bragges were againſt Abimelech his Maſter: and therefore he ſent him word thereof, and yet there was no ſuch conſent and wel grounded loue betwixt them, but for that he ſet this Zebul ouer the city in his abſence, which was but an outward fauour, that ſoone changeth, eſpecially betwixt ſuch as they were, (and for that he was a man (as it ſeemes) diſcreeter and more politicke, then ſome other. And this act of Zebul in that he could not beare this defiance that Gaal gaue out againſt Abimelech, being his maſter: this (I ſay) teacheth, that much leſſe ought a Chriſtian to heare God diſhonoured, no nor his Prince railed on, or to bee rebelled againſt by Popiſh enemies, or leaud ſubiects, but his heart ſhould riſe againſt it, and he ſhould in the ſpeedieſt manner bewray, and ſeeke remedie thereof, and that not for feare of law (which holdeth the concealers thereof as acceſſaries) but much more for conſcience ſake.
            
               
Euen as a naturall child cannot beare it, if he heare his father reproched: and therfore the blaſphemies againſt God giuen forth by Atheiſts and malicious enemies, (ſuch as thoſe were of curſed Rabſachee) againſt Moſes, and Chriſt, the Scriptures, and worſhip of God. And ſuch as that was of the Phariſies, who ſaid to the man that was reſtored to his ſight, We know that this 
               Iohn 9. 24. 
               man, (meaning Ieſus) is a ſinner; and finally whatſoeuer ſuch (as there are many of this kind, not fit to be ſpoken of before Chriſtian eares) they are all intolerable, yea and meaner reproches giuen out againſt him, ought not to be ſuffered, as ſwearing, forſwearing, filthie talking, or the like; but rather, we ſhould honour God in our bodies and ſoules, for they are Gods. And 1. Cor. 6. 20. becauſe hee that loueth him who begat, loueth him who is begotten alſo; therefore let this naturall affection and kind for Gods honour, deſcend from him, to the meaneſt of his Saints, yea let it make our eares and cheekes to glow and burne, when we hit into ſuch company as make it their game and paſtime to deride and traduce them whom we know zealous and ſincere Preachers and profeſſors of Gods holy truth. Let the Lords example teach vs, who profeſſeth, that he had as liefe men ſhould touch the apple of his eie, as ſo touch his holy ones. And if wee find not ſuch reproches to touch vs to the quicke and ſearch vs, ſo that we ſtep foorth, and ſtand out in the defence of ſuch innocents when there is cauſe; but ſecretly and willingly giue way to ſuch ſpeeches, as if they diſpleaſed vs not, but we beare, yea and brooke them too, wee are no better them falſe-witneſſe-bearers againſt our neighbour, Exod. 20. we ſhew our ſelues, I ſay, not weake and feeble; but (it Exod. 20. 16. may be feared) none at all, or rotten members of the body which feele not, neither are troubled any whit when they are hacked and lanced, wounded and torne by the tongues and teeth of dogges and ſwine, and therefore as Dauid called the Ziphims ſtrangers, becauſe of their falſehood, (though otherwiſe Iſraelites;) ſo theſe indeed are, forrenners, vnnaturall, men of another houſhold and familie, although they otherwiſe may be (by outward profeſſion and dwelling) neighbours and brethren.
            And moreouer this his faithfull aduertiſing his Maſter of the treaſon, and the wiſeſt way to oppreſſe it, teacheth, that faithfulneſſe betwixt religious 
                  Doct. 3. friends had need to be well witneſſed, leſt this dutifull loyaltie of Zebul towards his Maſter Abimelech put it downe and condemne it. We know, that ſuch truſtineſſe among Chriſtians abideth not, or is very rare; and yet in ſome particular caſe, it falles out, that men who are ſtrangers to religion, will goe farre one for another: which ought to prouoke vs, as we haue better reaſons then they had to ſhew it to our brethren; ſo eſpecially when occaſion is offered, to let our innocency and faithfulneſſe appeare, and bee ſeene; Prou. 3. 29. and alwaies to prouide, that our loue bee without diſſimulation, that ſo it may bee ſafely reſted on in time of need by them that depend vpon vs: Rom. 12. 9. touching which dutie of faithfulneſſe both in loue and the fruits of it, let the Reader ſee more in the hiſtory of Caleb and elſewhere.
            In theſe other foure verſes it is ſhewed, how Abimelech ſtrengthened himſelfe 
                  The clearing of verſ. 34. to 42. by the aduice of Zebul his officer, and by the meſſage that he ſent him, and how he prepared foure bands of men, and lay in waite al night for him, and the men of Shechem, not farre from their citie. And further how Gaal comming foorth of the ſame citie to goe to heare of, and ſeeke Abimelech,
               
pretending that he would ſet vpon, and inuade him, Zebul came out together with him, (as though there had been no ſubtiltie or conſpiracie intended) to the end that Gaal might ſuſpect nothing. And it being earely in the morning, when it was not yet cleare light, and Gaal hauing ſome ſhimering of Abimelechs bands and ſcouts, (as ſoone ſuſpecting that which he feared) hee bewraied as much to Zebul, that hee ſaw men lie in waite, yet knowing nothing: but Zebul on the other ſide, bare him in hand, (to draw him on further) that he feared without cauſe, and tooke the ſhadow of the mountaines for men, for they are not vnlike them a farre off in the dawning morning. But vnto that Gaal replied, that it was otherwiſe, and he was afraid indeed: in the meane while, light more clearely comming on, and Gaal and Abimelech more neerely approching one toward the other with their armies, Gaal could not goe backe with any conuenience, as hee gladly would haue done: whereupon Zebul then caſt his bragges in his teeth; for Gaal had challenged him before, and had contemptuouſly ſpoken of him, ſaying: who is Abimelech? and ſo he muſt needs goe forward, and comming neere Abimelechs bands, was ſore chaſed by him.
            Now in Gaals returning toward the citie for ſhelter, he was thence ſhut out by Zebul; by meanes whereof, Abimelech preuailed exceedingly, and ſlew many of the men of Shechem, and ſo Iothams prophecy began to bee verified, that he ſhould deſtroy them.
            Now to note ſome what from this part of the ſtory, firſt in the readineſſe Doct. verſ. 34. of Abimelech to put in execution Zebuls counſell, we may ſee our ſelues taxed of a double fault. Firſt, in that he ſhooke off al tediouſneſſe and toile, and that for a bare vncertaine hope of preuailing againſt Gaal his enemy, whereas we hauing a ſure hope of bleſſing, and that plentifull in all that wee obey the Lord in, (for in obeying him there is great reward) yet we are ſlow and Pſalm. 19 11. backward: whereby we verifie the prouerb, That a Lyon is in the way, and we are ready to faint. And this is our iuſt reproch, that bad men in an ill caſe Prou. 22. 13. ſhould be forwarder then we in a good, hauing yet ſo great and large incouragement by the reward that is promiſed vs in that behalfe. Where of in the former hiſtorie, I haue largely ſpoken in the examples of Iuda and Simeon in the 1. Chapter, and ſince by diuers occaſions.
            The ſecond thing to bee noted in Abimelech is, that Zebul being but his Officer; is not diſdained of him, but he is aduiſed by him, to furniſh himſelfe againſt Gaal: and yet Zebul hauing familier talke with him, hee might haue been like enough to haue been vnfaithfull to Abimelech his Maſter: It ſetteth 
                  Doct. 2. many of vs to ſchoole to learne, who refuſe better aduice, and that in matters of greater waight: Nay wee ſcorne oftentimes to bee counſelled, though it be for our good, in the beſt things: eſpecially, by our inferiors; which folly while Naaman committed, he had done it to his owne vtter vndoing 2. King. 5. 13. both of body and ſoule. if he had not bethought himſelfe, and taken better aduice after, then at the firſt, when he receiued the Prophets anſwere in ſo ill part. And what loſt Dauid by hearkning to the counſel of a woman? Nay, he bleſſed God highly for it himſelfe afterward. But ſuch is the fooliſh 1. Sam. 25. 32. pride of men, not onely in matters of the world, but euen in ghoſtly and heauenly, that we thinke it to bee our vtter diſcredit and ſhame to confeſſe ourſelues to be defectiue or vnable to mannage euery buſineſſe that pertaines

to vs, well and ſufficiently. Whereas who knoweth not, that euery foole can eaſily runne himſelfe out of breath? but hee had need be a wiſe man that ſhould ſtop his own bad courſe, and ſettle himſelfe againe in good order and frame without the helpe and counſell of other. Nay, do not prodigall and licentious perſons more imbezle and weaken their eſtate, credit, health, and the good of poſteritie oftentimes, then ten wiſe men can turne their hand to reſtore or redreſſe againe? Such is the caſe of the ſoule indangered deeply to Satan and hell: But who (among hundreds of ſuch) is willing to be aduiſed in time, till thrift and ſtocke, hope and helpe be quite paſt recouerie? Indeed when all is in the bottome, yea and worſe; then men aske and enquire after Thrift, Sobrietie, Diſcretion. But oh, had it not been much better for ſuch to haue admitted counſell before, againſt an irrecouerable miſchiefe? Counſell after the euent is no counſell, but either lamentable pitie, or bitter rebuke. It were to be wiſhed this folly were only bound in the hearts of youthfull Rehoboams, (although euen they ſhall finde it ſharpe enough to be taught by Miſtreſſe experience) and not as well in ancienter yeeres: whoſe commendation it ought to bee, to ſhew foorth the example of ſtaiednes and wiſedome to the younger ſort: But if they be neither able to aduiſe themſelues, nor willing to be aduiſed by other, what remaines but that euen the heathen Poet condemne them to be miſerable? Therefore be glad of counſell for ſoule or body, and make much of it: the time may come when it will be precious and deſired: when for want of it the body is turned into priſon, beggerie, and rags; and the ſoule, after many grieuous plunges, to hell. If Pauls aduice (as ill a Pilot as he was) had been reiected to the end, what had become of them that ſhould haue ſcorned to be beholding to him? Act. 27. I meane of them yt ſailed with him? Remember therefore what the wiſe man ſaith: Eſtabliſh thoughts by counſell: and Act. 27. 31, 32. Prou. 20. 18. and 15. 22. 27. 9 1. 30. know that without it, thoughts come to naught. And as ointment and perfume reioyce the heart, ſo doth the ſweetneſſe of a mans friend by heartie counſell. And further, they that refuſe counſell, ſhall eate the fruit of their owne way, and be filled with their owne deuices.
            
               Gaal alſo as well as Abimelech was earely vp to follow his matters, going Verſe 35. to 41 out of the citie to ſee what was done, and whether hee could perceiue any danger to be at hand: to our ſhame it may be ſpoken, who are backward, where it were more meete for vs to be ſpeedy and forward in all that concernes and belongs to our peace and happineſſe, as I haue ſaid before, in the example of Gedeons haſtie purſuit of the Medianites.
            But though he was earely vp, yet (as it appeareth in the ſtorie) he was neuer Doct. one of theſe verſes. the neere in the end: to teach vs, that it is not earely riſing, and late going to bed, nor all the care that may be taken, is not ſufficient to bring our attempts and buſineſſe to paſſe, if God pleaſe to blow vpon our endeuours: but this is all in all, that the Lord alloweth of our doings being with an vpright heart taken in hand, and according to knowledge, and that we are vpon good ground perſwaded (as wee ought to be) that he will vouchſafe to bleſſe the ſame. So ſaith the Pſalmiſt, Except the Lord build the houſe, that Pſal. 127. 1. is, gouerne and diſpoſe all things pertaining to the familie, they labour in vaine that build it: and except the Lord keep the citie, the keeper watcheth it in vaine. And yet I deny not but God doth ſuffer the wicked oft times to

proſper, but not long, as neither he did here this Abimelech: or if long, yet to a greater ouerthrow.
            A pregnant example hereof is Iehoram, (and his father Ahab is another) 1 King 22. 1. King 39. &c. who intending a voyage againſt their enemies of Aram and Moab (hauing rebelled) failed not in their outward preparation, and politike deuices to ouerthrow their enemies; for they prouided themſelues of men, munition, and confederated themſelues ſtrongly againſt them: but neuer conſidering that thēſelues had rebelled againſt a greater Lord, euen the Lord of hoaſts, they went on headily fearing no controlement, nay thinking they had God pinned, yea bound to them. But the one found to his coſt that hee went to worke againſt the edge, and deſperatly: The other, though he were ſpared for the time to a more notable ruine, (as it came to paſſe afterward) yet hee found himſelfe plunged and driuen to an extremitie before that, by want of water; which threatned the loſſe of his beaſts, and his owne, and his peoples deſtruction. Which was enough to proue that he played the foole in getting two Kings of his ſide, when God being ſhut out, and not ſought to, laughed him to ſcorne and was his enemie.
            Oh then, where are the hearts of the people who regard not this, but looke that by their toyle and moyle (as they ſay) all ſhould bee brought to paſſe, as they would haue it? And doe neither commit their affaires and dealings to God by prayer, neither goe to worke by his direction, nor conſult how they may pleaſe him, but raſhly and by their owne wit goe about all, and then look that it ſhould fall out according to their deſire. And therfore when they thriue not, neither proſper, as they would, they are as mad men impatient and outragious: and if they ſpeede better, and haue good ſucceſſe, then they praiſe their owne wiſedome and their good hap and fortune in ſtead of God. Looke more largely for the handling of this point, in the example of Siſera his preparation againſt Iabin.
            
            But before I come to the ſucceſſe that Gaal had by meeting with Abimelech, 
               Verſ. 36. 37. I will note that which went before it. To the which end it is ſaid here, and it is to be obſerued, that Gaal was now in the triall timerous: who had boaſtingly ſaid before, who is Abimelech? now he was afraid (I ſay) as ſoone as the leaſt ſuſpition and likelihood of danger aroſe and appeared vnto him: for he looking out as ſoone as he was able to diſcerne in the dawning, perceiued a band and companie of men a farre off: and as he did better diſcerne them, he was more afraid: ſo that he ſaid as much to Zebul his enemie, and thereby bewraied his daſtardlines vnto him, who had heard before of his great brags and boaſting againſt Abimelech. Whereby wee may cleerely, as Doct. in a glaſſe, obſerue the propertie and diſpoſition of boaſters: who prate and bragge of great matters, but effect ſmall, or rather none at all. Like to Benhadad, who triumphed ouer Ahab, arrogating to himſelfe all that was his: but was glad after to ſend a few of his men (that were left of two mightie armies) with ropes about their neckes to ſue for his life, and their owne, vnto the ſame Ahab, to his exceeding great ſhame, when they had ſmall hope to obtaine them.
            So that this example laieth out a boaſter in his colours; noting him to be one, who out of his vainglorious and frothie humour, vndertakes great matters, but performes nothing leſſe, and therefore in ſtead of honour purchaſeth

himſelfe ſhame by his folly. Commonly the boaſter is no bodie in the triall: like vnto a torrent or ſtanding water, which in winter ſwelleth and A ſimilitude. runneth a maine, when there is no vſe of it; but in ſommer and droughts, when it ſhould coole and refreſh, that is, when it ſhould ſtand any man in ſtead, it faileth and is drie. The impotent nature of man boaſteth of all the gifts of God, inward and outward, interuerting and holding backe thankes from God, by preſumptuous bragging of it ſelfe: but for the moſt part, theſe gifts are rather ſuppoſed to be, then be indeed in the boaſter: and therefore when the triall comes, the Thraſo or bragger is ridiculous to the beholders. Amaziah boaſted of his valour greatly, and prouoked Iehoaſh without cauſe, when he needed not: but hee ſped thereafter, and was ſore foiled. So the late miſcreants, I meane the powder-traytors, how boaſted they of their deuice, when it was almoſt at the vpſhot? God and man (ſay they in that letter of theirs) haue decreed the ouerthrow of theſe Engliſh heretikes, &c. But God had decreed the contrary, and turned their boaſting into ſhame, euen when they looked for a perpetuall deſtruction, vpon the vpholders and embracers of the Goſpell, and the ouerthrow of the Goſpell it ſelfe. So did Goliah challenge Dauid, by words to this effect; I will chop thee as ſmall as hearbes to the pot, (as the common phraſe of the ſwaggerer is) but hee was 1. Sam. 17. 51. chopt himſelfe head from body, with his owne ſword. The Phariſee boaſted of his righteouſnes, liberalitie, deuotion, thus: I thanke thee Lord, I am Luke 18. 11. not as this Publicane, &c. but the Publicane went away more iuſtified. The worldling in Iames, boaſteth of to morrow: To morrow (ſaith he) we will goe to ſuch a place, and make ſuch a gaine, &c. But the Lord was forgotten, Iames 4 13. and therefore they thriued as Iehoſhaphats ſhips that went to Ophir for gold, 1. King 22 48. for they were broken. So Hezekiah gloried of his treaſures, Nebuchadnezzar boaſted of his buildings, Achitophel of his policie & counſell, (ſee his words) 2. Sam. 17. 12. 
               Herod of his wit and eloquence: and now adaies, who is ſo naked but hee hath ſomewhat to vaunt of? And if of nothing elſe, yet of this to his neighbour, that he was in the towne before him, whom he contendeth with, and ouer-croweth; and will be there when he is gone: So another boaſteth of his skill in his profeſſion or trade; another of his ſelling deare, or buying cheape; of croſſing his aduerſarie and matching him, &c. for boaſting hath not ſo ſmall acquaintance as men thinke: yea, for a need, if a man be prouoked but a little, he will bragge of his pride, and not bluſh to ſay to him that is his better, Though I haue not ſo good a purſe as thou, yet I haue as proud a ſtomacke as thou, for thine heart: euen thus may ye heare the poore man contending with the rich. But O earth, earth, earth, conſider what thou Iercm. 22. 29. braggeſt of, for euen thy glory is thy ſhame: of thine owne mouth ſhall he condemne thee, who profeſſeth to reſiſt the proud. As for them that boaſt of worſe matters, who ſay, They will quench the zeale of theſe preciſe ones, 1. Pet. 5. 5. (as they terme honeſt men) and will wearie and purſue them, till they haue made them eate their word, and to renounce their preciſenes: as Pſal. 2. Pſal 2. 3. Theſe (I ſay) are as neere to the Lords deſpight, and to diſappointment as the reſt: and therefore he ſcoffeth at the boaſts of ſuch enemies, caſting their brags in their teeth, and ſaying; Tell the towers and gates, ſee the walles of Sion. &c. As if he ſhould ſay, What? haue they caſt downe all theſe, looke well, and conſider, yee ſhall finde that not a ſtone thereof is remoued. So

bad a member wee ſee the tongue is, and boaſteth of great things, to ſmall purpoſe. Therefore, to make vſe hereof, let not the wiſe, ſtrong, rich, boaſt of Ierem. 9. 23. their wiſedome, ſtrength, and wealth: but hee that will boaſt, let him boaſt that he knoweth me, ſaith the Lord. And he that can boaſt of this, ſhall not Note. feare arrogancie, ſeeing this knowledge of God is euer ſeaſoned with humilitie and loue. Let vs conſider this, that the ſinne of boaſting ſeldome goeth without vſurping Gods honour to a mans ſelfe, and lying: Both moſt capitall crimes againſt the firſt and ſecond tables. It is groſſe for a rich man to boaſt of his worth and wealth: but for a man to borow of this man and that Iob 31. 25. great ſummes, and to boaſt how well monied he is, how abſurd is it? Be able to ſay (if need be) vtter it, of thy well vſing thy gifts, that thou regardeſt it as much as them: or elſe thy craking of the gifts themſelues ſhall be a witneſſe againſt thee, in the giuing vp of thy account; yea rather let the beſt ſay: To vs O Lord belongeth ſhame, and confuſion of face, we haue ſmall cauſe of boaſting, if we ſaw our ſelues in any ſort, as we are, and our vilenes.
            Nay, let none boaſt ſo much as of to morrow, they know not what one Prou. 27. 1. day may bring foorth. Man is a worme, meane and baſe, if he were laid out in his colours: But being as he is, he ſhould rather breake into admiration, and ſay with the Prophet, O Lord, it is thy mercie that we be not all conſumed, Lam 3. 22. rather then to boaſt of things aboue his reach. It is abſurd and ill beſeeming euery way, but eſpecially it is odious, and as dangerous, when it is vſed againſt the people of God, as Iezabel did againſt Elias, and Rabſakee that 1. King. 19. 2. railing heathen againſt the good King Ezechias and his men, boaſting and 2. King. 18. 27. threatning them, and all to diſcourage them from the true ſeruice of God, as I haue ſaid. And this of Gaals boaſting: now of Zebuls anſwere.
            When Zebul, who being for Abimelech, ſaw the boaſtings of this Gaal againſt Verſ 36. 38. 
               Abimelech as he ſent him word thereof, when he heard of them by other, that hee might prepare himſelfe to come forward and fight with him; ſo now he heard him himſelfe, he fleſhed him on, and matched him in another kinde, to wit, in ſubtiltie and diſſimulation, while yet he ſpake faire, and ſeemed to be friendly to him, as here wee ſee. For hee went out of the citie with him, to the end he might ſuſpect nothing, when he had yet giuen warning to Abimelech, to lie in waite for him, againſt the time hee ſhould come foorth, and to be readie to ſet vpon him: and in the middeſt of the feare and danger that this Gaal was in, Zebul ſubtilly deceiued him, as if there had bin no cauſe of feare at all: egging and drawing him on ſubtilly, ſo that he could not for ſhame, when yet full faine he would haue broken away from him. Where, beſides that wee may note the diſſimulations, lyings and ſlie ſubtilties that be in the world, euen among ſuch as pretend great loue and friendſhip, as is to be ſeene in this Zebul. Which point I haue ſpoken of alreadie in this booke: ſo wee may ſee how men of euill qualities are matched and Doct. verſ. 58. meete together, as he was with Gaal. For if we marke wee may ſee, that one is a boaſter, another a diſſembler, and a ſubtill vnderminder, a third a quarrellet, and contentious liuer. Other tainted with ſundrie other dangerous and bad qualities, of which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh; theſe I ſay all, liue and deale 2. Tim. 3. 2. together. Is it not therfore the great goodneſſe of God, that one deuoureth not another? Yea if the Lord ſhould not bridle him for the vpholding of the peace of the Church and Common-wealth, they could not poſſiblie

dwell together, nor liue and conuerſe the one with the other, nor ſtand in any ſort, no, not as they doe, but being of ſo contrary and bad qualities, they muſt needs as fire and water deſtroy one another. And whereas the good Magiſtrate and faithfull Miniſter with other aſſiſtant Chriſtians, doe labour to throw downe the workes of darkneſſe, and of the diuell, and ſo to bridle the rage of the turbulent and vnruly ſort of people; herein it may be ſpoken with griefe, the oppoſition againſt pietie and goodneſſe is ſo great, that although (the Lord working not by miracle, but by meanes) ſomewhat bee done for the incouragement of his; and the reſtraining of the other; yet but little in reſpect of that which might be, and that were to be deſired and looked: becauſe ſuch good inſtruments, the moſt of them are too faint to fight the Lords battels againſt his ſo fierce, ſubtile, and many enemies. The like prouidence of God I noted before touching Abimelechs hiring vaine fellowes vpon the fourth verſe of this Chapter. And to that, I may adde, that the Lord doth vſe one wicked perſon to deuoure and oppreſſe the other, that ſo his owne people may enioy the more peace and ſafetie. As we ſee here, that this politicke diſſembler Zebul (a right picture of our ſubtile Machiauilians now adaies) ſmoothes and flatters this Gaal, and ſerues his humour, (as one that would make his fellow drunke, drawes him on leaudly to drinke pot after pot, till he be quite turned ouer) by a pretended ſhew of friendſhip, that ſo his intent and plot to betray him to Abimelech, might in the meane ſeaſon take the more ſure effect.
            Secondly, from hence let vs note, how one ſinner (being oppoſite to anothers 
                  Doct. 2. drifts and purpoſes) goeth to worke, in the defeating of his enemy. Euen thus that (as the prouerb ſaith) one naile driues out another: they haue no way to go beyond each other, but this, who ſhall vſe his weapon skilfulleſt, and moſt miſchieuouſly. They all fetch their wiles out of one budget, and their arrowes out of one quiuer: either ſubtiltie or force is their weapon: the ſligh and treacherous Achitophel runnes to the budget, the cruell and malicious Efau to the quiuer: here lies the point, who ſhall draw out the ſubtilleſt and cunningeſt fetch, or who ſhall take thence the ſharpeſt or deadlieſt arrow. Both ſhoot in the ſame, I meane the diuels bow, but the skill is, who ſhall ouer-reach, and ouer-ſhoote each other therein. And he that prouides them this artillery, will be ſure to be the gainer which part ſoeuer loſeth: hee will prouide, that his kingdome ſhall increaſe, euen in the oppoſition of his ſubiects: they fight as faſt for him as they doe againſt each other: Zebul and Gaal ſerue two Maſters here (in one ſenſe) the one Abimelech, the other Shechem, and the one by his boaſting ſeekes to out-face the other. The other by his conniuence and diſſembling ſeekes to root out him. But loe in the meane while both ſerue one Maſter the Diuell, hee reioyces as much in the ſpectacle, as Ioab and Abner did, in the beholding their young men to play, (as they cruelly called it) but in good earneſt to cut each 2. Sam. 2. 14. others throat. If men in their curſed doings and tradings thus in ſinne, would conſider that themſelues are ſure to goe by the walles, and forfeit their ſoules to him with whoſe engins and tooles they appugne each other, yea if they conſidered, that their quarrels ſerue to no other end, but to make Note. a pageant for the diuell to laugh at: If they could ſee into the iſſue, that hee who winneth, winneth hell, and hee that loſeth, loſeth heauen: the gaines

are onely Satans: oh how would this quaile them and dampe them in their leaudneſſe? Put caſe that in the ſame ſhip vpon the ſea, two men walke contrary ſteppes to each other, the one croſſing the other in their motions: doth not the ſhip carrie them both one way? Can they (will they, nill they) reſiſt A Simile. the motion of the ſhip wherein both ſaile? Euen ſo all ſinne hath one motion, though ſinners mooue diuerſly; let them ſtriue each againſt other neuer ſo eagerly both muſt yeeld to one motion, their ſinne wil bring them both to hell. The prodigall man walkes with quite aduerſe ſteppes to the couetous, but both ſteps tend to hell. One great man ſeekes to ouerthrow another: hee that is ſubtill takes the vantage of him that is ambicious, and laies ſuch a traine for him, as by following his ambicious plot, he incurreth the danger of the law, and ſo ſupplants him; but both the wiſdome of the one, and the folly of the other is helliſh. So that the cloſer and deeper the one is aboue the other, the ſooner he may ſubuert him: but a ſubtiller then both, goeth beyond them, and will (at length) ouerreach them both. One man vnderhand worketh miſchiefe againſt another: and he againe vnſheaths his tongue againſt him: the former is like to put downe the latter, but his owne ſinne will as faſt vndoe him. So the buyer would match the ſeller by his diſſembling: the ſeller would coſen the buyer by his boaſting and praiſing of the wares: but indeed both deceiue themſelues aſwell as each other. The vſe is, to teach men not to thinke themſelues ſafe and warrantable, becauſe they reſiſt euill, except they diſlike and hate it alſo; for they may ſinne as faſt in reſiſting it, as in allowing it. Againe, let it teach men to abhorre this eſtate which admitteth no peace, no ſound conſent and vnitie: but is a fountaine of confuſion: and to embrace that profeſſion and practiſe, which commeth from the God of order, and is as vniforme in the meanes as the end, and vniteth them that embrace it, in the league of loue and peace. As for thoſe that are better minded, let them beware of this errour of the wicked: let them not thinke their libertie hereby reſtrained, becauſe they may not match the vngodly in their kind to play the Cretians with Cretians, the Foxes with Foxes: this is not their profeſſion, they are bought with a price to ſerue the Lord in their bodies and ſpirits. The other indeed being diſſwaded from this practiſe, anſwere for themſelues: That if they did not ſweare, coſen, lie and temporiſe with the world, they could not liue, euery one would ouer-reach them, they ſhould greatly diſaduantage themſelues in forgoing that liberty. But let the godly oppoſe their innocencie, with the wiſdome of the ſpirit, to the ſubtiltie, and all other leaud qualities of the wicked: and if they cannot match them thereby, let them willingly take the foile, and ſubmit themſelues to God, rather then returne euill for euill.
            This vrging of Gaal by Zebul alleaging his owne words, that he had ſaid, Verſe 39. 
               [Who is Abimelech] made him goe forth againſt him, but ful ſoone he turned his face away from him, and fled: where we may ſee how God ſhamed him for his bragges, and that euen among the men of Shechem, where hee had made his boaſting: that they, as well as he, might take ſhame for their raſh and moſt vnwiſe aduenturing to ſet him vp for their head and guide, in whom they ſaw nothing but bragges. Thus doth God daily put to ſhame both boaſters and ſuch as aduance and cleaue vnto them: as what

boaſter is there, if he can make a flouriſh, but ſome baſe and vnſetled perſons or other will admire and applaud him, which God doth moſt iuſtly ſuffer them to doe, the one to deceiue, the other to bee deceiued, accordingly as they haue prouoked him, and yet in great mercy he doth it, to humble, and bring them to repentance, when they cannot but with ſhame ſee what they haue done: although we ſee (the more is the pitie) that few are the better thereby, or make any vſe thereof, but runne into ſome other bad courſe, if they be made openly aſhamed of that. Which I ſpeake as well to giue a watchword to both, to bethinke themſelues betimes of taking a better courſe, as alſo to the great comfort of them that are wary and aduiſed to ſhun and auoide ſuch deceiuers and baſe flouriſhers, and doe take like heed and care to keepe themſelues from euery euill way. But to returne: in that this Doct. verſe 39. 40. 
               Gaal was driuen ſo cowardly to flie, who had made ſo great bragges of courage and manhood, we ſee what many doe ſhew themſelues to bee in triall: for without grace there is little difference. And I doe not onely meane hereby groſſe and great braggers, of whom I haue ſpoken already, but others alſo in that kind, though as it is counted in a lower degree. For example: how many may we ſee, who ſhew great liking of good things, and who profeſſe their forwardneſſe in religion, and to diſlike others that doe not ſo, as if they were before-hand themſelues in compariſon of many? and yet it is cleere that either they haue ſmall or no vſe of religion, (when they be at the beſt) no, not as many of them haue, whom they diſgrace and condemne, or elſe they reuolt in time for all their faire ſhewes, and thereby doe openly bewray that there is nothing but froth to be found in them. Which is no ſmall cauſe of griefe to the beſt, that there being but few that do make any great profeſſion, yet that many of them ſhould deceiue themſelues and others. In ſtead whereof, let Gods true ſeruants feare alwaies, as the bleſſed Prou. 28. 14. doe, their infirmities and vntowardneſſe, which they feele to be in them, and giue no occaſions to any to thinke of them better then they are, but walke in vprightneſſe of hart toward God, and not neglect to honour him, 2. Cor. 10. 6. as they ſhall haue opportunitie in giuing good example to others.
            And while Gaal the Captaine of the men of Shechem fled, many of them Verſe 41. fell and were ſlaine, according to the Lords foretelling, and for that their ſin againſt Gedeons houſe: and their boaſting defender himſelfe (as he tooke vpon him to be) was caſt out of the citie with his brethren, that they did not ſo much as remaine in it. And by this let all learne a further leſſon, then to ſhunne and auoide boaſters; to wit that they neither put themſelues vnder Doct. the ſhadow of fleſh: for euen ſo they ſhall be ſerued, (as theſe men of Shechem were) who repoſe their confidence in man, or in any earthly thing. And this doth cleerely ſhew the beginning of the deſtruction of the men of Shechem. But of the argument now handled, I need not repeate that which hath been ſpoke vpon ſundry occaſions heretofore: as for Gaal, we Prou. 11. 2. ſee he roſted not that which he got in hunting. Gaal thought by crakes and boaſting to winde in himſelfe and his brethren with the men of Shechem: Verſe 41. as for Abimelech, hee knew hee got into the kingdome by tyrannie, and hee thought it liker for many to preuaile then one. And although commonlie it commeth to paſſe that men ſtabliſh themſelues and theirs, by flattery and coſoning, yet here it was otherwiſe. For hee was fruſtrate of his hope, and

as we ſee here, caſt out by Abimelech. And ſo God dealeth oft-times, that 
                  Doct. 2. though many vnworthy perſons lift vp their heads, and build their neſt on high againſt the darts of miſfortune, (as they call it) by pride, extortion, crueltie, boaſting, &c. yet God many times hindreth the courſe of ſuch, and throweth them downe: as he ſoone broke off the ill courſe that Iudas 
               Matth. 27 4. 1. King. 2 32. 2. Sam. 3. 27. 2. Sam. 17. 23. tooke to be rich: Ioab, Abner, and Achitophel, who were neere to the King in whoſe daies they liued, yet in time they were caſt downe from their greatnes and glory which they had. Oh how hath he done the like in latter times ſince, that if ſuch wil needs darken and obſcure Gods glory and the Goſpell for their owne pleaſure, or the ſetting vp of themſelues; they may ſee with their owne eyes, as alſo all that applauded them, that they haue receiued their due reward, when God hath caſt them downe with ſhame, and yet the worſt is behind; which abideth ſuch, whatſoeuer changes they meet with here in the meane ſeaſon. And this being the beſt ſtate that ſin bringeth (in this life) which I haue now mentioned, let it feare the godly to taſte of the dainties of ſuch, (as they count them) leſt they with Eue reaching out their Geneſ 3. hands after them, doe taſte alſo of their puniſhments in ſuch wiſe, as they wiſh with many ſtripes, that they had neuer done ſo.
            
               Verſe 42. And on the morrow the people went out into the field, which was told Abimelech.
               
               43. And he tooke the people and diuided them into three bands, and laid waite in the fields and looked, and behold, the people were come out of the citie, and hee roſe vp againſt them and ſmote them.
               
               44. And Abimelech and the bands that were with him ruſhed forward, and ſtood in the entring of the gates of the citie, and the two other bands ran vpon all the people that were in the field and ſlew them.
               
               45. And when Abimelech had fought againſt the citie all that day, hee tooke the citie, and ſlew the people that was therein, and deſtroyed the citie, and ſowed Salt in it.
               
               46. And when all the men of the Tower of Shechem heard it, they entred into an hold of the houſe of the god Berith.
               
               47. And it was told Abimelech that all the men of Shechem were gathered together.
               
               48. And Abimelech gate him vp to Mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with him, and Abimelech tooke axes with him, and cut downe boughs of trees, and tooke them, and bare them on his ſhoulder, and ſaid vnto the folke that were with him, What yee haue ſeene me to doe, make haſt and doe like me.
               
               49. Then all the people alſo cut downe euery man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and ſet the hold on fire with them.
               
               50. So all the men of the tower of Shechem died alſo, about a thouſand men and women.
               
            
            AFter the forementioned ſlaughter, and holding Gaal out of the citie, the Iſraelites in Shechem thought among themſelues, that they would 
                  The ſumme to verſe 46. be auenged of Abimelech, as it ſeemeth; and they went out of the citie to purſue him. They neuer conſidered what a puniſhment they had ſuſtained already, by their raſh putting themſelues vnder that vaine-glorious

boaſter Gaal, but vnaduiſedly followed their quarrell. But he vnderſtanding it, tooke the aduantage of that their attempt, and ſo diſpoſed his bands of ſouldiers, that hee ſet two of them to take thoſe that came forth of the citie, and ſlew them, and hee and another band ruſhed to the entrance into the citie, and hauing fought againſt it the whole day, took it, and ſlew the people in it, and deſtroyed the citie, and ſowed ſalt in it.
            If the men of Shechem had gone out of the citie, but to walke, or to doe 
                  The clearing of verſe 42. ſome buſineſſe, as ſome (perhaps) would thinke they did, Abimelech ſhould not haue needed to prepare two or three bands of armed men to ſet vpon a few, ſcatteringly here and there, and thoſe vnarmed, comming forth to their worke; or if they had gone out vpon pleaſure, what had he gained, to haue gone forth with bands againſt a few perſons? But it is cleare therefore (as I ſaid) and moſt certaine, that they went out in warlike manner to fight with Abimelech, (though they went without Gaal their Captaine) being much prouoked and incenſed for the loſſe of their neighbours, whom Abimelech had ſlaine the day before. For they were many, and for that they were now heated very much: and more in ſpite, raſhneſſe, and deſire of reuenge, rather then good aduiſedneſſe they went to worke: being driuen and put to their ſhifts, as they thought, and that ſomewhat they muſt doe to him, either that they muſt ouerthrow him, or elſe they ſaw that hee would ſurelie root out them: for to this it was now come, that the word of God by Iotham, 
               
                  Doct gathered generally to verſe 46. might be fulfilled. And by this we ſee to what deſperate ſhifts men are driuen by their falſehood, crueltie, raſhneſſe, vaine, confidence in man, and by the like ſinnes: and what wiſe man would looke for any better end of ſuch doings?
            If God had brought vpon them that trouble in their innocencie, hee would haue taught them how to beare it, whatſoeuer had been like to haue followed: but now they runne vpon the ſwords point, and therefore both they that ſought to fight with him abroad, and they that waited for to ſet vpon him and his men in the citie, are both of them deſtroyed. This is the beſt end that ſinne bringeth vpon the committers. And thus wilfulneſſe, ſtomacke, and ſtubborneſſe bring many to deſtruction, while they who are contrary minded are in peace. So contention, whoring, drunkenneſſe and riot, doe the like in their kind: and they that ſeeme to bee ſafeſt, and freeſt from danger being of that ſort, may looke for no better fruit nor end of their euill doings, but ſhame, ſorrow, and a miſerable death, though not by enemies, as theſe men of Shechem found it, whether it bee in their beds, or wrought by their owne hands, all is one, if repentance breake not off their euill courſe.
            The which while Gods ſeruants behold, and ſee to what a wofull end their euill doings bring many, who yet in their iolitie thought themſelues Note. the only wiſe men of others, and all fooles who walked in their innocencie and vprightneſſe. I ſay while Gods ſeruants ſee this, they ſhall praiſe him highly, for that they followed a better courſe by Gods direction; and euen now (I ſay) when they ſee Gods threats executed vpon euill doers, as they were told that it ſhould be ſo in the middeſt of their proſperitie and iolitie. And all that come after them, ſhall ſee good cauſe, and haue incouragement to hold on a Chriſtian courſe, and to turne neither on the right hand, nor

on the left, although they ſhall ſee pietie and good conſcience to be iuſtled to the walles, and ſcorned, yet ſhal the worſt day of theſe that practiſe them, be farre better then the beſt of the other, for all their ſetting out of the matter Note. for a while; and when their time commeth in which they ſhall ſmart, then ſhall Gods ſeruants reioyce in their owne ſinceritie and innocencie. Let the reader looke backe to the former chapter, and inlarge this point by adding thereto, that which hath been noted touching the ſinne and iudgement of Succoth and Penuel.
            Now followeth the further proceeding in, and laying foorth of the ouerthrow 
                  Verſe 42 to 46. ſtill continued.
                of the men of Shechem. Abimelech might for all the force of them goe and dwell ſafely in his houſe, as he did, at Arnmah, not farre from Shechem, their power being weakned, and Gaal thruſt out by Zebul. But yet they roſe vp againſt him, as we haue heard, of ſtomack, if poſſibly they might any way be reuenged: But their ſo doing being told to Abimelech, turned to the deſtruction of them that did ſo, and to them that were in the citie, with it alſo; as appeareth in theſe foure next verſes. Reade them in the text. The Lord hauing purpoſed their ouerthrow, did thus goe forward with it: for he hath many waies to execute his iudgments threatned vpon his enemies. It was a iuſt cauſe to aſtoniſh the reſt, when he began with the formoſt: but alas, where there is no counſell from God to direct them, what can they do, but waite their time to follow their fellowes in the like iudgement? Euen ſo, God ſometimes ſweepes away all the companie of bad men and euill 
                  Doct. 2. out of theſe verſes.
                workers in ſome one place at once, as hee did whole kingdomes in Ioſhuas time, and made his people poſſeſſe and inhabit them. Sometime he keepeth them vnder and waſteth his enemies by degrees, and one after another, as here: as before I noted out of the ſpace of Abimelechs raigne, where the ſame point hath been handled.
            So they that marke it, ſhall finde, that though hee giue them their ſcope and libertie for a time, which hee doth, that they may repent; they in the meane while looking after no ſuch thing, (I ſay) they that mark it, ſhall ſee, how God either beginneth to blow vpon their proſperitie, as the Eaſt wind Note. in the Spring beginneth to nip and hold in the leaues that were comming A Similitude. foorth, or elſe as a great froſt doth all at once kill them; ſo doth he ſuddenly ſend deſolation vpon them, one way or other, when their time is come. And therefore let no ſeruant of God feare, or be diſmaied for the greatnes and pride of ſuch, for in a ſmall time their glorie and iollitie ſhall vaniſh, it ſhall be no more ſeene; there is a greater then they, who will ſurely cut off Eccleſ. 5. 8. their hope, and lay their glorie in the duſt. Oh that the righteous could then praiſe God, for that hee hath kept them in all thoſe times of danger within their bounds, not ſuffering them groſſely to reach out their hands to iniquitie; and when they haue ſeene ſuch workes of God to be ſhewed on his enemies, then euer after to bee more firme in their couenant keeping with God.
            Theſe things being thus brought about to the killing of ſo many of the 
                  Doct. 3 out of the former verſes.
                men of Shechem, a thing ſo vnlikely in their firſt making of Abimelech king; it ſhall not be amiſſe to conſider a little of it, the ſpoile of the men being ſo great, and yet ſo ſmall likelihood thereof, till the Lord ſent an euill ſpirit betwixt Abimelech and them. Who would haue ſaid in the time of

their agreement and loue, that was betwixt them, that they ſhould haue growne to this point, to become vtter enemies? and while they were ſo neerely ioyned and knit together in amitie and friendſhip, that they could be thus alienated, and at the vttermoſt defiance one with the other? They who were promiſed by Abimelech to be aboue all other reſpected and preferred; who would haue ſaid, that they of all other ſhould be hardlieſt handled, yea deſtroyed? But wee muſt vnderſtand, that there were two cauſes hereof, and the one riſing from the other. The one was this, their loue was wicked and curſed, and bound together with rotten bands. The other was this; that the wrath of God burning like fire, brake and conſumed theſe bands: whereby hee raiſed an euill ſpirit betwixt them, to the deſtroying each of other. And let all that are wiſe, bee inſtructed hereby, that where men are, as theſe were, companions and friends in euill, and that they are not linked together by the feare of God, and the loue of goodneſſe, that their fellowſhip will not hold long, what likelihoods and ſhewes ſoeuer there be of the continuance thereof: And the more euils that it is compact and framed of, the deadlier and more violent ſhall the breach of it be. If it be not accompanied with wicked practiſes, as theirs here was, yet euen the ſecret moths of ſelfe-loue, priuy pride, and the ſeeking of commoditie therby, being the grounds of this agreement and fellowſhip; euen they wil conſume it as the moth doth the garment. It is a worke of great difficultie for the beſt intended loue euen betwixt good Chriſtians to be held firme, and kept vnbroken: and there muſt be renuings of couenants oft times betwixt them; and all little enough, the diuell ſo ſets in to raiſe and make diuiſion among brethren. For why? It is a good note of their welfare and happineſſe to be knit together in brotherly loue. So ſaith our Sauiour: Hereby ſhall men know that ye are my Diſciples, in that yee loue one another. But if men be brethren in euill, as if they be more neerely knit together, becauſe Ioh. 13. 35. they both ioyne in a bad cauſe, ye haue heard Gods ſentence of ſuch agreement alreadie, it ſhall ſurely come to naught, as this betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem did, now vnlikely ſoeuer it ſhall ſeeme to be ſo in the time of their peace and loue: And the ſame I ſay of their fellowſhip, who are both of them vnreformed, although it bee not for ill ends and purpoſes entred into by them. And let this which I haue ſaid, make vs wiſe in ſeeking loue and friendſhip one with another. But here, the occaſion being fitly offered, I end.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTIETH SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw followeth the further deſtruction of theſe men of Shechem. Verſ 46. For when their citie was deſtroyed, they fled to a double fort, which was their caſtle for the ſtrength of it: euen the houſe of their god Baal-berith, as they called him, with whom they had made a couenant, and therefore hoping that there they ſhould haue been ſafe. And theſe were the chiefe and wiſe men of the citie. And Abimelech hearing of it, came and deſtroyed both them and their Temple.
            In that theſe hoped there to finde eaſe and defence by the holineſſe, as Doct verſ. 46 well as the ſtrength of the place, wee may ſee, that when men haue no religion nor acquaintance with God, how wiſe and great ſoeuer they be, what poore ſhifts they haue to prouide for their ſafetie: euen to thinke, that the holineſſe of the place, their gods of wood or ſtone, or the reliques of Saints, or ſome ſuch rotten props ſhall free them from their troubles and feares: No, although they ſhould ſeek to the true God, in their haſte, which is much liker to worke their good, yet their hearts being farre from him, and they without confidence in him that he would helpe them: euen that ſeeking of theirs ſhould not be able to deliuer them.
            But all theſe are bruiſed reedes, and ſpiders webs: much like the helpe that Baals Prieſts obtained by calling on him; whom for their deceiuing of the people in ſuch a manner, Elias cauſed to be ſlaine. Euen ſuch helpe doth 1. King. 18. 40. the wilful generation of Papiſts and Seminaries at their death in their greateſt need, obtaine themſelues, and their ſuperſtitious votaries whom they haue deluded, and brought into the ſnare with them. Of whom one (a principall ring-leader) at his death, was conſtrained to renounce the opinion of merit, and humane ſatisfactions for ſinne, although he was loth to haue that gap opened to the people, for ſhame, whom they had ſo groſſely ſeduced. Another (yet liuing and of greaterreckoning in the Popiſh Church) Better I meane, is forced to confeſſe, that for the auoiding the perill of vainglorie and carnall preſumption, it is the ſafeſt of all to repoſe a mans whole confidence in the onely mercie of God in Chriſt Ieſus. And by this we ſee that howſoeuer (for ſiniſter ends) they ſuppreſſe the truth, and abuſe their ſillie Proſelites: yet when they are cōpelled by the force of their conſcience, or the terror of death, to put away lying, and equiuocating, which few of them attaine to, but dye in hardnes of hart, wherein they liued: but whē it f
                  •
               lleth out otherwiſe, thē they confeſſe & renounce their cōceits, as bruiſed reeds, to be vnable to ſupport thē: which as it is commonly vnprofitable to themſelues, ſo yet it ſhould ſerue to deterre others from venturing and reſting ſo

boldly vpon their vngrounded aſſertions. To omit other there was a third, of long and great account and reckoning among people of that religion, whom I viſiting vpon the death-bed, was an eare witneſſe with ſixe or ſeuen other of that place, then preſent alſo; that the partie, then ſhortly after deceaſing, renounced the dunghill ſtuffe of that religion, and reckoned all Poperie as a deceitfull trade, and particularly the chiefe points thereof, who yet had long been a ſtiffe and ſtout defender and maintainer thereof. Oh therefore bleſſed are the people whoſe God is the Lord Iehouah, and who know him the onely true God, and whom he hath ſent Ieſus Chriſt, for this Ioh. 17. 3. is eternall life. But as theſe men of Shechem here were ſlaine in the Idolatrous Temple of their Idoll Berith, for their blindnes and putting their confidence therein, ſo ſhall all be ſerued that reſt on ſuch proppes, that is to ſay, they ſhal be left in the briars, as Iudas was of the Prieſts, whom he truſted in. Matth. 27. 3. Let the reader looke backe to the fifth chapter, and the 30. verſe, where the anſwere of Siſera his mother to her ſelfe, and her wiſe Ladies to her, is recorded: and there he ſhall finde this point further in larged.
            As I ſaid they were ſlaine in the Temple of their I doll, which they put their truſt in, ſo it was done by Abimelech, who followed the matter to the Verſ. 47. 40. 49. purpoſe, when he heard whither they fled. This was his kindnes to the men of Shechem, that made him king. He promiſed other matters to thē, verſ. 2. that he being their bone, and their fleſh, be would regard them aboue all other. And now we ſee here that all was but flatterie: for to what end came all but to this, that they had no greater enemie then him? True it is indeed, this fell out according to that which Iotham before had denounced againſt them: to wit, that fire ſhould come out of the bramble and deſtroy the Cedars of Lebanon. But this excuſeth the fact of Abimelech, no more then the counſell and purpoſe of God touching the deliuerance of Chriſt to death, (A good watch-word) excuſed Iudas the traytor, and the Prieſts and other Act. 2. 23. who put him to death. This is good therefore, and an vſe to be made of this doctrine, (if euer) now needfull, and therefore to bee heard and regarded; namely, that wee take heed whom we truſt and giue credit vnto; that is to ſay, not ſuch as wee haue not proued to be faithfull, as the men of Shechem may teach vs, who too raſhly and readily truſted this deceiuer, and falſe hearted Abimelech.
            
            Our Sauiour would not commit himſelfe to them that were ſaid to beleeue Ioh. 2. laſt. in him, for he knew what was in man. Much leſſe ought we to doe ſo, who know there is much falſehood and doubling in them whom we truſt, and that they are ignorant, prophane, and hypocrites. Therefore Salomon going as neere the marke as he could, gaue this counſell about truſting of Prou. 27. 10. men: Thine owne friend and thy fathers forſake thou not, &c. So that if it may be, ſome proofe ſhould be made of their faithfulnes and vprightnes firſt, before we reſt vpon them, eſpecially if it lie in vs to doe it. And it being ſo neceſſary a gift, this faithfulnes I meane, the Apoſtle requires it in feruants, the meaner ſort of perſons, as one of the two neceſſary duties that ſhould be in them, (the other being diligence) without which they cannot doe their duties well, that we may ſee thereby how needfull it is in all other about greater matters.
            And as this ſinceritie is rare to finde, according to that which Salomon
               
complaineth of, ſaying, Where ſhall one finde a faithfull man? And Paul: 
               Prou. 20. 7. 2. Theſ. 3. 2. All haue not faith, that is the fruite of faith, which is faithfulnes and true heartednes: ſo it ſhould cauſe vs to begin with our ſelues, and vrge our own hearts for vprightnes firſt, and not to marueile that we finde it not in others, if it be not in ourſelues: as that we may be truſted vpon our word, and approue our ſelues ſuch as we would be taken to be. And then by our obſeruation and experience of the good dealing that wee can finde in any more then in other; thereafter let vs giue credit vnto them: and yet I meane ſuch good dealing, as hath been learned by the preaching of the Goſpell, ſuch as is according to knowledge. And by the ſame vprightnes and good dealings men ſhould bee led in chuſing their companions in mariage, and not to hearken to euery gloſing tongue that can make faire and large promiſes, which haue deceiued thouſands: and alſo in ſeeking of ſeruants, or to haue them (if it may be) the children of the faithfull well and religiouſly brought vp: and the ſame care ſhould be had in chuſing executors comeprimitters, and ſuch as we would put in truſt. To the which if it be demanded, where ſuch ſhall be found, that they may be truſted in matters of importance: I anſwere: beſide that I haue ſaid already, that euery one which will aske this queſtion, muſt firſt begin himſelfe to practiſe ſinceritie, that ſo hee may the better complaine of the want thereof in other; this I adde, that ſome who call for it and finde it not, are worthie to goe without it, although I doe not hereby excuſe them that are void of it, and offer the contrary euill meaſure. And they, who I ſay are worthy to goe without it, when they would full gladly finde it in thoſe whom they deale with, are ſuch as are carping, biting, Note. ſcoffing, and accuſing of them for their preciſenes, who labour and endeuor to keepe their conſciences pure and good. Too many there are in this age, who cannot ſo ſoone perceiue a man or woman to withdraw themſelues from the ſinnes of the time, and to bee afraid to offend, as the common ſort doe, but by and by they cry out of them, that they are Preciſians. Now they who can allow none to be vpright and conſcionable in their waies and life, it is no matter though they meete with ſuch in their dealings, as ſhew ſmall conſcience and vprightnes toward them, God being iuſt to make others to meaſure out to them as they haue meaſured to others, as Salomon ſaith in an other kinde, Eccleſ. 7. to teach them to know what an vpright hearted man Eccleſ. 7. 23. is worth, and to make much of ſuch, rather then to diſcourage them. One example ſhall ſerue for all; A cruell Landlord cries out of his vnfaithfull Tenant, that he hath broken his day, and (it may be) is runne away with his rent. But who is in fault? The poore Tenant that dares not appeare before his Lord to craue in differencie, or the cruell Lord who hath borne him in hand, that he hath let him a good peniworth; whereas indeede hee hath ſo racked and fleeced him, that he is fitter to begge reliefe, then to pay his debt out of the farme, hauing had nothing neere ſufficient (out of his owne labour) to vphold himſelfe. As for ſuch, let them crie out of vnfaithfulnes till they be weary, who will pitie them? Let the dead bury the dead, as our Sauiour ſaith, they are ſerued as they haue deſerued, and let them reape as they haue ſowne. Further I anſwere, let vs lament and pray againſt ſuch vnfaithfulnes, for that it is ſo common. At leaſt let vs pray, that we may be free from hauing to doe with ſuch: for vnfaithfull men commonly are alſo vnreaſonable:

at leaſt that we be not beguiled by them, ere we be aware, as Abner and Amaſa were by Ioab: which (except the Lord giue a man wiſedome to 2. Sam. 3 27. & 20. 10. diſcerne) cannot alwaies bee auoided. Beſides where leaſt truſt hath been found by experience, let men be wiſe to repoſe leaſt truſt in them. For who will put precious liquors in a broken veſſell, hauing proued it to be vn
                  •
               t for vſe? or through folly venter to daſh our foot againſt the ſtone, which we remember hath hurt vs? Therfore I ſay, let men truſt no ſuch, of whoſe fidelity and truth they haue no proofe, but rather the cōtrary, or no further at leaſt, then they may without any great detriment to themſelues: and where they muſt needs truſt ſome ſuch, let them bind them the more ſtrongly. And ſo let thoſe that vndertake ſuretiſhip, beware that they loſe not their liberty and bring themſelues into bondage, and their eſtate and poſteritie to wilfull penurie. Moſt of all, let Chriſtians beware of them, that vnder a colour of loue, ſeeke to vndermine them, to betray them, to get ſomewhat from them, which might tend to the danger of their brethren, or to the wounding of their owne conſcience; which I ſpeake becauſe many ſilly Chriſtians thinke themſelues happy if they can get countenance or benefit by ſuch as are their ſuperiors, not knowing that the benefits of the vngodly are forked, and bring more backe then they beſtow. Boner did more miſchiefe by his flattering poore men, till they abiured the truth, then by all his crueltie: for which cauſe, Salomon admoniſheth well of ſuch, ſaying: Be not deſirous of Prou. 23. 3. their daintie meates, for it is deceiuable meate. But where without inquirie and obſeruing in the beſt manner we can by our ſelues and others, we raſhly beleeue euery one who can ſpeake vs faire, (as indeed, Faire words make fooles faine, according to the prouerb) I ſay, they who are ſo light of credit, I ſend them no further then to this preſent example: let them looke what became of all the ſmooth words and faire ſhewes that this Abimelech made to theſe men of Shechem his kinſman and mothers brethren, in whom they repoſed ſuch confidence: for as they had no greater enemie then him, euen ſo neither let theſe looke to find any better meaſure.
            Now though this may bee laid forth in all kinds of fellowſhip among men, yet it is moſt commonly ſeene in their earthly dealings, wherin ſcarcely any promiſe is kept, and moſt liuely it is to be ſeene in marriages. What Note. ſolemne, kind, and ioyful beginnings haue many of them had? ſo as it might worthily haue prouoked the beholders thereof to praiſe God, and reioyce for ſuch a goodly ordinance of his, ſo like to bring foorth ſuch anſwerable fruit to thoſe beginnings. And betwixt the couples themſelues, ſo marrying and comming together, what liking betwixt them, and delightings one in another, as if they could neuer be enough, neither might one be well out of anothers ſight; but in continuance, longer or ſhorter, how haue all theſe been turned into the contrary?
            What diſlike and wearines hath there been one of another? what alienating of affection, croſſing one the other, chiding, railing and reuiling, ſeparating from bed and board, (while yet they muſt needs liue together) and afterward an vtter caſting off the one the other? I ſpeake not this of the heauineſſe which the Lords chaſtiſements meeting and taking hold of them, doe raiſe in them; to the which, all, euen the beſt are ſubiect, wherein they both ſhould and haue promiſed to be companions, and one to helpe the other

to beare the burden: which kind of behauiour would preſerue their loue, as it doth betwixt ſome others: I ſpeake not (I ſay) of theſe corrections of the Lord, but of the miſchiefe that their euill and corrupt hearts, falſe, raging, proud, wilfull and inconſtant, haue wrought betwixt them, they being diſguiſed, and nothing like the perſons they ſeemed to bee at their firſt meeting. Oh therefore if towards men wee bewray this diſeaſe, then how much more is it to be feared in profeſſing our repentance to God, it being ſecret and a thing hid from men? and in comming to the word and ſacraments, what need haue we of this vprightneſſe?
            In theſe two verſes it is ſhewed, by what meanes he ſlew them: and that was, by cutting downe boughes from trees, and bidding his men doe as he Verſ. 48. 49. did, and putting them to the hold, and ſetting them on fire, till all the men of Shechem that were therein, died. And there we may ſee, what force is in example, eſpecially if it be bad. Touching which, though I haue ſpoken at large before, eſpecially in chap. 1. the end where the ſinne of the moſt Tribes in neglecting the Lords charge is recorded: which I deſire the Reader to turne vnto, yet vnto ſo apt an occaſion as this is, ſomewhat I will ſay here of it alſo. Gedeons men followed him in carrying their pitchers and lampes after him in great danger to feare the Midianites: but that was as commendable as this was wicked and cruell, and moſt commonly followed: yet it is not to be denied, but if there were ſome to giue good example, there would be ſome followers of them alſo: as in meekneſſe, humbleneſſe, innocencie, faithfulneſſe, mercy, pietie, patience and the like. And namely, if rich men would for their parts begin to the reſt, and go before others in deeds of charitie, and ſell for lower prices to the poore, (when things are deare) then the common prices be, and would be examples in mercy, in harmeleſneſſe, in gentleneſſe, and ſuch like.
            It is hard to ſay, what good might be done thus? and by hauing religion and holy inſtruction in high account, and louing heartily, and well eſteeming of Gods people. But to this it is come, that men, and the wealthier ſort eſpecially, whereas they might bring on many to Chriſtian practiſe by well doing; they haue (alas) cold loue to good cauſes, but are ſlow and backward, and therefore deadneſſe and vnprofitableneſſe is to bee ſeene thicke and threefold in other that ſhould learne of thē, the diuell labouring, when he cannot make all ſorts alike in wickedneſſe, to leaue as few to giue countenance Note. to good things, as may bee. And men bee ſo vnapt to learne to performe duties aright, that except they ſee good examples before them, they cannot tell how to ſet vpon, or goe about them. But as for euill courſes, they need none to goe before them therein, they can find the way thereto without guides, though they are much more fleſhed and drawne on when they haue other to breake the ice to them. But where the beſt examples are giuen, let this bee our rule, that wee follow them no otherwiſe then as they follow Chriſt: and they that doe ſo, let them perſwade vs to al zeale and forwardneſſe 2. Cor. 11. 1. in duties of the firſt Table, (as to the reuerent receiuing of the word preached, and the right manner of preparing our ſelues to the Lords Supper, and ſuch like exerciſe) ſo in no wiſe follow we the common ſort in their behauiour and practiſe about duties to men in the ſecond Table.
            But let vs goe forward: The vnweariednes alſo of this curſed Abimelech
               
in his buſineſſe is to be marked, how from one thing to another he toyleth himſelfe: yea and that not without perill of his life. A baſe worke, one would thinke to goe vp to the mountaine, cut downe boughes from the trees, and bring them on his necke, and ſet them to the hold to burne it. But good enough for him, and thus will men toile and indanger themſelues for their pleaſure and profit in moſt baſe manner, though it come to nothing, but that they ſoone loſe all, as hee did. So doe all ſorts of men for a poore liuing, which yet they oft faile of notwithſtanding. Whereas in the meane while, godlineſſe, which is the great riches, lieth dead by them, and 1. Tim. 6. by no perſwaſions can they be brought to ſeeke after that with the leaſt delighting therein, whileſt yet God alloweth them time and trauell enough for things meet and neceſſary. For example, how duly come they to Sermons and to the Lords Supper? though they might reape no ſmall benefit thereby: and ſo doe they accordingly ſit wearie and ſleepie at the preaching of the word, when they be there. And yet the moſt part of men (theſe two actions with prayer being excepted) ſhew not ſo much reſemblance of religion in their whole life beſide. But oh, that euen Gods faithfull ſeruants did not grow (many of them) to the like point, ſhewing much vnto wardneſſe at the Word and Sacrament, when yet they haue approched to both, with great reuerence and chearefulneſſe in former times. If men be asked, how they can endure ſuch toile and paines as they take for the world, while they be ſo cold in duties to heauen ward, their anſwere is: Man is borne to labour; and the world is hard. If we labour not, we ſhall neither haue food nor rayment. This makes them (as the Pſalmiſt ſaith) to riſe earely, ſit vp late, fare full hardly, and all for a poore liuing. Ah poore ſoules, and what when they haue got it, (not to ſpeake of this, how many waies they offend God in getting it, and yet they are oft times diſappointed of that which they ſeeke: either by their leaud ſpending it, or Gods curſe vpon it:) but I ſay, What when they haue it? Doe ye not ſee, that at the ſolemne day of death, when they count all their great gains, and fruit of their labor, that their ſoule is yet vnprouided for? Was all their life little enough to feed and clothe their bodie, and thinke they (vpon ſo ſhort a warning) to prouide for their ſoule? Is not a ſoule of much more value then a body is; nay then a world? And yet in getting ſaluation for the ſoule which the bodie ſhall fare the better for alſo; yea, euen here it ſhall bee the better able to doe earthly labour, with chearefulneſſe, and without vexation; who will put his finger in the cold water for it? Who thinks not euery little time beſtowed that way, toyleſome and tedious? More particularly, to giue all diligence to obtaine faith and repentance, as we are commanded, how vnwelcome is the charge thereof vnto vs, which yet is eaſilier obtained, and with more aſſured ſucceſſe, if wee ſo ſeeke it as if wee would find, and is a more durable poſſeſſion, and of more neceſſary and daily vſe, and farre more pretious gaine, and that which exceeds the riches of Princes without it. Vpon the death-bed al this is confeſſed, and yet not once in a whole quarter thought of, while men haue life and ſtrength, becauſe they want heart and will thereto.
            And generally let all learne this by the men of Shechem, how they ioyne 
                  Doct. from verſe 1. to this 50 themſelues to the acquaintance of wicked men for hope of gaine, pleaſure or preferment: for God will meet with, and recompence ſuch, as they deſerue,

at one time or other. As here may be ſeene, where Abimelech for his great promiſes, was repaired and cleaued vnto: but what got they in the end who did ſo? Nay, while they ſought much, what did they not loſe of that which they had, euen to their very liues themſelues?
            So they that intend that, and ſeeke commoditie at the hands of ſuch, doe as I ſaid in the laſt point ſaue one, euen bring themſelues into bondage to them, if they haue any conſcience to accuſe them. For beſide this, that they are taken vp with ſuch thoughts, to wit, what gaine they ſhall get by them, after which manner the diuell occupieth them, to draw their minds from being better imployed: beſide this, I ſay, it muſt needs goe ill with them, if they profeſſe the Goſpell, and ſeeke to keepe a good conſcience, when they ſhall conſider, that by ſuch as Papiſts, Libertines, prophane and bad liuers, they be held in hope, and flattered, where the more they get, the more they loſe, and they are then in beſt caſe, when they haue leaſt to doe with them. But alas, the moſt ſuſpect not the ſeruitude that ſuch labour to bring them Prou. 22. 7. into, (for) the borrower is a ſeruant to the lender, and much more the receiuer to the giuer: while they hunt for the precious ſoule of him whoſe benefactors they would ſeeme to bee, aiming at this marke, (eſpecially ſome of them) euen to make them the children of hel as fully as themſelues be. And yet (which is farre worſe) they being ſo neere lincked in fellowſhip with them, they are ſo bewitched by their enchaunting and intiſing words, that they cannot tell how to bring themſelues backe againe out of the Maze wherein they are. I grant ſuch make ſhift to digeſt thoſe things till the day of their viſitation come, but then they be at their wits end.
            
               Verſe 50. Then Abimelech went to Theber, and beſieged Tebez and tooke it.
               
               51. But there was a ſtrong Tower within the Citie, and thither fled all the men and women, and all the chiefe of the Citie, and ſhut it to them and went vp to the top of the Tower.
               
               52. And Abimelech came vp vnto the Tower, and fought againſt it, and went hard vnto the doore of the Tower to ſet it on fire.
               
               53. But a certaine woman caſt a peece of a milſtone vpon Abimelech his head, and brake his braine pan.
               
               54. Then Abimelech called haſtily his Page that bare his harneſſe, and ſaid vnto him, draw thy ſword and ſlay me, that men ſay not of me a woman ſlew him, and his Page thruſt him through, and he died.
               
               55. And when the men of Iſrael ſaw that Abimelech was dead, they departed euery man vnto his owne place.
               
               56. Thus God rendered the wickedneſſe of Abimelech which he did vnto his father in ſlaying his ſeuentie brethren.
               
               57. Alſo all the wickedneſſe of the men of Shechem did God bring vpon their heads, ſo vpon them came the curſe of Iotham, the ſonne of Ierubbaal.
               
            
            THus we haue heard how God puniſhed the men of Shechem for their ſinne againſt Gedeons ſonnes: Now how Abimelech was alſo plagued for the ſame: that the prophecy of Iotham might bee verified vpon them both; is laid foorth in theſe words, and followeth vnto the end.
            To the former two miſchiefes that Abimelech wrought againſt the men 
                  The ſenſe of verſ 50. 51. of Shechem, in that he deſtroyed their Citie, and the people that were in it,

and their ſtrong place and hold that the reſt reſorted to for ſafetie, and burnt it: to theſe I ſay, the holy ſtory addeth how hee went about another. As thereby ſhewing, that he was not yet ſatisfied with the blood of the former: and therefore that he went further, to wit, to a Citie neere adioyning, called Thebez: which alſo as it is probable, though vncertaine, either ioyned with the Shechemites, or at leaſt refuſed to be ſubiect to Abimelech, and going againſt that, tooke it alſo. Thus we ſee how this cruell baſe-borne Tyrant proceeded in his bloody attempts, and thereby alſo is ſhewed what extremitie theſe people of Thebez, were brought vnto. For they were all driuen to ſhift for themſelues in a Tower that they had in their citie. Wherein Verſ 50. 51. Doct.
                though they might ſhelter themſelues for a day, yet they could not long liue, but muſt needs bee famiſhed at leaſt, by any thing that they could ſee. Theſe and ſuch like dangers men lie open to in this changeable world, whereof they ſee no likelihood a little before. Which may teach vs the vncertainty of al things here below, in which yet men repoſe their confidence, and that no man can vpon good ground ſay, that to morrow ſhall bee like to day. As by that ſpeech of the Lord, in the 12. of Luke, to him that bad his Luke 12. 20. ſoule take the eaſe, eate, drinke and bee merry, ſeeing hee had laid vp much good in ſtore, I ſay, by that ſpeech may bee ſeene, when the Lord ſaid vnto him. Thou foole, this night thy ſoule ſhall bee required of thee, then whoſe ſhall thoſe things be, which thou haſt prouided? euen the day before he died. And leſt it ſhould bee thought to bee his caſe alone, this he added: So ſhall it bee with him that laieth vp treaſure for himſelfe, and is not rich toward God. Therefore how many may we ſee and heare of, who are fearefully taken away from all? and many other are waſted, and haue their eſtate changed, as if they had neuer inioyed it? And ſuch as regard not theſe things, are like to haue much to doe, when they ſhall ſee their owne proſperitie ſo to fade in like manner: Oh it ſhall be vtterly vnwelcome. And who can ſay any leſſe, then that in ſmaller changes by loſſe, ſickneſſe, pouertie, diſeaſes; it is hard ſtooping to them when they come, yea although they be thought of before, and in ſome ſort prouided for? All this is ſaid to teach the wiſe to liue here as ſtrangers, and to make heauen their home, though they walke vpon the earth; and to warne the fooliſh to ſeeke wiſdome, that while they cling faſt to earthly ſtaies and delights, they bee not with the foole before ſpoken of, caſt out hence from all, and then vtterly to ſeeke of the true happineſſe alſo.
            But now it followeth, that after all this done to them of Thebez, the 
                  The opening of the 52. verſe to 56. Lord brought on the time of his confuſion I meane Abimelechs alſo, as well as of the men of Shechem. And for the effecting of Gods iudgement vpon him, it is ſaid, that when he had ſped ſo well, as we haue heard, he attempted the Tower that was in Thebez, to take that alſo, and being drunke with his former ſucceſſe, and therefore looking for the like there, hee receiued his deadly wound as his due reward, and that by a woman, to his great diſgrace; who caſt downe a peece of a milſtone from the top of the Tower, he going cloſe to the doore of it, to ſet it on fire, and broke his braine pan: whereupon he being not ſtrooke quite dead, and yet paſt poſſibilitie of recouery, called preſently for his page to thruſt him thorow, to preuent the ſhame (as he thought it) that it might elſe haue been ſaid, to wit, that a woman

had ſlaine him, and ſo hee came to his end alſo.
            By this laſt attempt of his, he hauing ſped ſo well in the former, wee may Doct. 3. verſe 51. 52. ſee, how the wicked are fleſhed by the ſucceſſe that they haue in their bad courſes, and that they bee ſo blinded therewith, that they make no ſtay, till they be cut off in the middeſt of them. For they make account, that they ſhall doe as they haue done: and dreame of no reſiſting of them. They ſay to themſelues like them in the Pſalme: Tuſh, the Lord will doe neither good nor euill. Is it not time then that God ſhould make them feele that power of his in diſpleaſure, which they will not acknowledge by teaching? and by this their going forward, til God ſtay their courſe, we ſee they cannot breake off, and this makes their ſinne the greater. The like we ſhall obſerue (God willing) in the Beniamites, chap. 20. of this booke. So Herod when hee had ſlaine Iames with the ſword, and ſaw that it pleaſed the Iewes, he went about to take Peter alſo, till in his attempt the Lord cut him off. And what maruell Actes 12. 2. though God vſually deale thus? the wicked will not know him, but they do meaſure their future ſucceſſe by the former, which he will make them ſee to be a wrong ground.
            For they thereby being imboldned, goe further from God, and by their ſucceſſe, through the corruption that is in them, they are made more vnfit to returne to him againe. But all muſt know, that the word of God followed and obeyed carefully of vs, bringeth the good ſucceſſe indeed, in which wee may reſt, yea and in that only. For what bleſſing ſoeuer it pleaſeth the Note. Lord to ſend vs in outward things (as hee promiſeth many) ſaying to thoſe that doe ſo, that other things ſhall be caſt vpon them; we haue alſo inward Matth 6. 33. comfort thereby, which neither can be bought with money, neither can be taken from vs: which maketh vs glad to vſe and imbrace all good meanes for the ſtrengthening and ſtabliſhing of vs: which the other being drunken with earthly peace, make no account of. And both theſe being conſidered, the godly haue ſmall cauſe to repine at the ſucceſſe and ioyfull proceedings of the vngodly: the Lord giues them their ſcope, that he might bring the more ſudden deſolation vpon them, while they looke to morrow ſhould be like to day, and much better. Neither ſhould it grieue the godly, that themſelues are often croſſed, and denied the ſucceſſe they dreamt of, and deſired: ſeeing either their enterpriſes were euill, and therein to bee croſſed is a bleſſing: or lawfull, but vnlawfully followed, and therfore Gods promiſes were Note. ſtretcht further by them, then indeed they reached: or although their doings were religious, yet it may be, they were vndertaken with too much confidence in the goodneſſe thereof, and in the meane ſeaſon themſelues who are the doers, not looked into, nor well purged from other ſinnes which may eaſily ſet behind the ſucceſſe of their beſt actions. But doubtleſſe, where a Chriſtian offends none of theſe waies, he ſhall neuer want ſucceſſe: and the fruite thereof ſhall be farre other, when it is leaſt, then the wicked mans who ventureth onely the more boldly vpon the next onſet, becauſe of his former good ſpeed, (as Abimelech here:) but he ſhall with Paul, beleeue that God, who hath well begun in him, will giue good ſucceſſe, both in mercies and deliuerances. But I haue handled this point at large in this hiſtorie before.
            In this Scripture is ſet downe, that this wofull inſtrument had his deadlie

wound; and by what meanes: euen in a baſe manner, by a woman breaking Verſ. 53. his skull, by throwing downe vpon him a peece of a mil-ſtone: where wee may further note by Gods cutting off this curſed inſtrument Abimelech, in the middeſt of his iolitie, and before hee had done any more miſchiefe, that the proſperitie of the wicked is both ſhort and vncertaine, when and how it ſhall come to an euil end. Which although I noted in general before out of the ſhort time of his reigne: yet a little I wil adde thereto by this preſent occaſion here offered. Now this their ſpeedy taking downe is wrought by the Lord, not only by the many waies that he hath to meet with, and to puniſh them, but alſo becauſe they are euer putting the Lord, as it were, in freſh remembrance Note. by their renewed and continued prouokings of him, what hee oweth them. And in the meane while, he is not idle, when he is ſtill and patient toward them, for hee knoweth and appointeth the time, and the meanes to ſubuert them. So the Pſalmiſt ſaith: Though the wicked flouriſh Pſalm. 37. 36. like a greene Bay tree, yet a little while, and his place ſhall haue no reſemblance of ſuch a one to haue been there, and hee ſhall bee no more found.
            Behold this verified in Zimry with his Cosby, in Chorah, the Rich man mentioned in the Scriptures, and in many other in our owne experience, who Luke 12. 20. and 16. 27. while they proſper, are decaying: but they that abide, and remaine in the power of faith, hope and patience, as of Gods ſeruants is required, and are thorowly ſet a worke in them, they ſhall ſee good daies, and be well liking; and yet euen they alſo, if they withdraw themſelues from their confidence, and will giue themſelues to liue by eye-ſight, as other doe, they ſhall ſee the Lord can ſoone change his courſe, and their ſorrowes will bee exceedinglie multiplied like other mens. Dauids feet had well nigh ſlipt, when hee beheld the preſent flouriſhes of the vngodly, til God drew him out of his own fancie into the Lords Sanctuarie, and taught him this wiſdome, to compare Pſalme 73. 17. them with himſelfe, as well in one part of their eſtate as another, and the bitterneſſe of their end and reward, with the plauſibleneſſe of their iollity, when they are in their flower, and their ſlipperineſſe, when they are at the beſt. Therefore as in a picture ſuch as will throughly view it, take not ſome A ſimilitude. note of the knee, or foote, or any one part of it, but the whole; for otherwiſe they ſhould ſee nothing to any purpoſe: ſo view wee the whole courſe of Note. Gods dealing with the wicked, as well the ending, as the beginning, and his proceeding with them, and thereby our haſtineſſe in deſiring their dainties, will be abated full ſoone, and our opinion changed; as Dauids alſo was in iudging the bad to be happie, after that he had better conſidered their end. Lay we alſo ſure hold on this, that as the time and terme of the wicked is ſtinted and appointed: ſo ſay we of the Lords dealing with our ſelues, Yet a little while, and he that commeth, will come and not tarrie, to bring our full redemption. Heb. 10. 37.
            
            Furthermore, we ſee here, in that Abimelech had his deaths wound, and 
                  Doct. 2. after was ſlaine; that he had not his will on the people of Thebez, as he had on the other: but as he ſuffered him to deſtroy the men of Shechem, which fled to the Hold of their God Baal-Berith, ſo yet he ſaued the men of Thebez and their wiues, who betooke themſelues to the Tower that was therein for ſhelter. Wherein we may note, that God doth oft times plague them

whoſe iniquity is manifeſt, as the ſinne of theſe men of Shechem was, when other who haue not ſinned in the like manner, though they be not (yet) religious, are ſpared and borne with, as theſe men of Thebez were. The reaſon is: the ſinne of the one ſort is manifeſt and grieuous, and cannot be hid and crieth for vengeance: the other, either through ignorance, or for that they haue not ſo wittingly or groſſely offended, are borne with, that they may come to repentance. And yet this is no excuſe to them, who liue in the light of the Goſpell, and haue knowlege, if they liue and abide vnrepentant, though they be not groſſe offenders. Neither on the other ſide haue they any cauſe to flatter themſelues, whoſe ſinnes are notorious, though they be not by and by cut off. The vſe of this doctrine is in this reſpect to incourage them, who doe but walke in the way of the vngodly, but ſtand not ſtiffely to maintaine their euill doings, that ſeeing God giueth them time to repent, and beareth with them, they ſhould not harden their hearts, but take all occaſions to turne vnto him. And for ſuch as are not fit to heare this doctrine, but goe forward in euill, they may euer feare, that Gods vengeance is comming. Now he being brought to bee paſt all hope of life by the blow the woman gaue him, we ſee, that hee who ſought ſuch glory as to be made King, yea and obtained it alſo, though moſt vniuſtly; euen he did yet come Doct. verſ. 54. to ſuch ſhame and reproch, (as hee counted it) as to be ſlaine by a woman, and not ſo much as by the meaneſt man of warre. Neither did it ſerue Abimelechs turne any whit at all, that the laſt ſtroke was giuen him by a Page, hauing had his deadly wound by the woman before: onely it bewraied his pride, which encreaſed the ſhamefulneſſe of his foile. And yet for him to be ſlaine by a Page, was it ſuch an honour to a great King ſo valiant and victorious, as Abimelech now thought himſelfe, being in the top of his hopes, and hauing brought vnder his enemies? Therefore where God will ſet his brand of ſhame vpon a man, it is but folly for him to ſtriue againſt him, or to elude him. It was as confidently giuen out that Abimelech was ſlaine by the hand of a woman, as that Siſera was diſpatcht by Iael: as for the Page, hee ſlew (as we may ſay) a dead man in a mockery. If this verifie not the ſaying, [God reſiſteth the proud,] what doth? When men that haue carried thēſelues 1. Pet. 5. 5. aloft, and borne their heads on high, as the tall Cedars, being terrors to their inferiors, eſpecially of the more religious ſort, are thus brought to ſhame, as he was, is it not notable to ſee them as much abaſed in their death below the meaneſt, as they aduanced themſelues aboue the greateſt before? It is reported Note. of a Pope that he entred in like a Fox, ruled like a Lion, and died like a Dogge: if he had alſo been buried as that proud Iehoijkon or Iezabel like an Ier. 22. 19. 2. King. 9. 37. Aſſe, what could haue been added to his ſhame? and yet a liuing Lion, to be made a dead dogge is baſeneſſe enough. Therefore we may clearely ſee by this that the ſeeking of glory, as Salomon ſaith, is no glory, but the glory of Prou. 25. 27. ſuch is their ſhame. For although for a time it may hold and laſt, yet in a ſhort time it ſhall vaniſh and end with reproch, whatſoeuer elſe goe with it. And ſo it is generally in all pride and vaineglory, as I noted out of Gaals example before, it ſhall end with ſhame; and contrarily, the humble and lowly in mind ſhall be exalted. For there can not one tittle of Gods word fall to 1. Pet. 5. the ground, but it muſt be verified, to the comfort of the one, and the iuſt rewarding of the other.
            
               
In this verſe let vs further ſee (for the Lord would not giue him the honor Doct. 2. in verſ. 54. to be ſlaine in warre) what he did, when he had his deaths wound: doth he crie for mercy? was that (as it ought to haue been) thought vpon? And yet the moſt paſt grace will lightly deſire, that he may haue three words before he die, for then (though it be to ſmall purpoſe) he thinks to aske mercy: but the glory that this monſter had hunted after in his life-time, that was all that hee regarded, euen now at his wofull end, as his words teſtifie, to wit, That it might not be ſaid, that a woman ſlew him, declaring thereby, that he more feared infamy then damnation. The multitude of deſperate wretches that die in all ages with as little hope of ſaluation, as hee did, maketh it leſſe to be conſidered and bewailed: but what is more fearefull then to thinke, a man ſhould go to hell ſo apparantly, and (as it were) viſibly?
            Where wee are to obſerue, that ſuch as mens thoughts and affections are in their life time, ſuch they bee commonly at their death. They loued not bleſſing, ſaith the Prophet, and therefore it is farre from them in their need: 
                  Pſalm. 109. 17. Note.
                  Pſalm. 109. 17.
                ſo it is ſaid elſewhere, they ſought not after God, neither deſired acquaintance with his waies, while they liued, and therfore God ordinarily ſuffereth them not to begin to doe it at their end. They remembred not their maker Prou. 1. 24. in the daies of their youth, neither ſhall they haue grace to doe it at their death: but as they are mercileſſe, ſo God iuſtly recompenceth them with Eccleſ. 11. 1. iudgement without mercy, in their latter yeeres. And the like we reade of Saul. But yet for all this is one of a thouſand (thinke we) of ſuch as he was perſwaded to repentance in the time of his iolitie? nay doth not one follow anothers courſe to condemnation daily, and from age to age?
            And ſuch as haue their libertie to aske three words before they die, how vſe they it? what come they to? but euen to worſe then nothing? Euen as Abimelechs few words did, [Let it not be ſaid, that a woman ſlew me.] And ſo their three words are vſed, as Saul vſed his at his death: [Draw out thy ſword, 
               1. Sam. 31. 4. 
               and thruſt me through.] And as that wicked man mentioned in the booke of Monuments, who when he was haled violently on a bridge by his Horſe into the riuer, being put in minde of his three words, he ſaid thus: Horſe and man to the diuell. A notorious adulterer there was a few yeeres agone, who alſo had poyſoned many youthes by his vncleane conuerſation, and lewd example, and tongue: he liued till he was threeſcore yeere old, to reſemble him to the ſinner whom Salomon ſpeakes of, Eccleſ. 7. neuer could hee bee brought to ſauour or taſte either preaching or praying, which yet hee ſaw many zealouſly did round about him: he might haue ſpend fiftie pound land by the yeere by his marriage; but being viſited by God, in a ſtrange manner, and loſing his maintenance by the death of his wife, his bodie 
                  •
               ore plagued with paine, and diſeaſes, when he lay like a lazer in a barne, (for thither he was thruſt, through pouertie, and there he died) now to come to the point, for the which I alleaged this example, hee being moued by ſuch as came to him, when they ſaw in what miſerie hee lay, to call vpon God; hee anſwered with fearefull oathes: Is this a time to pray? The which ſeeing he was neuer acquainted with in all his life, (wee ſee) hee was farre off from it, ſhunned and lothed it at his death, by Gods righteous iudgement.
            And as wee haue heard that it is commonly ſo with the vileſt perſons at their death, as it hath been in their life; ſo it were good wiſedome for

vs to ſeeke the Lord while he may be found, in the daies of our youth, leſt if Eccleſ. 12. 1. we ſhould not goe about it till death, it ſhould not bee a ſound turning to God, but in mood and paſſion, by violence and in feare onely gone about: and who knoweth not that late repentance is dangerous? And ſo let them reioyce and bleſſe God, who haue made the Lord chiefe with them in their young yeeres, and haue counted his ſeruice perfit freedome, ſuch ſhall not neede to feare that God will frowne vpon them, and forſake them in their age, or at their death, but (as many haue done) ſhall reioyce moſt for this, that they made the Goſpell their ſolace in their life time, and Gods fauour their portion and ioy, and would not for all the riches of the vngodly, haue done otherwiſe: for ſo they ſhould haue been then vtterly to ſeeke how to be ſaued. Oh one ſweete fruite of a godly life (beſide many other enioyed before) is a moſt Chriſtian and comfortable death: ſo ſaith the Pſalmiſt; Marke the end of the righteous, and ye ſhall ſee that the end of ſuch a man Pſal. 37. 37. is peace. As for Abimelechs Page, he was as he had been trained by him, one fit to ſerue him onely in euill. Like maſter, like man; ſuch an one, as hath many followers, of which ſort of hangbies few vnder ſuch maſters, as themſelues be, few of them are (I ſay) found to come to good. But both of them, deſperate, raſh, murtherous, and fraught with ſuch ſinnes as commonly accompanie theſe. Yea, and yet ſuch hold vp their heads in the world, for whom, who ſeeth not but that the priſon is fitter, where they may be kept from doing miſchiefe, rather then to commit many lewd parts at libertie abroad. But ſeeing ſuch are paſt admonition taking, let thē that are teachable, learne to take ſuch ſeruants to be neere at hand to them, who may in danger giue aduice to them, if need be, as Naamans ſeruants did, to the preſeruing of 2. King 5. 13. his health, rather then to be as too many are, that is to ſay, furtherers of their vtter vndoing or death. And ſuch as deſerue well (as Ioſhuas, and the ſeruants of Cornelius were) let them (I ſay) be well incouraged and rewarded, which are to be reioyced in, of their maſters, when the other being intertained but to their owne, and their maſters vndoing, or great detriment, ſhall load both themſelues and them with their bellies full of ſhame and ſorrow. Of this argument I ſpare to ſpeake more heere, being as much (and a great deale more) as is like to be regarded, of ſuch as I ſpeake of.
            Thus we haue ſeene the wofull end of this curſed Abimelech, and of the wicked men of Shechem, who had been the furtherers of him to the miſchiefe Verſe 55. that he wrought. And after theſe troublers of the land were taken away, there was peace, and euery man left off from the worke that Abimelech had drawne him to, and went home to his owne place: where firſt it may be ſeene, what ſtirre, diſquiet, and trouble one vile perſon may make in the Church or Common-wealth, the Lord ſo puniſhing the peoples ſinne, as partly I noted before in this chapter. Abſolon was but one man, but how did he diſquiet his father and the whole land? Likewiſe Sheba the ſonne of Bicry that raiſed a new commotion againſt Dauid: and ſo the Prophet Elias told Ahab that he troubled all Iſrael. And ſo I may ſay of Achan, and of Kora, and of many other: euery of theſe was but one in his attempts: but each of theſe, what plagues and miſchiefe wrought they by their ſeuerall ſinnes, though moſt of thē priuate perſons, to the whole ſtate of the Church and Common-wealth of Iſrael? If wee compare the ſinnes of the whole

body with the ſinnes of a few, wee ſhall finde that the ſorrow which few brought vpon the whole companie, came little ſhort of the plagues which God inflicted vpon the whole, when all prouoked him. Although alas, what ſpeake I of particular actions? Adam his ſinne firſt brought a feareful confuſion into the whole creation? What wonder then if this contagion and peſtilence hath euer ſince, and ſtill doth cauſe the like diſorder in the places where it rangeth? whoſe deformitie (yet) and the miſchiefe that it workes, though we ſee as it were with our eyes, who (almoſt) is not bewitched with the painted beautie thereof?
            But to returne: when Achan, Sheba, Abſolon were taken away, behold all was whiſt againe, and a great calme there was after ſo horrible tempeſts. The whole Church is as a ſhip; in which if there be one Ionah, what tumult makes he? but caſt him out, and the danger is ouer. And as this is true of great ſinners and publike offenders: ſo it is true of more inferiour and priuate perſons: as of Magiſtrates in their precincts, Headborowes in townes, Maſters and parents in families ſeeing (but for the badnes of ſuch) the reſt ſhould be in peace.
            And further, by the rooting out of Abimelech, let vs confeſſe it to bee a 
                  Doct. 2. great benefit, when ſuch authors of miſchiefe, and workers of iniquitie bee taken away: and therefore giue all our endeuour for the maintenance of peace, and to make holy and right vſe of it, while we enioy it. For as wee may ſee by theſe, that ſought peace after the death of Abimelech, euen ſo the moſt that are vſed to trouble other, in time waxe wearie of it.
            In theſe two verſes is the ſhutting vp the whole chapter: Iothams prophecie Verſ. 56. 57. is verified, and Gods iudgement thereby declared, how hee rewardeth iniquitie. Of which this I ſay briefly, ſeeing in ſome ſort it hath been touched already, that they who take ill matters and bad in hand, ſhall haue ſmal Doct. cauſe to reioyce thereof in the end. For their ſinne will finde them out, when they thinke leaſt of it. And it is moſt like alſo, that looke what way they haue ſinned, euen the ſame way their ſinne may be puniſhed, as here it was, Stone for ſtone. Abimelech killed his brethren vpon a ſtone: and he is killed by a weake woman moſt vnlikely with a ſtone. The like wee haue heard of Adonibezek, and of Oreb and Zeeb, who tooke their death where they wrought miſchiefe.
            Oh how doth God recompence into their boſome in full meaſure heaped Matth. 7. 2. vp and running ouer, vnto ſuch? The which they will not foreſee and ſo preuent, vntill they ſmart, and be paſt recouerie. If this cannot moue any of the like ſort, to take warning by ſuch watch-words, in time to hate their bad courſe, and that with deteſtation at leaſt, let thoſe that haue ſhunned and declined from ſuch euill waies, reioyce with thankſgiuing, and that vnfained, for that they haue been preſerued from them, and that they haue choſen the good way to walke in it, howſoeuer they haue had many prouocations vnto the contrary.
            And laſt of al, we may ſee here that as God reuenged the innocent blood 2 of Gedeons ſonnes, ſo God will take part with ſuch innocents. Hurt them not therefore, for the time will come when thou ſhalt pay deare for thy ſo doing: of which point looke more in the former part of the hiſtorie.
            The end of the ninth Chapter.
         
         
            
            
               THE SIXTIE ONE SERMON ON THE TENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. After Abimelech, there aroſe to deliuer Iſrael, Tola the ſonne of Puah, the ſonne of Dodo, a man of Iſſachar, and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim.
                  
                  2. And he iudged Iſrael three and twentie yeeres, and died, and was buried in Shamir.
                  
                  3. And after him aroſe Iair a Gileadite, and iudged Iſrael twentie and two yeeres.
                  
                  4. And he had thirtie ſonnes that rode on thirtie aſſe colts, and they had thirtie cities, which are called Hauoth-Iair vnto this day, which are in the land of Gilead.
                  
                  5. And Iair died, and was buried in Kamon.
                  
               
               
                  THE ſumme of this Chapter is briefly this; that the children The ſumme of the Chapter. of Iſrael hauing enioyed peace and libertie for a time vnder Tola and Iair; fell againe afterward to Idolatrie. Whereupon the Lord alſo did againe deliuer them into the hands of their enemies: wherfore they calling vpon God, were at the firſt ſharply reproued: but afterward truly repenting, they obtained fauour with God, and were releaſed of their ſinnes, as before time. By occaſion whereof, entrance is made into the ſtorie of their deliuerance in the chapter following. The parts of it are three: The firſt containeth the time of their 
                     The parts 3. peace, to verſe the ſixth: The ſecond, a new defection and reuolt of the people from God, to verſe the 17. The third mentioneth the preparation that the Ammorites made againſt the children of Iſrael, and the peoples and Princes meeting and comming together to conſult and agree how to goe againſt them; and this is to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  GOd raiſed vp theſe two Iudges, to wit, Tola and Iair, after the former, to keepe the people in the true worſhip of God, and in outward peace. Here to ſpeake ſomewhat in this firſt part, of both theſe two Iudges of Iſrael ioyntly together, and afterward, ſomewhat ſeuerally; this is to be noted of the former, that after the ouerthrow of that curſed Abimelech, the people of Iſrael had a long time of peace in both their daies, that is, 45. yeers. Where note, that though God iuſtly puniſheth the ſins of mē, as he did theirs here, Doct out of verſ 
                           •
                        . 23. yet he doth ſtill remember his people, and regard them, ſending them peace againe afterwards, euen as after a ſtorme and tempeſt commeth faire weather: and he hath ſaid, that the rod of the wicked he will not ſuffer to lie alwaies

on the lot of the righteous; God will not keepe his anger for euer toward Pſal. 125. 3. them. It is his great fauour to his, that they who are exceeding bad, Exod. 34. 7. liue not very long, and that he vpholdeth his owne people many waies. Indeed when God is prouoked, ſome muſt & ſhall ſuffer, as here by the plague many thouſands in citie and countrey haue been ſwept away of late, who if they haue been readie for their departure, and haue repented, it is well; they haue gone vnder Gods hand in their ſufferings the better. And ſo let ſuch as are preſerued aliue, when others are taken away, turne to the Lord with al feruencie and ſpeed, that ſo they may teſtifie that they may make their profit of Gods ſparing their liues, and that they may ſo procure the continuance of peace and the Goſpell to their poſteritie. Let Gods people (I ſay) do this, though other haue no eares to heare good inſtruction: and be well aſſured, that though carnall reaſon ſee no ſuch thing, God will doe much at the earneſt ſuite of his; yea though they be but few. As we ſee he would not haue deſtroyed Sodome, if there had been but tenne righteous perſons found there. But (alas) through the abundance of iniquitie the loue of many decaieth, Matth. 24 12. and few are wiſe to vſe their outward peace, or health, or other benefits of God to their good. And as for the moſt, (which is not to be wondred at) they vtterly reiect the things which concerne their peace for euer. As in the daies of Noe, the people (liuing in darkneſſe) ate and drunke, married and gaue in marriage, euen as they doe in theſe latter daies of the ſonne of man, before he come in his glorie; of whom ſome ſhall in their aduerſitie, when he ſhall awake them, deſire but to ſee one good day, and it ſhall be denied them. They neither labour to keepe outward peace each with other (which were no hard matter, while the common enemie is held vnder, and that there be peace in the land) nor yet betwixt God and themſelues, but nouriſh vile luſts (the fruite of Sodome) in themſelues, through fulnes of bread and abundance of wealth, the daughters of peace. But the worſt is, that Note. theſe fierie darts of mens luſts are throwne at God himſelfe (who hath granted vs theſe daies of peace to a farre other end, as Act. 9.) and at his ſeruants Act. 9. 31. who are the beſt pledges of our peace. Is this the recompence (ſaith Moſes in Deut. 32) which ye make the Lord, for your outward peace and ſpirituall Deut. 32. 6. libertie? And iuſtly may it be demanded of vs: Is this the thanke God hath at your hands for your peace and freedome from Egypt and Canaan? Conſider therefore that in our thus warring againſt, we fight againſt our ſoules, as the Apoſtle Peter ſaith: and againe, by this, that we ſerue not God purely 1. Pet. 2. 10. in this our proſperitie, the diuell himſelfe (a great word to ſpeake) is deceiued in vs, who tooke it for granted long agoe, as hee ſaw reaſon for it, that when a man is hedged in with bleſſings, (and eſpecially this ſtrong hedge of Iob 1. 10. a publique peace) he would ſerue God without queſtion. Indeede hee requireth a further matter of vs, euen that wee ſerue him in time of affliction alſo: but is this likely, when wee doe it not in peace? But of this matter I ſpare to adde any more heere, hauing vttered my minde of it before in the fifth chapter and elſewhere.
                  Theſe two, Tola, and Iair, are not ſaid here to haue riſen vp to iudge Iſrael Of the firſt three verſes ſtill. as intruding themſelues, but as following Gods appointment, who raiſed them vp as good gouernours to ſaue and deliuer his people out of their enemies hands, ſo was not that vſurper Abimelech, but a waſter and a ſpoiler.

So are they whom God ſendeth in mercie to rule, nurcing fathers, and ſuch as teach, be full of loue and compaſſion to the people; for he graceth them whom hee counteth faithfull, and putteth in his ſeruice euen to that purpoſe. 1. Tim. 1. 12.
                  
                  Somewhat I haue ſaid before touching Gods calling and the manner of it, yet by this occaſion I will adde ſomewhat. God in a generall prouidence 
                        Doct. 2. of permiſſion may be ſaid to raiſe al that riſe vp in place of gouernment and authoritie. By premiſſion, when he reſiſteth not them who raiſe vp themſelues vnlawfully, as Abimelech. In which reſpect the Lord tolerateth many (in his ſecret will) to doe many things againſt his reuealed will; he permitteth, I ſay, not cauſeth them, for then one will ſhould be contrarie to another. Secondly, he actually bleſſeth many, and raiſeth them outwardly himſelfe, (though their riſing be to no purpoſe) as Ieroboam. Thirdly, he raiſeth vp and bleſſeth other; (their attempts being lawfull, and not indirectly vndertaken, but according to his will) whereas he doth onely trie the other, by raiſing them, whether they will raiſe and aduance him or no, and ſet him vp as chiefe, and procure the like from others: ſo, if they forget him, as Ieroboboam and Saul, that then hee may honour himſelfe vpon them, when hee Exod. 14. 17. could get no honour by them.
                  This the holy Ghoſt expreſſeth liuely in Pharaoh, Rom. 9. But the laſt and moſt ſpeciall kinde of raiſing is, when beſide common gifts, the Lord raiſeth a man, as well vp to the life of grace and holineſſe, as inhaunſeth him in the world, adorning him with more rare gifts, as meekeneſſe, wiſedome, faith, holy courage, zeale, and the fruites of true loue to his Church and Gods glorie. And theſe onely may be ſaid moſt properly to haue been raiſed by God, and neither by men, nor themſelues, and therefore to be Gods fauourites indeede. There are many that riſe in the world, who grow further from goodneſſe: I ſpeake of ſuch as are apparantly raiſed, and ſome of them from the dunghill to honour, learning, wealth; but they were in more hope to Godward when they were loweſt in the world: ſince, they waxed proud, idle, ſcornefull, their hearts riſing againſt God and his ſeruants; and to euill ends abuſing the ſteps and degrees of honour and eſtate, by which God hath raiſed them, thereby prouoking the Lord to pull them downe to their former ebbe, euen the loweſt ſtaier of ſhame. According to that of Samuel to Eli vttered from God; Thoſe that deſpiſe me, I will ſet nought 1. Sam. 2. 30. by, but honour them that honour me. This rule will not be vnmeete to try our riſing by, for euen Heathens ſaw ſomewhat, when they could ſay; No good man waxeth ſuddenly rich. And as torrents, and ſtanding waters bewray ſome ſudden and great tempeſts and raine more then vſuall: ſo mens ſudden riſings bewray the immoderatnes of their affections, exceeding the meaſure of iuſtice and religion. And let this ſerue to quiet them whom God lifteth not vp to great place, if hee haue raiſed them vp with his Chriſt from death to the life of grace, and quickned them by faith to the liuely hope of glorie.
                  But I proceede to note ſomething of theſe two Iudges ſeuerally out of the verſes following.
                  To begin with Iair, hee was of the halfe Tribe of Manaſſeh a Giliadite, The ſumme of the third, fourth and fifth verſ
                           ••
                        
                      hauing many ſonnes, ſeeing they had many wiues in thoſe daies: his ſonnes

rode, in token of their greatneſſe; and euery one of them was a Ruler ouer a Citie, and therefore their father muſt needs be a man of great Nobilitie. Now to giue ſome light into this, it is ſaid in the booke of Numbers, that one Iair tooke many Cities of the Canaanites, and they were called the Cities Numb. 32. 40. & Deut 3. 14. of Iair: not that I ſay, that the man who is here mentioned of that name was he, ſeeing there were 300. yeeres betwixt them both, but being both of one place, there is little doubt, but that the heere mentioned, came of the family of the other, and ſo thoſe Cities (it is moſt like) fell and came vnto him.
                  Now from hence we learne, that God chooſing out of one Tribe, as well 
                        Doct 3. out of the 3 firſt verſes.
                      as another, as by thoſe that haue been mentioned before in this ſtory, and theſe here, may appeare, to wit, Tola of Iſſachar, a poore Tribe, and Iair of Manaſſeh very rich: by this, I ſay, we may ſee that he would giue to none of them any cauſe to complaine, no not the meaneſt, (as they might otherwiſe (it is like enough) haue taken occaſion to doe) that he had not choſen out of one Tribe as well as out of another, the deliuerer and Captaine ouer the people. Teaching vs by his example to be without partialitie in our dealings, and iniurious to none; which is a ſingular vertue, and ſhewed by Salomon, as a companion of his wiſdome, in deciding the cauſe betwixt the 1. King. 3. 27. two harlots, he leaned to neither, but dealt indifferently with both.
                  And ſuch indifferency we ſhould ſhew in our actions through our whole courſe, that wee might not be iuſtly challenged for the contrary, but to practiſe equality in compariſons and cenſures, and in one or other our dealings, we ſhewing good reaſon if we at any time do otherwiſe, not doing as ſome, whoſe office being to profeſſe the puniſhing of wicked perſons, will yet for fauour on the one ſide, or ſpite and malice on the other, not only be partiall, but alſo extenuate the fault of the guiltie partie, and charge the innocent and honeſt to be in greater offence, then the guiltie, which is the peruerting of iuſtice, and the direct way to nouriſh and multiplie iniquity, and this Prou. 17. 14. ſome will doe the rather, if the innocent partie be zealous of the Goſpell.
                  When the Lord ſent Manna from heauen to feed his people, he made a law againſt mens greedy ſnatching it vp one from another, prouiding that he that gathered more then his fellow, ſhould part with the ouer-plus, to make the portion of the other equall, ſo that none could complaine that he was neglected in that heauenly dole. Men of meane eſtate murmur that this abundance of the earth is ſo vnequally diuided by God, that ſome haue al, ſome neuer a whit. But ſo to doe in that caſe is more equalitie, then if all had alike, for a difference there muſt euer bee in eſtates, ſome rich, ſome poore. But who ſeeth not (euen in this) Gods indifferencie? Know ye not 
                     Iames 2. 5. 
                     brethren (ſaith Iames) that God hath called the poore of this world to be rich in faith and good works? Meaning that not many rich are vouchſafed this honour: and therefore in that the poore are betruſted with the Goſpel, which is the Treaſure and Manna of heauen, and receiue it willingly, Matth. 11. Matth. 11. 5. whereas the rich haue other matters to buſie themſelues about, are they neglected through partialitie thinke we? But if any of low degree, want his part in the beſt things alſo, he may thanke himſelfe for his abaſement: who will pity him who ſhortens himſelfe of his allowance? there would (doubtleſſe) be leſſe complaining among the better ſort of people; (as for the vnruly

and idle, they ſeeke their owne ſorrow) if men wee ſo prouided for, as God allotteth to them: for neither ſhould many men become poore through their leaudneſſe, and they that otherwiſe muſt of neceſſitie be ſo, ſhould both comfort themſelues in God, and be the better regarded by others through a larger contribution of his beſtowed vpon them.
                  Therefore againe I ſay, let this ſeemely vertue find fauour with them, whom the entertainement of it might much aduantage. Such as haue the rating of inferiors for publike duties, giue great cauſe of complaining, by their partialitie, through friendſhip or diſlike: yea and ſcape themſelues (proportion being obſerued) more eaſily then the meane ſort of people. Which is groſſe, that men will ſeeke for the higheſt place of countenance and honor aboue others, but in matter of burden and charge, put the baſeſt vnderling before themſelues.
                  More particularly, in that the Lord chooſeth out of the poore and baſe 
                        Doct. particularly out of verſe 1. Tribe of Iſhaker, this Tola, to Iudge Iſrael, it was to teach vs the truth of that prouerb, that a mans gift makes him to ſit among the mighty, and aduanceth the baſe and the meane, who ought not to be deſpiſed for want of wealth, if God hath giuen them gifts. How little this truth hath been regarded alwaies, Salomon declareth, who ſaith what he had obſerued, that a poore and wiſe man deliuered a citie ſore aſſaulted by the mightie, and that he did by Eccleſ. 9. 15. his wiſdome; but none remembred this poore man. And in another place he ſaith, There is an euill that I haue ſeene vnder the Sun, that folly is ſet in great excellency, and the rich in wiſdome and vertue ſet in the low place, I Eccleſ. 10. 6. 7. haue ſeene ſeruants on horſes, & princes walking as ſeruants on the ground.
                  This, ſeeing hee calleth an euill, hee well inſtructeth the children of wiſedome, to iuſtifie her whereſoeuer ſhee bee found, howſoeuer ſhee bee iuſtled and oppoſed by the carnall. And as the Queene of the South ſaid to Salomon, Happy are thy ſeruants that attend on thee, and who may 1. King. 10. 8. heare thy wiſedome: ſo becauſe a greater then Salomon is heere, wee ſhould count it our felicitie to heare him, and count their feet beautiful that bring glad tidings. And to receiue ſuch, as men of God, and as his Prophets, Rom. 10. 15. what meane ſhew ſoeuer they make in our eies, and to commune with them when they are dead, while we reade their holy works, when we cannot conuerſe with their perſons, being taken away from vs out of this life. Thus Dauid out of a mean family, and Saul alſo (though deſtitute of grace) were excellently gifted with courage for warre, and gouernment in peace, ſo that few of the nobleſt (doubtleſſe) might compare with them. So that the meanelier they were deſcended, the more admirable they were in themſelues, not being beholding to any predeceſſors for the ſpirit and good parts that were in them: but laid the foundation of Nobilitie to their poſteritie. Therefore ſo long as the baſe by birth, maintaine worthily the places of high office and honour whereunto their excellent gifts haue lawfully aduanced them: not degenerating by pride, crueltie, and couetouſneſſe, (the common companions of men bred meanely, when they are got aloft) I ſay, when ſuch are not regarded; it is a great contempt not of them onely, but of God in them, (for hee that deſpiſeth the poore, deſpiſeth his Maker, Prou. 17. 5. and much more, hee that reprocheth them in authoritie) to call them vpſtarts, or to defame them by their baſe blood, that ſo their more eminent vertues

may be blemiſhed. A common diſeaſe among the factious, and flattering followers of great and vicious perſons, to ſtaine the honour of ſuch as are more truly noble then they, in vertue and wiſdome, by this; that they are but men of yeſterday, and cannot ſhew the Armes, which their patrons can. But whether is it better (as hee in the hiſtory anſwered) to raiſe vp a new, or to bury the old Gentrie and Nobilitie? Of this the leſſe, becauſe I haue ſaid ſomewhat in the two points before not impertinent hereto.
                  Now as we haue heard that God choſe out of Iſhaker a poore Tribe, Tola 
                     Verſe 3. 4. to Iudge Iſrael; ſo alſo, we ſee here that he chooſeth the Noble to bee Gouernours, as he did this Iair here, who for his wealth, was able to giue a City to euery of his thirtie ſonnes. To teach vs that Nobilitie is no let to the gouerning 
                        Doct. out of verſe 3. and 4. of the common-wealth, but the honourable and mightie hauing examples of their anceſtors to prouoke them to vertue, and many other helpes and complements to the well diſcharging thereof, they may be ſeene in many reſpects to be the fitteſt: this being added, if they bee not lifted vp with inſolency and high conceit of themſelues, which they haue no cauſe to do, if they conſider that they came of nothing, and are but wormes meat, and alſo, if they would weigh their mutable ſtate, and how full of lamentables changes their liues be. And to ſay the truth, it is an vtter ſhame for vs, that when God hath done much for vs, we ſhould be found vnfaithfull. Neither is high place any greater impediment to priuate godlineſſe, then publike gouernment. Although if euery man might tell his owne tale, there is none ſo poore, nor any ſo rich, but will alleage ſomewhat, why they ſhould not be tied to dutie preciſe, but liue as they thinke good, and bee releaſed from this burden, as they count it: whereby, what doe they but lay ſtumbling blocks in their owne way. Therefore wee may boldly giue it foorth, as a rule in Chriſtian practiſe, it is a miſerable and vnlawfull eſtate of life, which cannot ſtand with the daily and carefull practiſe of Chriſtianity. Somewhat (I deny not) muſt be yeelded to the occaſions and vnſeparable buſineſſe, which attend vpon greatneſſe: but yet ſo farre foorth onely, as men defalke and detract nothing from the ſubſtance of that high and great due, which the greateſt owe to a greater then themſelues. But yet if men dare goe thus farre, they ſhall find, that God wil not giue his honour to another; but rather his iealouſie wil breake out againſt them like fire, that maintaine their honour by treading his vnderfoot, Pſalme 2. Pſalme 2. 9. Verſ. 2. 5.
                  
                  This be ſaid of thoſe things which were ſeuerall in theſe two Kings, and which they did in their life; now of that which was common to them both, I meane their death. For ſo it is ſaid of both, that they died, and that was, when their dutie, each for his time, was diſcharged in procuring and maintaining Gods true worſhip, and outward peace to their countrie a long ſeaſon: thē they gaue place, and were gathered to their fathers, & their bodies were laid in the earth, in hope of the reſurrection. To teach vs, that all of vs, 
                        Doct. out of verſ. 2. and 5. Luke 19. are here to doe our duties in our callings, to ſerue God therein: who hath giuen and committed to our truſt talents, with a charge to occupie them till he come, and allowes none of vs to bury them in the earth, but ſtraightly forbids it, to wit, to bee idle, and to ſuffer our gifts to ruſt in vs, and to this end, we inioy euery man his proper gifts. The Lord hath ſet vs our habitations, and ſtinted our time of dwelling in them, with commandement, that

we ſhould not be idle nor vnprofitable in the knowledge of our Lord Ieſus, Act. 17. 26. nor in our particular calling, but to attend thereunto, for profitable vſes to our ſelues and others: and hath for that purpoſe, appointed that we ſhould 2. Pet. 1. 8. haue comfortable fruite thereof in all neceſſarie things of this life, to incourage vs to our duties, that ſo we might be none of the refuſe, and idle hangbyes in the world: and in both our generall and particular calling to ſerue God for conſcience ſake and with comfort. To this end I ſay, God hath ſet vs here, alwaies to haue our eye vpon our departure, and with good father Barzillai to prouide for our graue. 2. Sam. 19. 37.
                  
                  And when wee haue thus diſcharged our ſelues, and the Lord ſhall giue 2 vs warning by ſickneſſe, paine, diſeaſe of our end to bee at hand, or call vs home with ſmall warning, wee ſhould be readie for his comming, to yeeld Note. our ſoules into his hands, and our bodies to the graue for a ſeaſon, in hope of receiuing them againe: which ſhall be no hard matter for vs to doe, who haue, as ſtrangers here, prepared for it before, as wee haue learned to doe. Neither ſhould we looke or deſire to haue any more abode or continuance here, but giue ouer our ſelues in peace, and willingly commend our ſelues vnto the Lords ſafe keeping, as I haue ſaid. And therfore in the meane time we ſhould ſoberly vſe all the tranſitorie helps of this life; as wealth, friends, wife, and our life it ſelfe, ſo that they may not be clogs with their deceiuable ſhew, to hold vs from farre better things. And in the meane while take the Note. beſt vſe of them to profitable ends, and doe the good that wee may doe by the helpe of them, ſeeing in the graue there is no ſuch thing to bee looked for. And ſo the remembrance of the time well paſſed, ſhall be moſt comfortable: Eccleſ. 9. 10. but as for thoſe that are calling in for their cheare and merry making in this world, otherwiſe then they are ſure they ſhall be able well to giue their reckoning for it hereafter, ſuch can neither poſſibly dye well, nor willingly, vnleſſe they bee deſperate. To the which purpoſe I haue ſpoken elſewhere, as the diligent reader ſhall finde.
               
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 6. And the children of Iſrael wrought wickedneſſe againe in the ſight of the Lord, and ſerued Baalim and Aſhtoroth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philiſtims, and forſooke the Lord, and ſerued not him.
                     
                     7. Therefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled againſt Iſrael, and he ſold them into the hands of the Philiſtims, and into the hands of the children of Ammon:
                     
                     8. Who from that yeere vexed and oppreſſed the children of Iſrael eighteene yeeres, euen all the children of Iſrael that were beyond Iorden in the land of the Ammorites which is in Gilead.
                     
                     9. Moreouer, the children of Ammon went ouer Iorden to fight againſt Iudah, and againſt Beniamin, and againſt the houſe of Ephraim: ſo that Iſrael was ſore tormented.
                     
                     10. Then the children of Iſrael cried vnto the Lord, ſaying, Wee haue ſinned againſt thee, euen becauſe wee haue forſaken our owne God, and haue ſerued Baalim.
                     
                  
                  
                     
NOw followeth a new reuolt of the people of Iſrael, and this is handled The ſenſe of theſe verſes. to the 17. verſe, wherein the things to bee conſidered are theſe: to wit, a double repairing and returning by them to God, when hee afflicted them by their enemies for their ſin in forſaking him. In their firſt ſeeking to him, they had the repulſe, for their repentance was not ſound. In the ſecond, God deliuered them, they ſeeking to him in repentance. In the former note theſe foure things: Firſt their ſinne, which was a ioyning to the nations among whom they dwelt, and this in the ſixth verſe. The ſecond is Gods puniſhing them euen by thoſe, whom they ioyned with in Idolatrie: which is ſnewed in the next three verſes. The third point is their crying to God: and laſtly, the fruite thereof, in the tenth verſe, and ſo forward. The fruite was diuers: for firſt God denied to deliuer them, to the fifteenth verſe. But at the ſecond crying of the people to God, hee deliuered them: which is ſet downe in the next two verſes vnto the ſeuenteenth. Now let theſe things be looked into more particularly. To returne therefore to the ſixth verſe, The opening of verſe 6. more particularly. and to begin with the peoples ſinne, it is ſaid, after the death of theſe two Iudges, in whoſe daies they had enioyed peace fiue and fortie yeeres, that the people fell againe to prouoke God, as wee haue heard their fathers did. And how? by committing Idolatrie after the manner of the ſeuen nations, that are here mentioned. For both that was liking to the fleſh, and beſides, they thought thoſe nations that did ſo, liued in more abundance, and in more pleaſure, then themſelues did; for many delights to tickle the fleſh forward they adioyned to their falſe worſhip, to draw away their hearts from ſeruing the true God aright, whom, it is ſaid here, that they forſooke. Thus much for the ſumme of this verſe, and therein of their ſinne. And here are diuers things to be conſidered.
                  Firſt it teacheth, that we ſhould not greatly marueile, that ſo many in this Doct verſ. 6. our age giue themſelues to Popiſh religion, ſeeing Idolatrie hath in moſt ages been ſo common: by reaſon that it hath ſo many player-like toyes and bables of ſights to bleare the eye, and ſonets to deceiue the eare, that it maketh them thinke they be in a peece of paradiſe, while they embrace and are made drunke with ſuch fond conceits, when indeed they be thereby caried (as it were) faſt aſleepe to hell. There is nothing that moueth or delighteth them in all the word of God, rightly vnderſtood, but only blind deuotion in their falſe religion, wherein they haue been nuzled vp, and then a fond and fantaſticall conceit, that they ſhall goe to heauen thereby. As for the authoritie and warrant of their Maſſe, and other trumperie; in the beginning of the world, nay in our Sauiour Chriſts time, and many hundred yeeres after, there was no ſhred nor ragge of it vſed or knowne, eſpecially to any ſuch end, whereas the true ſeruing of God was alwaies (as now it is) euen from the beginning. Heb. 11. the whole.
                  
                  And how prone people are to worſhip God with eaſe, (for ſo farre they like, whether it be ſound and true, or counterfeit) it may be ſeene not onely in Poperie, which is coyned for the purpoſe to deceiue the ſimple, with ſtrong deluſions, but alſo in our religion, which for the outward manner of it is holy, pure and good, and conſiſteth in hearing, prayer, and the vſe of the Sacraments for the ſubſtance thereof. And yet many of them who allow it,

as the true manner of worſhipping God, what doe they (for the moſt part) but draw neere to God with their bodies, but their hearts are farre from him? As if they would ſay, they would gladly goe to heauen, but they would haue an eaſie way thither; but to ſerue God in ſpirit and truth, which Ioh 4 24. is the direct way thither, they cannot bend themſelues thereto: whereas there is as great delight in the worſhipping of God aright, and that by the Pſal. 84. 1. Lords allowance and promiſe, (which in the two former kindes; of popiſh, and the other, of only outward worſhip are wanting) as great delight, (I ſay) and as ſound in true performing it, ſo farre as fraile fleſh may attaine to, as there is reward promiſed thereto, which is vnutterable. Pſal 19. 11.
                  
                  In this verſe alſo may bee ſeene, what fruite this people yeelded to the 
                        Doct. 2. Lord of their long enioyed peace, euen as wee haue ſeene their fathers did, and that was, how they fell to laſciuiouſnes, and forgetting of God: a ſufficient Deut 6. 12. watch-word whereof they had giuen them before by Moſes. Now for the laying out of this ſinne both in them and our ſelues, how fearefull and great it is, let vs onely conſider of it thus; Seeing this point hath been largely handled already, if the diſeaſed perſon pained with the ſtone or Note. ſtrangury, or the famiſhed, and hee that is in penury, or the man that is in exile and baniſhment; if theſe (I ſay) might be ſet free from that which oppreſſeth them, what would they not readily offer, and couenant to doe, in the ſeruice of God? yea and that much more feruently then other men? Therefore how grieuous is their ſin, (let all men iudge) who may in health, in wealth, at eaſe, and in outward peace doe this, I meane, ſerue the Lord, which is the thing that he requireth of them, and yet they can by no means be brought to it? But this I leaue to be further conſidered, as euery one ſhal ſee cauſe.
                  But more particularly, in that it is ſaid, they forſooke the Lord, it may be 
                        Doct. 3. marueiled at, that they ſhould forſake him, whom they had loued and ſerued before. But by this we may ſee, what force there is in ſinne to beſot and make drunken, them who giue ouer themſelues thereto; be it whoredome, the loue of the world, or any other: For it is able to bereaue them of ſound reaſon, to turne away their delight from prayer, and all good practiſe, and to forget the ioy that they had in both, ſometimes; and yet to blindfold them ſo, that they ſhall not ſuſpect any danger to be toward them for al this, while they may merrily ſerue their humour therein. Sampſon and other went farre this way. And let the beſt of vs feare, leſt we be carried away of our luſts to loue and like where wee ought not, and tempt we not God, but let vs reſiſt the beginnings of euill: wee know little what may befall vs in time, if wee Note. dare deale looſely and vnfaithfully with the Lord, and ſuffer our ſelues to beled away from our ſtedfaſtnes. This boldnes and careleſneſſe, if it thus be ſuffered to beare ſway in vs, may cauſe this ſcripture in time to be ſaid of and verified in vs, that we haue forſaken the Lord our ſtrength. And yet becauſe men are cunning to deceiue themſelues, hoping that as long as they embrace not another religion, they ſhall not become ſuch, nor iudged ſo hardly of, though they take vp their delight in ſins that pleaſe thē; I thought it not therefore amiſſe, to giue this caueat, that in vaine doe ſuch men worſhip God, though they draw neere to him with their bodies, while they ſuffer their hearts to goe another way: and it is a kinde of forſaking of God,

though not in ſo high a degree as the other, and as in time they themſelues are like to come vnto, and their labour is loſt that they beſtow in ſeruing God, while it is accompanied with ſuch anoiance and vnſauourines, he vtterly abhorreth it. This phraſe of forſaking God, is taken from wedlocke, when either partie renounceth intereſt and fellowſhip in the other, and departeth away: euen as the phraſe of [ſelling them away] vſed in the next verſe on Gods part, importeth the like action in the Lord, as iuſtly giuing ouer his part in them. As they had reſigned their right in him, their husband, (who had married himſelfe vnto them) vnto ſtrange Idols: ſo the Lord put ouer his intereſt in them, vnto ſtrange Idolaters, alienating himſelfe from them, as the commoditie which is ſold changeth the owner, and becomes the right of another man. Now then let not men thinke they may at their pleaſure breake their couenant (as the knot of marriage) with God; thinking they may returne to him as they liſt, and when they liſt, (as Sampſon to his companion, and the Leuite to his concubine) for neither will it be ſo eaſie for them to doe it, neither ſhall they finde God ſo ready in their haſtie ſeekings after him, vpon each occaſion to admit them.
                  And this is ſaid of the peoples ſinne, and by occaſion thereof. Now we haue heard of that, being the firſt point of the foure: in theſe three next Verſ. 7. 8. 9. verſes is ſet down Gods diſpleaſure conceiued againſt them for it. For when they had thus prouoked him by their ſore tranſgreſſions, he prouoked them alſo, by that which did little like them: for hee ſtirred vp the Philiſtims and Ammonites againſt them, who vexed them ſore for many yeeres. And this they did, not onely in the land of the Ammorites, beyond Iorden to the children of Iſrael that dwelt there, but they waxed more bold, and paſſed ouer Iorden & made warre with the tribe of Iuda, Beniamin, and Ephraim: ſo as they were not able to reſiſt them. And what ſhould wee ſay to all this? It muſt needs be granted, that this was an heauy bondage that they were vnder. But what remedie? If it had been any leſſe, it would not haue moued nor wrought vpon them. They would not complaine, nor crie to God for a little. For if they had, they ſhould haue been heard, and kept from ſo great extremities, that they ſhould not haue vexed them.
                  So that, to ſay no more of this, we may all ſee here, that when wee come Doct. verſ. 7. 8. vnder ſore afflictions, which in a manner take heart from vs, and make our liues weariſome, we may thanke our ſelues for it: God vſeth not to caſt his puniſhments vpon men all at once, but by peece meale, and by degrees, and giueth warning of them for the moſt part, at leaſt by his word alwaies: that ſo (as wiſe men ſeeing the plague comming) they may preuent them; or Prou. 22. 3. elſe he laieth his hand more lightly vpon them, that they may at the firſt repaire to him, and intreate him to ſtay it. If it be otherwiſe, that he ſuddenly, and at once take away the righteous with the wicked, they ſhall haue no cauſe to complaine of that, for they ſhall reſt in peace. If God remoue not his puniſhments, yet if they be reconciled to him, and liue obediently, hee will giue them greater grace of faith, hope, and patience, to beare the burthen more eaſily, and with farre greater contentment. All the danger is, if they harden their hearts, and bow not meekely to God vnder their burthens, that is more againſt them, then all their outward calamitie and bondage.
                  
                     
Wee haue heard how God puniſhed the people for their committing idolatrie, and ſuffered their enemies to oppreſſe them ſore and a long-time. But this was not al which is here expreſſed, though that was very grieuous, as all may well ſee. But with this, it is to be noted, how they alſo by their ſin, turned the Sun-ſhine of Gods fauour into moſt darke and vncomfortable diſpleaſure. This men purchaſe to themſelues by their wilfulneſſe and rebellion, when they might otherwiſe go out and in before him, to their good liking, and dwell moſt ſafely vnder the wing of his protection all the day long. What madneſſe is it to caſt themſelues into deadly feares and vnquietneſſe and anguiſh of ſoule for the Lords diſpleaſure, as ſharpe arrowes ſticking Deut. 33. 12. faſt in them, with reproch, diſcountenance of Gods ſeruants, and many other croſſings and diſcontentments? But of Gods anger and wrath, reade more in Chap. 2. 14. Here I end.
               
            
         
         
            THE SIXTIETH TWO SERMON ON THE TENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               WE heard in the former verſes how God afflicted this Verſ. 9. people for their ſinne: in this verſe, the holy ſtory ſetteth down how this oppreſſion by the enemies reached to the people beyond Iorden, as well as them that were on this ſide onely. Wherein that thereat was verified (whereof before hath been ſpoken) that they and their idols, ſhould be as ſnares vnto them, euen to their deſtruction. But beſides this we ſee, that this miſerie did ſpred further in time, then to thoſe that were on this ſide Iorden, for it reached euen to the Iſraelites alſo, which dwelt beyond Iorden. So that although the enemies began with them firſt, who dwelt in the land of the Amorites, yet ſeeing the people on both ſides of Iorden had communicated with the nations in their ſinne, they were therfore both plagued alike by the enemies. And ſo it fareth with vs: for if many ioyne together in prouoking God, they ſhall ſmart together, by bearing his corrections. And though the Lord begin, as I ſaid before of Shechem and Abimelech, with ſome at the firſt apart, yet he will, as the fire burneth one houſe after another, he wil, I ſay, deuour the reſt with the former at length, as by the plague we haue heard he hath done.
            Now in that it is ſaid in this verſe, that they cried to the Lord, ſaying: we Verſ. 10. haue ſinned, I haue ſpoken of this before, as alſo of this, that they were long in miſerie ere they complained, therfore I wil not repeate thoſe two points, onely this here is to be noted, that they did not crie vnfainedly at the firſt, but for the ſmart they felt, but hauing the repulſe of God, and they ſeeing

that they preuailed not thereby, they did after, ſet themſelues to ſeeke the Lord, and to repent in the truth of their hearts, as is ſhewed afterwards: and that they did not at their firſt ſeeking to him, come in true repentance, it appeareth by the Lords reiecting of their cries, and his bidding them goe to their gods, whom they had ſerued, for helpe; which hee would not haue done, if they had turned to him in truth: for hee is full of compaſſion, and readie to receiue thoſe that are of an vpright heart. Exod. 34. 7.
            
            And by this wee may ſee, that many men, when they are in extremities, Doct. confeſſe their ſinnes to God, as Saul, when hee feared the loſſe of his kingdome, and crie to him, when yet it is otherwiſe hardly wrung from them, neither doe it they ſincerely; and yet I will not ſay, that they here, or that all other ſuch, of whom I ſpeake, doe it in hypocriſie: but this I ſay, that in their Note. need and haſt they crie, onely they conſider not that God looketh for truth at their hands, neither reſolue afterwards to looke aboue all things to keepe their couenant with God, neither therefore indeed doe ſo: but like Ahab, bow for the time as a bulruſh, and afterward forgetting, through careleſnes and negligence, what they ſaid or promiſed; whereas they who in truth and vnfainedly repent, and turne to God, looke duly and conſtantly to their promiſe that they made to him, as Dauid did, who ſaid, I haue ſworne, and Pſal. 119. 106. will performe it, to keepe thy righteous iudgements. And there had need to be no leſſe in them, that couenant with God, a man would thinke, vnleſſe they will boldly and groſſely ſhew, that they deſpiſe him, and helpe to fill the Church with reuolters, as they were, that we reade of in the Pſalme. The Pſalm. 78. 34. vſe of which I repeate not, but referre the Reader to the places before mentioned.
            
               Verſe 11. And the Lord ſaid vnto the children of Iſrael, Did not I deliuer you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philiſtims.
               
               12. The Zidonians alſo, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites did oppreſſe you, and ye cried vnto me, and I ſaued you out of their hands.
               
               13. Yet ye haue for ſaken me, and ſerued other gods: wherefore I will deliuer you no more.
               
               14. Goe and crie vnto the gods which yee haue choſen, let them ſaue you in your tribulation.
               
            
            IN theſe verſes it followeth what God ſaid to them in theſe their cryings The ſenſe. to him: When the people had called vpon God, and began, as it ſeemed, to repent, God anſwered them indeed, but ſharpely and roughly, as appeareth in the text, whether by the high Prieſt, or by ſome Prophet. But why he ſo hardly reproued them, the reaſon was, to awake them further, and to bring them to ſound and conſtant repentance, to the which they were not yet come vnto. As if he ſhould haue ſaid to them, Yee ſeeke to be deliuered, but ye doe it, to the end that ye being ſet at libertie, may returne to your old byas againe, and follow your luſts, and ſerue ſtrange gods. But who could haue thought, that you would hereafter, ſaith the Lord to them, haue reuolted from me? Did you not call vpon me at other times, and were heard? Is

this the firſt, and when I deliuered you, yet he haue forſaken me, as is to bee ſeene this day, for the marke ye ſtil beare of it, and haue caſt me behind your backs. I deliuered you from the Egyptians, Ammorites, Ammonites, and other, and in ſtead of the thanks, ye by and by forſooke me, and fell to ſerue ſtrange gods. O horrible! Thus therfore the Lord (as we haue heard) now caſteth them in the teeth with their doings. And namely with their Idols, as if he ſhould haue ſaid, yee ſee now what your gods (as you call them) are able to doe for you. For if they could haue helped you, I ſee, that you would neuer haue ſought to me: I will not therefore deliuer you, and if you ſeeke to them, ye ſee they cannot. Briefly to end this; their ſtate being thus Doct. laid open by the Lord before them, I note (or rather repeate) out of the whole anſwere which the Lord makes them heere: that it is not ſo eaſie a matter for men to deceiue him, who knoweth their hearts, and the guile, falſehood and flattery, that is in them, as to beguile men, who in charitie do (as they ought) iudge the beſt of them by that which they heare and ſee. To heare ſome men in their good pangs, either when ſome great bleſſing befalles them, or when they are held vnder by ſome great affliction, (as by the feare of death) and kept vpon the racke, or when they haue heard ſome powerfull Sermon which hath ſearched them to the quicke, or when they behold the great workes of Gods power, as thunder, lightning, winds and tempeſt by ſea or land, or when they ſee Gods hand vpon other men, or to be heauy vpon themſelues any other way: vpon ſuch occaſions (I ſay) to heare the ſpeeches, and ſee the behauiours of ſome men, Note. what words of thankſgiuing, of trembling, of admiration, nay, what confeſſions and prayers breake from them, with earneſt couenants and vowes of repentance; I ſay to heare theſe things at ſuch times, would make a ſimplehearted Chriſtian crie out as amazed, and not feare, boldly to affirme, God be glorified; doubtleſſe theſe perſons are throughly changed, and truly penitent, and God is in them of a truth, ſurely Saul is become a Prophet of God: and thus in their ſimplicitie doe many iudge of ſuch, by occaſion of that which they ſee in them: and who, except they bee well experienced, ſhould not ſay the like in that caſe, and curſed are they that deceiue ſuch: yet thus they ſpeake of them, till they are afterward as much aſtoniſhed to ſee the contrary in them. Thus wee ſee, they deceiue men, whereas the Lord, as wee may ſee in this example, will not, nor cannot bee ſo eaſily deluded by them, neither wil ſo ſoone be ſatisfied with theſe their ſpeeches: but ſtill waiteth for the truth and vprightneſſe of ſuch as vtter them, and giues no credulous eare vnto them, but doth more then ſuſpect them, for he calles them to further proofe of their ſoundnes and affection towards him, and expoſtulateth with them, for that he finds it not ſo with them. Saul (as 1. Sam. 15. 24. and 30. I ſaid, fearing his kingdome) confeſſed the ſin which was laid to his charge, 1. Sam. 15. But the Lord profeſſed (for all that) he had reiected him, chap. 16. 1. Sam. 16. 1. So the people in Deuteronomy being in feare, and ſtrongly poſſeſſed thereof, Deut. 5. 29. in all haſt, proteſted they would obey the Lord in all things which Moſes ſhould tell them from the mouth of God: But the Lord ſmelt them and found them out preſently: for thus he ſaith to Moſes, This people ſaith wel, all that they haue ſaid: but I will not take their word, and why? Oh there is no ſuch heart in them, ſaith he, as their tongue would ſeeme to import. For

euen as a leaud houſwife, who is runne away from her husband, or any ill debter, who is fled for debt, if they be taken and terrified with the law, they will not ſticke to ſay and ſweare to any conditions which are offered them, ſo that the preſent danger and ſhame may be remitted: whereas yet they are as treacherous and looſe afterward, as euer before; as the iſſue prooues (in theeues and other malefactors) euen ſo, when vile perſons are vnder Gods puniſhments; (from whom they ſee, there is no breaking away by ſtrong hand) what will they not ſay, in accuſing and condemning themſelues? Nay, who can ſhame them as they will themſelues for their ſinnes? or who can ſo denounce and pleade againſt them as themſelues? What will they not promiſe, vpon condition of releaſe from the preſent woe they are in? And yet when theſe men come to the triall, they flie touch, and recoile againe, as if there were no witneſſe to conuince them, and as if all they ſaid, had been ſpoken in a trance. Oh therefore, thoſe forced exclamations and complaints, which either for horror and feare a grieued ſoule maketh, or which a body pinched, and in diſtreſſe, compell a man vnto: how may they be taken for approoued teſtimonies of repentance, either by themſelues, or by other? Yea ſuch as know they haue often abuſed the Lord thus, (as if they had him at command to order him as they liſt, vpon each flattering promiſe, whereas it is his wonderfull mercy that hee will forbare them, and offer them meanes of ſearching themſelues better: let them repent therefore of this playing wily beguily with God: Oh how ſhould this terrifie them, and ſcare them, that the Lord ſtill counts them but hollow perſons, rotten at the heart, and falſe in their couenant, and therefore that hee will at one time or other, reckon with them for all their villany and hypocriſie, which they durſt couer vnder the vizard ſpeeches of humblenes and truth. As for vs, who haue learned and practiſed better, let vs beware that, as Paul 
               1. King. 5. 22. bids Timothy, not to lay hands ſuddenly vpon any; ſo that we doe not lightly iudge well or commend the eſtate of any man vpon ſo ſlender euidence, let his conſtancie ſpeake for him: time (the mother of truth) ſhall prooue him: in the meane ſeaſon, lift not thou ſuch an one vp to the third heauen in one moode, when in another thou ſhalt bee vrged to condemne to the nethermoſt hell: but be ſober, and leaue him to God, to whom (as to his maſter, who knowes him) he ſtandeth or falleth.
            More particularly in theſe two verſes, he telles them what deliuerances he Verſ. 11. 12. had wrought for them, bringing his benefits to their remembrance, to prick their conſciences. And therefore to ſpeake the truth, what incouragement Doct. of verſe 11. 12. could they haue in comming to God in their need for helpe, whom they had dealt ſo treacherouſly with before? eſpecially, they hauing no teſtimonie, that they came in remorſe and ſhame for their former reuolts, and with firme and reſolute perſwaſion, both that God would pardon them, and that themſelues would no more fal from him. So, how can any of vs in our need, doe as they did, but we muſt looke for the like anſwer from him? And ſo we haue, though not by voice from heauen, yet by the fearefull accuſation of our conſciences, and by his word in canonicall Scripture. And as for men that haue bin ſo dealt with by any neighbours, yea though it be but once, if they haue been beneficiall to them, they wil ſoone ſhew them their minds, that is, how greatly they deteſt ſuch vnthankfulneſſe and falſehood. But how

we ſhould be moued by the hearing of Gods benefits brought to our remembrance, and of ſuch like matter I haue ſpoken largely in the ſecond Chapter, verſ. 1. 2. 3.
            This ſpeech of the Lord, namely, [I will deliuer you no more] becauſe afterwards Verſ. 1
                     •
                  . he did deliuer them, giuing occaſion of ſome doubt and difficulty, is to be conſidered of vs accordingly, I meane with more regard. His meaning is this: Yee (O people vnworthy to be beloued) haue abuſed my facilitie and gentleneſſe, and you ſeeing me eaſily entreated heretofore to helpe you, plied mee with your cries and complaints, till yee had gotten that yee would haue, euen deliuerance from your enemies, naming many ſorts vnto them. But when yee got once elbow roome, ſaith the Lord, (whereas I looked to haue been the God of your worſhip and ſeruice, aſwell as of your ſaluation) ye turned your backs vpon me, and rebelled againſt me: If this bee the fruit of my loue and tenderneſſe, that I muſt haue the worke to deliuer you, but euery ſtocke and ſtone, euery Idoll of Ammon, Moab, &c. go away with the thanks and reuerence, and get all the obedience and worſhip from me, I will helpe you no more, except I ſee better fruit come of it: and otherwiſe I haue done with you, goe ſeeke to them whom yee ſerue for ſuccour and reliefe. So then we ſee this refuſall is conditionall: and is applied to them for their former idolatry, and their preſent vnſound dealing, and reacheth onely to the preſent time, though they cried vnto him: as if he had ſaid: At this time, in the caſe you are in, I will not deliuer you, I will not helpe you, as faſt as you complaine, but when I ſhall ſee it meete, that is, when I ſhall ſee your repentance ſound, then I will giue you another anſwer. So that it is manifeſt I ſay, that he ſpeaketh but conditionally, and thus we muſt Doct. vnderſtand it; for otherwiſe (they not hauing committed the vnpardonable ſin) this ſpeech ſhould haue been contrarily 
                  ••
                other Scripture. Where the thing which is to be noted is this: that God after the manner of men, ſheweth his fearefull ſpeeches, as hee did heere, that he is offended with vs, Note. (and for the ſame cauſe doth oft afflict vs) to the end he may make vs ſearch out, ſee, and feele ſome ſpecial ſinnes, they are fore and grieuous in his ſight, and yet of vs nothing or little regarded. By this meanes therefore, he bringeth vs to ſuch a ſenſe of them, that we are not able to looke vp, but our hart (to the iudgement of fleſh) doth faint within vs, as may bee ſeene in theſe heere.
            This Dauid felt, when he ſaid, Innumerable troubles haue compaſſed me, Pſalm. 40. 12. my ſinnes haue taken ſuch hold of me, that I am not able to looke vp: they are more in number then the haires of mine head, therefore mine heart faileth Pſalm. 32. 4. me. So in another Pſalme, we may ſee the like. This doe mens ſinnes bring them to, when God citeth them, and ſeeth it expedient to awake them, though he doe not this often, eſpecially to the reprobate, and yet with ſlender, or rather no vſe nor benefit to them, when he doth it; they haue ſo many ſhifts to waſh it away, and ſo harden their hearts, that they cannot profit thereby, but with great vſe and comfort to his owne children, in the end eſpecially, how terrible and feareful ſoeuer the beginnings and proceedings alſo ſometime are, or ſeeme to be vnto them.
            And ſo he terrifies many at their firſt conuerſion with the feeling of his wrath and heauy diſpleaſure iuſtly kindled againſt them, for the odiouſneſſe

and deteſtation of their liues paſt, ſo that they fall into a kind of deſpaire, as the people in the Acts did at Peters ſermon, ſaying: Men and brethren what Actes 2. 37. ſhall we doe? And yet a little before, they made light of their ſinnes, which then ſo pricked their conſciences, and had no ſenſe of them. By all this that hath been ſaid of this matter, we may gather, what manner of thing ſinne is, if it appeare in the proper colours of it, and as it is indeed; to wit, the moſt Note. fearefull of all things. Many thinke this true that I ſay, of murther, adulterie, idolatrie, and ſuch like. But the truth that I haue vttered, is verified of other ſins alſo, which yet ſeeme leſſe odious: as of anger, impatience, worldlineſſe, diſtruſt, tetchineſſe, pride of heart, ſloth and idleneſſe, the leaudnes of the eie, ſelf-loue, deceiuing, reuenge, and the reſt whatſoeuer they be, if they come clearely to the conſcience to be felt and duly conſidered.
            And becauſe we make them ſuch common matters, and are ſo little grieued for them, the Lord is therefore driuen to awake vs, as heere hee did this people, to make vs aſtoniſhed, and ſtung at the heart for thoſe ſinnes which wee thought were ſmall, or none at all, while wee lay nuzled and drowned in them.
            For if God open our eyes once, to ſee them as they are to be ſeene, and as they may be felt, with the ſhame, fouleneſſe, baſeneſſe, ſottiſhneſſe in the Note. committing of them, and the danger that they bring; wee iudge euen ſo of them, as well as of the reſt.. For what horror doth adultery breed, when it is thought of after the committing? it is as an arrow ſhot through the liuer? But of that, ve will ſay, there is no doubt: ſo what is anger, when it is paſt, to him that offended by it but ſhame, and ſo I may ſay of all other. A view hereof, may bee taken in Saul, when God purſued him for his ſinne, and made him crie out, ſaying: What ſhall I doe? for God hath forſaken me, 1. Sam. 28. 15. and ſpeaketh no more to me. And what torment (thinke wee) felt Iudas, when of himſelfe he ſaid, I haue ſinned in betraying the innocent blood? And when his ſinne ſo wounded his conſcience, that the halter made an end of his life? And Adams tranſgreſſion alſo, which was diuers from both the other, what wrought it vpon him? was he not ſo terrified for it, that he fled from Gods preſence as farre as he could, to hide himſelfe in the thicket Geneſ. 3. 8. among the trees? And if I ſhould reckon vp an hundred more, who all ſinned in a diuers manner, one from the other; which of them hath not abhorred his owne, as if no other had been ſo vile, when God makes him ſee it. Therefore the Martyrs, rather then they would commit ſinne againſt their Note. conſcience, and feele the terrour of it, choſe to loſe their liues rather, as wee may reade plentifully in the booke of Monuments. True it is, men doe not alwaies ſee, nor feele this, neither can they be brought to be moued and aſtoniſhed for their ſinne, except they be by the Lords ſtrong hand thus forced and vrged. But by this (to end the matter in hand, we may iudge what ſhall be the horror of the Iudgement day it ſelfe, when all ſuch things ſhall fully be made manifeſt. And for vſe of all this, let vs learne, ſeriouſly to haue all ſinne in horror and deteſtation, yea euen then, when it puts on an harlots face, and hath moſt force to deceiue vs; leſt that which we heare, ſtrike and wound vs at the heart, when wee looke for no ſuch thing, but ſhall find it moſt deadly vnwelcome vnto vs.
            Another thing herein to be marked, is, that although they had dealt deceitfully 
                  Doct. 2.
               
with the Lord, both in their former abuſes of their deliuerances, and now alſo in their complaint which they make for new helpe: yet the Lord leaues them not in this caſe, which had been enough to haue hardned them, and made them quite deſperate. But euen by theſe words of defiance, whereby hee ſeemeth wholly to abandon them from protection, yet ſecretly he drawes them to a deeper ſearching into themſelues, and to a far more ſerious meditation on their eſtate, that ſo hee might grant them their deſire, and receiue them to fauour againe. Oh vnſpeakable and admirable Note. kindneſſe of the Lord, thus to draw water out of the rocke, and to fetch light (as it were) out of darkneſſe. If God be ſo gracious to his children when he ſeemeth to frowne; then how ſweete and pleaſant is his amiable countenance? and how delightfull are his promiſes and his incouragements? If he cannot forget himſelfe ſo farre to his children (though degenerate) as to put off the habit of affection towards them, euen when he would play the Iudge: then how pleaſant is his louing kindneſſe? Therefore, although it is not eaſie for him that is fallen, and departed from God, to ſee this intent of God toward him, in the time of his threats and terrors, yet they knowing it to bee ſo, they muſt grow to beleeue it, in the time of their neede, for it magnifieth Gods deepe rooted and tender loue to his children, when they haue offended, and it makes matter of vnfained thankes and praiſe, when the worſt end of his anger and diſpleaſure ſhall appeare to haue been this, that remorſe and repentance might be wrought in thoſe who had offended him, that ſo they may be receiued of him againe. The vngodly ſee not, neither finde any ſuch fruite of Gods renouncing their complaints and confeſſions, or his terrors of word and workes againſt them for their ſinne: his voyce is as the voyce which ſounds in a deafe mans eare: or if they heare Rom. 7. 8. it, they either rebell the more, or elſe runne away from him through feare? Gen. 3. 10. But did this preſent terror ſo worke in theſe? No, the Lord meant better to them, though he ſpake roughly, (becauſe indeed faire ſpeech was no fit medicine for their diſeaſe) and they were drawne to him by the ſecret condition, more then driuen from him by the open threat. So ſtrangely doth the ſame ſpeech and word of God inſtruct or teach wiſedome, yea put hope into the beleeuer: and vtterly diſanimate and turne off the wicked, or at leaſt no whit profit them. For as God intendeth a thing, ſo ſhall it worke: all ſhall worke for the beſt to them to loue God: Sweetnes ſhall come out of bitternes Rom. 8. 28. to them: whereas the other hauing no ſuch promiſe, finde no ſuch effect. Chriſt (ſaith the text) looked vpon Iudas comming to betray him: Luk. 22. 47. and ſo did he (as Matth. chap. 26. reports) looke vpon Peter, hauing denied him: Theſe lookes were frowning lookes both of them: but the worke of Matth. 26. 61. them was diuers: Peter by that looke was touched with compunction, and went out a repentant perſon: the other an harned and wretched perſon, not mollified by the ſame aſpect, becauſe there was no bountie in it.
            Laſtly by this point, let Gods children learne a double dutie, as well as 3 take occaſion of thankſgiuing: I ſay ſuch of them as haue declined and gone out of compaſſe, let them wiſely obſerue what Gods meaning is toward them in his word or workes of affliction. Let them firſt take heed, leſt they giue eare to his ſubtiltie who would prompt them with this ſuggeſtion, Thou art alreadie gone from God: and behold now he ſeekes to be rid of Note.
               
thee altogether, and to feare thee quite from him. Auoid Satan (let them ſay) this were to renounce my right in God by faith, and his right in me, which is his free loue: this were to put no difference betweene the beleeuers priuilege, and the vnbeleeuer. No, no, this dealing of God, I ſee is, as it was to his people of Iſrael, and the Niniuites: it hath a condition annexed to it, which argueth, God is more deſirous to forgiue me, reſtore me, heale and ſettle me in good eſtate againe, then to forſake me. If hee had meant ſo, what needed he to haue redeemed me at all? or now to haue ſpoken conditionally? Therfore I will euer hereafter highlier eſteeme of that life which hath the promiſe of Gods fauour annexed thereto: and whereas I ſee my ſelfe now frowned vpon by the Lord for my boldnes & wilfulnes in ſtolne liberties taking, and the pleaſures of ſinne, my peace waſted, my ſpirit abated, my faith weakned, my ioy, willingnes to pray, &c. appalled: I will therfore now giue my ſelfe no peace, till I haue ſearched out my ſinnes, repented Note. of my houerly confeſſing them, and my drowſie ſottiſh lying in them: I wil not ceaſe powring out my ſoule to the Lord, that his terrors may aſtoniſh me, and driue me to lay my ſinne to heart, and to bee ſo aſhamed of them, that God may accept my humiliation and ſorrow, and giue me faith to reſt in his promiſe of pardoning and reſtoring me againe. Secondly, let this alſo teach Gods people to indent ſeriouſly with the Lord, to vſe his former bleſſing and old deliuerances paſt thankfully, if they deſire to obtaine new: remembring how God here vpbraides theſe Iſraelites, ſaying: How dare ye come to demaund deliuerance at my hand, hauing ſo ſhamefully abuſed the former?
            In theſe words [goe crie to your gods, &c.] Doth God (thinke we) bid them Verſ. 14. The opening it.
                goe and ſinne? No, in no wiſe: but he ſpeaketh, as he doth oft times in the Scriptures, in another manner then the words ſeeme to meane, which if we marke not, wee ſhall eaſily fall into great errors and abſurditie. It is a moſt grieuous caſting them in the teeth, by an ironicall mocking of them with their Idolatrie: as if he ſhould ſay, Now yee proue and ſee what your gods can doe. As Elias did the like to the prophets of Baal, when he bad them cry aloud to their god Baal: perhaps he is aſleepe (ſaith he, &c.) he did not (all 1. King. 18. 27. may ſo meane) that they ſhould crie to him, but to vrge to marke well what a god they worſhipped.
            Therefore by thus ſpeaking, and bidding them goe ſeeke helpe at their Doct. Idols hands, they hauing ſhaken off the Lord, he teacheth vs (as it ſtandeth with good reaſon) that they whom wee haue ſerued, and committed our ſelues to, muſt pay vs our wages: and to them the Lord iuſtly doth, and will ſend vs to their patronage in our greateſt need, euen to our conuiction and horror, yea deſtruction, if he take vs not, as he did theſe here, to his mercie. Contrariwiſe, but yet according to the ſame equitie our Sauiour anſwered Peter, when he ſaid, that he and his fellowes had forſaken all, and followed Matth. 19. 29. him, and therfore asked him, what they ſhould haue, he ſaid an hundred fold here, and after eternall life.
            They therfore that haue truſted, and ſtill doe in man, and haue made fleſh their arme, ſhall know by experience one day, that they haue truſted to a bruiſed reede. So God will anſwere the workers of iniquitie, that ſerue Satan, Depart from me, I know you not. So let them know whoſe portion is Luke 13. 27.
               
in ſtolne pleaſures of ſinne, that there will come a time when they ſhall be infinitly more better, then euer they were ſweete, and that thereafter they Note. ſhall feele ſmart and ſorrow in full meaſure, when there ſhall be no remedie Reuel. 18. 7. nor redreſſe. So Papiſts ſhall be ſent for helpe to their Pope, Saints, Pardons, Pilgrimages. For God doth threaten all ſuch impenitent ones, who haue caſt him off by their dead workes, that as he neuer did, ſo hee neuer will acknowledge them for his.
            And ſuch patrons they ſhall then finde to bee cold comforters in thoſe torments, which they ſhall feele, as for their other ſinnes, ſo by the remembring how they ſought ſhelter by and from them, vnto whoſe ſeruice in their life time they addicted themſelues. Thus a wiſe parent, guide, or ſuperiour is taught to anſwere a ſcape-thrift and lewd wretch, that hath brought himſelfe into need, priſon, and miſerie; by idleneſſe, gaming, prophanenes, bad companionſhip, and ſuch like doings, when hee ſeekes to them for helpe; thus (I ſay) hee is to anſwere him: Get you to them, to whom, and whoſe counſell ye haue hearkened and followed: who (it may be) are in the ſame miſerie, or worſe then themſelues are in, and therefore vnfit enough to ſuccour or helpe them. And if God manifeſt his nature here, that this ſhall be his anſwere to ſuch as liue after this manner, then let vs learne and conclude, that no man ſhall end well an euill life: this being added, vnleſſed it be changed before by repentance: and therefore that it had been good for ſuch that they had neuer been borne.
            Briefly to conclude this doctrine with ſome other vſes thereof: wee ſee ſecondly by this, that God doth import no leſſe, then that (by the law of like equitie, and by vertue of a farre ſtronger couenant) if this people had perſiſted faithfull in his ſeruice, he could not haue denied their ſuite for help and defence againſt their enemies. Otherwiſe, by what reaſon doth he now ſhake them off, and ſend them to their Idols, whom they had ſerued? except he had meant, that himſelfe would haue beſteadded them, if they had cleaued to him for ſuccour by faith, & attended him by bringing forth the fruit of their confidence, I meane obedience. And what a ſweet prerogatiue is this for which wee haue the expreſſe grant of the King of heauen, that ſo long as we keep a couenant with God, ſo oft we may alſo claime from him (in reuerence be it ſpoken) the libertie of ſonnes and ſeruants, to bee defended and guarded againſt all inward or outward aduerſarie power of our ſaluation?
            This is that approching with confidence to the throne of grace, this is that freedom of ſpirit which calls God father, whether ye reſiſtance be made by ſome luſt, or ſome diuels inſtruments, or the diuel himſelfe: what libertie is this, that a Chriſtian may (with hope which will not make him aſhamed) Rom. 5. 5. pray againſt it, with aſſurance of being heard, euen as Chriſt himſelfe was in that which he beſought his father for? And why? Becauſe he is within the couenant, and therefore warreth againſt all euill, therefore hee may boldly pray for grace againſt it, that he be not foiled: for he is about Gods worke, and the Lord is a louing Maſter, he will not ſee his ſeruant fruſtrated of his hope in his ſeruice.
            Thirdly, theſe words note out this, That it is wiſedome for a man to beſtow his chiefe coſt there, whence hee lookes for beſt recompence, and acknowledgement

in the time of moſt need. The ſteward in his kinde, is commended for this policie: who would ſhew curteſie to ſuch as he knew in a Luk. 16. 4. day of hardneſſe and want, would be readieſt to remember it with thankes and requitall. The contrary folly the Apoſtle to the Romanes taxeth; what fruite had ye of thoſe things whereof yee are now aſhamed? A man is not aſhamed of that labour which hath brought him in plentifull gaine; but of that which anſwers not his coſt and hope. Men that haue runne themſelues Rom. 6. 21. out of breath all their life, groping after a blind happineſſe, in their vnprofitable, ſuperſtitious, prophane courſe; at length ſeeing themſelues deceiued, wiſh they had ſerued a Maſter who might haue ſaued them and receiued them into euerlaſting habitations: But he anſwers them, bidding them go, ſee, if their money will ſaue them (their god) or their luſts (their maſters): as for me, I had none of their ſeruice, neither ſhal they haue any wages frō me. Thus the Lord is faine to vpbraid men (though not by word, ſaying: Go to your Idols, yet in effect, in that he leaueth them ſhiftleſſe) or elſe who ſhould perſwade one of an hundred, that he ſoweth among thornes, or loſeth his labour and coſt, when he caſteth it, and himſelfe away vpon one Idoll (a broken ſtaffe) or other? And the truth is, ſuch a bewitching nature theſe Idols are of, (not Popiſh onely, but ſpirituall alſo, ſet vp in the loue of the heart) that they poſſeſſe their ſeruants with an opinion of fruite, which is to be obtained, (if they could hit vpon it) till at length with other like themſelues, when time and ſtrength, thrift and coſt is all ſpent and waſted, they crye out miſerably, (like theeues at gallowes) they were deceiued: leauing an example for others (if they bee wiſe) to profit by; as for themſelues, neither rule nor example could doe them good, as wofull experience witneſſeth in too many other.
            
               Verſ. 15. And the children of Iſrael ſaid vnto the Lord, Wee haue ſinned, doe thou vnto vs whatſoeuer pleaſe thee: onely we pray thee to deliuer vs this day.
               
               16. Then they put away the ſtrange gods from among them, and ſerued the Lord: and his ſoule was grieued for the miſerie of Iſrael.
               
            
            THe people hauing receiued an hard and ſharpe anſwere of the Lord to them, to wit, that hee would not heare them, laid it neere to heart, and 
                  The ſenſe of verſe 15. 16. cried againe to the Lord (how ſoone after, it is not here expreſſed) confeſſing their ſinnes, caſting away their Idols, (which at their firſt ſuing to God they did not): now in ſtead thereof, they ſerued the Lord, whom they had forſaken, and beſide all this, they ſubmitted themſelues to him, to doe what he would to them, reſting confidently perſwaded of his mercie, and ſo obtained deliuerance, which they had earneſtly ſued for and ſought, out of that preſent calamitie: for the Lord was intreated of them, and granted their deſire.
            Now if it ſeeme ſtrange to any, that in their firſt crying to God, their ſute Doct. ver. 15. 16 was reiected, wee muſt know, that they ſought not to him for it in the vprightneſſe of their hearts, as is ſaid before; and therfore God meant to hold them on the racke, as it were, and not onely to keepe them in ſuſpence, but alſo to hold them in a deepe feare, by denying helpe to them. Secondly, to bring them to a through repentance, as indeed now they did ſhew ſignes of

it, and thoſe alſo effectuall, which they did not before: and for this purpoſe he draue them more throughly to examination of them themſelues, then they had done before. So that we ſee at firſt, they gladly would haue been deliuered, but in the meane while they would not caſt away their Idols and other ſinnes, but would ſtill walke in the waies of their owne hearts. Which ſetteth before vs a common diſeaſe, that is too oft euen in Gods deare children: that in our afflictions we crie to God for mercy and helpe, and faine would haue the puniſhment taken away, but ſo, that we would haue libertie to liue as we did before, and hold faſt our ſinnes ſtill, and abide in them, Note. for they are dearer to vs then our owne fleſh. Euen after this manner many of vs too oft and boldly deale with the Lord: ſo that repentance is hardly attained vnto, no, not euen then, when we are to ſue to the Lord for eaſe in our trouble. As may bee ſeene in Dauid himſelfe in the 32. Pſalme, that it Pſalm. 32. 5. was painefull to him to confeſſe againſt himſelfe: we need not the ſpeech of the people of Anothoth to Ieremie, to preach vnto vs pleaſant things: and againe, that we will not heare the law of this thy Lord: neither to follow Demetrius the ſiluer Smith in the booke of the Actes; for theſe were wicked Actes. 11. 25. both of them. And how did they foile themſelues; they of Anathoth, to retaine their pleaſures; the other to vphold his wicked gaine? But that it ſhould be ſo with vs in any manner, who are of the better ſort, how can it be borne! And yet it may iuſtly be complained of, Oh euen the better ſort of men will not be reformed. Inſomuch, that when affliction is vpon them, of which they would moſt willinglie bee eaſed, yet they cannot be brought to ſee or amend any thing that is amiſſe, becauſe they flatter themſelues, & are great in their owne eies, while their iniquitie is found worthy to be hated. And yet there are worſe then theſe, who murmur vnder their affliction, and doe what they can, to hide their ſinnes.
            And here more particularly, as it is cleare, that this people ſaw they did euil 2 in worſhipping ſtrange Gods, but would not acknowledge it, til God draue them to it by his ſore iudgements: So when we ſee, and will not ſee, how we prouoke him by any of our ſpeciall ſinnes, let vs feare, that he will, if wee will not abhorre, and be weary of them by his inſtructions, and warnings which he giueth vs, that he will (I ſay) bring vs thereto by ſharpe correction. So that the beſt is to iudge our ſelues, that we be not iudged of the Lord.
            But by this, that the Lord ſo hardly vrging this people, they fell to a more ſerious ſearching into themſelues, and ſo came to better ſtate, wee may ſee, that as hardly as Gods people are brought to confeſſe and renounce their ſinnes, hauing fallen, as at ſometimes they haue done; yet when they ſee and feele the hand of God againſt them, and no releaſe nor iſſue of their trouble is ſeene by them; many are drawne thereby to ſorrow and repentance. But when they haue not felt Gods anger kindled againſt them for their ſinnes firſt, they can hardly for the moſt part, abide to be told of them, nor to heare of his iudgements for them, but ſhake them off, if they can poſſibly. But if God doe purpoſe to bring ſuch home; he wil ſo worke in them, that he will make them feele both his threats and his diſpleaſure ſo fierce and ſmarty, that rather then they will ſtill liue vnder the feare thereof, they will run through fire and water to eſcape both, though no other bodily affliction be vpon them.
            
               
Thus many haue been brought home, when the Lord hath tamed and ſubdued them by afflictions, eſpecially inward: for if they rebel not through pride, but ſtoope vnder their burden, there is good hope of them; euen as the high minded, who doe kicke againſt the pricke, and are refractarie and Note. wilfull, doe ſurely come to euill. Now therefore, ſeeing we may find that mercy from God by our afflictions, which we neuer felt before in our proſperitie, why ſhould wee ſtorme at the comming of them, but rather looke for ſome good by them, as the Apoſtle Iames wiſheth vs to doe, when he telleth Iames 1. 2. vs, that it is matter of greateſt ioy, when we fall into many of them?
            And laſtly in this matter, in that they returned to ſerue the Lord, know 4 we that this is the end of all our repentance to ſerue God, with chearefulnes throughout our life, euen as it is a chiefe end of our liuing here, for that to doe is indeed to bring foorth fruit or amendment of life; and when that worke faileth in vs, I meane, that the waies of godlineſſe are not pleaſant vnto vs, let vs know, it is not wel with vs, but that the diuell hath much preuailed Luke 1. 74. againſt vs.
            Now in the next place in theſe two verſes, let vs lay together the ſignes of the peoples repentance, which are theſe fiue. The firſt, their confeſſion; the ſecond, the ſubmitting of themſelues to the will of God; the third, the putting away of their Idols; the fourth, their returne to a godly life; the fifth, their confidence in God, taking no nay, neither making any doubt of his holp
                  •
               . And for our inſtruction, theſe things are here mentioned in this maner, that though they be not all vſually in Scripture expreſſely ſet downe in the repentance of men together, yet other are in ſundry places, as in Ieremie, 
               Ier. 31. 33. 
               Hoſea, &c. and theſe alſo may be found in ſuch as were penitents, if wee will examine the ſtories of ſuch, and ſearch them out. In Hoſea they may bee all Hoſe 14 2 3. 4. Pſal. 
                     •
                  1. 1. 2. 3. Luke 19. 8. found, though not all named: in Dauid alſo, in Zacheus likewiſe. And ſo by them all ioyntly laid together, let vs, whenſoeuer we liſt, looke to approoue our repentance to be ſound and good: but ſeuer wee them not in any wiſe one from the other. For to confeſſe alone without the reſt, may bee an vncertaine teſtimony, as is to be ſeene in Sauls confeſſion, and yet in ſome it is 2. Sam. 12. 13. ſufficient, yea, ſure and good, as in Dauids, when he vttered this bare confeſſion to Nathan, I haue ſinned. But to leaue euill, and doe good, with a reſting on Gods promiſe, and a ſubmitting of ourſelues to his holy will, I ſay all theſe together with confeſſions are ſignes of repentance infallable? euen as on the contrarie a failing in ſome of theſe may eaſily breed queſtion about the ſufficiencie of true repentance, where the Scripture doth not otherwiſe commend it.
            And in that the holy ſtory thus ſetteth it forth, that when the people thus repented, the ſoule of the Lord was grieued for their miſery, euen as he was angrie with them before for their reuolting, it doth admirably commend Gods mercy, as it is oft ſet downe in the Scripture: which is not ſpoken, as Ioel 2. 18. &c. Ionas 4. 2. though God were mooued with affections, but thoſe things which are noted to be in men, are aſcribed to God, and ſo it is ſpoken after the manner of men, euen as they are firſt grieued for the miſery of thoſe whom they pitie, ſo God is ſaid to be grieued for them, receiuing them to mercy.
            So that we may truly ſay, that God exceedeth in mercy towards poore ſinners, that haue ſore prouoked him, when they vnfainedly turne to him.

And as this is true of his affection to them, ſo is it alſo of the fruites of his fauour, as elſewhere I haue noted at large. And to this end is that oft repeated ſaying in Exodus: I the Lord am gratious, ſlow to wrath, ready to forgiue, Exod. 34. 7. and repenting for the euill that I brought vpon them. And as the Lord was wholly theirs, now they repented, notwithſtanding all their former abominations, which blotted out and darkned in them all ſound comfort, and ſo is to all other in their caſe; euen ſo doth he change the eſtate of wofull people by that reconciling them to himſelfe, no otherwiſe then as the foulleſt and moſt tempeſtuous day is vnto the moſt comfortable weather, and conſtant Sun-ſhine. And they need not know what theſe changes meane, but walke in Gods fauour continually, as they doe who continually delight in his law, Prou. 23. 17. and in his feare. But of theſe points from the fifteenth verſe hitherto, I ſpeak briefely, becauſe I haue handled them vpon the like occaſions before, in the ſecond and fourth Chapters of this booke.
         
         
            THE SIXTIE THREE SERMON ON THE TENTH AND ELEVENTH CHAPTERS OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſe 17. Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and incamped in Gilead: and the children of Iſrael aſſembled themſelues together, and incamped in Mizpeh.
                     
                     18. And the people and Princes of Gilead ſaid one to the other, What man is bee that will begin to fight againſt the children of Ammon? he ſhall be head ouer all the inhabitants of Gilead.
                     
                  
                  
                     I In theſe two verſes, being the laſt of this Chapter, (to Verſ. 17. 18. paſſe from the repentance of the people of Iſrael, which I haue ſpoke of) it followeth now, as we may ſee, the Ammonites were not ſatisfied with vexing the people of God, as they had long done, but now they went about to put them to the ſword, and to take their cities and lands from them for their owne. But marke we this: the Lord ſo dealt with his people, and prouided ſo well for them, that they their enemies could neuer goe about it in better time in reſpect of the Iſraelites. For now they had turned to God by repentance, and he had receiued them into his fauor and protection: this cauſed the Lord now to ſtand with him, who before was againſt them, ſo that they did know they had his direction and help to go about to deliuer thēſelues out of their bondage and miſerie. The Ammonites, ſeeing

Gilead was a goodly citie, and richly furniſhed, they laboured and determined firſt of all to deſtroy that: Iſrael was aſſembled in Mizpeh (while the other camped in Gilead) but that was too farre off from aiding the Giliadites their brethren, (who were then beſieged by thoſe Amonites.) Therefore as they were directed by God, they propounded betwixt themſelues, namely, the Princes to the people, that he who would begin the battell againſt the Ammonites, he ſhould be guide to them, and Iudge ouer them. And that they were led hereto by God, it may appeare by this, that the Lord raiſed vp thoſe that were Iudges ouer them, and after confirmed Iphtah in going againſt them.
                  The ſtory being thus laid foorth, I wil here ſtay a little, and ſay ſome thing Doct. verſ. 17. of them, both the Ammonites and Iſraelites. And firſt this: if the children of Ammon had gone about to take the cities and ground of the people of Iſrael into their hands and poſſeſſion, and oppreſſed them by warre, before Iſraels repentance, and turning to God, they might eaſily haue done it, for none of them durſt, or had any heart to reſiſt them, as appeareth in the ſtory: for they ſuffered them to oppreſſe them, till now in the laſt yeere eſpecially, they were ſore diſtreſſed and tormented by them. And beſides; they then had God alſo againſt them. But now after they ſought the Lord in the truth of their hearts; he was now with them, and they were heartned and imboldned to reſiſt, and ſtand againſt them, by the hope they had in him, as wee ſee they did manifeſtly declare. By the which wee may ſee how God keepeth 
                        Doct. out of verſ. 17. 18. Note. many euils and troubles from his deare ſeruants, till hee hath made them fit for them, and them able to goe vnder them: whereas if they had come vpon them before, they had been vtterly ouerwhelmed by them. For as he turneth many afflictions away from them altogether, which they ſaw not how they could auoide, euen ſo hee deferreth many, ſo that they ſhall not touch them, till he hath ſtrengthened their ſhoulders, and put courage into their hearts, and ſo made them able to beare them. And yet he leaueth them not vnexerciſed with one or other more ſmall and eaſie, as he ſeeth it profitable for them, and that they are fit to beare them.
                  But if any of vs well conſider it, we ſhall find that his goodnes hath herein exceeded toward vs, and who can chooſe but ſee it, that at his firſt inlightning of vs by faith, when wee were weake, and might eaſily haue been diſmaide, hee hath kept many of our ſinnes from our ſight, when by thoſe which we ſaw we were hardly kept from deſpaire, and ſundry troubles alſo; which if they had appeared to vs, when as yet wee were nothing able to heare of them, much leſſe to beare them, they would haue ſwallowed vs vp, Note. and haue driuen vs to vtter deſperation. And as this is true, we vnderſtand it of our firſt conuerſion, or after; euen ſo is it alſo with vs throughout our whole life. He ſpareth vs, to the end we may be better incouraged to ſerue him faithfully in that which we know, that ſo afterward we may be fit to ſee more, both of our ſinnes, and alſo to take part of the afflictions which abide vs. Euen as wee vſe our children tenderly, while they bee young, but after they be growne vp, we ſet them to worke, and ſhew them that they muſt labour, and ſuffer ſome hardneſſe, they being now better able to goe vnder it.
                  Thus did the Lord cal backe Saul from the purſuit of Dauid, when it was 1. Sam. 23. 27.
                     
likely that he could not haue eſcaped his hands if he had been let alone. So when Naſhaſh the King of Ammon might eaſily haue deſtroyed the Giliadites at the firſt onſet, while they were vnarmed: the Lord ſtopt him, and cauſed him to hearken to a needleſſe condition, whereby the time being 1. Sam. 10. protracted, they had helpe ſent them in the meane ſeaſon, and ouerthrew them. In this kind of dealing the Lord reſembles a friendly perſon, who ſpying a furious enemy comming fiercely with weapon againſt his neighbour, vnarmed and vnprouided to meet him, ſtayeth the rage of the one, till the other haue got himſelfe arm or fit to encounter him, or may eſcape his hands, or when hee hath done ſo, he commits them together, knowing that the innocent partie hauing the better cauſe, will eaſily foile the doer of wrong. Thus the Lord often doth, although when he ſeeth his time, he can alſo either quite diuert the enemy, as he did the King of Aſhur from comming againſt weake Ieruſalem: or elſe take his peoples part (as Moſes did the Iſraelites Exod. 2. 12. againſt the Egyptian) and fight for them while they ſtand ſtill and looke on. So he did to Pharao and Zenacherib. Now when the Lord reſerues his people till ſuch a time of ſtrength and courage, not ſuffering (as I may ſo ſay) the Canaanites to come vpon his people, (being weake through their late circumciſion) it is a greater fauour, then if he remoued their triall wholly from them: for in this, they haue onely proofe of Gods goodneſſe: but in the other, they haue (beſide that) a triall of their faith and grace more precious then gold; which triumpheth, hauing got the victory ouer the enemy, whether ſpirituall or earthly. Thomas Bilney a godly man, during his impriſonment, had a ſtrong aſſault giuen him by his owne fleſh againſt the paine of the fire, which he feared he ſhould not be able to endure. And who knoweth what he would haue done, if the triall had been hotteſt, when hee was weakeſt? But the Lord ſo ſuited the time, that when fire was put to him, he that feared the foile, of weake became ſtrong (Heb. 11.) and ouercame Heb. 11. 34. the fire, by yeelding his whole body to waſt it, whereas his finger could not before abide the candle. It is a great grace therefore to beleeue, that (as the Apoſtle implieth) God wil keepe from vs ſuch afflictions as we are not fit to 1. Cor. 10. 13 Note. honour him in, but liker to be ouercome of our corruption, and betray our cauſe. If any obiect the foiles of diuers ſeruants of God, preuented and taken vnawares by ſtrong trials, as Cranmer in the firſt aſſault of his enemies forced to yeeld to that which he ought not, &c. Let ſuch know, God hath a diuers end of a diuers method: and teacheth men humbleneſſe, and knowledge of themſelues by ſuch aſſaults as they cannot anſwer, to the end that they may be abler for thoſe trials afterward, hauing renounced themſelues, and got firmer hold vpon the alſufficiencie of God, without whoſe protection Note. they are weake, as other men. Now then let men beware how they abuſe this dealing of God to their owne hurt. For ſeeing God by this holding off, and forbearing of trials which wee could not beare, doth require both exceeding thanks, vpon ſerious recording of this manner of his dealing with vs from time to time: as alſo a growing daily in ſtrength to ſuffer greater troubles hereafter, (a grace not common:) how groſſely do they inuert Note. and abuſe this purpoſe of God, who make no other vſe of his ſparing and dandling them in the lap and armes, but to weare out the feare or expectation of affliction altogether? whereby the longer they are free, the weaker

they are to ſuffer? What difference in this point, will ye make betwixt theſe and ſuch, as to whom affliction is euer vnwelcome and intolerable? I meane the vngodly? Let all Chriſtians beware (therefore) of this ſoftneſſe and tenderneſſe.
                  Furthermore, we haue heard in the ſeuenth & eighth verſe, that the Philiſtims 
                        Doct. 2. Verſ. 17. 18. and the Ammonites ſore vexed Iſrael eighteene yeeres: and in all that time they neuer durſt take vp weapon againſt them, vntill they repented; but then they began with good courage to reſiſt them, and aſſembled themſelues againſt them. By the which, it may be noted, what liberty and courage true repentance bringeth with it. The reaſon is this: when men in their conſcience ſee, that they haue dealt trecherouſly with God, and haue nouriſhed and followed the deſires of their owne hearts, contrary to that they knew they ſhould haue done, they haue no hope in him at ſuch times, neither feele any heart or ſtrength in themſelues to deale againſt their enemies either ghoſtly or bodily.
                  This is that plague that God threatneth in Leuiticus, that his people Leuit. 26. 17. ſhould not be able to ſtand before their enemies, if they ſinned againſt him: and in the fifth Chapter of this booke, it is ſaid, when Iſrael had prouoked Iudges 5. 8. the Lord, there was no heart in them to ſtand againſt thoſe that held them in bondage. So that wee ſee, how ſinne diſguiſeth men, and how prepoſterouſly it cauſeth things to goe with them, when they are inchanted and carried away with the allurements and pleaſures of it. Which prooueth the contrary to be true, to wit, that the ſeruice of God is perfit freedome: and that it is faith and godlineſſe which onely giue courage and boldneſſe as to a Lyon by well doing. And ſeeing it cannot be denied, that no bondage is like this to be bondmen to our luſts, let all looke to receiue from God both reward and puniſhment in this life, and hereafter accordingly as in their liues they haue ſought either of both. See Iudges 5. 8. and the notes vpon it.
                  This order that the people tooke for the chooſing of their Gouernour, Doct. 3. verſe 17. 18. was by the Lords direction, as we may after ſee by his confirming it, in ſending his ſpirit vpon Iphtah: He did it as by an outward incouragement, to ſtirre them vp to fight againſt their enemies. Euen as he did the like by Caleb: who incouraged the people by the like meanes in ſuch a like caſe, ſaying, in a difficultie of winning a Citie, Hee that taketh it, to him will I giue Iudges 1. 12. 
                     Achſah my daughter to wife: which though the people ought to haue done, I meane, to fight againſt Gods enemies for his commandements ſake onely, yet they had neede of ſpurres, and were the better drawne on by ſuch incouragements. Euen as Magiſtrates and Miniſters owe duty of conſcience to God in their place to beate downe ſinne, and aduance the Goſpell: but yet they are the better heartned thereto, when both ſorts are incouraged by the high Magiſtrate, and the Miniſter beſide, by the readineſſe of the people to their dutie. And ſo euery other in his place ſhall be better ſet forward in well doing, by temporary incouragements, though Gods commandement be the ſtrongeſt motiue. So husbands and wiues ſhould liue kindly together by bond and promiſe each to other for conſcience ſake; but yet they doe this much better, when each reſpecteth the other, by yeelding mutually that which they owe each 
                        ••
                      other.
               
            
            
               
               THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE Booke of Iudges.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Then Gilead begat Iphtah: and Iphtah the Gileadite was a valiant man, but the ſonne of an harlot.
                  
                  2. And Gileads wife bare him ſonnes, and when the womans children were come to age, they thruſt out Iphtah, and ſaid to him, Thou ſhalt not inherit in our fathers houſe: for thou art the ſonne of a ſtrange woman.
                  
                  3. Then Iphtah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; and there gathered to Iphtah idle fellowes, and went out with him.
                  
               
               IN this Chapter the perſon is mentioned, who ſhould goe before the people 
                     The ſumme and parts 4. of Iſrael in the warre againſt Ammon. And the ſumme of this Chapter with the parts (which are foure) is here further ſet downe to be this. Firſt, the calling of Iphtah is mentioned vnto the 12. verſe. The ſecond part is, how he ſeekes to appeaſe the Ammonits by meſſengers, moouing them by reaſons to deſiſt from warre, but all in vaine, to verſ. 29. The third part containeth the ouerthrow of the Ammonites by Iphtah to verſ. 36. The fourth ſheweth what fell out after; and particularly how hee performed his vow which he had made to God (if he might get the victory) in verſ. 32. and this is to the end of the Chapter.
               Now to come to the firſt part, before Iphtah became their Guide and The firſt part. Captaine, it is ſhewed how vnlikely it was that he ſhould be ſo: therefore he is deſcribed in the firſt verſe, to haue been the ſonne of an harlot; who (ordinarily) might be admitted to no ſuch place. In the ſecond and third verſe it is ſhewed how his brethren did therefore (whether through pride and ſcorne or emulation or both) expell him out of their fathers houſe, ſo that he was faine to flie into another land, and ſomuch the more hee was vnlike to be gouernour. And yet God ſo brought it to paſſe by his prouidence, that the Princes of Gilead, euen ſuch as had driuen him away, were conſtrained to ſend for him againe, euen him among all other, (whom they had baniſhed from their fellowſhip,) to bee their guide, according to their decree made in the former Chapter, to wit, ſeeing he had of all other begun warre with the Ammonites: and ſo vpon agreement betwixt him and them, hee yeelded to them, and the Lord ouer-ruling the action he was elected Iudge ouer them, and this to the 12. verſe.
               Now of theſe more particularly, as they lie in order. And firſt how he is deſcribed, namely, in theſe two points. One, that hee was the ſon of an harlot, The firſt verſe. being the ſonne of Gilead. the other, that he was yet a valiant man, and of great courage, and fit for warre. So that by the firſt he was baſely accounted of, as he was baſe borne; by the laſt, he came to good eſtimation and credit among men, as he well deſerued.
               For the firſt, whereas Gilead, the father of Iphtah tooke to him an harlot beſide his lawfull wife, we ſee, he did not obey the commandement of the Lord in Deuteronomy, to wit, that there ſhould be no whore in Iſrael. And Deut. 23. 2. if it be demanded, why God forbad ſuch as were borne in baſtardie to enter into the congregation of the Lord, that is, to beare any office in the Church, it was not forbidden, for that the man ſo borne was worſe then others but

that the people might know, how greatly God abhorred whoredome, and this was but a iudiciall conſtitution appertaining to the Iewes. And in that Iphtah ſo borne, was yet ſet in authoritie ouer the people, (which thing God forbad) we muſt know, that hee made not that law to himſelfe, but for the Iewes, that it ſhould not be lawfull for them to preferre any ſuch, but as for himſelfe, who hath authoritie to call him into queſtion for that which hee doth.
               Now for inſtruction, we ſee here by this that Iphtah was begotten of an Doct. verſ. 1. harlot, that the law of God (forbidding that there ſhould bee any whore in Iſrael) was not obeyed, euen as before wee haue heard of Gedeon his concubine: whereby we ſee, how little Gods law is, and hath been regarded in all ages of many, whether this one law, or what other of his ſoeuer wee vnderſtand it of. As for this, of and againſt whoredome, that it was neuer more common then in this age, woful experience proues it to be too true, ſo that there want now no ſuch offenders more then in former times: I may truly ſay, in number they farre exceed them, as if the antiquitie of corrupt example in this kinde, were enough to licenſe men to continue it ſtill. And ſo it is in all other kindes of ſinne, verifying to the full the Apoſtles prophecie to Timothy, that in the latter daies ſhall come perilous times: for men ſhall be 2. Tim. 3. 1. louers of themſelues, couetous, proud, boaſters, and infected with diuers other ſinnes. And for this cauſe commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of diſobedience: and no marueile that wee haue many plagues, ſeeing God is not obeyed almoſt in any thing. And ſo may euery one particularly ſay to himſelfe, as he is moſt obedient, ſo ſhall his bleſſing be. And as this ſin in any man had been bad enough, ſo in Gilead a great man, and who ſhould haue puniſht it in others rather, (being the father of a familie) what a reproch was it? Euen as in Dauid, in Sampſon, in Iuda, and in Reuben. For alas, when a meane perſon ſees the commandement of God to be of no greater force, then that euery great man is bold to diſpenſe with it, he growes to thinke it but a ſcare-crow, and ſaith boldly (as the ſtrumpet in the Prouerbs) Tuſh, tis but a trick of truth. But for ſuch tricks of youth the Lord in wrath deſtroyed 24. thouſand of Iſrael. Yea when the great enemie of the Church Balaam being fruſtrate of his curſed attempt againſt Iſrael, (for they are curſed Numb. 24. 9. who can finde in their heart to curſe Gods people) ſought how to bring an equiualent plague vpon the Congregation, he could inuent no more fit and miſchieuous a plot, then to intice them to vncleanneſſe with the Moabitiſh women, and to Idolatrie with their heatheniſh gods. Therefore how great a iudgement of God hangs ouer this land for the luſt of the eye, (a maine branch whereof is filthines) and the vnlimitted luſt of all ſorts, (eſpecially in places of darkneſſe) wee can more eaſily coniecture, then perſwade them that are guiltie, to redreſſe it. Oh it is lamentable that ſuch ſpots of our Note. aſſemblies are ſuffered boldly to ſpit in the face of modeſtie, and to hold vp their heads aloft, as hauing the better end of the ſtaffe, I meane greater aduantage againſt their accuſers (commonly) then they againſt them. How ſhould this moue vs to ſue to the Lord, that ſuch ſhould be noted and ſhamed for inordinate perſons, that the reſt may blanke and feare by their example, and ſo the anger of the Lord be ſtaied, as once it was by the zeale of Phiniees, for the Lords cauſe, thruſting thorow Zimri and Cozbi for their Numb. 25. 8.
                  
ſhamefull abomination. So ſhould the word preached be more forcible, when the tranſgreſſors ſhould ſee the price of their boldnes; and ſo ſhould the law of the Magiſtrate take better effect, and not become ridiculous. And ſo ſhould not we feare that plague which Iehu denounceth vpon Iehoram (ſaying, What peace?) ſeeing the abominations and whoredomes of 2. King. 9. 22. thy mother Iezabel are ſtill in great number. Of which I ſay the leſſe, becauſe I haue noted it as the fruite of all ſinne as well as this, in the former parts of this booke. Onely I ſay, if the vngodly ſort will not take the Lords bridle to reſtraine their fleſh from this lewd courſe, (for adulteries, as our Sauiour notes, are the breakings out of the filthie heart, euen as the ſores and ſcabs Note. of the body are the fruites of a corrupted blood) then let the people of God learne this dutie, euen to poſſeſſe their veſſels in holineſſe, to keepe themſelues vnſpotted and pure, and to preſerue their bodies and ſpirits in chaſtnes, except they wil make of the temple of the holy Ghoſt, a ſtie of vncleane and loathſome luſt, fit to driue the ſpirit of God away. And otherwiſe the Lord ſhall ſet a marke vpon them, worſe then the brand of a theeſe, euen a marke of infamie, which I dare not promiſe that repentance it ſelfe ſhall quite waſh off, while they liue, but that the ſtaine ſhall ſtill continue. For this ſinne is of a ſcarlet dye, as Dauid ſpeakes, Pſal. 51. Pſal. 51. 2.
               
               Now to end this verſe, by that it is ſaid that Iphtah was a valiant man, we 
                     The re
                           ••
                        ant of verſe 1. muſt know that in thoſe times of warre, courage and valiantnes was a gift much ſet by and of good vſe. So that though he had a blemiſh vpon him in that he was the ſonne of an harlot, (which was not his ſinne) yet the Lord couered it (as I may ſay) with this excellent gift of fortitude, that made him much deſired. It was a croſſe to him (all may ſee) that hee was thus abaſed, and yet if he had not been vnder that, or ſome other ſuch chaſtizement, it had been like he ſhould haue been a worſe man, and in greater danger. For ſuch blemiſhes in the body, are occaſions through Gods worke, to turne the 
                     Doct. 2. minde to better matters, and to bring it in loue with them, and to hold from the partie greater troubles thereby.
               As we reade of Mephiboſheth, Ionathans young ſonne, that he being lame 2. Sam 9. 3. 2. Sam. 2 9. on his feete, could not reſiſt Dauid, as Iſhboſheth his vncle did, (to his great toyle and little preuailing) but liued peaceably in the Kings fauour and fed at his table: and how could he haue been in better ſtate? whereas if he had enioyed his limmes at libertie, it is hard to ſay whether hee would not haue been ſtirring, and taking part with Iſhboſheth to his owne ouerthrow: which had bin very like to haue befalne him, whē 
                  Abner forſook him, if he had not bin preuented by violent death. Thus doth the Lord (as Paul ſpeaks) clothe 1. Cor. 12. 23. the more vnſeemly parts with moſt honour. And in our experience many worthie men for their excellent parts (both in Church and Commonwealth) haue yet had their deformities. One among the reſt of late and godly memory, Maſter Perkins that worthy inſtrument, being lame of his hand, teſtified often, that his defect was the occaſion of his training vp to learning: as being vnfit thereby for other employment. Wherein Gods admirable prouidence appeared, in making him lame, that his blemiſh might be an occaſion of doing good to the Church. Indeed the common ſpeech is, that Nature noteth ſome men, for their ſiniſter and notorious qualities: (by how much the rather all ſuch had need pray much and vſe good meanes to

rectifie and perfect their inner man, and purge out their corruption, leſt this imputation be iuſtly caſt vpon them) but wee muſt know that God hath a further ſtroke then Nature, and laieth his hand vpon many, that hee might be glorified by them, and ſhew his workes on them, as (in a ſenſe ſomewhat diuers) our Sauiour ſpeakes of the blind man, Ioh. 9 So that ſuch as are notable Ioh. 9. 3. for their grace and gifts, as the other are notorious. Naturally we pitie ſuch as are deafe, lame, blinde, and we doe well, (for it is the part of a curſed Cham to deride ſuch) but the Lord oft turnes pitie into admiration, yea and condemnes by ſuch, the ſhamefull vnthankfulnes of them who haue no bodily blemiſhes, but inwardly are tainted with all that naught is. God had done his part (to vſe the phraſe) one way to Abſolon, who had not a wemme from top to toe, but who had a more diſguiſed ſoule then that faire bodie carried within it? Euen as we ſee, the compleatnes of many a mans perſon, drawes by degrees to the halter: many a womans beautie makes her a ſtrumpet. Whether then of the two is more to be deſired, a copper ring with a precious Iewell ſet in it, or a golden with a common peble?
               While many children haue their parents liuing with them, (who are their glorie) how bold, ſawcie, and lewdly diſpoſed are they, ſo that they were better vnborne. And other in the meane while, being depriued of their parents, which chaſtizement is nothing vnferiour to a blemiſh or ſcarre; how haue they been driuen to liue vnder good gouernment, and in good order?
               For vſe hereof, let vs not wonder, though the Lord mixe troubles with bleſſings, and (as I may ſay) blemiſhes with beauties, wants with perfections. Paul lifted vp to the third heauen, was not ſo ſafe as being buffeted. A little 2. Cor. 12. 7. abaſement may preuent the greateſt of all, yea I ſay, that ſome chaſtizement laid vpon vs by the Lord, doth keepe vs oft times from periſhing in the 1. Cor. 11. 32. world, and ſo ſickneſſe and pouertie doe take heart from ſinning, whereas health and wealth imbolden thereto. Therefore if thine affliction come from the Lord, (I meane when no apparent cauſe of thy drawing it on thy ſelfe can be ſeene, and ſo as thou ſuffereſt not for euill dealing) waite for ſome ſpeciall good to come thereby vnto thee, and to that end, labour to make vſe of it.
               And if it bee an hindering of thy bodily commoditie by loſſe, diſeaſe, Note. paine, and ſuch like, looke that it be to the benefit of thy ſoule, and that thou haue a rich and large ſupplie that way, for ſo the Lord is wont to deale with his: and that to the end they may ſee cauſe to ſay as Dauid did, it is good for vs that we haue been afflicted. It was ſometime the ſpeech of a vertuous Pſal. 119. 71. and religious gentlewoman, well exerciſed in Gods nurture, that if there had falne to her any hard trouble, and heauy croſſe, (as there did many) ſhe did confidently looke for ſome great bleſſing more then ordinarie, which was for the moſt part ſome addition of new grace, or a quickning of the old. And Saint Paul ſaith the ſame in other words, that as God ſendeth our afflictions Rom. 8. 28. Note. for our good, euen ſo we ſhould looke for them to be to vs; which if we did they ſhould not be ſo vnwelcome to vs as now they be, nor ſo diſcontentedly borne and gone vnder, as commonly and for the moſt part they are.
               For the blemiſh of his baſtardie, wee heard how his brethren thruſt him Verſ. 2. out, which was an vniuſt and cruell dealing with him. For what had hee

done? and as for their fathers ſhame which they raiſed therby, they ought to haue couered it, as they had bin able, rather then to haue reuiued it. And who ſeeth not that the ſonne for his part had ſorrow enough in that he was ſo branded with diſgrace for it, ſo that there was ſmal cauſe that his brethren ſhould adde more affliction vnto it.
               By the ſhamefull fact of them, here we are taught to beware that wee doe Doct. not deſpiſe any in their affliction, being baſe, meane and contemptible for the ſame commonly in the world, and eſpecially if there bee any good parts and gifts of God in them, whereby they may bee like to bee profitable to Church or Common-wealth. Yea and without reſpect of this alſo, for becauſe Chriſt died for them and they are our brethren. For we are taught of God how to carrie our ſelues toward thē, though the wicked will be taught by nothing. We learne in the Pſalme, that he is happie that iudgeth wiſely Pſal. 41. 1. of the afflicted, and that wee ſhould pitie them, and mourne with them that mourne. And in ſuch caſes it were our wiſedome to put the caſe, and ſuppoſe; what if ſuch affliction and abaſement were caſt vpon our ſelues, would we not deſire to be pitied and regarded? And beſides this, we haue learned, that iudgement ſhall be to the hard hearted and mercileſſe, and that without Iames 2. 13. mercie. And therefore to adde ſorrow to their bands, who are alreadie wrapped deeply therein, as it is a great ſinne, ſo it threatens to the committers, that they ſhall not goe vnpuniſhed, but receiue the like meaſure themſelues at Gods hands for their ſo doing. And ſometime they ſuffer the like diſgrace and harme at their hands to whom they offered the iniurie. For when God lifteth vp their heads out of aduerſitie, whom they haue abuſed and done the wrong vnto, (though they thought that they being once downe, ſhould no more get vp againe and recouer) they take ſtomacke and reuenge the iniury that was done them much more eagerly. As Ioſeph might haue done to his brethren, (their owne conſciences being witneſſes, when he was aduanced) for their vnnaturall dealing with him in his meane eſtate, and would moſt certainly haue done ſo indeed, if the feare of God had not Gen 50. 17. ſtaied him.
               But although there were no feare of any ſuch reuenge to come by pitileſſe dealing with others; yet this were enough to diſſwade a true Chriſtian from it, yea and from any hard meaſure offering to any brother liuing by him, how meane ſoeuer; that (beſide other inconueniences) by ſo doing, hee ſhould bring himſelfe into an hard conceit with him, and ſo hee ſhould neuer after bee able to doe him good by counſell and good inſtruction, exhortation, or comfort, as the other ſhould ſtand in need of it. And that hope no ſeruant of God ſhould loſe, (eſpecially the Miniſter, it being Note. ſo precious a thing to helpe ſaue a ſoule) to wit, to harden the heart of the meaneſt againſt him by vnchriſtian handling of him, that he ſhould therefore refuſe to take any good by him afterward. And yet I do not for all this, ſay, that we muſt tolerate and winke at any in their ſinnes and euils.
               In great perſons ſometimes crueltie and wrong is ſhrouded vnder the name of policy. For when as (according to the rule of their maſter Machiauel) they ſeeke to bring vnder and diſcredit their corriuals and men of equall worthineſſe, or it may be (better then themſelues) they practiſe this principle, When he is going, downe with him; if he riſe vp after he be ſunke, if he be

comming vp the hill againe whence he is fallen, ſinke him againe, thruſt him backward, tread vpon him, that hee get vp no more. Thus dealt Daniels aduerſaries in the Court of Darius: Thus dealt the enemies of Dauid in Sauls Court. And there be many petie and lower kinds of this iniurie among inferiours: as when the heire of the deceaſed or inteſtate partie (hauing the ſtroke in his hand) defraudeth both mother and brethren of their inheritance and portion, dominering ouer them, and driuing them to vnequall conditions, or elſe to endleſſe and bootleſſe ſuites. So the like may be ſaid, when men mocke others euen for their affliction, (which ſecretly vpbraideth them of it ſelfe) as crookednes, blindnes, &c. of which more (God willing) ſhall bee ſaid hereafter in his due place. In the meane time, let theſe conſider the reward of mocking ſuch, in the example of thoſe Bethelites, 2. King. 2. (being but children) and of thoſe Philiſtims how they ſmarted, 2. King. 2. 23. that made Sampſon their may-game (and yet but Heathens) what ſhall be the portion of Chriſtians, and men of diſcretion then thinke we?
               The law had dealt ſeuerely againſt Iphtah, thruſting him out of the publique place of worſhip: But theſe thought that not enough, except they draue him alſo out of the number of the people of God amōg Meſhec and Kedar, I meane Infidels. Let Dauid ſpeake what a bitter puniſhment this is: who ſaith to Saul, Curſed be they who haue caſt me out from the inheritāce 1. Sam. 26. 29. of the Lord. To returne therfore, woe be to him that curſeth the innocent: but double woe to him that addeth affliction to the Lords affliction. If Iſhmael were curſed for mocking Izhak: doubly accurſed were thoſe Babylonians, Gen. 21. 9. 10. who ſeeing Ieruſalems ruine, cried, Downe with it, downe with Pſal. 137. 7. it, race it to the ground. As haileſtones vpon the ripe eares of corne are vnſeaſonable: and as the putting out of that mans eye who hath but one, that ſo he may be vtterly blinde, is cruell: ſo is the adding of ſorrow to the heauie hearted. This cauſed the Lord to make this law to the Iewes: Grieue not the ſtranger: it is enough for him that he is from his place, and euen that Exod. 22. 21. alone makes him ſad in heart. Let the rule of the Apoſtle conclude this: Reioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that weepe: remembring thy ſelfe, and doing as thou wouldeſt haue others do to thee. For who ſeeing his neighbours houſe on fire in one place, wil take ſome of the brands Rom. 12. 15. and ſet it on fire in other places that it may be quite deſtroyed?
               Now followeth the third verſe, wherein wee ſee, that by his brethrens Verſe 3. hard dealing with him, he was faine to flie whither he could for ſhelter, euen thither among ſtrangers, where he might haue miſcaried altogether, if God had not greatly regarded him. Whereby wee may ſee, that the iniurie and oppreſſion of ſome cauſeth the innocent to vndergoe much hardneſſe. A thing that may long enough be complained of, before any one of many ſo offending, will amend it. Great cries and complaints are heard euery where of the inferiours and vnderlings, what wrong and hard meaſure is offered them by the mightie, or ſuch as haue power ouer them, as pitileſſe Land-lords, and ſuch as haue men at aduantage, who when they are put to their ſhifts for money, make them take it vp on conditions that vndoe them, with ſuch exactions as they were as good flea the skinne from their bodies. So vngodly parents, who labouring to raiſe ſome one of their children, and caſting off the reſt, compell them to ſeeke their fortunes (as they prophanely

ſpeake) and driue them to extremities. Alſo ſtepfathers and mothers, and cruell maſters and dames, may be reckoned here among many doers of iniury, for I can giue but two or three inſtances among many, leſt I ſhould bee tedious; let the reſt in other kinds be conſidered by theſe. Theſe with cruell dealing, as depriuing them of neceſſaries, and laying heauy burthens vpon them, cauſe the poore orphans and vnderlings to runne away, as Eſau did Iacob, and being ſhiftleſſe, to ſtarue or miſcarrie. And euen ſuch is the dealing of the reſt, who are cruell and void of mercie. Let them take warning: for if the poore and oppreſſed crie in the eares of the Lord, they ſhall bee heard, and ſhall pay to the full, for the iniury which they haue offered. I would be loth to do the leaſt wrong; for God will make it come againſt him that ſhal be bold thus to prouoke him, and grieue his neighbour, when it ſhall ſting as a Serpent, and be deadly vnwelcome.
               It were a wiſe part for a man to iudge of his ſinne, as he iudgeth of the many dangerous effects that follow vpon it. But who ſeeth it an abſurd vnſeemely thing in the wealthy, to play the Lords and controllers ouer the baſer and poorer ſort? Not being content to make them their drudges and ſlaues to doe their meaneſt workes: but both in word and deed taking liberty to vſurpe ouer them, as if they had been only made for them to crow ouer? Sometimes rating them with reproches, nick-names, vpbraiding them by their pouerty, (which is to deſpiſe their maker) other whiles making a pray of them, and racking them for the poore commodities they buy, whereas yet for their worke, they will driue them to the loweſt wages that may be, as hard as times are, and all things deare and chargeable, which the poore ſtandeth in need. But now when the worme troden vpon, turneth againe, and draweth out the onely weapon it hath, the tongue I meane, to reuile and raile moſt diſdainefully vpon the rich, for their miſfortunes and oppreſſion, then I ſay euery wealthy perſon can ſay, this is odious. And ſo it is indeed: but was not their dealing as bad which prouoked them? They doe badly, but by them God will teach the wealthy how to conſider wiſelie of the eſtate of the poore. Therefore when men being exaſperate, turne to ſhifting, euery man can ſpeake againſt them: but who conſiders the greatneſſe of their ſinne who vrge them? The law of neceſſitie (we know) is hard to vndergoe. And when theſe ſhifters turne vpon their oppreſſors, not only with tongue, but with hand alſo, reioycing in ſtealing and purloyning from them, doe not then all crie out and complaine of the dammage they ſuſtained? And yet their ſtealing was cauſed by the others robbery: onely the one being a rich theefe ſtole openly, the other for feare in ſecret: and defends himſelfe by this, That he hath but robbed him, that firſt ſtole from himſelfe. Indeed it is Gods mercy, that (oppreſſion of the poore being ſo riſe, as who ſeeth not that all the gripings wherewith one rich perſon oppreſſeth another, are in the vpſhot wrecked vpon the pooreſt, who can worſt make his part good?) that there is ſo little harme done in this kind: and in great part the cauſe is in the good gouernment ciuill which reſtraineth ſuch. But if we ſhould reade or heare of the diſorders of other places (wanting ſetled order and execution of law) it would amaze vs, and teach vs to practiſe that equitie and moderation of mind towards our inferiors, which might preuent ſuch ill meaſure at their hands, or rather Gods hand who will reuenge it.
               
                  
For all this hardneſſe that Iphtah ſuſtained at their hands, yet this is worth the noting, that God prouided for him in a ſtrange countrie, where he was able to maintaine diuers that reſorted to him, and to frame them to fight againſt the enemies of God. And thus the Scripture is verified, that when Doct. 2. verſ. 3. father and mother forſake, the Lord taketh vp. As he dealt with Ioſeph, Heſter, Mordecay, and many others. And this protection of his, if it reached only to the maintaining of ſuch needy and diſtreſſed perſons in their bodily neceſſities, and temporary ſorrowes, it were much: but to bring them alſo Note. into fauour with himſelfe, that in ſo wicked a world they may bee weaned from the defilements of it, and that in better ſort then many thouſands, who haue father and mother to bring them vp, this is no leſſe then admirable. Oh therefore what madneſſe is there in them, and how are they to be pitied, who in the multiplicitie of dangers and miſeries that ſwarme euery where, cling not nor cleaue neerevnder Gods wing, where only ſafetie is to be found and enioyed? And yet where they ſeeke it any other way, they haue got that which will not ſtand by them, if they get any thing, and yet their account is to come.
               Now although this be a priueledge of the faithfull, onely to haue God their prouider for, and vpholder, yet euery hang-by catcheth the ſpeech by the end, and ſaith, I hope God will prouide for me aſwell as he hath done, &c. Wheras yet, neither haue they any faith to beleeue it, nor grace to beare their croſſe, when they fall into any vnlooked for extremitie: no, nor yet applie themſelues vnto any ſuch meanes (as through Gods bleſſing) may giue hope of ſufficiencie. How can a man ſhift and vſe bad courſes to maintaine himſelfe, and yet (in truth) ſay, he beleeues God will prouide? For firſt he beleeues no further then he ſees how he can bring his deſire to paſſe, (which is not faith) and (which is worſe) he vſes vnlawfull meanes, whereas God makes no promiſe, but to the obeyer of his commandement, but curſeth wicked practizes. Iphtah here was prouided for: But how? Firſt, God gaue him a gift of valour aboue others, and then taught him how to ſet his gift on worke to good purpoſe, and ſo (beleeuing that God would not be wanting) he obtained the fruit of his labour. Now this is not the courſe which all ſuch take, as yet with great confidence will profeſſe. They doubt not, but God will feede them, hauing giuen them a mouth, and clothe them, hauing giuen them a body, yea and ſaue them too, ſeeing bee hath made them. Theſe hopes are blind hopes, neither is faith the parent of them, nor contentation and thanks the fruite of them, when they enioy their deſires, much leſſe patience and depending vpon God, when they are fruſtrate, as often they are.
               In this verſe a further thing then wee haue yet heard, is laid out. For by 
                     More in verſ. 3. Gods prouidence, Iphtah had ſet theſe men that reſorted to him, who were needie, hee had, I ſay, ſet them againſt the Ammonites, and they carried away from them what they could get. And in the meane while, they warring againſt Iſrael, and namely Gilead, a great and wealthie citie, the Princes of Gilead had agreed among themſelues with the people, that hee who firſt began warre with the Ammonites, ſhould be their Captaine and guide to rule ouer them. And thus it came to paſſe, that they ſent for him, I meane Iphtah, to intertaine him for their Captaine, whom before they had caſt

out from among them as hath been ſaid.
               Now here in the end of the third verſe, where it is ſaid, that hee vſed the Doct. 2. verſ. 3. ſeruice of certaine wandering fellowes, who (it appeares) had no dwelling place conſtant, and ſet them on worke againſt Gods enemies, (for how could they haue been better employed?) as Dauid alſo did: we learne that 1. Sam. 25. 7. ſuch as are idle, needy and without imployment, ſhould▪ brought by the wiſdome and godly care of men, as the Magiſtrate 
                     〈…〉
                  , and ranged within compaſſe, vnto ſome worke profitable, and to the maintaining of themſelues, and putting them out of their idle courſe. For ſuch vagrant perſons waite but to doe miſchiefe.
               So then, theſe are neither to be caſt off altogether for their bad qualities, (but pitied and relieued in their miſery) nor yet too much nouriſhed and harboured in houſes or townes, but (by them that are religious, and make conſcience themſelues of ſpending their time) whether Gentlemen (who entertaine many into their houſes that are ſhiftleſſe when they are out of office) or others, and their gift that is in any of them, as of wit, courage, or skill, &c. is to be wiſely directed to the fitteſt and moſt profitable obiect, leſt it breake out to outrage, being not gouerned. And this being done be times? labour and exerciſe (by habit and vſe) will be more welcome then idlenes, beſides the cutting off of much ſinne, both againſt God and man. Whereas for the want of this prouident care, wee ſee that many growing vp to mans eſtate, in the practiſe of leaudneſſe and licentiouſneſſe, waxe impudent and incorrigible, filling the Church with noyſome example and offence, and the Common-wealth with theft and beggery. But I will not repeate that which I haue ſaid of this before, chap. 9. 3.
               Much good hath been done of late yeeres to diminiſh the number of ſuch, and to cut them off from a rogueiſh life, by enioyning them to labor: and if it were not croſſed, I meane this good order, by the fooliſh pity of ſome, who incourage them to continue this begging and idle life, by giuing reliefe to them, rather then to the needy that dwell by them; much more good might yet be enioyed thereby. And further, they who take ſuch into their ſeruice, or being able, ought ſo to doe, when there is cauſe, if they would inſtruct them, and rule and looke to them carefully, as Iphtah and Dauid did, wee ſhould not haue ſuch diſorders, and outrage in Church and Common-wealth as we haue: neither ſhould it be ſuch reproch as it is, to keepe ſuch bad ones in mens houſes: for though they are rude and bad themſelues; yet by good care had ouer them, they might be brought to better order. This being added, that if they will not be ruled and kept in compaſſe, that they be deliuered to the Magiſtrate, and committed to the houſe of correction.
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXTIETH FOVRE SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſe 4. And in proceſſe of time the children of Ammon made warre with Iſrael.
               
               5. And when the children of Ammon fought with Iſrael, the Elders of Gilead went to fetch Iphtah out of the land of Tob.
               
               6. And they ſaid vnto Iphtah, Come and be our Captaine, that we may fight with the children of Ammon.
               
               7. Iphtah then anſwered vnto the Elders of Gilead, Did not yee hate me, and expell me out of my fathers houſe? How then come yee vnto me now in the time of your tribulation?
               
               8. Then the Elders of Gilead ſaid vnto Iphtah, Therfore we turne againe to thee now, that thou maiest goe with vs, and fight againſt the children of Ammon, and be our Head ouer all the inhabitants of Gilead.
               
               9. And Iphtah ſaid vnto the Elders of Gilead, If yee bring mee home againe to fight againſt the children of Ammon, if the Lord giue them before me, ſhall I bee your head?
               
               10. And the Elders of Gilead ſaid vnto Iphtah, The Lord be witneſſe betweene vs, if we doe not according to thy words.
               
               11. Then Iphtah went with the Elders of Gilead, and the people made him Head and Captaine ouer them: And Iphtah rehearſed all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh.
               
            
            
               IN theſe eight verſes, we ſee how God brought to paſſe by his prouidence, that the Princes of Gilead, who with Iphtahs 
               The ſumme of theſe verſes. brethren, had vniuſtly expelled him out of the citie, were driuen by their owne law to deſire him home againe, and to fight againſt the Ammonites for them; which that they might the better effect, they goe themſelues in a ſolemne manner to the place of his baniſhment, euen to the land of Tob, and with entreaty in all humbleneſſe, offer him the gouernment, and chiefe command in the battell againſt Ammon. Iphtah at the firſt caſting them in the teeth with their vnkindneſſe before-time, (as it was meet that ſuch diſcourteſie and diſgrace as they had offered him in time paſt ſhould not be altogether buried in ſilence and be vnmentioned) requireth of them good aſſurance of their fidelitie, becauſe it might be doubted, that their preſent neceſſity draue them to make this offer, rather then any loue towards him. Which being tendered and granted to him accordingly; he yeeldeth to their requeſt, and went home with them, and (the Lord ordering the buſineſſe) there he found the whole congregation

readie to confirme the election of the Elders of Gilead, as alſo, afterward, the Lord himſelfe did: and ſo Iphtah was made their Captaine, and proceeded to the worke whereto God had appointed him.
            Generally this teacheth how ſtrangely God turneth the times and ſtate Doct. ver. 4. 5. of things by his wiſdome, whereby he ruleth and diſpoſeth them: and this he doth for the triall and comfort of his, and contrary to and againſt the expectation and deſire of their enemies, as here he did to Iphtahs comfort, and to the croſſing of them of Gilead, raiſe this warre. To teach vs all that are fit to learne, to depend vpon him alone, and to haue his word for our direction, that ſo we need not be aſhamed whatſoeuer come to paſſe.
            Whereas if we haue followed our owne humor, either in croſſing, and wronging any, as they here did Iphtah, we may be driuen to ſtand in need of them, and to ſeeke helpe at their hands, as they did at his, which will not a little croſſe vs; or if we haue reproched ourſelues, by bragging and boaſting, we may receiue the foile at their hands, whom we haue ſo abuſed, and ſo we may with ſhame bee made to eate our word; or if we haue proudly ſet vp our ſaile, or doe depend vpon vncertaine hope of future commodities, and momentany preferment, wee may bee diſapointed to our iuſt reproch, and that eaſily; the Lord ſo altering and changing things as he doth. And herein his daily fruſtrating of many mens hope, who depend vpon blind fortune, promiſing to themſelues, that all ſhall be, as they wiſh, vtterly ſhutting God out from their attempt, might make vs wiſe.
            An example hereof in the King of Aram, as in many other, is to be ſeene: who oft appointed his armies ſecretly againſt the King of Iſrael; but he was 2. King. 6. 10. 11 diſapointed by God of his expectation, till he raged and fretted at it. Herevpon S. Iames reprooueth his reſolution of man, that hee will himſelfe, and Iames 4. 13. 14. of himſelfe ſay of theſe changeable things; to morrow we will goe to ſuch a citie and gaine, &c. when yet Salomon telleth vs, we cannot tell what one Prou. 27. 1. day may bring foorth. And yet men ceaſe not to determine what they will doe, and how they will thriue, reuenge, take their pleaſure and paſſe the time: and ſo we reckon of, and deale about ſeaſons, that although all know the weather altereth the price of things, yet wee will ſell and buy our commodities Note. before hand, when wee know not how to make good, and performe couenants to other, or how other will to vs, no, neither are willing, if prices alter, to ſtand to our word: which yet God doth bring to paſſe ofttimes, to the ioynting not of ſuch common doings onely in ſmaller matters, but alſo of the richeſt in their greateſt affaires, and that a thouſand waies according to his good pleaſure. And therfore it were our wiſdome to ſubmit our ſelues to his prouidence in all things, and not to ſtand ſtiffely vpon our owne will, ſeeing he will breake our ſtomackes in ſpight of our hearts, by diſappointing of vs, and except we doe ſo, we ſhall neuer be quiet.
            But to returne againe, we ſee that God brought this about principally for the good of his ſeruant Iphtah, and to worke his enlargement, though to the ſhame and conuiction of his aduerſaries. Iphtah neither himſelfe made any meanes, by meſſengers, writing, or ſuite of friends, for his returne out of baniſhment: neither would the Lord permit him to doe ſo, but prouided better for him, that he ſhould haue a calling to it: for if he had returned blindly home, as a priuate exile, what great matter had it been, or how could Gods

worke haue been ſeene in it, as now it was? But behold, the Lord will rather haue Iphtah abide ſometime in diſtreſſe and baſeneſſe, that hee may bee fetcht home with publike conſent of his nation, as Ioſeph was out of priſon; and that they did not ſo much to the gratifying of him, as themſelues: the greateſt perſons of Gilead requeſting it at his hand, and profeſſing themſelues highly beholding vnto him, if hee would grace them by returning, who had diſgraced him before, by caſting him off. Nay, and he muſt not Note. be ſent for, but come for, not by friends, but by his ranckeſt enemies, not to his former eſtate of a ſubiect, but to be a Lord and Gouernor. A carnal man hearing of this, Oh how his teeth water and his fingers itch at the ſucceſſe of Iphtah, and how doth he wiſh he might haue his deſire vpon his enemies, and triumph ouer them as he did? But oh foole! this is no prerogatiue for thee to claime, it is the glorie of innocencie, the fruite of faith, of patient waiting vpon God, and committing a mans waies to him in wel-doing. Such another example (leſt wee ſhould ſay this is alone) is Mordecai. The Lord might haue put it into the Kings mind to peruſe the Chronicles and recognize Mordecaies well deſeruing long before he did: but alas, that had been an obſcure fauour in compariſon. God meant his worthy ſeruant farre better then ſo: he would haue this breake out when it was moſt ſeaſonable: and the ſeaſon was, when his prouidence might be moſt manifeſted therby. Therefore when great Haman was working his ouerthrow, and al the Churches; then is the opportunitie to bring forth the record: that ſo (all vnder one) the aduerſary may be defeated with ſhame, the Church notably deliuered from danger, and Mordecai not reſcued onely, but brought forth out of trouble, with the higheſt honor that his rankeſt enemie could be forced to giue him. Come forth (ye diſciples of Machiauel) and ſet your braines on worke in the politiqueſt manner ye can, and ſee if ye can teach your nouices ſuch a way as this, ſo famouſly to ſupplant your oppoſites, and ſet vp themſelues in their roome! ye cannot doubtleſſe, or if ye could, yet ye teach them but diueliſh policie to contriue it, whereby you and they haue more cauſe of ſhame and repentance, then boaſting and inſulting. Therefore (not to digreſſe) now Iphtah is buſie about Gods matters (neuer thinking of a reuenge of his owne priuate wrongs) and loe, the Lord is as buſie about Iphtahs affaires, and contriuing how he may bring him foorth out of his trouble. Is not this enough to perſwade vs to make God our Factor and Aduocate 
                  Doct. 2. to pleade for vs, and bring about our matters? yea to tie our owne hands behind vs, from putting them forth vnlawfully in our owne defence? May we not ſay now, there is a truth in thoſe words, Roll thy waies, or caſt Pſalm. 37. 5. thy care vpon Iehouah, and he will giue thee thy hearts deſire? Did he not ſo to Iphtah? Euen that iſſue which he would haue deſired and ſought by reuenge, or euill meanes (if he had been a bad perſon) I meane to haue his enemies to be his pages to conduct him home as their Commander; that I ſay obtained Iphtah, not by vſing euill meanes, but without vſing any at all. Was not this as a man would haue it? What needed here any ſhifting, any ſtirring, any plotting? Did not God effect it without theſe? So when Ioſeph in priſon was forgotten by Pharaohs Butler to be ſet free, how did the Lord remember him, to bring him foorth with farre greater honour. Thus hee dealt with his, where they relye on him. And if hee did this for Iphtah, a

poore ſouldier, a baſtard, and baniſhed, and for Mordecai a deſpiſed ſtranger, and for Ioſeph a poore priſoner, as wee haue heard; will he not doe the like to vs, if we would cleaue vnto him as our alſufficient God, and honour him by putting ouer all to him, to deale wholly for vs, while wee ſit ſtill, and goe about his ſeruice? And what leſſe can we doe then truſt him with our matters, and wholly giue vp our ſelues to be doers of his work, when as our Maſter profeſſeth himſelfe to be wholly ours, and to bring our matters to paſſe, which our ſelues (with much labour and more ſinne) ſhould neuer be able to compaſſe?
            We haue heard how Iphtah was repaired vnto by the chiefe of Gilead, 
                  The ſumme of verſe 6. 7. 8. and what a free and large offer they made to him if hee would goe with them: thus had the Lord prouided for his ſeruant. Now followeth his anſwere: Iphtah therfore (as he might well) told the Princes of Gilead of their fault, by ſo good occaſion and opportunitie as was offered; and how iniuriouſly they had dealt with him, in driuing him out from among them againſt all right and law: and hereupon hee demanded of them how they could now in their ſtreight ſeeke to him among all other? and indeed they could with no ſound reaſon requeſt fauour of him whom they had hated; and as for him, hauing receiued ſuch meaſure from them, how could hee truſt them? And they could not denie it, which was a ſhame to them to remember: but now they would preferre him (they ſaid) to make him recompence, and the rather to perſwade him thereof, they confeſſed the whole matter vnto him. But if he had been as wilfull now they ſtood in neede of him, (which he ſaw very well) as they had been cruell and ſpightfull againſt him before; hee would neuer haue condeſcended vnto them, but would haue held them on the racke.
            We learne here, that God doth oft make vs ſtand in need of their helpe Doct. verſ. 6. whom we hate and deſpiſe. Firſt to the end wee may ſee our fault in hating them, and take ſhame for it, as there is cauſe. Secondly, to ouercome enuie, which if we had not need one of another, would grow very ſtrong. For this cauſe did the Lord ſo diſpoſe, that the Tribes euer needed one another, (as we ſee through the ſtories of this booke and the bookes of Samuel) that they might hold one with another againſt Idolaters, and might not hate each the other; and in a ſpirituall reſpect, ſo God made the people ſtand in need of the Apoſtles, whom before they had railed vpon in the ſecond of the Acts 2. 37. Acts. And ſo we, if we weighed it would neuer hate each the other, nor fall out as we doe too eaſily, one with another, conſidering the plunges we may be put to thereby, as when we are driuen to ſtand in need euen of them among all other, and it is in their hand to doe vs ſome great hurt.
            And yet ſome doe ſo reſt in their owne ſufficiencie, through the want of Note. wiſe foreſight of the caſualties which after may befall them, and through the pride of heart in their preſent eſtate, that they would ſtand in neede of none, neither be beholding vnto any, which is but a nouriſhing of the hardnes of their hearts, and high mindednes, that ſo they may further glorie in themſelues: and therfore ſuch will rather offer violence to themſelues, then they will vſe the helpe of any ſuch as they like not: As Ahab ſpake of Michaiah, when he both ſtood in great need of his help, and was wiſhed to vſe it by godly Iehoſaphat; No, ſaith he, for I hate him, and he doth not prophecie 1. King. 
                     •
                  2. 
                     •
                  .
               
good for me: but it had been better for him to haue been beholding to him.
            So that in reſpect of ſuch paſſions, it is ſome reſtraint of nature and bridling of the corrupt heart, in him that can ſeeke to his enemie. And ſeeing God doth make vs all to ſtand in need one of another, why ſhould wee not make our hearts to bow and bend, eſpecially when it ſhall be alſo for our owne good and benefit? Although I muſt ſay, that this is not ſo commendable in vs, nor profitable for vs thus farre to ſeeke to other, when we may feare the better thereby; (for a naturall man will ſtraine himſelfe for aduantage) but when we doe it to croſſe ourſelues, and our euill hearts (which rebell in vs, and would carrie vs to the contrarie) and ſo ſtoope to the ouercomming of the poyſon and corruption that is in them, and that alſo for conſcience ſake, that we may pleaſe God therein; this is a grace and worthie thing indeed.
            This being done, we ſhould doe well to help one another, and perſwade each other to turne away to alienate rancour and ſtomacke from their enemies, as Iacob hath commendably gone before vs herein to Eſau, and Dauid 
               Gen. 32. 18. 2. King. 6. 22. toward Saul, and the Prophet Eliſha did perſwade the King of Iſrael to handle his enemies kindly which fell into his hands. But yet on the other ſide we muſt take heed as well of flattering men in their euill, as hating thē: for wee may not ſinne to obtaine and get mens fauour, but beare our croſſe contentedly, if euer wee be driuen to ſeeke helpe of them whoſe ſinne wee haue ſet outſelues againſt; for why wee haue done our duties, though wee receiue ill meaſure for our good will, and God will make a way for vs, that al ſhall be well, and he will (if it be expedient) turne their hearts towards vs, for all that: but (as was ſaid before) let vs make none our enemies by needleſſe prouoking of them, but hold peace with all, (if it be poſſible) yea euen with them that are our enemies.
            For how would theſe here haue done, if Iphtah had vſed them as they did him? Or what had become of Iehoram, 2. King. 3. if Eliſha had perſiſted in his reiecting the motion which he made, becauſe he and his father had ſcorned 2. King. 3. 13. him and his predeceſſor Elija before? Therefore be wee wiſe, for God may ſo order it, that (to reſiſt proud men) euen they whom we haue prouoked in our raſhnes, may be in place to doe vs much hurt, and that none ſaue the very perſons whom we haue ſcorned, can helpe vs in our neede. When Saul was newly created King, there were ſome iuſt of this humour (and therefore they are called ſonnes of Belial) who defied him: Tuſh, ſay they, 1. Sam. 10. 27. what new vpſtart is this? how ſhall ſuch a baſe fellow ſaue vs? ſo that they would not acknowledge nor take him for their King. But ſhortly after, how ſhould they haue done (when Nahaſh came vpon them) if that deſpiſed fellow (as they accounted of him) had not holpen them? Then there was ſeeking to Saul: and after the victorie it was demaunded by the people, who were theſe that ſpake againſt Saul ſo deſpightfully, ſaying, Shall he raigne ouer vs? bring them foorth, and let them be ſlaine. Therefore (that we may auoid this ſhame and imputation of folly to be in our extreames, now to abandon a man as nothing worth, and after to ſeeke to him, acknowledging him to be our onely helper) let vs learne this moderation towards all, as neither to be burdenſome to the greateſt, nor yet beare a ſcornefull minde toward

the meaneſt. If the Samaritan, and the man that fell among theeues had knowne each other before, and the one ſcorned to be the better for the other, is it like the one would haue looſed and relieued the other in that extremitie? Yet we may well thinke (in ſuch a caſe) hee muſt haue been of a rare proud ſtomack, that would haue lien ſtill wounded and in paine, rather then be beholding to him that was there to helpe him. And let me giue the poore a caueat, concerning this humour (for they that muſt depend vpon all, yet hauing a proud heart, wiſh that all depended vpon them, and ſometimes will vtter words to that effect) and I ſay this vnto them, It ill becommeth the richeſt: and euen they may bee ſure at one time or other to ſmart for their proud ſtomacks: but much worſe it beſeemeth the pooreſt, who rather (as Salomon ſaith) ſhould vſe all entreatie. Let ſuch breake their hearts, and make holy vſe of Gods affliction vpon them, and ſubmit themſelues to the bearing of their burthen, that ſo the hearts of the wealthier be not iuſtly hardned againſt them.
            Alſo we ſee here in their deſiring the helpe of Iphtah, whom they had before Doct. 2. verſ. 6. expelled, that oft times the things which men reiect, God chuſeth to doe great enterprizes by. Which as it was moſt cleerely verified in our Sauour, who being the ſtone which the builders refuſed, was made the chiefe Acts 4. 11. corner ſtone; ſo was it alſo liuely verified in the Apoſtles after, Paul himſelfe ſaying of himſelfe: For all the good he had done, and the reſt, we are al made 1. Cor. 4. 9. a gazing ſtocke to the world, to the Angels, and to men. And ſo at this day, by whom doth the Lord gather his Church together, but by them that are counted the abiects of the world? or whom doth he make members of his Church, but them and thoſe to be deareſt vnto him, who are not counted meete to liue on the earth? Therefore let no faithfull ſeruant of God be diſmaied for the diſcourteſies and diſcouragements which he ſhall meete with by the vnthankfull world; the Lord ſeeth their workes, and hath them in neuer the leſſe account, but will plentifully reward them: of which point I need not ſay much, hauing ſo often handled it in this booke alreadie.
         
         
            THE SIXTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw let vs proceed with Iphtah his anſwere made to the Elders of Gilead: Firſt therefore in this hee repeateth and Verſ. 7. rippeth vp their fault, which in times paſt they had committed againſt him: telling them, that they now comming to him in their diſtreſſe, he (as he might well) marueiled at it, they neuer hauing made agreement with him. And it is eaſie to be ſeene, that in all this, hee anſwered, as he might lawfully doe, putting away all gall and bitternes; for it was

meete they ſhould ſecure him. And euen ſo it is lawfull for vs, by ſo good an occaſion as was offered to him by them, to doe as hee did, in a like caſe: to wit, to rehearſe mens great iniurying of vs, when they would make nothing of them. And yet all is not neceſſarie to be followed and practiſed of vs alwaies, which Iphtah ſaid to them here, and namely his repeating of their Doct. in verſ. 7. fault, but as the partie is able and fit to beare it, and as the weightines of the matter requireth. But without due regard had, the ripping vp of matters Note. and faults betwixt ſuch as haue been at variance, is oft times a reuiuing or an increaſing of ſtrife betwixt the parties. But theſe men of Gilead ſeeing they were many, and their offence had bin great and apparant in excluding him, therefore hee maketh mention of the iniurie which they had offered him, he hauing ſo good opportunitie, and doing it ſo meekly and kindly; and yet Gedeon did wel before in not ripping vp, but burying an iniury done to him by the men of Ephraim, and paſſing it ouer in ſilence, when yet they had ſore prouoked him.
            Therefore herein we muſt craue of God the ſpirit of wiſedome to direct Note. vs how to deale in the like caſes, and whether to repeate wrongs done vnto vs, and how farre, and when: as if they be but words, and in heate and paſſion vttered, then to paſſe by them. But if it ſhall be found expedient to rehearſe our wrongs, yet this muſt be reſolued of by vs, to doe it without bitternes and prouoking of them who haue hurt vs: and if we can make them ſee their fault, it is well: but to this end, in the affection of our loue let vs goe about it, and ſeeke it at their hands, but not to caſt them in teeth with it, to eaſe and ſatisfie our ſtomackes thereby, and ſo ſtinging them, but earneſtly deſiring their good in any thing that wee ſay to them, neither denying to them (for all that mentioning of their offence) any helpe wee can yeeld to them for their benefit. And when we ſhall ſee cauſe to ſpeake, let vs alſo take heed of harſhnes and tartnes in ſpeaking, whereby our hearts will otherwiſe eaſily be incenſed, and ſet on fire againſt them before we be aware.
            Now in their anſwere to his exprobration made againſt them, in verſ. 7. let vs in this verſe note, that they doe not deny, but confeſſe that they had Doct verſ. 8. iniured him, but indeed they ſhew that they (conueying it cleanly another way) are vtterly vnwilling to heare of it: telling him why they came to him, namely to make him their Captaine for their deliuerance, by which kindneſſe offered to him, they hoped (they ſaid) to make him amends. Where we may learne, that it was commendable in them, and to be followed, in that they doe grant that they had faulted and iniured him. So is it euer to bee done of vs: and contrarily, that the waſhing away of mens faults, (whereof they may iuſtly bee conuicted) by facing, lying, or otherwiſe hiding, or cloaking, or extenuating them, muſt be carefully auoided. By which meanes wee doe but lay them more open before God, and as it were, put them in remembrance of them: the onely way to couer them, is by confeſſing and renouncing them, for to ſuch belongs the promiſe of forgiuenes, Prou. 28. 13. Pſal. 32. 1. which is called the true couering of them by God himſelfe, Pſalm. 32. For if wee haue ſinned, wee ought to acknowledge it, according to the nature, qualitie and kinde thereof: whether to God or man, publikely or priuatly, yea if it be to one: according to S. Iames direction, in theſe words: Acknowledge your faults one to another. And if we cannot be brought to do Iames 5. 16.
               
ſo, and that willingly; much more hardly, or not at all, will we offer further reſiſtance of, and violence to our corrupt nature, which ſome ſinnes doe and will require. And yet if we come to yeeld ſo farre, yet if we doe it houerly and for faſhion, or to get that which we ſeeke, by our ſo confeſſing, howſoeuer it may bee commendable before men, yet before God it is nothing worth.
            But in that they haſted from hearing much of that matter, it being harſh 
                  Doct. 2. in their hearing, and ſore againſt them, it bewraieth a corruption to be noted in vs which is ouer common, to wit, how vnwilling we are to haue our faults brought to light; we care not how little and ſeldome we heare of any Note. thing that is againſt our corrupt nature, or euill practiſe, againſt which yet Ioh. 3. 19. we ſhould be ready to heare the hardeſt, knowing that wee are not debters Rom. 8. 12. to the fleſh, but enemies to it, and that profeſſed. A token (no doubt) of a filthie and hard heart, much putrified: for ſhould we not be ready to purge out the poyſon and putrifaction which will burſt and kill vs?
            In particular, the practiſe of moſt men is like theſe Gileadites; for if they haue ſlandered their brother by whiſpering reports in corners (where they thinke they are ſafe enough from comming to light againſt them) and afterwards are charged to make them good, or take the ſhame thereof by eating their word, they can cunningly winde themſelues out of that argument, by turning their ſpeech to ſome other matter, which they thinke will better pleaſe their accuſer, at leaſt which may couer their owne lewdneſſe. And if they be preſſed with it, oh then (ſay they) let vs heare no more of Note. that, ve ſpeake out of ſeaſon, &c. Is this honeſt dealing? to lay on loade of reproch vpon the innocent, and to aggrauate conceits or falſe rumours againſt them, and when the truth ſhould bee brought foorth to the ſauing and preſeruing of our brothers good name, then to leaue him in the briars vnconſcionably? Let Ioſephs brethren condemne theſe, who confeſſed their ſinne againſt their brother and concealed it not.
            If it be the propertie of a ſeruant of God, to hunt and purſue himſelfe for his inward ſinne, yea though it be but one, as wee reade Dauid oft to haue Pſal. 51. 3. Pſal. 73. 3. done; what ought we to doe for many, and thoſe alſo manifeſt before men? But if men doe accuſe and iudge themſelues no ſorer for their ſinnes in priuate, Note. aggrauating and bewailing them to God, with taking ſhame to themſelues for the committing them, then they giue teſtimonie thereof to men: alſo, if they doe not more reſiſt them aloue, then they loue to heare of them by others, it is no marueile that they be ſo bad as they are. And as it is too common to take a priuate reproofe vnkindly, nay rebelliouſly, and with Leuit. 19. 17. hating him that offers it, which yet he is commanded of God to doe: euen ſo in publique hearing it fareth; inſomuch as if ſome mens conſciences be touched in any liuely manner, (which is an wholeſome warning) yet wee ſee how vnwelcome it is to the moſt, and excepted againſt, though without the leaſt cauſe of ſo doing, but of the contrary rather, to wit, of yeelding thankes for it. The vſe is, that if we cannot be willing to heare of faults, we ſhould in no wiſe giue libertie to our ſelues, nay nor by any violence bee brought to commit them. But of theſe points, ſee chap. 9. in Iothams fleeing from his brother, &c.
            Now out of the offer of the Elders, compared with Iphtahs ſpeech in Verſ. 9.
               
the ninth verſe, demanding aſſurance thereof, (for he did indeed vrge them about it, as he had cauſe) a queſtion may ariſe, how they could offer this to Iphtah to be their Iudge, and how he could take it with a good conſcience? Firſt, ſeeing they had no authoritie to offer it. Secondly, ſeeing he and they Deut. 23. 2. both had this blocke in their way, that a Baſtard might not enter into the Congregation of the Lord to beare any office. The anſwer is to both queſtions one: that the Lord directed them thus to doe, who is bound to no law: and that he guided them herein, the whole ſtory through the Chapter teſtifieth. The Lord excludeth ſuch in Deuteronomy from bearing publike office: and that to terrifie men from begetting Baſtards, who are in this world reprochfull, and lie open to much miſerie. And yet how this forbidding that ſinne preuaileth with men, this the commonneſſe of the ſinne, and this prophane practiſe of adulterers too too much bewraieth, who thinke that by this meanes, of bringing Baſtards into the world, (that is the pitie they take of them) they ſhall ſhunne the weariſome company of the wiſe, and tediouſneſſe of children, with the vnwelcome annoiances that they count to accompany both. But oh monſters! doe they thinke by auoiding the burden of the lawfull wife and children, to eſcape the blot of vnlawfull libertie, euen reprochfull whoredomes? Doth not God ſet a brand both vpon them and their curſed fruit? For it is prooued by experience, that beſides the diſcouragement which baſtards are oppreſſed with, as of ſcorne, and opprobrie in the world, (which of it ſelfe is enough to hold them vnder) the Lord denieth them (commonly) good education: ſo that they prooue vagabonds, curſeth them with a more then common indiſpoſition and aukeneſſe of nature, to retaine inſtruction and gouernment. And laſtly, there are few of them who are not tainted with vile and odious Note. qualities, ſuch as they deriue from their vitious and vncleane parents. And therefore the greater is their ſinne, who for all this his prohibition, moſt wickedly fil the world with them, & cauſe them to be brought into ſo great calamitie. Yet as the innocents cannot doe with it, ſo (God bee thanked) they are not ſhouldred out from the hope of ſaluation, for there is no reſpect of perſons with God, if they feare him. But if they were caſt off by the Lord, Actes 10. 34. yet ſuch is the vnconſcionable beaſtlineſſe of thoſe graceleſſe perſons, that for their owne filthy luſt they would thus endanger them, as the loathſome practiſe of thoſe vncleane Locuſtes, the Popiſh Monkes and Friers, both in this land and elſewhere hath abundantly witneſſed to the world in former ages. See more in the firſt verſe of this Chapter.
            
               Iphtah hauing found ill dealing at their hands before, as we haue heard, Verſ. 10. 11. for that they were not lead by conſcience and the feare of God, when they caſt him out, but by partialitie, vſed crueltie againſt him; he did not therfore truſt them vpon their word, but requireth an oath of God at their mouthes, as may be gathered by their making God a witneſſe of the promiſe which they made vnto him, and ſo tieth them to a ſure couenanting with him: For it had not otherwiſe been wiſely prouided for by him: and therefore when he went with the meſſengers to Mizpeh, he rehearſed theſe things there before the Lord, that ſo the promiſe which they made, might ſtand ſure, God being deſired to be the beholder and witneſſe.
            And here let vs learne, that when men haue dealt vnfaithfully, and diſhoneſtly, Doct. verſ. 10.
               
they haue no wrong offered them, if they bee not credited as before, no, although they bee bound by bond, (whereas their bare word was taken while they went for honeſt men) for they haue giuen iuſt cauſe to other to ſuſpect their credit. And by this, which I ſay, may be noted, that one cauſe Note. why men are in leſſe credit now adaies, is their vnfaithfull dealing. And whereas ſome cannot be truſted, nor borrow vpon their word or bond, but for want of credit doe goe without that which would ſtand them in exceeding great ſtead, for their vpholding and maintenance; it is the fruit of their owne doings, and that which they haue ſought by their owne vntruſtineſſe, and breaking of their promiſe, whereby they haue loſt their credit together with their honeſty.
            For in theſe daies many care not to deceiue, yea, and vndoe others, and therefore come to nought themſelues alſo for the moſt part, whereas ſome other being faithful and conſcionable; vpon their bare credit, liue and maintaine their charge by borrowing, and by other mens forbearing them. And whereas it is obiected on the behalfe of theſe vnthrifts and deceiuers, that they muſt be borne withall, though they cannot pay that which they haue borrowed: I anſwer; Some of them ſee no likelihood that they can repay ſo much as they will ſeeke to borrow, and take into their hands, of other mens goods; which argueth little honeſty, and therefore are well content to wind it from them cunningly and craftily, whereby alſo they impoueriſh ſome; others will not diminiſh their occupying in the leaſt manner, though they goe aboue their reach, nor detract from their belly and paſtime to pay the owner, therby ſhewing that they care not how he come by his due and right, or whether he euer haue it againe or no.
            Now while theſe things are thus, we may note that the beautie of religion is ſuch, if it be planted in men ſoundly and indeed, as that it winnes credit to him that hath it for contrary dealing, and maketh him to be approoued for his faithfulneſſe, conſcionableneſſe and honeſty: whereas he that is void of them, liueth in vtter diſcredit and iuſt reproch. And whereas ye will ſay, ſome of them that make ſhew of religion, doe yet deceiue and deale vntruſtily with their creditors. I anſwer, it is not the ſhew of religion, but the practiſe of it that carrieth the beauty with it that I ſpeake of: and if any that be taken to be religious, offend this way, know wee that it is not their religion that imboldneth them to ſuch dealing, but that they haue ſo little of it. And ſo it is true alſo, that ſome that haue credit deſeruedly, doe, for the ſweetneſſe of the gaine, if they take not heed, hold their due from the owners ſometimes, though they may little reioyce in it. And let them know, that their ſinne is the greater: but yet all this notwithſtanding, there are ſome who dare not, neither will by any meanes be brought to doe ſo. And if ye aske me, Why then doe men take bonds of ſuch as are of approoued honeſty, and haue not broken nor loſt their credit; as if they were no better truſted then other common men? I anſwer: Not becauſe they be diſtruſted, but firſt, ſeeing all are mortal, and ſo men might loſe their goods, if they had no ſecuritie for them by thoſe in whoſe hands they are: and ſecondlie, that contention may not ariſe betwixt the poſteritie of both parties that ſhal come after. And againe, ſeeing there are ſuch deceiuers in the world, as

would prouoke euen the honeſt to contention, if they can ſee any hole open, or eſpie any aduantage.
            And this rule holdeth alſo firme and good in religious actions before God. For as it is the honour of a Chriſtian to continue conſtant in his loue to the truth, and the Church of God, the fruit whereof is a ſound and good report: ſo if a man begin to warpe and bewray his hollowneſſe or treachery in either; his ſtaine is not eaſily waſht out, neither can he looke for that currant eſtimation or reuerēce which before he had, nor ſcarce obtain ſo much afterward as to be credited, for all his profeſſion. Although men will be truſt their veſſels with oyle or wine, while they be ſound & whole, yet if they begin to leake and run, they will not commit any thing vnto them, which is in danger of loſing. Our Sauiour asked Peter but once, Whom ſayeſt thou that Mat. 16. 16. 17. I am? and tooke his word, when he deſerued no other: whereas afterward hee was not ſatisfied with one nor two profeſſions of his affection, Simon 
               Iohn 21. 15. loueſt thou me? good reaſon, he had made a great cracke in his credit, and therefore he that had forſworne Chriſt, deſerued not vpon his owne bare Note. word and anſwere, to be beleeued. And thoſe who haue deceiued the opinion of the Church touching their religion, by falling into error and ſchiſme, or their pietie and honeſty, by groſſe offences; may thanke themſelues, if euer afterward the people of God haue them in a iealouſic. As we reade in the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, that when once the baptized partie reuolted either from his religion or good conſcience, (as Miriam by her arrogancie) the Church admitted him not without ſerious repentance and confeſſion of his fault. But if he ſlipt the ſecond time, they practiſed greater ſeueritie towards them, enioyning them not repentance only, but (for a ſpace of time) to remaine out of the Church as in famous. Yea, ſome euen of the reuerendeſt Fathers of thoſe times, as Cyprian and others, grew to this erronious opinion, that ſuch were not to be admitted without rebaptization, as if their former ſeale had been quite puld off by their ſin, I meane the ſeale of forgiueneſſe. Therefore let all Chriſtians looke to their ſtanding: the didiuell (if it be poſſible) will quite ouerthrow them; but if he cannot, hee will Note. foile them, and take away the crowne of their reioycing, which is their faithfulneſſe and conſtancie. And he is an impudent perſon, who hauing foully diſhonored God and his profeſſion, wil hold vp his head boldly, and claime his old priuiledge. Doe we not ſee that among men, one periured, or a forger, is diſabled from euer bearing any witneſſe, againſt or for any, in publike court? And haue not all men ſuch a one in ſuſpition? Doth not treaſon taint euen the blood of the traitor, ſo that (euen when he is loyall) he goeth for no better? and hee who hath got a patent of reſtitution, or pardon for his fellonie, doth he not forfeit it by a ſecond offence in the like kind? But of this enough.
            Another thing worth the marking is this, that in as much as Iphtah went Verſ. 11. ſo eaſily from his iuſt quarrell that hee had againſt them of Gilead, and had ſo ſoone done, when he had wiſely told them that which concerned them to heare, and when they had aſſured him of that which he demanded; by this I ſay, we are taught, not to hold in our harts an iniurie againſt vs by any, Prou. 16. but ſoone to remit an offence, for it is an honour to paſſe by it. He mentioneth

the matter but once to them, and once requireth ſecurity, but goeth no further. And who ſeeth it not to be a great grace in any man to doe ſo? for therein he doth after the example of the Lord himſelfe, who doth not follow Exod. 34. 7. things againſt vs hotly, but ſheweth great lenitie and kindneſſe. And as Note. we ſhould not be rigorous and cruell in our dealings, to prouoke men with our bitternes to wrath, ſo ſhould we make an end of controuerſies, as ſoone and in as few words as may be, as for other cauſes; ſo, not in the leaſt reſpect for this, ſeeing in many words commonly there is much ſinne. Of this ſomewhat was ſaid before in verſ. 4. but eſpecially looke backe into Chap. 8. verſe 2.
            And further learne what hath been the religiouſneſſe of an oath in times 
                  Doct. 2. paſt: to wit, ſuch that if it were once offered and taken, there was no more queſtion, but the controuerſie was ended. As we ſee Rahab, hauing it granted Ioſhua 2. 21. her by oath of the ſpies, that ſhe and her fathers houſe ſhould bee ſaued aliue, at the deſtruction of Ierrico, reſted ſatisfied. Therefore men muſt looke to what they ſweare: ſeeing an oath is not to bee violated, vnleſſe it were made for the accompliſhment of euill: in which caſe the keeping of it were double ſinne; (as Heroas was) and the leaſt euill therein is great. And Marke 6. 20. as heed muſt be taken, how men ſweare, ſo muſt they who offer the oath to other, that it be ſo done, that they to whom it is miniſtred, may be free from ſnare, ſo that they may doe it (as the Prophet ſpeaketh) in truth, righteouſneſſe and iudgement.
            Therefore ſuch as draw men by oath to fulfill their deſire, and to doe things againſt conſcience, haue the more to anſwer for. Men then muſt not be drawne and forced thereto, to which they cannot yeeld, nor of themſelues raſhly ſweare to doe that which they approoue not, but abhorre. Iphtah doubted no more after the oath, but goeth after the army. But an oath is not ſtrong enough now adaies to hold a man faſt, neither can wee ſafely Heb 6. 1
                     •
                  . reſt in it, for the deciding of controuerſies, although the Lord hath taught vs otherwiſe. Now for the further ratifying of the couenant betwixt them, it is rehearſed before the Lord in Mizpeh by them: for thus the men of Gilead ſay, We couenant with thee before the Lord, to doe, as we ſay, and that he may puniſh vs, if we breake it. Therefore ſuch as are common ſwearers are not to be admitted to this ſolemne oath, either in accuſation or deciſſion of controuerſies. For (as I ſaid) they haue loſt their credit: they haue often falſified their oathes, (for how ſhould a common ſwearer auoid common periury?) and therefore that which another man vſeth reuerently, and with conſcience, ſuch ruſh vpon commonly and careleſly, through a prophane habit: being herein worſe then Heathens, who counted not ſuch worthie of ſocietie, but inteſtabiles, as they called them, that is, ſuch as were not to be admitted as witneſſe. And commonly ſuch they are, who proſtitute themſelues for gaine to ſweare falſely before the Magiſtrate: of whom there are many, and ſome the Lord ſhoaleth out from among their fellowes, as notorious monſters, branding ſome with in famie and miſery, and terrifying the conſciences of other with helliſh feares, if not with deſpaire. And a ſtep to this ſinne, is the abuſing of the tongue by falſe aſſeuerations, or conteſtations: as to ſay, Verily it is thus, or ſo: As ſure as I am in this place it is true: God knoweth I ſpeake no more then truth: I take God to witneſſe, &c.

Whereunto commonly men ioyne deprecations with Peter, if they bee not beleeued. And yet all falſe. This I ſay, neuer goeth alone: the commonlyer, the falſe aſſeuerer, will not ſtick, if need be, to be a falſe ſwearer alſo. Therfore (to ſhut vp) let men account of oathes as diuine bands and pledges: cautions of our fidelitie and truth depoſed, and left in the hands of God himſelfe: which he that dare forfeit or breake, let him be ſure, that God (to whoſe cenſure he yeeldeth himſelfe) will find him out, if not in this world, (as many are) yet hereafter, when hee ſhall giue him his portion in the lake that burneth with fire and brimſtone for euer. As indeed what puniſhment can equall that ſinne, which ouerthroweth all ciuill ſocietie and (the ſinewes thereof) religion itſelfe?
         
         
            THE SIXTIE SIXE SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 12. Then Iphtah ſent meſſengers vnto the King of the children of Ammon, ſaying, What haſt thou to doe with me, that thou art come againſt me, to fight in my land?
                     
                     13. And the King of the children of Ammon anſwered vnto the meſſengers of Iphtah, Becauſe Iſrael tooke my land when they came vp from Egypt, from Arnon vnto Iabbok, and vnto Iorden: now therefore reſtore thoſe lands quietly.
                     
                     14. Yet Iphtah ſent meſſengers againe vnto the children of Ammon,
                     
                     15. And ſaid vnto him, Thus ſaith Iphtah, Iſrael tooke not the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon.
                     
                     16. But when Iſrael came vp from Egypt, and walked through the wilderneſſe vnto the red Sea, then they came to Kadeſh.
                     
                     18. Then they went through the wilderneſſe, and compaſſed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the East ſide of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other ſide of Arnon, and came not within the coaſt of Moab; for Arnon was the border of Moab.
                     
                     19. Alſo Iſrael ſent meſſengers vnto Sihō King of the Amorites, the King of Heſhbon, and Iſrael ſaid vnto him, Let vs paſſe we pray thee, by thy land, vnto our place.
                     
                     20. But Sihon conſented not to Iſrael, that hee ſhould goe through his coaſt: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Iahaz, and fought with Iſrael.
                     
                     21. And the Lord God of Iſrael gaue Sihon and all his folke into the hands of Iſrael, and they ſmote them: ſo Iſrael poſſeſſed all the land of the Ammorites, the inhabitants of that countrie.
                     
                     22. And they poſſeſſed all the coaſts of the Amorites, from Arnon vnto Iabbok, and from the wilderneſſe euen vnto Iorden.
                     
                     23. Now therefore the Lord God of Iſrael hath caſt out the Amorites before his
                        
                        people Iſrael, and ſhouldeſt thou poſſeſſe it?
                     
                     24. Wouldeſt not thou poſſeſſe that which Chemoſh thy god giueth thee to poſſeſſe? ſo whomſoeuer the Lord our God driueth out before vs, them will we poſſeſſe.
                     
                     25. And art thou now farre better then Balak the ſonne of Zippor, King of Moab? did he not ſtriue with Iſrael, and fight againſt them?
                     
                     26. When Iſrael dwelt in Heſhbon, and in her townes, and in Aroer, and in her townes, and in all the Cities that are by the coaſts of Arnon three hundred yeere? Why did ye not then recouer them in that ſpace?
                     
                     27. Wherefore I haue not offended thee; but thou doeſt me wrong, to warre againſt me. The Lord the Iudge, be Iudge this day, betweene the children of Iſrael and the children of Ammon.
                     
                     28. Howbeit the King of the children of Ammon, hearkned not vnto the words of Iphtah, which he had ſent him.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        IPhtah being now ſtabliſhed their Captaine and The ſenſe of theſe verſes in generall. Guide, as wee haue heard, it is ſhewed in the verſes now read, how hee went to worke againſt the Ammonites, and that was in this manner. Firſt, hee ſendeth meſſengers to the King of Ammon, with reaſons to appeaſe him, if it may be, and hold him from warre, but he hearkens to none. His quarrell was for land, which Iſrael had now enioyed full 400. yeeres, and yet the King of Ammon claimeth it, and being denied it, now maketh warre with them for it. Now more particularly let vs heare their reaſoning about the matter: the which to auoid tediouſneſſe, I will not at large ſet downe firſt, but lay it out in the verſes, as they be in order.
                  In theſe two verſes, Iphtah demands of the King of Ammon by his meſſengers, 
                        Verſe 12. 13. particularly.
                      why he made warre againſt him, and what iniurie hee had offered him, why he ſhould doe ſo. The King of Ammon anſwered him, that Iſrael had taken away part of his land, when they came out of Egypt, and this he required to bee ſafely deliuered, and reſtored peaceably to him, and hee would depart from moleſting his countrie, but otherwiſe he would not. Of theſe in their order.
                  Firſt here let vs conſider Iphtahs dealing, who before hee goes to warre, Doct. ver. 12. debateth and enquireth about the matter, to ſee if by this meanes the enemy might be appeaſed: in a word he vſeth the beſt meanes he could deuiſe to keepe peace: which ought to be obſerued as a rule, that ſo we ſhould do before the attempting of warre with nation, or ſuite with any perſon. According to the generall rules: As much as in you lieth haue peace with all, and Rom 12. 18. Heb. 12. 14. againe, Enſew peace and follow it, though it flee from you, (for it is a pretious treaſure.) So in this particular eſpecially: We know how carefully we labour, to preſerue a member of our body before we will cut it off. So much more we ſhould deale in this caſe, to preſerue many bodies of men and perſons rather then commit them to the hazzard of warre, (as making no more account of the liues of Chriſtian men, then of dogges, oxen, or ſheepe, or to ſuffer ciuill and priuat enuy, contention and ſtrife, to the loſing of many ſoules. And ſo did the ten Tribes deale with their brethren on the other ſide Iorden, that is, they did preuent and ſtay much that might haue riſen, and

blood-ſhedding. For when after their departure from them, they heard they had committed a grieuous treſpaſſe againſt the Lord, for the which Ioſu. 22. 33. they thought they had iuſt cauſe to make warre with them: yet did they not follow their owne mindes, nor giue full credit to the report, but did firſt wiſely ſend vnto them to know the certaintie, and thereby they were ſatiſfied. But I doubt not of the eaſie conſenting to this part of iuſtice, as being a point diſputed and agreed vpon by Heathens and their practiſe in their warres, as alſo your Moraliſts, whoſe poſition it is: That an honeſt warre, is to be preferred to an vnequall or hurtfull peace, and no otherwiſe. To leaue this therefore and to come neerer to our ſelues, the ſame rule is to be kept in priuate controuerſies betwixt men, that law be not attempted, till all other meanes be firſt vſed: and a great ſinne it is among Chriſtians, to runne by and by to law, and to the ſuing one of another, as too many vſe to doe, hotly, raſhly, and wilfully, though themſelues ſuſtaine moſt hurt by it, who doe ſo, as being authors of the contention, and ſuite. Likewiſe the ſame may be ſaid of offenders in other kindes, who if they haue been lead away by leaud counſell or companie, and yet relent for it afterward, and take admonition againſt it willingly, they are to be vſed more fauourably (ſo farre as by the law they may be forborne:) euen as the ſtiffenecked and ſawcie, and bold defenders of their ſinne are ſharply to be dealt with, leſt they grow paſt recouerie, and doe as the waters, euen ouerflow all places where they come.
                  Some controuerſies ſhall (no doubt) alwaies ariſe betweene man and man, touching things, the equitie whereof is vnknowne, and vncertaine it ſhall be whoſe the right is. But if contentions proceeding from manifeſt wrong, or from vngrounded ſurmiſes, were at the firſt taken vp, and cut off, (in which commonly moſt raſhnes, heate and diſtemper is bewrayed) yea if trifling quarrels were troden vnder foote; then neither ſhould men haue ſo many needleſſe ianglings, and thoſe which are ſerious and could not bee auoided, ſhould more indifferently be handled and decided, either priuatly Note. or (with peaceable conſent of both parties) by trauerſe of law. Yea I ſay, if themſelues could not hit vpon agreement, they would yeeld to the diſcretion and loue of ſuch as might compound their differences: rather then multiplie one ſinne vpon another, as fiercenes of words to the gall of their ſtomacks, and other actuall purſuite each of other to both the former; ſhewing themſelues vnappeaſeable and inexorable. It is the pride, bitternes and enuie of the heart, rather then the weightineſſe of the cauſe, which oft prouokes men to the heate and ſtomacke which they vtter and bewray (all may ſee) in their iarrings each againſt other. And therefore they are ſo farre from Iphtah his practiſe, that they reioyce they haue any pretence of debate and ſuite againſt their neighbour: and follow it in ſuch eager and odious manner, that all may ſee they ſue not becauſe they haue cauſe, but are glad they haue any occaſion (ſuch a delight they haue therein) that they might fall to ſuite. The claime of a whole Tribes inheritance, did not ſo ſtirre Iphtah to wrath againſt this vſurper, as many of vs would bee ſtirred againſt him that would challenge a few acres of our poſſeſſion: what doe I ſay? nay, againſt him that contendeth about a twelue penny matter with vs; and yet wee ſhould exceed them, that goe many degrees before Iphtah in the meanes of knowledge and acquaintance with Gods will in particuler duties, if we did

well conſider it. Let ſuch doings be heard of among Heathens: as for Chriſtians, if one partie will not heare of his dutie, let the other giue him ouer, and let him contend (if he will needs) with his owne ſhadow. Doubtleſſe in many contentions, if either party were wiſe, the others folly ſhould ſoone appeare, and the contention which growes paſt recouerie ſhould ceaſe, and be at an end.
                  And further Iphtah, by asking what wrong he had done him, that he came 2 to warre againſt him, giueth all to vnderſtand, how abſurd and odious a thing it is, to doe wrong and deale hardly with them who haue done no iniurie to vs: and therefore hee ſaith, If I haue done wrong, good reaſon it is that I ſhould ſatisfie the challenge, &c. For if that be fooliſhnes when wee doe but meddle with a matter that belongeth not vnto vs, and with the which we haue nothing to doe; yea though wee meane no euill thereby, if that (I ſay) be folly; and as Salomon ſaith, all one as if a man plucked a curſt Prou. 26. 17. dogge by the eare: then to hurt any willingly, and to bee cruell and iniurious to him, that would liue in peace by vs, is an high degree of iniquitie. And if we ought to ſuſtaine a double iniurie, rather then to offer to reuenge Matth. 5 39. Prou. 17. 15. one, how great a ſinne is it to doe wrong, or hurt any man, wee not being prouoked by him? It is abomination; euen as it is to let the guiltie goe free, and yet many make no conſcience hereof. But I haue ſpoken of this point in chap. 8. in Gedeons proteſtation to Zeba and Zalmunna and in other places.
                  The King of the Ammonites ſends him word, that Iſrael had taken away Verſ. 13. part of his land, when they went out of Egypt toward the land of Canaan, and therefore he made warre with them. But how true this was, ye may ſee in Deuteronomy, where the Lord ſpeaketh thus to the children of Iſrael, Deut 2 19. when they ſhould paſſe by them: Thou ſhalt not lay ſiege againſt the children of Ammon, neither make warre againſt them, for I will not giue the land of the children of Ammon into thy hands. And in the 37. verſe, Moſes tels them, they obeyed the Lord therein, ſaying: Vnto the land of the Deut. 2. 37. children of Ammon thou cameſt not: nor vnto any place of the riuer Iabbok vpon which it bounded. So we ſee, that whereas it is manifeſt, that the Lord ſuffered not Iſrael to meddle with Ammon; yet the King anſwers boldly, they did.
                  This teacheth that ſuch are to be found, who neither meane well & ſimply, Doct. verſ. 13. neither care what they ſay: but as their hearts are full of falſehood and deceit, ſo their mouthes are full of lying. The Lord himſelfe had ſaid, the people of Iſrael ſhould not, neither did they meddle with the Ammonites, as the forementioned ſcripture teſtifieth; yet their King boldly and vntruly auoucheth, that they tooke his land and enioyed it as their owne. The which, who ſhould not be ready to beleeue, being ſo boldly auouched, and that by a King? Euen ſo, many care not what lyes they coyne, nor how ſhameleſly they lay claime to other mens goods, and how boldly and impudently they ſet againſt the truth in many other dealings. And this they doe either for their commoditie, as this King did; or for their credit, and to ſet a colour on their doings, as the old Prophet of Beth: I did by lying, and 1 King. 13 18. 
                     Gehazi alſo when hee had gotten the tallents of Naaman: or for both reſpects together, as Anantas and Saphira; and Saul alſo: See his anſwere Acts. 5. 5.
                     
1. Sam. 15. Let the credit of ſuch be with vs thereafter. In ſtead of this dealing 1. Sam. 15. 20. wee ſee the beautie of truth and faithfulnes, without which, how can men liue one with another? Put away lying therefore, as the Apoſtle willeth, Epheſ. 5. 25. and ſpeake the truth euery man to his neighbour.
                  In this vnreaſonable and abſurd anſwere of this King, compared with 
                        Doct. 2. 
                     Iphtah his wiſe and equall proceeding, we ſee the contrarietie of mens diſpoſitions: there are ſome that ſtriue by all poſſible meanes againſt contention and vnpeaceablenes: there are others againe, whoſe delight it is to be euer at debate and oddes with ſuch as full gladly would liue at peace, as Eſau with Iacob: and all becauſe they would make a gaine and bootie of them that are honeſtly minded, or haue their will of them ſome other way. They know a godly man will buy his peace deare, rather then want it: and they wil lay loade enough vpon ſuch therefore, to ſee what they can wring from them, although without all colour of equitie. Beſides, peace is vile and of no price with an vnrighteous perſon, there is nothing to be got by it, hee ſaith: but when the water is troubled, then is his ſeaſon to caſt in, and therefore all is fiſh that comes to net. Who ſeeth not that this King was miſchieuouſly minded, in that he ſhapeth ſuch an anſwere as either (being yeelded vnto) tended to the vndoing of a Tribe; or if not, threatned implacable diſſention? So Benhadad ſends this meſſage to Ahab, Thou and all thou haſt 1. King. 20. 3. are mine, deny it if thou dareſt. It is plaine he was ſet vpon warre, who ſent ſo proud a challenge, as excluded all poſſibilitie of agreement and peace. And ſuch there are in all places, who (if they might haue their mindes) would chuſe warre, rather then to liue in peace, that they might boldly rifle their houſes whom they grudge at, and whom they could not ſuffer to liue by them, except they might poſſeſſe them, and all they haue, as Hamor ſpake of Iacob and his ſonnes to the men of his citie: Therefore ſeeſt thou an vnrighteous Gen. 34. 23. perſon? wonder not then if thou heare of vnreaſonablenes to come from him: for theſe two goe yoked together, (though feare and danger of law doe oft reſtraine the inward corruption from breaking out) ſo hideous a monſter is iniuſtice, if it might be ſeene in the colours! As for this practiſe of lying, forging, ſubborning, concealing truth, and impudent facing out an ill cauſe (as an ill title, to goe no further) for aduantage ſake, though to the treading downe of the poore innocent, nay, to his vtter vndoing, when was it more common then now adaies? And this euill (as well as other ſcurfe and iniquitie) will cleaue to the better ſort too, (if the diuell can) and he will alſo, except they walke armed with their breaſt-plate continually. Epheſ. 6. 14.
                  
                  In theſe fiue verſes, Iphtah ſends word againe to the King of the Ammonites, Verſ. 14. to 19. that it was not ſo as he affirmed: they tooke no part of his ground to them: and then proceeds further by reaſons to perſwade him to deſiſt from his attempt. As firſt thus: Iſrael ſent meſſengers when they came out of Egypt, to the King of Edom to goe through his land, and he not yeelding to them, they were faine to goe a great way about, by a long and tedious iourney in the wilderneſſe: ſo they deſired to paſſe by Moab alſo, and could not be ſuffered. But did they make warre with either of both? No, they choſe rather to abide long in the deſert, and to goe farre about (as I haue ſaid:) ſo farre is it off, that they did them any wrong, that they choſe rather

to offer violence to themſelues. So that they did no iniurie to any. And was it like then, that they would offer violence to any? and conſequently, not to thy predeceſſors, the children of Ammon.
                  As Iphtah heere giues not place to vntruth, though hee preuailed not: Doct. ver. 14 15 wherein he honoured the Lord, in bearing witneſſe to a good cauſe; ſo let vs know, it is our dutie to doe: namely to bring the truth to light, as much as in vs lieth; if it be but to bring them to ſhame who reſiſt it, for they worke much miſchiefe and iniquitie thereby: and to hold ſinne from multiplying, as it doth greatly by lying. And haue we it in greater deteſtation, then ſome of them who would be taken for honeſt men, for as much as we know that the Lord hath linked ſuch as loue to make lies among dogges, Inchanters, Reuel. 22. 15. and whoremongers. And let vs remember that which Salomon ſaith: Hee who iuſtifieth the wicked, (lier or other) is as abominable to the Lord, as he Prou. 17. 15. that condemneth the innocent. And the Apoſtle puts the conſenter to euill (whether to lying, ſwearing, &c.) in an higher degree of ſinners, then the committers. As who ſeeth not, that the Phariſees and Iewes which hired Matth. 27. 20. and fleſhed the falſe witneſſes againſt our Sauiour, were worſe then the falſe witneſſes themſelues? Thus Samuel conuicted Saul of his lye, 1. Sam. 15. Eliſha 
                     1. Sam. 15. 14. 2. King. 5. 26. Gal. 2. 14. argued Gehazi. Nay Paul, Galath. 2. did openly checke and detect diſſimulation in Peter, and reſiſted him to his face. The truth is, men in generall hate lying, both the coyner of it, and the teller of it: but in particular, there are ſo many occaſions fall out, (as ſometimes when a man in fauour of his kinſman will not ſticke to ſweare againſt conſcience to purge him of adulterie) to lay men open who doe ſo, that their generall hatred thereof, is turned into a ſpeciall liking of it, or a tolerating it, and conniuence at it. Neither is it ſtrange, that they who are not iuſt and armed with the breaſt-plate of righteouſneſſe, ſhould want the girdle of veritie. Some for bribes, fauour, flatterie, friendſhip, commoditie, and ſuch like partiall and ſmiſter reſpects, will (to vſe the prouerbe) not ſticke to ſay, The crow is white, if their great patrons, or ſuch as they depend vpon, wil ſay it before them: and others for feare, are driuen to conceale the truth, and to heare a falſehood iuſtified, who are as bad as lyers, and coupled with them, Reuel. the laſt. And yet we muſt know, that euery vntruth is not a lie, except we know that which we report as an vntruth, to be ſo. Yet muſt we beware that we offend not therein, neither by vttering raſhly whatſoeuer we heare ſpoken of other (but as it may doe good:) neither in telling the truth are wee bound to vtter all the truth, further then we ſhall ſee it expedient to doe ſo.
                  
                     Iphtah not onely withſtands an vntruth, but alſo ſheweth reaſon: ſo wee Verſ. 15. 16. 17. muſt withſtand vntruth by reaſon, approued of all and of the Scripture it ſelfe; ſo that they who will not yeeld to it, may ſhew themſelues vnreaſonable, and ſo they are to bee accounted, and no better, who waſh away all ſound reaſon, which they are not able to reſiſt, breeding quarrelling and contention hereby: wherein the Phariſies and Prieſts went before other, neuer reſting in the moſt ſound reaſons, wherewith our Sauiour in commoning with them, did conuince them, but withſtood them ſhameleſly. So when other alleage reaſons to vs, it is our dutie to yeeld to them: as Laban himſelfe though an Idolater, anſwered Abrahams ſeruant, in that matter hee dealt with him for; ſeeing the report which he made of things vnto him, to

be ſo currant and reaſonable, I can ſay neither leſſe nor more, ſaith hee, for Gen. 2
                           •
                        . 50. this thing is of the Lord. But more of this in the 28. verſe by way of vſe hereof.
                  Now what his reaſon was we haue heard: to wit, that the children of Iſrael 2 did offer violence to themſelues, rather then they would in the leaſt manner wrong other: therefore they would much leſſe take away ſo great a portion of ground from him with whom they had nothing to do, neither were prouoked by him. Where we learne this, that we ſhould neuer finde ſweetneſſe in comming by any profit amiſſe, and namely with the hurting and wronging of other. Firſt, ſeeing wee thereby prouoke God againſt vs, for God is the auenger of ſuch things: and what is our life, if God be againſt Gen 12. 3. Matth. 7. 2. vs? Beſides, as we deale to other, ſo ſhall we be dealt with againe: and laſtly, beſides an ill name, wee ſhall haue an ill conſcience alſo, as wee may ſee in Iudas.
                  
                  And as we ſhould offer hard meaſure to none, ſo leaſt of all to the poore, and to ſuch as cannot beare the loſſe, and are not able to ſtand with vs in ſuite. For wee being by the commandement of God to relieue them, what pleaſure ſhould wee take in plucking from them? and God threatens to Rom. 12. 13. heare their crie againſt their oppreſſors. And yet how are the poore griped and pilled? But he that obſerueth it, ſhall find, that either God maketh themſelues who ſo wrong them, to crie out of it, for feare of his reuenging hand, one time or other: or elſe it ſhall be to them, I meane their ſweete morſels (as they count them) which they take in by wronging other, as the Iſraelites Quailes were, who died with them, while they were in their mouthes. Euen Numb. 11. 33. ſo ſhall they haue ſmall liking of their iniurie they doe, that I ſay no more. But let them rather make reſtitution, and that ſpeedily, while they may, in token of their repentance, which is the onely good end that can be made of ſuch doings. This point hath oft come to hand and largely been inſiſted vpon. See verſe twelfth. Only let vs marke the example of Iacob for the proofe of the doctrine, who rather then he would giue Laban (a quarrellous and Gen. 31. 39. vnreaſonable man) the leaſt occaſion to challenge him for pillage and robberie, did more then he needed, euen make good euery ſheepe, which was caſſually deſtroyed or periſhed, with his owne. Now if all this our good dealing, doe not preuaile with our euill aduerſarie, nor ſtop his mouth, yet (as Iacob anſwers Laban) the Lord who ſeeth vs in ſecret, will take our cauſe into his owne hand, and plead for vs; whereas otherwiſe, although all men ſhould ſtand out for vs, yet our conſcience and God being againſt vs, wee ſhould not be able to ſtand vnder our burthen.
                  Another reaſon Iphtah ſetteth downe in theſe verſes, thus: Sihon, king of Verſ. 19. to the 25. the Ammonites, would needs come out againſt vs, as wee were going toward Canaan, and God gaue him into our hands, ſo that by him wee enioy this land which ye contend for, and which he enioyed; and therfore what haue ye to doe to claime it? or what right haue yee vnto it? For yee neuer poſſeſſed it, but Sthon of whom we wonne it by the law of warre. So that if the Lord our God hath caſt him out, and giuen his land to vs, commeſt thou in who haſt nothing to doe with it, againſt vs to poſſeſſe it? Hee further in the 24. verſe ſheweth that which he ſaid cleerely by a ſimilitude, thus: Yee Ammonites worſhip the Idoll Chemoſh for your god, and you thinke that

the land which yee poſſeſſe, yee inioy it by his benefit, and ſo by good right: ſo we haue this by the benefit of the true God, and therefore we poſſeſſe it by very good right. And as for Chemoſh, hee called not that idoll a God, for that hee tooke it to bee ſo, but for that the Ammonites ſo iudged it to be.
                  We may ſee here, how farre we may lawfully enioy ſuch things as are taken Doct. verſ. 19. to the 29. in warre: and that is, when the warre is lawfully taken in hand, as by Iſrael it was. That which we thereby obtaine by good ſucceſſe, that may we enioy, as giuen into our hands by the Lord. And to ſpeake of things more priuat, the ſame may be ſaid of all that God giueth vs by the good will of our friends, or by our lawfull dealing, and by Gods bleſſing in our calling. But yet with this watchword, that wee honour him therewith in Chriſtian life, and glad the hearts of Gods people thereby: which we ought as well to do, as to be able to prooue and ſhew, that the commodities we enioy, are no fruites of our owne rapine, oppreſſion, couetouſneſſe, and euill conſcience, but indeed the bequeſts of our father, which, as Iacob ſaid, the Lord our Geneſ. 32. 10. Geneſ. 33. 5. God hath beſtowed, as a bleſſing vpon vs his ſeruants, ſeeking firſt the things that concerne our happineſſe and God his kingdome, and receiuing from him theſe ſmaller things againe, in token of his allowing and approouing of vs. But this is an vſuall argument in this booke, therefore I paſſe by it.
                  More particularly, let vs note out of this verſe, in that Iſrael would not Doct. verſ. 19. (and was guided by God therein) when he had great need, ſo much as goe through the land of Sihon without his leaue, learne we hence I ſay, that no man may vſurpe or challenge to himſelfe another mans right, but euery man is to be content with his owne portion and allowance; yea in this the Lord will haue the meaneſt free from the tyrannie of the greateſt, and taketh the cauſe of the poore into his owne hand, againſt their potent enemies, though there be none vpon earth that can iudge them, as in the caſe of Ahab and Iezabels extorting Naboths vineyard, doth appeare. And the reaſon is good: for next to the good of the Church, the Lord hath a ſpecial care of vpholding of ſocietie among men, by order and good gouernment, which are ouerthrowne when proprietie in goods and commodities is taken away, by the vnequall vſurpation of the greater ouer the ſmaller. And in truth, as there is ſmall oddes betwixt beaſts and men, when the common bands of equitie are broken: ſo much leſſe is it like, that a Church can bee ſetled and eſtabliſhed in ſuch confuſion: and the greater is their ſinne, who euen in the Church exerciſe this miſchieuous practiſe, whereof not God (who is the God of order) but Satan is the author, euen as he is of all other diſorders. Therefore let none be troubleſome or iniurious to other, more then he would be content, that another ſhould wrong or hurt him in that which is his. None ſhould be oppreſſed in bargaining, or otherwiſe, as the Lord by the Apoſtle hath giuen in charge; which if it were well regarded, 1. Theſ. 4. 6. much complaining of iniurie and hard dealing would ceaſe. But this is a branch of the other.
                  It came of the Lord, that Sihon did not only deny paſſage to Iſrael through Doct. verſ. 10. to the 23. his land, but alſo that he ſhould prouoke them to warre, that he might giue him and his land into their hands, and withall giue them paſſage through his country. Euen ſo it is, that many doe wilfully and ſtiffely oppoſe themſelues

againſt the innocent, as by ſuites of law, vntill their wealth bee conſumed, as the fat of lambes againſt the Sunne. Others meddle needleſly, where they haue no cauſe oft times, neither can by any reaſon bee diſſwaded, yea and ſome with their betters, through a proud ſtomack (contrary to the counſell of Salomon) becauſe the Lords meaning is, to let them fall into euill, and to ſuffer them to meet with their match, that they may pay for their griping of their vnderlings, and ſmart for their owne ſinne. For otherwiſe he would, as he is able, hold them back ſome way. And thus adulterers, drunkards, cauillers, and ſuch wilfull perſons, go forward, but to their confuſion. And ſo Elies ſonnes were hardned, that they might be deſtroyed. 1. Sam. 2. 25. And Pharao in not ſuffering Iſrael to depart. So Ahab would not heare Micaiah, 
                     Exod 14. 8. 1. King. 22. 28. that ſo he might fall at Ramoth. And had Iudas proceeded on to betray his Maſter, (thinke we) hauing had ſo faire a warning by him a little before (enough to haue cooled his courage, and to haue holden him backe from ſuch an attempt) but that he was a curſed veſſell of wrath appointed to miſery? And happie is he who relenteth and meekely ſubmitteth himſelfe to God by reſiſting his wicked attempts, and ſtopping his bad courſe: leſt by kicking againſt the pricks, he goe forward to his ſorrow and deſtruction. And this is much more verified in ſuch as will take no counſell by the reproofe of the law of God, but turne away their eares from it, yea liue a long time vnder it vnprofitably, till they waxe obdurate: ſurely thus they do, becauſe they of al others are the vnhappy people, whō the Lord hath not purpoſed, by his promiſe and the miniſtery of the Goſpell, to conuert and ſaue. Elſe why ſhould it not be the caſe of all aſwellas of ſome? Now if any will cauill againſt this and ſay, either that God is bound to deale with them as he did with Paul, whom hee ſaued by violence as it were: or that God in ſo hardning men, is the author of their perdition: I anſwere to the firſt, that God is a free agent, & bound to none of his creatures, he need not at al ſtop them in their euill courſe, much leſſe to ſtriue with them, when they breake through his oppoſing of them, as Balaam did in his iourney to the King of Numb. 22. 18. 19. 
                     Moab. For the latter I ſay, that the Lord need not cauſe any mans deſtruction, for if he ſtay him not, he runneth on to it of his owne accord: and as for the Lord, he finds matter of ſinne in him (he neede not infuſe any) and therfore if he doe not mollifie the heart, it waxeth hard of it ſelfe without his hardning of it.
                  And here further we ſee, that the wilfulneſſe and ſtiffeneckedneſſe of euill Doct. verſ. 21. 22. and rebellious perſons redoundeth to the benefit of Gods ſeruants many times, who haue to doe with them. The reaſon is, that God reſiſteth the 1 Pet. 5 5. proud, and giueth grace to the lowly. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that ſuch wilfull perſons meete with much hardneſſe, they prouoke other againſt them, and although they want not power, yet by crueltie, violence, and raſhneſſe, they runne themſelues againſt a rocke, and contrarily algoeth much the better with the other, (for the moſt part, though ſometime they be borne downe) and in ſuites and comprimiſes their innocency and good dealing is ſeene and rewarded. Thus the Lord gaue ſentence on Dauids ſide againſt Saul, and choſe him, rather, then his houſe, and rewarded the innocencie of the one, and gaue vp the other to a reprobate ſenſe.
                  And by theſe two verſes we ſee, that Gods ſeruants may with good ſecurity, Doct. verſ. 23. 24.
                     
and boldnes, vſe and inioy the poſſeſſions and goods which God hath giuen to them, and by much better reaſon then other, who think that to be their owne which they haue, howſoeuer they haue come by it: whereas theſe haue no ſanctified vſe of any thing they enioy, hauing no right nor title to it from God by Chriſt who is heire of al, although the meanes be lawfull which they vſe: but beſides that, they come vnlawfully (many of them) by much of it: they I meane. The other not only haue right to it by Chriſt, but alſo haue ſought it by a good conſcience, and the vſe is accordingly bleſſed vnto them. This I ſay we may learne by that Iphtah anſwered the King of Ammon thus: Thou thinkeſt it to be thine which Chemoſh (as thou imagineſt) hath giuen thee, much more we may enioy this land of the Amorites which the Lord hath giuen vs. But this I toucht in the 18. verſe.
                  In the frame of this argument wee may obſerue the arguers diſcretion. He conuinceth his aduerſarie, by a ground confeſſed by himſelfe, handling it comparatiuely after this manner: Thou (ſaith he) thinkeſt thou haſt good right to that which is giuen thee, and that by Chemoſh: ſo doe I account my ſelfe to hold that firmely, which Iehouah my God hath granted me. Wee know he might haue ſaid, much more may I lay claime to Iehouah his gift, then thou to thy Idoll, who indeed hath no more authoritie, then deitie. He might haue diſcourſed much (and that truly) touching the difference betweene God and an Idoll, Heathens and Iewes, the true Church of God: But to what purpoſe? he might haue been ridiculous, but he could not (by ſuch diſpute) haue conuicted him. To teach vs, that all men muſt not bee alike handled in confutatation of their errors, hereſies, prophane cuſtomes: but by grounds acknowledged by themſelues, they muſt bee vrged to confeſſe the truth of concluſions which they would not acknowledge. No man putteth new wind into old veſſels: No man puniſheth a Frenchman by Engliſh law: for why? he takes not himſelfe to ſtand bound to a law which he neuer conſented vnto: the law Ciuil is not like the Common law. Sometime we may take the true confeſſion of our aduerſarie, as an argument againſt him: and this is the more forcible of the two; both becauſe it is a truth, (and therefore of it ſelfe confuteth the contrary neceſſarily) and alſo becauſe we conſent with him therein (whereby we ſhew that wee would not diſſent from him at all, if it were poſſible to auoid it.) And ſometimes wee may vſe his owne confeſſion againſt him, though it be falſe, ſo it bee to conuince him, and doe him good, (for otherwiſe we muſt not abuſe his errour to hurt him:) and this manner of arguing, though it conclude not directly, yet it is ſtrong againſt him that holdeth it. The Apoſtle Paul being to conuict the Athenians of their falſe worſhip, firſt argues from an abſurd confeſſion of their own, abſurd in reaſon, Ye worſhip (ſaith he) an vnknowne God, as the title of your Altar importeth, and therefore ye know not how ye worſhip: whereupon doubtleſſe your worſhip is a prepoſterous, and falſe worſhip. And we know Paul vſeth one kind of Apologie to Heathen Feſtus and Felix, another to Agrippa a Iew borne. This teacheth vs in dealing with any aduerſary of the truth, to ſmite him with his owne weapon, not with Gods weapons, drawne from the Armorie of the Scriptures, which are truths by reuelation only, not by nature; and therefore to ſuch as they are vnreuealed vnto, they are as Pauls doctrine of Reſurrection was to the profane Stoicks.

The Church ſmiteth not the Infidell by ſpirituall Cenſures: becauſe he is not capable of ſpirituall direction and doctrine. There are none ſo erronious, but they hold ſome truths: and the truths which they hold, may ſerue to infringe the errors they maintaine. And ſo when they are brought to ſuſpect or renounce falſehood, they may the ſooner be perſwaded to admit the truth, which before their ſtrong preiudice will not ſuffer them to doe. The Heathen by confeſſing a Deitie, may by graduall conſequences, be forced to acknowledge an vnitie: and ſo by the workes of this deity, vrged to confeſſe a worſhip due thereto, and that inward aſwell as outward, as alſo to ſee the folly of his manner of worſhipping. And thus being prepared, hee may the better be inſtructed in the truth. The reaſon of the former point is, becauſe all truth is vniforme, and repugneth to all falſehood, though it be not diſcerned ſo to be but by demonſtration. So the Popiſh Tranſubſtantiation, the Lutheran Vbiquitie, are beſt confuted by their owne poſitions and confeſſions (as alſo other their errors and hereſies) and not by our own. Neither will it be hard to doe ſo, ſince that it is impoſſible, but that he who writes many truths ſhould contradict himſelfe in his errors ere he be aware. And let this courſe be vſed againſt the ignorant and vngrounded: neither let vs preſently raile vpon ſuch or abandon them, becauſe they are not perſwaded by the things which are forcible with vs, but let them be kindly drawne on, by little and little, and not driuen further of. Thus much bee ſaid of that which hitherto hath paſſed betwixt Iphtah and the King of Ammon.
               
            
         
         
            
               THE SIXTIE SEVEN SERMON ON THE ELEVNTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  NOw to proceede: In communication betwixt the King of Ammon and Iphtah, it followeth, that he vſed another Verſe 25. reaſon to the King of Ammon by his meſſengers: and that is preſcription, & long continuance of time, euen 300. yeeres well nigh: all which time this ground was neuer claimed. No, nor Balac the King of Moab, when Iſrael was newly come into the cities belonging to it, and dwelt in them, neuer challenged it, nor contended for it, when yet hee ſtroue with them, that they ſhould not enter into his owne borders. Now this reaſon of Iphtah muſt be vnderſtood to follow vpon the former more pertinent reaſons, after this manner. He had prooued directly, that this land was no part of the Ammonites land: now he proues further, that Ammon could lay no iuſt claime to it in any ſecond reſpect: as becauſe it was a part of the Amorites land, bordering

vpon them. For (ſaith he) then might Moab aſwell (nay better) challenge it then the Ammonites: which yet neither they did, nor had done in 300. yeeres ſpace before. If the reaſon be not thus conſidered, it concludeth nothing: for it doth not directly follow, that Ammon had no title to it, becauſe Moab had none. Thus Iphtah anſwered him, and then committed the ſucceſſe to God. But the King of the Ammonites did not hearken to him.
               Although Iphtah ſheweth that for 300. yeeres, Iſrael enioyed the country Doct. verſe 25. 26. of the Amorites quietly, yet hee brought other reaſons alſo, drawne from right and reaſon aſwell as fact and poſſeſſion: which made that more ſtrong as we haue heard. All which laid together, did ſufficiently prooue that the land was theirs, and that the King of Ammon did trouble them vniuſtly, and without cauſe. This I ſay, for that we may know, that preſcription of time, as it may fall out, (though ſeldome it doe ſo) is no ſufficient reaſon, to hold our commodities by: but that there may be right on the other ſide, and good proofe for the ſame: and yet our law, ſuppoſing a great likelihood of right to be on our ſides, when we haue long enioyed our lands, hath well determined the controuerſie, by giuing it to vs, when it hath been long enioyed of vs and our predeceſſors, ſeeing (otherwiſe many endleſſe contentions might ariſe) becauſe it is not like that any aliue can alleage any good reaſon againſt ſo long a cōtinuance of time, neither can bring any thing certaine from former times to ouerthrow it. And the equitie of the law aimeth at that which moſt vſually, though not generally or infallibly, holdeth for the moſt part ordinarily.
               And where Iphtah ſaith, that Balak King of Moab ſtood againſt Iſrael ſtiffely to hold him from going through his land, yet hee ſtroue not with them for the recouering this land of the Amorites, which he might as iuſtly haue done, as he the King of Ammon did, hee prooueth thereby, that he had nothing to doe with it, nor any right vnto it. Teaching this thereby, that when men are deadly ſet againſt their aduerſaries for any matter, ſeeking thereby to vexe them in the ſoreſt manner they can, they would ſhew their rancor, in bringing foorth greater crimes and accuſations againſt them then they doe, (whereby they might much more eaſily bring them downe) if they were prouided with any. And whereas they ſeeke to blemiſh their names, or to impoueriſh their eſtate, or to afflict their perſons by reſtraint of libertie, impriſonment or baniſhment: they doe as the old Serpent, bite at their heele, becauſe they cannot breake their head, but they would be gladdeſt of all to ſhed their blood. God indeed plucks them back, and ſo they vomit not their poiſon out, to ſo great miſchiefe as they conceiue it, but fall ſhort: but their poiſon is nothing leſſe deadly for all that, they want but matter to worke vpon. And this is manifeſt by theſe two ſignes: the one, that they are content to take the ſlighteſt occaſions, and rather chooſe to be ridiculous in their malice, then not malicious: the other, that both they aggrauate their ſlender accuſations, with ſlanderous additions of their owne inuenting, and combe both the warpe and the woof, both the crime and the amplification thereof in the diuels forge, their lying hearts and braines, becauſe the innocency of their aduerſarie yeelds them no iuſt exception. Thus thoſe enemies of our Sauiour (for want of matter) ſuborned falſe witneſſes:

which periurie argued, they would not haue ſpared to produce true and greater crimes if they could haue found them. It is noted of Daniels aduerſaries, Dan. 6. 5. chap. 6. that wanting matter of treaſon, they were faine to bring out his religion againſt him: which (as they contriued the matter, by the law they made for the purpoſe) toucht his life alſo: but if they had found ought to lay to his charge in the other, they would rather haue vſed it.
               This doctrine ſerueth to anſwere them who pretend for the couering of their malice, that whereas they vexe their aduerſarie one way, they could doe it many waies, and ſay, that they haue greater and more cauſes to purſue them, then that one which they alleage. But all ſuch ſpeech is bragging and boaſting without iuſt cauſe: for if they had greater, doth any man doubt but they would take their aduantage by vſing them, when as they proſecute the ſmaller ſo hotly againſt them?
               Vpon the forementioned reaſons, he concludeth, that hee gaue him no cauſe to make warre with him, as he had done, but hee had been ſtirred vp Doct. verſ. 27. vniuſtly againſt him. And as Iphtah was bold to accuſe him, and auouch his owne innocencie, hauing ſo good proofe for both, ſo euery one that can proue the goodneſſe of his cauſe, ſhall bee able boldly to defend his owne innocencie, againſt his aduerſaries and accuſers, to their ſhame and iuſt reproch, and their owne peace and comfort. Whereas other muſt be driuen to vſe ſhifts, as lying, diſſembling, boldnes, heate, multiplying of words, and falſe witneſſes, as may be ſeene in the cauſe of the Prieſts and Phariſies accuſing our Sauiour before Pilat. The truth ſeeketh no corners. See notes vpon verſes 14. and 15.
               And ſo hee appealing to the moſt higheſt for his ſimplicitie in the matter, 2 to be iudge therein, he endeth his meſſage. Thus muſt wee be able to doe, I meane not to be afraid, to make the Lord iudge in the cauſe, that ſo, though we be iuſtled to the walles by our vnequall Iudges vpon earth, yet we may reſt in Gods teſtimonie of and vnto vs and our cauſe, and therefore, not fearing man, may be confident; verifying the prouerbe, The righteous 
                  Prou. 28. 1. Iob 31. 35. 
                  is bold as a lion. In the ſame kinde Iob ſpeaketh, ſaying: Though mine aduerſary ſhould write a booke againſt me, would not I take it vpon my ſhoulder and binde it as a crowne to me? Meaning it ſhould be to his commendation. But ſeeing the men of the world ſee boldnes ſo much to preuaile in the defence of their bad cauſes, therfore they face out matters themſelues thereby. Wherby this watch-word is needfull to bee giuen them, that men looke not ſo much how boldly they ſtand in the defence of themſelues and their doings, as how truly: for that which in a good cauſe is courage, in an euill is impudence.
               But though Iphtah had ſaid enough, and that alſo to good purpoſe, yet we Verſ. 28. ſee that it moued the King of Ammon nothing at all, but as he had taken a bad cauſe in hand, ſo he meant to defend it vnto the death; euen as men too commonly doe, who hauing begun an ill matter, doe purpoſe to goe forward. So that we ſee wiſe and ſound reaſons, and perſwaſions, howſoeuer they be vſed, both to purpoſe and in ſeaſon, ſo that they (who can iudge) would thinke they might be like to preuaile and moue (eſpecially not knowing the corruption of the heart, which couers it ſelfe with ſhew of honeſtie) yet with the wilfull they doe no good, nor with any ſuch as bewray themſelues

(being put to it) to be reſolute to do wrong, and of a preiudicate mind, or poſſeſſed of ſtrong paſſions. Therfore it is that Salomon ſaith, A word more 
                  Prou. 17. 10. 
                  entreth into the wiſe, then an hundred ſtripes will auaile with the froward. This humour poſſeſſeth many, whom it would not eaſily be thought to be in, and therefore (being diſcouered) ſo much the worſe beſeemeth them, euen ciuill courteous perſons, ſtill, and ſometimes religious: becauſe, either they ſuſpect not themſelues, and ſo are ouertaken by any occaſion ſuddenly falling out: or elſe they nouriſh this ſerpent in their boſome wilfully. Naaman was taken with that tech, (and no marueile he being an Heathen (when he heard the Prophets anſwere, by what meanes he told him he ſhould be healed. But highly to be commended was Dauid, who receiued the counſell of Abigail (a woman) ſo readily, to turne him from a cruell and wicked reſolution. And euen ſo, they who are obſtinate, (as thinking it a diſcredit to them to deſiſt) ſhall meete with more ſhame by proceeding: but happie are the meeke and tractable, who receiue the wholeſome words of exhortation, and ſtop not their eares from good counſell, but ſubmit themſelues without reſpect thereto: ſuch ſhall deliuer themſelues from great euill. And (a man would thinke) ſuch behauiour doth better become profeſſors of the Goſpell, then wilfulnes and obſtinacie. Concerning the vſe, whereof I haue ſpoke ſomewhat by the like occaſion in the 21. and 22. verſes: let the reader ioyne them both together.
               
                  Verſ. 29. Then the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon Iphtah, and hee paſſed ouer to Gilead, and to Manaſſeh, and came to Mizpeh in Gilead, and from Mizpeh in Gilead, he went vnto the children of Ammon.
                  
                  30. And Iphtah vowed a vow vnto Lord, and ſaid, If thou ſhalt deliuer the children of Ammon into mine hands,
                  
                  31. Then that thing that commeth out of the doores of mine houſe to meete me, when I come home in peace from the children of Ammon, ſhall be the Lords, and I will offer it for a burnt offering.
                  
                  32. And ſo Iphtah went vnto the children of Ammon to fight againſt them, and the Lord deliuered them into his hands:
                  
                  33. And he ſmote them from Aroer vntill thou come to Minneth, twentie Cities, and ſo foorth to Abel of the vineyards, with an exceeding great ſlaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were humbled before the children of Iſrael.
                  
               
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  IN this third part it is ſhewed generally, that Iphtah ouercame and ſubdued the Ammonites. And in particular, firſt how God gaue him the ſpirit The ſenſe of theſe fiue verſes. of courage and fortitude to this end. Secondly, that before hee entred the battell hee made a vow to the Lord, that if hee ſhould get the victorie, hee would offer that to him, which ſhould firſt come out of doores to meete him. Thirdly, how after this he went forward to Gilead and Manaſſeh, and came to the place where the Ammonites were: and ſo laſtly, how (fighting with them) the Lord deliuered them into his hands.
                  In this verſe it is ſhewed how Iphtah came to the Ammonites: from Mizpeh in Gilead (for it is diſtinguiſhed from that Mizpeh, that is in the Tribe

of Inda.) Before that, the Lord had furniſhed him with gifts of his ſpirit fit for warre, both valiantnes of mind and ſtrength of body, as was ſaid before. And by this it may appeare, that the Lord had appointed before, that hee Doct verſ. 29. ſhould be their Iudge and deliuerer, though it was vnknowne to the people when they ſent to him to haue him to be their Captaine.
                  Now for our inſtruction and benefit, heere wee may ſee, that when the Lord appointeth any man to any ſpeciall calling, hee giues him gifts for the diſcharge of it. When Moſes was to be ſent to Pharao, hee alleaged his vnfitnes and vnſufficiencie to ſpeak to a King, the Lord prouided for that, before he began to diſcharge it. The Apoſtles likewiſe whom Chriſt left weake and vnfurniſhed for ſuch a worke as they were to take in hand after his aſcenſion, to wit, to preach the Goſpell to the moſt nations of the world, yet before they tooke it in hand, he made them meete for the worke they went about.
                  So Iphtah, when hee was to fight againſt the Ammonites, for the deliuering of Iſrael, hee was by the ſpirit of God indued with gifts for that purpoſe, euen farre greater then he had before, now when hee was ſet about a greater worke. So the Miniſters much more, as the calling is farre more excellent, when hee ſendeth them to any people to conuert them, and make them of his militant Church, hee ſtirres them vp by loue, zeale and labour, to ſet their gifts of knowledge a worke, and maketh a great change among the people by their miniſterie. They who are vnfit to doe the Lords meſſage Note. to them to whom they are ſent, are not ſent by him, but ſeeke themſelues and their owne profit, and not the peoples. It is worthie our view to behold the difference of men called by God, and ſuch as climbe in by another way of their owne framing. Both doe one and the ſame worke, but the one ſets himſelfe aworke, the other is ſet aworke by God. The one (after his faſhion) goes about it: but how? awkly and vntowardly, by ſetting a bold face vpon the matter, by carrying a great ſhew, and bearing ſway, by preaching what and when he pleaſeth, and in the manner he liketh beſt: but errand he hath none to doe to the people, (no more then Cuſhi had to Dauid) and thereafter is his welcome. For as hee faileth of the end of his office, ſo loſeth he the honour of it; except with a few flatterers and hang-byes. Alas they haue enterprized a long race and iourney, without prouiſion to enable them to runne it through: It is not the habit that makes the Miniſter, nor the learning (though that comes neerer) degree, dignitie, or applauſe of man, which onely will carrie this worke through ſtitch: It is this, that God hath ſaid to him as to Paul and Moſes; Goe, I will be with thee: that is, fit thee, embolden thee, (for a Miniſter hath enough to diſcourage him, euen from within himſelfe, as I haue noted elſewhere) yea beare thee out againſt oppoſition, and encourage thee by bleſſing thy labour: otherwiſe all thy prouiſion is to little purpoſe, thou maiſt ſtand like a foole, errandleſſe & ſpeechleſſe. Now being called and ſeparated by God, (and therefore alſo qualified) though thy ſelfe a weake earthen veſſell, yet what precious treaſure doeſt thou carrie? How admirably doth the Lord make way for him, making high hils to ſtoope, and lie leuell before him, procuring honour from the conſciences (not the countenances onely) of ſuch as they haue wonne to God from the power of Satan and darkneſſe, by conuerting and ſauing

them. And by ſtopping the mouthes of ſuch as might deſpiſe and diſcourage them, ſaying: Who is this new-found babler? what, will hee beare downe all, and thinke to haue vs tyed to his girdle? No, no, he deales for his Maſter who ſent him, and therefore ſeekes to bring yee vnder the yoke and girdle of Chriſt: and therefore let the diſcouragements be neuer ſo great, Note. this worke ſhall proſper: and euen out of the mouthes of blockiſh, brutiſh, ſauage and ignorant, yea prophane ones, the Lord ſhall procure credit to his Miniſterie, (when he hath changed them thereby) and theſe ſhall iuſtifie wiſedome againſt all cauillers, ſcorners and enemies thereof. Let them be of neuer ſo many kindes, as in this age there are many, who (contrary to the manifeſt fruite they ſee) impeach either the ſufficiencie of their calling, or the worthineſſe of their meſſage. Oh therefore how lamentable is it, that all congregations are not thus furniſhed, and made partakers of ſo bleſſed an ordinance of God! Therefore the Lord Ieſus, to ſhew how pitifull a caſe it is, to ſee the people diſperſed, as ſheepe hauing no ſhepheard, he not onely had compaſſion on them himſelfe, but alſo willed the Diſciples to pray to Matth. 9. 38. the Lord of the harueſt to thruſt labourers into the harueſt, ſeeing none are forward to that worke, except the Lord ſtirre them vp thereto. This point hath been ſpoken of before, I therefore will not be tedious therein to the reader.
                  The vow, that I ſaid before Iphtah made, is heere ſhewed what it was: Verſ. 30. 31 namely, that he would in token of his thankfull heart, offer and dedicate to the Lord that thing that ſhould firſt come out of his houſe to meete him, if he returned with the victorie. This vow, though hee meant well, was ill made and in great ignorance, in that he did not make it more diſtinctly and aduiſedly. For what if a dogge had firſt met him? which is a fauning creature, and had been like enough to haue firſt come foorth to meete him? hee could not haue offered it to the Lord, it being vncleane, and ſo forbidden to be made a ſacrifice. His words haue this meaning when he ſaith (It ſhall be the Lords, and I will offer it for a burnt offering) that is, I will offer it in ſacrifice, and it ſhall be a burnt offering to the Lord, for hee meant ſimply, that he would offer the firſt thing that ſhould meete him; if he had thought of his daughter, would he haue made that vow? And will any ſay, that in ſo vowing, he meant, that if that which ſhould firſt meete him, ſhould not bee fit for ſacrifice, he would offer it to virginitie, and yet perhaps it ſhould not be fit for that neither? as if it had been a dogge: and if he had meant to offer it to virginitie, as ſome hold he did; did hee not ſee that his daughter had been moſt like to haue bin the partie vpon whom his vow ſhould haue bin performed? For who had bin liker to haue firſt come foorth to meete him then ſhe? And would he (thinke wee) haue vowed that which might haue turned to his owne, and his daughters ſo great ſorrow? Therefore I ſay, hee meant no offering of that which ſhould meete him, to perpetuall virginitie. Neither are thoſe words of his to be taken diſiunctiuely, as ſome think they may, thus: That which firſt commeth forth to meete me, ſhall be the Lords, or I will offer it. For though the Hebrew letter (
                        •
                     ) be ſo taken ſometime, yet very rarely: and ſo little reaſon is it, that it ſhould be ſo taken heere, being moſt commonly taken coniunctiuely, as they well know that haue any vnderſtanding in the Hebrew tongue, yea and oft in ſome one chapter, as may

eaſily be ſhewed. As for example in Geneſ. 32. 1. 2. 3. 4. foure of fiue times it is ſo taken in 3. or 4. verſes. So in Geneſ. 33. 1. 2. as oft in two verſes, and Geneſ. 45. 1. 2. 3. As many times it is found to be, and in moſt Chapters (if not all) throughout the old Teſtament this word (,) ſignifieth (and) coniunctiuely, not (or) diſiunctiuely, as I haue ſaid before. Therefore heere to take it otherwiſe, there is ſmall reaſon for it, eſpecially the ſenſe of the place not being amended thereby. For to vnderſtand it diſiunctiuely thus, [It ſhall be the Lords, or I will offer it] what ſenſe can it haue thus? If it be be not fit for ſacrifice, it ſhal be the Lords: How ſhould it be the Lords? they ſay by offering it to perpetuall virginitie, if it be fit thereto, for ſo ſome vnderſtand it, as I haue ſaid before? But where did God require virginitie to be inioyned to any children by their parents? or what example haue we thereof in Scripture? And yet if he had meant ſo in vowing, we know it had been moſt like to bee his daughter, I ſay againe, that ſhould firſt haue come foorth to meet him. Therefore what ſenſe can there bee in it to take it ſo, that hee would offer it to perpetuall virginitie, if it were not fit for ſacrifice? For this cauſe I conclude, that the words are to bee vnderſtood coniunctiuely, and the latter clauſe to be the expoſition of the former, thus: It ſhal be the Lords, and I will offer it in ſacrifice.
                  And if it be asked, whether Iphtah offended in making ſuch a vow, which ſome think he did not, becauſe it is ſaid here, that the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon him: and againe, ſeeing he is reckoned in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes Hebr. 11. 32. among the faithfull. I anſwere, firſt to the queſtion, and after to the reaſons: to the queſtion, that if hee had vowed ſimply to be thankfull, he had done well: but in ſuch a vowing as this was, hee ſinned greatly, as ſhall appeare better, when we come to his performing of the vow afterward, verſ. 39. And to the firſt reaſon I anſwer, that the ſpirit which is ſaid in this verſe, to come vpon him, was the ſpirit of courage and fortitude for war: although it is not denied that he was a beleeuer, and had the ſpirit of ſanctification alſo. But what hindred, but that hee might in ſome particular actions, through ignorance or weaknes, offend, as Gedeon & Barak did, and yet they were the true ſeruants of God, and obtained the victory alſo, for all that? So many ſound Chriſtians among vs there are, who yet tread awry ſometimes, and ſo did Iphtah: and this one anſwere may ſerue both the reaſons: And this of and concerning his vow, till the 39. verſe before mentioned.
                  Now as he offended not in vowing (for that tended to the praiſing of Doct. God, though as he made it here, he faulted greatly) ſo wee may bee perſwaded, that it is a lawfull thing to make a vow to God. Whereby I meane neither the generall vow of faith and obedience required and performed, both in the old and new teſtament, neither that ſpeciall vow that was ceremonial onely, practiſed in the old Teſtament, and ſome where in the new (to wit, in the firſt age of the Church) but I meane that ſpeciall vow, which is a promiſe made to God, touching ſome duties to be performed to him, and to a good end: and this vow (if it be made accordingly) is lawfull, and belongs to the Church both of the old and new teſtament. Such a vow was Iphtahs (in reſpect of the godly intent thereof) but that it was not lawfully made, nor in a right manner, as hath been ſaid. And ſuch are ours, when we promiſe as Iacob did, that if God deliuer vs from ſuch a danger, wee will more Gen. 28. 20.
                     
carefully and conſtantly walke with him afterward.
                  And ſo when to helpe our dulneſſe and infirmitie, wee ſet ourſelues by firme couenant, to prayer and reading, more then ordinary, for meaſure or for frequency and feruency, and to giue ſet almes, for ſpecial cauſes knowne to our ſelues, or to keepe ſet times of faſting for a ſeaſon, as there ſhall bee cauſe; or if we perceiue and find our ſelues prone to drunkenneſſe, and in danger to fall thereto by drinking wine or ſtrong drinke, wee may vow to abſtaine for ſo long a time, as may bee fit to keepe our ſelues from ſinning. And although wee bee bound already hereunto by the word, yet may wee more ſolemnly, and for the better bridling of our rebellious nature, renew the ſame bond in a vow, to this end, to helpe our dulneſſe, for want of zeale, and to make our ſelues more forward in duty to God, and loue to men; as Dauid did: I haue ſworne (ſaith he) and I will performe it, to keepe thy righteous 
                     Pſal. 119. 116. 
                     iudgements.
                  
                  Theſe kinds of vowers are lawfull, ſo as they be agreeable to Gods word, and ſtand with Chriſtian liberty, and bee agreeable to our calling, both generall and particular; and be in our power, and made deliberately, not raſhly and the end of it be good: whereas not Popiſh vowes only, are failing in theſe, but euen Iphtahs alſo in many of theſe points. And although vowes made in this manner, are no part of Gods ſtanding and conſtant worſhip by themſelues, yet neither are they wilworſhips, nor yet ſimply left to our arbitriment alwaies, but to be vſed as helpes and furtherances to godlineſſe, wel approoued by the experience of the Saints, as to preſerue the gifts of faith, prayer, repentance, and other vertues of the mind, ſo alſo to teſtifie our thankfulneſſe to God, for bleſſings which wee haue receiued of him. And with this minde, Iacob vowed in the way as hee went to Aram, as I ſaid before. Gen. 28. 20.
                  
                  Now this vow of his, as it was a more then vſuall token of his thankfull heart, which he indented before hand to expreſſe, if God ſhould giue him the victorie: ſo wee muſt know that it proceeded from a rare feeling of the ſpirit of God exciting and quickning him vp to ſuch feruencie. Gods people find not themſelues alway in one tenor and tune, either for inward ioy and comfort in God, or for outward forwardneſſe to dutie. Paul had his 2. Cor 12. 9. lifting vp into the third heauen, and hee had alſo his buffeting to abaſe him lower then the earth. Peter was rauiſhed in ſpirit, when he was in his heauenly Act. 10. 11. &c. trance before his going to Cornelius, but we know hee had as rare ebbings at other times. Elias, a man of men, for grace and familiaritie with God, and that appeared by his reall aſſumption into heauen bodily: but he was in a poore caſe, when he was faine to flee from Iezabel, and goe 40. daies faſting and mourning for the miſery which lay vpon him and the Church: beſides his weakneſſes which he bewraied, and therefore is called by S. Iames a paſſionate man, one that was clothed with the like infirmities that others had. It were to be deſired, (& we heare men make great moane for the contrary) that there were alway in vs that abundance of grace, faith, feruencie, chearefulneſſe, which is at ſome odde time. But the contrary befalleth moſt men, partly the Lord ſo diſpoſing of it, becauſe hee knowes wee were not able to beare it, but would turne it into a diſtemper, (euen as too much good blood in the bodie makes a pleuriſie, and when there is more water in the channel

then it can containe: it muſt needs ouerflow the bankes, and doe harme) and partly our ſelues procuring it, who nouriſh not in our ſelues ſuch motions, nor make wiſe vſe of them, by ſetting them a work, and applying them to ſome fit obiect, (as Iphtah here did) but delight only in the ſweetneſſe and pleaſure which we feele, and ſo ſuffer the heauenly flame to vaniſh, for want of laying on fewell to preſerue it.
                  And although the Lord cauſeth his children, euen here, ſometimes in health, ſometime at death to enioy ſuch vnſpeakable feelings and operations of the ſpirit, (which hee doth to giue them ſuch a taſte of heauen, as may cauſe in them a reſtleſſe longing, til they come thither) yet he knoweth, they would ſay with Peter, Maſter it is good for vs to be here, and would thinke of Matth. 17. 4. no departure, if this ſhould be an ordinarie diet. Therefore he rather conſiders, what they can digeſt, then what he can afford, and ſaith, My grace ſhall neither be giuen in ſuperfluitie, nor yet in penury, but it ſhall be ſufficient. And let vs learne to account ſo of it, as the beſt for vs. Onely let vs beware, leſt by our giuing way to our fleſh (the counterpoiſe of the ſpirit) that is to the earth to our ſenſualitie and luſts; we bury and quench the ſpirit, and ſmother it from appearing in the beauty thereof; and alſo leſt wee cauſe it to be heauy and ſad in vs, and ſo our ſelues to bee blockiſh and ſottiſh, rather then heauenly and ioyfull: which is to chooſe to feede with ſwine, when we might eate Angels foode.
                  In theſe two verſes is not only ſet downe the victory, which God gaue to Iphtah ouer the Ammonites, but it is alſo particularly amplified and in larger Verſ 32. 33. manner deſcribed. As that many fell in the battell; and that hee ouerthrew twentie of their cities; and that hee brought the Ammonites in ſubiection to him. Where wee may clearely ſee, what it is that encourageth vs, and ſetteth vs forward in our duties doing. Euen the Lords appointing and calling vs thereto, as of the publike calling of the Miniſter I ſpake before: it is true of the priuate duties alſo. Husband and wife from thence haue their hartning on to liue mutuall helpers one of another to their Chriſtian and peaceable conuerſing together, and paſſing their daies ſweetly, and bearing their croſſes contentedly; euen from hence, I ſay, that they beleeue God hath ioyned them together to that end. So the Magiſtrate, and all other in the ſeuerall duties of this life. And want of this faith, is enough to make Note. mens liues ouercaſt, as the weather is with clouds and tempeſts, and to fill men with ſinne and ſorrow. Other things which might bee noted from hence, haue been mentioned before, but beſides them of theſe two a little.
                  In that the King of Ammon went by the worſt in the battell had with Verſ. 33. 
                     Iphtah, it ſhewes what wilfulneſſe brings a man, or the contempt or reiecting of good and ſound perſwaſions, ſuch as Iphtah vſed to diſſwade him from warre. For though he were an Heathen, yet he knew by the law of Nature, that he ought not to offer iniury to the innocent. And we know that when the Gentiles knew God onely by the light of nature, and did not honour Rom. 1. 19. him accordingly, he gaue them vp to their hearts deſires to fulfill them againſt nature. Much more, they who haue light in the word of God, hauing no regard of good inſtruction and admonition, ſhall come to naught, eſpecially the deſpiſers thereof, vnleſſe they take ſhame and abaſhment to themſelues for it, and ſo come to better ſtate: according to that which is written,

                     He that knoweth his Maſters will, and doth it not, ſhall bee beaten with many ſtripes. 
                     Luke 12. 47. But more of this puniſhment vpon wilfulneſſe, ſee before ſet downe by the like occaſions, and by name in Chap. 8. 14.
                  And in that hee loſt twentie cities which hee had of his owne, and loſt 2 thoſe alſo which he fought for, which were none of his, it liuely ſetteth before our eies, that many not contented with that which is their owne, while they claime to, and ſeeke that which belongs to other men, either by colour of law, or otherwiſe; they loſe that which they ſued for, and ſpend and conſume that which they had before. The Lord doth oft times requite their vnconſcionableneſſe that way: and yet in great mercy he dealeth with them in ſo doing, to keepe a heauier iudgement from them, who would Note. (moſt certainely) be worſe, if they ſhould by their corrupt and bad dealing ſpeed better, and be ſuffered to haue ſucceſſe.
                  I will cleare this point by example and inſtance. Pharaoh not contented to haue oppreſſed the Iſraelites (for many generatiōs) with bondage; would needs purſue them, when they were gotten out of his clawes, though hee had ſmarted many waies for not letting them goe. But what came of it? ſeeing Exod. 14. 28. he ſought vniuſtly to encroach vpon Gods poſſeſſion, he not onely failed of that hee deſired, but loſt alſo that which he ventured, euen his owne life, and all that hee had, and his people alſo, in the middeſt of the ſea. The ſame is verified in other parts of vnrighteouſneſſe: Sampſon not content to liue with credit and honour in his owne land, and within his compaſſe, would needs breake out among the Philiſtims, & there hit into Delilas company, which his ſoule entirely loued, (though vnlawfully) and was made a vaſſall to a baſe miſtreſſe. But behold a ſhort time this pleaſure of ſinne laſted: for loe, his louer rewards him with treaſon, and then Sampſon (poore Iudges 16. 20. man) is faine to forgoe his miſtreſſe by force, (who could not be plucked from her by conſcience,) and that which he abhorred, that he was made to vndergoe, (and that by them whom he moſt hated) to wit, a painefull bondage while hee liued, beſide ſhame and ſorrow, and after all, an vntimely death. I will inſtance firſt in the ſinnes of the ſecond Table. The murtherer and thiefe can by no perſwaſion bee brought to labour with his hands, and to doe the thing which is good: tuſh, it goeth vtterly againſt him to bee put to labour, and to worke hard all the yeere long for a poore liuing: hee can bring in all at once, and get great booties, to liue at eaſe, and plentifully for a long time, as he imagineth, and is not that a merry world? yes while it laſteth; in his kind, but how long is that? He gets two or three purſes, and in the fourth enterpriſe he is taken in the manner. Doth hee not then (thinke you) wiſh from his heart, that hee had obeyed Gods ordinance, and been hard at work, (as much as he loathed it before) rather then to haue put forth his hand to violence? For he ſeeth, that neither he hath obtained that which he ſought for: and that ouerthrow which he little looked for, that hee hath brought vpon himſelfe. He lay in waite for the life and goods of another: therein he was defeated, but this will not ſatisfie for his ſinne, he muſt giue life and goods to boote, and all to make amends by mans law. What needed he haue feared the law (which is not made for the iuſt, but the tranſgreſſor) 1. Tim. 1. 9. if he had holden himſelfe content with his owne? But men ſay they muſt venture: nothing venture nothing haue: till by venturing all, they loſe all: Note.
                     
not money and body, but ſoule alſo, if God be not more mercifull. Theſe things notably lay foorth the folly and fruit of ſinne, euen in outward reſpects: and yet it is as manifeſt in ſpirituall. For to adde another inſtance in the firſt Table: Many there are that ſay, they hope that God is not ſo hard a maſter, neither wil puniſh ſinners ſo ſeuerely as the Miniſters would beare them in hand: others goe further, and will enter vpon Gods prerogatiue, ſaying euery one for himſelfe, I cannot beleeue that God hath reiected ſo many thouſands, and will ſaue ſo few: (meaning, that if God doe ſo, hee is cruell.) But oh foole, as Paul ſaith, what getteſt thou by diſputing againſt God, nay by bereauing and ſpoiling him of his iuſtice, (oh ſacrilege and vnrighteouſnes in the higheſt degree?) Surely, as Auſtin ſaith (ſpeaking hereof, That which they would haue, they loſe, but that which they would not, they haue (euen woe) for euer. They would get heauen by diſanulling the decree of God: that ſhall they neuer get, (for the Moone keepes her courſe, though dogges barke at her:) and they would ſcape hell too, but that (will they, nill they) muſt be their portion for euer. But what fruit ſee we in the liues of moſt men, of this and the like doctrine, driuing and ſcaring them (a man would thinke) forcibly from all kind of vnrighteouſneſſe. But I paſſe from this to that which followeth.
               
            
         
         
            
               THE SIXTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 34. Now when Iphtah came to Mizpeh vnto his houſe, behold his daughter came out to meet him, with timbrels and dances, which was his only child: he had no other ſonne nor daughter.
                  
                  35. And when he ſaw her, hee rent his clothes, and ſaid, Alas my daughter, thou haſt brought me low, and art of them that trouble me: for I haue opened my mouth vnto the Lord, and cannot goe backe.
                  
                  36. And ſhe ſaid vnto him, My father, if thou haſt opened thy mouth vnto the Lord, doe with me as thou haſt promiſed, ſeeing that the Lord hath auenged thee of thine enemies the children of Ammon.
                  
                  37. Alſo ſhe ſaid vnto her father, Doe thus much for me: ſuffer me two moneths, that I may goe to the mountaines, and bewaile my virginitie, I and my fellowes.
                  
                  38. And he ſaid, Goe: and he ſent her away two moneths: ſo ſhe went with her companions, and lamented her virginitie vpon the mountaines.
                  
                  39. And after the end of two moneths, ſhe turned againe vnto her father, who did with her according to his vow, which he had vowed, and ſhe had known no man. And it was a cuſtome in Iſrael:
                  
                  40. The daughters of Iſrael went yeere by yeere, to lament the daughter of Iphtah the Gileadite, foure daies in a yeere.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE FOVRTH PART OF THE CHAPTER: Of the executing of his vow.
                  WHen Iphtah had gotten the victorie, he returned home to Mizpeh, for The ſumme of theſe verſes. there he dwelt: and therfore we heard before, that he made a league with the Gileadites, before the Lord in Mizpeh. And behold (for now I returne to his vow) to the bewraying of his deepe folly in making his forementioned vow) the firſt that came foorth to meete him was his daughter, which ſo troubled him, that his ioy for his triumph, was turned into moſt deep and bitter ſorrow: but ſhe, when ſhe vnderſtood her fathers vow, ſubmitted her ſelfe, onely deſiring a time to bewaile her virginitie. And hee after her returne, performed his vow on her. And it was a cuſtome that the daughters of Iſrael went foure times in the yeere to bewaile her.
                  Now to peruſe the verſes particularly, it is ſaid here, that when he had bin Verſ. 34. made ioyfull by the victorie; at his returne, his daughter was the firſt that came forth to meete him with trimbrels and dances: for ſo they were wont Exod. 15. 20. to celebrate the worthy acts of Princes and greatmen: As they did I meane the maides) to Saul: thus they vſed to expreſſe their publike thankſgiuings 1. Sam. 18. 6. to God. Now to the aggrauating the griefe of Iphtah, it is ſaid ſhe was his onely childe, and he had no other.
                  And in that his daughter came the firſt to meete him, who muſt be done Doct. to (he thought) as he had vowed: all may ſee what effect comes of raſhnes, and how vnbeſeeming a companion it is to a wiſe man, who ſhould ponder his doings, and weigh his words with reaſon, yea religion, euen in the ballances of the ſanctuarie, that is, by the word of God, before they be vttered. The beſt fruite of it is ſorrow and repentance. It is a true ſaying; Raſhneſſe doth nothing well, as in Herods raſh promiſe and oath is to be ſeene. The like Mark. 6. 23. had Dauid done, if he had not bin ſtaied by Abigail againſt the houſe of Nabal. 
                     1. Sam. 25. 34.
                  
                  Much like was the wilfull and raſh act of the Prodigal, who would needs goe ſee the merrie world abroad, (as he thought it) yea and he might in no wiſe be ſtaied from his purpoſe, as though hee had gone about ſome great Luke 15. 13. and weightie worke, when he had gotten his portion into his hands to that end; but to what extremitie of miſerie brought he himſelfe? The ſame may be ſaid of the raſhnes of choller, whereby men ſmite out teeth and eyes out of the heads, yea and breath out of the bodies (ſometime) of wiues, children, ſeruants, or any of them, whom they light vpon, in their fume: alſo of the raſh bargaines and ſuertiſhips which are made and vndertaken in the world, and a thouſand miſchiefes beſides. Likewiſe of the proteſtations commonly made in this manner: I pray God I ſinke where I ſtand, if it bee not true that I ſay; or, Gods curſe be vpon me. Which Peter himſelf through raſhneſſe and forgetting himſelfe, did fall into. Therefore it behoueth all to be wiſe and well aduiſed in their vowes to God, and promiſes made to men, that they ſnare not themſelues, neither bring needleſſe ſorrow and woe vpon their owne heads. And euen ſo, when they be aduiſedly and circumſpectly made, according to the rules before ſet downe, verſ. 30. then in no wiſe

to goe from them, but to performe them as Dauid did, Pſal. 119. Of this look Eccle. 5. 3. Pſal. 15. 4. Pſal. 119. 105. more in the hiſtorie of Gaal, chap. 9. and elſewhere.
                  Furthermore in this verſe wee are taught, that God is to bee praiſed 2 publikely for the publike benefits which wee receiue in common, as both here wee ſee in Iphtahs daughter, and in many other places I haue ſhewed, although not in the ſame manner, and Moſes alſo, Miriam, and Debora, with ſundrie others did: and that as for other reaſons heretofore ſet downe, ſo to teach poſteritie by our example to doe the like. But of this after. God would haue the firſt fruites conſecrated to him, that wee might vſe the reſt with thankſgiuing.
                  And in that ſhe was his only childe, it muſt needs increaſe his heauineſſe, that by his vow he had brought vpon himſelfe, when he ſaw he muſt be depriued of her: and to this his ſinne brought him, in his raſh vow making, or whatſoeuer other ſinnes they were, that others may beware thereby. And by this we learne, that God for mens ſinne will not ſpare to depriue them of that which is moſt deare vnto them. One reaſon hereof is, that the Lord meaneth to humble them deeply, and to cauſe them to deſcend into themſelues more ſeriouſly, and to purge out the ſinne that waiteth them a miſchiefe, Note. and ſo to preuent it. And therefore this vſe wee ſhould make of it, that whenſoeuer the Lord dealeth ſo with vs, wee ſhould know it is for the hardnes of our harts, which otherwiſe and without ſuch breaking of them, will not be ſoftned. And let vs the leſſe marueile at it, when we finde it to be ſo; for though he haue often gone about it by gentler meanes, yet we know they haue not preuailed: ſo that wee haue driuen him to deale more hardly with vs, as wee count it, and to handle vs more roughly, as to wound vs ſo deeply, by taking the things from vs, which are moſt deare vnto vs. And if we are not to be accuſed for that our hearts are hardned by the deceitfulnes of ſinne, but that wee relent, yet let vs know, that God hath ſufficient cauſe to afflict vs; as to exerciſe and prepare vs for greater, and to hold vs here as ſtrangers. But of this in another place; although I haue often obſerued it, before in the ſeuerall ſtories, of the puniſhments which fell vpon the idolatrous Iſraelites.
                  By this verſe it may appeare, how ſore Iphtahs daughters meeting of him Verſ. 35. The ſenſe.
                      did trouble him, as both by his word hee teſtified, ſaying; Oh thou that ſhouldeſt haue been my chiefe earthly comfort, thou (I ſay) art one that haſt chiefly caſt me downe. Alſo by ſignes thereof hee ſhewed it, in that hee cut his garments for ſorrow, after the manner of the Hebrewes, when they ſaw that ſome great calamitie was ſuddenly befalne them, as in Ioel and other Ioel 2. 13. places it appeareth. And he ſhewes the reaſon, that hee hauing vowed to offer her to the Lord, he might not (he ſaid) goe backe: ſuch was his ignorance, that he knew not there was libertie giuen by the Lord, in that caſe to redeeme that which a man had vowed amiſſe.
                  This verſe affoordeth vs many good leſſons, and firſt by this, that ſhe was Doct. ſuch a trouble to him, after hee had gotten the victorie, and that the Lord pulled him downe ſo ſore thereby; by this (I ſay) we are taught, that God ſeeth it expedient thus to deale with his ſeruants oft times, that when hee hath exalted them by ſome great fauour beſtowed vpon them, leſt they

ſhould take too much delight therein, and ſo become ſurfeited therewith; hee addeth ſome affliction to it, or taketh away ſome part of the benefit, which point I haue at large handled in chap. 8. verſ. 1. of this booke, yet I will here adde ſomewhat. This appeareth therefore, in ſundrie particulars; as in our goodly ſhew and likelihood of fruitfull harueſts, and hope of other commodities, commonly wet or drie, cold or heate immoderate, and other changes and caſualties cut off a great part of our hope.
                  So in marriage, wealth, credit, and ſuch like, the Lord addeth ſickneſſe, Note. ſome loſſes, or other affliction, or holdeth the feare of them ouer our heads, (as the parent doth the rodde ouer the childe) to weane vs from too great pleaſure taking in them. Euen as we reade in all ages he hath done the like: So Iſaak and Rebecca, in their kind and comfortable marriage, had Eſau their ſonne to bee a vexation to them, in his moſt wicked marriage, and before Gen 26. 35. and verſ. 7. 22. that, ſometime a famine, and ſometime the ill dealing of ſtrangers with them. So Iob for all his wealth, had his croſſes and namely his wife, yea hee Iob 1. and 7. 1. was ſo acquainted with this truth, and Gods dealing with his deare children, that hee ſaid in the middeſt of his proſperitie, that he looked for his change.
                  And who doth not ſee it neceſſarie, that the Lord ſhould deale thus with vs? For elſe it ſhould bee found ſo to be with vs, as it was in the daies of Noah, when they did eate and drinke, marrie and were married, and made Matth. 24. 37. that the chiefe end of their liuing here: whereas godlineſſe being the great riches, and a day paſſed therein, being better then a thouſand in any eſtate beſide, the Lord would haue vs claſpe about that, and be ready to learne by Note. little and little, that wee haue no hold of any tranſitory thing here below though lawfull, but we ſhould count one thing neceſſary, though we be occupied Luke 10 42. about many. And to make good the doctrine that I haue gathered out of this verſe, to wit, of Gods keeping vs vnder, ſome way in the middeſt of our proſperitie, I conclude, that if Paul had neede to be buffeted, leſt hee 2. Cor. 12. 7. ſhould be lifted vp aboue meaſure, we may lay our hand vpon our mouth and ſay, God hath moſt iuſt reaſon to deale thus with vs, as I haue ſaid. Now if hee ſeeth it meete thus to exerciſe vs, leſt wee ſhould bee lifted vp, then much more if we haue already been ſo, and paſſed our bounds in any ſuch manner.
                  Now to goe forward: by theſe words of Iphtah, (Oh my daughter thou art of them that trouble me) and by the deepe and ſudden ſorrow which Doct. 2. ver. 35. they teſtifie to haue then poſſeſſed him, by them I ſay wee may ſee and obſerue another thing, that the beſt delights and greateſt pleaſures of this life, in which wee haue had exceeding comfort, as hee had in his daughter, may poſſibly and doe often turne to our great ſorrow and diſcontentment. We ſee the ſame in Iacob, when his ſonnes hating their brother Ioſeph, had dipped Gen. 37. 33. his coate in blood, to hide their owne ſinne, and brought it to their father, to make him thinke that he had been ſlaine by ſome wilde beaſt; when he ſaw it, hee brake out in a great paſſion, and ſaid, This is my ſonnes coate, an euill beaſt hath deuouted him. Oh what heauineſſe tooke hold of him, euen from and by him who was his ioy and moſt deare vnto him? And thus it is with vs, as it was with them. So conſider how deare Abſolom was 2. Sam 18. 33. to his father Dauid: and when word was brought him of his death, how

heauily did he take it? how did he wiſh and deſire that hee might haue loſt his owne life, to haue ſaued his, as his words vttered in moſt patheticall and lamentable manner, doe teſtifie, where he thus crieth out: Oh Abſolom, my ſonne, my ſonne: would God I had died for thee, oh Abſolom my ſonne, my ſonne. Euen ſo what ſore diſquiets and corſiues, are many children to their parents, wiues to their husbands, and theſe againe to them, and one deare friend to another? And what vexations haue many mens goods been to Note. them, as their houſe and land, when they haue brought them to naught, and when they haue ſeene they muſt forgoe them? And how haue other mens pleaſures ſtung them at the heart, when they hauing been the ioy thereof, they haue forſaken them? Oh if men durſt or could be perſwaded to bewray it, when they haue ſeene they muſt dye, and leaue all, how haue they been wrapped in deadly ſorrow and thraldome thereby, ſo neere were their hearts knit to their earthly delights, that they haue been able to thinke of no good thing to helpe them to ſaluation, and to make their account well to God, no nor to entertaine any good aduice and inſtruction, if it had been offered them. And what may bee the reaſon of all this? Truly this, ſeeing they haue ſo greatly abuſed them, by ſetting them in the Lords place, and their harts vpon them ſo impotently and fondly, directly contrary to Gods commandement, giuing this charge: If riches encreaſe, ſet not your hearts 1. Tim. 6. 17. Pſalme. vpon them. And to make this their ſinne the greater, they muſt know, that they who are not brought as yet to faith in Chriſt, and true repentance, ſo that they bee by him intitled to them (who is Lord and heire of all) they haue no right to any of their lawfulleſt pleaſures and profits, no not their children by Gods allowance, hauing loſt the ſame right by Adams ſinne, which indeede once was giuen in Adams innocencie. And yet euen the godlieſt muſt vſe them ſoberly, and learne to enioy them with Gods allowance (as they may, when they reſolue with contentment to leaue them, and when they are put to neceſſarie, profitable, & godly vſes) for that is (indeed) to learne to want them, (as we are commanded, and haue example thereof) 2. Tim. 3. 4. Phil. 4. 12. when God will ſo haue it: And otherwiſe they who haue had moſt, ſhall wiſh they had had leaſt. And if yee will aske, if there be nothing that men may ſafely and boldly reioyce in: I anſwere, Yes, let them reioyce in beleeuing, Rom. 5. 3. in hope, patience and a good conſcience: that ioy ſhall not be taken from them.
                  Beſides in this verſe, in that Iphtah ſaid, his daughter troubled him, and yet it was by no ill behauiour, let it be an inſtruction for children, that they 
                        Doct. 3. had not need to be croſſes to their parents, by looſenes and diſobedience: for their parents are many waies grieued by them in other reſpects; as to ſee them croſſed and brought behinde hand in the world, by pouertie, or for that they thriue not in their outward eſtate, ſo for their other ſundrie troubles that befall them: and with theſe, when they looke to haue them the ſtaffe of their old age, then if they ſee them taken away by death, or croſſed by their awke and bad matches; if then they alſo with the like to theſe ſhall vexe them in their life, how can they chuſe but bring their gray haires with ſorrow to their graue? Monſters therefore and vnnaturall children are they, who knowing that from their very conception & birth, they are occaſions of griefe and heauineſſe of heart, to their parents many waies, who take

thought for them alſo afterward in euery part of their life, how to bring them vp and prouide for them, monſters (I ſay) they are who doe yet adde more heart ſmart, and greater griefe to them by their vnrulineſſe, ſtoutneſſe, loftines of minde, riot, ill ſpending their time, and goods with lewd companions, and many other euill waies, euen ſo many as who can reckon them vp? But this point hath been diuerſly occaſioned already, and more directly concernes the 36. verſe following.
                  And becauſe he ſaith he could not goe backe, but muſt execute his vow, 4 Leuit. 27. 2. 3. many marueile he ſhould be ſo ignorant, that he knew not the law in Leuiticus concerning the redeeming of a ſonne or a daughter in ſuch a caſe, for ſo might hee haue done. But hee being driuen out of his fathers houſe, becauſe he was baſe borne, and baniſhed, & fell to a ſouldiers life, it might the rather be therefore, that he was leſſe acquainted with the law of God. But it is more marueilous, that being ſo famous a thing, that the high Prieſt ſhould not be conſulted with, by the motion of ſome of his friends eſpecially, there remaining two moneths before the vow was put in execution. But his ignorance it was, that held him in that grieuous error.
                  And it is a watch-word to all Gods people, to labour againſt it, ſeeing he being ignorant of this one point, brought ſuch ſorrow and woe vpon his owne head: for who findes not likewiſe, that want of knowledge in ſome one point, or want of care to remember that which he knowes (which in effect is all one) hath been a ſore blemiſh to him among his betters, who can eſpie his ignorance? or elſe through the want of it, hee hath runne vpon rocks, I meane indangered himſelfe, to doe that to his ſhame and griefe; which, knowledge thereof would haue guided him, to haue done to his owne great comfort. Oh ſeeke we therefore ſauing knowledge, and all that is neceſſarie while we may, and as wee may, it is a crowne to an humble and ſanctified perſon: and in a doubtfull caſe, doe we not, as Iphtah here did, to neglect the ſeeking of reſolution, when and where we may haue it. And let them who liue vnder an ordinary Miniſterie vnprofitably, repent betimes, and redeeme the time: for it is a great plague of God, to bee euer learning, 2. Tim. 3. 7. and neuer comming to the knowledge of the truth. And ſuch as want meanes, let them quicken their appetite the more, and labour to ſet the beſt Note. price vpon knowledge and wiſedome, which is the holy vſe of it. For hee that matcheth theſe with the moſt precious iewels, and ſearcheth after thē 
                     Prou. 2. 5. as gold, hee is like to finde them ſooneſt. The other paſſeth by them vnknowne at vnawares, as he that walketh ouer mines and treaſure hidden in the earth, neuer the wiſer.
                  But the text giuing occaſion rather to vrge this care vpon the better ſort, we may iuſtly bewaile it, how long it is ere euen many a good Chriſtian attaine to that meaſure of competent and neceſſarie knowledge, which might guide his courſe. I ſpeake not now of exact knowledge in all points, much leſſe of curious knowledge of things leſſe pertinent, which yet many ſeeke after more greedily, then they doe the other; like diſtempered ſtomackes, which feede vpon traſh rather then good nouriſhment. Now what makes it ſo difficult a thing as it is? Sometime an inuincible defect in nature: in which caſe I confeſſe, a tractable and modeſt minde may pleade an excuſe from God: in others a conceit that if Chriſt be knowne in any ſort, it skils

not whether other matters bee knowne or no; (which is a fooliſh opinion and collection.) Others and the moſt heare badly, or adde no priuate helpe of their owne reading, or vſe of the memory by conference. Therefore as contraries be cured by contraries, ſo let euery mā ſeeing his diſeaſe, addreſſe himſelfe to the cure. We ſee that ignorance in the law of the land, ſometimes breedes a man ſuch trouble and loſſe, as makes him rue it all his life long: much more then, a man would thinke, in the law of God. For example, many a man through ignorance (though otherwiſe wel-minded) is drawne into bad company, and by ſuch, entiſed to leaudneſſe, or made drunke, or ſnared by raſh promiſes, bargaines, ſuretiſhips. Others ioyne with their religion, abuſe of their lawful liberties, and are ouertaken therein groſſely, in vnlawfull gamings, and ill ſpending of the time, laſciuiouſneſſe, fooliſh mirth, and many other blemiſhes. Some doubting of the lawfulnes of a thing which they earneſtly deſire to doe, entangle themſelues, which (if they had knowledge) they durſt not doe. So it is rare, but a goodly ſight, to ſee a man order his ſteppes by knowledge, and to haue fellowſhip with the light, and the contrary (beſides the other named inconueniences) much diſhonoureth the profeſſion it ſelfe of the Goſpell.
                  Further, to omit that he might haue redeemed her, as I ſaid, and to ſpeake no more of his ignorance in that point, note we this, that his care was great 5 in keeping a good conſcience: a good conſcience I ſay, according to the knowledge he had, though I confeſſe it cannot bee in it ſelfe a good conſcience, which is not a ſound conſcience. But an euill conſcience it may bee, euen to doe a thing lawfull, if it be contrary to that which a man is perſwaded, though erroniouſly. And it appeares Iphtah ſought to keepe a good conſcience, in aſmuch as he ſpareth not his onely child, to the end that hee might pleaſe God, as he thought, by performing his vow. For there was nothing elſe could cauſe him to bring ſuch ſorrow vpon himſelfe by offering his only daughter in ſacrifice, but the ſhunning and auoiding of a greater ſorrow, namely, the bringing of God to bee againſt him, as hee feared hee ſhould haue done, if he had not offered her according to his vow.
                  His care to keep a good conſcience in that he thought he knew, teacheth all Gods people, in that which they know to be faithfull. Better is he by many degrees, who in that which hee knowes is carefull to doe the ſame; then another who ſwelleth with pride, and is puffed vp with great knowledge in the letter, when he ſeeth not the end of it, much leſſe attaineth to it; which is by loue to edifie, and doe good to himſelfe and others by it. But in them who be vpright hearted toward God, as the good women were, that accompanied our Sauiour on earth, that is, verified which hee ſpake. If ye know Iohn 13. 17. Matth. 5. 19. theſe things, happie are yee if yee doe them. &c. And contrarily, he that offendeth in the leaſt (teaching others ſo to do) ſhall be leaſt in the kingdome of God. Now to this we muſt adde that which (in part) was toucht before that men muſt beware of that corrupt conceit of Popery, that conſcience (for ſuch is all true deuotion) may bee in a thing where knowledge is not. Nay, they go further, for they are ſo bold as to ſay, that deuotion is the fruit of ignorance. It proceeded not from Iphtah his ignorance, but from his grace, that he was ſo deuout. That which ignorance properly brings forth, is error and wilworſhip: deuotion is neither cauſed by ignorance, no, nor

yet by knowledge without faith and grace, though knowledge muſt guide and perfect it afterward.
                  Now to this lamentable complaint of the father, to wit, Iphtah, let vs heare Verſ. 36. the kind and dutifull anſwere of the daughter. My father, ſaith ſhe, if thou haſt vowed any thing to the Lord concerning me (as ſhe perceiued by him he had, for euery word is not recorded in a briefe hiſtory) I yeeld obediently to thee, and am willing to confirme and helpe to make good thy vow. Her obedience, or rather deſire of obedience to her father, was highly commendable, euen as his was to God, but yet in the reſpect before named, to wit, becauſe ſhe thought her fathers vow was lawfull, as himſelfe thought; it muſt bee performed and kept: for ſhee ought and might haue denied to haue yeelded, where her father had ſo vainely and needleſſely vowed, if ſhe had knowne that her father had had libertie by the law of God to redeeme her. But ſhe to pleaſe God, as ſhee ſuppoſed, and that her father might not offend him neither, by breaking his vow, did ſubmit her ſelfe, and makes no exclamation at the heare-ſay of it, nay doth not ſo much as queſtion about, and diſcuſſe it with a ſcrupulous mind. And marke further that ſhe ſaith, it was not grieuous for her to die, ſeeing the enemies of God were ouerthrowne.
                  This her readie and obedient affection (ſetting aſide the error thereof) is a cleare glaſſe for youth to looke in, to ſhew their readineſſe in obeying their 
                        Doct. 1. parents, it being agreeable to the law of God, which is required of them, and ſo in obeying their gouernours ſet ouer them. And as ſhee ſaid in her owne caſe for her ſelfe, ſo ſhould they ſay, euery one for himſelf vnto them, farre bee it from mee, that I ſhould procure, or bee a meane of your ſorrow. Children that are teachable may heare her, and learne when they may or muſt ſpeake, and how to doe it. And that is thus: that whereas reuerence, obedience and thankfulneſſe is required of them, ſo they bee readie accordingly in the performing of them all vnto them to doe their duties.
                  Their humble and kind words ſhould comfort and glad their parents hearts, and yet they ſhould looke carefully to be found ſutable alſo in their deeds. And theſe were as double armour to them, when the wicked children wound and lay open their parents to reproch among the bad ſort, and are corruption to their bones. Theſe ſhould make them not to be aſhamed Prou. 12. 4. of them, as their children. And bleſſed is the man that hath his quiuer full of ſuch arrowes, they ſhall defend him from the ill tongues of his enemies. Euen ſo the common ill behauiour of the moſt children, and namely, their words and anſwers, which they giue to their parents, chattingly, ſtoutly, ſaucily, (yea and with gybes and taunts, ſome of them,) they are to their parents, as I haue ſaid, reproch and poyſon to their owne ſoules. But to make this point more ſull and cleare, here let all good children learne this duty from God, that with their ready and willing mind, ſubmitting themſelues to their parents, they ioyne alſo wiſdome and ſound knowledge, to direct them wherein to obey, that ſo they may not commend their affection onely, but the whole duty to their father in heauen, aſwell as to their father in earth. I ſpeake not this, as if I would teach them to conteſt with their parents, or deſcant with them about their lawfull demands; but to beware left by obeying man in a good intent, they offend God in the maine. Neither

doe all parents make conſcience what they vrge, but require a ſtrict obedience without controle. And they that doe make conſcience, yet require their due often ignorantly: and would be full loth to doe it, if they knew it vnlawfull, as Iphtah doubtleſſe would. Indeed I confeſſe this duty lieth ſtreightlieſt vpon the parent, to know what to demand, but the child (if hee neglect) is bound to performe the ſame, which might of the other be lawfully demanded. And let none thinke that by this rule, the inferiour is euer a whit priuiledged: no doubtleſſe, hee obeyeth the parent and gouernour beſt and moſt, who obeyeth in the Lord vpon knowledge.
                  And in that ſhe ſaith, Seeing thou art reuenged of thine enemies, I am 
                        Doct. 2. well content to dye, it was a ſpeech that might well haue become the experiencedſt ſeruants of God, though vttered by a young damſell. Oh let ſuch examples be our inſtruction! for as Paul ſaid the ſame words in a like caſe; ſo Actes. 1. Iohn. the Lord inſtructeth vs to doe the ſame. So that wee haue cauſe to ſay and thinke it, that our liues ſhould not bee deare to vs, in reſpect of the welfare and peace of Gods Church and people: for her proſperitie ſhould bee our deſire and ioy. As wee are taught by the example of that rare noble man Nehemiah, more famous for grace and godlineſſe, then for his greatnes and aduancement: who being asked of the King, why his countenance was caſt Nehem 2. 3. downe, and ſad; he anſwered, Oh my Lord the King, why ſhould I not bee ſad, when the houſe and citie of the ſepulchers of my fathers lieth waſte, and the gates thereof are deuoured with fire?
                  Commendable alſo was the anſwere of Mephiboſheth to Dauid, when hee was ſafely deliuered from the rebellion of Abſalom, and reſtored againe to 2. Sam. 19. 30. be the vpholder and welfare of the Church: thus he ſaid, What are all my goods and ſubſtance to mee, ſeeing my Lord the King is come home in peace? And Paul ſhewed by his words to the Romans, Chap. 9. and 10. that Rom. 9. 1. & 10. 1. ſo earneſt was his deſire and prayer to God for Iſrael, that they might be ſaued, that he would pledge his owne ſaluation to purchaſe theirs. And hee telleth King Agrippa, that ſo as he and all that heard him that day, were added as true members to increaſe the Church, hee was content to beare the bands and hardneſſe himſelfe alone, hee (I ſay) could haue wiſhed that hee Actes 26. 28. might haue borne all the brunt, to free them from it. Such loue ſhould wee beare (and not pretend) to the Church of God, that a great part of our ioy ſhould bee diminiſhed, vnleſſe ſhe might ioy with vs. But we may complaine with the prouerb, Euery man for himſelfe: but they are happieſt that weepe and reioyce with her. For wherein ſtandeth our happineſſe, and whence haue we our chiefe cauſe of reioycing? Haue we it not from hence, that we are members of that holy Catholike Church of Chriſt, which (being his body) is knit and compacted by ioynts and ſinewes together, and draweth from him (as her head) life and grace? And partake wee not euen here ſingular fruit from this communion of Saints, not only by the ſweet Note. conuerſing with them, whom wee are next vnto, and dwell among, but by the prayers of ſuch as wee are onely preſent with in ſpirit, though in place farre diſtant? Therefore next to our communion with our Lord Ieſus himſelfe, what ſweeter meditation haue we then of our fellowſhip with his bodie? whereunto he hath granted ſuch ſingular priuiledges, and which hee hath beautified with ſo many admirable gifts and graces? in all which wee

haue our parts, if we haue any part in her. What thinke we? Is Chriſt diuided: Is his body ſubiect to diſmembring? Can any of vs draw from the head, any influence of grace, if wee will be ſingular by our ſelues, or ſeparate our ſelues from our brethren? Doth not a great part of our felicitie hereafter, conſiſt in this, that we ſhall haue fellowſhip with the Saints in light, euen the light of Gods and the Lambs immediate preſence? For theſe reaſons, let vs bee perſwaded to enlarge our ſelues, and not to bee ſtreightned within our ſelues, as if we neither had any part in the ſorrowes or proſperitie of others. For as there is a duty required of vs toward the whole body, to pray for the peace of it, and mourne for the grieuances thereof: ſo eſpecially for that part thereof, whoſe eſtate is beſt knowne to vs: and with Dauid we muſt ſay, If I forget thee (O Ieruſalem) let my tongue cleane to the roofe Pſalm. 137 5. of my mouth, and my fingers forget to play. And againe, For Zions ſake, I will not hold my peace, &c. till her beautie breake forth as the light, and till Ieruſalem be ſet vp, the glory of the earth. And this affection ſhould bee ſo ſtrong, that it ſhould ouerflow the bankes of the Church, and extend it ſelfe to the borders and confines thereof: and be earneſt with God, for them that are yet ſtrangers and aliants, that they may be made members of this bodie, and citizens of this Citie: that the Kingdome of Chriſt may bee ſtretcht out from ſea to ſea, and he may rule farre and wide throughout the world. And it will become vs aſwell to entreate the Lord, to pitie the many thouſands of them that ſit in darkneſſe, who cannot diſcerne betwixt the right Ionas 4. 10. 11. hand and the left, as the contrary ill beſeemed Ionah, who was checkt for his labour. And further, ſeeing the varietie of the neceſſities and eſtates, both of diuers particular Churches, & members of each, (ſome of them knowne to vs) is manifold: we muſt thinke this duty not eaſily diſcharged, without a great meaſure of loue, and an heart dilated therewith, and well purged of ſelfeloue. There are many that pretend this office to the Church (being indeed Schiſmatikes and Heretikes) out of a prepoſterous loue of a communion, out of vnion. But let them know the Church acknowledgeth no ſuch baſtards, neither hearkneth after thoſe that would, vnder the pretence of a new deuiſed communaltie of their owne, draw her to either a ſeparation from her head, as Papiſts doe, or from fellowſhip with the body of Chriſt, as they who terme themſelues of the ſeparation doe.
                  When Iphtahs daughter had anſwered her father, as he had giuen her occaſion, Verſ. 37. 38. ſhe made a requeſt to him for her ſelfe, as in this verſe is ſhewed, ſaying: Giue me leaue to goe to the mountaines, to bewaile my virginitie, I and my fellowes. For it was counted a reproch in thoſe daies, to die childleſſe. And a ſolitarie place as ſhe asked, was fit for that purpoſe. Now that ſhe would not without leaue doe euen that which was good, ſhe ſheweth clearely, and we may ſee, that much leſſe would ſhe haue done as Dinah, Iacobs daughter did, to range and roue, idlely, needleſſely and dangerouſly.
                  Which may teach our youth, and particularly the maidens of our age, to Doct. learne this point of obedience of her; namely not to bee their owne caruers, to cut out their liberty to themſelues, while they be vnder the gouernment and authoritie of their parents or other; to go where they liſt, and to thinke themſelues too good to craue leaue, eſpecially, for their lawfull going forth: which to doe agreeth not with ſtout and loftie ſtomackes, and therefore the

moſt of them, going commonly to ſuch places, & to ſuch ends, as they wiſh afterward that they had ſtaied at home, doe with ſhame and ſorrow, reape the iuſt fruit of their diſobedience: whereas by crauing leaue they might haue been anſwered by them with whom they ſhould haue conſulted, that ſuch goings foorth had not been for their good, and ſo might haue been ſtaied at home with ſafety. And if ſhee asked leaue for her going abroad, how much more would ſhe haue asked it in more weightie caſes? But this is a branch of the generall duty of obedience, whereof much hath been ſaid in Chap. 1. and elſewhere. Onely this wee may wonder at, that the daughter of Iphtah, a man ignorant (no doubt) and vnaquainted with many things, concerning the will of God; and therefore none of the fitteſt to ſeaſon his children with religion, (eſpecially conſidering his baniſhment, and maner of liuing) that ſhe (I ſay) ſhould yet attaine to this excellent courage, and ſhew ſo rare a patterne of obedience, as that few mens example in the Scripture may compare with her in the one: but aſſuredly, the greateſt part Note. of the children of the moſt carefull and religious parents (for al their knowledge) come farre ſhort of her in the other. But where grace is, there nature and ſexe is not to bee reſpected: that which the Author to the Hebrewes ſaith, That by faith many waxed ſtrong, is truly verified in this worthy damſell, Heb. 11. 34. among the reſt.
                  The leaue ſhe asked, was to this end, that for two moneths ſhe might go 
                        The 2. point in this verſe.
                      and bewaile her virginitie, and comfort her ſelfe with her companions, (which were virgins alſo) on the mountaines in ſolitarie places: for it was among women a reproch in thoſe daies, and lamented, to be barren, and ſo it was by her, that ſhe ſhould die a virgine without iſſue. For it was a kind of curſe of itſelfe to die ſo. For God had commanded men from the beginning, to repleniſh the earth. And the Hebrewes deſired to encreaſe a holy ſeede and Common-wealth: and they hoped, ſeeing the Meſſiah ſhould come of the ſeede of Abraham, that he might poſſibly come of theirs.
                  Now in that ſome thinke, that ſeeing ſhe asked to goe bewaile her virginitie, that therefore ſhe was not offered in ſacrifice, but only kept from marriage, and was vowed by her father to perpetuall virginitie while ſhe liued. I anſwere: That cannot bee, ſeeing neither God did euer command, or require of any, to vow the virginitie of their children, and ſo 
                        •
                     rie them to it, neither could Iphtah mind or meane that, when hee made his vow, as I haue ſaid before, for hee ſaw that it had been moſt like that his daughter ſhould haue been ſhee, that ſhould haue met him, as it was ſo indeed. Beſide his daughter was not conſenting thereto, which of neceſſity ſhe muſt haue been, if his vow had been made of that. And beſides when he returned, and met his daughter, how was he ſtricken with great griefe, ſhee not knowing why: and what ſenſe had there been in this, when hee made his vow, that he ſhould meane thus? [The firſt that meeteth me, I will offer her to perpetuall virginitie.] But his lamenting it, and common ſenſe ſheweth the contrary: and if any other but his daughter (as what knew hee) had met him, what authoritie had he to vow her to virginitie? And if yee will ſay, nay; he meant his daughter, I haue anſwered that, and beſides, how can his vow of a burnt offering be expounded of virginitie.
                  Likewiſe the abſurditie of the fact, and his vnnaturalneſſe to his owne

child, and hauing no more, and the Lord not requiring it of him, what had it been leſſe then madneſſe in him, (though it had been in his power to doe it) to haue either vowed, or intended any ſuch thing, and much more to execute it? Therefore although he did as ill (I grant) through ignorance, in offering her, yet it cannot be that hee vowed her to virginitie, but hee meant when hee vowed, to offer that as a ſacrifice that ſhould firſt meete him, and he thought he might. But if ye aske, why ſhe ſaid, ſhe would go and bewaile her virginitie, if her father meant not that, I ſay virginitie is here expreſſed becauſe ſhe more grieued that ſhe ſhould dye a virgin, then ſimply that ſhe ſhould dye: for in as much as loſing her life ſhe died childleſſe, it was all one as if ſhe had liued all her life long in virginitie. The meaning then is, ſhe lamented that ſhe muſt dye a virgin.
                  That which we are to learne here, is this, that the afflictions which God 
                        Doct. 2. laieth vpon his ſeruants, ought both to be grieuous to them for the preſent Heb. 12. 11. time, and alſo according to the meaſure and continuance of his afflicting hand: ſo ought the meaſure and continuance of their ſorrowes be. The whole booke of the Lamentations of Ieremy, is a plentifull witneſſe of this truth, for it containeth a bitter continued complaint, made in the behalfe of the Church, for the deſolation which was vpon her, euery part and circumſtance whereof is laid in the ballance, to prouoke her to a due correſpondent heauineſſe and humiliation vnder Gods hand. And ſo ought it to be with vs alſo. Firſt, becauſe we haue none laid vpon vs, but we deſerue them by our ſinne, and wee muſt be led to repentance by them, or elſe wee abuſe Lam. 3. 3
                           •
                        . them. And beſides, the greatnes and continuance of aflictions argue, for the moſt part, that we are not ſufficiently humbled, nor repent as we might doe, for our ſinnes; nor call vpon the Lord effectually as wee ſhould. But moſt men turne away their eye from that which is vnpleaſing, and carnally ſolace Note. themſelues with their outward bleſſings, that ſo they may auoid all heauineſſe, or choke it.
                  The vſe hereof is, to reproue the ſtoicall blockiſhnes of thoſe that be not moued with afflictions, and to reproue them againe on the other ſide, that by continuance vnder the croſſe, doe grow hard hearted and rebellious; which condition is a fearefull ſigne of Gods reiecting of them. Alſo to teach vs the heauier and longer that troubles are vpon vs, the more earneſtly to labour with our ſelues, to grow in repentance, zeale and feruencie of Iam. 1. 5. prayer. But oh how ſoone doe euen the better ſort of Gods people faint or waxe blockiſh vnder them, if they doe no worſe, eſpecially being grieuous and long vpon them? Yea and how doe they exceed in the other extreame oftentimes, in laying their croſſes too neere their hearts, and aggrauating them beyond meaſure? which ſinne Iob himſelfe, when his troubles exceeded, was not free from.
                  Now to performe this ſolemne worke, ſhe choſe both a ſolitarie place fit Verſ. 38. for the purpoſe, and alſo farre from her fathers houſe, to weane her ſelfe from thence or for to auoid recourſe of her friends vnto her. To teach vs, that there fall out times and occaſions to bee ſolitarie, euen as it is it ſelfe commanded vs of God. and that both extraordinary, as here, and in priuat faſting, and ordinary alſo for meditation; and theſe both the one and the other we ſhould vſe to our good when we haue cauſe, either longer or ſhorter

time to goe apart by our ſelues, knowing that this is a ſpeciall action of religious worſhip, and therefore requireth ſeperation from hindrances. So did our Sauiour Chriſt for a time, after much preaching and being in companie, goe into ſome ſolitarie place, with his Diſciples, as it were returning to himſelfe, that hee might haue more freedome for heauenly contemplation and prayer. So in the time of great lamentation, as the people did mourne for the death of Ioſias, and in the time of Zachary the Prophet, whē 
                     Zach. 12. 12. the familie did it apart, one member of it from another, the husband apart, and the wife apart. But fondly doth Popery abuſe ſuch examples, to maintaine Monaſticall life, and ſuch like fancies, when they were vſed in the beſt manner, (if euer well vſed) but now much more, when they haue brought them to ſuch abomination as they are come vnto, that it is but a couer for much and great wickedneſſe.
                  And this point deſerueth our obſeruation: that ſhe being now in heauines, wiſely choſe the fitteſt exerciſe to ſet it in on worke, and did not yeeld to her paſſion, which then would haue made her loggiſh and vnprofitable, but vſed it to a ſingular good end, euen to fit her ſelfe for her death and departure. In mirth and ioy how hard a thing is it to recall home our wandring ſenſes and ſtraying affections, and retire our thoughts and mindes from rouing in euery corner of the world, our wofull experience can tell vs. Sorrow hath likewiſe many and thoſe grieuous annoiances attending it, but that of the two (the compariſon being equall) is the fitteſt trumpet to ſound this retreit. And as naturally it contracteth the body and the ſpirits, ſo if it be taken heed vnto, it bringeth the ſuperfluous and noiſome cares, delights and deſires of the ſoule into a narrower compaſſe. And when a man is wholly at home, is he not fitter for any good dutie, then when hee is abſent in great part from himſelfe? Therefore as the day of griefe is a ſeaſon and opportunitie for ſome good dutie, which at other times is to vs vnſeaſonable, ſo let vs vſe it accordingly, that is, redeeme it. Solitarineſſe (I confeſſe) is not fit for euery ſorrower: and yet it is neceſſarie for the better doing of this dutie. I therfore diſtinguiſh of perſons: Such therfore as are ignorant, and yet oppreſſed with heauineſſe, for that they doubt, and are vncertaine of Gods fauour, for their ſinne, and eſpecially if they bee preſſed with melancholy. To theſe I giue this counſell, that they auoide ſolitarineſſe in their pangs of griefe, and melancholike paſſions, and giue not vantage to their enemie the diuell to finde them alone, (as neere as they can) leſt they finde his deluſions and temptations the more forcible, as Iudas in his perplexitie did, when hee went aſide from all companie. But let their ſorrow driue them to aske counſell, and make their caſes knowne to ſuch, as can aduiſe or comfort them. The diuell was bold to aſſault our Sauiour himſelfe Luke 4. 2. in his ſolitarineſſe. But to returne and to ſpeake of the point. If a ſuruey were taken, I doubt wee ſhould finde few houres (I ſpeake not of weekes or moneths) dedicated by the moſt part of Chriſtians, to this heauenly worke of vſing ſolitarines for meditation, eſpecially for preparation to dye, to make vp their accounts againſt they ſhould be called for. Oh they look to liue long, they are not in the caſe of this maide, who was within two moneths of her dying day, and applied them wholly to fit her for death; but they are made drunke with an vnſatiable deſire of liuing ſtill; and therefore

tell not them of ſuch ſad vnwelcome matters. But oh fooles! are they not ſuddenly taken (and as vnprouided) within few daies and houres of their death, as they were many yeeres before? Therefore to leaue them: when the Lord at any time iuſtly occaſioneth vs to be ſorrowfull and penſiue, let vs beware of blockiſhneſſe (which commonly accompanieth them, who in in their mirth thinke of nothing but iollitie) and ſay wee euery one thus to our ſelues: Now the Lord calles me home to the practiſe of a dutie, (which indeed ought to be oft in vſe) to meditate of my eſtate, to vnburden my mind and ſoule of thoſe manifold, needleſſe and noyſome thoughts and affections, which I haue ouerloaden my ſelfe a long time withall: now the Lord will haue me bent to ſearch out my errors, corruptions, and diſorders of hart and life, and going aſide to eaſe my ſtomack of them, confeſſe, loath, renounce and aske pardon of them. Now the Lord will haue me to pray, that his ſpirit may be reſtored to me in greater meaſure, that I may returne with more libertie to his ſeruice, and beware that I be not againe ſurfeited, with that which now I haue vomited vp, as the world, pleaſures, vaine deſires, vile and loathſome luſts. This is a good vſe indeed of heauineſſe: the Eccleſ. 7. 1. houſe of ſuch mourning, is better thē the houſe of feaſting. And to this end, oh it were to be wiſhed, that damſels as well as other, liuing in theſe daies, would ſetforth themſelues to the world, not in pride, boldneſſe, niceneſſe and curioſitie of faſhions, but in modeſtie, grace and wiſdome (as this maiden here did) which were another manner of ſpectacle, then to ſee many golden rings in a ſwines ſnout.
                  Now whereas it is ſaid here, (to fill vp the meaſure of her due commendation) Verſ. 39. that ſhe returned at the time ſet, vnto her father, to doe to her as hee had vowed; the faithfulneſſe, conſtancie and obedience of the maid is not onely to bee commended, but admired. For why did ſhee ſo, but to ſerue God therein, as ſhe was perſwaded? Such keeping of couenant and promiſe Doct. made by her, when it was to the forgoing of her life, doth vrge all in ſmaller matters, much more to keepe promiſe, and to make conſcience of their word, and that not only towards God, but euen to men alſo. The like we ſee in Paul, who hauing his liberty giuen him, both in his iourney towards Rome, and at Rome alſo (where hee was Nero his priſoner) whereby hee might haue made many an eſcape and ſhifted for himſelf: yet neuer attempted any ſuch courſe, but faithfully returned to his Captaine, and to his Keeper, (though to the perill of his life) rather then he would procure ſafety by breaking away, by diſtruſting God, or by vnfaithfulneſſe. A good cauſe will ſeeke no ſuch ſhifts: and our great Ieſuits, if there were in them that zeale, which they pretend, they neede not by breaking oath, nay priſon, prouide for themſelues, as ſundrie of them haue done, to teſtifie what a good cauſe they haue to maintaine, who betray it ſo groſſely. And this further condemneth that common vnfaithfulneſſe and falſehood (which alſo I haue noted before, but cannot too much complaine of) at this day practiſed, to the vtter vndoing of many thouſands, by breaking both promiſe and bond, and running away with mens goods, or playing the banckroupts, and all to defeate them.
                  Now in that it is ſaid, he did to her according to his vow, it is a ſufficient Verſ. 40. proofe, that he vowed her not to virginitie. I haue in ye verſes before ſhewed

how theſe words are to be vnderſtood: to wit, that he ſacrificed her, as his vow was to doe, to that which ſhould firſt meet him, and did not tie her to liue a virgine: and therefore I ſay no more of it, leſt I ſhould make a needles repetition: and if I diſſent herein from any, they are thoſe who confeſſed, it was but their opinion, in that they thought otherwiſe then I doe: and I haue ſhewed my reaſons of this my aſſertion. Now though hee did ſo performe his vow vpon his daughter of meere conſcience, (for he thought that he ought to keepe and performe that vow which hee had ſolemnely made, though it fell out vpon his owne daughter) yet this that he did conſult with none in all that time about it, (which is admirable that he did not) doth admoniſh all in doubtfull and dangerous caſes to aske counſell, and ſeeke reſolution. But withall let them take this: to ſeeke where they ought, namely, in the Scriptures, or at the mouth of the godly and learned, to be reſolued by the Scriptures. See before verſe 30.
                  It is ſaid further, that it was kept as a cuſtome of the daughters of Iſrael, Verſ. 39 40. that they went to bewaile the daughter of Iphtah foure times in the yeere. Some tranſlate the Hebrew word to talke with, and to comfort; other to bewaile: the word yeeldeth both ſignifications. But whether of the two is to be vnderſtood in this place is eaſie to ſee: for the vow of Iphtah being taken in this meaning, that he ment thereby to offer her in ſacrifice, it followeth of neceſſitie, that theſe maides bewailed her when they met, and did not talke with her, ſhee being dead. For although the Hebrew word in deed ſignifieth, both to common with, and to bewaile, yet I haue ſhewed that the latter ſenſe here is to be imbraced. Now in that they held this as a cuſtome to lament her that ſhe was ſacrificed, it appeares they ſought this thereby, that it ſhould not bee forgotten, and beſides that, it is like enough they did it, that all parents might be warned to make no ſuch vowes.
                  This cuſtome while it was not abuſed, nor brought to any ſuperſtitious Doct. vſe, was the leſſe to be miſliked, whereas otherwiſe, it had been fit to breake it off: accordingly ſhould cuſtomes be thought of, and dealt with. For as they agree with Gods law, and with charitie, they are to be obſerued and kept, but otherwiſe, as they be ſuperſtitious and prophane, to hinder, or put by Gods worſhip, or when there is danger that they will grow to ſuch abuſe, they are to be broken. Alſo when they tend to the maintaining, of needleſſe charge and expences, the hurt and hindring of any, or bee otherwiſe vnlawfull, (as there are many ſuch at this day maintained and keept) they are to be aboliſhed. And therefore the blind and wicked practiſe, of ſpending the twelue daies at the Natiuitie in play, reuell and diſorder, alſo the leaud cuſtomes ſtill retained in ſome parts of this land, to keepe their prophane cuſtomary feaſts and drinkings on the Sabbath, with al other miſrule of like ſort, are vtterly to bee rooted out, and better plants ſet in their roomes, if it may be: of which I ſay no more, hauing before more fully diſcourſed thereof.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE SIXTIETH NINE SERMON ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſe 1. And the men of Ephraim gathered themſelues together, and went Northward, and ſaid vnto Iphtah, Wherefore wenteſt thou to fight againſt the children of Ammon, and didſt not call vs to goe with thee? we will therefore burne thine houſe vpon thee with fire.
                  
                  2. And Iphtah ſaid vnto them, I and my people were at great ſtrife with the children of Ammon, and when I called you, ye deliuered me not out of their hands.
                  
                  3. So when I ſaw that yee deliuered me not, I put my life in mine hands, and went vpon the children of Ammon: ſo the Lord deliuered them into mine hands. Wherefore then are yee come vpon me now to fight againſt me?
                  
                  4. Then Iphtah gathered all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead ſmote Ephraim, becauſe they ſaid, Ye Gileadites are runnagates of Ephraim, among the Ephramites and among the Manaſsites.
                  
                  5. Alſo the Gileadites tooke the paſſages of Iorden before the Ephramites, and when the Ephramites that were eſcaped, ſaid, Let me paſſe, Then the men of Gilead ſaid vnto him, Art thou an Ephramite? If he anſwered, Nay,
                  
                  6. Then they ſaid vnto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he ſaid Sibboleth: for he could not ſo pronounce: then they tooke him and ſlew him, at the paſſages of Iorden: and there fell at that time of the Ephramites, two and fortie thouſand.
                  
               
               
                  THe ſumme of this Chapter conſiſting of two parts, is 
                     The ſumme and parts 2. this, firſt, the ſedition of the Ephramites, but to their owne coſt. For they quarreling with Iphtah for a light or rather no cauſe, and comming to make warre with him, many of them were ſlaine by him, and others of them in flying, were in the like manner put to the ſword, and this to verſe 7. this is the ſumme of the firſt part. The ſecond declareth and ſetteth downe the time of the gouernment of Iphtah, and of the three other Iudges, who ſucceeded one another, and of their death and buriall, to wit, Iphtahs, and the other, who were theſe, Ibzan, Elon and Abdon, and this to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  IN this former part, theſe two things are contained: Firſt, the bitter contending The firſt point. of the Ephramites with Iphtah, threatning to burne him and his houſe with fire: and Iphtahs anſwere and defence to verſe 4. The ſecond thing is, how Iphtah killeth diuers of them in the skirmiſh and fight, and others of them in their flying away, to verſe 7.
                  
                     
The ſinnes of theſe Ephramites, which they ſhew here in one action, are Verſe 1. many: of the which it ſhall not be amiſſe to take a view, as the text offereth occaſion, in the moſt whereof I will bee the briefer, becauſe I haue handled them already, vpon the like fact, Chap. 8. 1. The firſt is ſedition, in riſing againſt 
                        The ſenſe of the 3. firſt verſes.
                      their lawfull gouernour Iphtah; and this came of pride, whereby they attributed ſo much vnto themſelues aboue other. Then their vnthankfulneſſe to him, who had farre indangered himſelfe to the Ammonites before he got the victorie, for theirs, and the ſafetie of their brethren. Thirdly, their falſe accuſing of him, that he had not called them to helpe him in the conflict, boldly making a lie in ſo charging him, whereas hee had called them, and they refuſed to come, which ſhewed their diſobedience to him, who by his authority might command them: and laſtly, their threatning to burne him and his houſe, a fruit of their ſedition; and to void this their ſtomake of the baggage in it, it is ſaid they went Northward to Gilead againſt Iphtah, that is, to contend and fight with them.
                  To make ſome vſe hereof, firſt we ſee, that ſuch as beare the face of honeſt Doct. men, and liue in countenance among their neighbours, as theſe Ephramites did, may yet poſſibly become and proue ſeditious. Pride of it ſelfe is able to ſet men forward to it, as it did Abſolon, and theſe here. Much more, eaſe and idleneſſe, ill counſell and enuy, with ſuch like. And though the ſprigges of it bud forth full faſt, and are readie too eaſily to yeeld fruit in all, yet we muſt haue an eſpeciall care, that they grow not: but let them be pruned-off, yea and a digging at the roote betimes had need to be, that the branches may wither. See what I haue noted of this point out of the face of the Shechemites, chap. 9. 2. 3.
                  Now for the remedie hereof, ſeeing pride and diſcontentment are the cauſes hereof, let the heart bee kept with all diligence, from nouriſhing of ſuch affections and thoughts, and to cracke pride, and pull it downe, thinke Note. we of our ſelus as we are: euen ſuch as if we could ſee our faces in the cleare glaſſe of Gods law, ſhould appeare more loathſome, then the moſt deformed Lazer: ſuch is the filthineſſe of our inborne corruption, and foule litter of moſt monſtrous ſinnes that proceed from thence, ſo farre off ſhould we be from ſwelling and thinking our ſelues to be great, yea, petty Angels as we are readie to doe, whereby we imagine we be too good to be in ſubiection to our betters in the Lord, yea, or to the Lord himſelfe, in obeying his word. There are many who accuſe the ſincere preachers and profeſſors of the Goſpell, as ſeditious and tumultuous, yea, enemies of good order, &c. A man would not thinke, that the accuſer were like to bee ſtained with the crime, which he chargeth vpon another. But when for want of the feare of God, ſome of the ciuilleſt, and ſuch as ſtand for law and gouernment in townes ſhal be puld out for notorious malefactors, either in this crime of ſedition, as Demetrius and his fellowes, or in any other riot and diſorder; while they whom they chargde ſhall be found innocent, then they wiſh they had been a little preciſer in that kind, and confeſſe that onely conſcience can reſiſt theſe temptations to ſinne. They make a ſhift for a while to conceale their leaudneſſe, but if forcible occaſions and prouocations aſſault them, they haue no power to withſtand them. Thus much of this. Looke vpon the quarrelling of the Ephramites with Gedeon, Chap. 8.
                  
                     
Secondly, their bitter and cauſeleſſe contentions, threatning to burne him and his houſe, where they had cauſe rather to haue been highly thankfull to him, doth teach of what mettall and diſpoſition ſome be, that they cannot liue in their place innocent and harmeleſſe with other, but take vpon them to dominere ouer them, holding them in feare of them, when yet the Lord hath commanded, that wee ſhould not be many maſters, neither ſuffer Iames 3 1. any to liue in feare by vs. Such were the Iewes againſt Paul: for this ſin of contending with others, though it be odious whereſoeuer it be found, yet when it is raiſed for religion, it is monſtrous: and they that hate their neighbours for their weldoing, and for that they cannot ioyne with them in their vnfruitfull and ſhameleſſe workes of darkneſſe, but reprooue them rather, ſuch I ſay hate them with a deadly hatred, and cannot in their diſliking and malicious conceits againſt them, be pacified or reconciled to them, their wrath is vnapeazable, as we reade that Cains for that very cauſe was towards 1. Ioh. 3. 12. his brother Abel, that his brothers deeds were good, and his euill.
                  This ought to teach vs, not onely to liue peaceably with thoſe that are quietly diſpoſed, though they be not framed to liue Chriſtianly; but alſo to doe our beſt to winne and perſwade them to looke after the life to come, and to feare God; and that firſt by our innocent liuing among them, and good example giuing vnto them, and then by little and little drawing them forward, by good inſtruction, admonition, or otherwiſe, as there ſhall bee cauſe. But eſpecially it ſhould vrge vs to be more neerely knit in brotherly loue, one Chriſtian with another, and to beare the infirmities which we ſee each in other, and helpe one another out of them: rather then to take a pritch and conceit one againſt another, and ſo to cauſe ſtrangenes and breaking of fellowſhip, wherein many offend greatly, till they be forced by the hard vſage, that they finde among the bad ſort, to make more account of their brethren afterward, then they did before. But of this often.
                  To the former doctrine, this may be added as a limme or branch of it, that ciuill men not Heatheniſh onely, as the King of Ammon, chap. 11. but 3 Profeſſors alſo ſometimes (as we ſee theſe Ephramites did) to adde ſtrength to their contentions and braules, and to giue them more libertie therein, will, I ſay not, ſticke to ſet out their diſlikes, and accuſing of other with lyes and falſe chargings of them, that ſo they may ſeeme to haue iuſt cauſe to hate and contend, as that wicked Ziba did bring into disfauour & diſgrace, 2. Sam. 16. 3. that innocent man Mephibaſheth with Dauid, as much as in him lay; with lyes and falſe accuſations. Let the odiouſnes of ſuch dealing, make the ſpeaking of the truth to be more ſet by of vs, and yet for loues ſake to our brethren not to vrge the vtmoſt that we may doe, though we might doe it iuſtly, which is the right and kinde ſhewing of our loue to them. Let the reader ſee chap. 11. 13.
                  And by the vnthankfulnes of theſe Ephramites, which it is no marueile to ſee in them towards Iphtah, they being branded with ſuch groſſe euils, as 4 we haue heard to bee in them, let vs learne what Gods ſeruants may looke for in this world, for all their loue and labour in procuring the peace and welfare of other, and in bringing them to good: truly, vnthankfulnes they may looke for, if not ill will and the fruite thereof: and that recompence is rendred them for all their good will, to go about to bring the wicked world

to a better point, I meane in labouring to acquaint them with God. They owe them more then all that they haue is worth: as wee may ſee by Pauls words to Philemon: yea and it is cleere alſo by the word of God, that they Phile. 19. are beholding to them in great part for their liues; as we reade, that for ten righteous mens ſake Sodome ſhould not haue bin deſtroyed: euen for this Gen. 18. 32. they are (I ſay) beholding to the ſame good ſeruants of God, as well as for the welfare of their ſoules, who by their holy prayers and other good endeuours would be helpers to them, if they might be regarded of them: yea to ſay much in few words, if it were not for them, the world could not ſtand, ſo that they haue all that they enioy for their ſakes, and more might haue at Gods hands, but that they willingly withhold it from themſelues.
                  And what doth the whole rabble of them yeeld againe to Gods people (thinke we) but vnthankfulnes, (vnleſſe it be a few whom God inlightneth to beleeue the truth) euen as Iphtah did receiue at the hands of the Ephramites, whom he ſet at libertie, yea and that with all indignitie, diſcourteſie, and bad vſage. But to omit them, with whom there is little hope of good to be done, this I ſay to them who deſire to glorifie God by bringing foorth Iohn 15. 9. much fruite, let them not be diſcouraged, but beare it contentedly at their hands, it is the onely recompence that the vnthankfull world can yeeld to ſuch; as Chriſt himſelfe found and foretold it vs, ſaying, I haue done many good workes among you, for which of them doe yee ſtone me? And againe, If they 
                     Iohn 10. 32. Iohn 16. 
                     haue not knowne me, ſaith he, neither will they know you. For the fuller vſe hereof, looke in chap. 8. verſes 22. and 35. alſo chap. 8. 1.
                  Laſtly in this verſe, whereas this finne of contending and diſſembling in theſe Ephramites, is found to be not in one, but many generations of them, 5 as partly we haue heard already in the 8. chapter of this book, where we ſee the Ephramites did the ſame to Gedeon then, that theſe their poſteritie did here to Iphtah, and afterward the like pride is read to be in their poſteritie; it reacheth how a ſinne keepeth in a kindred, for many generations after, as treaſon, whoredome, flatterie, diſſembling, and ſuch like, and ſuch taints and ſtaines are not worne out, till ſpeciall grace of God doe worke and effect the ſame. But of this before, chap. 8. 1. for in theſe points I ſhunne tediouſnes of purpoſe.
                  In theſe two next verſes is ſet downe the anſwere of Iphtah to theſe Ephramites, by which anſwere it is cleere, that he vſed all meanes, like a wiſe Verſ. 2. 3 and well gouerned man, before hee would take vp weapon againſt his brethren the Ephramites, notwithſtanding their bold prouoking of him, and he Iudge and gouernour ouer them, and might therefore by his authoritie haue beaten them downe. And the ſumme of his anſwere was this; that they laid a falſe accuſation to his charge, for contrariwiſe, at ſuch time as he was ſore prouoked by the Ammonites, and driuen to make warre with thē, he ſought helpe of them, and they would not goe foorth with him, but put him to his ſhifts: and when he fought with them, to the perill and danger of his life, the Lord deliuered them into his hands: Therefore he demands of them, what cauſe they the Ephramites had, to aſſault and ſet vpon him in that manner they did. Thus much of Iphtahs anſwer.
                  Now let vs a while conſider of this more particularly, as wee haue done before of the Ephramites quarrelling with him. Where this commeth firſt

to be noted by their diſordered contending with him, not in courſe of law, Doct. but ſeditiouſly and with tumult, how one affliction aroſe to this good man after another: as the trouble yt he had by his daughter was accompanied in ſome ſort with this, that came to him by his neighbours the Ephramites. Whereby we may ſee the condition of Gods people as in a glaſſe, that they are euer wrapped into new combats and troubles daily, ſo as the end of one is the beginning of another. As wee ſee in the booke of Iob, it is ſaid of his Iob. 1. 16. troubles, how one complaint came to him in the necke of another: and yet (which is more to bee marueiled at) God of his goodneſſe ſo worketh by them, that they who will be ruled by him, may ſee them turne to their profit and benefit, according to the ſaying of the Apoſtle, to wit, that all things Rom. 8. 28. turne to the beſt to them that loue God. The like ſaith S. Iames; Count it Iam. 1. 2. (my brethren) matter of the greateſt reioycing, whē ye fall into diuers tribulations. And it is a doubt mercie of God that it is ſo: For we are ſo corrupt and defiled, that if things ſucceed with vs after our deſire, we are exceedingly lifted vp, and forget our ſelues, in ſuch wiſe that our pride is intollerable, and we ſhamefully diſguiſe our ſelues, ſo that ſuch as feare God, and behold vs, knowing we are but wormes meate; are greatly grieued to ſee our inſolencie. Therefore to keepe vs from ſuch diſguiſednes, and the danger that commeth thereby, what a fauour of God is this, that he after ſome proſperitie, doth vſe to exerciſe vs with new combats and afflictions, and all to hold vs vnder, yea, and much to benefit vs. For as it is better to goe to heauen Mark. 9. 45. with one foote, then to hell with both; ſo he will rather ſaue vs with putting vs to ſome paine and griefe here, rather then to loſe and forgoe vs vtterly, by ſuffering vs to enioy vncertaine and momentany proſperitie and the pleaſures of ſinne for a while. Of this hauing ſpoken what I thought fit in chap. 11. verſ. 34. and 8. 1. I adde no more here.
                  Onely this watch word is neceſſarie to be taken of vs, that although wee be now and then (as Iphtah was before, chap. 11. 35.) humbled with ſome afflictions, ſo that for the time we be brought to obedience, and ſubdued as it is meete for vs to be; yet becauſe wee doe ſo ſoone waſh them off, therefore we haue need of many, and thoſe alſo ſtrong afflictions, (as Iphtah had) as mallets to beare vs downe one after another, and bruſe vs that ſo we may be meekned vnder the mightie hand of God; and we muſt be importunate with him in our prayers, that we may be more and more accuſtomed daily, Note. to beare the croſſe patiently and contentedly, till hee haue perfected and Luke 9. 23. brought to his appointed meaſure, the good worke that he hath begun in vs. And whereas the ſucceſſion of heauie afflictions much diſmaieth vs for the moſt part, (though alas they are not worth the naming in reſpect of Chriſts, whoſe afflictions wee ſhould be conformable vnto; nor yet to the glorie (which through him) they worke vs, as the Apoſtle ſaith, I ſay it Rom. 8. 18. ſhould be otherwiſe, and we ſhould caſt one eye eft vpon the righteous and equall dealing of God, and eft vpon the cauſe within our ſelues, as well as vpon the greatnes of the affliction, or the multiplicitie of them, as hath often been noted before in handling this argument.
                  Secondly here we ſee, that anſwer is to be made to falſe accuſations, when they bee proudly giuen out againſt vs, and are to our reproch and hurt, as 
                        Doct. 2.
                     
theſe of the Ephramites were againſt Iphtah: ſuch (I ſay) are not to be ſuffered to paſſe, leſt the authors of them bee imboldned thereby, to doe ſo ſtill, yea and goe further. So Salomon teacheth, ſaying: Anſwere a foole according Prou 26. 5. to his folly, leſt he be wiſe in his owne conceit, and ſo he waxe bold to make a practiſe of it.
                  For though wee walking in our innocencie and vprightnes in all good conſcience, ſhould not regard the taunts and vniuſt reproches of euill Eccleſ. 7. 11. tongues, which they commonly ſend after vs, much leſſe hearken what they ſay of vs, for then wee ſhould neuer be quiet; yet in weightie matters that touch our profeſſion, and the credit thereof, we ought (if we can obtaine it) Note. to vſe the helpe of the Magiſtrate, both to reſtraine the ſlanderer, (in which reſpect Mephiboſheth complained to Dauid of Ziba) and to procure vnto him his due, vnleſſe he repent. But eſpecially take wee heed that we giue them no iuſt cauſe to ſpeake euill of vs, while wee ſuffer as euill doers, for ſo wee 1. Pet 3. 17. bring a double puniſhment vpon our ſelues.
                  And becauſe much ſeed of contention is ſowne in the world by bad perſons, this I ſay further of it, that it is our part and dutie to roote it vp, as faſt and as much as in vs lieth. And if ye aske how that is done: I anſwere, beſides that which before I ſaid, we ſhould carefully looke that we take all in good part, if it may be; but if it cannot be, yet in defending our innocencie, let vs ſhew all meeknes, and ſtriue againſt all bitterneſſe: if the offender ſee Note. his fault, we haue good bleſſing of our labour; if not, it is lawfull to goe further, and according to the greatnes of the fault, ſo let ſatisfaction be vrged at his hands: but in any wiſe, let vs ſee that wee keepe the vnitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace. This I thought good to adde to that I haue ſaid before in the eleuenth chapter in Iphtah his anſwere to the Elders of Gilead, and in his replie to the King of Ammons lying anſwere.
                  To come more particularly to the matter, we ſee, that whereas they make this the chiefe cauſe of their quarrell againſt him, that he called them not to helpe againſt the Ammonites, hee telleth them hee did call them, but they would not come. So that he conuinceth them of a lye. But who would 
                        Doct. 3. thinke, that ſo many ſhould conſent together ſo boldly to maintaine a falſe matter? And men of the viſible Church and of the tribe of Ephraim, one of the famous tribes among the reſt. Therefore they who at this day doe carrie their heads aloft, both for their profeſſion and outward eſtate in the world, haue great cauſe to ſuſpect and feare themſelues both in and about this ſinne and the like. But to terrifie and withhold men from ſtanding ſtiffe in a lye, let that fearefull example of Gehazi preuaile with them, with ſuch 2. King. 5. 27. like in Scripture.
                  The heart of man is falſe and naught, and will eaſily carrie men to that which is odious and vile, eſpecially if the matter ſauour of profit or pleaſure, and ſelfeloue ſhall ſo blindfold them, that they ſhall not ſee the euill they haue done, till they ſmart for it, vnleſſe they be ſuch as keepe a narrow watch ouer their hearts, and a ſearching into them faithfully, to finde out that which is amiſſe. And this that it may be done, God hath giuen vs two eſpeciall good helpes: the firſt is our comming to the light, that our euill Iohn 3. 19. deedes may that way be made knowne to vs. The other, our owne examinings

priuatly of our waies, and arraigning of our ſelues before God, that ſo Pſal. 4. 4. Lam 3. 40. we may caſt out ſuch filthineſſe, of lying, diſſembling and the like ſins. See branch 3. of verſe 1.
                  Theſe Ephramites dealt with Iphtah, as the men of Succoth and Penuel Doct 4. ver. 2 dealt with Gedeon, when hee followed the Princes of Midian, to wit, Zeba and Zalmunna: for they dealt roughly and vnkindly with him. So theſe when Iphtah their gouernour ſent to them for helpe, they moſt vndutifully denied it, and yet (which was much worſe) they came and quarrelled with him, now when hee had got the victorie, for that (as they ſhameleſly affirmed) he had not called them to the battell, and ſo they would bee thought to haue deſerued as much fame and commendation in that victorie, as Iphtah, ſeeing they boaſted that they were as ready to haue gone againſt the Ammonites as he, when indeed they meant it not.
                  Therein they bewrayed two foule faults, very odious and to bee taken heed of: the one, hard-heartednes and barbarous vnkindnes, not to helpe their brethren in their need, the caſe being their owne as well as theirs; and this was ioined with diſobedience, in that Iphtah was their gouernour. The other fault was their ſubtiltie, in that they did (which way, and on which ſide ſoeuer the victorie ſhould goe) prouide for themſelues. By the firſt we are taught to beware of this vnkindnes and incompaſſionate hard heartednes, to bee ſenſeleſſe of the miſeries and neceſſities of our brethren; but to be moued with pitie toward them in their diſtreſſes: and this wee ſhould doe, as for the commandement of God and other cauſes, ſo for this that we our ſelues are ſubiect to fall into the like troubles, and doe alſo at one time or other. In which caſe our conſciences beare vs witneſſe, that we are iuſtly forſaken of other, and left to ſinke in our ſorrowes, and ſmart by our calamities, and that none ſhould offer themſelues to pitie vs, ſeeing wee ſhewed 
                        •
                     o little mercie and kindnes to other before in the like troubles, but were rather hard hearted towards them. And it is (doubtleſſe) one cauſe (as wee Note. may ſee by the euill ſeruant, who had no pitie on his fellow, and therefore his maſter was wroth with him, and deliuered him to the tormentors) it is Matth. 18. 34 one cauſe (I ſay) why God afflicteth vs, for as much as we ſhould otherwiſe neuer pitie our brethren in their troubles, but thereby we learne commiſeration towards them. Looke chap. 5. in Deboras complaint of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     : and chap. 8. verſ. 6. and 8.
                  The other fault was their ſubtiltie and double dealing; for they hauing Doct 5 in verſ. 2. 3. an ill conſcience propounded this to themſelues, that if the Ammonites had the victorie ouer Iphtah, then they ſhould be free from hurt and danger, ſeeing they had not ſtirred againſt them to aide him; and if Iphtah ſhould preuaile againſt them (as he did) then they would come forth, floriſhing boldly with a lye, affirming that they had cauſe to take it hardly, for that hee got the victorie proudly with a few, (and would not call them to bee partakers with him) and ſo they did indeede. And thus they had, as men ſay, two ſtrings to their bow. This falſehood is ſo common in the world, to deale ſubtilly, as it is hard to know whom to truſt, as Salomon complaining asketh, where a faithfull man ſhall be found? Touching this vngodly policie and Prou. 20. 7. ſubtiltie, enough hath been ſpoken vpon the like occaſion before. Now of

their hollow heartednes and falſehood (the ground of it) I will adde ſomewhat more particularly.
                  This ſinne, as it is committed many waies, ſo in three things eſpecially I Subtiltie and bad policie appeares in three things chiefly: the remedies. obſerue it. Firſt in the profeſſing of religion: ſecondly, in friendſhip betwixt and among men: and thirdly, in mens bargainings and worldly dealings. For remedying of the which (for it were very long to diſcourſe at large of thē) this ſhould be done: For the firſt, becauſe many profeſſing, are brought to like religion for credit, profit, and vainglorie, and ſo fall from it againe, by ſmall occaſions: therefore take this for inſtruction, let the power and beautie of the Goſpell perſwade thee to become a profeſſor of it, rather then hope of profit, or the ſeeking of credit thereby, &c. and when thou haſt felt Note. it to haue wrought in thee (by the powerfull preaching thereof) faith, and a new life; and when thou ſeeſt how ſafe and well liking that hath made thine eſtate to be vnto thee, in compariſon of all that was before; this (by Gods bleſſing) ſhall worke faithfulnes in thee, to honour and beautifie thy profeſſion, ſo as thou ſhalt not ſtart aſide from it, as too many other doe; and otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer hold out in thy profeſſion, what faire ſhewes ſo euer thou makeſt; or if thou doeſt, yet thou ſhalt reape no fruite in peace, nor harueſt of ſuch profeſſion, becauſe when it was at the beſt, it was not ſound.
                  To paſſe to the ſecond: for the remedying of doublenes and diſſimulation The ſecond remedie. in friendſhip, let this be one chiefe rule: Chuſe thy friend for his goodneſſe, and his excelling others in pietie and vertue, eſpecially hee being approued to be a continuer therin, and one that is free from ſtrong affections, Note. as choller, anger, tetchines. And loue him ſtill for that, (ſeeing the thing that is to be deſired of a man, is his goodneſſe) whether there be other kindneſſes Prou 19. 19. enioyed therewith or no; which if there be any and faile, yet hold the principle ſtill, and nouriſh it, by thinking true friendſhip to be both rare and precious: and let not that counſell of Salomon be forgotten; Thine owne friend and thy fathers forſake thou not. And beware thy ſelfe of tetchineſſe Prou. 27. 10. and conceits againſt him; yea though thou thinkeſt he hath giuen thee cauſe; or of the tale-bearer, which would ſet diuiſion betwixt him and thee; neither Prou. 17. 9. repeate any matter which ought to haue been buried and forgotten, which may eaſily alienate him from thee; and in no wiſe let hope of earthly commoditie tickle thee, or the want thereof coole or diminiſh affection in thee towards him: So faithfulnes in friendſhip will be preſerued, and hollownes and diſſembling auoided: otherwiſe, like the league of fooles, it will be ſoone broken off.
                  And to remoue falſehood and vntruſtineſſe in bargaining and worldly dealings, thinke not that good for thee, that thou ſeeſt is euill and hurtfull to 
                        The third remedie. Note. another, eſpecially to a meaner man in wealth then thy ſelfe, but moſt of all to a poore body. And when the worth or value of the ware or commoditie ſhall be agreed vpon, plainly and without ſubtiltie, be willing to giue a penny for a penniworth: and as Abraham weighed the ſiluer, according to the manner and cuſtome of the time to Ephron the Hittite, for the peece of Gen. 23. 16. ground that he bought of him, to bury his dead in; ſo do thou pay currant money and coyne for it, according to couenant, that as neere as may be,

there may be equalitie to both. If a day be ſet for paiment, keepe it, at leaſt let there be no fault in thee, but let it be ſeene that thou art diſappointed and hindred from paying, againſt thy will: and ſo if the Common wealth be regarded of thee, not thine owne priuate onely, thou ſhalt come neere the rule that our Sauiour giueth for earthly dealings: that is, looke what ye Matth. 7. 12. would that men ſhould doe to you, euen the ſame doe yee vnto them: So ſhalt thou not be guiltie of double dealing and falſehood. And if thou thus Note. ſhunne in theſe three, hollowneſſe and ſubtiltie, thou ſhalt haue great cauſe to reioyce in and for thine vprightnes and ſinceritie, and not eaſily brought to halting or diſſembling in other matters.
                  Now let vs proceed: Iphtah anſwers further to the Ephramites, When I ſaw you would not helpe me (ſaith he) I put my life in mine hands, meaning 
                        Doct. 6. I aduentured without you, and reſted on God, going foorth with ſmaller helpe, when I could not haue greater. And by this paterne wee are taught, that we hang not, neither depend on other men in the good things we take in hand. For example, that neither in thoſe things that concerne our owne happines directly, (I meane the ſeeking of faith and conuerſion, nor which pertaine to ſanctification of life & godlines, as mercie and loue, righteouſnes and innocencie) we muſt neglect any good dutie, becauſe we ſee other backward in it; but rather look we to the examples of the forwardeſt and moſt faithfull both in their generall and ſpeciall calling, and in no wiſe let vs regard to follow them that come behinde in good things. As all will acknowledge that we ſhould doe ſo, in the preuenting a miſchief neere at hand, as Iphtah did here in following hard the Ammonites, when the Ephramites refuſed to helpe him. Abigails wiſedome and eare is to be commended 1. Sam. 25. 33. and imitated by many degrees before Nabals folly and ſenſeleſſe blockiſhnes. Euen ſo let vs ſay with Ioſhua, If other will not goe and ioyne Ioſhua 24. 15. with vs, yet we and ours will ſerue the Lord. When our Sauiour ſaw many offended at his doctrine, and departing away, he asked Peter in the name of the reſt, Will ye alſo goe away? Peter anſwers; Whither ſhall we goe (Lord) Ioh. 6. 68. if we forſake thee, who haſt the words of eternall life? Be we ſure therefore we prouide ill for our ſelues, if we pinne our zeale and forwardnes vpon others, and gather not ſtrength enough from our owne aſſurance of Gods peculiar goodneſſe towards our owne ſoules, to keepe vs cloſe and firme in our purpoſe of cleauing to him and that daily. Who doth ſo, is wiſe and Matth. 7. 24. builds vpon the rocke, and no aſſault ſhall batter his building: as for the declining or ſtarting backe of others, he leaueth that, ſaying thus to himſelf: They ſtand or fall to their owne maſter: and whether they haue euer been truly perſwaded of Gods fauour towards them or no, I cannot tell: But I know in whom I haue beleeued. Therefore if other men will be blind, ſhall I put out my owne eyes? If I ſee the world generally diſpoſed to coldnes, Note. looſenes, and luke-warmnes; ſhall I preſently repent me of my zeale and forwardnes? Haue I reſolued vpon no better grounds, then may be ſhaken with euery blaſt of winde, the frowning of my betters, the want of encouragement from men, or becauſe I ſee theſe things are not in price and account among ſuch as cannot iudge? If I onely ſerue God faithfully, of many that liue in the ſame towne careleſſe and prophane: will God be aſhamed of me before ſo many, or rather will hee not acknowledge me and reiect

them for all their multitude? Oh then what a wretched part were it for me to be aſhamed of him before men! or to feare baſe and ſinfull man (whoſe breath is in his noſtrils) more then God, who can caſt body and ſoule into Matth. 10. 28. hell? But of this point ſee chap. 8. verſe 11. compared with former.
                  In ſaying, God deliuered the Ammonites into his hands without their 
                        Doct. 7. helpe, as it is manifeſt he did, wee ſee firſt how gratiouſly God prouided for this his ſeruant: that whereas hee could by no meanes procure aide from theſe Ephramites, the Lord dealt ſo for him that hee needed them not, but went through as proſperouſly, as if he had obtained their beſt aſſiſtance. For why? God will not forſake his, that truſt in him, hee is their helpe and defence in time of neede, in ſo much that if father and mother forſake them, hee taketh them vp. This is a thing which greatly fleſheth the vngodlie, (who alas little know what refuge the righteous haue in time of neede) to wit, that if they haue friends, might, and wealth, they thinke they can ouermatch their aduerſarie: and then they thinke hee hath no ſhift, (as for the Lord, they exclude him) but he muſt either fall into reproch, or make ſhipwracke of his conicience: although if God ſee it expedient, hee diſappointeth and fruſtrateth their hope. Thus the enemies of Dauid, Daniel and our Sauiour, inſulted, when they had contriued their purpoſes ſo miſchieuouſly to manward, that they ſaw no way for them, whom they purſued, to eſcape: Now (ſay the Iewes) let vs ſee if God will helpe him at this pinch. But oh fooles! if God were farre off alſo from his, when you are hotteſt in your furie againſt them, ye ſaid ſomewhat indeed: but loe, he is then neereſt them, to carrie them through and laugh their enemies to s
                        •
                     orne. Iphtah was deſirous here of the Ephramites helpe; but being denied, the Lord ſo wrought that they were the firſt that complained, and not hee: There needed no Ephramites helpe, the Lord of hoaſts being on his ſide to make a ſupply. And let this be added as an encouragement to them whom I ſpake of in the laſt doctrine; that their hakednes and ſolitarines, I meane want of mens countenance and furtherance, ought rather to driue them to cling more cloſely vnder the Lords wing, who is able to make the enemies of his people their Prou. 16. 7. friends, if their waies doe pleaſe him: if not, hee can vſe meanes to vphold them without their helpe. For either he can ſo muzzle them, that they ſhall Note. not hurt them, as they would: or hee can enable them with ſuch courage and boldnes, that they ſhall contemne their contempt, and little regard their oppoſition: or if they be ſuch as may doe them any hurt, yet the Lord can ſo grace them, that they ſhall goe vnder that croſſe willingly and bee rather confirmed, then vnſetled in their good courſe thereby. And let all ſuch as would willingly bee religious, ſaue onely for the reproch with others, yea euen their owne fleſh would caſt vpon them: let ſuch (I ſay) labour to beleeue this, and that temptation ſhall little trouble them. Againe, obſerue from hence what bleſſing God giueth by weake meanes; when men goe to worke in their ſimplicitie and in a good conſcience: which in all good attempts ought to encourage them that offer themſelues willingly to the worke, as the tenne thouſand of the men of Zebulon and Napthali did in the Iudg. 4. 6. Lords battailes againſt ſome hundred thouſands in Siſer
                           •
                        s armie that came againſt them. In ſuch a caſe where God hath ſet vs on worke and heartned vs, let vs not be diſcouraged by our meaneneſſe, which in ſhew of reaſon is

indeed able to doe little: which hereby I may perſwade, that they haue not been the greateſt men of account, that haue brought greateſt light in the Goſpel vnto men, but ſuch as are very meane in the iudgemēt of the world; euen ſo, in many other of his dealings, he effecteth great matters by weake meanes. See that which is noted vpon Iphtah his victorie in the eleuenth chap. and 32. verſe, being the ſame words.
                  Vpon theſe promiſſes Iphtah concludeth with an interrogation, asking 
                        Doct. 8. them wherefore they were come to fight againſt him? As if he ſhould haue ſaid, I ſaued your liues, you ſitting at home with eaſe, what reaſon haue yee therefore thus to come againſt me? By this we may learne, that when wee ſhould do good to all by Gods commandement, it proues vs to be of a moſt bad diſpoſition, when we ſhall be found iniurious and hurtfull to the innocent, as theſe men of Ephraim were againſt Iphtah; and ſo I may ſay of thoſe that doe vs hurt, and no good, though we liue innocent by them: whereas the Heathens doe good to ſuch as doe good to them, &c. The vſe of this Matth. 5. 46. doctrine is, that we ſo liue among men, that wee may not be charged iuſtly, nor conuicted of wronging any: and yet not to reſt there, but to be ready to doe them good, as it may ſtand with our calling, and as we ſhall be able, ſo ſhall wee be ſure neuer to feare accuſations of vnkinde and vnbrotherly dealing; but if any be brought, we may anſwere them as Iob did, If mine aduerſarie write a booke againſt me, I will take it on my ſhoulder, reade it Iob 31. 36. who liſteth.
                  As touching their reiecting this Apologie of Iphtah, the point hath been 9 handled before in the eleuenth chapter (although this wilfulnes farre worſe became them, then the Heathen king of Ammon) yet ſomwhat I will adde by ſo fit occaſion. It is like their wilfulnes troubled Iphtah not a little, eſpecially being their gouernour, who was loth to haue turned the edge of the ſword vpon his owne people (if it could haue been auoided) and beſides yet could not ſuffer it to haue his graue and iuſt defence ſo ſlightly reiected. But what other fruite was to be expected at their hands, who came ready armed to trie the matter by force? Was it like they would ſtand debating and reaſoning long with him, who came with a preiudicate and reſolute minde to the contrary? It is not ſaid indeed, that they gaue not eare to him, but their reall refuſall to hearken, appeares in their proceeding to warre. But yee will ſay in the eighth of this booke, their predeceſſors bewraied the contrary, for their wrath was appeaſed by the anſwere of Gedeon. I anſwere: Indeed being vſed like froward children and condiſcended vnto, that is, their proud and angrie humour being pleaſed, they gaue ouer with much adoe: they had bin beaſts if they had not: nay doubtleſſe, they could not although they would (for an angrie man cannot continue in his anger ſo long as he would, the fewell being remoued:) But is this the praiſe of a man, that being humoured (as I may ſay) he giues ouer? No, though it be the honour of the appeaſer, yet it is his ſhame, becauſe he ſhould haue ouercome himſelfe before; his ſhame I ſay in that reſpect, although indeed he that deſiſteth by any meanes, is better then the implacable. But to returne: If there had been but a dramme of good nature and indifferencie in them, (for religion they had none) would they not as well haue abated their ſpirit towards him by their hearkning to his ſound reaſon, as their fathers

did before to Gedeons mildneſſe? Yes doubtleſſe: but it is as impoſſible to order an vnreaſonable paffion by reaſon, as to be mad with reaſon. Let this then ſet before our eyes (who are Gods Miniſters) the diſpoſition of the moſt of our ordinary hearers, that ſo wee may learne how to be armed againſt that diſcouragement. We are yoked with ſuch ſtiffenecked and oppoſite natures, as winde about their fingers, the moſt ſerious charges we lay vpon their conſcience, and (as they in Hoſee) we declare vnto them the large Hoſ. 6. 4. &c. and weightie things of the law, and they account them as a ſtrange thing, that is, after long information, fare as if they had neuer heard, and make them as words of courſe, or as if wee ſpoke in an vnknowne tongue vnto them. We looke that they ſhould receiue them as from God, (and ſo ſome few doe) and yeeld, ſubſcribe, and hearken: but it is not ſo: we may ſay to them, We haue piped vnto you, but ye haue not danced, &c. And why doe Matth. 11. 17. they not conceiue our meaning, and of the tune of our ſong? Yes, but they are otherwiſe reſolued, they haue another courſe to runne, (as thoſe Ephramites had, of whom God complaineth that hee knew not how to entreate Hoſ. 6. 4. them) and therefore they hearing vnderſtand not, ſeeing will not ſee, but winke and harden their hearts againſt vs. Muſt not this needs grieue vs? Yes: and ſo it ought to make vs mourne: but how? moderatly, as the Phyſition ouer the patient, whoſe diſeaſe was paſſ his skill, ere he medled with him. And indeed ſo it ought to be: let vs feede them, and if they caſt away their meate, or thriue not with it, they diſcredit not vs that diet them with a good ordinary. We could wiſh, that we could find them appetites as well as food: but this is paſt our skill: they died not of a famine, but of a ſurfeit: the meanes were vſed, and therein we reſt, and ſay; we are a ſweete ſauour to the Lord in them that periſh. It is manifeſt by the ſigne, that Gods will was to reiect them: that God would not perſwade them by vs, and then (alas) how ſhould we perſwade them? we haue ſaued our owne ſoules, their blood be vpon their owne heads, they died not for want of phyſicke. Now of this their wilfulnes (I meane the Ephramites) againſt Iphtah came ciuill warre betweene them. Of which in the next Sermon.
                  And laſtly, in that ſo many could agree together in ſo wicked an action, 10 (no leſſe then two and fortie thouſand men, for ſo many loſt their liues thereby:) we may ſee how eaſily men agree together in euill: as traytors, rebels, and other confederates in euill, doe. Whereas it is hard for a few, yea dwelling together in one towne and of the better ſort, to agree together about a good matter, or againſt the euill committed therein, though it be to their owne great eaſe and good to doe ſo. For why? the moſt of them that ſhould ſeeke the puniſhing of ſinne, as are farre gone themſelues, and as deepe therein, (in one kinde or other) ſo that they muſt hold backe for ſhame, and that, leſt their owne puniſhment ſhould be procured, in vrging it buſily vpon others. Beſides this, men are commonly of their owne corrupt nature, ſlow and backward in doing good.
                  The vſe of this is, to purge and clenſe our ſelues with all care from that which is euill both of ſoule and bodie, and to keepe our hearts with all diligence, 2 Cor. 7. 1. that good life may come from thence. So ſhall wee neuer neede to feare that wee ſhall be vpholders of ſinne in other, or agree with them who Prou. 4. 23. are ſuch. To the which purpoſe it is good to note, by what degrees wee

grow, either to that or any other height of ſinne, which euen heere may bee learned by the example of theſe Ephramites. In whom as in other of like fort it may bee ſeene, that firſt anger was kindled againſt Iphtah, and bred in their hearts: then wrath followed, which is continued anger; next to both, hot contention; and then conſent to ioyne in warre, and to band themſelues againſt him, who was both innocent and helpfull yea euen to them. But this point I haue handled heretofore. Thus much of the Ephramites quarrelling with Iphtah, and his anſwere.
               
            
         
         
            
               THE SEVENTIETH SERMON ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  NOw followeth the fight and cruel warre that was between Verſ. 4. 5. 6. The ſumme of theſe 3. verſes.
                   the Ephramites and Iphtah. For they, as wee haue heard, would in no wiſe relent, at the ſound and good reaſon that Iphtah brought to diſſwade them from battell, but were reſolute to proceed therein. Wherefore he fought with them, and ouercame them; and that they might not eſcape, hee preuented them, and tooke the paſſages ouer the waters at Iorden before them, that they could not paſſe ouer, and returne home, but there alſo many of them were taken and ſlaine.
               But to come to the verſes ſeuerally: In this fourth verſe, whereas it will 
                     The ſumme of verſe 4. be marueiled at, that Iphtah made ciuill warre with theſe Ephramites; ſuch are to know, that as they could not be ſtaied nor diſſwaded from making aſſault vpon him, and therefore it had been free for him, in that reſpect, he being in ſuch a ſtreight to defend himſelfe, although he had been but a priuate man: ſo, much more, he being, as he was, to wit, head and chiefe ouer them, had the ſword and authoritie put into his hands, whereby he was not onely to goe againſt forreine enemies, but alſo to ſuppreſſe and puniſh the rebellious and ſeditious of the land, when they ſhould offend in that manner. And the Lord gaue him the victory ouer them, who had deſpiſed him, and ſought againſt all right of law to take from him the gouernment ouer the Gileadites, and to caſt him out by ſtrong hand, hee being rightly poſſeſſed of it.
               All which being duly conſidered, and the puniſhment and deſtruction Doct verſ. 4. which befell them thereby, euen the loſſe of two and fortie thouſand mens liues, who by no perſwations would yeeld to peace: it laieth out the heauy and iuſt iudgement of God againſt thoſe who are vnthankfull, wilfull and ſeditious; and it is worth the noting, to ſee what ſuch proud ſpirits bring vpon themſelues, and how they trouble themſelues, who ſeeke to trouble others. For either God taketh vengeance of ſuch by men, as vpon Achan he

did by Ioſhua, who ſaid vnto him, Seeing thou haſt troubled vs, God ſhall Ioſh. 7. 25. trouble thee this day, when they ſtoned him to death: or elſe the Lord doth it himſelfe without meanes, as when it is ſaid, He will recompence tribulation 2. Theſ. 1. 6. to them that trouble his. To teach vs to follow peace with all men and holineſſe, without which no man ſhall ſee the Lords face. Heb. 12. 14.
               
               Of this fruit of mens wilfulnes and the deare price it coſteth them, I haue noted ſomewhat elſewhere. To knit vp the point therefore, marke how iuſtly God met with theſe Ephramites, and what a ſhame it was vnto them, to be the firſt diſturbers of peace, and good order, and to be ſo foully foiled and beaten, by them whom they prouoked iniuriouſly. When it falleth out ſo, (for it falleth not out alwaies ſo) what a cutting of their combe is it, and a pulling downe of their proud ſtomacke? And if they ſhould carrie away the field, and preuaile alway, who ſhould liue with ſuch? But for the defence of the innocēt, and the preuenting of that confuſion which would otherwiſe enſue, (for what is more intollerable then a boaſter, when hee hath his will) the Lord reſiſts ſuch, and pares their nailes: ſo that their hornes are but ſhort, though their hearts be full curſt. And ſeeing all will ſay, that when a makebate and contentious perſon is put to the worſe, he is well ſerued, to teach him to liue within his bounds, and meddle not with them that giue him no cauſe: let vs prouide in our dealings with others, that both our cauſe be honeſt and well grounded, and that our affections be ſutable, not carried with paſſion, heate, and rage againſt him, who hath Note. wronged vs: for if it fall out that wee be defeated, and put to the foile, (as we may looke for no other in ſuch a caſe) and God himſelfe take againſt vs in our bad courſes, how ſhall wee be able to hold vp our heads for ſhame, when men reioyce at our ouerthrow? Surely hee had need be impudent, who ſhould beare God and men and his owne conſcience downe altogether, and not blank for all the ſhame which his owne boldnes hath brought vpon him. But as for ſuch as meaſure all by the ſucceſſe they haue in their leaudnes; thinking it becommeth them well enough, while they proſper, more ſhall be ſaid of ſuch in the 5. and 6. verſes following.
               In this verſe a reaſon is added, why the Gileadites ſlew them of Ephraim, 2 to wit, becauſe they railed on them, for theſe Ephramites which branded themſelues with ſo many foule ſinnes together, as we haue heard, (which was too bad) yet added this to the reſt, that they railed on them alſo. Theſe railing words were vſed before in their contention with Iphtah, vpon which the Gileadites were doubly incenſed. For ſeeing they quarrelled with Iphtah, and threatned him ſo, what wonder if they grew to diſgrace the whole familie of which he was? The meaning then is, Gilead ſmote Ephraim, becauſe Ephraim, beſides their ſedition, added diſdainfull and reprochfull termes, and (becauſe they dwelt betweene two tribes) they tooke occaſion to call them, Mungrels, hang-byes, and men of no ſet tribe, but Neuters.
               So that by all that hath been ſaid, though the tribe of Ephraim was a famous tribe among the reſt, and none of the meaneſt, yet we ſee how the beſt for birth and deſcent, may poſſibly degenerate and grow companions with the baſe and ſhameleſſe, as theſe here who had worthily ſuch meaſure offered them by their brethren, for their leaudnes, quarrelling, tumult and railing. Now if thoſe may thus diſguiſe themſelues, then how eaſily, nay

how vſually (thinke we) may it be ſeene, that very vile abiects and ofscourings may dwell among worthy and right honeſt ſeruants of God and good chriſtians, and be of their kindred alſo? For as many vagrant and idle perſons doe hang about Princes courts, who are neither hired, nor belonging to the houſe, but ſhifters for their bellies and backes, offering themſelues to runne of meane perſons errands: ſo are there in townes and cities, vnruly and diſordered fellowes, either ſhrouded vnder the wing of their godly kindred, or neſtling themſelues among other of good note for religion and Note. honeſt behauiour, ſome without callings, brought vp to no labour, ſome without liuing, but all voide of grace, ready to be ſet a worke in doing miſchiefe if opportunitie ſerue.
               Such in diuers cities we reade of in the booke of the Acts of the Apoſtles, who waited to bee hired to make tumults and vprores therein. And yet I would haue none to take me thus, as though I meant, by ſuch as I ſpeake of, the poore folke in townes, who are in meane eſtate to liue: of whom I ſay this, that many of them follow their calling diligently, and labour painefully for their liuing, and where the Goſpell is truly preached, ſome of them are religious and approoued good chriſtians, I ſpeak of that which I know: although I deny not, that there are of them alſo, many idle hangbies which may be reckoned worthily among the other that I ſpake of. The vſe of this is to helpe to weede out ſuch (as men haue abilitie and authoritie) and chiefe men in townes, and all other to bee furtherances hereunto, and to preuent idleneſſe, irreligiouſneſſe and liuing without callings, from whence ſuch annoyances doe ariſe. Looke more about this before in chapter 9. 4. and 11. 4.
               We haue heard of the ſubduing and killing of many of the Ephramites in Verſ. 5. 6. the battaile before mentioned: now it followeth how the reſt were ſlaine. And that was, by taking the paſſages at Iorden before them, and there as many as they found to bee Ephramites they ſlew; all that were put to the ſword, and that loſt their liues at one time and other, were two and fortie thouſand. Now becauſe many paſſed ouer Iorden of the Reubinites and Manaſſites, as well as of them who were Ephramites, therefore they tried them by their language and ſpeech, whether they were Ephramites or no, and that was by their tongue in pronouncing. For when they bad them pronounce Shibboleth in a more full manner, they could not, but ſaid Sibboleth, being not able to pronounce ſo, and by that meanes they were diſcerned, and ſo taken and ſlaine.
               The firſt thing to be noted here, is the occaſion which moued the Gileadites Doct. to vſe this policie, to bid the other ſay [Shibboleth] and that was, becauſe theſe Ephramites being asked who they were, made a lye to ſaue their liues, and denied their tribe. It is true which Satan ſaid, Iob 2. Skin for skin, Iob 2. 4. and all that a man hath, he will giue for his life; euen truth, honeſtie, and all. And few will marueile at (it may be) or blame theſe for lying in ſo weighty a caſe, as life it ſelfe is, becauſe they thinke that if they ſhould be put to it as theſe were, it were no more then they might and ſhould doe to ſaue their life. Indeede i confeſſe life is ſweete, and if lying be lawfull in any caſe, it is in the caſe of the perill of life. But it is one thing for a man to omit ſome dutie of the law for mercies ſake to our owne life, another, to commit an

expreſſe ſinne againſt the negatiue of the law. Therefore although it bee lawfull for a man to preferre his life before the doing of ſome dutie commanded (put caſe it be the Sabbath daies duties) yet a man may not before a Magiſtrate anſwere falſely, or equiuocating-lye, vnder colour of mercy in ſauing his life. For it is not onely the omitting of ſome dutie, but the doing of a groſſe fault: herein therefore the rule is true, Euill muſt not be done, that good may come thereof. And the negatiue rules of the law admit no exception, except God diſpenſe (as he did with the Iſraelites in robbing the Exod. 11. 2. and 12. 35. Aegyptians) who is aboue the law. And hence it followeth, if lying bee a ſinne, that it is as well a ſinne to lye, in the defence of a mans life, as it is to lye needleſly, or to pleaſe. All three, the officious, the vaine, and the ſhameleſſe lye, are of the ſame cloth, though not the ſame colour, nor equall and of ſo deepe a dye. And to vs Chriſtians it ſhould ſeeme no hard condition neither, to caſt our ſelues vpon God, rather then be beholding to a lye for our life, if the caſe ſhould ſo ſtand. Better it is not to liue, then to liue with that Note. (which is worſe then any death) an accuſing conſcience. As the abiured Proteſtants in the time of perſecution can witneſſe. It is not the fond and fooliſh pretence, or colour warped by the ſubtile braine of man which can diminiſh one iot of the commandement of God, much leſſe diſanull it. He that will ſaue his life, by euill and indirect meanes, ſhall loſe it when all is done: as we ſee theſe Ephramites gained not by their lye, but were conuicted of it, by the ſame tongue that made it, as it were with one breath. The Matth. 16. 25. truth is, as the caſe ſtood with them (they fleeing before their enemies in ſo bad a quarrell as this was) little better was to be looked for at their hands, then to lye and ſhift for themſelues, hauing brought themſelues into the briars by their contention, rebellion and railing before. But let vs beware, we bring not our ſelues into ſuch ſtreights by our ſinne: for we ſhall finde it a matter hard enough to helpe our ſelues in extremitie of danger and trouble: which God brings vpon vs, if we be not the better fenced with faith and a good conſcience. But the danger of the former is deſperate and remedileſſe, as elſewhere I haue more fully declared in the Shechemites and their Captaine Gaal, chap. 9.
               Secondly, whereas the text ſaith of theſe Ephramites, that they failed of Doct. 2. the full pronouncing of the word, we ſee that although all the Tribes ſpake in one language, yet euen therein ſuch a difference was, that one ſpake not as the other (for we ſee that theſe Ephramites could not pronounce, as the Reubinites and the Manaſſites did) euen as alſo the Greekes haue great difference, and we Engliſhmen, namely ſoutherne and northward, differ much one from another in our dialect or manner of pronouncing, though we all ſpeake one language. This ſhould teach vs, that as oft as wee heare or thinke of any hurt or detriment comming thereby, we ſhould call to mind, and bee humbled in our ſelues, for the ſinne of them that cauſed the confounding of language firſt, the fruite whereof remaineth among vs at this day, and ought iuſtly to humble vs, for that much toyle and time is now ſpent in learning to vnderſtand languages, which might elſe haue been otherwiſe beſtowed. And alſo by ſtrange tongues wee ſee how the wicked keepe many from vnderſtanding the pure word of God, as the Romiſh Prelates long haue done, which could not haue been, if there had been but

one language and ſpeech ouer the earth, as once it was. Beſides with what difficultie, in reſpect of this which I ſpeake of, doe many trauell into forraine lands, to exchange their wares and commodities, or to other ends and purpoſes? For except they haue learned their languages, they cannot ſpeake to each other, but by an interpreter? What labour is there beſtowed in the tranſlating of the Scriptures and other writings, which elſe might haue bin ſpared? which when all is done, commeth ſhort of the naturall tongue and language. Not to inſiſt in the inconueniences which ariſe by Tranſlations, euen controuerſies in religion, about faith, which had been (in ſome part) cut off, if one and the ſame language bee generally embraced: and they which tranſlate beſt, attaine not vnto that ſignificancie of words and proprietie of meaning, which the naturall language would affoord them, and that without difficultie. Theſe and other like diſcommodities ariſe from this diuiſion of tongues: although they that liue at home in their owne countrey, and conuerſe with ſuch as are of the ſame ſpeech with themſelues, doe not ſo much obſerue them: let ſuch conſider, that it is Gods mercie, that this confuſion reacheth no further then it doth, but is confined though within ſo large bounds as it is. And againe let vs know, that mens diſhonouring God by their tongues, by periury, yea or ſwearing, by blaſphemie or curſed ſpeaking, and ſpecially by imprecations, might bring a deeper iudgement vpon them in perſon (though the generall little trouble them) euen the taking away of their ſpeech altogether; which kinde of examples, neither experience of former ages, nor our owne haue been wanting in: although if God ſhould ſmite as oft as he is prouoked, there ſhould bee no end. I conclude this therefore, let it bee a watchword againſt abuſing our language, leſt wee prouoke (as many daily doe) ſome curſe and puniſhment from God, and bee made examples to feare others, ſeeing other mens would not admoniſh vs.
               Laſtly from hence, that they ſlew ſuch as could not pronounce the word, 
                     Doct. 3. we learne, that as theſe loſt their liues in returning homeward, though they eſcaped in the battaile, ſo when wicked men paſſe by one danger, yet they ſhall fall into another. For the Lord being againſt them, they are neuer ſafe nor free from feare or perill of ſome euill to light vpon them, although not by and by. For which cauſe the Prophet Amos ſaith, If a man flie from a Amos 5. 19. Lyon, a Beare ſhall meete him. And euen ſo we ſee it to be by experience, if ſuch eſcape by lying, friendſhip, money and ſuch like, by the hands of men, God himſelfe will certainely meete with them, by the peſtilence, or arreſt them by ſome ſtrange diſeaſe, debt, impriſonment, ſhame, or ſome Note. other viſitation: or els the worme of conſcience as a ſerpent ſhall bite them; and if they haue their conſcience ſeared as it were with an hot yron, yet this plague ſhal take hold of them, euen an hardned heart which cannot repent, and ſo they dying (for few of them ſeeke to get out of that plunge) they doe moſt certainely periſh vtterly without any recouery, being throwne into that gulfe that is bottomleſſe, where is weeping and gnaſhing of teeth.
               And although ſuch ill diſpoſed perſons dye not alwaies by companies and multitudes, as they did heere, and at the flood in Noahs time, and as it commeth often to paſſe, according to the occaſions that are offered, (and therefore it is the leſſe marked) yet he that obſerueth it, ſhall finde that they

who bewray that they are not vpright harted, but diſſemblers and hollow, and that they haue no fauour in the Goſpell and good things, and by their behauiour, ſpeech and companie, doe teſtifie their bad liues; I ſay ſuch as obſerue it, ſhall find that now one, and then another, and ſome by one iudgment, and ſome by another, ſhall verifie that which I ſay, namely, how ſuch pine and wanſe away ſecretly in ignorance or impenitencie, or bee areſted apparently with ſuch viſitations of God, as in which they teſtifie the ſame. See my notes vpon the ninth chapter in the death of Abimelech and the men of Shechem.
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 7. And Iphtah iudged Iſrael ſixe yeeres: then died Iphtah the Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
                     
                     8. And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem iudged Iſrael,
                     
                     9. Who had thirtie ſonnes, and thirtie daughters, which he ſent out and tooke in thirtie daughters from abroad for his ſonnes. And he iudged Iſrael ſeuen yeere.
                     
                     10. Then Ibzan died, and was buried at Bethlehem.
                     
                     11. And after him iudged Iſrael, Elon a Zebulonite, and he iudged Iſrael tenne yeeres.
                     
                     12. Then Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon, in the countrey of Zebulon.
                     
                     13. And after him Abdon the ſonne of Hillel the Pirathonite iudged Iſrael.
                     
                     14. And hee had fortie ſonnes, and thirtie nephewes that rode on ſeuentie aſſe colts, and he iudged Iſrael eight yeeres.
                     
                     15. Then area Abdon the ſonne of Hillel the Pirathonite, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.
                     
                  
                  IN theſe verſes following, is contained the time of the reigne of Iphtah and Verſ. 7. to the end The ſumme.
                      diuers other, that were Iudges in Iſrael, together with their death and buriall in their owne cities, where they dwelt and aboad in their life time. Wherein that which is ſaid in common of them both, I wil ſpeake of ioyntly, as of the time how long they gouerned, and of their death and buriall: for they are all ſet downe alike. Other things herein contained, I will ſeuerally note as occaſion ſhall be offered in the text. And firſt of the time of their being Iudges ouer the people.
                  It is ſaid Iphtah had that place ſixe yeere: Ibzan ſeuen yeeres: Elon tenne, Doctrine in generall out of all. and Abdon eight. All which being but one and thirtie, were a ſmall number for foure to enioy the place one after another. Whoſe office, as it was to deliuer the people out of the hands of their enemies, ſo (doubtleſſe) they did, if there were cauſe, by their being in bondage, or elſe they kept them in peace, that they were not oppreſſed nor brought vnder of their enemies at al. And that was a great fauour of God to Iſrael, that they changing their Gouernours ſo oft, yet they are not ſaid betwixt the time of the one and the other to haue been in their enemies hands; which when it was ſo, is expreſly ſet downe in the former examples and ſtories. Thus the Lord hath bleſſings of all ſorts for his Church, & is not willing to change them into puniſhments, till our abuſe of them turne them to our owne bane. And as theſe 31. yeeres

of peace, vnder foure gouernours were granted to Iſrael, ſo it was their owne ſinne and reuolt from God, which brought vpon them ſo long or a longer time of warre and diſquiet: the Lord could haue allowed them their peace without interruption, if they could haue ſerued him in it without vnſetling and wearineſſe. And as he dealt with them, ſo would he with vs alſo: who as he hath vndeſeruedly continued our peaceable daies euen in the times of our late change, (a worke of his moſt worthy to be had in remembrance) ſo he would haue freed vs from plagues and dearth alſo; but in that he hath allaied our peace with ſuch domeſtical puniſhments, as theſe late yeeres haue witneſſed, wee may thanke our ſelues, and marueile that they haue been no ſorer, for (doubtleſſe) hee hath therein remembred mercie in iudgement. Our peace is from him, our troubles wherewith it is accompanied are cauſed by our ſelues, and farre more bitter ſhould the cup be, if we were made Lam. 3. 39. to drink it, as we haue tempered it: but the Lord in mercie holds back from vs, confuſion, and bondage, to our enemies, which hee inflicted often vpon theſe Iſraelites. But more particularly, this teacheth that it is a great mercy of God, when in the change of Princes and Gouernours, there falleth not out ſome great detriment and hurt to the people, eſpecially when the changes are often. For that is counted a puniſhment, as Salomon ſaith. For the Prou. 28. 2. tranſgreſſion of the land, there are many Princes: and the ſtate of the Common wealth, if it bee in peace and proſperous, is then like to change to the contrary. It cauſed Dauid when he heard of the death of Saul, who was not very commendable in his time, yea although hee knew that hee himſelfe ſhould ſucceed him, it cauſed him (I ſay) to mourne with a great lamentation, ſaying: Ye daughters of Iſrael, mourne for Saul, how much more would 2. Sam. 1. 24. he haue done ſo, if he had been religious and godly? The ſame I ſay of inferiour Magiſtrates who helpe to vphold and countenance the Goſpell, and doe maintaine peace in their precincts and corners where they dwell. The loſing of them is with great danger, beſides feare of worſe to follow: and of faithfull Preachers the like may be ſaid alſo: though there be many inſtructers, yet there are not many fathers: the taking away of them therefore will not be without much cauſe of griefe alſo, for who knoweth what ſhall 1. Cor. 4. 15. follow?
                  The vſe is to ſtirre vs vp to thankfulnes for Gods goodneſſe to vs and our land, in reſpect of the late peaceable ſucceſſion and preſent proſperitie and health of our Soueraigne: which indeed all are willing to take part in, but few take the paines to conſider how much they owe to God for ſuch a benefit as this; which as a knot containes in it all the particular bleſſings which we enioy as infolded in it. Much leſſe doe they weigh that ouer-ruling power of God, which ſwept downe, as a cobweb, the long contriued plots of the Popiſh practiſers for a forreine gouernment, and defeated in a moment and derided their hopes, by ſetting the crowne vpon the head of the true apparent Heire, our gratious Soueraigne, without the leaſt contradiction of ſo many enemies. The ſenſuall abuſe of this bleſſing, hath now cauſed the Lord to abate ſomewhat of this his fauour, by abridging vs of a part of our hoped welfare, in the death of our late enioyed noble Prince. The which (among other vſes) ought to teach vs firſt to bee earneſt ſuters to God for the long life and proſperitie of the young Prince: ſecondly, to teach vs ſobrietie,

that ſeeing there fall out ſuch changings in our liues, ſo that no man knowes what ſhall come to paſſe, & what troubles may fall out in our daies, therefore to ſet our affections on things not ſubiect to change, euen to furniſh Col. 3. 1. our ſelues with knowledge and grace, whereby wee may bee fitted for the beſt eſtate while wee liue, and after death to enioy durable honour.
                  Of Iphtah to ſay a little particularly, when hee had ſo many and great Doct. verſ. 7. troubles, for the ſhort time of his abiding in his place, as three are ſet downe at large: his dangerous battaile with the Ammonites, the vnlooked for forgoing of his only daughter, and this bitter prouoking of him by the Ephramites, this teacheth (beſides that which hath bin ſaid hereof before, verſ. 2.) what great afflictions they haue, who are of calling and high place in the world, who in compariſon of many thouſands are thought by their wealth to haue a little paradiſe in this life, (and doe indeed enioy many outward priuileges aboue other) and what then may the life of meaner perſons be accounted but a vale of miſerie?
                  And eſpecially the liues of ſuch I may ſay, who are in penurie and want with many other calamities which accompanie it, and yet haue no hope of ſaluation neither; which were able not a little to aſſwage the force and anguiſh of ſuch tribulations. All which I ſpeake to ſhew how great the madnes of men is, and that of all ſorts and conditions, who for all their daily and manifold afflictions which cannot be expreſſed, are yet ſo wedded & glued to this world: as that they are not fit to heare of a departure from hence, no nor to bee brought to a ſober and moderate vſe of it, nor by the ſtrongeſt perſwaſions to looke after and waite for immortalitie, ſo as they may enioy it. Now let all iudge how little cauſe they haue to doe ſo.
                  It might bee thought a benefit, that the long life of man is ſo ſhortned from nine hundred yeeres to ſcarſe halfe nine ſcore, if men duly weighed how euill they are, as old Iacob told Pharao; Few and euill haue the daies of thy 
                     Gen. 47. 9. 
                     ſeruant been. But oh, at what a rate would moſt men buy the lengthening of their miſerie? a madneſſe ſo much the more extreame, becauſe they want that which might much allay the vanitie and vexation that falleth out in their life, I meane faith and grace. Others, on the other ſide, meeting with much, yea and that ſtinging trouble in their liues oft times, waxe diſcontented, deſperate, and wearie of liuing, and yet without all willingnes to dye, ſaue through a neceſſitie of their owne making, thinking thereby to auoide that, which they encreaſe thereby. A third ſort lay all their miſeries vpon their pouertie: whereas (alas) if they had the beſt eſtate and happineſſe vpon earth, Iphtah might teach them, that they ſhould be neuer the neerer their deſire, for they may haue ſorrow and vexation enough for all their wealth.
                  Now of the death and buriall of them I ſay this: as they all died, with all Doct of verſ 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. other vnto this day, ſo it liuely admoniſheth that it is the way by which all that yet remaine muſt goe, and who knoweth how ſoone? that wee may mind and prouide for it. And as they were buried in the places where they dwelt, (as Iphtah in one of the cities of Gilead, &c.) ſo we ſhould ſubmit our ſelues thereto, with ſuch other abaſements as accompany it, (though fleſh rebell againſt them) and this wee ſhould willingly doe for the hope of the

glorious reſurrection. But of death and buriall before. Thus much therfore be ſaid of the Iudges ioyntly.
                  Now this is ſeuerally ſaid of Ibzan, that he had thirtie ſonnes whom hee Doct. verſ. 8. 9. liued to marrie, and thirtie daughters whom he alſo beſtowed in marriage, for ſo long hee liued together with them. And this is ſet downe to ſhew, that the great number of children is reckoned, as then it was, for one of the great bleſſings of God. Therefore the Lord promiſed to Abraham his Gen. 15. 5. friend, that his ſeed ſhould be multiplied as the ſtarres of heauen, and as the ſand of the ſea. And ſo ſung the Prophet in the Pſalme: Thy wiſe ſhall be as 
                     Pſal. 128. 3. 
                     the fruitfull vine on the ſides of thine houſe, and thy children like the oliue plants round about thy table: and then he addeth this, Loe thus ſhall the man be bleſſed, that feareth the Lord: calling it not onely a bleſſing, but more then common.
                  And it doth the more condemne the vnthankfulneſſe of them who doe what they can to auoid that bleſſing, and doe of purpoſe ſhunne the occaſion of hauing their part in it, by marrying with full purpoſe and reſolution, where they may be ſure they can haue no children. Whoſe fault may be the leſſe, if it be of ſimple ignorance, but elſe it may be reckoned as a companion with theirs who grudge and murmur, for that they haue ſo many children: which ariſeth partly of diſtruſt in Gods prouidence, partly fearing that they ſhall not haue wherewith to nouriſh them; partly of pride, who ſee they muſt pull downe their countenance, for becauſe of the number of them, and cannot ſet foorth themſelues with the wealthieſt of their condition, to braue it iollily in the world, for that they be plucked downe with ſuch a companie of brats, as they terme them. And yet as bad as theſe ſorts are, farre more groſſe and barbarous are they, high or low, Miniſter or people, who rather then their countenance ſhould in the leaſt manner be abated by mariage and multitude of children, do not only liue in continuall whordome, zodomie, and ſuch like vnnaturall and filthie vncleanneſſe, but are glad (though moſt vniuſtly and in diſſimulation they doe it) to be counted and numbred amongſt them that liue chaſt, which ſinne ſhal bring the ſwifter damnation to them: They are loth to abaſe themſelues (as they count it) by ſtooping to Gods ordinance: but God hath many waies to pull them down, and make them ſtoop (as I haue noted in the former chapter) though they eſcape it one way and time, yet hee meeteth with them another: for fornicators and adulterers God wil iudge, as the Author to the Hebrewes ſaith, Heb. 13. 4. and the experiments thereof are infinit in all kinds of iudgements, by ſcripture and experience, both of old and daily: Although what neede wee goe farre? That which they ſhunne by their auoiding marriage, the moſt pull vpon themſelues, by the contrary courſe, as I haue ſaid. Now what remaineth, but that they who haue and count children a bleſſing, endeuour carefully to make them the children of God alſo, that ſo they may be to them a double bleſſing? Which is done of few, eſpecially as the caſe requireth, that is, with carefull and conſtant looking to the religious bringing vp of them, and the marking of their diſpoſition, and the ſinnes which they are moſt prone and inclined vnto, that they may in due time and good manner helpe to remedie it accordingly.
                  Another thing that is ſeuerall in theſe verſes, is this, that this Abdon, 
                     Verſ. 13 14.
                     
the laſt that is reckoned, had fortie ſonnes, and thirtie ſonnes ſonnes, and theſe were of place, and ſome countenance, riding ſtately, and not as meaner perſons going on foote. Whereby it appeareth (to ſay no more of the number of children) that they had peace then, and were free from oppreſſion by the other nations that dwelt about them. For they muſt not elſe haue had ſuch elbow roome, nor their libertie ſo to ſhew themſelues boldly and openly, but to hide their heads as well as meaner perſons, and to lay their iollitie aſide.
                  For our inſtruction this wee may learne, that in the time of peace, when there is freedome from warre and perſecution in a land, there is great proſperitie in euery kinde, as multitude of people, building, purchaſing, and growing in wealth and promotion. For though the plague and famine ſometime ſweep away & diminiſh the number of people, yet they through Gods goodneſſe not continuing long, nor ſore, are the ſooner outgrowne: but the other, I meane warre and perſecution, make ſtrippe and waſte, as we ſay, euen as the violent fire burneth all where it commeth, and the raging waters drowne. But when they ceaſe, there is plentie for the moſt part going with peace, and there is with both great outward proſperitie.
                  Which is to bee acknowledged a ſingular great fauour of God, and to ſuch as are able to vſe it aright, it giueth much libertie and encouragement, to liue well and happily. And otherwiſe what is all iollitie and abundance, if we haue not learned, and be not fitted for the right vſe of it? The which how few regard or looke after, but onely ſeeke to paſſe their precious time, in eaſe, vanitie, play, idleneſſe, whoring, drinking and ſuch like: and the ciuiller ſort to minde little elſe, then to encreaſe and gather wealth, the moſt of them not knowing why, but to content & pleaſe themſelues thereby: to Note. ſee (I ſay) how fondly, nay madly ſo many doe vſe this peace and liberty of quiet liuing; it is much more to be bewailed, then the benefit it ſelfe is to be reioyced for: And to thinke, how in this time of peace, good preaching ſhould be in vſe throughout all parts of the land, to hold downe Poperie, Atheiſme, prophanenes and other ſinne, and that which ſhould be all in all with vs, to bring many people to God, and yet how little is done this way, it cannot without much bewailing bee thought on. Now if in this earthly manſion of ours (wherein wee are abſent from the Lord, and liue as ſtrangers for a time) he can allow his people ſo liberall and comfortable a ſupply of earthly refreſhings meete for them, vntill they ſhall no longer ſtand in need of them; then what is like to be their entertainment at home in heauen (thinke wee) and what prouiſion will the Lord make for them there? where all ſound reioycing is without end or meaſure? A great meanes (doubtleſſe) to prouoke them to ſerue out their time with cheerefulneſſe and faithfulnes, when they conſider that all things are theirs, both here and hereafter: all good things ſerue to make vp the happineſſe of them who are Chriſts, who is Lord of all. And this be ſaid of that which is to be conſidered of in theſe Iudges ſeuerally and apart, and ſo of the whole chapter.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE SEVENTIE ONE SERMON ON THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. But the children of Iſrael continued to commit wickedneſſe in the ſight of the Lord, and the Lord deliuered them into the hands of the Philiſtims fortie yeeres.
                  
                  2. Then there was a man in Zorah of the familie of the Danites named Manoah, whoſe wife was barren, and bare not.
                  
                  3. And the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto the woman, and ſaid vnto her, Behold now thou art barren, and beareſt not: but thou ſhalt conceiue 
                           〈◊〉
                         beare a 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  4. And now therefore beware that thou drinke no wine, or ſtrong drinke, neither eate any vncleane thing.
                  
                  5. For loe thou ſhalt conceiue and beare a ſonne, and no razer ſhall come on his head: for the child ſhall be a Nazarite vnto God from his birth, and he ſhall begin to ſaue Iſrael out of the hands of the Philiſtims.
                  
               
               
                  HEre before I giue the ſumme of this Chapter, as I vſe to do in the entrance of euery Chapter, I will firſt lay downe the ſhort ſumme of the foure Chapters next following; containing the ſtorie of Samſon. And it giueth good light to the matters therein contained. This Chapter ſetteth downe his birth: the next his mariage, the 15. ſome of his acts, the 16. his death. For The ſumme. the firſt of theſe it is ſaid that the Iſraelites being for their ſins brought into the hands of the Philiſtims, and oppreſſed by them, Samſon is promiſed of the Lord to his parents, to be borne as a reuenger of them: and the Angell of the Lord inſtructing them what to doe about the child, confirmed the promiſe by a ſigne, and at the time it was performed that Samſon was borne.
               Agreeable hereto are the parts of the Chapter, which are three: firſt, The 
                     The parts 3. appearing of the Angell to Manoahs wife, with a meſſage to her of a ſonne, 1 that ſhe ſhould beare, to helpe Iſrael againſt the Philiſtims, to verſe 6. Then 2 his ſecond appearing to them both together, Manoah and his wife I meane, to the fifteenth verſe. Laſtly, the ſigne that the Angell gaue, that the thing 3 he promiſed ſhould come to paſſe, as it did indeed of the childs birth, and this to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  THe holy ſtorie ſheweth in this firſt part of the Chapter, that God ſent Verſ. 1. tidings and hope of help againſt the Philiſtims, and that is done in this,

and theſe foure next verſes following: and that was becauſe the people hauing fallen againe to prouoke the Lord, hee deliuered them into the hands of the Philiſtims, and that for fortie yeeres. But here it is ſaid, hee thought vpon their bondage, and went about their deliuerance. This their bondage when it began and ended, is hardly gathered for certaintie: but moſt likely it began after the death of Abdon, and continued almoſt to the time of Heli.
                  
                  Of the ſin of Iſrael, that they added to worke euill in ye fight of the Lord, Doct. verſ. 1. for ſo are the words: meaning, as they had done before in times paſt, and as their fathers had done before their late peaceable gouernment, ſo they did now againe. For this muſt be vnderſtood of the body of them, not of particular perſons: who (there is no doubt) committed ſinnes againſt the Lord, but not ſo boldly, groſſely and openly with conſent. But now they fell to that, and moſt like to idolatrie among the reſt. And now the Lord had omitted to puniſh them, and had giuen them peace, they fell againe to their old byas. This teacheth how naturall it is, for all fleſh to decline, and to fall to thoſe ſinnes which once they abhorred.
                  Our latter works ſhould be better then our former: but how rare is this to be ſeene, no not in the better ſort? no, vnleſſe it be in them, who do obſerue Note. their own frailtie, & how many waies they are ready to fall, and lay daily for eſpeciall grace of faith and good gouernment, & knowledge without fainting and wearines, as at any time they haue done, ſince they firſt began, elſe I ſay it is hardly to be found. And no leſſe had need to be done of them, becauſe both old and new prouocations to euill are ſo many and ſtrong, and euer in the way, that they will otherwiſe preuaile one time or other. And therefore men ſhould know and conſider, that they waite for a reward of great price, and no man is crowned except hee ſtriue for it lawfully, and to the end: therefore they ſhould not be weary of weldoing, neither faint in their good beginnings. But (oh to bee lamented) many of the forwarder ſort in times paſt, are now growne to tempt God boldly, and take vpon them to ſtint him in their prayers and other ſeruice, and detract from it, and coldly goe about it, much like them who are driuen to worke dead worke with their creditors, and are conſtrained rather to pay them therby the debt that they owe them, then that they haue any wages to receiue for the ſame: which kinde of worke, all know how vnwillingly and weariſomly for the moſt part it is taken in hand. And to ſpeake a word of thoſe who are not ingrafted into Chriſt at all by faith, and to ſhew how awkly they come forward, in the ſincere receiuing the doctrine of the Goſpell, (though wee know, and ſo may they, that the Lord beareth long with them, to the end Rom. 2. 4. he may bring them to repentance) yet how many of them may we obſerue, who though they liue vnder good teaching, doe not verifie the Apoſtles words to Timothy, of the wicked & vngodly, viz. that both for knowledge, they are euer learning, but neuer obtaining it, and as for their practiſe, they 2. Tim. 3 7. waxe worſe and worſe, rather then that they haue ſo much as any purpoſe 2. Tim. 3. 13. to ſet their hearts to ſeeke after true repentance. For the fuller handling hereof, let the reader looke backe into the former Chapters, wherein the other reuolts of this people are mentioned.
                  In that it is ſaid, God gaue them (when they had thus prouoked him) into

the hands of the Philiſtims, as he vſed (when they fell to the like ſinnes) to ſell them to other nations about them; and they and their fathers had ſo often found it ſo, that they might haue knowne (if they would) that they ſhould finde ſome ſuch like thing againe as oft as they reuolted from him. The Lords thus dealing with them, I ſay, not onely laieth foorth their boldnes 
                        Doct. 2. in ſinning (which I haue ſpoken of) but it certainly teſtifieth alſo what God will doe to them, and to all others in ſuch a caſe, to wit, that hee will ſurely be auenged of ſuch his enemies, who dare ſo boldly tempt him; yea one time or other he will moſt certainly doe it. And ſo let vs and eſpecially ſuch as take aduantage, by deferring of Gods executing his iudgement, to ſettle themſelues the more to doe euill, let vs tell to our owne hearts, and that not doubtingly, as the woman anſwered of the puniſhment to the Serpent, Gen. 3. 3. which God had certainly annexed to the eating the forbidden fruite, but aſſuredly. And this let euery one that is wiſe apply to himſelfe, as a moſt vndoubted truth vpon the committing of thoſe ſinnes, to the which hee is moſt in danger, or elſe hee muſt looke to ſmart afterward. But of this point and the next in this verſe, namely that he did ſo long continue the people in bondage to the Philiſtims becauſe of their ſinnes, I haue ſpoken in another place.
                  The Lord purpoſing to raiſe vp one that ſhould helpe his people, doth Verſ. 2. 3. 4. 5. firſt appoint his parents, and them he mentioneth and deſcribeth in this ſecond verſe: and ſheweth in the third, how he ſent word to the woman by his Angell, that ſhe ſhould beare ſuch a childe, as ſhould helpe to auenge their enemies: in the fourth hee directeth her how to vſe her ſelfe who ſhould beare that childe, and that ſhe ſhould not eate or drinke any forbidden or vncleane thing: in the fifth he ſhewes a reaſon hereof, to wit, becauſe the childe ſhould bee no common perſon but a profeſſed Nazarite. And therewith he declareth what he ſhould doe, that is, begin to ſaue Iſrael out of the hands of the Philiſtims.
                  Touching the firſt of theſe points, of deſcribing the parents of Samſon, I would ſay the more, but that I ſee the holy Ghoſt omitteth and paſſeth by the commendation of their godlineſſe here, which yet by that which followeth appeareth to haue bin great. But yet I will borrow ſomewhat from other places in this chapter to this purpoſe. We may obſerue in Scripture, that vpon the like occaſion ſometimes a very liberall roome and commendation is allowed to the parents of worthie inſtruments. One for all may ſerue, of the parents of Iohn Baptiſt, Luk. 1. 6. not ſo much deſcribed by circumſtance of place and outward condition, as by their grace and godlines. This is here omitted, and yet ſo as by the ſequell of the hiſtorie in this chapter, it may appeare they were a worthie couple: and the holy Ghoſt (as it were) leauing it to the diſcretion of the reader, to make vp their deſcription by the good fruites and effects which are after recorded of them both, as (God willing) ſhall be noted out of the text, I doe here make mention of it, as being to good purpoſe, in the firſt mentioning of them. Briefly then, let vs note from this practiſe of the ſpirit of God, how much it auaileth to the due ſetting out of a good poſteritie, to ſee from what manner of parents they are deſcended, (the godly progenitors, being the crowne of a good progenie) eſpecially if the vnworthineſſe, and vnſutablenes of the

yonger, depriue them not of that honour which their elders haue purchaſed for them. The godly parents are the roote whence the children (euen Exod. 20. by promiſe and couenant, Exod. 20.) are to deriue bleſſing vpon themſelues, if they bee faithfull. Hence is it, that all beleeuers are honoured with the ſpirituall priuiledge of being the ſonnes of faithfull Abraham: a greater by farre then to bee his degenerate children by carnall propagation, Iohn 4. Secondly, this inſinuateth to Parents the dutie of care and gouernement: ſeeing when the children are named (as in the booke of Kings commonly) there the parents are ſet in the forefront, to beare the blame, or to carrie away the honour: if their children deſerue well, they may claime the praiſe of it iuſtly, as a bleſſing and rewarde of their education: to the ſhame I ſpeake it of ſuch looſe perſons, as whoſe childrens religion ſhameth the ignorance and vngodlineſſe of their parents. Thirdly, this redoundeth to the honour of God, and his faithfulneſſe, when one poſteritie after another, for ſome generations ſhall bee found to know the God of their fathers: in whoſe ſteps to walke it is to them a worthy commendation before men, but much more in the ſight of God, as Timothy a godly childe and grandchild, 2. Tim. 2. 5. is commended.
                  Secondly here, in that the Lord doth raiſe a deliuerer out of the tribe of Doct. verſe 2. and the reſt. 
                     Dan, in which this place Zorah was, neere to Eſhtaol, and verſe 25. ſheweth; this tribe being one of the meaneſt: It teacheth that God will ſerue himſelfe by the meaner ſort as well as by the mightier and greater, when it pleaſeth him. For if he furniſh them with gifts fitting, for that he ſetteth them about (whereof they are as capeable as the other) thereby he enables them for the worke, which not their birth or wealth alone can doe, as we haue ſeene before. Therefore it is not for vs to ſcorne and reproach ſuch, whom the Lord by their gift will exalt, though this be to be added, that neither meane nor mighty ſhall haue any cauſe in the end to reioyce in their preferment, otherwiſe then they haue well and rightly vſed their place, and themſelues in it with their gifts. And as I haue ſaid of outward place and aduancement in the world; ſo I ſay of inward grace and gifts of the ſpirit. That euen out of the meane or middle ſort of people, the Lord chuſeth many, yea moſt to be heires of ſaluation: and to vſe our Sauiours words, Matth. 11. to be ſeaſoned Matth. 11. 5. with the Goſpell by beleeuing (for ſo I expound the words.) And doubtleſſe in compariſon of theſe, few great ones are called: nay many 1. Cor. 1. 26. who haue ſtriuen againſt mediocritie of eſtate (which yet Agur preferreth as the beſt to ſerue God in) they haue forſaken their owne mercy. See more in the tenth chapter, 1. 2. 3. verſes thereof.
                  The Angell ſpeaketh to her of her barrenneſſe, that ſhe might receiue the Doct. verſ. 3. meſſage of bearing a childe more thankefully and ioyfully, for barrenneſſe in thoſe daies was generally holden a kinde of curſe, as I noted in chap. 12. the end, and fruitefulneſſe a bleſſing: but wee ſee that God turneth this curſe to a bleſſing, and it was counted no doubt by this woman, a great worke of his mercy, that hee gaue a childe to her being barren, as well as of his power, as Dauid reckons it. Thus doth the Lord make way for the thankfull entertaining of his mercies, by laying before vs our want and inſufficiencie: Pſal 113. end. Luk. 1. 37. and yet all is little enough to procure that affection, (except it be a little at firſt) for in a very ſhort time our mindes are changed with the time,

and we rather looke vpon that we enioy, then looke backe vpon our former penurie, or the author of our change. So that the Lord is faine to vpbraide vs, by his vndeſerued kindeneſſe (as hee did Dauid by his taking from the ſheepefold) in ſtead of reaping the fruite thereof in praiſe and dutie: which is verified well in many of them that haue mourned and complained long of the heauie burden that oppreſſed their conſcience (which they feared, as Hezekiah once did, that they ſhould neuer bee eaſed of) and at length met with ſuch comfort, as they long wiſhed for: for although at the firſt obtaining Eſay 38. 10. thereof, they indented with God, that hee ſhould bee all in all with them, yet in time they haue worne out the remembrance of ſuch kindenes, as Pharaohs butler did Ioſephs. Let ſuch and all others whoſe conſcience Gen. 40. 23. Note. beares them witneſſe, that the Lord hath made them fruitfull of barren, (in what kinde ſoeuer) but that they haue brought forth ſower grapes, and wilde oliues, and made themſelues barren againe of fruitfull: let them (I ſay) looke backe and view the matter yet better, and pay their rearedges which they are run into with God, leſt at length they wiſh they had bin beholding to God for leſſe, except their fruit might haue made the Lord (as I may ſay) beholding to them for more then they haue yeelded. To him that Luk. 8. 18. hath ſhall be giuen: hee ſhall receiue fauour vpon fauour, that keepes the old in precious remembrance and regard, occupying for him whoſe the talents are which are occupied: whereas he who hath not, ſhall forgoe ſtill, till he haue loſt all: that is, he that hath forgotten him of whom he receiued that which hee hath, ſhall both loſe that for which he hopeth, yea and the principall to which he hath. This for one point.
                  Beſides, by this example, the Lord ſheweth vs, how hee turneth his chaſtiſements Doct. 2. in verſe. 3. to benefits vnto his people, as the iſſue of Iobs afflictions witneſſeth. For if they from whom he taketh away any good things, and correcteth, receiue not greater outward benefits then they forgoe; yet if they waite on God, they ſhall haue proofe of the graces that are in them, as faith, patience, and obedience (as oft I haue already noted in this booke) which are farre more ſweete to them then any outward libertie which they loſe and forgoe. So then let the people of God prouide to walke before him with vprightneſſe, and they ſhall ſee whether their life bee not repleniſhed with comforts, and they followed with many a token from God of his loue to them, and pleaſure in them, by all which they ſhall finde their daies vpon earth to be ſweetely paſſed, and they exceedingly well prouided for, till they be taken to glorie.
                  The Angell in preſcribing to the woman, that ſhee ſhould drinke no Doct. verſ. 4. 5. wine, nor eate no vncleane thing ſaid ſo, becauſe the childe that ſhe ſhould beare, ſhould be a Nazarite to the Lord: who (by the law of the Nazarite) was himſelfe to bee tied to certaine ceremonies, for that time of his ſo being: the one was that he ſhould (alſo) abſtaine from wine; ſecondly, that no raſor ſhould come on his head; thirdly, that hee ſhould not touch or come neere any dead body: of this reade further in the booke of Numbers. Now a Nazarite was one that was ſeparated from others, and more particularly Numb. 62. &c. ſuch a one as ſerued the Lord in a more ſtrict manner then other did: as for Samſon, who was to continue this eſtate throughout his life, he was a peculiar perſon and therefore a type of Chriſt, not onely in death, and that

moſt victorious, but euen in life, wherein our Sauiour fulfilled all righteouſneſſe.
                  The ſignification of the Nazarite was this, that the Lord would haue all that come neere vnto him, and will be in his ſeruice, to be ſeparated from the common ſort, which doe not examine their waies after the rules of Gods word, but walke after their owne hearts deſire. And hereby, and vnder a ceremony, hee requireth that of his, which in plaine words he doth elſewhere; ſaying, ye ſhall therefore be perfect as your father in heauen is perfect: alſo purifie your ſelues euen as I am pure: Be mercifull euen as your 1. Pet. 1. 16. heauenly father; And be ye holy, for I am holy. Inſomuch that in another place he ſaith, without holineſſe, no man ſhall ſee the Lord. And the ſignification Heb. 12. 4. of the Nazarite, doth exclude all that are vncleane and vnſanctified, from the Lords preſence, fauour and ſeruice. True it is, the ceremoniall rule is aboliſhed: for in the Church of the new teſtament, it is not permitted to any man to vowe any regular ſeruing of God according to outward obſeruances and orders, with placing any religion therein; no not ſo much as to retaine the obſeruation of the Nazarite, much leſſe to inuent new rites and orders, and yet ſuch are holden the onely religious men and women at this day in the church of Rome, as haue ſolemnely entred into ſome order or other (as they haue many confuſed orders of their owne forging) and therein ayme at perfection. But to let theſe and their diſorders goe: the equitie of this inſtitution ſtill remaineth firme, and bindeth vs. For the Lord will haue all his to know, that they are not ſet here to liue, no nor to ſerue him as they liſt, or bee as ſeruants that be at their owne hands, but hee tieth them to a rule and an order, according whereto he will haue them to walke. But this rule is ſpirituall firſt, then vniforme, and bindeth all without exception. Rom. 12. 1. The ſumme whereof is (as I haue ſaid) to giue vp themſelues in bodie 2. Cor. 7. 1. and ſoule to the Lord in all inward ſubiection of heart and outward obedience of life ſtrictly: with clenſing themſelues of all ſuperfluitie and filthineſſe of either body or minde.
                  The ceremonies alſo here required to be vſed of the Nazarite, had their ſignification: thoſe which are mentioned in the text are theſe two: the one, the ſuffering of the haire of his head to growe and not to be cut off, for the 2 time that their vow of being Nazarites remained, for they vowed it either for a certaine number of daies, moneths or yeares. But when their vow was at an end, and the time of keeping it expired; at the offering of ſacrifice and burning the fleſh in the fire, they cut off their haire and burnt it in the ſame fire. And after that they were free, and returned to their former courſe of life. Although it was otherwiſe with Samſon: for he was by the Lord appointed a Nazarite for his whole life: though that was not according to the common manner of being made Nazarites. The ſignification of it was, that much time ſhould not be taken vp in too nicely trimming and looking to our bodies, ſeeing we know they muſt be conſumed to the earth, and become wormes meate; and therefore a ridiculous folly to forget that, and to pleaſe our ſelues in ſuch deceiueable fancies. And alſo when the minde is ſet curiouſly on that worke, as it is a dangerous token of pride, ſo it bewrayeth that it ſlenderly regardeth the inward apparrelling of it. But as this nicenes and curioſitie in the weaker ſexe (who ſpend too many good

houres, vainely and vnfruitefully in this kind) argueth pride & folly: ſo there is a foule abuſe in men about this matter, and that is their diſguiſed wearing of long haire. I thinke there are few of them who will defend themſelues by the practiſe of Nazarites: if they did, yet the world would conuince them, as being (for the moſt part) furtheſt off from the ſtrict worſhip of God, and ſincere walking after his will, as the Nazarites did: if they doe not alſo mocke and skorne thoſe that embrace it. Me thinkes it is ſtrange, and argueth ſomewhat more then common for the badneſſe thereof, that among many changes of corrupt Engliſh faſhions, worne out and expired, yet this vnnaturall faſhion (as Paul calles it) for a man to weare long 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 1. Cor. 11. 14. hath ſuruiued them all. I know ſome nouriſh it for amarous lightneſſe of minde: others as a ſuppoſed ornament to their perſon, or marke of gent
                        •
                     ie; or at leaſt imitation of gentlemen. Theſe, as I thinke, might more wiſely forbeare it now, (ſeeing it is become the faſhion and habite of the baſeſt ſwaggerers and ruffians, and the diuels marke which he hath ſet vpon many that wil not be reformed) then at the firſt, when they vſed it, either as enſigne or ornament. It was the ſpeech of a worthie and reuerend Iudge of the land, That the vſe of the long locke was firſt taken vp by branded fellowes, for a couer of their ſhame. And that honourable perſonage in his circuit, ſitting in the place of iuſtice, vpon malefactors, practiſed according to the former obſeruation: commanding all whom he ſaw beſet with ſuch deformed haire, to be immediatly cut or ſhorne, whether to diſcouer their eare marke, or to ſhame their vnſeemely guiſe, I know not. And yet many of them (farre enough from Nazarites all may thinke) ſet as much by their haire, as if they had put religion therein, and were as loth to haue ſheares or raſor to come vpon it.
                  The ſignification of the abſtaining from wine or ſtrong drinke, was not 3 ſimply to forbid the vſing of it to all (for wee ſee in Nehemiah the Lord giueth Nehe 8. 10. his people libertie to eate of the fatte, and drinke of the ſweete) but it was commanded them that were Nazarites, for the time that they continued ſo, to abſtaine therefrom: the ſignification (I ſay) thereof was, to teach Gods people, that they ſhould auoide all exceſſe that way, leſt thereby they ſhould dull and blunt the powers of their mindes, and ſo they muſt of neceſſitive vſe them to ſhamefull ends, which were giuen them to farre more excellent purpoſes: which I ſay to the iuſt condemning of all beaſtly drunkards, and ſuch as are their pot companions, though they can better beare drinke without open diſguiſing of themſelues, then the other: who yet ſpending their time wickedly, and in needeleſſe and brutiſh deuouring of it, are nothing inferior to them in ſinning: but in ſundry reſpects are much worſe then many of them. But of this ſinne by other occaſion I haue ſpoken. This particularly be ſaid of the rule of Nazarites, and the caueats thereof: more generally this I adde to the former, that by theſe prohibitions and ſuch like, the Lord would teach vs, in how high account hee hath an heart well mortified and purged from the droſſe and ſuperfluitie of luſts and concupiſcence which it is ſtuffed withall. Wee ſee how he enioyneth his Nazarites not ſo much actuall worſhip, as a ſtraight reſtraint of the fleſh from all vnlawfull exceſſe, which he ſhadoweth out by theſe two, of diet, and d
                        •
                     cking the body, & abſtinence in both. Doubtleſſe if it were poſſible

for a man, to equall the Angels in obedience, and cheerefulneſſe, readineſſe and integritie of ſeruice, yet if it were poſſible againe, that the olde man with his deſires and paſſions, might ſtill remaine aliue with them, as wrath, malice, couetouſneſſe, vncleaneneſſe, hollowneſſe, looſeneſſe, pride, vncharitableneſſe, an vnruly tongue, &c. the religion of this man were altogether vaine. There are reaſons of this: 1. The Lord ſaith, Sonne giue m
                        •
                     e thy Prou. 23. 26. heart, he meaneth not a rotten heart and corrupt (he needs it not) but an heart well ſearched, and well drained from ſinfull affections and luſts: ſuch an heart he calleth for, and chuſeth. For he knowes, that where a mortified Note. heart is, there alſo is an heart quickned to the life of God, and the more fit for dutie, both within and without. 2. The chiefe ſeruice of God is inward; and this inward ſtands eſpecially in repentance, which firſt conſiſteth in the change of the euill habites and qualities of the ſoule, ere new be put in. For no man grafteth vpon a rotten ſtocke; nor puts new wine into old veſſels. 3. A chriſtian man fetch ſurer euidence from hence of his reformation, then from any particular dutie to the affirmatiue commandements of the morall law: and more ſoundly diſtinguiſheth himſelfe from an hypocrite. I ſeperate not the parts of repentance, but diuide the falſe from the ſound by this rule: many a good Chriſtian is behinde hand in this worke (and euer ſhall be, for no man is pure) and hardly forgoes ſome one or few old relikes of Adam: and therefore looke how much a man profiteth in this peece of religion, ſo much hee groweth more truely religious. The vſe is, that they who haue choſen the eaſier courſe of ſeruice, I meane Note. to doe good duties, doe better tend that other part of chriſtianitie, which hath been leſſe regarded by them; and that they trauaile in denying themſelues, ouercomming their paſſions, abſtaining from, and crucifying their corrupt nature, where it is ſtrongeſt in them, and ſo ſhall their religion proſper, and better beſeeme them. For though it be the harder part of the two, yet time beſtowed therein, will counteruaile the labour moſt plentifullie. And for a good man to be a debter to any luſt, is moſt vnſeemely, but to be Rom. 8. 12. a ſeruer, fulfiller, and obeyer thereof, and to haue the weapons of ſinne ſtill vnmortified, and fighting in him againſt righteouſneſſe (as Paul ſpeakes) is monſtrous: Thus much of the Nazarite.
                  In this verſe, the Angell telleth the office of the childe that ſhould bee Doct. verſ. 5. borne, to wit that when he ſhould come to age fit for it, he ſhould begin to deliuer his people from the bondage of the Philiſtims. Wherein the Lord declareth his tender loue and care of his people: who when they are oppreſſed and in tribulation, doth pitie them, and thinketh euen before, of eaſing and redreſſing their ſorrowes; whereby he would draw them to relenting for their ſinne, and to be aſhamed of their prouoking of him to puniſh them, and of the hardning of their hearts, by lying ſtill in their offences, without humbling themſelues and crying to the Lord for mercy and deliuerance. And if yee aske why hee doth not as well take them out of their Obiect. troubles, as well as he pitieth them therein, and why he ſuffered this people to lye in bondage ſo long to their enemies, till Samſon grew vp and was able to deliuer them. I anſwere: he were willing and ready to doe it, and much Anſw. more, if it might be good for them; but that cannot be, while they ſtill harbour and nouriſh their ſinnes, but they would procure vpon themſelues

greater vexation by continuing their wicked courſe, if the Lord ſhould deliuer them, before they repent for the ſame, as hath bin often proued by the example of theſe Iſraelites, crying for eaſe, but neuer heard, till by repentance Iudg. 10. 16. the Lord was grieued for their miſerie. So that Gods ſuffering their oppreſſions to hold them vnder a long time, as this his people was by theirs, namely from the birth of Samſon, till hee came to mans eſtate, and after; it was not for that he taketh pleaſure in afflicting his, (hee profeſſeth the contrary) but it is for that they relent not, neither caſt themſelues down before Lam 3. 33. him, to draw compaſſion from him, by their lamenting after him. And therfore 1. Sam. 7. 2. their long abiding vnder their tribulations, doe argue exceeding hardnes of heart in them, whereby they procure the ſame.
                  And whereas men cauill with God, and ſay they cannot bow their own Obiect. hearts, nor force them to relent, God muſt ſoften them and breake them, or elſe he is the author of their miſerie. I anſwere, they can binde heauie burthens Anſw. vpon his ſhoulders, which themſelues will not take vp with the leaſt of their fingers. And that appeareth by the ſlight account they make hereof, and their dealing ſo careleſly in ſo weightie a matter. For although the Lord can pull out the ſtone of the heart (as the Prophet ſpeakes) and make Ezek. 36. 26. it an heart of fleſh: yet if this were the thing they deſired, they would firſt apply themſelues to that grace of his, which is able to worke this effect in them, and then put ouer and commend the bleſſing of their labor to God: which while they neglect to doe, they haue that within them which ſhall witneſſe againſt them, to be the wilfull cauſes of their own deſolation. The Lord is not bound to them, in the leaſt reſpect, to miniſter the meanes of the word, in afflictions, benefits, examples, help by others, much leſſe grace to be humbled and repent. Therefore in that they vſe none of theſe ordinances of his, to the wholeſome ends to which they are appointed, the ſin is theirs: he is guiltleſſe, in that he hath offered them more faire, then themſelues were willing to accept of. Neuer did the Lord leaue any to himſelfe, hardned and impenitent, who deſired to profit vnder his doctrine and diſcipline. Therefore let men beware they ouerreach not themſelues in their ſubtiltie: for as bold as they are in ſpeech here, yet when they come to anſwer the Lord face to face, they ſhall be dumbe: and of their own mouthes ſhall the Lord condemne them. To the which end more might be added, if the point came not ſo often to hand throughout this booke, as oft as the relapſes of the people are mentioned. See alſo the firſt branch of the doctrine vpon the 7. 8. 9. verſes of the former chapter. Thus much of the firſt part.
               
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 6. Then the wife came and told her husband, ſaying, A man of God came vnto me, and the faſhion of him was like the faſhion of the Angell of God exceeding fearefull: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name.
                     
                     7. But he ſaid vnto me, Behold thou ſhalt conceiue, and beare a ſonne, and now thou ſhalt drinke no wine, nor ſtrong drinke, neither eate any vncleane thing: for the childe ſhall be a Nazarite to God, from his birth to the day of his death.
                     
                     8. Then Manoah prayed to the Lord and ſaid, I pray thee my Lord, let the man
                        
                        of God whom thou ſe
                              •
                           teſt, come againe now vnto vs, and teach vs what wee ſhall doe vnto the childe when he is borne.
                     
                     9. And God heard the voyce of Manoah, and the Angell of God came againe to the wife, as ſhe ſate in the field, but Manoah her husband was not with her.
                     
                     10. And the wife made haſte, and ranne and ſhewed her husband, and ſaid vnto him, Behold the man hath appeared vnto me that came vnto me to day.
                     
                     11. And Manoah aroſe and went after his wife, and came to the man and ſaid vnto him, Art thou the man that ſpakeſt vnto the woman? and he ſaid, Yea.
                     
                     12. Then Manoah ſaid, Now let thy ſaying come to paſſe: but how ſhall we order the childe and doe vnto him?
                     
                     13. And the Angell of the Lord ſaid vnto Manoah, The woman muſt beware of all that I ſaid vnto her.
                     
                     14. She may eate of nothing that commeth of the vine tree: ſhe ſhall not drinke wine, nor ſtreng drinke, nor eate any vncleane thing: let her obſerue all that I haue commanded her.
                     
                  
                  NOw it followeth how the Angell appeared the ſecond time, and that Verſ. 6. to 15. The ſumme.
                      to them both, to wit, Manoah and his wife: and that was thus. She like a good wife went and told her husband, that ſuch an one, ſome Prophet or man of God appeared to her, and told her of ſuch a thing, and what ſhe ſhould doe, but ſhe ſaid, ſhe anſwered nothing to him againe. Then Manoah beſought the Lord, that he might come againe, and hee appeared againe to the woman, who immediatly went and called her husband, who finding the man of God in the field, asked of him, both of the former meſſage, which he had brought to his wife, and alſo what they ſhould do to the child, when it ſhould be borne, and he anſwered him, euen as he had before ſaid to his wife.
                  Here the woman in her telling her husband of the meſſenger, deſcribeth him thus: The fauour of the man of God (ſaith ſhe) that appeared to me, was (as an Angell of God) fearefull; for ſo the Hebrew word is tranſlated, which ſignifieth alſo wonderful: and ſo it is like ſhe ſaid and meant, though it be tranſlated fearefull. And to preuent all doubts and ſuſpitions, further ſhe telleth him, that neither ſhe knew him, nor from whence hee was, neither did he tell her his name. But this onely hee ſaid to her, that ſhe ſhould beare a ſonne, and ſhe muſt abſtaine from wine, and eate no vncleane thing, for the childe ſhould be a Nazarite from his birth vnto his death.
                  But let vs now peruſe theſe verſes throughout more fully. Touching that Doct. verſ. 6. which ſhe vttereth of the reuerend preſence of the Angell, I will not inſiſt in it, hauing elſewhere noted the ſubſtance thereof. I begin with this ſixth verſe, where firſt know we this, that the woman by and by going to her huſband ſimply, to ſignifie the matter to him, as ſoone as ſhe receiued the meſſage, which equally concerned them both, did as became a good wife. For ſo it behoueth that married couples ſhould communicate their mindes one to another, matrimony being a ſocietie betwixt two, as if they were but one. Ephe. 5. 31. For they ought to haue their fellowſhip together in imparting heauenly things one with another, and earthly alſo, euen as there were both, in this matter: heauenly, ſeeing the meſſage came in the name of God and from heauen; earthly, ſeeing it was of and about a temporall comfort or bleſſing

pertaining to this life, to wit, of the bearing of a ſonne. This example betwixt two godly couples, doth commend to vs the ſociable and kind agreement and liuing together in mariage, that both be of one minde in good things, and ſhew foorth their inward conſent in affection, by the tokens of communion in outward things concerning them both, as Abraham and Sarah, Iſaac and Rebecca, with many other did. And as God hath commanded that it ſhould be thus: ſo in like manner it ſtandeth with all ſound reaſon, that they who are ſo neerely linked together in cohabitation and fellowſhip, ſhould be neerely affected, and agree together moſt kindly. Therefore Salomon wiſheth the husband to reioyce in his wife, and that ſhe ſhould Prou. 5. 19. be as the louing Hinde and pleaſant Roe before him. And ſo we ſhould ſee cauſe why mariage ſhould bee counted a ſingular benefit, as the Scripture calleth it. Concerning the which, though ſome couples voide of religion, haue ſome ſhadow hereof, ſeeing they agree in vpholding the familie, and in gathering wealth one with the other: yet they are out and in, their loue is not conſtant, but full of vnſoundnes, diſlikes, diſſimulation, inconſtancie, and vnquietnes; for they want the principall, which is ſome true meaſure of the feare of God, for that is the chiefe ſtaier of debate, and the nouriſher of true loue betwixt them: which ſhould therefore be laid for at their firſt comming together, or elſe will hardly be wrought in them after. But this kinde agreement betwixt couples, is ſo farre from the moſt, that ſtrangenes and wearines one of the other, doth ſoone meete with them, with other blemiſhes Note. manifold, which deface the beautie of mariage exceedingly. And yet leſt while I vrge this conſent, ſome couples ſhould catch more libertie then I or the Lord allow them, let me adde that their agreement muſt be in things warrantable, or elſe they rather band themſelues together againſt the Lord, and abuſe his ordinance. For they are not yoked together, that they may ioyne their wits & wils to do miſchief, as Ahab and Iezabel, Ananias and Saphira, which is not to be helpers of each other, (as they come together to that end) except it be to euill and to hell. This I ſay, becauſe many couples are neuer at one, but when they conſent in euill: then they are as cloſe as barke and tree, where they ſhould differ and diſſwade each other: but in good duties their mutuall affections are ſo farre from ioyning, that they are repugnant and diuided each from other as farre as may bee. By vertue of this holy concord, great is the bleſſing, and ſweete is the fruite of this ordinance. In all duties of the familie, as education of children, in all actions of Gods worſhip, in the workes of loue to the Saints, in the vſe of their lawfull liberties, &c. with freedome of minde, what ioy and contentment ariſeth in this vnanimitie and amitie betweene them? which otherwiſe is much impeached. And the fruite of this accompanieth them in their inward troubles of mind, and outward croſſes of body and eſtate: the one being ſtrengthened, comforted, reſolued, and holpen by the wiſedome, knowledge and aſſiſtance of the other. Yea ſurely the precious memorie of this agreement remaineth as a pledge in the boſome of the ſuruiuor, when death hath made a breach betweene them. But woe to him that is alone: double woe to couples that are diuided: where the one ſcorneth to communicate with the other: and the wife chuſeth any to breake her minde to, rather then her husband.
                  
                     
But (to returne) as the woman is to bee commended for telling her huſband; ſo the more ſhe deſerueth it, ſeeing that the partie that appeared to her, was taken of her to be a man, and his meſſage to her, being barren, was, that ſhe ſhould beare a childe. This might haue raiſed ſtrange thoughts in her, as doubting & wondring how this ſhould be; and ſome woman would haue concealed ſuch a matter, leſt her husband ſhould haue had her in iealouſie and ſuſpition about it: and againe, ſeeing that if he ſhould haue heard of ſuch a matter by ſome other and not by her, it might haue been hardlier taken of him againſt her. Betweene theſe contrary motions and conceits, ſome woman (I ſay) would haue been held in ſuſpenſe, or would haue choſen ſilence as the ſafeſt: but ſhe dealt ſimply, and did the beſt in opening it to him. And this teacheth that in faithfulnes about the mariage bed, there ſhould be ſuch holy loialtie and agreement betwixt couples, that there may not be the leaſt doubting one of anothers faithfulnes, neither any occaſion offered of the contrary, neither any ſuſpition about it. Which by their religious and oft confirming one another, in their faithfull keeping of couenant, and concerning all things elſe betwixt them, and the free opening of their mindes each to other, and their agreeing together in holy duties and exerciſes of religion, might eaſily be. But where are theſe to bee found almoſt among the better ſort? but to be ſure they be reiected of the common ſort, and thereby it may eaſily be iudged what manner of life they leade. Of this I ſay the leſſe, becauſe all will graunt, that if this amitie ought to be betwixt them in all actions mutually concerning each other, then eſpecially in that office which is moſt eſſentiall and naturall to mariage. And the Greeke word, which Paul vſeth in the former text, I meane beneuolence, although it doe admit a compoſition of two words, which ſignifie to be well minded, yet more properly it is deriued from the word that ſignifieth a bed, as noting that this containeth the other ſmaller beneuolences vnder it.
                  In ſaying to her husband, that ſhe did not once aske the man of God, from whence he came, nor hee told not her his name, for it was needleſſe: 3 let vs bee taught by both, not to ſtay in company needleſly, and eſpecially men with women, and moſt of all alone without other company, & where they may be in danger of doing or taking euill, or giuing occaſion of ſuſpecting Note. any ſuch thing to other. Oh the infinite miſchiefe that hath been wrought hereby, I meane by the idle and needleſſe meeting and tarrying together of men firſt, whereby one draweth another to ſome euill or other; and much more of men and women, whereby much whoredome hath bin committed, (yea and much that was neuer thought of before:) as by Elies ſonnes meeting women in the Tabernacle, which although it was lawfull, yet they abuſed it monſtrouſly. Particularly, let women learne of the Shunamite, 2. King. 4. 15. 2. King. 4. that comely modeſtie and ſhamefaſtnes which is fitter for their ſexe, then that boldnes and lightnes, which the moſt of them bewray, when they are in the companies, wherein they dare ſhew themſelues. This woman therefore being called to Eliſha his chamber (and yet not alone neither, but his ſeruant ſtanding by) came before him, and ſtood in the doore, that is, ſhe went not to him, but ſtood aloofe, as became a ſober Matrone. But thoſe daies are paſt: modeſtie is a burthen to many women, and further then feare or ſhame reſtraines them, grace and wiſedome there is little

in ſome of them to doe it, as may teſtifie when the other bands are ſhaken off.
                  The laſt thing in this verſe is, her ſparines of ſpeech to the Angell; She 4 asked him not any queſtion, but reſted in the meſſage. The little time ſhe ſtaied in his companie ſhe ſpent in hearing and marking, pondring (as Mary 
                     Luke 1. 29. did) not inquiring and deſcanting about it. Admirable is it that a weake woman, hearing a report of a thing ſo ſtrange, ſo vnlikely, and yet ſo pleaſing, and that from a man that ſhe knew not, ſhould not once moue a queſtion. A leſſe occaſion by many degrees, had been enough to haue ſet ſome womans tongue on endleſſe running, and her eye and minde on rouing and caſting: but then we muſt thinke (if ſhe had bin of this humour) an Angell of glorie had not bin ſent to her. Oh rare woman, which maiſt ſet both men and women to ſchoole, to learne ſobrietie. If Eue had been as wiſe, ſhe had preuented a great deale of woe, from her ſelfe and vs. Curioſitie is a foule blemiſh in a man, but a far greater in a woman: and as this woman was chaſt, ſo ſhe was of few words, and both goe well together: For ſhe in the Prouerbs who is deſcribed to be light footed and fugitiue, oftner and more in Prou. 7. 11. 12. the houſes of others then her owne, is taxed alſo to be light tongued, and talkatiue. This iangling and prating of women (a vice ſo deteſted in them by Paul) was neuer more rife in any age then ours. And (which is to be lamented) it is a diſeaſe incident to ſuch as (otherwiſe) are not of the worſt ſort neither: and all becauſe it is an impotencie and intemperancie, which iſſueth from the weakneſſe of their ſexe (in great part) which they thinke no diſcredit to themſelues, becauſe it is another nature vnto them. It is a nature vnto them indeed, but a corrupt one, which muſt be ſpied in time by thoſe that are wiſe, and corrected. I will not ſay, that ſuch are not fit for Angels company, they beſeeme not the company of a diſcreete or graue man: for a wiſe perſon would ſoone be wearie of them, though themſelues haue no ſtay of their vnruly member, till their breath faile them, or they be put to ſilence: no more then the wheeles of a Iacke, till the plummets be vpon the ground. I need not amplifie this: I wiſh that all praters and tatlers were but galled and gagged with this example here, and in the middeſt of their worke, made but to ſee their face in this glaſſe, which I think would trouble them more, then the glaſſe which the old Curtizan once looked in, and beholding her wrinkles and ſpots therein, crackt it aſunder becauſe it was ſo true a mirrour.
                  In this verſe is ſhewed, how ſhe told her husband what the man of God Verſ. 7. ſaid to her of the birth of the childe, and what ſhe ſhould doe her ſelfe, as we heard before verſe 4. and 5. of the which I haue ſpoken there: for this is a repeating of the ſame things. Onely this wee may learne by Manoahs wife, to report and relate things truly and aright as they were done, or as wee heard them related vnto vs. For through forgetfulneſſe, careleſneſſe, or of a worſe meaning, things are carried in ſuch ſort oft times, that by vntruths and lyes told out, much ſtrife and contention ariſeth, which bring and cauſe great trouble and annoyance. An example of many, may that be of Ziba, his falſe report to Dauid of Mepbiboſheth, that he refuſed to goe with Dauid againſt Abſolom, when hee himſelfe withheld his beaſt from him, at

ſuch time as he would full gladly haue gone, and whereon he ſhould ride, becauſe he was lame. Another is that of the Iewes ſlandering our Sauiour, 2. Sam. 16. 3. that he ſaid, Deſtroy the Temple, and in three dayes I will reare it againe. Whereas hee ſaid deſtroy this Temple, meaning his body: ſo they that Matth. 26. 61. compared with Iohn 2. 19. 23. Iohn 21. 23. hearing Chriſt ſay of his beloued diſciple Iohn, If I will that hee abide till I come, what is that to thee, &c? gaue it forth erroniouſly, that hee ſaid, I will that hee abide till I come, and ſo gathered that Iohn ſhould not dye.
                  Concerning this ſoundneſſe and fidelitie in reports hearing, bearing and telling, this I ſay, that he muſt bee a man well ballanced with grace, and girded with veritie, as a peece of his chriſtian furniture, who leſſe or more lieth not open to the diuell in this kinde, who will doe much to make them that goe for profeſſors, to loſe the credite of their godlineſſe. Was it not a goodly ornament for the old Prophet (whoſe honour is to be true of his word) 1. Kings 13. 18. to be taken in a lye, both warpe and woofe, making and telling? Was it not a ſweete noſegay to the Church, thinke wee, that two great and forward profeſſors, ſhould be drawne forth and cenſured for lyars, I meane Ananias 
                     Acts 5. 9. and his wife? Euen chriſtians rake vp the common ſcumme and ſcurfe of the age they liue in: and hauing heard reports, doe out of a corrupt vanitie, or a leaud and ſiniſter intent, altogether corrupt the truth and text thereof with gloſſes and comments, additions and detractions of their owne making, Pſalm. 15. this is no good ſigne of a man that ſhall dwell with God, if we may collect by contraries. If the Lord require that wee bee wiſe, and beware Pſalm. 15. 2. of beleeuing euery thing, leſt we become reporters of an vntruth vnwillingly: how ſhall they eſcape that caſt each tale in their owne mould, and hammer it in their owne forge, ere they giue it out? and when it is broched, it is no more like that which they heard from another, then an apple is to an oyſter, as the ſpeech is. Whereas the breaſt of each honeſt man ſhould be an harbour for truth to lodge in: and ſhould be as preciſely carefull to ſee it ſafely deliuered and vttered forth, as of a pledge or ſecret pawne left him by his friend. And let this worke a deteſtation of this Popiſh practiſe of lying and giuing foorth reports (yea and coyning them oft times) which they thinke will make for their vantage, not onely falſely, but ſo incredibly, and ſhameleſſely, that the very hearers bluſh for ſhame thereof. It hath been, is, and euer will bee, one of the rotten pillars wherewith they ſtay vp their kingdome and maintaine their diueliſh doctrine. But here I ende.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE SEVENTIE TWO SERMON ON THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  IT appeareth that Manoah beleeued his wife, and therefore Verſ 8. 9. 10. hee prayed to the Lord, that the man might appeare againe to them, who had brought the meſſage to his wife, that they might not be left in doubt what they ſhould doe to the childe, euen as they beleeued him that it ſhould be borne. And the Lord heard his prayer and ſent him againe vnto them: and hereby it was that the man of God appeared the ſecond time, as in this ſecond part of the chapter may be ſeene.
               In that Manoah gaue credite to his wife, as appeareth by his prayer, to Doct. verſ. 8. ſend him to them againe, we ſee that there was faithfulneſſe and truſtineſſe betwixt them, in that as ſhee reported the meſſage by and by that was brought vnto her, ſo hee beleeued it at her mouth accordingly. A liuely glaſſe for couples to looke in, to direct them in this poynt, how they ſhould Note. be true and truſtie one to the other: according to that which Salomon ſpeaks Prou. 31. 10. of a faithfull wife, Prou. 31. That her husbands heart reſteth in her: and a man would thinke, that there had need to bee no leſſe betwixt them, who muſt liue for their whole life time together. And much wearineſſe and diſcontentment muſt there of neceſſitie bee betwixt them otherwiſe; as they finde, who reſpect not grace chiefely in their matches, but either to ſatisfie their eye, ſaying with Samſon, giue me her for ſhe pleaſeth me: or elſe make them vp for wealth, or begin their marriage in a worſe manner then by Note. both the former. Such finde litle truſtineſſe one at ahothers hand, as appeareth within a ſmall time after: who yet haue that which they ſought, and reape the fruite of their owne labours; when they meete with many curſes in their matches, euen as God hath foretold them. But of this I will adde no more here, hauing ſo oft ſpoken of it.
               And it is well to be marked, that in this doubtfull caſe of the childes bringing 
                     Doct. 2. vp, about which they were carefull, but yet knowing not what to doe; in this doubt, I ſay, he therefore prayeth to the Lord, for direction by the appearing againe of the Angell, for he knew that God would not leaue them in ſuſpence, about ſuch a thing as he would haue them doe. Which ſhould teach vs, that in all difficulties and doubts, as well as in other troubles, wee ſhould ſeeke to God to guide and aſſiſt vs: they being matters in doing whereof, we muſt giue proofe of a good conſcience, both as Iehoſophat did, 2 Chron. 20. 2. Pſ
                        •
                     lm. 50. 15. and as the Lord commandeth in the Pſalme: ſaying, Call on mee in the time of trouble, &c. We can skill to complaine and make our moane, to euery one that wee meete with, what heauy affliction haue befalne vs, who

yet cannot helpe vs, but rather increaſe our ſorrowes; but with God, to whom they ſhould chiefely complaine, and make their moane, men haue no acquaintance. But as it is with them in this, that they bee ſtrangers to him, euen ſo they haue helpe, and thriue accordingly. Let the reader ſee chap. 1. 2. and often in this booke, touching this argument, as alſo the next poynt, which is anſwerable thereto.
               As he ſought to the Lord, ſo hee obtained that which he asked, to teach Doct. verſ. 9. that it is not in vaine to pray, and as he ſeeing that God hauing ſent to them a ſtrange and vnuſuall meſſage, which Manoah did not well vnderſtand, knew hee would not leaue him in ſuſpence and feare, but would make his minde knowne to them more perfectly, and therefore prayed in faith: in like manner we are to doe; to beleeue that we ſhall obtaine that which we pray for. He muſt pray in faith, and wauer not, ſaith Saint Iames, and in an Iam. 1. 6. Iam. 5. 15. other place, It is the prayer of faith that muſt ſaue. And Saint Paul ſaith, that we cannot call vpon him, in whom we beleeue not. Which I ſay, both becauſe Rom. 10. 14. that is no prayer but babling, that is voyde of faith, and alſo for that ſuch prayer of faith, euen by one, much more by many, being ſeruent, obtaineth moſt vnlikely things at Gods hands. And in all difficulties, this is the ſpeedieſt remedy, (both becauſe for the time preſent, it eaſeth the heart well, and for the time to come, giueth hope of redreſſe one way or other) Note. and vnburdeneth the minde of that vnprofitable heauineſſe which cloggeth it, and deteineth it from being well occupied. Although more particularly, the occaſion that mooued Manoah hereto, was a trouble which concerned the married eſtate; which howſoeuer it neuer falleth out (in this kinde) now adaies to couples: yet in ſtead thereof, many other doe, as care of bringing vp the children, employing them in the fitteſt trade of life, beſtowing them in marriage; defraying the charge of houſekeeping, with many more ſuch. In all which are there not many difficulties, feares, and doubtings, which ariſe in the minds of carefull and tender Parents and gouernours? Yes doubtleſſe, and ſuch I meane, ſo daily and ſucceſſiue, that they will breede no ſmall diſtemper, inwardly by fretting, carking and contriuing: nor diſturbance in the family by impatience and diſcord, if a wiſe courſe be not taken to ſtay and preuent the one and the other. Now what courſe can bee like this of Manoah, who being troubled about a meſſage, which God had ſent him, doth repaire to the ſame God, and deſireth him to free him from the feare and doubt which hee had cauſed: ſo ſhould the husband and wife do together, that ſeeing the Lord is the ordainer of marriage, the bleſſing of poſteritie is from him, and he hath vndertaken to prouide for them and theirs to many generations that feare him: therefore it would pleaſe the Lord to giude them in their gouernement, to frame their mindes to patience and contentedneſſe in their croſſes, to giue a bleſſing to their education and care of their children, to bleſſe their labours and callings, that there may bee ſufficiencie, and in a word to ſhew them the beſt way or iſſue out of thoſe troubles of houſehold and familie, which vnſettle and diſquiet them. A man would thinke it were a iollie eaſe (in ſuch caſes) to haue God a mans friend, ouer it is with them, that neither haue God nor friend to counſell them, but vncomfortably to beare their burdens by their owne ſtrength, which none at all is able to doe.
               
                  
The Angell at the prayer of Manoah, appearing againe to the woman in the field without her husband, ſhe made haſt to tell her husband that he appeared Verſ. 10. againe to her, as hee had done that day already; which newes ſhee knew would not a little ioy his heart, and eaſe him of much doubting that troubled him. And this teacheth the wife another dutie to her husband, to fulfill his ioy, and to doe the things that may make him cheerefull and a glad man, as farre as ſhe is able: as on the other ſide, the husband ſhould, yea and that much more, doe the like to her againe. And ſuch countenance, geſture and ſpeech, with their whole carriage ſhould be betweene them, as might free them from feare or doubt of heartie loue and kindeneſſe, but rather by all good occaſions, might make one another ioyfull. As for brawling, chiding, Note. prouoking each other, or ſecret diſlikings, tetches, or conceits, which might cauſe the ſame, though there will neuer want occaſions; nay if they ſhould, yet the euill heart miniſtreth too many, they (I ſay) ſhould be farre from them, eſpecially from neſtling, and being ſeated in them. Therefore Salomon ſpeaking of ſuch a woman, ſaith of her thus: Who ſhall finde a vertuous Prou. 31. 10. woman? For her price is farre aboue the pearles. The heart of her husband truſteth in her, euen as hers alſo ſhould reſt in him: for they haue many other troubles, and ſuch alſo as accompanie marriage, ſo that they haue little neede to trouble one another alſo, but ought euery way to allay Note. and ſtoppe occaſions, or to remooue them by their ſweete and chriſtian ſocietie and liuing together. And therefore it is moſt abſurd, that one of them ſhould doe that, which may grieue the other; but monſtrous that one ſhould ſeeke to vexe the other.
               And indeed, where both are of one minde, and will, in good things, this is no difficult matter, thus to ioyne and worke together that naturall loue and content in each other, and ſo (which is the fruite thereof) ioy and peace in the good ſucceſſe they haue in their endeauours and affaires, may be procured and augmented, I ſay among ſuch as be of one ſound minde, it is more eaſilie obtained (though the beſt had need to watch for ſuch grace, that fickleneſſe, eſtrangement and wearineſſe, doe not breake in) but how ſhall this bee found among other couples, wholely corrupt, and voide of goodneſſe, ſuch as the greateſt number is? Surely not eaſilie, eſpecially if trials come (for alas the worſt make a ſhift to pleaſe each other while they proſper) as we ſee in that fooliſh woman, Iobs wife, who while things went well with them, is not ſaid to haue broken out ſo groſſely, but ſeeing her husband plunged into miſerie, added to his ſorrow by her vnſeaſonable ſpeech, whereas ſhee ſhould then (aboue all other times) haue ſpake ſomewhat in ſeaſon, to haue comforted him, when all other outward helps failed. No man (ſaith the Apoſtle) euer hated his owne fleſh, but nouriſhed and cheriſhed it: ſo that ſelfeloue might ſomewhat perſwade this dutie, that couples ſhould ſeeke the peace and welfare of each other. And if the example of our Lord Ieſus may preuaile (as we know married perſons are ſent to that rule to learne of him) then let them conſider, how tenderly hee careth for his Church and ſpouſe, by all meanes procuring delight to her, and auoiding moleſtation from her, ſaying: I charge you wake not my ſpouſe 
                  Cant. 3. 5. 
                  till ſhe pleaſe. This charineſſe and care of remoouing all ſuch things out of the way, as might cauſe each others heauineſſe and griefe, and bearing the

burthen of each other, that the afflicted partie might bee eaſed, is the beſt way to witneſſe in them this ſympathie of affection, and like mindedneſſe.
               Now when Manoah commeth to the Angell to be ſatisfied in his doubt, Verſe 11. marke the manner of his ſpeech: he vſeth no long circumſtance, but directly goeth to the matter. Art thou the man (ſaith hee) that appeared to the woman? Such was the ſimplicitie of that age, that one might aske of another that which concerned them, and be anſwered. How farre was that from the practiſe of our time? for now there is much courteſie, gloſing and coloured hypocriſie and ſubtiltie, but little good meaning and honeſt ſimplicitie: neither ſhall a man be ſure of the minde of his neighbour, when he hath faire words enough tending that way. A ſhew of loue but with diſſimulation. Rom. 12. 9.
               
               Touching vnfaithfulneſſe in dealings and conuerſation among men, I haue elſewhere ſpoken chap. 12. 2. 3. to the which this as a limme thereof may bee added, which I am to ſpeake of, to wit, vnfaithfulneſſe in ſpeech. Both are birds hatcht in the ſame neaſt of a falſe & deceitful heart, I meane as well Ioabs curteſie to Abner, as Zibas fidelitie to Mephiboſheth. It is an equall 2. Sam. 3. 27. 2. Sam. 16. 3. ornament to a chriſtian (ſay they what they can, that miſlike the olde faſhion) to be a plaine dealing and a plaine ſpoken man; for both argue he is a plaine hearted man. He that carieth with him an heart and an heart, carieth Note. 1. Chron. 12. 33 about him, a tongue and a tongue, an hand and an hand, all double and diſſembling, all abominable to the Lord, as Salomon faith. For though the clouen footed beaſt was cleaner then the whole-houed, yet the clouen hearted and clouen tongued man is more vncleane to him, then the ſingle heart, and the vniforme tongue. In which reſpect the Iewes were brought vp to hate doubleneſſe and falſehood by the forbidden types of Plowing with two kindes of beaſts, wearing two kindes of ſtuffe, and ſowing two Leuit. 19. 19. kindes of graine, to wit, at the ſame plough, in the ſame garment, and in the ſame field. But wee at this day haue both abrogated ceremony and ſubſtance too for the moſt part: and though (as in other points, ſo in this) we hold, that generally the equitie of morall commandements is eternall, yet in particular, this plaine hearted and faithfull communicating and dealing of men together, is aboliſhed, as if it had been a meere ceremony. True it is, men haue not quite forgotten ceremonies in this dutie, but their new found ceremonies haue eaten vp the old ſubſtance ſheere, euen as the leane kine deuoured the fatte in Pharoahs dreame, I meane this, the affected apiſh Gen. 41. 4. or complementall ſpeeches of the moſt men, haue quite conſumed the trueth, ſimplicitie and honeſtie of the heart, that ſhould bee found among them. I miſlike not ſeemely and courteous ſpeech, if it carrie with it the colour and temper of the heart, but I meane that which Salomon ſpeakes of in Pſalm. 55. 22. the Prouerbs, when the words are ſoft as butter and oyle, ſweete as honey, but the heart is ſharpe as a ſword, and bitter as wormewood, and hath ſeuen abominations in it. Indeed I confeſſe all haue not in them this curſed habit (it commonly being the cloake of the malicious and politique whom a man may for the moſt part vnderſtand to meane contrarily to that they ſpeake) but it is alſo a vanitie and affectation of many others, to bee more full of ſhewes and courteouſneſſe, then to intend friendſhip or goodwill. Be it of malice or of vanitie, it is naught: if of the former, diueliſh: if of the

latter, frothie and ſuperfluous. Sinnes ſtay not alway in the Court: they come downe alſo into the countrey, wherein many men are ſo hollow, that their conſciences tell them, they deſerue to be hollowly dealt with: they haue vſed vndermining queſtions to others, and ſo they haue anſwers, as ſiniſter, indirect, and forked. So that now adaies, if a man would haue a plaine anſwere from another, he is ſaine to vſe ſome ſlight or wile to get it out: for if he ſpeake plainly, the other hath ſo many caſts and conceits in his mind, that he feares aduantage will be taken ſome way againſt him, which can be no leſſe then a token of a bad conſcience. If it be a matter that wee would communicate, for redreſſe of any euill, in towne, familie, or perſon, we know not how to breake one with another about it, (the meaner to his better eſpecially) but if wee doe, a ſlender regard ſhall be had of it. Euen ſo in friendly meetings at table, when we haue apparant cauſe offered of thankes by Gods benefits, yet euen there it is harſh to heare any words ſauouring of Epheſ. 5. 4. religion, or tending to edification, (although giuing of thanks is the ſpeech with which our table ſhould by the Apoſtles commandement be ſeaſoned) but if there be not ſome to croſſe them, that offer occaſion of ſuch ſpeech, yet ſhall ye haue the moſt part winding away from (ſeconding or giuing liking of it) into other needleſſe, worldly, or frothie ſpeech, euery one as he delighteth to talke. And as our ſpeech to men is many waies to be charged, ſo is our commoning with God ſeldome, and when wee haue any, full of coldnes, looſenes and wandring.
               
                  Manoah, vnderſtanding the man of God, in that hee had ſaid to his wife, Verſ. 12. and ſeeing that ſhe had rightly related the matter to him (for the meſſage which this man of God had done to his wife before, and ſhe had reported to him, agreed with his ſecond rehearſall thereof in all points) hee reſteth in that they ſay: for ſo he anſwereth, Be it as thou haſt ſaid: or thus, I beleeue it ſhall ſo come to paſſe, although to manward it ſeemeth not likely. So whē wee haue receiued any meſſage from God, and by examining and comparing one ſcripture with another, for the confirming of vs therein; we haue Acts 10. 17. proofe what the will of God is, which we were in ſome doubt of before; we ought to ceaſe diſcourſing, and though wee were held in ſuſpence, as Peter was at the viſion, till we were reſolued, yet now wee ſhould without contradiction or difficultie receiue it from God, yeeld to it, and reſt in it. Euen as before we know it we were, according to the occaſion offered vs, to doe as Manoah did, being vnreſolued; that is, trie the ſpirit, whether it be of God or no, and to pray God to reueale it to vs: and therefore as our Sauiour ſpeaketh, to ſearch the Scriptures for further knowledge therein: according to Iohn 5. 39. Acts 17. 11. the example of the Beraeans, who tried all things, holding themſelues to the truth; as the Apoſtle counſelleth the Theſſalonians to doe. We ſee that all 1. Theſ 5. 21. naturall motions tend to a reſt and quietnes: wherein the perfection and end of the thing ſo moued, conſiſteth. And he that runneth a race, attaineth not his purpoſe, till he haue reached to the end of his courſe, and then he reſteth. And becauſe I am come by occaſion of Manoahs reſting in that particular which he ſought, and haue ſhewed that we alſo ought to doe the like: I will ſay ſomething of that which we ought to reſt in, after a more generall manner. My meaning is this: A Chriſtians perfection and end which ſhall hereafter be full in the bleſſed reſt of glorie, (the Sabbath of the Saints) is

begun euen in this life, and that is, when the minde, ſoule, and whole man is at reſt, that is, enioyeth, feeleth, and poſſeſſeth that, for which they much trauailed and tooke paines. The reſt of the minde is actuall reſolution and Note. certaintie of the truth againſt errour and doubting: and this is the fruite of ſeeking knowledge. The reſt of the ſoule is, perſwaſion and aſſurance of Gods fauour and his alſufficiencie, being reconciled vnto vs, and this is the fruite of ſeeking faith. The reſt of the whole man is his inward ſetledneſſe, being the fruites of faith, repentance, and ſanctification: and this is the end of ſeeking encreaſe and growth in grace. Now becauſe all theſe are but imperfect in vs here, (for we know, beleeue, and grow, but in meaſure) therefore we muſt ſeeke ſtill to know, beleeue, and be ſetled, more and better, daily. Howbeit herein ſtands not our happineſſe, in that we are learning, laboring, endeuouring after, but rather in that which we hold, and haue learned and gotten. This laieth much to the charge of ſuch as hauing long been vnder teaching, fare as if they neuer had heard: after tenne, twentie, and more yeeres asking, Oh that I were reſolued of the truth! Oh that I might heare the way to ſaluation plainly deſcribed! Oh that this or that doubt, feare, temptation, luſt and corruption were remoued! Why, O thou ſluggard, what hath bin a doing all this while? Haſt thou not bin iogged, pulled, and punched out of thy ſnorting and dead ſleepe by the Miniſterie, and doeſt thou now open thine eyes, and aske why no bodie would awake thee? It was thy ſottiſhnes and lethargie, not want of rouſing, which drowned thee Note. in ſleepe ſo long. Therefore if thou haue care of thy ſoule, beſeech the Lord to bedew and moiſten thoſe drie clods of thy minde and ſoule, wherein the ſeede of the word hath lien ſo long vnprofitable, that at length it may take roote and fructifie. And ceaſe not till by this meanes thou be reſolued and ſetled about, and in the truth, that ſo thou maiſt reſt ſafely, and not (as before) dangerouſly: reſt, I ſay, not from worke and exerciſe of thy knowledge and faith (for the vſe of both is to be occupied, when thou haſt them) but from vncertaintie, error, doubting, and diſtruſt. This point I deſire the reader to compare with that I haue ſpoken touching Gedeon, chap. 6.
               When Manoah was reſolued that hee ſhould haue a childe by his wife, Verſ. 13. 14. though ſhe had been barren, he asked what they ſhould doe to the childe, of which thing they no leſſe doubted: whereby hee ſtill ſheweth his deſire of reſolution in the doubts that remained: and teacheth vs to be wiſe in making our benefit of the company and familiarity of ſuch as are able and willing to reſolue vs, and pretend we not fooliſh baſhfulnes, (when indeed it is but ſlothfulnes) or lothnes to be troubleſome, leſt by that meanes wee procure to our ſelues more trouble (then wee can eaſily auoide afterward) by ſuch baſhfulnes, ignorance, and ſloth. But I will not repeate any thing. Now to this ſecond demaund, the Angell anſwereth the ſame that hee did to the woman. But to the woman his preſcription was; what ſhe ſhould do her ſelfe, and not what they ſhould doe to the childe. So that it ſeemed he anſwered not Manoahs doubt: for when he asked what they ſhould do to the childe, the Angell anſwered, what ſhe ſhould doe that was to beare the childe. But it was all one in effect, as if hee had ſpoken thus: That which I ſaid that ſhe ſhould obſerue, was that ſhe ſhould doe it, becauſe of the child, and therefore much more he muſt obſerue the ſame.
               
                  
Againe, whereas ſhe was bidden to abſtaine from that which was vncleane, and that might ſeeme a needleſſe charge, ſeeing the law forbad all people the vſe of vncleane things before that time: to that it may be anſwered, that after the Philiſtims had got dominion ouer the people, as confuſion in the Common wealth and tyrannie grew; ſo religion among the Iewes began not a little to decay. No wonder then, if among other things of greater weight, this one point of the ceremoniall law was broken, that they fell to eate things vncleane, as well as that which was cleane. For it was common with the Iewes, vpon diuers occaſions to breake the ceremonie, as appeares by that 1. Sam. 14. See the place. And by this wee may learne that 1 Sam. 14. 32. it ought not to ſeeme ſtrange when wee ſee in the places of ignorance and darkneſſe, ſundrie euill cuſtomes, errours, and prophane practiſes receiued and vſed: and no print nor ſtep of Gods commandements and ordinances remaining, but all worne out and forgotten. Alas, they are to be pitied and lamented, not wondred at and ſcorned. There are more waies to deface and race out religion, then warre and forreine tyranny. Bleſſed be God, we ſigh not vnder that burthen: no, nor yet vnder the bondage of Antichriſt: wee haue peace, and gouernment, free from a profeſſion of Poperie. Let vs pray the Lord to adde hereunto this mercie, that by the free paſſage of the Goſpell, we may be alſo cured of that blindneſſe which now poſſeſſeth many places, and keepeth the people in errour, ſuperſtition and all kinds of vngodlineſſe. Secondly, in that the Angell ſpake the ſame thing to Manoah, 
                  Doct. ver. 13. 14 that he did to his wife before, about the ſame matter; we obſerue by his example, that it becommeth, and is meete for Gods ſeruants alwaies to ſpeake the ſame truth, in or about any matter, at one time and in one companie, that they doe at and in another: according to the Apoſtles words to the Epheſians, that they ſhould caſt off lying, and euery man ſpeake the truth to Epheſ. 4. 25. his neighbour; which is to the iuſt reproch and conuiction of them, who carrie two tongues in their head (as they ſay) and are ſuch as haue loſt their credit by reporting vntruth where they come, and doe hurt to other, as well as bring an ill name on themſelues. But this I noted out of the womans report to her husband, and in diuers other places.
               By the other part of the Angels words, in preſcribing that the woman ſhould abſtaine from things forbidden and vncleane, ſeeing the childe that 2 was to be a Nazarite muſt be borne of her; when yet the preſcription was chiefly for the child, we ſhould learne this: That when things which ſeeme leſſe likely are commanded or forbidden, much more thoſe which are more apparantly ſo. As if the ſeruant and childe muſt keepe holy the Sabbath, Command 4. much more the parents and maſter ſhould doe ſo: and moſt of all the Miniſter. And if the appearance of euill be forbidden; much more the euill it ſelfe. And ſo if a ſmaller thing be commanded or forbidden, much more a greater. And this is to the iuſter condemning of them that both heare this taught them, and ſee many well gouerned chriſtians to giue them example herein, yet not onely follow them not, neither the doctrine which they heare, but offend in the ſhamefulleſt and foulleſt manner. And let vs know that if the Lord in his Commandements will haue all his ſeruants to vnderſtand by the great ſinne or dutie expreſſed, that his will is the ſame in all the

reſt of that kinde, be they neuer ſo ſmall and ſpecial: how much more then if hee manifeſt his liking or diſling of a leſſer euill (that is more ſecret and more doubted of) or of a leſſer dutie (ſeruing to be of leſſe neceſſitie) ought we to collect that he will not hold vs guiltleſſe in thoſe euils committed, or duties neglected, which are more manifeſt, as being either by the light of nature, or by apparant Scripture allowed or forbidden? If he will not hold him excuſed, who is not wiſe to gather the leſſe by the greater: woe be to the careleſſe, who being commanded to ſtreine out a gnat, ſwalloweth a cammell. Thus much of this, I proceed in the text.
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 15. Manoah then ſaid to the Angell of the Lord, I pray thee let vs retaine thee, vntill we haue made readie a Kid for thee.
                     
                     16. And the Angell of the Lord ſaid to Manoah, Though thou make me abide, I will not eate of thy bread, and if thou wilt make a burnt offering, offer it vnto the Lord: for Manoah knew not that it was an Angell of the Lord.
                     
                     17. Againe Manoah ſaid vnto the Angell of the Lord, What is thy name, that when thy ſaying is come to paſſe, we may honour thee?
                     
                     18. And the Angel of the Lord ſaid to him, Why askeſt thou thus after my name, which is ſecret?
                     
                     19. Then Manoah tooke a Kid with a meate offering, and offered it vpon a ſtone, vnto the Lord: and the Angell did wonderouſly, whiles Manoah and his wife looked on.
                     
                     20. For when the flame came vp toward heauen from the altar, the Angell of the Lord aſcended vp in the flame of the altar, and Manoah and his wife beheld it, and fell on their faces to the ground.
                     
                     21. (So the Angell of the Lord did no more appeare vnto Manaoh and his wife) Then Manoah knew that it was an Angell of the Lord.
                     
                     22. And Manoah ſaid vnto his wife, We ſhall ſurely dye, becauſe we haue ſeene God.
                     
                     23. But his wife ſaid to him, If the Lord would kill vs, he would not haue receiued a burnt offering and a meate offering of our hands, neither would he haue ſhewed vs all theſe things, nor would haue now told vs any ſuch.
                     
                     24. And the wife bare a ſonne and called his name Samſon: and the child grew, and the Lord bleſſed him.
                     
                  
                  IN this third part, followeth the ſigne by which they ſhould be certified, Ver. 15. 16 17. 18 The ſumme.
                      that the thing told them by the man of God, ſhould come to paſſe. But firſt Manoah doth two things: one, he deſireth the Angel to eate: the other, hee asketh him his name, to both whereof the Angell makes anſwere. Of theſe firſt in order.
                  Concerning the firſt, the Angel of God hath now done his meſſage, and Verſ. 15. anſwered Manoahs doubt. But he kindly accepting him for the good tidings he brought vnto him, deſired to retaine him, that he might refreſh himſelfe after his trauaile, and (as hee thought) his hunger, and therefore hee ſaid to him, let vs ſtay thee while we make ready a Kid for thee. But the Angel hauing

no need to eate, drew Manoah from his purpoſe, telling him he would not eate, and led him to more heauenly matter, that is, to honour God, by offering a burnt offering vnto him.
                  In theſe two verſes we may conſider diuers things: firſt in Manoah, then 
                        Doct. 1. in the Angels anſwere. In Manoah theſe two following: Firſt his curteſie and thankfulnes in offering him to eate, (thinking hee had been a man) hauing brought ſuch a meſſage from God to him and his wife. And this confirmeth vs in that wee haue heard before, that where wee receiue kindneſſe, wee ſhould render and ſhew the like againe, as we can. And the godly vſed both, then, before, and after, to offer ſuch curteſie to the ſeruants of God being ſtrangers, though they brought no meſſage to them from God, and it is called hoſpitalitie, as wee reade of the Shunamite, who requeſted Eliſha to turne in as he came by, and built him a conuenient chamber for that purpoſe. They knowing that he who receiued a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Matth. 10. 41. and a righteous man becauſe he was ſo, ſhould receiue the reward that ſuch ſhould.
                  It is not a thing ſo commendable in Chriſtians to be kind towards them that deſerue it, as the contrary is odious and brutiſh in them. Thoſe that are commanded to doe well to their enemies, and loue them that hate them, what great thing is it if they loue and be kinde to the well deſeruing? (Heathens and Publicans doe likewiſe) But to be vnkind towards them that haue been louing and well affected toward them, is not only worſe then heatheniſh, but alſo then any beaſt will yeeld to another. Nay hiſtories report that alion hauing bin eaſed and holpen by a paſſenger that came by, of a wound which by ſome meanes had befallen him: long after acknowledged the benefit. For the Romanes vſing to behold the ſpectacle of men ſighting with beaſts: condemned malefactors to this death. Now among the reſt this man being one, came armed into the place, to fight for his life: and (as it fell out) this Lion was the beaſt, which was committed with him. The Lion no ſooner ſaw the man, but came and fell downe at his feete, holding vp his foote in the ſight of al the people, and making no ſemblance of furie againſt his preſeruer. The matter being enquired into, it was found that this man had taken a thorne out of the foote of the Lion and ſo eaſed his paine. This (being but a diſcourſe of a thing of inferiour nature) I may be thought not ſo wiſely to inſert in ſo graue an argument: neither had I done it for the ſtrangenes of it, but that I would thereby ſhame ſuch boiſterous, rough and barbarous natures, as being prouoked to this dutie of kindneſſe, by the ſtrongeſt meanes, yet out of a bitter ſtomacke, doe rather thereby take occaſion of hatred and miſchiefe, like Saul, who by Dauids innocencie and pitie to his life, was the more enraged againſt him. But theſe meete with their match, for God giues them ouer to be touzed and hampered by ſuch as ſpare them not, and want conſcience, when they are fallen into their hands, to teach them for euer after to abhorre ſuch inhumanitie, I had ſaid lionlike crueltie, but that I ſhould wrong that creature, if I ſhould aſcribe mans euill qualitie vnto it.
                  Thus much of the firſt thing to be noted in Manoah, as I ſaid before. The Doct. 2. verſ. 15. other thing here to bee learned out of the example of Manoah is this, with what reuerence we ought to receiue Gods meſſage by them whom he ſendeth

to doe it, and to bee entirely knit vnto the meſſenger himſelfe, for his meſſage ſake. Eglon a heathen king ſhewed this reuerence to the meſſage of Ehud from the Lord, and Gedeon much more, with others. Beautifull ſhould the feete of them be, who bring glad tidings (and yet the feete of ſuch as Rom. 13. 15. went barefoote in thoſe countries, were not very beautifull of themſelues, but vnſeemely) And ſo much the more precious and heauenlier that the meſſage is which they bring, they doing the ſame in ſuch manner as becommeth it. And therefore (bleſſed be God) we haue experience of no leſſe in ſome, that they who apprehend and embrace the ioyfull tidings of ſaluation brought vnto them by Gods meſſengers, ſoundly, ſweetly, and ſauourly, euen to the aſſurance of pardon and happineſſe, are knit to the meſſengers moſt dearely and vnfainedly for their worke ſake, (though they be but the inſtruments, and ſometime meane perſons in the eye of the world) by whom God worketh and reuealeth his will and minde vnto, that they may beleeue.
                  Which thing Paul knowing very well, told Philemon that hee owed himſelfe Philem. 19. vnto him, for the good he had receiued by his miniſterie, whereby hee was truly turned vnto God; and what marueile? Therefore ſuch meſſengers of God deſerue not checks and taunts (as the wicked and vnthankfull world can doe no other then giue them) for their ſo teſtifying their affection to them. And they are iuſtly to be pitied, who hauing heard the meſſage of God at the mouthes of ſuch, yet haue their hearts no way inlarged to them, whereby they giue teſtimonie that they haue taken no good by their preaching.
                  Will an earthly King endure his Ambaſſadour to be lowred vpon, or abuſed thinke we? Look vpon Dauid, how he reuenged the indignitie which 
                        
                           •
                        . Sam. 12. 31. 
                     Hanun offered his ſeruants? And what did the husbandman to thoſe that farmed his vineyards, and beate, wounded and ſlew his meſſengers? Hee Matth. 21. 41. Iohn 15. 1. Luke 10. 16. that deſpiſeth you (ſaith Chriſt this husbandman, Ioh. 15.) deſpiſeth me, and him that ſent me. Next to the contempt of the meſſage, this deſpight of the meſſenger is moſt damnable. For by Paſtors and Teachers, the Lord manifeſts his will, touching our liuing peaceably heere, and enioying life hereafter for euer: (which are treaſures precious, farre aboue thoſe of Princes) and therefore they are ſauage people that lightly weigh them: But they that haue found comfort by them, yea their reconciliation, as Iob. 33. Iob 33. 23. ſpeaketh: they that haue taſted of the good gift of God by them, and haue their ſoules bathed in this dew of heauenly knowledge, eſteeme them worthie of more honour then they can yeeld them, and count them as a few men of a thouſand, and are neerlier knit to them, then nature can knit them to their owne fleſh. And ſo is the Miniſter againe to them, being as the 1. Theſ 2. 20. crowne of his miniſterie. And yet to preuent a cauill, I ſay not that they worſhip them as God neither, for all that: but indeed they make more of them, then common men: which little liketh them who would haue them thought of as men, not worthie to haue place in the Church, no, nor on earth at all. Therefore let all good hearers learne, firſt to bee riuetted into their doctrine, to get acquaintance with that firſt, and then, if their hearts can go againſt the meſſenger let them; but that cannot be, they muſt needs aduance themſelues in ioy and affection to the inſtrument, if once God and

his ordinance haue got any honour and loue in their hearts. As for ſenſeleſſe blockes, or cauilling controulers, either of meſſage or inſtrument, who take vpon them to carpe at their doctrine, or the manner of vttering, or the perſons that bring it, (as the trueth is, the wofull people make no other vſe of theſe things, but to iangle and cenſure them) they bewray themſelues to be no children of wiſdome as yet: what they may be, I ſay not, but yet they be not bred nor begot by her, for doubtleſſe they would then pleade for, and iuſtifie her. I haue often thought it Gods mercy to keepe the knowledge of ſuch diſcouragements from them that are to enter into this office (leſt they ſhould bee deterred wholly from it) till by experience they might be armed againſt it. To conclude then, if Manoah for a temporall benefit foretold him by the Angell, and but once appearing to him, yet becauſe hee was the meſſenger of God, ſhewed himſelfe ſo kinde as hee did to him, and as hee tooke him to bee a man, ſo hee was carefull to entertaine him, as it was meete ſuch an one ſhould be; oh how much more ought the teacher and meſſenger of God, and the people ouer whom he is ſet, and to whom he is ſent of God to guide them ſafely to his kingdome, yea and to whom he declareth the whole ſecrets of God, and that daily both in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, as Paul ſpeakes: how much more ought they (I ſay) to be knit in true loue the one to the other? Whereas there is ſcarcely outward peace and agreement betwixt the moſt of them, vnleſſe it bee in euill, as in vaine iangling and prating, drinking and gaming, and ſuch like ſpending their time together: and this of Manoah.
                  
                  The words of the Angell follow: wherein firſt, that he denieth not, that Verſ. 16. he may be moued to ſtay with him if there were cauſe, but not to eate, if he ſhould make prouiſion for him: therein (I ſay) hee teacheth vs theſe two things; the one, that we may lawfully and willingly be perſwaded (vnleſſe there be neceſſitie to the contrarie) to ſtay together, one neighbour with Doct 1. verſ. 16 another in company, after we haue done our earthly buſineſſe, if there be ſeene cauſe, and namely, if thereby we may doe good or take good one by the other, as to conferre, and vſe good communication together, for knowledge, edification, and their mutuall comfort and increaſe of loue betwixt our ſelues, or for the good of each other. In theſe reſpects (I ſay) neighbours may keepe company one with the other, after their other affaires and buſineſſe ended, which though it be not in vſe among neighbours, where no religion is, yet let not other loſe that benefit. But otherwiſe if they doe not ſo in tarrying together, I meane, inſtruct, edifie and comfort one another, and prouoke mutually to loue, and good works, it is much meeter for them to depart aſunder, each to his owne home and calling; rather then to fall to idle, needleſſe, or hurtfull iangling and ſpending the time in no good ſort together. This is ſomewhat like that which I haue been before occaſioned to ſpeake of in the womans wiſdome, ſhewed in departure from the Angell, as ſoone as ſhe had receiued his meſſage. There is a danger as well in mens too long ſtaying together with men as with women: and it is apparant, that many haue held out company longer then was meete, after their neceſſarie affaires were diſpatched, or their lawfull refreſhings by the creatures enioyed: becauſe they fall from eating and drinking, to drunkenneſſe, to vngodly gamings, to buy and ſell their neighbours, to plot miſchiefe, to

wrangle, quarrell and bee at daggers drawing each with other: had it not bin wel theſe had not met at all, or at leaſt, to haue bin parted in ſeaſon? But on the other ſide, if time, place, and good occaſion offered doe ſerue, it is the dutie of a Chriſtian to redeeme any ſeaſons in company to doe good therein, if it were but for this cauſe, that they meete not commonly nor oft together. And where there is willingnes, and as it may be thought, ſimplicitie and vprightneſſe in them that deſire it, there ought to bee readineſſe and forwardneſſe in him that can yeelde it (except other predominant reaſons doe vrge the contrarie) without any ſtrangenes and auſteritie, and the rather, becauſe the moſt part of the world looke after no ſuch matter in their meeting together. And this wiſdome we may learne by the Angels words.
                  The other part of his anſwere is this, that he would not eate, if he ſhould 2 prouide for him, becauſe he was no man (as Manoah tooke him to be) and therefore had no need to eate. For though ſometime the Angels of God did eate, as with Abraham and Lot, and did put on the ſhape of men when they had ſome meſſage of God to doe, and ſo tarried the longer, yet here the Angell hauing done that he came for, and ſo haſtning to depart, refuſed to eate, ſeeing it was needleſſe.
                  In this ſpeech the Angell teacheth this, that the creatures of God ought 
                        Doct. 2. not to be ſpent needleſly, but receiued for neceſſary vſe: euen as our Sauiour taught long ſince, that the broken meate and fragments ſhould not bee Iohn 6. 12. caſt away, which were left after the people had been ſatisfied. And this commendeth frugalitie and honeſt ſparing, as it condemneth the prodigall lauiſhing and waſting that many ſtroy goods doe vſe, who fatte their dogges, and famiſh the poore, for whom broken meate ſhould be reſerued. But of this I ſhall ſay more afterward God willing.
                  Neither is it vnworthy the nothing for vs, to ſee how carefull the holy ghoſt is here, to cleare the good meaning of Manoah from any blame. Hee 3 knew not (ſaith the text) that it was an Angell of the Lord, q. d. If hee had known it, ye may well thinke, he would not haue ſpoken ſo: but being ignorant, he is to be excuſed: I blame him not for it, no reaſon therefore that his ſimplicitie ſhould make him ſubiect to hard cenſure. It is not ſimply indeed excuſable in Manoah, onely becauſe he was ignorant (for Peter was faultie for ſaying hee knew not what, being with Chriſt vpon the mount) but becauſe he was neither bound to know, nor able of himſelfe to know any ſuch matter. See then how tender the Lord is of the credit of his good ſeruants, that whiles they in their innocency walke according to their knowledge, he auoideth all the blame that might grow to them by their vnauoidable ignorance: the Lord will iudge the worke of his ſeruants, according to that they haue; but as for the defect which is inuincible, it ſhall doe them no harme: this by the way. The thing I purpoſe to inſiſt moſt in, is, 
                        Doct. 4. that knowing afterward this meſſenger to be an Angell (otherwiſe then he ſuppoſed) was aſhamed euen of his blameleſſe error: how much more ought we to bluſh for our faultie errors, nay groſſe ignorance, or (which is worſt) wilfull ſinnes? That which Paul Rom. 6. ſaith, implieth no leſſe, Rom. 6. 21. That we being regenerate ſhould be aſhamed to looke backe into our olde profane courſe of blindneſſe and badneſſe: as if a deuout Papiſt (like Ephraim in the Prophet) being conuerted, ſhould be abaſhed to conſider the vnfruitfulnes

of his deuotion, and kneeling to the Crucifix, and the image of the Virgin Mary, and a peece of bread, ſaying to theſe Idols, Fie vpon you, get you hence, they were blinde that made them, they themſelues are like the makers of them, and I as blind that worſhip them. So ſhould the proud boaſter, that hath ſcornefully diſdained his neighbour (in his heate and madneſſe) being come to himſelfe, and ſeeing he is no better then earth and a fire-brand of hell, be aſhamed of himſelfe, and ſay; Who am I, that haue thus baſely forgot my ſelfe? So he that hath come iollily to the Sacrament, and yet profanely, becauſe hee could diſcerne no more at the Lords boord, then his owne: when he ſeeth his boldneſſe, and how farre hee hath ventured; how ſhould it aſtoniſh him? The truth is, knowledge and grace haue no greater enemies then the ignorant, who (if they could ſee themſelues as they cannot) how highly would they magnifie God for knowledge? if for no other cauſe, yet for this, that thereby they are made to ſee their eſtate far other, then they could euer beleeue it to be: and ſo reſting thankfull, walke in the light thereof, and abhorre their former blindnes.
                  The Angel ſeeing Manoah deceiued taking him to be a man, led him further to more fit matters for him, bidding him make a burnt offering of the 
                        Doct. 5. meate that he deſired to refreſh him with. For to no end was Manoahs ſpeaking of meate to him, offering him to eate the kid of the goates. This ſpeech of his ſheweth that it is true wiſedome to take occaſion to draw one another forward to holy duties, and to communication of heauenly things. The moſt being earthly, and faſt locked vp therein, Manoah was buſie about prouiding for him, which through his errour, was to no end, therefore the Angell drew him to that which was profitable indeed. And ſo it well becommeth Chriſtians to be ready to leade one another from vnprofitable expence of the time, to talke of things more diuine and fit to the edifying one of another: neither ought the wiſe chriſtian to ſtumble at it when he meeteth in companie with ſuch as are vnſauourie, whoſe tongues are their owne to ſet themſelues on worke as they pleaſe. Alas what other is to bee looked for at the hands of ſuch, as neuer learned how to gouerne themſelues either alone, or in their priuate houſes, or in the publike actions of Gods worſhip? How ſhould their tongues be well ſeaſoned in companie, or bring foorth fauourie and gracious matter, out of an vncleane heart abounding with the contrary? But rather let him pitie ſuch, (for all bad men are not bad of malice) and by his milde and modeſt ſilence at leaſt, and much more by ſpeaking that which is likeſt to preuaile and doe good; turne off, and put by their ſuperfluous and frothie talke: not fearing but that it will giue place, and cauſe the vtterers thereof to ſay, Indeed this ſpeech of yours is farre meeter for the companie, and deſerueth to be accounted of, and pitie it were that looſe and vaine talke ſhould haue put it by: pardon vs, for if we had knowne better, wee would haue vſed better. Is not this a good effect of Chriſtian boldneſſe (though no more then needs) thus to take occaſion to breake off bad communication, and to bee farre preferred before an offenſiue giuing place to ill ſpeech till it haue gotten the vpper hand, ſo that it is too late to repreſſe it? But to come neerer to the occaſion of this text. A Chriſtians dutie towards them that come behinde him in experience and the right vſe of conference with ſuch, is, not to make himſelfe ſport at their weaknes, or

to ſcorne their ignorance, but to goe before them, and teach them how to ſpend the time more profitably. A man may diſcerne teachablenes, and an humble ſpirit in many, who out of a ſimple meaning, vtter that little good ſpeech that they can, or which comes next to minde, though they can little conſider to what purpoſe or edifying. Here is a fit occaſion offered to the other, with lenitie & ſoftnes to diuert rather then breake off ſuch ſpeech, to looſen the bands of it rather, then violently to cut them aſunder, that ſo the hearers may ſee themſelues wound into better communication ere they are aware, and ſecretly bluſh at their owne ignorance.
                  The particular that the Angell mentioned, was to counſell him to offer 
                        Doct. 6. a burnt offering to the Lord. The ſignification thereof was, that thereby hee ſhould conſecrate himſelfe, body and ſoule, with the powers and parts of both vnto the Lord: and ſo he ſhould honour the Lord, as became him, and ſhew, that hee did thereby acknowledge himſelfe willing and readie to obey him in all things. And this is our true ſeruing of God to offer Rom. 12. 1. vp our ſelues wholly vnder his gouernment, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh to the Romans. And ſo on the contrary, they doe nothing leſſe, who giue themſelues to follow their owne luſts, and the deuices and deſires of their wicked hearts, or who in ſome things wil yeeld him dutie, and by halues, as we reade that Saul did, for which cauſe the Lord reiected him. Let the reader looke more of this point in chap. 2. and in chap. 10. and elſewhere.
                  And further as Manoah for the kindneſſe hee receiued of the Angell, was bidden to offer to God that which he offered to him; ſo we ſhould not offend, who are Gods Miniſters, if in the like caſe we doe the like. As for example, if for our trauaile by aduice and counſell to any brother, either troubled in conſcience, or otherwiſe with ſome great and dangerous doubt; he being ſatisfied and quieted to his good contentment by our counſell, if (I ſay) he, the partie ſo counſelled by vs, out of a thankfull minde ſhould offer gratuitie to vs, (as many thinke it their dutie) I ſay, wee ſhould not offend, if we ſhould deſire him to giue it either wholly, or a part thereof, as freely to ſome very good vſe, if he be well able, as to ſome godly poore, as hee would haue done to vs, ſeeing we thinke it vnmeete for vs to receiue it, becauſe we would in no wiſe bring a reproch to our miniſterie, orgiue occaſion to any, to thinke, that we doe baſely ſell the gifts of God for money. For if hee bee both able and willing (as Naaman the Sirian in the like caſe was) to ſhew thankfulnes, which we thinke it vnmeete to receiue, we ſhall doe a good dutie to helpe to benefit ſome other, where there is need of it, and ſo fit an occaſion is offered by Gods prouidence, to relieue him. Too few ſuch occaſions are offered of doing good in that maner, & if they be, yet they are not taken; and yet it is well knowne how many there are to doe good vnto and how wee are commanded by God to take all occaſions thereof, as he offereth them. And if ye aske, why Eliſha did not worke vpon Naaman in that manner: I ſay, hee was an heathen, and a ſtranger, newly conuerted; and if he had requeſted any ſuch kindneſſe of him, it muſt haue been put into his hands to diſpoſe; in all which reſpects hee refrained. But of this I haue ſaid ſomewhat before, chap. 8. in Gedeon his refuſing the kingdome and demanding the earings: the leſſe therefore ſhall ſerue.
                  Another thing I thinke good to ſtay about a little in this verſe, and that

is, by occaſion of a word the Angell ſpake. And that is this: that hee called that, bread, which Manoah called fleſh: For when hee deſired the Angell that hee might prepare for him a kid of the goates, the other anſwered hee would not eate of his bread: whereby who doubteth (will ſome ſay) but that both meant one particular thing? Manoah, that he would prepare ſome refreſhing for him; and the Angell, that hee would not eate with him.
                  Here by the Hebrew word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      which ſignifieth not bread onely, but all 
                        Doct. 7. food, and ſo fleſh particularly; by this word (I ſay) the Papiſts (who are faine to catch hold of euery thing that they thinke may ſerue for their purpoſe) take occaſion to maintaine their tranſubſtantiation; and they crie aloud, that the bread in the Sacrament may ſignifie fleſh, as it doth in other places of the Scriptures. Where it appeares, that they are ſo haſtie to alleage a proofe from hence for their purpoſe, that in the meane while they take one thing for another. For though the Hebrew word may ſignifie fleſh, as it doth bread, yet they ſhould remember that Paul wrote in the Greeke tongue, where the Greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſignifieth bread, is neuer taken for fleſh. And what gaine they by thus playing the Sophiſters among the ignorant? For they who are able to iudge, do ſee yt they abuſe the reader groſſely in ſaying, bread may be taken for fleſh, becauſe the Hebrew word ſometime ſignifieth ſo, when the Greeke word neuer ſignifieth ſo; in which tongue yet all that concerneth the Lords Supper, is written. And ſo while they goe about (with the dogge) to get the fleſh that ſhineth in the water, they loſe that which they ſeemed to haue in their mouth, and ſo both. And yet if the Greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      did ſignifie fleſh, as it doth bread, how doth it follow that it ſhould ſignifie ſo in the Sacrament againſt ſenſe, reaſon, ſcripture and truth? So wee ſee what ſubſtantiall proofes they bring to vphold and iuſtifie their abſurd opinions and religion. This I ſay vpon this ſuppoſition granted, that the Angell and Manoah ſpake of the ſame indiciduall thing, which yet no man will grant to bee a neceſſarie conſequence. For though Manoah meant fleſh, yet the Angell might meane bread, both by a Synecdoche, meaning a refreſhing by bread and meate: Manoah might offer him a kid, and he might anſwere (I will not eate of thy bread) in this ſenſe; Prepare nothing for me, I will not eate ſo much as any bread, much leſſe of thy fleſh. Who is ſo ſimple as to thinke otherwiſe, except any ſhould imagine that the meate was like to be ſet before the Angell, without bread? If bread were needfull alſo, what neceſſitie is it that both their meanings muſt needs be about the ſame particular? But I ſpare. Thus much of Manoahs deſiring him to eate: the ſecond thing followeth, of asking him his name: but of this in the next Sermon.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTY THREE SERMON ON THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               THus he ſtill ſeeing the man of God (as he tooke him to Verſ 17. 18. The ſenſe.
                be) to ſhew ſuch grace in his ſpeech, was the more knit to him, and ſo deſired to know his name: and hee ſhewes him the reaſon, to wit, that when it ſhould come to paſſe, which he promiſed, Manoah might honour him with ſome reward: The Angell ſeeing it a needleſſe thing that he asked, did not anſwere to him in word: but thought it fitter to make himſelfe knowne to him in deedes then in words, and thereby to confirme the former promiſe made to them. And this to be the meaning of the verſe, the next words doe proue, namely, that hee did wonderfully; for ſo are the words in the originall: hee was marueilous, or he did wonderfully.
            The Angel that reſolued there ſhould be no yeelding of gratuitie to him, for which cauſe Manoah asked his name, hee did not tell him: and yet who can deny but Manoah asked it vpon good conſideration, namely that hee might ſhew himſelfe thankfull to him, as he thought himſelfe bound to be? Wherein he gaue cleere teſtimonie of his honeſt and ſingle heart, in deſiring to take the opportunitie thereof vnto him afterwards for the kindneſſe that was offered him. Which is a neceſſarie duty, though it be not regarded nor looked for of them to whom it is due. But of this before.
            Now that the Angell did ſhew (as we ſee in this verſe) what hee was, by Doct. verſ. 18. deeds rather then by words, he hath not onely left vs his example, but alſo confirmed vs in that the Scripture teacheth both Miniſter and people concerning that matter. And firſt of the former (who being a publike meſſenger of God, is called an Angel) my meaning is not that the Miniſter is liable to euery ianglers cenſure, for his allowance of him, or for his ſufficiencie. But let him get this Seale of his Miniſterie, which here the Angell bringeth out, to wit, the efficacie of working, I meane, both a powerfull teaching, and a powerfull example; and theſe ſhall be his iudges. By theſe they muſt iudge of him, who are able to iudge, and they who iudge by any other rule, are ignorant or malicious, and therefore diſabled to iudge. And the beſt Miniſters that euer were, neuer refuſed this Canon of doctrine and life to be examined by. Neither our Sauiour nor the Apoſtle Paul euer arrogated to themſelues ſuch libertie as to be receiued, the one for true Meſſiah, the other, for a true Apoſtle, vpon their bare word. It might haue opened a gap to euery ſeducing ſpirit, to haue ſtood vpon his owne worth, and (like Antichriſt at this day) to compell mens conſciences to acknowledge him a ſucceſſor of the Apoſtle, becauſe he (out of the abundance of his owne ſenſe)

boaſted himſelfe ſo. So that baſe teſtimonies are inartificiall arguments (all meere men being lyars) but to trie the ſpirits whether they be of God, is a 1. Iohn 4. 1. needfull dutie: they that are ſo tried, haue no wrong done them, neither can complaine, if their charter bee demanded, I meane the power of teaching, and the power of godlineſſe. Theſe workes admit no appeale, though they be no miraculous works, (as the Angels here) yet they are demonſtrations. In the 11. of Matthew, Iohn Baptist ſends his diſciples to Chriſt in Matth. 11. 2. policie to reſolue them of the truth of his mediatorſhip: our Sauiour (when they had done their errand) doth not ſcorne them, or diſdaine to giue account of his calling. But what manner of euidence giueth hee? Goe (ſaith he) tell Iohn, what yee haue heard and ſeene, The blinde ſee, the lame goe, the poore receiue the Goſpell. q. d. If theſe workes will not euince what I am, take mee not for him that I goe for. So he tels the Phariſies, If I gaue witneſſe onely to my ſelfe, I could not claime credit thereto: but the workes I doe, they beare witneſſe of me, and further I deſire not to be embraced. So Paul tels 2. Cor. 3. 2. the Corinths, ye are my Epiſtle written in your hearts, &c. q. d. The ſpirit of God coworking with my Miniſterie, to the begetting of faith, a new heart and life in you, hath ſealed alſo this truth vnto you, That I am a true Apoſtle of Chriſt, againſt all gaineſayers. And it is the dutie of all Gods Miniſters to adde this commendation and allowance vnto the outward calling Note. of the Church, their letters commendatorie I meane and licenſes. And if hereupon wee may bee receiued, let vs not complaine: as for them who vpon this teſtimony from God, will not admit vs, either our perſons, as factious Separatiſts; or the power of our Miniſterie, as all vnbeleeuers and vngodly ones, woe be vnto them, for in not receiuing vs, they deſpiſe him that ſent vs. As for their cenſures, we may appeale from them with our Sauiour; ſaying, I receiue not praiſe or diſpraiſe of men, I haue another Iudge: And with Paul, It is a ſlight thing with me to be iudged of ſuch, I paſſe not 1. Cor. 4. 3. for your iudgement. And ſecondly let all priuat perſons, that receiue the meſſage of God by the Miniſter, know their dutie alſo, which is to declare what they bee by the good actions of their liues, rather then by their talke, and to bee examples to other in their conuerſation, and not in their communication 1. Tim. 4 12. onely. So our Sauiour taught when he came to giue his life for vs here on earth: If ye abide in me, and my word in you, then are ye my very Iohn 8. 31. diſciples indeed.
            Agreeable hereunto are his words in another place, Not euery one that ſaith Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen. Neither let any man deſire to bee Matth. 7. 21. taken for better then he is, but ſubmit himſelfe to this touchſtone which will bewray what mettall he is made of: and for as much as the inward duties of faith and pietie are vnknowne to others, let the workes of each mans calling ſay for him what he is, let a good magiſtrate be content to loſe the credit of his profeſſion, if he cannot maintaine it by vprightnes, courage in puniſhing offenders, & defending the innocent, being free from couetouſnes, parcialitie, or iniuſtice. Let the husbandman approue his religion, by walking as a man of vnderſtanding before his wife, and ſhe hers, by ſubmiſſion in the Lord, and reuerence towards him: and ſo the other parts of the familie in their ſeuerall places. And otherwiſe, let them hold their peace as

guiltie perſons. Thirdly, this doctrine is to ſettle the beſt Chriſtians to bee ſo ſtill, notwithſtanding the taunts and mockes of the vngodly, who bayte them with the names of hypocrites, and men of ſingularitie, ſeeing they declare that out by their good liues, which they imbrace with their hearts: and generally let all ſuch take warning by this, as onely haue a name they liue, but are dead, and who ſpeake well, but haue not hearts to doe thereafter, and as for ſuch as reproach and ſcorne them who honour their profeſſion with a life anſwerable, their iudgement ſleepeth not.
            It appeareth by that which is ſaid here, that as the Angell willed Manoah to doe, euen ſo he did: I meane, offer a burnt offering vnto the Lord. Now Obiect. where it is obiected that it was not lawfull for him to offer in any place, but at Ieruſalem, and therefore that it was not lawfull for him to offer where the Angell met him; I anſwere, that it was lawfull to offer in other places while the Arke was carried about, and was ſtaied in no certaine place: but after the building of the temple at Ieruſalem, then indeed that law tooke effect, and it was not lawfull to ſacrifice elſewhere, but all high places were then to be taken away. And this I ſay, ſuppoſing the action to be ordinarie; Anſw. but indeed this of Manoah had bin warrantable at any time, as being grounded vpon diuine warrant, commanding him ſo to doe.
            And whereas it is againe obiected, that Manoah not being of the tribe of Leui, but of Dan, ought not to offer ſacrifice, neither was that according to the law that hee did: it is anſwered, that hee gaue the fleſh and the other things to the Angell, whom he tooke to bee a Prophet, that hee might offer them, for the Prophets had an extraordinary calling, that though they were not of the houſe of Aaron, yet it was lawfull for them to ſacrifice, as Elia and Eliſha did: for when the Prieſts corrupted the pure worſhip of God, the Lord ſtirred vp the Prophets to reſtore it againe. But this was no Prophet, ye will ſay; I anſwere, no hee was not, but more then a Prophet: and therefore the fleſh and the other offering being laide on the rocke, the Angell did wonderfully; hee raiſed fire out of the rocke, and conſumed the ſacrifice.
            And the ſame we haue heard to haue been done in Gedeons ſacrifice before: for although it bee not expreſſely ſaid here, that fire was brought out of the rocke as there; yet ſeeing there is no mention of any fire brought by Manoah, and yet that the Angell is ſaid to haue departed in the flame, it is moſt likely that fire was ſtricken out of the ſtone: the Angell aſcended into heauen, as though he would vſe the flame inſteade of a chariot, and he diſſolued the body which he tooke on him, and went away in the fire, which was a great wonder to them, for Monoah and his wife were ſtricken with a great feare, when they ſaw that he was an Angell of God: and after that, he appeared no more to them.
            In that Manoah did as the Angell willed him, turning that which hee Doct. verſ. 19. would haue ſet before the man of God for meate, into a ſacrifice; it teacheth how fit and ready we ſhould be, to be moued and ledde by good inſtruction to any duty that wee know not, neither thought of before: meekely receiuing the words of exhortation without reſiſtance or vnwillingneſſe. This minde was in the Theſſalonians, to whom Paul writeth thus: We are 2. Theſ. 3. 4. perſwaded of you in the Lord, that both yee doe already, and will doe ſtill

the things that wee commande you, meaning, that they reſolued with themſelues, to make the doctrine of the Apoſtles the rule of their life.
            Thus ſhould all Chriſtians bee affected, like the paterne that Paul giues the widowes, that they ſhould diligently be giuen not onely to the particular 1. Tim. 5. 10. duties of compaſſion, Rom. 12. but to euery good worke. This commendeth the grace of God highly in all ſuch as are thus prepared to ſerue God in euery part of their life, that as they ſhall ſee what the good and acceptable Rom. 12. 2. will of God is toward them, ſo they are ready ſtill to new duties. And ſo it doth much checke and accuſe them, who are ſlow and backward to any good thing that ſhall be required of them, and readily yeelded to by their brethren: they would be counted with the forwardeſt, but yet in duties that like them not, they will be reaſoning againſt them, though in ſome other they ſhew themſelues commendable. And yet for all that which I ſay, let it be clearely ſeene, that there is enough to binde their conſciences, to that whereto they ſhould yeeld, leſt they be lead by company, will, or fancy: and there is cauſe of this readineſſe and alacritie in receiuing the word by the people, if they conſider that the Miniſter himſelfe is tied to the like dutie in vttering it, according to that charge of Peter, feede the flocke of 1. Pet. 5. 2. God with a ready minde, not of conſtraint: and the Apoſtle Paul confirmes it, There is neceſſitie impoſed vpon me, and wo be to me if I preach not, &c. If then I doe this neceſſarie worke willingly, it is thankworthie: otherwiſe it is neceſſarie, and I muſt doe it without thanks. How ſhall this bee, if the people hold off and pleade libertie to take and refuſe what they pleaſe? Therefore Cornelius, Acts 10. profeſſeth himſelfe and his, ready to heare Acts 10. 33. whatſoeuer Peter ſhould ſay from God to him. And when he ſaith [whatſoeuer] he meaneth, whether reproofe, or commandement, as well as comfort and inſtruction. This ſhe weth, that not all that doe ſome duties, doe them readily; but either for finiſter reſpects or by halues: as he in the Goſpell? who was bidden goe into the vineyard, anſwered, hee would, but Matth 21. 32. went not: ſo, many heare zealouſly, but neuer weighing the worke of God, Note. nor forecaſting the difficulties, repent them of their forwardneſſe. Others readily yeeld to the truth in their minds as ſound and good, but their hearts come ſlowly forward, they delight not therein, nor approue it, as liking that it ſhould gouerne them. Againe, ſome things which the word requires we yeeld to, (for the outward action eſpecially) yea and ſtand ſtiffely in the defence of it, as Iudas did for the relieuing the poore, becauſe (in a diuers reſpect) our deſire concurreth with Gods commandement, euen corruptly peruerting the end and vſe of a good duty to our own benefit, which ought onely tend to Gods glorie. But here we doe not obey readily, becauſe the manner of obeying, which is for conſcience ſake, diſpleaſeth vs: as the artificer liketh it well, that God calleth for diligence in his calling, for his coueteous Note. minds ſake; but to be occupied therein for the ſeruing of Gods prouidence, the auoyding of noyſome luſts and temptations, the practiſe of his faith and patience, thankfulnes & contentment, he hath no readines thereto: yea this awkeneſſe is in the beſt, that they like any dutie ſhould bee vrged which others are tardie in, and themſelues prone vnto; but to be drawn any further, and to ſuffer exhortation and reproofe for their blemiſhes and errors, that is vnwelcome. So that readines and teachablenes humbly to

giue place, and curbe our contradicting and rebellious nature, where God hath manifeſted his will vpon good ground, is a rare gift of the ſpirit, and attendeth onely vpon them, who with Dauid haue a reſpect to all Gods Pſalm. 119. 6. commandements. Excellent is that ſpeech of Dauid, O Lord thou ſaidſt, Seeke my face; and I anſwered, Lord I will ſeeke thy face. Euen as the waxe applied to the ſeale, receiues the impreſſion, and the holy inſtruments of muſicke in the Temple ſounded according to the skilfull blowing or fingering of Aſaph and his brethren, ſo pliant and tunable ſhould our hearts be to the voice of God, and make ſuch harmony in his eares, as he himſelfe hath made inwardly in them: as the ſeruant mentioned in the Goſpell, Note. whoſe obedience in going, comming, and dooing, ſeemed to be ſo prompt, as if it were the eccho of his Maſters voyce. And ſuch as haue attained any meaſure herein, let them looke to this one thing, that they be conſtant in ſo doing, leſt (beſide the expectation) the diuell in time by inward or outward diſcouragings or allurings, quite alter their temper, and make them firſt to heare without delight, remiſſely and coldly, and in time with diſlike and reſiſtance, as wofull experience witneſſeth. Touching the particular kinde of Manoahs readineſſe to turne the meate into ſacrifice, ſee more in the peoples giuing to Gedeon the earings of their pray, which poynt is diuers from the former.
            Further this conſuming of the ſacrifice with fire by the Angell procured 2 in ſuch a wonderfull manner, as it could bee no other then the worke of God, this, I ſay, was done for the confirming of Manoah and his wife: the which alſo was granted to Gedeon in the like caſe, and at the prayers of Elia, 
               Iudg. 6. 17. he did giue the like ſigne for the confirming of the people, that Iehoua the God of Elia, was the true God, and Baal an idoll, and his prieſts deceiuers 1. King. 18. 24. of them. By all which and many more ſuch, the Lord teſtifieth, how willing he is, that his poore ſeruants ſhould be free from doubtings and feare, which doe much diſtract and diſquiet them.
            For though he allow them not to looke for, or depend vpon ſignes now, as in times paſt, yet a moſt ſure rule he hath giuen vs in his word to goe by, to the which he ſendeth vs, ſaying; Search the Scriptures, for they beare record of me, and ſhew, what my will is toward you. And whereas it will Iohn 5. 39. be obiected to me that all cannot vnderſtand the ſcriptures, and therefore that may be farre enough off from reſolution in doubtfull caſes: I anſwere, the Lord hath taken order, (if hee were obeyed therein) that throughout his Church there ſhould bee preachers to reueale his minde to the hearers, and to haue their abode, and liue with the people, to the end they may helpe to reſolue their doubts, as they ſhall ariſe daily in them, and ſo helpe to ſtabliſh their faith, and ſet them forward to the kingdome of glorie, all Note. which the poore people haue neede of.
            And if Gods matters were regarded of men but as their owne be, there would be ſuch care to furniſh all places, by them whom it concerneth, with fit and meete teachers (choyce being made alwaies of the beſt firſt, and they ſought after) that both the reſt of them who are ſtudents in Diuinitie might be well incouraged to follow their ſtudie, and beſt examples, and the people well prouided for thereby, and ſo might grow to reſolue themſelues in many of their doubts, and be helped by their teachers in the reſt, ſo as they

might liue comfortably, which a few attaine to of many, and then it may be ſeene alſo, what other people goe without of their due, by wanting ſuch Note. teachers, and they who are cauſes of it, may repent, which would bring great ioy into our ſtreetes.
            It is ſaid further here, that after this was done, the Angell did yet wonderfully Verſ. 20. in another thing: to wit, that when the flame aſcended from the altar toward heauen, he aſcended in it, Manoah and his wife beholding the ſame, that ſo they might know what he was who appeared to them, euen the Angell of God, whom they tooke to be ſome man of God, or prophet. Thus they were better confirmed about that which was ſaid to them concerning the childe. This, as the former verſe, confirmeth vs in that we learned 
                  Doct. 1. there, namely, what a care the Lord hath to eaſe our infirmities, and to relieue vs therein: which being beleeued of vs, is no ſmall refreſhing and incouragement to vs. But of this poynt hath been already ſpoken much in the hiſtorie of Gedeon.
            
            Alſo it is ſaid here, that Manoah and his wife, when they beheld this, and knew, as it followeth in the next verſe, that he was an Angell of God, they (I ſay) fell on their faces to the earth for feare, as appeareth by his words to his wife afterward. For we may not be ignorant of this, that in thoſe times 2 the people were afraid at the ſight of an Angell, or in beholding any ſignes of Gods preſence, as in Exod. 19. we reade, and Iudg. 6. ſo I ſay, it was with Exod. 19 16. Iudg. 6. 22. them, and ſo it would be with vs, if we ſhould haue the like occaſions offred vs: the reaſon is, firſt our inherent ſinne, and the inborne corruption that is in vs: ſecondly, the accuſation of our conſciences, which tell vs what wee are in, and of our ſelues: to wit, moſt vile, rebellious, and diſobedient; the which ought to humble vs, when God by ſuch or other meanes, doth as it were, ſhew vs our face in a glaſſe, that through our ſin we be afraid, whereas we ſhould reioyce.
            In that they did ſhew reuerence in ſuch caſes, it was their duty ſo to doe: and we owe the ſame, in reſpect of Gods ſpeciall preſence in the congregation. But as we ſee it was with them, that in doing a good thing they paſſed meaſure in their feare, and it was exceſſiue in them: ſo wee may beholde thereby, how hard a thing it is to auoyde corruption in our beſt actions. But as they went too farre in one extremitie, that they were too much afraid, ſo wee goe further in the contrary, for that wee come ſhort, and doe not feare the preſence of God at all, when we come before him in ſpeciall manner, or very little. So that the reuerend behauiour of the Fathers toward God, will be an accuſation of vs for the contrary, when yet we ought to carry our ſelues reuerently in all places. Let the reader looke backe into the 6. chapter and 22. verſe, where this argument is largely handled.
            In that it is ſaid in this verſe, that the Angell hauing done that which he Verſe 11. came for to them, departed, and was no more ſeene of them, it teacheth vs the ſame, to wit, that when we haue met together before the Lord to ſerue him, as for example, in the publike vſe of prayer, word, and Sacraments, and haue religiouſly ended theſe duties; then wee ſhould depart, euery one to his place, conſidering how many and great inconueniencies doe follow idle and needleſſe tarrying behinde, and loyterings: whereby we doe not onely forget ſuch good inſtructions as we haue heard (whereas while they See Hebr. 2. 1.
               
be freſh in our remembrance, we might in our returning, either meditate on them, or reuiue the memory of them by good company, but alſo fall to drinking, playing, prating, and ſuch like behauiour, as whereby wee doe much more hurt to our ſelues and others, then we got good by our hearing. The diuell hath more ſtrings to his bow then one: and therefore if he cannot draw men to neglect the meanes altogether, hee will buſie their heads with wandring, or oppreſſe their bodies with ſleepe: but where neither of theſe preuaile, yet ſometimes he windeth in with thē ſo by other deludings of them, that hee depriueth them of all fruite which they ſeemed to haue got, and that as eaſilie as they may be brought aſleepe: and not leaſt of all, by occaſioning forgetfulneſſe of that they heare, by needleſſe company afterward, or ſome other improuidence. And while men are yet hot and glowing through the power of the word, hee doth caſt cold water vpon their affections, and quencheth the ſpirit, which had kindled good deſires in them before. And yet few are ſo wiſe as to ſuſpect the danger, but thinke themſelues ſafe enough, and well fenced from the diuell, they hauing ſo lately been taken vp in holy duties, as in hearing and prayer, and ſo are eaſily beguiled by him, that doggeth them, though inuiſibly, from the Church, as well as to the Church, and in it. And this I ſpeake not onely of the common abuſe of the Sabbath, (which of Chriſtians ought to be abhorred) but euen of other meetings occaſioned beſides, and not auoided. But let this be well conſidered after their publike hearing, beſides the ſhunning of vnſeaſonable companies, that although I forbid not men to returne to their lawfull callings and affaires after hearing, whereunto the word fitteth them much better (and they are no enemies to the fruite which they haue gained in publique) yet I ſay thus much: firſt, that there ought to bee ſome reſpite betweene the one and other (if it may bee) ſo much as may ſerue to draw the minde and affections together, and ſettle ſome reuerence vpon them, that they ruſh not forward looſely to matters of another nature, as if with the foole in Iames they had forgot the hew whereof they ſaw themſelues to be in the glaſſe of the word. Secondly, that if it cannot be that they ſeparate themſelues to the reuiewing of the things they haue heard, Prou. 18. Prou. 18. 1. but it muſt needs bee that they haue to doe with others, as in markets and faires (where yet Sermons are vſuall heard by all ſorts) or the like occaſions: then let men watch more ſpecially to their hearts and tongues, that neither they breake meaſure, nor forget the right manner and end of their companying together, but rather take occaſion to ſeaſon others with ſuch things as they latelieſt heard, then to driue out one nayle with another (to vſe the phraſe of Eccleſiaſtes) and loſe all abroad which they ſhould haue carried home for the prouiſion of their familie. But alas, as for the common ſort whereunto ſhall I liken them? They are like to fooliſh market men, who hauing ſtored their purſes with money, and their ſacks with neceſſaries, ſteppe into ſome lewde houſe or other, where they finde ſuch companions, as either by gaming, or drunkenneſſe, or iugling, picke that money out of their purſes, and their commodities which they had bought, ſo that they ſend them home farre more bare and empty then they came forth. This dealing is bad enough at a market, but worſe at a Sermon, or vpon the occaſion of religious actions: worſe, I ſay, becauſe the former commonly

falls out againſt a mans will: but the latter wrong, men offer to themſelues voluntarily. It is not to be wondered at that there are many ſuch; for as they whom our Sauiour whipt out of the Temple, becauſe they made the houſe of prayer a den of theeues, came not thither to ſerue God, but themſelues: ſo now many come to the congregation, onely to meete their copeſmates, with whom they are to deale, contract, buy and ſell, and the like: the Temple is their place to them where they appoint to concurre: their market begins not for the moſt part, while Gods is done. This point is needfull to be enforced daily, where ſuch meetings are.
            How much more then, are the looſe and vnaduiſed gaddings from our owne houſes wantonly and wailily without any good end, how much more I ſay, are they full of danger? For of wilfull goings forth to euill ends and purpoſes (as in youth and maſterleſſe perſons is to bee ſeene) I neede not ſpeake, all doe know how odious they are, and what miſchiefe they bring with them: the moſt are eaſilie deceiued about the other. Dinah Iacobs 
               Gen. 34. 1. daughter, who went to ſee the maydes of the countrey, may bee an example to all ſuch. It were meeter for Chriſtians, to learne of Dauid in this behalfe, what to anſwere: when he was of his enuious brother Eliab asked what hee made there, (his father hauing ſent him thither, namely into the campe) he anſwered him, is there not a cauſe? As if he ſhould haue ſaide, haue I not cauſe to be here? then I might indeed be iuſtly found fault with. So let all aduiſed perſons ſee cauſe of their being abroad, and that they are where they may defend their being, to the peace of their conſcience. The moſt miſchiefes that are now, or haue been, haue come by mens leauing 1. Sam. 17. 29. of their calling, and going into company without cauſe, or hauing cauſe, by not returning in due time. But of this by the way, more ſhall be ſaid of it in his proper place.
            And this be ſaid of the ſigne, and that which went before it: now is added Verſ. 22. 23. 24. to the former in theſe three verſes an other thing, and that is a new trouble which befell Manoah and his wife, which was this; that becauſe they had ſeene an Angell of God, therefore he concludeth, they ſhould certainely dye. To whom his wife anſwered (as more ſtrong in faith, and confident then he) wee ſhall not dye, and ſheweth her reaſons, as followeth to bee conſidered. Thus, as I noted in the ſtory of Gedeon, wee ſee how a new Doct. verſ. 22. trouble aroſe to the good man, and ſo doth daily to Gods ſeruants, marueiled at by them no doubt, but in great fauour brought vpon them by the Lord, and ſeene of them alſo that will trie it out, and receiue it meekely. But Pſalm. 119. 71. of this in the ſtorie now cited.
            The trouble that oppreſſed Manoah, and that cauſed him to breake out into theſe words (we ſhall ſurely dye) was, for that they had ſeene the Lord. And by this we ſee what Angell it was, that was ſo called in the 21. verſe? See chap 6. 14. Euen the eternall word, whom here he calleth God, and in the next verſe is of his wife called Iehoua, who ſometime put on the ſhape of a man, and appeared to men, as alſo Angels did. And it is cleare in the ſtories of the ſcripture, that after good men had ſeene God thus, or an Angell, they were exceedingly terrified, and out of heart, and looked for no other then preſent death: for they knew what God had ſaid to Moſes, that a man ſhould not ſee him, and liue: but they miſunderſtoode the words when they tooke

them to be meant of his appearing in a bodily ſhape, for many had often ſeene him ſo, and yet liued after: as both Gedeon did, and this Manoah and his wife, with others. The reaſon of this their feare, reade before in verſe 20.
            The thing I note here, is this: what great weakneſſes oppreſſe Gods ſeruants Doct. 2. verſ. 22. oft times, as wee ſee heere they did Manoah, of which kinde is deadly feare, doubting, and diſtraction. And who can ſay, euen of the ſeruants of God, that they haue not been wound and wrapped in with ſuch ſore diſquietnes either in ſome ſore affliction, while they haue thought of the vttermoſt that might come to them by it, or when in ſome ſudden and deep paſſion, they haue feared ſome grieuous calamitie to bee comming toward them? In ſo much, as they haue made this reſolution with themſelues, that Note. they were vndone.
            And yet they haue ſeene that God hath giuen an iſſue out of them, and that they haue paſſed ouer their heads as a clowd: and they haue ſafely eſcaped and waded out of them. So that they haue not riſen from deliberate conſideration and grounded knowledge of Gods will, but from feare oppreſſing them, and too vnaduiſed and raſh iudging, and vnbeliefe, and oft times haſted on by melancholy: vnto the which as the beſt are ſubiect, ſo yet they muſt know, that grace and goodneſſe are ſmoothered and ouerwhelmed in them, when they fall deeply into theſe diſguiſing of themſelues, and therefore that they muſt bee carefull daily to watch and pray in faith, that no ſuch oppreſſing and turbulent thoughts and vexations take hold of them, euen as our Sauiour hath giuen charge, ſaying: Let not your Iohn 14. 1. hearts be troubled.
            And to conclude, ſeeing it falleth out (as in this ſtorie is manifeſt) that 
                  Doct. 3. good people may oft times be at this point, and are alſo (as Manoah was here being plunged into feare) to doubt ſo dreadfully of Gods fauour toward them, all may learne by this, how needfull it is, for them to gather and get all arguments and teſtimonies thereof before trials come, and in the daies of peace to giue all diligence to make their calling and election ſure, that in 2. Pet. 1. 10. Acts 21. 1. their greateſt need they may be quiet and confident, and not doubt in time of triall. One way is to endeuour to haue a good conſcience alwaies both toward God and men: alſo to be the ſame in ſecret, that wee would ſeeme (when we walke moſt innocently before men) openly to be; with many other ſuch fruites of faith: wherein the folly and ſenſeleſſe blockiſhneſſe Rom. 2. 28. euen of many of the better ſort may bee marueiled at, that they can in this ſo weightie a matter, and of ſo great vſe vnto them, be ſo careleſſe. Let the reader looke into the ſixth chapter, as I haue already referred him.
            We heard in the laſt verſe, of the great feare that oppreſſed Manoah for Verſ. 23. that hee had ſeene the Lord. Now it followeth in this verſe what his wife did, when he vttered his feare to her, and in the next and laſt verſe is ſhewed that Samſon was borne. When the wife of Manoah ſaw her husband ſo troubled, ſhe was better ſtaied: and therefore counſelled, and by reaſons did perſwade him ſo to be alſo. Thus the Lord oft times ſpareth one of his Doct. verſ. 23. children, and that alſo in the ſame houſe, when hee afflicteth another, and vpholdeth one when another is caſt downe, which is to bee marked of vs. And this he doth, as we ſee here in ſpiritual trials, as well as in bodily health,

and viſitations: to the end that one may bee an helper and comfort to another. And if he viſit all together, which is rarely ſeene, yet he ſupplieth their wants ſome other way, in giuing that grace to the parties aſunder, that they were wont to enioy one by the other together. And although this mercie be little obſerued, while it is enioyed, (men being readie to aggrauate their croſſes, and amplifie them to the higheſt degree, but blinde in ſeeing Gods goodneſſe in his afflicting them) yet ſuch it is, as might full ill be ſpared, and when it is, it cauſeth men to accuſe themſelues of vnthankfulnes, which hath procured the increaſe and multiplying of their croſſes. We know addition of miſerie made him who thought it a ſmall benefit to liue as a ſonne Luke 15. 17. vnder his fathers wing, to wiſh he might be entertained but in the place of a hireling.
            To returne to the point againe, this mercifull forbearance of the Lord is euen ſeene oftentimes in one and the ſame perſons viſitation: that although he lay his hand vpon the bodie, yet oft times the minde is free, and the ſpirit is able to ſuſtaine the bodies infirmitie. Yet I ſpake not this, as if this were a token of Gods forſaking a man, when he ſeemeth to afflict on euery ſide: for then the Lord driues his people to cling to himſelfe, when all props and crutches are remoued, leſt they ſhould ſinke altogether. Iobs wife and himſelfe Iob 1. were downe together, (as we may ſay) children ſlaine, cattell and ſubſtance deſtroyed, friends and kindred alienated. And this wrought (no doubt) ſtrongly vpon his weakeſt part: but if the Lord had not been on his ſide, yea inſtead of all comfort by wife, or others; he could neither haue reſiſted deſperate impatience, euen at the hearing of the firſt heauie meſſage that was brought vnto him, nor (much leſſe) haue ſaid afterward, Although he kill me, I will truſt in him. Therefore although the Lord doe ordinarily Iob 13. 15. thus meaſure out to his children, that all ſorrow comes not at once: yet let none indent with the Lord, that thus hee ſhall deale alway with him. The Lord is tied to no certaintie, or neceſſitie in temporall croſſes to his beſt ſeruants, ſaue onely to be their God alſufficient, and to miniſter vnto them the grace which ſhall be ſufficient. Many haue fallen into ſuch ſtreights through infectious diſeaſes, pouertie, trauaile, &c. that they wanted ſuccour and comfort, from the neereſt vnto them. Onely the Lord forſake not his, being neerer to them in miſerie, then nature can make the neereſt friends to each other.
            But ſeeing the woman here, though in regard of her ſexe the weaker 
                  Doct. 2. veſſell, was yet the ſtronger in faith, to incourage her husband when hee fainted, let vs learne, that the husband may not deſpiſe his wiues counſell, when God ſhall grace her equally or aboue him. It is many mens caſes to be honoured with ſuch wiues, who by their faith, experience, knowledge, humilitie, innocencie, and ſuch other good gifts of God, might hardly bee wanted, and are much to bee regarded. But they that haue theſe gifts, let them be farre from thinking on the other ſide meanely and baſely of their husbands, remembring who commandeth them the carriage of reuerence towards them: Husbands againe muſt reioyce for them, and not ſcorne to take good by them, vpon a vaine conceit that their wiues will deny them ſupremacie, or (as many will ſay) crow ouer them. And yet thoſe that want grace, and be otherwiſe ill qualitied, let them not leane much to their counſell,

remembring Ahab and Salomon, in this ſinne, little differing. See verſ. 9. and 10. of this chapter.
            Her firſt reaſon was this, and it was ſound and good: If God (ſaid ſhe) 3 would haue killed vs, he would not haue receiued our ſacrifice. But he hath receiued it. And how knew ſhe that it was accepted of God? I ſay, ſeeing he it was that bad her offer it, therefore it was acceptable to him. And againe, the manner was allowable, for that God had conſumed the ſacrifice with Doct. the flame. And we may ſay the like. That if God heare our prayers, and approue of our weake and poore courſe of life, wee may aſſure our ſelues that 
                  Acts 10. 4. he loueth vs, and therefore will not in any aduerſitie forſake or caſt vs off. But God heareth not ſuch as lie ſtill in their ſinnes. This reaſon of the woman Ioh. 9. 31. (pithie and concludent) may bee further extended to this ſenſe: that ſeeing God had then allowed and accepted them and their offering, when they had leſſe ground to looke for it, nay were more vnlike to ſpeed of their deſires: then much more would hee now and in time to come teſtifie his loue towards them, hauing paſſed his word to them, and in token thereof, deuoured their ſacrifice. It was his meere goodneſſe (ſaith ſhe) to giue vs any acceſſe at all to his Maieſtie, to offer vp our requeſts and thankſgiuing to him and to vouchſafe to ſmell aſweete fauour from our offering. He needed haue done no ſuch matter, it came from himſelfe, it was his free loue to vs, to reueile himſelfe to vs more ſpecially then to others. Doubtleſſe if hee had meant to ſlay vs, he would haue done it before, and ſpared all this labour: therefore theſe are arguments rather, that he will reueile himſelfe yet further to vs, and loue vs more dearely, and giue vs more cauſe hereafter to truſt him, and giue thankes to him. So that when ſhe ſaith, He meanes not to kill vs: ſhe implieth more, viz. But rather bleſſe vs more abundantly then before, ſo farre will he be from killing vs. And this argumentation of hers, is not vnlike to that of Pauls, Rom. 5. 8. If Chriſt dyed for vs being ſinners, much more being iuſtified in his blood, ſhall we be ſaued from wrath. And it ſerues as a preſident for Gods people, in their doubts and temptations, to rouſe vp themſelues from deadly feare, and to gather ſtrength againe to themſelues, by reaſon framed according to this of hers. And thus ſhould euery afflicted ſoule and conſcience reaſon in time of his trouble, and ſay to himſelfe: There was a time when I was out of couenant with God, had no promiſe to ground my faith vpon, and wanted hope: yet then the Lord viſited me in mercie, opened my eyes to ſee, and my heart to mourne vnder the burthen of my ſinne, to come to him for eaſe, and to finde forgiueneſſe. Since that time I haue had much doubting, and been troubled about beleeuing, and repentance, which haue driuen me to proue them, and thereupon I haue reſted, and found peace. Now therefore though I am tempted againe ſtrongly to thinke my eſtate to be vnſound and naught, yet I remember Gods mercies of old, and therein am and will be comforted. If God had meant to forſake and caſt me off quite, hee would not haue proceeded ſo farre with me as he hath done, he would haue let me lien ſtill in darkneſſe, vnbeliefe, hypocriſie, &c. and taken leſſe paines to call me, change me, reforme and gouerne me. Theſe betoken not hatred, but loue, no more then the deuouring of the ſacrifice argued that God would kill Manoah and his wife. Doubtleſſe the Lord who did owe me no ſuch fauour at all, ſhewed

me mercy freely, to the end he might ſhew me more in time to come, and finiſh his gracious worke in me. And thus I conſtrue all his dealings with me hitherto, his enabling me to pray, and to beleeue, to hate ſin, to grow in knowledge, and to inioy his bleſſing vpon all theſe to much encreaſe. Let others ſay as they will: I will not be ſo vnthankfull as to think he hath done all this in vaine, that were to mock and deceiue me: but I verily beleeue all was and is for good, and therefore that I ſhall ſee more promiſes fulfilled, till I ſee the Lord himſelfe in the land of the liuing, &c. But here I end.
         
         
            THE SEVENTIE FOVRE SERMON ON THE XIII. AND XIIII. CHAPTERS OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
            
               OF the firſt reaſon of Manoahs wife, we heard in the laſt ſermon. The ſecond followeth, which was this: he appeared again & again to vs (ſaith ſhe) & inſtructed vs what we ſhould do, wherto alſo ſhe ſaid to her huſband, we attended readily (as you know) and beleeued his words: (for thus we muſt vnderſtand her, for as much as the word profiteth not, if it bee not mixed with faith) therefore ſhe concludeth, that they ſhould Heb. 4. 1. not dye. And this, which was in her ſo commendable, is no leſſe in ſo many of vs, as the like is found, but an eſpeciall gift of God, to vphold our ſelues in Doct. tryals, and then to beleeue God, and giue credit to him, when we haue nothing elſe to depend vpon. But if we be faint in trouble, then, as Salomon 
               Prou. 24. 10. ſaith, our ſtrength was neuer great. And as it was no ſmall trouble to Manoah ſo to doubt, in like maner ſhall we find it. Further, out of this ſecond reaſon of hers rightly vnderſtood, we learne, that although this is no good conſequent, God hath ſent his word among vs againe and againe, therefore he will not deſtroy vs, but loueth vs: yet let vs take it, as it was both meant of her, and practiſed of both her and her husband, to wit, that they receiued the meſſage at the mouth of the Angell, and beleeued his word, being confirmed Doct. by a ſigne, and then the reaſon is good, in this manner: God inſtructed vs, and we receiued it, therefore he will not deſtroy vs. And thereafter is our inſtruction. For if we imbrace and beleeue the doctrine of the ſcripture, that it is for our vſe and benefite, and receiue it, not as the word of Iohn 1. 12. man, but as it is indeed, the word of God, and it be ſweet to vs, as the honey 1. Theſ. 2. 13. Pſal. 119. 103. to the taſt, as the Prophet ſpake, then may we be ſure that we ſhall not periſh. But more particularly, the words of this ſecond reaſon hauing relation to the Angels meſſage, giue vs occaſion to looke backe into the nature and quality thereof. The Lord (ſayth ſhe) hath told me, that whereas

I was barren, I ſhould conceiue a ſonne, and that he ſhould be an inſtrument to ſaue Iſrael out of the hands of the Philiſtims. The time alſo he hath appointed, the manner of my dyet and abſtinence he hath preſcribed, adding the reaſon, becauſe the childe muſt be a Nazarite. And this he hath not once to me, but the ſecond time to vs both teſtified, and we haue reſted therein, beleeued the report, and receiued a ſigne. What? ſhall we now thinke God will kill vs? How then haue we beleeued the meſſage, ſeeing that if he kill vs, it is not poſſible that a child ſhould be borne and begotten by vs, and therefore all the other particularities are abſurd and frinolous. Or, if we ſtill beleeue the word of God, how can we ſay, God will ſlay vs? Thus doth this woman beſtirre her ſelfe to ſettle and reſtore her husband, by a ſtrong reaſon drawne from their faith in the promiſe of God, which could admit no contrarietie, except God hi
                  •
               ſelfe could be charged to be oppoſite in his performance to his promiſe. And this ſhewes how rarely God hath graced this woman, that ſhe (a weake creature) ſhould be able thus to reſt her ſelfe, and vnder-lay her husband, by an argument of the greateſt force, which might not be gainſayd, except groſſe abſurdities were granted, yea impoſſibilities, to wit, that God might falſifie his word. And in ſuch caſes as Manoah was, no leſſe euidence of truth and proofe would haue ſerued the turne. It commendeth this duty vnto vs when we ſhall be tryed in the like manner, to wit, that we ſuffer not our ſelues with Manoah to forget who it is that hath made vs a promiſe of forgiuenes, and who hath aſſured vs that we ſhall not periſh, but be kept to the reſurrection day. Iohn 10. 28. It may be, that in ſome great and ſudden feare, or trouble, the Diuell may quite ſpoyle vs of the remembrance of the grounds whereupon we haue Note. built our faith, and ſtrip vs naked of the experience of our faith, which in time paſt we haue had the fruit and benefite of, yea and the particular circumſtances alſo, which haue added great force and likely hood to the truth of the promiſer: as we ſee in poore Manoahs example. But then ſhould we ſtep forth with this woman, and accuſe our ſelues for this our forgetfulnes, as Chriſt did the two diſciples, ſaying, O ye dull and ſlow of heart to beleeue, &c. and giue no place to our vnbeliefe, ſtruggling againſt our weakeneſſe, as a ſtrong man (whoſe hands and feet are bound by theeues) to breake the bands and get the vſe of our ioynts and limmes, to help our ſelues withall. Note. Then ſhould we ſtriue to call back the word of God to our minds, whereupon in times paſt wee built our faith and confidence: and ſo ſhame our ſelues, that wee did not ſtill aſcribe to God the honour of beleeuing him, which in times paſt we haue done. Nay more, we ſhould embolden our ſelues thus, that we cannot be diſappointed of our hope, (whether it be of any deliuerance preſent, or glorie itſelfe hereafter) except God himſelfe can be conuinced of falſhood, which is impoſſible, and to ſay ſo were blaſphemy; for he hath paſſed his word to vs, we haue been perſwaded of it, and had cleare teſtimonie thereof at ſundry times: ſo that it is as ſure our ſtate is good, as that Gods word (ſo much as in one iot or title) can not be fruſtrate. In things meerly temporall there may ſeeme a repugnance betweene the Lord his ſecret will, and his reuealed: I ſay, ſeeme, becauſe men e
                  •
               large temporall promiſes further then they reach. But in ſpirituall promiſes

there is neuer any repugnancie at all, where faith is ready at hand to argue with this woman thus: If this ſhould be, God ſhould be contrary to himſelfe, which is impoſſible.
            Now in this laſtverſe, (for I referre the next to the Chapter following) Verſe 24. the birth of the child Sampſon is mentioned, as the ſigne thereof was giuen before by the Angell, and how the Lord prepared him for ſuch a purpoſe, as to helpe his people againſt their enemies, by giuing him ſtrength of body, and courage of minde. About his birth, after his parents had receiued a promiſe from God of hauing ſuch a childe, yet there were many doubts in them, which now we ſee were all anſwered.
            Euen ſo we are to know, that though there be many thoughts of heart, Doct. and much heauineſſe in Gods people about the inioying of the ſundry good things that God hath promiſed them before they be accompliſhed, yet wee ſee God in his appoynted time effecteth and bringeth them to paſſe. It is true, that by reaſon of the much vnbeliefe that is in vs, yea, though ſometime it be well purged out of vs, we are euery while doubting Note. till we obtaine the things which are promiſed, and yet ſome of them we liue to ſee performed: and as certainely ſhall the reſt be alſo, euen as wee ſee the promiſe that a barren woman ſhould beare, came to paſſe to the parents that beleeued it, that Gods deed and his word may be one. And this is true in the promiſes of remouing any iudgements or croſſes, as by the malice of the wicked, by paine, penury, or other oppreſſions, or of any bleſſings temporary, as well as of grace to beare afflictions, or to vſe proſperity rightly, or of a good end of our dayes. How many and great promiſes had Dauid of the kingdome? yet through not only the long deferring thereof, but alſo the admirable and manifold oppoſitions that he met with, what likelyhood was there that he ſhould euer haue inioyed it? in ſo much as vpon the ſight of them, he brake out himſelfe, and ſayd, I ſhall ſurely dye by the hand of Saul one time or other, but yet came it not to paſſe that he inioyed it, and was ſtabliſhed in it. Therefore let all thoſe who haue a part in the promiſes of God, count it their ſingular priuiledge and honour to haue the Lord of heauen and earth thus bound to them, (as indeed to be out of this compaſſe is the greateſt miſery, though a man had all abundance) let ſuch, I ſay, reioyce dayly that they are reckoned among them whom God hath aſſured to grace, enlighten, purge, gouerne, vphold, and hereafter glorifie. And let them watch and wait for the performance of theſe promiſes, ſeeing that hee who hath made them, and in whom they Note. are made is no man, that hee ſhould change yeſterday and to day, and the ſame for euer: renewing his mercy dayly. To hold this by faith is the beleeuers crowne: let him beware that none take away his crowne from him.
            As the childe grew vp, ſo it is ſaid, the Lord bleſſed him with common gifts of the ſpirit, as it is manifeſt that this is to bee vnderſtood: but it is not ſo clearely ſeene that it ſhould be vnderſtood of the more ſpeciall gifts alſo that are peculier to the godly. But yet foraſmuch as the word [bleſſed him] is generall to both kindes, and not reſtrained to one kind only by the holy Ghoſt, we haue no reaſon to reſtraine it, but to take it generally,

and the rather, for that the worthy actes he did were fruites of his faith, as we ſee Hebrewes 11. and it followeth after, that Sampſon was induced with ſpeciall gifts of grace, as well as with courage of minde fit for a valiant man, and bodily ſtrength ſutable to purſue his enemies. And this is ſaid of Samſon, as being a type of Chriſt, of whom it is ſaid, that hee grew in fauour, &c. (Luke 1. laſt verſe) as in yeeres and ſtature.
            Whereby we ſee, that all good gifts which wee enioy are of Gods free 
                  Doct. 1. Iam. 1. 5. bountie communicated to vs: as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. And the graciouſeſt, wiſeſt, or hee that excelleth among men any other way, is beautified with the gifts which he hath, by God who giueth them. No man hath any thing of his owne, but ſinne. The heart of man is onely, and alway euill: and as the heart is, ſo is the man himſelfe, that God may be all in all. Therefore it Luke 6. 46. is a finne to be bewailed in the moſt not meanely, that they make no haſte to ſue to him, for all good that they would haue, as wee repaire to the fountaine and ſpring for water, neither (hauing obtained them) doe praiſe him for the ſame, nor vſe ſuch bleſſings to honour the giuer. So that if any ſhould deſire or long for any gifts of God that wee haue, wee ſhould not make them fall into an admiration at vs, but they ſhould be ſent to the author and giuer of them: and leſt wee might take any part of Gods due and honour from him, we ſhould anſwere them as Ioſeph did King Pharaoh, and Gen. 41. 16. Dan. 2. 30. 
               Daniel Nabuchadnezzer, The Lord hath reuealed the ſecret hereof to vs, but we haue no ſuch wiſedome in vs, more then other men. This bee added to that which heretofore hath been ſaid by occaſion of the like words before, as chap. 11. 21. 32. and many other places. And ſo much of Samſons birth, the chiefe thing in this chapter, and of the things pertaining thereto: now in this next Chapter I proceed to his mariage.
         
         
            
               THE SEVENTIE FOVRE SERMON, CONTINVED IN THIS XIIII. CHAPTER.
               
                  Verſ. 1. And the ſpirit of the Lord began to ſtrengthen him in the hoſt of Dan, betweene Zocah, and Eſhtoal.
                  
                  2. Now Samſon went downe to Timnah, and ſaw a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philiſtims, and he came vp and told his father and his mother, and ſaid, I haue ſeene a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philiſtims, now therefore giue me her to wife.
                  
                  3. Then his father and his mother ſaid vnto him, Is there neuer a wife among the daughters of thy brethren, and among all my people, that thou muſt goe to take a wife of the vncircumciſed Philiſtims? and Samſon ſaid vnto his father, Giue her me, for ſhe pleaſeth me well.
                  
                  4. But his father and his mother knew not that it came of the Lord, that hee
                     
                     ſhould ſeeke an occaſion againſt the Philiſtims: for at that time the Philiſtims reigned ouer Iſrael.
                  
               
               
                  THis firſt verſe is in ſome tranſlations the laſt of the former The ſumme of the Chapter. Chapter, but I make it the firſt of this, as ſome other alſo doe. In this ſtorie of Samſon contained in foure Chapters, we haue ſpoken hitherto, concerning his birth, and that he was ordained to be an helper to Gods people againſt the Philiſtims: now in this next Chapter it followeth (to the further effecting hereof) that wee ſee how the Lord did ſtrengthen him with further meaſure of the gifts, wherwith he had bleſſed him before, and more eſpecially after his mariage. This is generally ſet downe in the firſt verſe, and particularly laid foorth and declared throughout the whole Chapter, and in the next two following, to wit, the fifteenth and ſixteenth. And in this Chapter his mariage is ſpoken of, ſeeing one particular occaſion was offered there to him, by which hee was mooued firſt to ſet himſelfe againſt the Philiſtims, namely an iniurie wrought him at his mariage by them. Hereby (I ſay) he began to be ſtirred and prouoked againſt them, and to that purpoſe the whole Chapter diſcourſeth at large concerning his mariage.
               The parts of it are two. One is, how he was ſtrengthened by the ſpirit of God; in the firſt verſe. The ſecond is, the ſhewing foorth of Gods gifts, 
                     The parts 2. wrought in him by the ſame ſpirit, both at the going about his mariage, and at it: and this is throughout the reſt of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  HEre it is ſhewed, that as Samſon grew in yeeres, the Lord ſtrengthened Verſ. 1. him, & ofttimes the ſpirit of ye Lord came vpon him, that is, endued him with a burning loue of honouring God, and ſeeking the good of his people: and this he did, when he abode in his fathers houſe, who was of the tribe of Dan, and dwelt among them in their habitations, in that place which was betwixt Zorah and Eſhtaol, which was neere the citie Ioarim.
                  By this we may ſee, that the Lord openeth the hearts of thoſe whom he will be ſerued by, as he did the heart of Lydia, and counteth them faithfull, Doct. and putteth them in his ſeruice, as he did Paul, and leadeth them by his ſpirit, Acts 16. 14. 1. Tim. 1. 12. as hee did Samſon, to loue, deſire, and endeuour to doe thoſe things that pleaſe him, without the which, they ſhould neuer goe about them to any purpoſe, much leſſe be well carried through them. Of what place, ſtate, or degree ſoeuer men are, thus they muſt be graced and fitted to their duties, although indeed God doe not now, as in times paſt, I meane, he dealeth not the ſame way that he did with Samſon and many other then. For in thoſe daies he ſpake to our fathers, and inlightened them after ſundrie manners, Heb. 1. 1. but in theſe latter times, the outward meane that he vſeth, is chiefly his word truly preached. But the ſpirit of God hath alwaies wrought grace in their hearts, what other meanes ſoeuer he hath vſed. But wee looke not for reuelations, nor Angels miniſterie now, but while we giue heed to the doctrine of the Lord Ieſus, which is plainly, foundly, and powerfully taught vs, the

Lord inlighteneth vs with grace and power of the holy Ghoſt, and giueth vs another heart to ſerue him, (as hee ſaith in Ezek. 36.) then wee had before. Ezek. 36. 26.
                  
                  This doctrine is a double linck of that golden chaine, mentioned by the Apoſtle in theſe words, Rom. 8. [whom he predeſtinated, them he called, iuſtified, 
                     Rom. 8. 30. 
                     and glorified.] There is no other way to ſeeke out the certaintie of our election, but by the meanes which ſerue to our calling: and our calling neuer goeth without the gift of faith, and the ſpirit of God ſanctifying, which is the beginning of our glorifying in heauen. So that as predeſtination it ſelfe is manifeſted in time, by the inlightening and opening the heart to receiue the glad tidings of the Goſpell: ſo when Chriſt is embraced by faith, the holy Ghoſt is giuen to the beleeuer, who quickens the heart with ſpirituall grace, and fitteth ſuch a partie to the worke of God; both inwardly more renuing and changing his nature, and outwardly framing the life to his will. And thus he worketh in all his: though hee giue greater meaſure to ſome, (who are deputed and appointed by him, to greater imployment and ſeruice) I meane hee giueth them more zeale, courage, loue, diligence, conſtancie, experience, iudgement, and the like. And yet (leſt any ſhould erre about this point) know wee, that hee workes none of theſe without meanes: thoſe therefore whom he will thus ſanctifie, hee will alſo prepare, by ſtirring vp in them an earneſt coueting of theſe graces, a ſpeciall hunger and thirſt after them, an high opinion and account of them, and a ſinglar affection of loue to them, with a feruent deſire of honouring the giuer of them, and a ſtudious endeuour by all meanes both of prayer and labour, to attaine them: yea looke what affections he worketh in ſuch as he will bring to the certaintie and aſſurance of ſaluation: the like he preſerueth and nouriſheth in the beleeuer, for the encreaſing of grace, and the inabling him to his ſeruice in better manner. He ſuffereth them not to ſit ſtill, or take their eaſe, till theſe gifts drop into their mouthes: nor to be indifferent, whether they attaine and come by them or no: but he cauſeth them to giue themſelues no reſt, till they bee ſatisfied from time to time with the good things that they deſire. And in this ſenſe and reſpect it is verified which is heere ſaid, All whom God will be ſerued by, hee will furniſh them with gifts for that purpoſe, as he did here Samſon.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  WE haue heard in the former verſe, how Samſon was led and ſtrengthned Verſ. 23 by the ſpirit of God: now it followeth to ſee how that grace was ſet aworke in him: and firſt in going about his mariage, to the which he was led by God, to make it with a Philiſtim woman, for it had otherwiſe been vnlawfull: which being ſpoken of throughout this whole Chapter following, I will lay foorth in this manner, referring all things about it, to theſe foure points. Firſt, how he ſought his wife, in theſe 4. next verſes. Secondly, how he went to agree with her and receiue her, and what fell out by the way, to the tenth verſe. Thirdly, what was done in their meeting at the mariage, which is ſet down in the eleuenth verſe; and this to the twentieth. And laſtly, what followed the mariage feaſt, and namely, that hee paied the

Philiſtims the apparell and linnen, and how hee tooke occaſion by ſomewhat done there, to begin to vexe the Philiſtims, and this to the end of the Chapter.
                  Concerning the firſt, his ſeeking of a wife was thus: Hee going to Timnah The more particular ſumme of theſe verſes to 
                           •
                        he ſixth. a towne of the Philiſtims, he ſaw a woman there, whom he liked: and he deſired his father and mother, that ſhe might be giuen him: but they (as it is no marueile, ſeeing they feared God) diſliked that he ſhould deale with one that was an Idolater. Neuertheleſſe hee was earneſt for her, they not knowing then that God had moued him to take a wife there, to the end that hee might ſeeke an occaſion thereby againſt the Philiſtims, who at that time were Lords ouer Iſrael.
                  Now in that Samſon was growne vp to yeeres fit for mariage, and yet the Doct. verſ. 2. people of Iſrael were ſtill in ſubiection to the Philiſtims, and lay vnder oppreſſion by them, (as they were before he was borne) wee may ſee cleerely that they were long held vnder of that calamitie. And ſo it commeth to paſſe oft times, that as it is long before God puniſheth, ſo it is long before he ceaſe puniſhing of his children. And that we may not much marueile at it, we may know that he doth ſo; firſt, that his correction may in ſome meaſure recompence the abuſe of his patience: And ſecondly that hee may frame vs aright to his minde and liking, which is hard to doe at his firſt afflicting of vs, and long ere it be wrought in vs, becauſe of our vntowardnes. For a little affliction and ſhort, doth not commonly ſearch vs deeply, nor bring vs very readily vpon our knees, and therefore ſuch great ſores muſt haue deepe tents, by longer continuance of the paine and ſmart. Some wee reade of to haue been afflicted twelue yeeres, ſome eighteene in the Goſpell: as this peoples forefathers were long vnder the Moabites, and the Canaanites, and ſore vexed by them: ſo famines haue bin continued, three, 1. King. 17. 1. Ruth. 1. 4. ſeuen, and more yeeres: which how vncomfortable, grieuous, and ſtinging they haue been, we may eaſily gather, by that which we ſuſtained ſome few yeeres ſince, who ſaw the third yeere of famine to hold and continue, much more pinching and oppreſſing, then the former two: neither was it ſeene of the wiſe, how a fourth yeere could haue been borne, (if it ſhould haue been caſt vpon vs) without ſtaruing and famiſhing to death of a great number of the people; ſo ſore was the want of bread. To ſpeake of particular mens calamities, in which alſo they haue lien long, it were endleſſe and infinite. Let Acts 7. 6. the vſe of this doctrine to all of vs both perſons and companies, be, not to make full account of preſent or ſpeedie riddance from any croſſe, by the which we are held vnder; and yet not to deſpaire, though we haue ſuffered long, not being relieued and eaſed, but abide patiently, and pray the more feruently: for God, before we ſhall fall into extremitie, will certainly come with helpe, though we know not how, and not tarrie. More of this the reader may finde in the former Chapters, as 13. 1. and others.
                  Now to proceed: It is ſaid in this ſecond verſe that Samſon going downe 
                        The anſwering of a doubt in this verſe 2. & 
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      to Timnah, ſaw there a woman of the daughters of the Philiſtims, whom in the next verſe it is ſaid, he deſired might be his wife. But before I proceede further, a doubt ariſeth about this attempt of his whether he did well or no: Obiect. for this action of his, being in it ſelf againſt the law of God, on the one ſide, namely to take a ſtranger and an Idolater to wife, his parents alſo being

godly and diſliking it; and on the other ſide he himſelfe being led by the ſpirit of God, and renowned in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, among the faithfull of worthie memorie: theſe (I ſay) thus conſidered, breeds a queſtion, how he could not onely like ſuch a thing, but go forward with it, and bring it to paſſe, and in all the time not once calling himſelfe backe. For though it be not to be denied, but a godly perſon may poſſibly ſlippe into a ſinne wittingly, yet either he ſhall ſee his fault by and by, and diſlike it, before he proceed to other duties, ſaying in repentance; What haue I done? as ſome did (by the lamentable example of Ananias and his wife) feare, or at leaſt repent, when it ſhall be brought to his remembrance ſome good Acts 5. 11. time after, as Dauid did. But neither of theſe we reade to haue been done of Samſon, as though he had been either void of conſcience, (which hee was not) or as if God had priuiledged him in that action, yea and (which maketh the queſtion and doubt the greater) his parents themſelues, who firſt withſtood him, and diſliked his attempt therein, did afterward conſent, and his father went with him to the woman, and was at his mariage feaſt: what ſhall we ſay then hereunto? I anſwere: This thing came of the Lord, that 
                        Anſw. Iudg. 13 5. 
                     Samſon might thereby haue occaſion to vexe the Philiſtims. And though the marrying with an vncircumciſed woman was generally forbidden, yet the Lord giuing him a perſonal charge ſo to doe, (who is aboue his law, and not tyed to it) he offended not therein. As both the whole ſtory following doth proue; where we may ſee, that God not onely brought it not againſt him afterward as a ſinne, as he did Dauids and Peters ſinnes; and there was as great cauſe, if Samſon had been iuſtly to be charged in this, why hee ſhould haue done the like to him: but God bleſſed him ſtill afterward, and ſupported him in great difficulties and troubles raiſed againſt him by the Philiſtims, (except where he ranged and ranne after ſtolne liberties without his allowance) that all might ſee apparantly, God to haue been with him herein. And as for his parents, they knew not Gods minde in that matter at the firſt, and therfore, as they ſaw themſelues bound by dutie, they were againſt him in his mariage. And in that they did afterward agree to it, who doubteth but that they had it reuealed to them by God, or that Samſon himſelfe told them, that God would ſo haue it? And all this was neceſſarie for me to ſay, for the anſwering of the doubt, and the cleering of this verſe.
                  By that which hath bin ſaid of this point, as we ſee ye Lord may diſpenſe with his owne law, as he did here, and with Abraham, where he hath giuen Doct. in verſ. 2. and 3. a perſonall commandement contrary to it: So where he hath done no ſuch thing, know we, that neither wee may looke to be diſpenſed withall by any other meanes; nor contrary to his commandements, attempt the thing that Samſon did heere, in ſeeking a woman, and taking her to wife from among Idolaters, or any other ſuch like. A fact vtterly vnlawfull for vs to doe, and which ſhall be reckoned againſt the committer, as a capitall and great ſinne. I put both the actions together, of his ſeeking and liking ſuch a woman, for they are both of one kinde, though in degree one worſe then the other (to wit, if he that ſeeketh ſuch a wife, deſiſt and leaue off, before hee liketh, and before he giueth ouer himſelfe thereto:) but elſe, ſmall difference there is betwixt them.
                  And great reaſon there is, that they ſhould bee both odious to vs, for as

much as there can be no true ſeruing of God in ſuch matches; but it is to be looked for, that the great ſinnes, namely Idolatrie and prophanenes in the one partie, ſhall deuoure, and as a canker, eate out the goodneſſe of the other partie, rather then be auoided thereby: neither is it poſſible, that they who are ſo vnequally yoked together, can enioy the chiefe benefits of their marriage, without which the reſt are little worth: for whereas they ſhould conſent and agree together in all good things, as in conferring, praying, and reading together, and to be of one minde in all other things of like ſort and qualitie; they are contrary minded one to another, and draw an vnequall yoke; and what faithfulnes or loue (except it be in diſſimulation) can there be betwixt ſuch (eſpecially on the behalfe of the worſer partie) through the courſe of their liues? As they finde it, who will not be held from marrying in Popiſh kindred, and with perſons well knowne to bee vncircumciſed? which they finde, to the iuſt accuſation and vexation of them long after. And no marueile, for we being ſtaightly commanded to marry in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 39. we are thereby iuſtly challenged for matching with Canaanites in a ſtrange religion, or with ſuch as are impious, and very ſcandalous in their liues, though of our owne religion, as in the ſecond point of the next verſe ſhall appeare. Let this be added to that which I ſpake of more briefly, vpon ver 2. chap. 2. and other places.
                  
                     Samſon hauing broken the matter of his mariage to his parents, they giue Verſ. 4. him anſwere in this verſe, and a reaſon of that anſwere is rendred by the holy Ghoſt in the next. In their anſwere they obiect, the kindred and religion of the woman, that ſhe was a Philiſtim, and vncircumciſed, and doe further tell him, that he ought to take a wife among his owne people. Here his practiſe, that hee attempteth not the matter, without acquainting his parents with it, when hee liked the woman, doth condemne the common attempts Doct. in verſ. 4. of the moſt of our age about this matter, who haue ſo degenerated and turned away from this durifulneſſe of ſeeking their parents conſent in their Note. match, as Samſon did, that they haue made an end, and done what they deſired, with their wiues, yea many of them are vndone and readie to leaue them, before they begin to breake with their parents about it.
                  So that, whereas the Lord hath by commanding them to ſeeke their parents conſent, prouided, that they ſhould not raſhly and vnwiſely caſt themſelues into danger, and be led (as vnexperienced youth eaſily is) into depth of euils and ſorrow, but well aduiſed and directed, as well as dutifull, therein to them; they not onely deſpiſe the counſell of God, but caſting it and their parents helpe and furtherance behinde their backs, they doe therefore right ſoone both ſmart and ſorrow for their haſtineſſe and wilfull proceedings. But herein they follow Eſaus moſt curſed example, who againſt the will and liking of his parents, tooke Canaanitiſh women to be his wiues, Gen 26. 35. whoſe ſight and conuerſation they could not beare nor abide.
                  A great part of the croſſings and vexations in Marriage, doe ariſe and ſpring from this fountaine: for as they haue begun amiſſe, who thus gōe to worke in their matches, ſo they proceed (for the moſt part) worſe, becauſe they neuer feared that God would ſit in their light, till after many weariſome and oft complainings, and (ſometime alſo, of their haſty and raſh making vp of their marriage, though out of ſeaſon, and too late) but moſt of

all, of the miſeries which they ſuſtaine: after all theſe, I ſay, they doe with paine and penſiueneſſe end their dayes therein. But of the annoyances in marriage, which come of other cauſes, I haue no time here to ſpeake. Therefore with one caution and watchword giuing both to parents and children, I end this point: And to them this I giue, that they doe not exerciſe a tyrannicall power ouer their children (as many doe) to draw them to ſuch marriages, as they cannot yeeld vnto: to theſe, this I ſay, that they doe not lightly and haſtily caſt their affection where it cannot be faſtned without great danger, when iuſt cauſes may be ſeene of breaking off their match, and that they proceed in them as God hath commanded, to wit, with their Parents liking and good will, vnleſſe they will apparently reſiſt God.
                  Now out of the anſwere of Sampſons Parents, we learne another thing, 
                        Doct. 2. that the marriages of Gods ſeruants ought to be made with ſuch as are like minded to them, not with the vncircumciſed, and with thoſe that be of an other and contrary religion, for ſo they ſay to him in this verſe, Is there neuer a wife of the daughters of my people, but thou muſt goe to the Philiſtims for one? This to bee neceſſarily required of them, as commanded by the Lord, the ſeuenth of Deutronomy, with other ſcripture, doth clearely teach, namely, Deut. 7. 3. Exod. 23. 33. that the true worſhippers of God may not ioyne themſelues with Idolaters, and thoſe that be of another religion. The reaſon is at hand alleaged by the Lord himſelfe, to wit, for that they will be infected and corrupted by them. And beſides, how can one hope that ſuch ſhall be faithfull together, when the Papiſt, who is an Idolater, is vnfaithfull to God? Looke not in then at the dores of ſuch perſons for a wife, though much wealth be there. But foraſmuch as many of the profeſſors of our own religion are found to be bad, lewd, and of vild qualities, and thoſe alſo ariſing from euil & diſtempered ſpirits; here leſt any ſhould ſtumble, and take liberty amiſſe, let them know, that it is likewiſe forbidden them of God, to caſt themſelues away vpon ſuch vngodly ones: and to marry with any that be of their owne religion, if they be ſuch: but they ought eſpecially to looke vnto it, as they will anſwere it to God, that they be as well marryed in the Lord, as in their owne religion: for that did Sampſons parents include and vnderſtand, when they vrged him to marry with the daughters of his people, that were not of the vncircumciſed, but liued after the law of Moſes, which was then the knowne truth among them; and this duty of marrying aright was afterward more clearely expreſſed and ſet downe by Saint Paul, when he giuing liberty to the widow to marry with whom ſhe will, addeth this; that it be in the Lord, that is, religiouſly, and in the feare of God. 1. Coc. 7. 39.
                  
                  For many otherwiſe profeſſing true religion, are exceedingly diſguiſed in their liues, ſo as whoſoeuer be yoked with them, and meerely lincked to them in this fellowſhip of marriage or otherwiſe, muſt of neceſſitie either liue in deadly vncomfortablenes, if there be any better things in them then in their companions, or elſe (which is worſe) they ſhall fall to their manners Note. and faſhions, or match them ſome other euill way. So that concerning marriage, (for of that I ſpeake here) it ſhall behoue them to be wiſe in ſo waighty a matter, both themſelues, and their faithfull friends, and namely to enquire of, and learne both the diſpoſition, and behauiour of thoſe whom they ſeeke to make their companyons, that if they be tainted with

any groſſe and notorious vice, or in a high degree giuen to anger, wrath, impatience, curriſhneſſe, ſtoutneſſe, wilfulneſſe, or be ſcoffing ſpirited, oppreſſed with melancholy; women particularly, of a ſtinging tongue, and Parretlike, or exceeding other in any ſuch bad qualities: and ſo the man in ſome like manner diſguiſed, I ſay, if theſe be, let there be great wiſdome and care vſed to auoyd matches of ſuch qualitie and condition.
                  For although in this act of Samſons, God did put in himſelfe to leade him, yet otherwiſe, theſe ſpeeches of him; that he ſaw a woman in Timnah, (whom he deſired to marry, and that ſhe pleaſed him well) were no way to be allowed in him as ſufficient cauſes to reſt in, neither therefore in vs of proceeding therein. The pleaſing of the eye, and fancy, are both very dangerous to aduiſe vs in this caſe, yea vtterly inſufficient, if they goe alone; though where better things accompany them they are allowable, yea and ought to haue place in both the parties, I meane, that both the eye and the heart be pleaſed, contented, and ſatisfied. For ſeeing marriage is for a mans life time, it is meet there ſhould be good liking the one of the other, to the Note. well bearing of all moleſtations, croſſes, and aduerſities that may befall couples: yet with this liking, the one of the perſon of the other, there muſt alſo be good graces and qualities, as I ſaid before, to goe therewith. For who knoweth not that the eye is blind, and the heart deceitfull: by the one, ſinne is let into the other, as light into the houſe by the window; and whatſoeuer is done by them alone, without better aduiſers, doth ſurely come to an euill end: as that one example may teſtifie long agone giuen, that the ſonnes of Gen. 6. 2. God ſaw the daughters of men that they were faire, and they tooke them to be their wiues, and ſo iniquitie multiplied.
                  Now that we haue heard how the parents of Samſon conſented not to Verſ. 5. him, that he ſhould take a Philiſtim woman in marriage, the reaſon is rendred in this verſe, that they knew not that it came of the Lord; to the end that the Philiſtims might firſt giue occaſion to Samſon by iniury offred him, to be afterward auenged of them the more iuſtly. So that they followed their knowledge that they had in the law of God, in denying their conſent to ſuch a match. And therefore when they knew not that this marriage was of God, they diſliked it, as their knowledge in Gods word directed them to doe. And in that they yeelded to it afterwards, they did ſo when they were made acquainted with the will of God by their ſonne, or otherwiſe, to wit, that God would haue it ſo, for they would not elſe haue yeelded, and gone from their profeſſed obedience to that law which for bad it.
                  And their example ought to be our inſtruction, that as they haue done, Doct. verſ. 5. ſo we ſhould know we ought to doe, that is to ſay, that we follow the light and knowledge which we haue of the will of God. Of the which if we be perſwaded that it is the truth we ſhould ſinne if we did contrary to it, for we ſhould goe againſt our conſciences in ſo doing. Thus did Peter while he did not yet vnderſtand the viſion, he followed the knowledge that he Acts 10. 28. had in the law, but after, when he was clearely and fully inſtructed in the contrary by the viſion, and ſaw that God allowed him ſo to doe, he then changed his minde, and ſtill did after his better knowledge.
                  It was commendable in Abimelech toward Sarah, that he would not haue taken her to him, if he had knowne ſhe had been an other mans wife: and Gen. 20.
                     
alſo that being admoniſhed afterward by God that ſhe was ſo, yet though he were an Heathen, yet he followed the light he had in not touching her, which was the wife of an other man. And Pilate alſo did well, while he defended Ieſus againſt the Prieſts bitter and falſe accuſations according to the Luke 23. 4. knowledge he had of his innocencie. And this much more well becommeth vs who are Chriſtians, that according to the light we haue of Gods will, ſo we ſhould doe, euery one according to the meaſure that he hath, yet euer ſeeking to be inlightned more and more, and confirmed in our knowledge, leſt wee ſhould be deceiued; and to bee well grounded, leſt our conſcience be erroneous. But to doe againſt it, I meane that which we are perſwaded to be the truth, (which yet is the moſt mens caſe) it threatneth ſore ſuch perſons, that they will make ſo many wounds at length in their conſcience, that they will neuer be kindly healed: See more of this in Chapter 11. 35. and the caueat there propounded.
                  Now whereas it is ſaid, the Lord (or Samſon by him) ſought occaſion 2 from the Philiſtims to fight againſt them, (and therefore was this marriage ſought by him) though he could many wayes haue plagued them, and defended his people from them; yet ſeeing he would not doe it by open warre, but by one man, he muſt haue a fit occaſion thereto, which by this marriage was offred, that by priuate iniuries done againſt Samſon by the Philiſtims, he might more fitly take occaſion openly to vexe and annoy them. And it appeareth that while they were thus vnder the dominion of the Philiſtims, there were certaine couenants made betwixt them, which might not without great danger raſhly be broken by the Iſraelites. And further, Samſon was but a priuate man, as farre as any could know, and therefore God would haue a ſufficient occaſion of fighting againſt them to be offred, that if in ſuſtaining any iniury by them, he ſhould againe make any requitall, it might be thought of them that he rather reuenged his owne priuate wrongs, then the publike againſt their nation; although it cannot be denyed but that the Lord might, if it had pleaſed him, haue armed Samſon as well as he did Othniel, Ehud, and other in the like caſe, to haue chaſed and ſubdued them by profeſſing it openly.
                  But now, for that which concerneth our inſtruction out of this place, Doct. though God would haue Samſon doe thus, yet (as by the like occaſion I noted before out of the ſecond and third verſe) wee haue neither warrant nor authoritie to doe the like, ſeeing wee haue a plaine commandement from God of the contrary: to wit, that wee ſhould auoide all occaſions either of doing, or of reuenging wrongs: and that we ſhould ſuſtaine ſome hurt and damage rather, then offer the leaſt, without the which there is no liuing in any peaceable manner among moſt men in this world. He that is fit to beare iniurie, and ſo to buy and redeeme quietnes thereby, may more eaſily enioy Note. it, then ſome other: but if he be noted for offering wrong, he ſhall haue his loade of trouble in that one reſpect, as he well deſerueth, beſide many other waies: and therefore wee are commanded to follow, and inſue after peace, (yea although it ſhould flie from vs) and holineſſe, without which no Heb. 12. 14. man ſhall ſee the Lord. Whereof ſeeing enough hath bin ſpoken elſewhere, I need not here inſiſt longer therein. And thus much of the firſt of theſe 4. points in this ſecond part of the chapter, that is, of Samſons ſeeking a wife.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſ. 6. Then went Samſon and his father and his mother downe to Timnah, and came to the vineyards at Timnah, and behold a young lion rored vpon him.
               
               7. And the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon him, and hee tare him, as one ſhould haue rent a kid, and had nothing in his hand, neither told his father and his mother what he had done.
               
            
            
               NOw followeth the ſecond generall point in this ſecond part of the Chapter, to wit, firſt, the double iourney of Samſon to this woman, which was to bee his wife: (in both the which, hee was accompanied with his father and mother:) whereby it appeareth that they knew Gods will then, about his marriage, better then they did before: and ſecondly, what fell out in both iournies by the way; and this to verſ. 11. His firſt going to her at Timnah, with that which fell out therein, is laid foorth in theſe two verſes, and that is this: That as he went with his father and mother, (he going aſide from them out of the way) a young lion met him, roring on him, and the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon him, and though he had nothing in his hand, yet he rent him in peeces: but hee told not his father and mother what he had done.
            And by this that fell out by the way, God would giue to Samſon a proofe of the ſtrength that he meant to endue him with afterward, that hee might be bold to looke for power to doe greater things. And now, this being ſaid, it remaineth that wee obſerue more particularly that which concerneth vs, out of this ſtorie. And firſt this: that when his father and mother vnderſtood that his mariage pleaſed God, they went downe with him to the woman whom he ſhould marrie, to finiſh the agreement betwixt them, and to countenance and further him euery way in it. So parents, when they ſee Doct. that their childrens attempts, either that, or any other way, bee pleaſing to God, they ſhould be ready to helpe and free them by all meanes from delay, and trouble and griefe thereby, as much as in them lieth; euen as in the contrary they are bound to croſſe and hinder them, leſt if they ſhould allow them in their euill courſe, their childrens ſinne, beſide their owne bad example, ſhould be chiefly laid to their charge. And this aſſiſtance of theirs vnto Samſon, is further mentioned in the 8. verſe of this Chapter: therefore let this onely bee here noted, that parents be very warie leſt they turne that authoritie and power of theirs, which God hath giuen them for the good and benefit of their children, that they turne it not (I ſay) vnto the deſtruction

or damage of them, by laying the bridle in their necke, and ſo embolden them to euill, by their allowance, counſell, or example.
            Now in that a young Lion is ſaid to haue met him, (not a whelp) which 2 had been like to haue fawned on him, and played with him, but one that was full growne, (for the word ſignifieth one of full growth) and therefore neither pleaſant, nor kinde, as ſometime they be, being as yet not growne: in that (I ſay) ſuch an one being cruell and fierce, did ſet vpon Samſon, as the nature of them is to doe; which thing ſo falling out, ſuppoſe we in that caſe, that he had gone about any vnlawfull buſineſſe, behold what ill ſucceſſe had followed it? Euen as we reade for example, how it fell out to the man of God, who came from Iuda to reprooue the Idolatrie of Ieroboam at Bethel, 1. King 13. 24. who, ſeeing he tranſgreſſed the commandement of God afterward, in going into the old Prophets houſe to eate bread, (which God had forbad him to doe) loe, a lion met him, when hee was gone out of the towne, and ſlew him.
            And it was an apparent correction of God vpon him for that; for though in other things he had obeied God to his high commendation, yet becauſe in that one thing he had done contrary to the charge giuen him, (he being told by the old Prophet of Bethel that he might do it) we ſee what an heauie iudgement befell him. It teacheth, that we ought to ſee in all the manifold actions of this life, that we looke wee haue good warrant for the taking in hand of them, and the going about them, leſt we meete (I ſay not) with a lion, but with the Lord croſſing of vs, worſe then a lion could hurt vs, ſome 1. King. 21. 20. way to our little liking in the middeſt of the hot purſuite of our deſires, and that either with outward reſiſtance of vs, as he did Ahab by Elias, when he was going to take poſſeſſion of Naboths vineyard; or with inward wound of conſcience, as moſt commonly hee vſeth to doe, to ſuch as haue knowledge; or with hardneſſe of heart, which alwaies hindreth and keepeth away Rom. 2. 4. repentance. And by occaſion of Samſons iourneying out of Iuda to Timnah of the Philiſtims, I ſay more particularly, let ſuch as trauaile, (whether within the land, or beyond ſeas into forreine countries) ſee, that their errands are lawfull and warrantable, not expreſly croſſing the Lords charge, (as that of Shemei did Salomons) leſt although they ſcape Shemei his puniſhment, 1. King 2. 43. yet a worſe befall them. Remember Dina, and Gehazi. Nay, ſee they not onely that their buſineſſe be good, but look they alſo that their affection be well and orderly carried thereto: otherwiſe their ſeeking after noueltie, curioſitie, vanitie, (I ſpeake of them that doe ſo) or their ſiniſter intent any other way, will marre their action of trauailing, be it neuer ſo lawfull. And as that is nouriſhment to one creature, which is anothers bane; euen ſo is trauaile to ſundrie ſorts of men, though to ſome other it be good and profitable. It is apparant that many trauellers who went out with no euill purpoſe, yet being vnarmed againſt euill, and not ſtrongly reſolued to depart from it, haue ruſhed vpon the pikes, tempted God, caſt themſelues vpon ſtreights, and indangered their bodies, liues & conſciences manifold waies. I ſpeake to ſuch as profeſſe to haue God the directer of their waies: as for others, let the dead bury the dead. That is a iourney well vndertaken, which a man can take in faith, and ſanctifie it by prayer, and ſo commit himſelfe therein to Gods protection and bleſſing. And ſurely if we goe otherwiſe to

worke, wee are as able to beare meekely and patiently; either diſappointment, ill ſucceſſe, or any hard accident that ſhall befall vs, as wee are to encounter a Lion, if he ſhould meete vs. But beſide theſe vntimely and vnſeaſonable trauailings abroad, there are other no leſſe dangerous at home, or neere at hand: and among the reſt for example ſake, when the Sabbath is abuſed to wanton and waily gaddings, to ſtage-playes, gaming houſes, drinkings, on which yet by Gods commandement the moſt lawfull common actions and ordinary buſineſſe ought not to bee done, which may bee done on other daies. This is one inſtance of many other wicked iourneyings and trauailings on that day, which are as vſuall with the ill diſpoſed, as it is ordinary among the better ſort to heare the word preached, or to vſe any other religious exerciſes. But although ſuch perſons haue no ſtoppe in their way to turne them backe, neither doe meete with the oppoſition that Balaam did, to hinder and croſſe their deſires; yet they ſhall reape the wages of their iniquitie, as hee did, and wiſh they had kept at home, and been free from ſuch company, with many ſtripes.
            The meeting of a Lion by Samſon, which was (as wee haue heard) with Verſ. 7. the perill of his life, yet was to him, as God did vſe it, an occaſion to trie, declare and ſhew foorth Gods power and ſtrength in him, which ſhould elſe haue been hidden. For the ſpirit of the Lord ſtirred vp in him an extraordinary gift of might and manhood, more then is to bee found in the ſtrongeſt perſon, whereby he hauing nothing in his hands, did yet teare the Lion in peeces, one part and member from another, as if it had been a young kid or lambe.
            By this example wee may learne, that though the croſſe be to vs as feareful, Doct. when we ſee it comming toward vs, as a Beare or a Lion is to meet with, yet the Lord who loueth vs, as hee did Samſon, doth vſe by his quickning grace, to hearten vs againſt it, ſo that wee finde it to turne to our great good Note. and benefit. But let this be marked which I ſay: that God doth by his ſpeciall grace bring it thus to paſſe, not that we ſhould looke for it by extraordinary meanes, though he dealt ſo with Samſon, but wee are to beleeue and waite certainly for it, becauſe he hath promiſed it, and by the helpe thereof, we ſhall not need to doubt, but that ſuch ſtrength ſhall be granted vs, as ſhal put away feare, or at leaſt abate and reſtraine it: but without that help from God, we ſhall feare and be troubled, when wee doe but heare of the croſſe or danger, as at the ſight of a lion, yea and be diſquieted and ouercome with the heauineſſe that we haue for it, as if we ſhould meete a Beare.
            We haue too many examples of this weakneſſe and feare in Gods deare people, as in the ſeruant of Eliſha, who when hee ſaw an armie of Aramites 2 King. 6. 15. compaſſing the houſe, cried out, and ſaid, Alas (maſter) what ſhall wee doe? So in the Diſciples the like is to bee ſeene, who through their vnbeliefe, Matth. 14. 26. thought they had ſeene a ſpirit, and were ſore afraid, when yet that which they feared was Ieſus their Maſter, comming toward them, to comfort thē: So that we of our ſelues indeed, are moſt timerous euen when we haue little cauſe, much more otherwiſe: but yet when great afflictions oppreſſe vs; God being with vs, as I haue ſaid, we are able through his might, to do great things, as the Apoſtle ſaith, I am able to doe all things through the helpe of Phil. 4. 13. Chriſt, who ſtrengtheneth me. Yea ſo great oddes is there betweene one

and the ſame man oppreſſed with feare, though for a ſmall trouble, when he is taken on the ſudden, and with a great one, when hee is prouided for it, as Note. betweene the heate of the leaſt candle, and a greateſt fire. He that fainted at the one, when he was weake in faith, eſcaped and ouercame the force of the other, being aſſiſted therewith, as hath at large been ſhewed in Gedeon, at one time afraid to goe and behold that campe, which after hee blanckt not both to encounter, and to conquer.
            And this whole ſtorie of the Lion, all that conſider, may vnderſtand, that 2 it tendeth directly to this end, to prepare and make Samſon able to beare the diſpleaſure and enmitie of the Philiſtims, which was afterward raiſed vp againſt him, the Lord giuing him ſtrength for that purpoſe: and that it might miniſter matter for the riddle which he did after propound to them, whereby they did ſore prouoke him. By the firſt, learne, that when God indueth men with excellent gifts betimes, (as he doth many) he thereby declareth, that hee will both double and multiply them in thoſe perſons, and alſo vſe them to ſerue him to ſingular purpoſes, if their proceeding be not hindred by ſome ſiniſter practiſes of theirs, to ſtand in their way, or by the diuell and Note. his inſtruments ſubtilitie, diuerting his good gifts to bad purpoſes. This is apparent by that which God did worke in Samſon in his firſt yeeres of diſcretion, and when hee was yet but young, compared with that which followed afterwards when he made ſtrip and waſte of the Philiſtims. Euen ſo when he will worke (I ſay) in more ſpeciall manner by ſome in future age, he will giue ſignes thereof in younger yeeres; which is notably to be ſeene in Dauid, who in the great danger he was in by Goliah, (when Saul told him that he was but a boy, but hee whom he vndertooke to fight with, to wit Goliah, was a man of warre from his youth) anſwered vnto Saul, Thy ſeruant 1. Sam. 17. 36. kept his fathers ſheepe, and there came a Lion, and likewiſe a Beare, and tooke a ſheepe out of the flocke; and I went out after him and ſmote him, and tooke it out of his mouth, and when hee roſe againſt me, I caught him by the beard, and ſmote him and ſlew him. Therefore this vncircumciſed Philiſtim (ſaid hee) ſhall be as one of them; ſeeing hee hath railed on the hoaſt of the liuing God. And the like is manifeſt in Samuel, whom becauſe the Lord meant to make a more then ordinary inſtrument of his glorie, in the function of both Iudge and Prophet: therefore he reuealed himſelfe familiarly by viſions vnto him, in his tender age, yea before he ſeemed to be of diſcretion, and ripenes of yeeres and iudgement, the Lord began that work in him early, which in time to come, he meant to accompliſh in great meaſure. So that we ſee that the religious and prudent training vp of young ones in the knowledge of God, and of themſelues, and good literature, (being the ordinarie meanes now adaies to promote this worke of God in time to come) is not to be deſpiſed: much leſſe the towardlineſſe of ſuch as whom God in their youth ſhall begin to grace aboue others, is to bee ſnibbed and checked, as the practiſe is of ſome brutiſh perſons to ſcorne and reiect ſuch, ſaying: Tuſh, what reckoning make yee of ſuch? A young Saint, an old Diuell.
            This truth is exemplified in many young perſons at this day, who by good education doe ſhew very great towardnes: as ſchollers in the Vniuerſitie in their learning, and other in the countrey, both young men and

damzels in ſuch things, as wherein they are trained vp, and both ſorts in the practiſe of Chriſtianitie farre differing from the common ſort of youth, who are ſaucie, diſobedient, and prophane, and giue fearefull ſignes of miſchiefe working, and ſuſtaining miſerie afterward. And out of them hee raiſeth excellent inſtruments, ſome fit for Magiſtracie, and ſome in other places to doe much good in the Miniſterie, not to be teachers onely, but alſo fathers begetting many children to God, and others to bring foorth much fruite to his glorie. And herein that prophecie is verified, that in thoſe daies the Lord would powre out his ſpirit vpon all fleſh; not old men onely, but Acts 2. 17. euen the tendereſt, young men and maidens. A fruite (no doubt) of that vnction of Chriſt Ieſus the arch Prophet of his Church, who began at the age of twelue yeeres to giue demonſtration of ſtrange forwardnes, for wiſdome and grace, becauſe in his riper yeeres hee was more fully to declare Luke 2. 52. that he was annointed with the ſpirit without meaſure.
            Theſe therefore whom I ſpake of before, if they vſe well the gifts of God, as Dauid and Samuel did, which they receiued in their youth, ſhal (after they haue gotten experience) ſee how God proſpereth and inlargeth them to their ſound and great reioycing, and the good of many other, and helpe to to caſt downe, and deſtroy the workes of darkneſſe, and of the diuell, in places where they bee not too ſtrongly reſiſted and ſet againſt, by ſuch as loue darkneſſe more then light, becauſe their deeds are euill. But if after they haue begun well, and in their younger yeeres giuen great hope, if (I ſay) they comming further into the world, ſhall be dazled with the deceitfull Note. beautie of it, as though they had found a better portion then grace, and ſhall be blindfolded with profit, pleaſure, and promotion, ſo that thereby they cannot do their former workes, they ſhall complaine too late (when all theſe muſt forſake them) that they were once in the way to do well, if they could haue ſeene it. And all may ſee, that howſoeuer they woond out of the diuels hands in the firſt maine temptation, wherein they were in danger to be brought to deſpaire, and in the next alſo, which tended to bring them to preſumption; yet that he hath preuailed againſt them in the third, about the glorie of this preſent world, and thereby hath deceiued them. Matth. 4. 8.
            
            And thus much be ſaid of the firſt thing which I mentioned now laſt in this verſe, to wit, of the gifts of God appearing in Samſon, in the firſt yeeres of his diſcretion: of the ſecond, namely, that this ſtorie doth miniſter matter of the riddle afterwards, I will ſpeake in place, where I ſhall haue a fitter occaſion offered, namely in the fifteenth Chapter.
            Laſtly, in this verſe in that it is ſaid, hee told not his father nor mother of this that hee did to the Lion, it ſhewed both that neither hee himſelfe was 4 vainglorious, (for then not onely they, but other ſhould ſoone haue heard thereof) but alſo it appeareth, that he ſaw no cauſe nor end of vttering it to them at that time. So let vs learne when to ſpeake, and when to hold our peace, and to be ſilent, euen when our ſpeaking can doe no good; or more hurt then good, or when it cannot but doe hurt. And by this rule, which guideth vs how to be ſilent, and when; let vs alſo learne how to ſpeake, and when, namely, when wee ſee it may doe good, and no hurt, or more good then hurt. The ſame is repeated of him in verſe 9. and agreeth with that which I haue often vrged in the generall, to wit, that wee ſhould ſhew all

godly wiſdome as well as vprightnes in our doings: as our Sauiour Mat. 11. would not commend Iohn Baptiſt before his Diſciples were gone, leſt it Mitth. 11. 7. ſhould haue as much hindred them, as profited the people.
            
               Verſ. 8. And he went downe and talked with the woman thoſe things that were pleaſing in the eyes of Samſon.
               
               9. And within a few daies when he returned to receiue her, he went aſide to ſee the carkeis of the lion: and behold, there was a ſwarming of Bees, and hony in the body of the lion.
               
               10. And he tooke thereof in his hands, ond went eating, and came to his father and his mother and gaue vnto them, and they did eate: but he told not them that he had taken the hony out of the body of the lion.
               
               11. So his father went downe vnto the woman, and Samſon made there a feaſt: for ſo vſed the young men to doe.
               
               12. And when they ſaw him, they brought thirtie companions to be with him. Then Samſon ſaid to them, I will now put foorth a riddle vnto you: and if you can declare it me within ſeuen daies of the feaſt, and finde it out, I will giue you thirtie ſheetes, and thirtie change of garments.
               
            
            NOw it followeth according to the diuiſion made in the ſecond verſe of 
                  The ſenſe of verſe 9. this ſecond part of this Chapter, how Samſon went to agree with the woman, and his father and mother with him, as we heard they did in the ſeuenth verſe: and that his father, when they came thither, did that which pleaſed him in concluding the match with her. For that is the ſenſe of this firſt of theſe verſes: to wit, that where it is ſaid, he did ſpeake the things that pleaſed Samſon, we ſhould vnderſtand that to be meant of his father, that he talked with the woman to the good contentment and liking of his ſonne: alſo heere is ſhewed, what fell out at this their next going vp in the way when he went to receiue her, and this to the 11. verſe.
            But here I muſt a little ſtay the reader, by occaſion of a doubt ariſing out Verſe 8. of the 8. verſe, to wit, in that it is ſaid, Samſon went aſide to the carkeis of the lion, and tooke hony out of it. For ſeeing he was a Nazarite, as appeareth by cap. 13. 5. and chap. 16. 17. it may bee thought that Samſon either ſinned againſt the rule of the Nazarite, or elſe had a ſpeciall diſpenſation to breake it. Touching the rule, wee reade Numb. 6. and particularly verſ. 6. that it forbad comming at a carkeis. And yet we ſhould be vncharitable in caſting the blame of wilfull finne vpon Samſon, and as raſh in iuſtifying any diſpenſation, ſeeing neither of both are mentioned or intimated in the text. The anſwere is, Samſon neither ſinned againſt the rule, nor was diſpenſed with by God: and the reaſon is, He was tied to no ſuch rule. And ſeeing it will be demanded ſtill, How then could he be a Nazarite? I anſwer againe, that we muſt make a difference betweene Nazarites: Some were borne Nazarites, and by an immediate ordaining of God, ſeparated to this profeſſion. Others voluntarily vndertook the vow according to the Ceremonie. Both ſorts had ſomething common, both the profeſſion of a more ſtrict and pure worſhip of God, and ſome ceremonies annexed thereto. But they differed herein, that as the former ſort were neceſſarilie tied to that eſtate, and that for their whole life, ſo they had priuiledge allowed them to be exempt from ſome

ceremoniall obſeruances which the vowed Nazarites were tied to. For as the vowed Nazarite was voluntarie, and for a certaine ſpace of time onely, ſo for that time he was bound indifferently to all the Articles mentioned in Numbers. Samſon then (I ſay) was no voluntarie or vowed, but a borne and ordained Nazarite extraordinarily. And therefore though it be probable that hee was tied to more then his long haire, as namely to abſtaine from ſtrong drinke, (as his mother was) yet it is cleere that he was free from this ceremonie of touching the dead and ſundrie other. Of the like ordination was Iohn Babtiſt, as by the text appeareth, Luk. 1. 15. This anſwere is applied by them who hold our Sauiour to haue been a Nazarite (not by the place of his education onely, Matth. 2. 23. but by profeſſion alſo) to ſalue the obiections of his drinking wine, comming to the dead, &c. but how ſoundly I will not here enquire: onely this I ſay, if that could be proued that our Sauiour was a profeſſed Nazarite, then thoſe obiections hinder nothing, becauſe they onely oppugne the vowed, not the ordained Nazarites. But of this, thus much. Now I proceed to the doctrine.
            Firſt, here by Samſons father and mother going with him to conclude the mariage, it teacheth, that when parents ſee that the match which their children Doct. vpon iuſt occaſion propound to them, and deſire their conſent in, is of the Lord, and pleaſing to him, they ought (as I ſaid before) to be ready to further and accompliſh it in the beſt manner, and with the beſt conditions that they can: ſo their children may in reuerence deſire them, that ſeeing God doth allow and bleſſe them herein, that they would not hinder them. But if they make their matches ſo that their parents and guardians may not, neither dare be ſeene in them, as it is a great blemiſh to themſelues, ſo it is iuſt that they bee both held backe by them, and their attempt ſtaied therein; let them therefore ſubmit themſelues to the Lord, and giue their parents the honour that is due to them, leſt they make them moſt ſtrangers in this work, who ſhould be chiefe doers in the ſame, and by that they may know, that their proſpering therein ſhall be ſmall. But for this point, let the reader ſee that which I haue noted of Caleb, chap. 1.
            After Samſon and the woman had agreed about their mariage, hee went againe afterward and tooke her to bee his wife: and what fell out in the Verſe 9. 10. way as he went is ſhewed. By the firſt of theſe two, in that he married her 20▪
                afterward and tooke her for his wife, when he had now firſt conſented with her to liue together as man and wife, and that with his parents agreeing thereto; all theſe doe proue that the vniting of one man and one woman Doct. together in mariage, is a ſolemne ordinance of God, and appointed by him, and ſo it is likewiſe bleſſed by him, where hee is obeyed in it: and that the looſe and brutiſh liuing together otherwiſe, (as one man with many women, &c.) is moſt vnfitting a Chriſtian, and contrary to God; ordinance, and bringeth foorth moſt noiſome euils: euen as the parting and ſeparation of one of the married perſons from the other, ſaue for adulterie, is odious. And this of the firſt of the two points be ſaid briefly, ſeeing occaſion is offered to ſpeake more particularly of it elſewhere.
            The ſecond thing in theſe two verſes, to wit, what fell out in the way as he went, was this that Samſon went aſide, as he trauailed to his marriage, to ſee the carkeis of the lion which he had rent in peeces, and what was become

of it. And hee found in the body of it, a ſwarme of Bees and hony: a ſtrange thing to behold, for thoſe creatures loue the ſweeteſt places, and not thoſe which are vnſauourie. But the Lord had ſo brought it to paſſe, and that his father and mother ſhould eate thereof, and yet not know from whence it came, to the end that it might miniſter matter for the riddle that he propounded at his mariage, whereby occaſion aroſe to him of purſuing the Philiſtims. Thus God prepared the hony in the body of the lion, and directed him to finde, eate, and giue it to be eaten.
            By this that I haue now ſet downe in theſe two verſes, wee may ſee, that Doct. 2 in verſe 10. 11. when God pleaſeth either to puniſh or bleſſe, as here hee did both, (for hee intended a bleſſing to Iſrael, and a puniſhment to the Philiſtims) he will vſe meanes for the effecting of the ſame, though wee ſee not alwaies how, and extraordinarily, rather then they ſhall faile, and not come to paſſe. And ſo when he purpoſed to deliuer his people out of Pharaos bondage, and none Exod. 14. 12. ſaw how it could bee, they being hedged in (as it were) on euery ſide, hee made a way (we ſee) for them thorow the red ſea, as it had been by the high way, and drie ground.
            Euen ſo be we perſwaded, that he hauing appointed and purpoſed to do vs good in this life, who feare him, and to bring vs well through all difficulties, as he hath promiſed, and to finiſh our courſe with ioy; he will moſt certainly doe it, though wee ſee not how, but it may ſeeme oft times to vs impoſſible, for he hath many waies to bring his will to paſſe. Euen as hee did, when he deliuered Eliſha the Prophet from the armie of the Aramites, by an 2. King 6. 17. armie of heauenly ſouldiers, and when hee promiſed great plentie of corne by his Prophet on the next day, when yet at that preſent they were almoſt famiſhed, he did (I ſay) performe it, and that by the meanes of foure leprous perſons, in ſo much that a great man neere to the King affirming, that although 2. King. 7. 16. God ſhould raine downe corneout of heauen, it could not bee ſo; yet he liued and ſaw it ſo, though he liued not to eate of it, euen as the Prophet had told him. And ſo be we perſwaded that whatſoeuer he ſeeth expedient for vs, he will bring it to paſſe, though we ſee not how, hee hath waies enough; and that which he doth not for vs, wee muſt willingly ſubmit our ſelues to want and forgoe, as knowing that it were not good for vs to haue it granted. Whereas wee in our troubles and feares either about grace to bee Note. granted vs, or deliuerances to bee wrought for vs, doe either ſmoother our faith, by feare and deſpaire of helpe, or breake foorth into open murmuring and diſcontentednes, which in time cauſeth vs to ſhift and make way for our ſelues by vſing vnlawfull remedies. And by this meanes we double our affliction, both for meaſure and continuance oftentimes: or elſe ſhake it off, as the aſſe doth his burthen, not ſtaying Gods leiſure, till hee caſe vs: ſo that when the next commeth, we are vnfitter for it, then for the former. Now if we (being in our ſelues moſt ſhiftleſſe) could behold that alſufficiencie of Note. power which is in God, and the varietie of meanes which his wiſedome can worke by, for our deliuerance, this confuſed and diſtruſtfull behauiour of ours ſhould in great part be cured. Eſpecially, ſeeing whatſoeuer power he hath in him to ſuccour vs, his diſtreſſed ſeruants, his loue ſetteth him on worke to ſhew and exerciſe it, and all for our exceeding benefit and good. Dauid ſaw not before Sauls comming againſt him, by what meanes God 1. Sam. 23. 27.
               
would reſcue him, neither was it needfull ſeeing he had promiſed ſo to doe: howbeit he waiting by faith the iſſue, he was deliuered, and ſo ſaw how the Lord wrought it for him: and thereby gathered, that ſo hee was able and ready to do often in the like danger, rather then his promiſe ſhould faile and Note. be falſified. Thus wee ſhould hearten on our ſelues to waite with pacience through all difficulties, till we haue finiſhed our courſe with ioy.
            And in that he tolde not this either to his father or mother, which was 2. very like he ſhould haue done, (it being a ſtrange thing to finde honey in the carkeis of a Lyon) and we are all giuen to tell ſuch things to our friends, as are ſeldome heard of, and are like to be wondred at, as newes very welcome to them, yet I ſay, in that he ſignified it not vnto them, it was wiſely done of him to conceale it, whether he then thought to make a riddle of it, or no, it is vncertaine, as after he did: for then, if he had told it to them, it might eaſily haue been knowne to many, and ſo it had been like to haue by ſome meanes been diſcloſed to and among the Philiſtims, as wee ſee it was afterward, when he tolde it to his wife onely. It confirmeth vs in the former doctrine out of the ſeuenth verſe: namely, that we be very wary to conceale things that need not bee vttered, eſpecially ſecrets, when wee ſee no good can come thereby, but by concealing them there may. And becauſe it is not eaſie for a man to foreſee euery inconuenience which may come of vnſeaſonable ſpeech; therefore it is the wiſeſt way for vs to cut off al talke, whereof wee ſee not ſome good reaſon to moue and warrant vs to vtter it. Now if there grow any inconuenience thereby, notwithſtanding our care and reſpectiuenes, wee ſhall haue the leſſe to accuſe vs, as we ſee in Dauids fact, 1. Sam. 21. I meane in his requiring the ſhew bread and armour of Golia 
               1. Sam. 21. 6, 9. from Abimilech in the preſence of Doeg, neceſſitie draue him to aske it, and Chriſt defended the fact, and therefore hee had leſſe cauſe to bee troubled, though much hurt aroſe by it. To them that obiect, that Samſon tolde the riddle to his wife, which was more dangerous then to haue opened it to his parents: be this taken for an anſwere, that he offended greatly in ſo doing. And we may learne by it, that we may poſſibly ſhew wiſdome in ſome part of our life, whereof yet wee may faile, without great heed taking, afterward.
            We haue heard how Samſon went to take his wife, and what fell out by Verſ. 11. to 20. The ſumme generally to ver. 20 the way. Now followeth the third point (in this ſecond part of the Chapter) to wit, their meeting to accompliſh his mariage, and what things were done thereat, and they were eſpecially foure. The firſt, he made the Philiſtims a feaſt, in this verſe. Secondly, what the Philiſtims did to him: verſe 12. That is, they prouided thirtie companions to be with him; Thirdly, Samſon propounded a riddle to them, with condition what they ſhould haue, if they could tell him the meaning of it, within ſeauen dayes, and contrariwiſe: and this to the middeſt of the 15. verſe. Laſtly, how they laboured to know the meaning of it, but could not, till the ſeauenth day, and then they tolde it to him, hauing gotten it of his wife before: and this to the twentieth verſe.
            The firſt of theſe 4. things mentioned in this verſe, was, that he made 
                  The ſenſe of verſ 11. particular.
                them a feaſt: his father going downe with him againe, (no doubt) to be a comfort to him in that ſtrange place, and to countenance him, as I haue noted

twice before in verſe 6. &c. And it is added, that Samſon did that according to the cuſtome of the place, for ſo the yong men were wont to doe at their mariage. Here by this cuſtome (not vnlawfull in it ſelfe) we ſee it hath been an vſuall thing to call friends together at ſuch times of marrying their kindred, to feaſt and reioyce one with another. It hath been the practiſe of the good, as well as of the bad: neither is it our commendation, ſimply to ſhunne the ciuill or indifferent actions of common men, and the multitude; but this indeed is to bee looked to, that wee conforme not our ſelues to the euill manner of vſing them in the age we liue in, Rom. 12. And Rom. 12. 2. as for this one cuſtome and faſhion of feaſting, as Samſon vſed it, ſo Chriſt was preſent at a marriage feaſt in Canan a towne of Galile, where many Ioh. 21. were met together, and he approued their feaſting.
            And as for the bad, Laban made a feaſt, and called together the men of the place, when he gaue his daughter to Iacob to wife. So alſo did the young Gen. 29. 22. men of the Philiſtims vſe to doe at ſuch times. The action therefore hauing been the practiſe as well of the godly as of bad people, in it ſelfe is indifferent to be vſed; and as it may be done lawfully, ſo it may alſo be omitted, becauſe wicked men haue vſed it, who doe nothing well: and therefore as it falleth out for the moſt part, that the greateſt number that meete at feaſts are none of the beſt, it may be ſeene oft times more conuenient to omit the meetings of ſuch, leſt much wickedneſſe ſhould be committed by them, and lewdnes in tongue and behauiour, to the diſhonour of God, which is the more eaſily done, when they haue well filled themſelues.
            Or if it cannot be altogether let paſſe, yet a ſmaller company would bee gathered, eſpecially of ſuch of our friends as are of the beſt ſort of people; and for the other, if they muſt needes be there, they ſhould ſo bee placed at the table, that as few of them be ſet together as may be, and that it bee obſerued, that they may bee ſoone interrupted and broken off, (by ſuch as ſit neere and are better minded and wiſe withall) if they ſhould fall in any offenſiue behauiour. As for our Sauiour Chriſt, hee gaue good example at the marriage where he was preſent, and took occaſion, by the miracle which he wrought there, to hold them occupied in good talke, and to turne the people away from the contrary; and we as farre as we may ſee our companie to be to good ends, as that we may be like to doe good, or take good ſo and thereafter to vſe it. And this be ſaid of this point here, hauing before touched it, and hauing occaſion to ſpeake fullier of it afterwards.
            Further, by this that is ſaid here, that the young men vſed to make a feaſt 2 at their marriage, and therefore Samſon did ſo, we ſee the force and ſtrength of cuſtome how it preuaileth, and is as the Medes and Perſians law was, that is, not eaſily broken. Such a cuſtome that was, that the people at their deſire had a priſoner deliuered & ſet free to them at the Paſſeouer: by meanes whereof they asked Barrabas a murtherer, rather then Ieſus. Such cuſtomes Matth. 27. 15. as are bad are continued ſtill, whereby diſorder and reuell is maintained, euen fruits of darkneſſe, into the which the people is ſo reuited, that though the preaching of the Goſpel hath bewraied and brought to light the ſhame and odiouſnes of them, yet they can hardly bee broken almoſt in any places. As the prophane ſpending the greateſt part of the Lords Sabbath in carding, drinking, feaſting, and ſuch like abomination, and other ſuch, in

euery countrey after the manner thereof, making it a day rather held to Bacchus, or Saturne, then the Lord. And the ſame may be ſaid of the riotous and intemperate miſpending of the twelue daies, and certaine other daies in the yeere, farre worſe paſſed, then (I ſay not Papiſts) but euen Heathens oft times vſe to doe. And except the putting downe of Faires, that were wont to be kept on the Sabbath (which with much ado were ſome yeeres agone aboliſhed) I remember not many more ill cuſtomes ouerthrowne and put out of vſe. As for the ouerthrowing of many blind, dangerous, and diſordered Alehouſes, (for there is vſe of the honeſt, for the neceſſitie of trauellers) it hath indeed very commendably been gone about by ſome honourable and worſhipfull perſons; but yet through the vpholding of them by ſome gentlemen and others, to their ſmall credit, they remaine ſtill, to the working of much euill and miſchiefe thereby in moſt places. As for thoſe that are good cuſtomes (to ſay no more of the bad) they ought; and other that be not hurtfull, may be ſuffered and continued. And in that reſpect (I take it) did Samſon here, after the manner of the young men, make a feaſt to the Philiſtims.
            But to proceed, they being on both ſides met at the marriage, I meane Verſ. 12. 
               Samſon and his friends on the one part, and the Philiſtims on the other, the holy ſtorie ſheweth what the Philiſtims did: to wit, they tooke thirtie yong men (for they had choice enough) but the friends of Samſon being ſtrangers there, could not command ſuch a number, neither is it like that the Philiſtims would haue liked it: ſo that it cannot be meant of Samſons friends, that they took thirtie men to countenance and honour him, but of the Philiſtims, who when they ſaw what manhood and ſtomacke was in him, and that they had neede to beware of him, they gaue him thirtie men (pretending they did it to honour him) to attend vpon him, which indeed they did for feare of him.
            In theſe Philiſtims we may obſerue two things: the one is, their policie: the other, the care that they had of, and ouer thēſelues, when they thought there was danger towards them, and cauſe of feare. Policie (I ſay) was in them, for that when they feared, they would not ſeeme ſo to doe, but couered it with a faire cloake, namely in appointing thirtie companions to him, as if they meant to ſet him foorth and countenance him. This the light of nature did teach them, to keepe themſelues from danger and harme. Neither were the meanes euill that they vſed for that purpoſe, though it muſt be granted, that it was all one to them whether they were or no.
            So much more we being more cleerely and fully inlightned by the written word of God, may in great perill not ſeeme to feare, when it can doe vs 
                  Doct. 1. no good (but it may put vs to reproch:) but vſe ſuch lawfull helpe, as wee haue at hand, to repell the ſame, though we let it not appeare. Euen as Paul did, who when hee was in great ieoberdie of his life by the Phariſies and Sadduces, and like to bee rent in peeces betwixt them, hee bewraied not to them what hee feared, but vſed that helpe that God ſhewed him, that was this policie, that he ſaid with a loud voyce among them that he was a Phariſie: Act 23. 6. whereat there was a ſudden diuiſion of his aduerſaries, the one ſect being againſt the other; and the Phariſies holding with Paul againſt the Sadduces. Onely let no man (by this that I haue ſaid) iuſtifie his ſhifting and

vnlawfull policie in bringing himſelfe out of trouble: among which ſort of ſhifters at this day, the moſt bold and dangerous and diueliſh is this treacherous crue of Ieſuites, who when they haue brought themſelues into the briars by their villanous doings, ſeeke to relieue themſelues by lyings, equiuocations, and periurie, or flying (if they can) from comming to their anſwere.
            The other thing to bee noted in theſe Philiſtims, was their wiſe care to 2. keepe themſelues from hurt by Samſon, when they ſaw him to be a man to be feared, and this they ſhewed herein, that they ſet thirtie men of their own countrey, as if they would haue honoured him, (much like Herod, who pretended that he would honour Chriſt, when he ſought to kill him) whereas Matth. 2. 8. they intended no ſuch thing, but to ſet them as watchmen to take heede that no hurt might be wrought by him againſt them. And as they did by the light of nature thus prouide for their owne ſafetie, ſo wee ought wiſely and warily to preuent danger, where it is comming towards vs: and to bee wiſe as ſerpents and beware of men, as well as to be innocent like doues. Matth. 10. 16.
            
            We haue great cauſe in theſe daies to beware whom wee truſt, and to whom we commit ourſelues by giuing credit to them. Our Sauiour hath left vs a good example behinde him, whereby wee may take heed how farre we commit our ſeiues to men. For when he was at Ieruſalem at the Paſſeouer, Ioh. 2. 24. many beleeued in him (it is ſaid) when they ſaw his miracles that hee did. But Ieſus did not commit himſelfe to them, ſeeing he knew what was in them. Teaching vs to be circumſpect, how farre wee truſt them, whom Note. we doe not ſufficiently know. Many ſmart for that they are too light of credit: namely, for that when they heare faire words, and conditions, they are ready thereupon to put themſelues into their hands. Whereas they ſhould know this, that they who are not faithfull to God, will not bee faithfull to men, as Papiſts and looſe profeſſors. It hath been many mens vtter vndoing, who haue too raſhly put their eſtate and goods into the hands of them who haue made faire ſhewes of truſtines of friendſhip toward them. Other haue ſuſtained the like by their owne children, hauing a better opinion of them through blind ſelfeloue, then there was cauſe; and truſting them with almoſt all that they had, haue loſt all through their owne folly. The ſame I may ſay of vnwiſe and vndiſcreet lenders, and ſuch as haue vnaduiſedly brought themſelues into danger by ſuertiſhip, till with their loade of griefe they haue ended their miſerable daies in priſon or penurie.
            But none are either more commonly deceiued, or more to be pitied, then ſillie and ſhiftleſſe damſels and maides, who care not into whoſe hands they put themſelues, till they complaine and crie out, that they haue not found truth and faithfulnes at their hands, who promiſed them great matters of quietnes, and liuing at eaſe: who haue in a ſhort time groſſely broke their couenant with them, by moſt contentious and vnquiet liuing, or left them with their charge to ſhift for themſelues: of which woful perſons England is full. For I muſt ſay the truth, that in moſt places there are few faithful people to be found. Let vs make the more account of them that are ſuch, and for the reſt, I ſay with our Sauiour, let the dead bury the dead: and let them match together, ſeeing they will needes doe ſo, who are both of them vnfaithfull. And ſeeing (in this ſubtile vizard age) we can hardly diſcerne oft

times betweene one and other, I meane betwixt the truſtie, and the deceiuer; let vs with Paul pray God to deliuer vs from hauing to doe with ſuch 2. Theſ. 3. 2. as haue neither faith, nor fidelitie in them. And ſo farre as by our narrow obſeruation we can finde any hollowneſſe or falſehood in ſuch as pretend the contrary, (as for others, they are more eaſily auoided) let it be a watchword for caution in time to come. All is not gold that gliſtereth: faire words are fit to beguile euen good people, whoſe innocencie makes them thinke that other are as themſelues. But with the breaſt-plate of righteouſneſſe, (which ſerueth to keepe them from being offenſiue) let them vſe their head-peece, I meane wiſedome and preuention of danger, that they may be defended from hurt by others. All know that none leſſe deſerue wrong then the harmeleſſe: yet none we ſee daily are more vſually beguiled, and made a pray to the ſpoiler for want of circumſpection.
         
         
            THE SEVENTIE SIXE SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               Verſ. 13. And Samſon ſaid vnto them, I will now put foorth a riddle vnto you: if you can certainly declare it me within the ſeuen daies of the feaſt, and finde it out, then I will giue you thirtie ſheetes, and thirtie change of garments:
               
               14. But if you cannot declare it me, then ſhall ye giue me thirtie ſheetes, and thirtie change of raiments. And they anſwered him, Put foorth thy riddle, that wee may heare it.
               
               15. And he ſaid vnto them, Out of the eater came meate, and out of the ſtrong came ſweetnes: and they could not in three daies expound the riddle.
               
               16. And when the ſeuenth day was come, they ſaid vnto Samſons wife, Entice thine husband, that he may declare vs the riddle, leſt wee burne thee and thy fathers houſe with fire: Haue ye called vs to poſſeſſe vs? Is it not ſo?
               
               17. And Samſons wife wept before him, and ſaid, Surely thou hateſt me, and loueſt me not: for thou haſt put foorth a riddle vnto the children of my people, and haſt not told it me. And he ſaid vnto her, Behold I haue not told it my father, nor my mother, and ſhall I tell it thee.
               
               18. Then Samſons wife wept before him ſeuen daies while their feaſt laſted: and when the ſeuenth day was come, he told her, becauſe ſhe was importunate vpon him: ſo ſhe told the riddle to the children of her people.
               
               19. And the men of the citie ſaid vnto him the ſeuenth day before the Sunne went downe, What is ſweeter then hony? and what is ſtronger then a lion? Then ſaid he vnto them, If yee had not plowed with my heiffer, you had not found out my riddle.
               
               20. And the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon him, and he went downe to Askelon and ſlew thirtie men of them, and ſpoiled them, and change of garments vnto them,
                  
                  which expounded the riddle: and his wrath was kindled, and he went vp to his fathers houſe.
               
               21. Then Samſons wife was giuen to his companion, whom he had vſed as his friend.
               
            
            
               NOw followeth the third thing that was done at the Verſ 13. 14. marriage, and that was the riddle that Samſon put foorth to the Philiſtims there met together: the which courſe was in great wiſedome taken by Samſon, if it bee well conſidered. For if the cauſe bee ſought, why Samſon propounded this riddle, I anſwere: It was a pleaſant whetting of their wits, and miniſtred occaſion of mirth to ſet them about the inuenting and ſearching out the meaning of it, which was hard and difficult, that ſo in the meane while they might bee kept from manifolde offendings. And it was without ſuſpition to the Philiſtims of any euill intended by Samſon. And hee ſeeing that the ſeuen daies continue while the feaſt laſted (for ſo their manner there was to doe) was a long time for him and his friends to be in company and conuerſant among Idolaters, without much ſinne and offending God, hee could not haue taken a ſafer nor better courſe, then ſo to ſet them a worke and occupie their heads.
            As for religious talke there was no place for it: to haue fallen into that, had been the next way to haue ſet them altogether by the eares at the firſt. And yet by the propounding of the riddle, they were held greatly within compaſſe from lewd and wicked talke, and ill behauiour, which could hardly haue been borne by Samſon and his friends: the which yet had otherwiſe ſo abounded with much other diſorder, ſuch as falleth out at thoſe kinds of meetings, (where yet one would thinke there ſhould be leſſe feare of it) as would haue bred moſt bitter contentions among them; the which by this wiſedome that hee ſhewed in putting out the riddle, hee ſhunned and auoided.
            And by this practiſe of his wee may learne, when we be pent in companie, Doct. where no good things haue intertainment, but euill many waies is to be feared, (which companies are too common) how to bethinke our ſelues what is beſt to be done of vs. If it may bee, let ſuch companies be turned from altogether, eſpecially if they be our betters, who will take more libertie to offend, and yet beare it more hardly to bee reſiſted, or ſpoken againſt: whereby our griefe will be the greater, when we ſee no meanes to keep our conſciences quiet and peaceable, but that we muſt haue part in the ſin. But if it fall out ſometimes (as it may doe, that wee bee brought by Gods prouidence into ſuch companies by neceſſitie, when we cannot preuent them, if they be ſuch as we may be bold to ſpeake to them, they being of no wealthier ſort then we, or not much aboue vs, there is the leſſe cauſe of feare, or of any ſuch great danger to fall out: but yet euen there we muſt take heed that wee iumpe not, neither fall in with them, to iuſtifie and conſent to their offenſiue talke and behauiour: but if religious communication will not bee borne nor brooked of them, ſome other things indifferent (and yet not impertinent nor vnprofitable) would be thought vpon of vs, and miniſtred by

vs, to ſtay and preuent worſe, as fit occaſion may be taken thereof. And if ye aske what, I ſay, for example; the mentioning of the death of any among vs, and namely ſuch as are of note: and of any iudgements and plagues of God either preſent or lately fallen out about vs, as burnings, ſtrange death, and namely vpon drunkards; alſo the execution of malefactors, and ſuch like: which matters will be better borne to be talked of, then things meerly diuine: and yet by occaſion of ſpeaking of them, not onely ill communication may be kept away and auoided, but better alſo, and that which is to edification, may the eaſilier come in place. For to an honeſt Chriſtian man it is a great griefe to loſe and bee cut off from his ſweete words, which flow from the abundance of the heart. But ſeeing this muſt bee borne oft Pro 23. 8. times, and worſe alſo at the hands of ſuch as are of wealth and power in the companie being ill minded, there; if we cannot reſtraine them, neither may haue place or liberty to ſpeake, when God is diſhonoured by them, in cauilling againſt the truth, railing vpon Gods people, or ſlandering the innocent, or by ſwearing, filthie talke, or any ſuch like; the beſt way will be to depart out of the company, or to giue no eare to them, if we may turne to other who are neere vs, or to ſhew diſlike in our countenance; or if they will needs aske our opinion, at the leaſt to ſhew our diſſent from them, but yet in meekneſſe and in a peaceable manner. But if the caſe be ſo, that wee may rebuke ſuch vnfruitfull workes of darkneſſe, God giuing vs occaſion iuſtly, let vs not carrie our zeale in our boſomes, as a ſword in a ruſtie ſcabberd, but vnſheath it to the defence of Gods truth, and his religion, leſt if we hold our peace in ſuch a caſe, the ſtones of the ſtreete will crie: which point hath elſewhere been opened.
            
               Samſon, as it appeareth, tels them, he would propound his riddle to them ſo, that if they could tell it, they ſhould haue thirtie changes of apparell, and peeces of linnen, whether ſheetes or ſhirts, &c. and if they could not tell it within ſeuen dayes, then they ſhould giue as much to him: which was a kinde of wager laying, and their ſport was for loſſe on the one ſide, & gaine on the other. Which kinde of dealing, I meane after this manner of wagering for gaine, (ſeeing he had his direction from God therein, and warrant in ſpeciall to practiſe it) cannot be counted vnto him for ſin, neither ought any to ſtumble at it.
            I might here take occaſion to ſpeake largely of the like actions and exerciſes among mē to that which was in this place vſed of Samſon, but I ſhould be too long. This is all that I will ſay, that as the moſt handle the matter, they doe grieuouſly ſinne againſt God: as when men play or wager either in a couetous deſire to winne, or when they are angry and paſſionate in playing or wagering; or when they ſweare and blaſpheme the name of God in their play; or when they fall a quarelling, or goe together by the eares amidſt their paſtimes and wager-laying; or when they are immoderate in their playing, ſpending whole nights and dayes therein, neglecting in the meane time the neceſſary duties of their vocation, and the moſt neceſſary duty of all others the ſeruice of Almighty God: of which ſort alas there are too many who ſpend moſt of their time in bowling allyes, and at trucksbettings, and ſwearing vpon euery caſt; prophane men, that make ſo little account of their time as to paſſe it away ſo idly; let them take heed that they

be not driuen as many haue been in time to deſire one houre to repent, and yet goe without it: or laſt of all when they thus play or wager away all their maintenance. And for ſuch kind of gameſters who haue not money competentlie to maintaine their familie, much leſſe for the reliefe of others, though Paul biddeth them that ſtole to ſteale no more, but labour with their hands, that they may haue wherewith to helpe the poore (for which two ends it chiefely ſerueth) and yet haue enough to play away, let them with the reſt of their companions take heed, that among many other puniſhments of God, which they draw vpon themſelues, this be not alſo one and not the leaſt, that becauſe they loue paſtime they become poore men. And we may wel thinke that if God denie to clothe the bodies of ſuch with Prou 21. 17. apparrell (for rags are their liuerie) much leſſe will hee clothe their ſoules with grace here, or their perſons with glory hereafter, except they repent; which is not at commandement, nor eaſily found of ſuch.
            We haue heard of Samſons wagering with the Philiſtims in the former Doct. verſ. 14. verſe, and part of this: now it followes in the latter end of it how they gaue allowance thereto, and ſhewed their liking thereof, ſaying vnto him, Put forth thy riddle that we may heare it. And this ſheweth, how readily wicked men turne to heare euen the godly (whom otherwiſe they diſlike and ſcorne) when they ſpeake pleaſing things to them. Euen as Ieroboam King of Iſrael did greatly like Eliſha, and ſpake kindlie to him when hee did that which pleaſed him wel, in bringing the army of the king of Syria his enemie 2. King. 6. 21. as priſoners into his chiefe Citie Samaria, hoping that thereby hee might haue his will of them in putting them to the ſword. Oh when they fit their humour by words or deeds, they will change themſelues on ſudden toward them, and applaud them as if they were friends with them. And euen ſo is it with them in the conſtruing of thoſe actions that pleaſe them, ſuch I meane as whereby they receiue benefit and fauour or aduantage: for theſe, they ſhall be aduanced aboue the skyes: but let them therewith ioyne admonition and good counſell, or ſo much as the mildeſt repoofe, eſpecially if they take themſelues croſſed by them in their purpoſes of profit, pleaſure, or will, (although neuer ſo iuſtly,) then they are the worſt that goe vpon the earth, their goodneſſe is remembred no more. Yea and this which I ſay may be extended to the beſt Miniſters, who ſo long as the plauſiblenes of their gift doth hold the bad in any admiration or affection, will ſhew the greateſt ſignes of taking pleaſure and delight in their company. But let the Miniſter leaue tickling of their corrupt fleſh, and begin to ſearch them a little, or bewray their corruptions which were hidden from them before, oh then hee is bitter and irkeſome to their taſte, and becomes their enemie for telling Gal. 4. 16. them the truth, yea, then all his former deſert is vaniſhed with commendation and all: all which doe teſtifie too clearely, that they allow not of thoſe who are godlie, either Miniſters, or other for their goodneſſe, which ought chiefely to be regarded, but for other cauſes. This muſt further teach the beſt ſort to obſerue themſelues with the beſt circumſpection how far they goe in humoring the wicked, to wit, ſo far only as they keepe bounds, that is, ſpeake that which they may, for the turning them from euill, or drawing them to the liking of the beſt things by degrees, alwaies preſeruing entire their liberty in reprouing, without any iuſt cauſe of bluſhing. As for them

that will not admit of ſuch kind of dealing, but like onely to be flattered, let them know their ſtomacks are diſtempered, and they in a dangerous caſe, (when they can take no liking of any thing but fleſhly and ſenſuall) euen as they are who will ſerue their turnes by flattering them.
            Thus now of the firſt two things that were done at the feaſt, we haue Verſ. 15. heard, and of part of the third, to wit, that Samſon told them, he would put foorth a riddle to them, and how they readily apprehended it, and were willing to heare it. Now therefore in the former part of this verſe it is ſaid, he propounded it, which was the third thing done at the marriage, [Out of the eater came meate, and out of the ſtrong came ſweetneſſe.]
            
            The meaning is, that hony which is ſweet, and meate to eate, came out of the body of the Lyon who is ſtrong, which I open and vtter, ſeeing the ignorant not comparing this with the 19. verſe, would not elſe vnderſtand it. In this latter part of the verſe it is ſhewed, that when the Philiſtims had heard the riddle, they toyled themſelues, and went about by their owne labour and wit to finde out the meaning of it, but could not by their owne helpe. And this is the fourth thing done at the Marriage, namely, how they ſought to find it out, & how they preuailed. But of this more in due place.
            But I will firſt returne a little to Samſon, and ſhew how he made vſe of the Doct. verſ. 15. works of God, which he conſidered and obſerued. For to his great benefit he gathereth a riddle, and raiſed thereby a queſtion out of the worke of God in the Lyon, which was a meane to hold much euill from among them. So it behoueth vs to marke things that come to paſſe daily, (which all fall out by Gods prouidence) and his dealing in and by them, that wee may learne wiſedome thereby, and take good by them. For as Preachers gather ſimilies by the things they ſee, reade, and heare, to illuſtrate that which they vtter in their Sermons to the people; ſo ſhould we by Gods iudgements vpon the wicked, and his bleſſings on them that feare him, we (I ſay) ſhould learne to profit by them, and to ſhun the one, and to get our part in the other, ſo as all may ſay, we haue made right vſe of them in deed, whereas the moſt part take no good by either of both, nor by any other of his great works: my meaning is not, that the generall adminiſtration of God onely in the gouerning the creatures (which he hath admirably made) ought to be noted, but ſpecially the ends of the iuſt and vniuſt: that to the one there is alwaies peace, the other cannot, no not at death giue teſtimonie of a good eſtate, nor depart with hope, nor encourage his companions to be like him, but dieth either with a wounding, yet deſperate conſcience, or is ſtricken like Nabal, with a dead Palſie of inſenſibleneſſe.
            But to proceede with this act of Samſon, in the latter part of this verſe, we Doct. 2. ver. 15. ſee how by occaſion of this riddle much euill was ſtaied in that companie: for the time which would haue been otherwiſe very lewdly and ill beſtowed by the Philiſtims, was now buſilie taken vp about ſtudying and ſearching out of the meaning of the riddle: for ſo it is ſaid in the text, they could not in three dayes expound it. And hereby we may learne, that much ſinne may be ſtaied in meetings of friends & neighbours at feaſts and merrie makings, if there bee any perſons there, to intend and endeuour to preuent and ſtop it. And that is done by good and religious talke brought in, (if it will be admitted) or of things indifferent, yet tending to good ends:

(as I haue ſayd before) the which once occupying and poſſeſſing them, may put them out of their bad by as, which I haue oft ſeene done in my time: namely, much euill to haue been hindred, and put by, while by ſome in the company better minded then the reſt, it hath thus been preuented carefully and wiſely by chriſtian & ſauoury communication, and alſo kind vſage of them, and ſuch like good meanes.
            And to inlarge and vrge this matter a little further, of and about theſe Philiſtims, that as they were leaſt hurtfull when they were moſt buſie in ſeeking out the meaning of the riddle, ſo I may truly ſay this of the moſt of bad ſort, that the greateſt good they doe either in Church or common-wealth, or at leaſt, the ſeweſt euils that they commit, are when they be at their labour, and tyed to the works of their calling, euen as the theefe is faſt from doing of euill when his hands are tyed behind him. For though euill perſons are ill minded euen at their worke, and as ill occupied, if they haue opportunitie, ſeeing they are framed thereto, yet this can be nothing ſo much, as when oyle is put to the flame: for then they are at elbow roome, and much more when they be lincked in company with ſuch as be like themſelues, which is as far from that which ought to be, as may be, ſeeing euery part of a chriſtian mans life ſhould bring forth fruit. And it ought to be a great humbling of ſuch when God ſhall open their eyes, (vntill which time they dreame of no danger) that whereas they are commanded in all that they doe, or goe about, to honour the Lord, they yet ſhall be by manifold witneſſes brought againſt them, conuinced of the contrary. For whether they faſt or feaſt, labour or be idle, whether they be alone, or in company, or whatſoeuer they doe, yea euen when they worſhip God in the congregation, their hearts are luſting after ſome euill, and far from goodnes. Therefore happy are thoſe ſeruants, who when the Lord commeth may be found occupying their talent, ſo as they may be able to ſay, they haue been neither idle nor vnprofitable in the knowledge of the Lord Ieſus willingly and with good aduiſednes, but ſince they were taken into his ſeruice haue ſhewed themſelues faithful & diligent: (alway except infirmitie) and yet euen then they are alſo occupied, namely in reſiſting the ſame.
            Thus we ſee that for three dayes they did beat their brains about finding Verſ. 16. out the meaning of the riddle, and we read no other but that they do ſo the other three dayes, till the ſeuenth came. But very probable it is, that they deuiſed among themſelues (if need ſhould be) that they would vſe Samſons wife in the matter, to help them to come by the meaning of it, becauſe it is ſaid in this verſe, that they came to her, and vrged her ſore to get it of him on the ſeauenth day, when their hope otherwiſe was altogether paſt, although it is like they had ſore vrged her to doe ſo before, then (I ſay) they threatned that they would otherwiſe burne her fathers houſe. And further they made a great matter of that they ſhould loſe thereby if they could not ſhew the meaning of it, as if they had been vndone by it, (and all this they aſcribed to her bringing of him thither) if ſhe did not learne the meaning of the riddle, and tell it to them.
            And hereby their ſeeking to get it by ſhifts and guile, when they could Doct. not finde it out by coniecturall wit, and deliberation, wee may ſee how like to theſe Philiſtims the moſt part of people are: who for a while keepe compaſſe

in their matters they deale in, and in their behauiour, as though they were well ordered perſons; this (I ſay) many do for a time, while they haue no great prouocation nor temptation to breake out, but if they doe like ſtormes and tempeſts ariſe to ſtirre and diſquiet them; loe, then they appeare in their colour, and make themſelues knowne what they are, and what little gouernment they haue of themſelues. Saul when Dauid being purſued of him, ſhewed him plainly, that hee had ſuch aduantage againſt him, that hee could haue killed him, ſpake mildly and kindly to him: but 1. Sam. 24. 18. when he had thoughts put into his head, that Dauid ſought his life, then he was moſt ſpitefully exaſperated and incenſed againſt him.
            So in another kinde, while Ananias and Saphira his wife kept their poſſeſſions in their hands, there was no complaint made of or againſt them, neither were they accuſed to haue liued offenſiuely: but when the Church was in need, and they for praiſe of men would doe as other did, according 
                  Acts 5. 2. &c. to the Apoſtles perſwaſion, that is to ſay, relicue the poore, and ſo proceeded to ſell ſome part of their lands, then they began to diſtruſt that they ſhould haue enough, and of a couetous minde kept away part of the price that they ſold it for, and yet would make a ſhew to giue it all, ſwearing falſely thereunto. So many among vs liue peaceably, innocently, and vnoffenſiuely, as honeſt neighbours, and well liking religion for a time, who yet in trials, and yet theſe not great, & particularly in matters of money or money worth, bewray that they are to be commended for none of all theſe ſhewes of goodneſſe, but lay foorth themſelues in contrary colours. Much like to that which Satan ſpake of Iob, (though amiſſe, and in another caſe) Touch 
               Iob 2. 5. 
               him, and he will curſe thee to thy face. And we may almoſt binde it for true, that if a man being laid to the touchſtone of gaine, eſpecially when no man knoweth what he doth, doe approue himſelfe conſcionable, he is an honeſt Note. man indeed. And as the Philiſtims did here fall to ſhifts, vnlawfull meanes, crueltie, and many other euill waies, who firſt did not ſo. In like manner we ſee among ourſelues, that ſome will ſhew themſelues as faire chapmen as may be, like the bargaine very well, and boaſt they will not take good gaine tenne pound, &c. for it againe: alſo they will agree vpon couenants, ſeale the writings, take witneſſes, appoint the day of payment or deliuerie; and what ſhould I ſay more? yet let the ware or merchandiſe in the meane ſeaſon waxe cheaper then was ſuppoſed, then begins the franke buyer to ſhrinke, palter, and ſhift diſhoneſtly for himſelfe: And ſo doth the ſeller commonly, if the price riſe any thing: whereas they bought and ſold before hand, pretending they were reſolued vpon whatſoeuer euent to reſt ſatisfied; if there were loſſe, to depend vpon God for reſtitution, and not to ſhrinke backe: Pſal. 15. 4. if gaine; yet to confeſſe it equall and iuſt, to yeeld, and forgoe it without grudging, ſeeing God hath caſt it vpon the partie. And the ſame humour is bewraied in ſuch ſellers, as comming ſhort of the Note. price they would haue, yet being compelled to deliuer the commoditie, do change and impaire the qualitie, and goodneſſe of it, or cut it ſhort in meaſure, or vſe other men gripingly, to make themſelues amends: ſhewing plainly, that they regard not any thing in their contracts, ſaue onely to make a pray of their brother, and ſerue their turne by him, without conſcience, or ciuill reſpect of the Common-wealth. So alſo when men cannot enioy

their commodities, and thriue as they would, but decay, or feare that they Note. ſhall; or if things grow deare, or by an hundred like occaſions, they who for a time were of good carriage and behauiour, haue fallen to bad practiſes, and very offenſiue courſes to liue and bee maintained by, and thereby diſguiſe themſelues, as if they had neuer been well reported of, nor had been honeſt of behauiour. Yea, (and which is more) this taketh hold of many of the better ſort euen of Chriſtians, if they bee hardly laid at by trials, and prouocations, they too readily yeeld to do things euill and vnbeſeeming them. All which, if they will not ſee and ſo amend and reforme ſuch diſhoneſtie, when it appeares to men, or ſecret falſehood, though God onely ſee it, they ſufficiently bewray that God hath no pleaſure in them. But if any break out in their liues offenſiuely, and in ſuch a wicked ſort, whē they be not ſtrongly laid at and prouoked to doe ſo, they doe worſe then theſe Philiſtims, who were ſore prouoked and neerely driuen (as we haue heard) (the time drawing neere in which they muſt giue the meaning of the riddle, or elſe ſuffer inconuenience) before they fell to ſubtiltie and violence, and yet euen therin we ſee they diſguiſed themſelues groſſely.
            And heere it ſhall not bee amiſſe to marke the wrangling and diſhoneſt 2 contendings of theſe Philiſtims, when they ſaw they muſt loſe; and what commeth of playing for money, or wagering. Euen in this our age, wh
                  •
               re the vſers of them are of the ſame mould and nature with theſe Philiſtims, the ſame may be ſeene: Among many other euils, which I will not here ſet downe, theſe that are mentioned in this place, to haue been practiſed of them, are for the moſt part, companions with play and wagering. That is to ſay, diſcontentment, quarrelling, contentions, denying, and breaking the couenants, and ſeeking to doe this by force and by threatnings. As theſe here are not aſhamed to require that Samſon ſhould tell his wife the meaning of the riddle, that ſhe might declare it to them, which was as much as to goe from their couenant, and ſo with diſhoneſtie to deny it. But of theſe miſchieuous fruites futable to the cauſes, I ſaid ſomewhat before.
            But in the meane ſeaſon this further marke (for the aggrauating of the fact) how ſmall a matter it was, that they could haue loſt thereby: which I doe not ſo much ſpeake, as though I would cauſe maruciling, that the vncircumciſed and irreligious people ſhould contend for ſo ſmall a matter, who did the like throughout their life; but to the end I may fitly take occaſion hereby, iuſtly to charge numbers at this day, what a great and grieuous finne they commit, who fall out one with another for a leſſe matter then for a change or ſuite of apparell, when yet they profeſſe to bee guided by knowledge in the things which they doe. But it is leſſe marueile that they ſo breake out at their playing to winne one anothers goods, when as they will doe as much in their lawfull bargaines, that is, quarrell and ſtriue (that I ſay no worſe) for a groate or a ſhilling valew, as I ſaid in the former point in a more generall ſort.
            Oh the miſchiefe that many doe, yea and vpon a ſmall occaſion, and for a very trifle. For theſe were ready to burne downe the houſe and her, and all that was in the houſe, rather then they would loſe the valew of a ſuite of apparell: So, how much is ſpent by men in their rage and heate at the law for a twelue penny matter, though not ſo much for the thing, as the ſatisfying

of the will and ſpitefull ſtomacke of the man. Yea what vndoings withall of one another are ſeen, and that in one age after another, leſt they who come after, ſhould ſeeme to learne wiſedome by them that went before them; both wofull and long experience doe too lamentably teach. Beholde how great a fire a ſmall ſparkle kindleth: that is, when it falles vpon matter fit Iam. 3. 5. for it. This be ſaid for amplification of the former point, and of the whole for this time.
         
         
            THE SEVENTIE SEVEN SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               HOw earneſtly the Philiſtims vrged Samſons wife to get Verſ. 17. 18. 19. the meaning of the riddle of him, wee heard in the former Sermon: now the holy ſtorie ſetteth downe, what followed their threatnings of Samſons wife, that ſhe might get the meaning of the riddle at his hand. Firſt ſhe ſued to him in moſt earneſt maner to know The ſumme. it, and and required of him, that as hee loued her, hee would declare the meaning of it vnto her: who anſwered her by ſound reaſon, and gaue her a deniall. But ſhe not ſatisfied therewith, deſiſted not, but was importunate with him, and weeping to him the reſt of the ſeuen daies after the firſt three were paſt: for ſo are the words to be vnderſtood in the 18. verſe [ſhe wept before him the ſeuen daies, while the feaſt laſted:] then, I ſay, hee told her the meaning of the riddle on the ſeuenth day, and ſhe declared it to them, and they to Samſon, and ſo the controuerſie was ended.
            And firſt let vs marke the womans dealing with him: thou loueſt me not, Verſe 17. ſaith ſhe, but hateſt me. That had been hard indeed at the firſt entring into their marriage, though a thing which falles out often in the marriages of many vnaduiſed couples. But her words were not true, neither therefore by and by ſo to be beleeued, as ſhe vttered them, to wit, that hee loued her nor: yet if it had been ſo, wee all ſee had been guiltie of a foule and great crime: whereby before we proceede further, let vs note this: that in the iudgement of an heatheniſh woman, there ſhould bee no hatred but neere and vnfained loue betwixt couples in marriage: much more among Chriſtians ſhould it be verified, Neuer any man hated his owne fleſh, &c. Such an abſurditie (I ſay) is not to be admitted, but to be abhorred, which cauſeth (that I ſay no more) wearineſſe one of another. The falling out among thoſe is much more to their great ſhame: yea, and ſo is the diminiſhing of loue alſo which maketh ready way to hatred, ſeeing loue ought to be ſtrong Cant. 8. 7. as fire, which cannot be quenched with many waters. But they prouide ill

for this, who make their marriage (when yet it is void of grace, and the feare of God) the onely ground of louely and delightfull qualities: whereas the beſt things that are in it, beſide theſe, are flitting, and momentanie, and ſo is the loue yt is grounded on them: but the true and chriſtian loue is conſtant, and bringeth foorth much fruite. And this is a point of ſuch importance, that the Apoſtle includes all the husbands dutie therein, that hee loue his wife: as if he ſhould ſay, Where that is, other good things are not wanting. For hee being the head of relation and vnion, from whom muſt flow and deſcend to the wife all comfort and welfare; he muſt know, that he is thorough this loue, to communicate himſelfe to his wife, in all free, bountifull, and plentifull affection, and dutie: whereupon it followeth, that ſhe is to him againe in all reuerend ſubmiſſe, and yet cheerefull manner, fitted and framed. Yea ſo weightie a point is this of loue, (I ſpeake not of frothie, hot and fooliſh loue, which is vanitie of vanities) that except the heart of the man bee knit to the woman in the Lord, as to one not onely religious and well qualified, but alſo as the onely perſon, whom he can delight in, and liue within this ſpeciall kinde of fellowſhip: except this (I ſay) it is not the generall chuſing of a good woman, which will ſerue the turne, neither ſhall the ſeuerall and mutuall offices which concerne each party be euer currantly or conſtantly performed, much leſſe the whole life, and the eſtate of marriage bleſſed or comfortable.
            Further, by her weeping, when ſhe had no iuſt cauſe, wee may note the 
                  Doct. 2. ſubtiltie of a bad woman, to complaine bitterly of that, which her husband gaue her no occaſion of. For what though hee told her not that which hee ought not to doe, muſt he therefore hate her? and although the Philiſtims threatned her, did that proue that he hated her? I ſay therfore (to leaue her to her ſelfe, and ſuch as ſhe was) let no iuſt cauſe of vnkindneſſe be offered by a Chriſtian husband, and let it be well teſtified that he doth ſo, and if ſhe will then (as many women doe) diſſemble, and charge her husband vniuſtly, and knowes that ſhe doth ſo, and that onely to bring him to the bent of her bow, or to make her owne cauſe ſeeme tolerable and good, and ſo ſeeke (as ſhe did here) to draw him to inconuenience; if (I ſay) ſhe doe thus, let it make all Chriſtians wiſe and warie of ſuch fetches, and teach them that they in the meane while, giuing them all due that belongs to them, take heed that they be not ouercome of them that way, or in any ſuch caſe. As for example, if a ſpitefull woman will call her husbands loue into queſtion, becauſe hee will not reuenge the falſely ſuppoſed wrongs which another hath offered her, as ſhe out of her impotent humour pretendeth: Or if a proud woman will thus vpbraid her husband, for not ſatisfying her demaunds touching coſtly attire, or allowance of more money, then his eſtate will admit. So alſo if a iealous woman, to iuſtifie her baſe and vncomely conceits and behauiours to her husband, ſhall make her caſe good, by alleaging that he is cheerefull in other womens companies, though he do it with ſobrietie and warineſſe: In all theſe caſes let the husband ſee that he be innocent, and then beware how he proſtitute or imbondage himſelfe to ſuch of his wiues paſſions, leſt by yeelding a little, he loſe his libertie: but yet let it be done kindly and peaceably anger and bitternes.
            Now further, in that ſhe chargeth him that he loued her not, becauſe he 
                  Doct. 3.
               
tolde her not of that ſecret that in no equitie it concerned her to know; what reaſon had ſhee ſo to doe? But ſhee drew her reaſon from a wrong ground: that is, that women muſt know their husbands minde in al things, or elſe they thinke they loue them not. If this had been her error alone, I would haue ſaid no more of it. But behold, it is a fondnes and follie that poſſeſſeth many women. I confeſſe that in things common to them, and that concerne both, either pertaining to ſoule or bodie, or this preſent life, there be a free and readie communicating of all ſuch things betwixt them, for the woman hath a right therein, as well as the man: but ſeeing there are many things of fecreſie beſides them, which lie waightily vpon the huſband, but doe nothing concerne the wife, yea and dangerous to bee tolde foorth, and many women weake to conceale them, the husband in no wiſedome may impart them vnto her: and yet for all that, he ſhall not be iuſtly charged with want of loue. But more of this in the next Chapter (God willing) ſaue one.
            
               Samſon withſtood his wife at firſt by good reaſon, namely, this, that he had not told it to his father, nor mother, whom yet he loued dearely, and 4 long; ſhe was but new marryed to him, neither had he proofe of her faithfulnes, wiſedome, and ſilence; but otherwiſe his reaſon had not been good, ſeeing a man may impart ſome things to his wife rather then to them, and in denying her requeſt he did well. So we ſhould with reaſonable anſwers withſtand vnreaſonable ſutes, and then we ſhall ſhew ourſelues well fortified by the word and ſound reſolution out of a good conſcience, when we can giue a ſufficient reaſon of our refuſall: and otherwiſe we are as like to be drawne to ſinne, although we be not greatly ſollicited by the importunitie of others, our ſelues being vngrounded or vnarmed againſt the ſubtiltie and looſe diſpoſition of our owne hearts, though we thinke neuer ſo well of our owne ſtrength. But it muſt be granted, that the greateſt danger is when beſide our owne readineſſe and proneſſe to euill, we haue prouocations alſo, and thoſe ſtrong by inward temptations and outward occaſions. In auoyding and reſiſting both, Ioſeph hath giuen vs an example worthie our following, who was neither ſnared nor inticed inwardly, when he ſaw he might eaſily haue had ſuch deſire ſatisfied, neither being allured with words and flattery, did ſo much as hearken to his whoriſh miſtreſſe. Now as I haue ſpoken to men, ſo a word I will adde to women, and that is this, that if they were wiſe, they would learne to ſhake off the bold and ſhameleſſe ſutes of ſuch as ſhould dare demaund that of them, which were their diſhoneſtie, reproch, and vndoing, namely, to proſtitute their chaſtity to any of them at their pleaſures, who hauing once ſpoyled them, doe leaue them ſo. But of the fruit of dalliance more afterward.
            It is ſaid here that ſhe would not be anſwered ſo by him, but was importunate with him all the reſt of the ſeauen dayes of the feaſt, after the firſt Verſe 18. three, in which they could not finde out the meaning of the riddle, and ſo ſhe woon and obtained at his hands at laſt that which ſhe ſought: and ſo ſhee told it to her people and countrey men the Philiſtims. Theſe three things may be ſeene in this verſe diſtinctly, her importunate vrging of him, his impotencie in being ouercome of her, and her telling the expoſition of the riddle to the Philiſtims her people. And they miniſter ſeuerall inſtructions

to vs. Firſt by her importunate vrging of him, when no reaſon would anſwer her, wee may ſee, how vnreaſonable ſhameleſſe, and bold, and yea vnwearyed wicked perſons are in the following of their bad ſuites, ſo that they will neuer giue ouer, but thinke they ſhall preuaile by one meanes or other, at the leaſt, by their importunity: wee cannot doe the like, nor come neere them either in ſeeking to further goodnes by men, or in ſuing to God for it; but a ſmall denyall, and a weake withſtanding of vs by men, makes vs ſoone weary of our honeſt attempts, and ſo we may faint by and by, and in like manner giue ouer in making our requeſts to God, yea, and that for great matters if we preuaile not at once. How vnlike are we to the woman of Canaan, who would take no repulſe, nor be diſcouraged by the hardeſt anſwer that was giuen her. And our Sauiour hath taught vs, that if we were Luk 18. 8. importunate with him, we could not faile, nor goe without that which we a
                  •
               ke, our requeſts being made according to his will. And this is one ſpeciall point of wiſedome, wherein the children of light are to learne of the children of this world.
            Now further to paſſe to the ſecond thing of the three, we ſee that by this 
                  Doct. 2. following him thus with continuall vrging of him, he yeelded to her ſuite, and told her the meaning of the riddle. So that he who withſtood her at the firſt, was afterwards ouercome. It teacheth, that when we haue ouercome a temptation at the firſt aſſaulting vs, (which one would thinke were hardeſt to doe in reſpect of times following) yet we may poſſibly be ouercome of it afterwards, and be giuen ouer to it: as for example, whether it be to ſuch vnlawfull demaunds as this was, or to incontinencie, filthy gaine, ſeeking, or any ſuch like. The reaſon is, becauſe we are fickle and flexible, and doe not ſtrengthen our ſelues to be conſtant at one time as an other in a good thing, neither be oft inſtant with God by feruent praying, watching, neither couenanting againſt ſin, or not looking carefully to the keeping of them, neither diſgrace ſin: by meanes whereof, Satan taketh his aduantage againſt vs one time or other.
            Euen ſo the ſame Samſon here ſpoken of, did afterwards the very like, who withſtanding the inticements of a ſubtile woman as now he did at the firſt, and that with full purpoſe (for a time) to doe ſo ſtill, yet yeelded by long perſwaſion vnto her vniuſt and vnreaſonable requeſt at the laſt. It is no marueile to ſee it thus in ſome particular ſinne and temptation that one is brought to yeeld at laſt, who reſiſted at the firſt: for we ſee it to be ſo in the generall liking and imbracing of the whole doctrine of the Goſpell. That ſome, who receiued it with ioy for a time, yet fall away from the loue of it afterward, as if they had neuer imbraced it. Therefore, much more they who haue reſiſted a ſinne for a time, may poſſibly afterward fall into it notwithſtanding. And it ought to make the beſt of vs conſtant in watching againſt all euill as well as at the firſt, remembring that our Sauiour his charge is peremptory and indefinite reaching at all times [Watch.] As for them who neuer haue had any ſound proofe of the forgiuenes and death of ſinne wrought in them by the power of the Word, no marueile if this inconſtancie bee ſeene in them, that they pleaſe themſelues ouer-much in their good actions, and ſoone are diſcouraged either from within or without themſelues by the leaſt occaſion. The beſt people muſt plie God with

their prayers to hold out, and to build vp daily vpon a good foundation. Can a ruſh grow without mire? or can a man be watchfull to perſiſt in the good courſe which he hath ſeemed to like, or in hating the ſinne which hee ſeemed to haue diſliked, when there is nothing to ſet him forward in a matter of ſuch difficultie? Fleſh and blood cannot inherit the kingdome of God: neither is Satan diuided in himſelf. Reioyce not men in their ſhewes therefore, but get the aſſurance of Gods fauour, and not patch vp an euill heart with a fewe colours of goodneſſe which are not ioyned with ſubſtance.
            Alſo this weaknes and follie of Samſons, before I paſſe to the third point, 3 teacheth another thing: that when we haue ouercome an hard difficultie, and greater temptation, yet we may be afterwards ouercome of a ſmall one. For he had concealed the opening of the riddle to his father and mother, to whom he had farre greater reaſon to tell it, as hauing ſo long proofe of their pietie, loue, and faithfulneſſe; rather then to her a ſtranger, and whom hee knew to bee void of the moſt of them, if not all. And it is like hee tolde not them, leſt they ſhould by ſome occaſion haue opened it to the Philiſtims, as his wife did now vnto them.
            His follie in bewraying it to his wife, was like the ſin of the man of God, who came to reproue Ieroboams idolatrie at Bethel. For he hauing a charge giuen him of God that he ſhould goe into no houſe in that wicked place, to 1. King. 13. 8. 9. eate or refreſh himſelfe, did well and carefully obſerue it in the place where it was hardeſt to doe it, that is the Kings houſe, and yet behold hee was ouercome, and went from his charge, through fooliſh credulitie, where he might much more eaſily haue kept it, that is, to his fellow. For hee being inuited home by the King, he withſtood it, not fearing his diſpleaſure: but when afterwards he was moued by the old Prophet of Bethel, to goe to his houſe and eate, he went with him contrary to the commandement of the Lord, and was therefore after his departure ſlaine of a Lion in the high way.
            The reaſon hereof both in him, and as many as offend that way, that they are ouercome of a ſmaller ſinne, when they haue ouercome a greater, is this; that men are more afraid of committing that, and diſtruſting themſelues, ſeeke the more feruently to God for helpe, and obtaine it: but when it is a Note. ſmaller ſinne, we doe not ſo much ſuſpect and feare our ſelues, and ſo being vnarmed and ill prouided, we doe the eaſilier fall into it. And thus it commeth to paſſe, that when we haue ſlaine a Lion, a Beare foiles vs, and hauing deuoured a camell, a gnat chokes vs, that is, wee auoid the harder inconuenience, and yet bewray and ſhew our weakeneſſe in a ſmaller, which wee might more eaſily haue ouercome. And ſo it fareth with vs in repenting, that for a great treſpaſſe we are eaſilier brought to relent, ſeeing wee know that wee were more hardned in and by the committing of it, and yet in a leſſe offence wee ſhall hardlier bewaile and confeſſe it, ſeeing the heart in committing of that doth not ſee ſo much euill. Therefore it is well with Gods ſeruants, while they liue by their former experience, and renue their care of pleaſing God, and feare of the contrary: for then they ſhall bee ſo farre from this diſtemper, that they ſhall be able (with the ſame Prophet at

another time) to beleeue that hee who deliuered them from the Lion and Beare, (the more dangerous) will not ſuffer the Philiſtim to preuaile.
            Now to come to the third point: whereas it is ſaid, that when Samſon 
               4 had opened it to his wife, ſhe did by and by tell it to her countrey men, the Philiſtims; it appeareth, that all her weeping to her husband was but diſſimulation and falſehood, treacherie and vnfaithfulnes, euen a packe of miſchiefe ſhe did bewray to lie hidden in her heart, vnder that faire ſhew of kindneſſe and loue. To teach vs, that we ſhould not giue credit to the outward ſhewes of goodneſſe and ſimplicitie, ſo as we reſt in them as ſufficient proofes thereof, and when we haue no better teſtimonie in them that will Ierem. 17. 9. ſeeme ſuch. For the heart of man is a deepe gulfe full of abomination: and ſuch as are ſubtile can waite their opportunitie to get and obtaine that which they ſeeke. And yet iudge we none before the time, and till God ſhall lay them open, but waite and trie them. Many pray to God, but it is onely as S
                  •
                
               Iames ſaith, to beſtow amiſſe that which they aske, euen vpon their Iam 43. luſts. And ſo doe many pretend faire to men, when there is no ſuch thing in them, but diſſimulation and hypocriſie.
            Now they had got the knowledge of the riddle by the woman, they Verſe 19. bring it forth to Samſon before the Sunne went downe on the ſeuenth day. A moſt groſſe part played by them, to ſeeke it out that way, as Ahabs act was in killing Naboth, when Elias met him, and ſaid to him, Haſt thou killed and taken poſſeſſion? But it may giue warning to vs, to haue no more to doe with ſuch then we muſt needs. For this is ſo common, that falſe hood, violence and vnconſcion ablenes is crept in euen among men of better profeſſion, ſo that they who deale with ſuch, cannot tell when they haue made their couenants and bargaines ſure enough. For not onely they flie from their word, but alſo from witneſſe and writing too, if there be the leaſt Note. hole to be found. Which is to make men more faithfull themſelues, and more wiſe in taking heed of others.
            Beſides, note the vnweariednes of theſe men, that after they begun; they 2 neuer gaue ouer labouring, and perſwading the woman by flatterie and threats, ſweating at it, till they had that which they ſought, and yet had little hope of comming by it by her meanes, who was wife to their aduerſarie Samſon, with whom the wager was laid who if ſhe had been faithfull to him, might as well haue fetched the water of the well of Bethelem, (by going through an hoaſt of armed men for it) as they ſhould haue got it of her.
            Oh the toyle that lewd fellowes will take for their pleaſure and profit, and to bring their wicked purpoſes to paſſe. If they haue no ſucceſſe at one time, yet they take no diſcouragement at it, but ſet vpon it another. They that take ſuch paines for traſh, a man would thinke ſhould take ſome for Note. grace. But oh that they who profeſſe to loue goodneſſe, could be brought to doe but halfe ſo much to bring good things to paſſe, and to ſeeke happineſſe for euer, as they doe in hunting after the pleaſures of ſinne, and filthie gaine, which are but for a moment. I haue ſaid ſomwhat of this in the womans importunitie, though indeed ſhe was woed to this by theſe, and theſe were the firſt that ſwaied her motion. But ſhe (of the two) was the

more like to preuaile with him, then they to draw her to bee a partie with them. Therefore ſtrange was their confidence and preſumption in attempting to goe thus betweene barke and tree, and obtaining their purpoſes by ſo deſperate a meanes, as were no leſſe then the ſetting husband and wife together by the eares. But what will not ſuch aduenture, as are ſet vpon miſchiefe? A right Embleme of the curſed brood of Ieſuites, negotiators for the whore of Babylon, whoſe furie no attempt, no ſedition is impoſſible vnto vs.
            And to ſhut vp this matter about ſeeking out the meaning of the riddle; 3 now let vs heare Samſons anſwere, when they brought in the meaning of it, after this manner: [What is ſweeter then hony, or ſtronger then a Lion] he ſaid in effect to them againe; And what is more vnfaithfull or vntruſtie then a woman? Hee anſwered little leſſe, when hee vttered theſe words to them; If yee had not ploughed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle: which was as much as if he had accuſed them of falſehood, and vniuſt dealing, and her of vnfaithfulnes to her husband.
            By this learne one property of a wicked woman, that ſhe is more true and truſtie to ſtrangers, then to her owne husband. And yet to ſpeake as the truth is, ſhe is neither conſtant nor ſure to either of them, if a third come in Note. the way betwixt both. But ſhe that will deale ſo with her friend, namely her husband, what, thinke we, would ſuch an one doe to her enemie? And if ſhee would doe it without iuſt cauſe, what, if ſhe ſhould be prouoked? Whereby let other be admoniſhed. But oh faithfulnes, how precious and much to be deſired art thou? And of Samſons wife and the Philiſtims thus much: of Samſon himſelfe I will ſay more in the next Sermon.
         
         
            THE SEVENTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw I will end the Chapter with Samſon, and ſhew what Verſe 20. was done by him then, after the feaſt was ended: which is the fourth and laſt branch of the ſecond part of the Chapter. We haue heard how ill hee was dealt with by the Philiſtims, yet (as the ſtorie relateth) he did performe that, which they challenged as their due, which yet in deed they had iuſtly depriued themſelues of by their bad dealing, if Samſon would haue ſtood with them. But the Lord ſtrengthened him, ſo that he paid them with the apparell of their owne countrimen. And hauing ſlaine thirtie men of them, and anſwered the demaund of the other that wagered with him, he was greatly offended with his wife, and went away from her to his fathers houſe, not telling her whither hee went, and in

the meane while, ſhe was giuen away from him by her father to one of his companions. And theſe things fell out after the marriage feaſt.
            It is ſaid heere, that the ſpirit of the Lord came vpon Samſon againe, that we may know that he was guided thereby, in that which hee went about, when he ſlew the thirtie Philiſtims at Aſcalon, and was thereby ſtrengthened alſo to doe it. This example of his is not to bee followed of vs, I confeſſe, but we muſt do things in our vocation which God haue commanded generally in his word.
            The apparell of theſe thirtie men of the Philiſtims whom hee ſlew, hee 2 gaue to them that told the meaning of the riddle. So that although he fell into their hands by ſubtiltie, yet doth he not ſhift them off, and ſerue them according to their dealings with him, but ſatisfie them: for though no mention be here made of the linnen that hee gaue them with the garments, yet we muſt vnderſtand it thus, that hee gaue them all, though the chiefe onely be named, it being the manner of the ſpirit of God to expreſſe the whole oftentimes by a part: and beſides, wee know, they would not otherwiſe haue been contented and ſatisfied. So we are to know that it doth not become vs who are Chriſtians, to yeeld ill meaſure to them that offer it to vs, as we ſee that neither Samſon did, but to ouercome euill with good: which (it muſt be granted) will hardly be yeelded to, and the fleſh affordeth much ill counſell againſt it: but we are not debtors to it, to fulfill the deſires of it, Rom. 8. but to practiſe innocencie, through many prouocations to the contrarie. Nay further, although wee ſhould pretend that wee vſe our aduantage againſt him that hath wronged vs, to this end that we may play ſtopgame (as we ſay) with him, and ſaue our ſelues harmeleſſe, although we doe not depriue him ſimply of his owne, euen this (I ſay) is not permitted vs: except the aduantage be ſuch as wee may lawfully take, and would haue taken againſt him in equitie, whether he had giuen vs occaſion of reuenge or no. As for example, if hee haue wronged vs in our bargaine through our ouerſight, we may not prouide for our ſelues by ſome ouerſight of his: but if he ſtands not to couenant, or deny vs our due, we may lawfully ſeek our owne, after all other meanes to come by it haue been vſed, ſo we haue no reſpect of reuenge. And this is the ſtreight rule: but where is the practiſe of it, euen among them that know it, and profeſſe it ſhould be ſo, to let others goe? But we thinke our condition vnequall, if we may not deceiue the deceiuer, and preuent his ſubtiltie with the like, and play the Cretians with the Cretian, that is, diſſemble, cogge, and lye with him that makes no conſcience, as if Chriſtianitie might not meddle in this buſineſſe; which yet is as apparant a relike of the old man, and the luſt of our fleſh, from which we ſhould be purged, as any other, if Paul may be beleeued. Oh what occaſion doth the common ſort take to recompence euill for euill? They then ſhew themſelues in their kinde and colours, when they can hit them home, who haue ſtood in their light neuer ſo little, and they loue to talke and glorie of it, when they haue done. But to ſay a word more of them, though it was not expreſſed in the agreement betwixt Samſon and the Philiſtims, that the meaning of the riddle ſhould be declared by their owne finding out, and not by falſehood, or indirect meanes: yet who doubteth, but that they meant ſo? In like manner, this departing from innocencie

in bargaines and contracts, and going to ſhifting, and againſt that which is honeſt and iuſt, vnder a pretence that euery particular cannot be mentioned and ſet downe, it is a great fault among men, and proues them that deale ſo, to bee farre from vprightnes: but thoſe that yeeld of their due rather then ſtriue endleſly, to be odde people.
            But to paſſe from this, and to come to another point, namely of Samſons 
               3 wrath kindled againſt his wife for telling the riddle to the Philiſtims, and therefore going away without her to his fathers houſe, or at leaſt, not telling her of it, that act of his is not to bee iuſtified. For hee ought not in ſuch a moodie manner to haue departed from his wife, and leaue her in a wondering at his ſo ſudden going from her, and giuing her cauſe to feare at his returne home, a renuing of his diſpleaſure toward her againe: he ſhould not (I ſay) haue left her (a young woman new married) in doubts and feares, what might befall her: but he ſhould haue told her fault vnto her, as ſhee had been fit to heare it, betwixt them two, and ſo after a kinde reproofe, and a counſelling of her to be better gouerned, to haue ended the controuerſie, and either to haue taken her with him, or at leaſt not to haue gone away frow her ſullenly in diſpleaſure.
            This ſheweth what a fault ſullennes is, when we bee angrie with any bodie, and yet wee will not bee knowne of any ſuch thing, neither ſhew the cauſe peaceably and plainly, why we are grieued, that ſo we might make an end of the matter, and be ſatisfied (if it may be) with the anſwere giuen vs, or at leaſt beare it patiently by little and little, and ſo cut off anger; but either to goe out of the companie diſcontented and vnquiet, or ſaying nothing, but broyling in our ſtomackes to the great griefe and offence of the partie againſt whom our anger is kindled and conceiued, thus to doe (I ſay) is a thing vtterly vnbeſeeming a Chriſtian. But if queſtion bee made which of the two is worſt, either open or ſecret anger; I ſay, the bewraying of it, and the letting of it appeare, if we be ſo impotent that we cannot bridle and ſuppreſſe it, is of both euils farre more tolerable, then this ſmoothering and keeping in of it, though both be vile and odious.
            For as if an houſe be ſet on fire, it is farre more dangerous, and threatneth greater miſchiefe to the ſpeedie conſuming of all that is in the houſe, when the flame is pent in, then when it hath vent to breake foorth: Euen ſo, the anger that is hidden and concealed, is farre worſe then that which ſheweth it ſelfe; as may be ſeene in Abſoloms hidden wrath (breaking into murther) which except it bee in a high degree inflamed, (and that bewraieth much follie) will ſoone vaniſh and come to an end: whereas the other imagineth euill, and bringeth it foorth, when hee thinketh and ſeeth beſt. Yet I grant there are degrees in this ſullennes, but it is too vnbeſeeming a Chriſtian, when it is in the loweſt degree that is; yea though it goe away in time, when the ſtrength of it is ouer, without any further hurt doing.
            The remedie here, is to weigh the follie and ſhame of ſuch diſguiſing of our ſelues. Alſo to conſider what and who wee bee, that take the matter ſo hotly, which is done againſt vs, who haue prouoked God as many times as we haue haires on our head. And how much greater cauſe we giue to God to be diſpleaſed with vs we ſhould conſider, and whether we could like that the Lord ſhould ſo hide his diſpleaſure againſt vs, and execute it vpon vs,

when we would not, neither are aware of it. Thus, and by ſuch like meanes, we ſhould goe about to reſiſt and aſſwage it. And if it bee hardly done at the firſt, yet afterwards it will be done more eaſily, if wee labour for it, and ſo in times chace it away altogether, further then that ſome reliques of it will remaine in vs, as after ſome ſore ague. Cauſes (I confeſſe) there are of ſeparation betweene married perſons, but euery man muſt not be his owne Iudge, but either the Ciuill Magiſtrate, or elſe thoſe that are appointed by God in the Church to bee iudges in theſe and ſuch like caſes, muſt determine. For what manner of ſociety were there like to be among men, if each husband vpon euery tetch might for a ſhorter or longer time, leaue the fellowſhip of his wife? To be ſure, this practiſe is one meanes (beſides many more) of much vncleanenes, confuſion of blood and poſteritie, beggery of the parties and families ſo forſaken, and of what other riots and diſorder God knoweth. For where the ſacred ordinances of God (which are the religious bands and ſecuring pledges of peace, vnion and order) are once leapt ouer, and troden downe, who can limit within any bounds the miſchiefe like to enſue? Therefore let none of ſuch as are guiltie in this kinde, plead Samſons example, who had as little libertie giuen him herein as they.
            Now whereas ſome obiect, that Samſon herein gaue place to wrath, and rather withdrew himſelfe, then abode with her, leſt hee might poſſibly haue broken out further: I anſwere, Samſon in not dealing outragiouſly in words or deeds, is to be commended: howbeit his going away in paſſion, is not thereby excuſed, ſeeing this did not amend the matter, but made it worſe. And although the partie offended may ſometimes auoid (as Ionathan did) to alleniate ſuch as are diſpleaſed in the companie, yet this followeth not, that the partie offended of the married couples) may depart from the offender, and goe away for adoe: for thereby he nouriſheth his own humour, & prouoketh the other further, rather thē ſlaketh it in either.
            But to goe forward, and ſo to draw to an end, here we may ſee what men Verſ. 21. get by ſuch dealing. For while they be ſullen, and take diſpleaſure, and will not bewray it, the other againſt whom they conceiue it, are impatient, and cannot beare it, as we ſee here Samſons wife and her father not enduring this manner of his departure from her in diſlike and diſcontentment, they (no marueile) breake off their loue, and turne and ſhew it to another. This was the good he got by his inconſiderate dealing. And if we marke, wee ſhall finde, that ſuch raſh follie and vnaduiſed dealing (as this of Samſons was) is commonly recompenſed with ſome ſuch vnwelcome croſſe and trouble, and all through their owne fault who cauſe and prouoke it: ſo that they would after buy it off with labour and coſt, when it is too late; which by a little wiſedome and patience they might altogether haue remoued, & kept away. As may appeare by that fact of Abſolom, who being ſecretly incenſed againſt Ammon for abuſing his ſiſter (whereas he ought to haue accuſed him to his father, and committed the righting of his cauſe to him vnder God, without nouriſhing of a reuengefull humour;) what brought hee to paſſe thereby, and what enſued of it? but Ammons murther, Dauids ſorrow, a breach in the familie, and to Abſolom himſelfe an vnpleaſing exile from his fathers Court and preſence. But farre different was Dauids behauiour, being prouoked by Shemei: he leaues the man, and looks into himſelfe: It may
               
               be I haue deſerued (ſaith he) that God ſhould ſuffer him to curſe me, let him alone. A moſt worthie preſident. Therefore, let the angry and ſullen perſon come foorth and ſhew what he hath gained by his folly, ſaue the name of a foole, and the brand of reproch, and we will recant and call backe that wee ſpeake. No wonder if the mad man, caſting fire, darts, arrowes, and deadly things, haue ſome of them light vpon his owne pate. It is iuſt alſo with God to bee diſpleaſed with ſuch, and reſiſt them, while they are vniuſtly diſpleaſed with others, and meditate how to reuenge. Many euen vpon the ſudden in their vnaduiſed rage haue killed their deareſt friends, (as Alexander is reported to haue done in his drunken fume) and after being ſober, they haue been readie to reuenge themſelues for their madnes. Others leaue prints of their anger in the faces or bodies of ſuch as they light vpon, and ſome they kill forth right: which they then repent of when either they haue ſmarted well in the purſe, or be drawne forth to puniſhment which is appointed for ſuch furie and outrage. Let it teach vs, to ſhake off wilfulnes, impatience, and heate paſſions, and in ſtead of a little pleaſing of our ſelues through folſie, not neglect wiſe and kinde dealing, which ſhall not be repented of. And to this end we muſt vſe to meditate, both of our own corruptions of pride, ſelfeloue, anger, looſenes, tetchines, frowardnes, and the like; how many and foule they are; and alſo of our ſelues, who are but wormes, duſt and aſhes; and therefore no ſuch as may not be croſſed: and laſt of all, we ſhould conſider of thoſe whom wee are wont to bee offended with: that they are but men and mortall, and therefore ſubiect to humane infirmities; and what marueile then, if they doe things ſometime that we like not, and which doe croſſe vs ſeeing they doe to vs, but as we haue done oft to other. And wee being ſicke of the ſame diſeaſe, and being infected with the ſame originall contagion and poyſon, ſhould rather pitie them, then bee angrie and out of patience with them. But it were infinite to ſet downe that which yet might be ſaid to good purpoſe of anger, and remedies againſt it. This for this time by occaſion of Samſons ſullen mood at his departing from his wife then.
            As for the fact of Samſons wife and her father, ſo ſoone to be aleniated from him, and ſhe to be giuen to another, it is not to bee marueiled at, neither any reaſon to be asked of it, they being not led thereby, much leſſe by a better guide in their doings, but by will, and ſtrength of fleſh, whereby they were readie to take very ſlight colour and pretence of reaſon for their doings, as hath been noted before, and as ſhall further appeare in the next chap. verſ. 2. And ſo we muſt looke for no better meaſure at the hands of wicked and vnreaſonable men, if we giue them the leaſt occaſions, who are commonly carried to outrage without any occaſions: to teach vs to haue as little to doe with them, as wee may: and when wee muſt needs, take wee heed that we make all ſure on our ſides, (as poſſibly we may) to auoid euill and perill by them. But if it fall out afterwards, that wee bee in danger to them, and that they haue aduantage againſt vs, (as who is not ſubiect to that and to the like?) wee muſt beare it patiently, committing the ſucceſſe to God, with well doing. And here an end of this Chapter.
         
         
            
            
               THE SEVENTIE NINE SERMON ON THE XV. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. But within a while after in the time of wheate harueſt, Samſon viſited his wife with a Kid, ſaying, I will goe in to my wife into the chamber: but her father would not ſuffer him to goe in.
                  
                  2. And her father ſaid, I thought that thou hadſt hated her: therefore gaue I her to thy companion. Is not her younger ſiſter fairer then ſhe? take her, I pray thee, in ſtead of the other.
                  
                  3. Then Samſon ſaid vnto them, Now am I more blameleſſe then the Philiſtims: therefore will I doe them diſpleaſure.
                  
               
               
                  I Will proceed, keeping the order that I obſerue in the The ſumme of the Chapter. reſt. And firſt to begin with ye ſumme, it is thus much: Samſon, when his wife was denied him, vpon his returne to her, tooke occaſion to ſet on fire the corne fields of the Philiſtims, and to kill them, being armed againſt them: whereupon they came into Iudea, to fight with the men thereof, vnleſſe they would deliuer Samſon into their hands bound: who therefore did ſo. But his bands being broken by the Lord, he ſlew a thouſand of them with the iaw bone of an aſſe: and being thirſtie after his labour, he obtained water from God by prayer: and ſo he was refreſhed againe.
               The parts of it are foure. The firſt, how Samſon tooke occaſion to hurt 
                     The parts 4. and to bee reuenged vpon the Philiſtims, to verſe 9. The ſecond, how the Philiſtims got him to bee deliuered bound into their hands by his owne countrimen: to the midſt of verſe 14. The third is, how he was ſtrengthened by God, ſo that he brake the cords, and ſlew a great many of them: to verſe 18. The laſt, how he thirſting after his labour, and obtaining water of God, was refreſhed. Of which in order, as the text giues occaſion.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  COncerning the firſt part, and the woe that hee wrought them, the occaſion The ſumme of the firſt part. was, that his wife was denied to him, when he returned to take her, and was giuen to another, as appeareth in the firſt two verſes: hereby hee was prouoked, as we ſee in the third verſe, and ſo he ſet vpon and hurt them in their commodities, being ſo prouoked, as is ſhewed vnto the 9. verſe.
                  And firſt it is ſaid, that after a while he came to his wife againe, & brought Verſe 1. a Kid with him to make merrie with her, and to ſhew thereby that he was reconciled to her, and was purpoſed to liue with her againe. For he hauing

in abſence conſidered his fault, in going from her in ſuch a manner as he did, reſolued and thought good now to cut off all occaſions of griefe from her, and of ſeparation, and to renew and recouer his decayed loue againe. It all that will condemne Samſon for his choler would ſhame themſelues as hee did here (in returning, which was a condemning of his departing) when they haue bin ouertaken as he was it were well: or if m
                        •
                     n could be brought out of loue with ſuch their wilfull doings, by conſidering that for the time they baniſh God out of their thoughts, and make a man ſlaue to his rankeſt enemy. But by this we ſee, that though good and bad haue paſſions, carrying and ruling them, yet where grace dwelleth, they ſhall be found out in Doct. time, and that ſhall be done to the vanquiſhing of them which the ſtrength of corruption in thoſe that want grace, will not ſuffer a man to marke and reſiſt them. Sinne nouriſheth it ſelfe (eſpecially anger) by ſelfe-loue: ſmoothing it ſelfe vp with Ionah his conceit, [I doe well to be angrie] and ſo Samſon 
                     Ionah 4. 9. would (perhaps) haue anſwered, if hee had been demaunded a while after he departed from her. But now at leiſure he recanteth, and by returning, condemnes his departure, as I ſaid; much like the ſonne, that being ſent into the vineyard, bid his father doe his worke himſelfe for him; but after, comming Mat. 11. 29. to himſelfe againe, did as he was bidden and went. Whereas a lewde perſon hauing ſinned, pleaſeth himſelfe in it, and doubleth it with Eſau in Gen. 28. 9. his taking ſtrange wiues; or if hee relent, it is for ſhame and terror onely as Iudas; as I haue noted in Abimelech before, chapter 9. Samſon in his cholencke Mat. 
                           •
                        7. 3. pang, went away with reſolution (likely) of neuer returning, but to let her goe as ſhe deſerued. But now in cooler blood he appeaſeth himſelfe (as the Muſitian did Eliſha) and demurring of his doings, confeſſeth, that though his wife deſerued ill meaſure, yet it became not him who in ſo great 2. King. 3. 15. heate ſought to marry her: to deale ſo deſpitefully againſt her, and that preſently vpon his marrying of her.
                  And more particularly, as Samſon here vpon better conſideration returded to his wife againe, ſo it muſt be granted of all that there ſhould not be any long diſpleaſure conceiued betwixt couples, (if it cannot be auoided but that ſome will be,) and ſpecially that it is too much that there ſhould be any ſeparation betwixt man and wife, vnleſſe it be with conſent, and in loue, and that alſo but for a while, and as the Apoſtle willeth that they may giue themſelues to prayer and faſting, and ſo to come together againe, leſt the 1. Cor. 7. 5. diuell tempt them to euill. This I ſay were to bee wiſhed: but if there fall out worſe matter betwixt them, it ought to ceaſe betimes, as wee ſee here Samſon returned to his wife within a while after hee went from her. For if the prayers of married perſons ought not to be broken off through diſſention any day, as S. Peter chargeth; much leſſe ought there to bee a ſeparation 1. Pet. 3. 7. for a longer time.
                  Therefore ſeeing many occaſions fall out hereof betwixt couples in marriage, by reaſon of much conceitednes one againſt the other, way wardnes, inconſtancie in loue, falſe heartedneſſe, and ſuch like; let ſuch as abhor and Note. would ſhunne this and the like weariſomeneſſe of their companions, neuer ceaſe till they renounce and diſclaime thoſe corruptions, and pray oft and earneſtly againſt the ſame, and arme themſelues with many renued couenants, that no ſuch thing may bee betwixt them. So ſhall they the better

keepe other in order who are vnder them, when they ſhall ſee no breaches nor brawles betwixt them: yea and they ſhall be fit to ſet other couples together who are at variance; but they ſhall ill doe that abroad, if they maintaine not peace at home.
                  But by occaſion that I ſaid, that married couples ſhould not be abſent any Obiect. long time one from the other; it is obiected that many are, who through neceſſitie of following their calling, cannot chuſe but be a long time one from another, as many Lawyers, Merchants, Sea men and other: and therefore how can that charge that is giuen by the Apoſtle to the Corinths 1 Cor. 7. 5. ſtand? to wit, that there ſhould be no long abſence betwixt couples. I anſwere: becauſe that charge is no better kept, therefore is much euill committed, Anſw. I meane through long abſence one from the other, and many complaine how they ſmart by meanes thereof, and yet redreſſe it not, nay ſay plainely, they ſee not how they can.
                  And I ſay further, that men ſuffer much ſorrow, and ſuſtaine great troubles through their owne fault, who ſeeing what their callings are, and that abſence muſt fall out betwixt them, doe neither labour for more grace themſelues to beare it the better, neither ſeeke ſuch yoke-fellowes as excell other therein, neither faithfully take order betweene themſelues carefully to looke about them euery way to auoide danger. For God is not contrarie to himſelfe, neither commandeth he contraries: as that there be no long abſence one from another: and yet that they ſhall follow ſuch callings as of neceſſitie require it. But if the laſt muſt needes be; then certainely they may bee helped and relieue themſelues in the firſt. And if they both feare God (as otherwiſe what promiſe haue they that God will bleſſe them in any thing, or what ſpeaking to them is there about any ſuch matter? If (I ſay) they feare God, then by good order taking, betwixt themſelues, and by oft and earneſt praying on both parts, for quiet and chaſte mindes and bodies, vſing therewith all good meanes for the ſame as neede ſhall require, then they ſhall attaine redreſſe againſt it, and God hath promiſed to ſuch, that with conſent they may be abſent each from other, without the many vnquietneſſes and other inconueniences, the which yet doe moſt certainely meete with ſuch as be not ſo qualified: who if they fall into adulterie, and the like euils, it is the fruit of their ſinne which God puniſheth, I meane of their irreligiouſneſſe, vnfaithfulneſſe, and ſuch like, as they fall out to bee; who is able to ſay what or how many?
                  It followeth in this verſe, when Samſon would haue gone into the chamber to his wife, to do the dutie of an husband to her, the father the Philiſtim, 2 would not ſuffer him, for he had giuen her to another! Oh wofull act, but eſpecially before he had ſpoken with him. But we neede not wonder at that; for what reaſon doe ſuch profeſſe to yeelde of their doings? By this dealing of the Philiſtims, wee may ſee, what a ſore puniſhment it is to haue to doe with ſuch vnconſcionable men, that will boldly hold our right from vs, and ſo deale with vs, that wee cannot make any reckoning, no not of that which is our owne, if it muſt come through their hands, neither can be ſure of our owne, if it be owing and due vnto vs by them.
                  And what bondage is this, that another ſhould haue power and authority ouer our goods? Nature it ſelfe being the foundation of propriety in each

mans goods, and abhorring community, as the cut-throte of ciuill ſociety and common-wealth. As if the labourer when he had done his work, muſt nor looke to receiue his wages; or the man who hath lent wares for money, ſhould be denied it: as though hee that liſteth, ſhould claime or detaine another bodies goods. And to that point things are come in many places, that for the heatheniſh vnconſcionableneſſe that is grown vp in this world, Note. a man cannot ſay that any thing hee hath is his owne, there are ſo many waies to defeate the owners of their due. And ſo are men purſued with other open wrongs, that they may well ſay, as Samſon had cauſe to complaine; you deale with vs as Philiſtims. The vſe of this is, to account of honeſt and faithfull men much the better, and in dealing with other bee wary and circumſpect; alſo be ready to offer all good meaſure to thoſe with whom we haue to doe. But this point offereth it ſelfe often.
                  And as for Samſon, who was denied his wife when hee returned to her fathers houſe to take and enioy her, all may ſee what a puniſhment it is. But when men bring it vpon themſelues by their owne ſinne, as he did, they are the leſſe pitied And this is true of the finall diſappointment of the vngodly, as the example of the fooliſh Virgins ſheweth, excluding themſelues from that place, which yet they deſired. Let euery man therefore auoide occaſions of troubling himſelfe as well this way as otherwiſe, by giuing liberty to his corrupt affections and luſts; wherein Samſon failing, by going from his wife in a fullen and diſcontented manner, rather then wiſely ſaluing vp her offence, now brought it to paſſe that hee was denied her when hee would gladly haue enioyed her. Thus doth a mans ſin crop off the bloſſome which ſhould after in ſeaſon yeeld fruit. And this and ſuch like are the fruites of our ſinnes, which neuer yet, no not the pleaſanteſt, did vs any good. This hurt among many other commeth; that therby we are depriued of our beſt liberties, when we would enioy them, and all becauſe wee did, in our ſinfull mood ſet light by them. But of this enough in the laſt verſe of the former chapter.
                  Her father to excuſe his curſed act, in giuing his daughter to another man, tels Samſon, he thought he had hated her, therfore (he ſaith) I gaue her Verſe 1. to thy companion, and then hee offered him her ſiſter, as being fairer then ſhe. Wee may learne by this his firſt ſpeech, that wicked and vnconſcionable men, when they haue offered great wrong to their neighbour, make a light matter of it: they thought (they ſay) they might haue done as great a matter as that, without offence taken thereat, and that they had cauſe to doe ſo; and they thought it would not haue been ſo hardly taken; yea and many bid them goe ſeeke their remedy, where they can get it. So in the Hiſtory of the Church, Iulian the reuolter being ſolicited to deale more indifferently with the Chriſtians, vſed to anſwere: Tuſh, they haue no wrong done to them, for their Maſter commands them being ſmitten on the one Mat. 5. 39. cheeke, to turne the other. So did the cruell Pharaoh vpbraid the poore Iſraelites groning vnder their burthens; ſaying to them, Yee are idle, and want Exod. 5 17. worke: and the Babylonians ſo taunted the poore Iewes mourning vnder captiuity; Sing vs ſome of the ſongs of Sion. Rehoboam alſo being willed to mitigate Pſal. 137. 3. the heauie hand which his father held ouer his ſubiects, anſwereth; 1. King. 12. 14. Tuſh, yee had too good meaſure ſhewed yee by my father; my little finger

ſhall be heauier then his loines. And as ſlightly bad men deale with the Lord in his ſeruice: they thinke their drawing neere to him with their bodies is ſufficient ſeruice, though their hearts be farre off, when yet he himſelfe profeſſeth, that in vaine doe ſuch worſhip him. Math. 15. 9.
                  
                  So Saul thought he might offer a burnt offering and a peace offering to 1. Sam. 13. 9. 13 the Lord, (though it was contrary to his commandement) and would needs imagine it to bee well pleaſing to him ſo to doe, taking it harſhly that Samuel preſſeth him ſo with his diſobedience. But hee ſhould haue obeyed God, and not haue followed his owne fancie.
                  But to returne to their dealings with men, whom when they haue ſore hurt and wronged, they make a light matter of it, and ſay, they meant no harme; they are like the man in the Prouerbs, that fained himſelfe mad, and caſt firebrands and arrowes, and ſaith, he was in ſport: ſo they deale deceitfully Prou. 26. 19. and wickedly with their friend and neighbour, and ſay, they are in ſport, that is, they meane no harme. But if the leaſt iniurie bee offered them (as was heere to this Philiſtim by Samſon, going from his daughter but a while) they will make of a little matter a great, rather then be ſatisfied with ſuch an anſwere, that the party thought it would not be ſo hardly taken. To conclude, as Salomon ſaith to the young men; Reioce in thy youth, &c: but bee 
                     Eccleſ. 11. 9. 
                     ſure God will bring thee to iudgement: ſo I may ſay to theſe men while health and iollity laſteth, and none to controll you, tread your vnderlings vnder your feet, and winde God himſelfe about your fingers: make a ſlight matter of ſinne, and ſay, it was but a tricke of youth, it was but a ſmall matte, I did it but once; as many at this day make a But of Adams ſin, he did but eate an apple (a matter of nothing) and loe both he and all his poſterity muſt die for it. And doe ye as Eſau did, Tuſh, what great matter is it to ſell my birthright, Gen. 25. 32. let it goe? Sooth vp your ſelues (I ſay) with the conceit of him that thinkes God is (as the Papiſts paint him) but a good old man and ſits idle, hee will neither doe good nor euill, wee may vſe and deale with him as wee liſt. But when God ſhall take the wild Aſſe in her moneths (who being light, cared for none of her purſuers) I meane, when he ſhall viſit theſe men, Ier. 1. 
                           •
                        4. and ſet before their face their vnconſcionablenes and hard meaſure, which they haue offered and made nothing of, (as if other men were made to bee their teniſ-balles, and the obiects of their wrong and ſcorne) then their ſin ſhall not ſeeme a ſmall But, but a great hill and mountaine vnto them, and they ſhall cry out, ſaying, We neuer felt the weight of our ſinne till now; it was light in committing, but the puniſhment is greater then wee can beare. And as the holy Ghoſt threatens adulterers, God ſhall iudge them; ſo let theſe Heb. 13. 4. know, that ſeeing they are too ſtout and ſtately for common men to meddle with, God will take them in hand, and (as Iames ſaith) bee an aduocate for the innocent againſt their oppreſſors. This bee added to the former point, Iam. 5 4. to this end, that as there I counſell others to haue little to doe with ſuch 2. Theſ. 1. 6. Cormorants: ſo by this marke and cognizance, and the like (as the next point noteth) we may know and auoide them the better. Thus much bee ſaid of the firſt ſpeech of Samſons father in law: the next followeth.
                  And that was, that he offered him his wiues ſiſter to be his wife. For hee 2 reſpected not how neere ſhe was in blood, but feared him, becauſe hee ſaw that hee was a man of a great ſtomacke, and did fret ſore againſt the Philiſtims,

therfore he offered him her to appeaſe his wrath, and yet many of the Heathens did know that ſuch marriages were vnlawfull, and made lawes againſt them. Thus he thought to put him off. Euen ſo wicked men, when their bad dealings are found out, and they in ſome danger and feare by meanes therof, marke what recompence they offer: and that is worſe then if they offered none at all, (as hee did heere) and ſuch as they cannot take, nor be the better for, being (for the moſt part) againſt conſcience: for either they promiſe them faire and goe from it: or if they pay their debts, and ſatisfie for their wrongs which they haue done, it ſhall bee done moſt vnwillingly, or with other mens loſſes and harmes.
                  By this act of his father in law, Samſon tooke occaſion to vex the Philiſtims, Verſ. 3. the Lords enemies: for hee ſaw that his father in law did but mocke him, and ſo he took not the condition that was offered him, but ſaid, I haue receiued wrong of you Philiſtims, and my dealings ſhall be ſeene to be better then yours, if it come into queſtion. Ye haue giuen me iuſt cauſe to ſeek reuenge. But yet we muſt know, that this hee did as one appointed by God thereto, and not as a man to eaſe his ſtomacke vpon them for his own pleaſure. So we may in no wiſe reuenge our enemies in the heate of our hearts, (howſoeuer wee hardly heare that ſaying) but leaue vengeance to God, and bridle our vnruly affections, that they may not carrie vs to euill againſt men; but ouercome their euill with doing them good. Although I denie not, but Rom. 12. 21. where we are commanded of God to purſue euill, we muſt goe about it readily, as Samſon heere did. But heere I end theſe verſes.
                  
                     Verſ. 4. And Samſon went and caught three hundred foxes, and tooke firebrands, and turned taile to taile, and put a firebrand in the middeſt betweene two tailes.
                     
                     5 And when hee had ſet the brands on fire, hee let them goe into the ſtanding corne of the Philiſtims, and burnt vp both the ſhockes, and alſo the ſtanding corne, with the vineyards and oliues.
                     
                     6 Then the Philiſtims ſaid, Who hath done this? and they anſwered, Samſon the ſonne in law of the Timnite, becauſe he had taken his wife and giuen her to his companion. And the Philiſtims came vp, and burnt her and her father with fire.
                     
                     7 And Samſon ſaid vnto them, Though ye haue done this, yet will I be auenged of you, and after that I will ceaſe.
                     
                     8 And he ſmote them hip and thigh, with a great ſlaughter, and hee went downe, and dwelt in the top of the rocke Etam.
                     
                  
                  
                     SAmſon hauing gotten occaſion to ſet vpon the Philiſtims, the holy ſtory in theſe fiue verſes ſheweth how hee vſed it, that is to ſay, theſe two The ſumme of theſe verſes. waies: firſt in ſpoiling their commodities, their vines and oliue trees, and burning vp their corne; and then in taking away the liues of many of them alſo. The firſt of theſe two vexings of them is ſet downe in theſe two firſt verſes, and he did it in this manner. He got three hundred foxes (which abounded in thoſe places) and the tailes of them hee bound together, and put firebrands in the middeſt of them, and ſent them into the corne of the Philiſtims, which then was ripe, and burned vp heapes or rickes of corne gathered in, and that which was ſtanding alſo.
                  
                     
It is but a folly for vs to aske why hee plagued the Philiſtims that way among Verſe. 4. 5. all other. It is ſufficient that the holy Ghoſt hath ſet it downe that he puniſhed them very ſore euen that way, as we may conceiue. For a fire being kndled in many places, and ſpreading further and further in euery place where it was kindled, much hurt might ſoone bee done thereby; as appeared by Abſaloms dealing with Ioab in ſetting his corne field on fire. But much 2. Sam. 14. 30. more theſe wild creatures (being terrified with the fire) running too and fro, and carrying it through the fields might doe greater miſchiefe. A thing (doubtleſſe) vnlikely to haue come to paſſe ſo; but the more vnlikely it was, the more it admoniſheth vs, not onely that our commodities and riches are ſubiect to loſſe ſundry waies which we may conceiue, but euen that way alſo that we cannot thinke. For who would haue thought (though by windes, wet, and drought they might haue loſt their fruites) yet that they ſhould haue been ſpoiled this way? But the reaſon is, for that there are ſo many caſualties and changes in this tranſitorie life, and we are liuely put in mind of it hereby. Poſſeſſe we therefore theſe earthly benefits, as if wee did not, and ſo we ſhall be leſſe addicted to them. For no man can ſhew to how many vnlikely dangers mens goods lie open, beſide thoſe which are common and ordinary. We haue heard of late, that many mens commodities being brought in (and ſo in likelihood paſt danger) haue been in great part deſtroyed by vermine, as mice and rats.
                  Therefore they are called vncertaine riches, ſeeing no man hath any hold Luk. 12. 20. 1. Tim. 6. 17. of them, but one mans they are to day, and another mans to morrow. Beſides, we ought not to ſet our hearts on them, which we cannot keepe, neither thereby giue occaſion to our ſelues to be diſquieted when God by any meanes ſhall depriue vs of them. But minde we better things, and thoſe not ſeene with mortall eye, which ſhall alſo be witneſſes that wee haue treaſure Mat. 6. 20. laid vp for vs in heauen. And when wee walke in the diſcharge of our callings, whereby, through Gods bleſſing we encreaſe our ſubſtance, yet euen then regard we more the commandement enioyning vs labour, then the profit: and comfort we our ſelues in our good conſcience in comming by and vſing them, with Gods promiſe of good ſucceſſe, rather then by reckoning our commodities before we enioy them. But of this point I haue ſaid more elſewhere.
                  The next thing in theſe two verſes is this, which we are to make our profit 2 by; that when the Lord giueth vs opportunity, and offereth vs occaſion to do him ſeruice, we ſhould be wiſe to ſee it, & ready to vſe it, that we may ſo teſtifie our obedience both to God and men. For ſo did Samſon here. The Lord would haue him ſet vpon the Philiſtims, but ſo, that he ſhould firſt be prouoked by them; leſt if he had done it without iuſt occaſion offered him, they might not haue purſued him alone, but all the land; as they made much adoe for the hurt he heere did them, till they knew that ſome of their brethren, the Philiſtims, had prouoked him, and that thereupon hee ſought to be reuenged on them; as in verſ. 6. Looke more in Gedeons ſtory.
                  Before Samſon proceed any further againſt the Philiſtims, to purſue them Verſ. 6. in their liues, it is ſhewed in this verſe, that there was hot enquirie among them who it was that had ſo ſpoiled their commodities. And they learned that it was Samſon that had done it: and further the reaſon was rendred why

he did ſo, and that was, becauſe the Timnite had taken his wife from him, and giuen her to another. Which when they vnderſtood, they went by and by and burnt her and her father with fire: for they conſidered that they had done him great wrong, and thought that he auenged himſelfe on other of them for that which they had done to him.
                  In this verſe, by the earneſt inquirie after him that had done them ſo Doct. great diſpleaſure, we may ſee, that by the light of nature they did this, (euen as it is lawfull for vs to doe in our owne caſes by the help of the Magiſtrate) to ſeeke to finde out ſuch as haue done much euill in the Common-wealth, and that were troubleſome. But yet herein we muſt differ from them, that as theſe heere did eagerly purſue the doer of wrong to themſelues, (more then the diſorder) ſo much more wee that are further inlightened by the word of God, ought to hearken after ſuch offenders, and to procure their iuſt puniſhment as we may; rather for their ſinne, then to auenge our ſelues thereby. As Salomon dealt with Ioab, who had ioyned himſelfe with Adonijah 
                     1. King 2. 34. againſt the Lords annointed: for hee commanded him to bee ſlaine, that the blood which he had ſhed cauſeleſſe, might be vpon his owne head. And great is the ſin of them, that rather then they would incurre the leaſt danger and diſpleaſure at the hands of bad perſons, worthie to be cut off, or ſore puniſhed; doe ſuffer them to goe on in their wickedneſſe, rather then to withſtand and bring them foorth before authoritie to receiue their due; yea rather, if they can, they will bee readie to excuſe their fault and defend them: but if a treſpaſſe be committed againſt themſelues, there is no meaſure in purſuing their enemies. But a fitter occaſion to handle this, will be offered in the 21. Chapter.
                  When the Philiſtims vnderſtood that Samſon had thus ſpoyled them, becauſe 2 the Timnite had giuen his wife to his companion, they went (it is ſaid here) and burnt both him and his daughter, and the houſe ouer their heads. But why did they ſo? For the Timnite was not he that hurt them. No, but ſeeing they could not come by Samſon, to take reuenge on him, therefore they puniſhed them who were the occaſions of Samſons ſpoyling them, though they were in no wiſe conſenting to it, nor knowing what hee did. A moſt vnreaſonable act, to fall vpon them who were no way guiltie of the hurt done to them. The Lord (indeed) did moſt iuſtly hereby reuenge that villany, which they had all of them offered to Samſon, but this they looked not at: God onely ouer-ruled their appetites, that in one and the ſame act (moſt iniurious in it ſelfe) yet the Lord executed his moſt righteous iuſtice againſt theſe malefactors, arming one wicked perſon againſt another, and preparing a way thereby to reuenge theſe Philiſtims themſelues, as ſhal appeare afterward.
                  But here we may ſee the madnes and outrage that is in men. For though theſe were Heathens, and therefore might bee thought to haue none to match them in groſſe wickednes, among ſuch as are baptized: yet behold, they who are deſtitute of grace among vs, (further then the feare of man reſtraineth ſome) are let looſe to as great ſinnes. For proofe whereof, behold the dealing of thoſe furious Iewes, Acts 18. who when they could not come by Paul, fell vpon Soſthenes his companion, and beate him: and at this day Acts 18. 17. the Papiſts when they cannot come by the heretike himſelfe (as they terme

him) vſe to draw his picture, as exactly as they can, and with great deſpite burne it in the fire, ſhewing what they would doe to the perſon. Not vnlike to the practiſe of ſeditious ſouldiers, in chopping them as ſmall as herbs to pot, who oppoſe them in their mutinie. And we ſee it commeth to paſſe ſometimes, that when vile men are giuen ouer to furie, paſſion and moode, he ſhall beare the blowes that commeth next in their way, though hee was in no fault, and whatſoeuer is next them, be it knife, dagger, cudgel, or whatſoeuer elſe, whether it beate out the eye or tooth, or breake arme or legge, all is one with them, when they be moodie: euen as ſhe-Beares that are robbed of their whelpes. Nay, ſo little are they led by ſound reaſon, that when, through their owne raſhnes, they haue hurt themſelues at a doore, or fall, by ſtumbling at a ſtone, they curſe the one, and beate the other. But if they ſuſtaine damage or loſſe by any neighbour, they are not ſatisfied, till with the Philiſtims they haue their blood, at leaſt till they ſeeke it, though the hurt done to them was againſt their will, who are thus doggiſhly purſued of them.
                  Touching ſuch rage and madnes I haue ſaid ſomewhat heretofore, to diſcredit it, and diſſwade men from it: both by ſhewing the hideous face therof, and the curſed fruites iſſuing therefrom. As who beholding Lamech in his furie and outrage, and hearing the terrour of his words, would not abhorre Gen. 4. 23. him and his qualities? And yet there remaine among vs men of no better diſpoſition, (though they will not ſpeake ſo plainly as Lamech did) who could in their rancour eate the very heart of their enemie with garlicke, as the ſaying is: and yet nouriſh this ſerpent in their boſomes ſtill, and fight not againſt it with the ſword of the Spirit, nor confeſſe themſelues to bee beaſts for their yeelding ſo farre, whereby their whole Chriſtianitie is called into queſtion.
                  But another thing in this verſe is not to be omitted, that whereas Samſons 
                     
                        Doct. 3. wife being threatned by her neighbours before, that they would burne her, except ſhe told them the meaning of the riddle; ſhe (as wee haue heard) to auoid the danger, did tell it them, to the griefe and great hurt of her huſband; and yet now behold, ſhe could not auoide it, but by the Philiſtims was burned for all that. For by and for her telling the riddle to her people, ſhe was ſaued from burning, but Samſon went from her, and for that her father gaue her to another to wife: for that, Samſon ſpoyled the Philiſtims corne and commodities; and for that cauſe they burned her and her father; and ſo the riddle, the declaring whereof ſaued her life, the ſame was the occaſion of loſing it. Euen ſo, that which ſhee ſought before by vnlawfull meanes and ſhifts to ſhunne, I meane burning; by the ſame vnlawfull ſhifts ſhe procured it. And ſo it was with Ioſephs brethren, when they ſought to be Gen. 37. 27. rid of him, becauſe of his dreames of ſuch honor that he ſhould haue aboue them, which he told them of, and they in no wiſe could abide it, and therefore they ſold him into a farre countrey: euen thereby they brought him to that honour, cleane contrary to their mindes and liking, as is cleere in the Gen. 39. 1. and 20. compared with 41. 40. &c ſtorie.
                  And what is more manifeſtly and manifoldly proued by experience among vs then this, that whereas many ſeeing great troubles comming toward them, doe ſeeke by euill practiſes, as lying, ſwearing, forſwearing and

ſuch like, to winde out of them; what may bee commonlier ſeene (I ſay) Note. then this, that thereby they bring farre greater and ſorer, if not the ſame troubles vpon themſelues? For while they ſeeke to auoid worldly ſorrow for a while, which had come by their trouble, but much leſſe, they are plunged into a farre greater, euen to torment their conſciences with deadly ſtings of ſorrow by their ſinne, which of a long time will not bee plucked out. So the Iewes ſought libertie by putting Chriſt to death; yet when Matth. 8. 11. thereby he roſe roſe againe from death, it cut their hearts deeplier, and imbondaged them much more, (I ſpeake of ſuch as were not ſeared with an hot yron) and ſo much the rather for that they haue thereby brought his blood vpon them, and their children vnto this day.
                  I ſtand the rather vpon this, becauſe it is thought a fooliſh part for a man to beare a diſcommodity patiently, rather then to ſhift it off by vnlawfull meanes, and is counted a point of wiſdome to fall rather into the hands of bad men, though by yeeding to ſinne, then to commit his caſe to God, with confidence in him: for what account is made of that, though it bee againſt a mans conſcience? As many Politikes cenſure Daniel for his vpright Dan. 6. 10. perſiſting in the ſeruice of God, after the decree was made againſt him by the Princes. What? (ſay men) had he no ſhift nor euaſion to deliuer himſelfe, and elude his aduerſaries, but he muſt wilfully fall into the ſnare? Oh foole! learne by this example the truth of that denunciation; He that will 
                     Matth. 16. 25. Iob. 2. 4. 
                     ſaue his life, (that is, giue skinne for skinne, conſcience and all to ſaue it) he ſhall loſe it: that is, either be diſappointed for his ſhifts, God not giuing him fauour in the eyes of his enemies, who count him but an hypocrite for all his ſhifting) or if he ſeeme to gaine ſomewhat thereby in one kinde, yet he ſhall neuer enioy his penniworth with comfort, but rather with a checking and vpbraiding conſcience, if he doe not at length with wearines renounce it, and caſt it away, as Iudas did his wages of iniquitie. But hee that loſeth his 
                     Matth. 27. 3. 
                     life, that is, truſteth God with his moſt precious liberties, rather then he will runne vpon the pikes to haue his will, he ſhall finde it, as Heſter did, by ſauing Note. ir; or as the good Martyrs did, by changing it for eternall life, after the ſhort enduring of trouble, which their good and quiet ſpirit, and the hope of reward ſhall make tolerable. Oh that men would once learne to meaſure gaine, not by the preſentnes, but by the cleerenes, and worthineſſe of it! they ſhould by this meanes auoid many a ſinne, with the ſhifts that attend vpon it, beſides preuenting of many after-reckonings of ſorrow and puniſhment, which an euill conſcience makes vnſufferable: eſpecially if the ſame miſchiefe light vpon them, which with ſo deare a price they ſought to auoid. Very Heathens could ſay, that vengeance would not ſuffer the guiltie to Acts 2. 4. eſcape, though they might ſhift for the preſent. But the word of God teacheth vs the cauſe: becauſe the God of vengeance is the Lord of hoaſts, and hath a hundred ſouldiers armed to meete with his enemie, though he haue eſcaped one. It is as if a man hauing ſhunned a Beare, ſhould meete Amos 5. 19. with a Lion: he hath eſcaped the former, but he is ſtill in chace, neuer at reſt till he be deſtroyed, and hee had been better to haue yeelded to the firſt. The ſtory of al Churches verifie this truth in the examples of abiuring hypocrites, who met with worſe meaſure when God took them in hand, then

they ſhunned at the hand of men. For the wiſedome of man is fooliſhnes with 
                     1. Cor. 1. 20. 
                     God.
                  
                  Now in theſe two verſes the other way is ſet downe whereby Samſon 
                     Verſ. 7. 8. hurt the Philiſtims, and that was in their bodies, which hee ſo lamed and pained with kicking them with his feete, that he did beate life out of them. And ſo wee are to vnderſtand thoſe words in the 8. verſe [hippe and thigh] that is, with a neceſſary ſupply added for making the ſenſe runne the roundlier, thus; his foote put foorth to their thigh with a ſtrong blow, and had no other weapon to fight againſt them, but his foote; ſpurning them as ſluggiſh perſons, not able to reſiſt him. This as the beſt expoſition (in my opinion, leauing others to their own iudgement) of theſe words [he ſmote them hippe and thigh with a mightie plague] I ſet downe, not troubling the reader with other opinions about it.
                  Now by this extraordinarie ſtrength that hee had, thus to ſpurne and Doct. tread them downe euen to death; and the ſlauiſh daſtardlines of the Philiſtims, on the other ſide as much to bee admired, that they ſeemed not to ſtriue or fight for themſelues a whit: wee may ſee how mightily God aſſiſteth his ſeruants, whom he ſetteth about his worke, when he will haue all to ſee that it is he that bringeth it to paſſe, and not they. As in Gedeons vanquiſhing the Midianites that couered as graſhoppers the face of the earth Iudg. 7 7. for multitude; for he did it with a very few, euen three hundred men. And ſo he dealt with Iehoſaphat. For when the children of Ammon, and Moab, 2. Chro. 20. 17. and mount Seir, came to caſt him and the people of Iudah out of Gods inheritance, with a fearefull and an exceeding armie, the Lord ſent a meſſenger to them, ſaying: Feare not for all this great multitude, for the battell is not yours but Gods. Stand ſtill, moue not, and behold the ſaluation of God towards you, To morrow goe out againſt them, and the Lord will be with you. And (to make vſe of this doctrine) I ſay, that if wee haue eyes wee may ſee, that God aſſiſteth and helpeth his, in their trouble, feare and neede, beyond all that mans reaſon can reach vnto, when they depend on, and truſt in him: yea hee brings them into danger oftentimes and ſtraits, and all to this end that his power in deliuering them, may be ſeene in their weakenes, and fighteth for them as ſenſibly as he did for Iehoſaphat, or for Dauid againſt Goliah. Of the which truth Ionah is a liuely proofe, who was receiued into the fiſh, (when he was caſt into the ſea) preſerued in the belly of it, and caſt vp to land by the extraordinarie prouidence of God, rather then hee ſhould be loſt and forſaken.
                  
                     Samſon hauing thus ſlaine them, hee went and abode in a place called Etham, an high rocke, which belonged to the tribe of Simeon, in the borders of Iudah. And therefore it is ſaid in the next verſe, that the Philiſtims came and pitched in Iudah to ſeeke for him. But before hee thus ſlew them, as is ſaid in the 8. verſe, that is to be marked which he ſaid, and is ſet downe in the ſeuenth verſe; that when he ſaw that they had burned the Timnite and his daughter, ſeeing they were onely an occaſion of their loſſe, he ſaid thus to thoſe Philiſtims; If yee haue done thus to them your neighbours, and of your owne countrey, who did not hurt you, what would you doe to me, if I ſhould fall into your hands? I will therefore be auenged of you, before I

ceaſe. Thus much for the cleering of theſe two verſes.
                  Out of this verſe wee may note, that if men be cruell and outragious againſt Doct. verſ. 7. them that were onely the occaſions of their hurt, though they neuer ſought nor intended it; how much more will they ſhew their fury and madnes againſt them, who haue done the hurt and wrong vnto them? This may fitly be gathered from the reaſoning of Samſon. And ſo wee may well conclude and ſay; that if wee will bee exaſperated againſt ſuch as doe but come in our way, or were onely preſent where wee ſuſtained ſome reproch or iniurie; how much more, if we light vpon him that hath done the wrong to vs, will wee ſhew our ſelues vnreaſonable? For hee that cannot beare a little, much leſſe will beare a great deale. Fall not we (as neere as we can) into the hands of ſuch. So hee that will beate the ground at which he ſtumbled, will much more fiercely riſe againſt him, who hath caſt him wilfully on the ground.
                  Further, in that Samſon ſaid, hee would be auenged of the Philiſtims before he ceaſed, hee ſpake as it became him, ſeeing God had appointed him to doe ſo. So are all in authoritie ſet in place by God to be a terrour to the Rom. 13 4. wicked, euen as they are for the comfort of thoſe that are good. For it is a grace, and no eaſie matter to puniſh ſinne aright, and to ſeeke to winne the Prou. 17. 15. offender. And it is as great an offence for them to doe that worke of the Lord negligently, as it is to fall vpon the innocent haſtily and cruelly. So all priuate perſons, and Preachers of the word eſpecially, ſhould doe likewiſe: to wit, make that ſinne odious to themſelues and others (as farre as lieth in them) which the Magiſtrate is to puniſh, and they to reproue: euen as they ought to be like affected to all ſin, becauſe God abhorreth it. Herein ſaying with good Leui; Who is my father? I know not euen my father, if hee Deut 33. 9. goe about to hinder the worke of God: and herein follow wee our bleſſed Sauiour, who came to deſtroy the workes of the diuell. But I haue oft noted 1. Ioh. 3. 8. this before, therefore I preſſe it no further.
                  That which in the former verſe he was ſaid to threaten, the ſame in this Verſ. 8. verſe he is ſaid to doe and accompliſh. That is, to ſmite them with a great plague and in reprochfull maner: ſetting (as it were) his feete vpon them, or ſpurning them vnto death. This, if it had not been commanded by God, had bin cruelty. So that here we may learne to know, that except we haue 1 our charge from God to execute vpon men ſeuere and ſharp puniſhment, it is meere crueltie to ſet vpon it, which wee ſhould in no wiſe like, much leſſe delight to attempt: no more then wee would be willing to haue the like offered to our ſelues. But haue wee compaſſion and commiſeration ouer ſuch as are in miſerie any way, as we our ſelues would in like caſe deſire the ſame. This is a branch of the former, often touched before.
                  That which is ſaid of the rocke Etham here in in Iudah, is to ſhew that 2 he abode there, till hee was after taken from thence by the men of Iudah, and carried to the Philiſtims: which was ſoone after. Of which I know no more to be ſaid, ſaue onely that we may ſee that he did not goe to hide himſelfe in a corner, as though hee durſt not ſtand to that which hee had done, but being like to be apprehended he went, God directing him to take that patiently which they ſhould doe to him, and to depend on him for iſſue, though to a defenced and high place, yet to an open, where he was knowne

to be, and was eaſily remoued from thence, when the men of Iudah came vp thither to carrie him bound to the Philiſtims, he committing himſelfe to Gods prouidence, whoſe worke he had done. For though he went thither from the Philiſtims, yet he was euen there in a place where they gouerned.
                  So let all bee wiſe, to doe that for which they may not bee driuen to flie for it: but ſo anſwere to it, and bee armed to beare that which comes vpon them for the ſame. As it falleth out oft times, that euen for that which they haue well done, ſome inſtruments of the diuell or other will bee ready alwaies to moleſt and bring trouble vpon them for it. Notwithſtanding the which, yet they may reioyce as our Sauiour willeth them, and bee glad if Mat. 5. 12. they be perſecuted and reuiled for his ſake, that is, for well doing. But let 1. Pet. 3. 17. Prou. 20. 1. no man ſuffer for euill doing, for hee ſhall bee forced to hide himſelfe, and runne away; the wicked flying, when no man purſueth him. And yet (all that I haue ſaid notwithſtanding) it is not denyed any man, to reſcue himſelfe from the open wrong of the vnconſcionable, by any lawfull meanes, neither ought it to preiudice the equity of our cauſe.
               
            
         
         
            THE EIGHTIETH SERMON ON THE XV. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 9. Then the Philiſtims went vp, and pitched in Iudah, and ſpread themſelues in Lehi.
                     
                     10 And the men of Iudah ſaid, Why are ye come vp againſt vs? and they anſwered, To bind Samſon are we come vp, and to doe to him, as he hath done to vs.
                     
                     11 Then three thouſand men of Iudah went to the top of the rocke Etam, and ſaid to Samſon; Knowest thou not that the Philiſtims are rulers ouer vs? what is this that thou haſt done to vs? And he ſaid vnto them, As they did vnto me, ſo haue I done vnto them.
                     
                     12 And they ſaid vnto him, We are come downe to bind thee, that we may deliuer thee into the hand of the Philiſtims. And Samſon ſaid vnto them; Sweare vnto mee that ye will not fall vpon me your ſelues.
                     
                     13 And they ſpake vnto him, ſaying; No; but wee will bind thee faſt, and deliuer thee into their hand: but ſurely we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him from the rocke.
                     
                     14 And when he came to Lehi, the Philiſtims ſhouted at the meeting of him.
                     
                  
                  
                     HOw Samſon vexed the Philiſtims, we haue heard in the firſt part The ſumme of theſe verſes. of this Chapter: In this ſecond is ſhewed, how they purſuing him, got him to bee brought bound vnto them. And that was after this manner. Firſt they came vp againſt Iudah where Samſon was, threatning to fight againſt them, vnleſſe they brought Samſon
                     
bound vnto them. And this is in verſ. 9. 10. Secondly, they of Iudah fetched him from the rocke Etam, where hee was, and brought him bound vnto them: verſ. 11. 12. 13. And thirdly, when he came to them at Lehi, the place heere mentioned, the Philiſtims ſhouted for ioy that hee was come, thinking to haue ſome great hand ouer him: and this is in a part of the 14. verſe.
                  But to come more particularly to theſe three points, it is ſaid firſt, that the Verſ. 9. 10. Philiſtims came with an armie againſt Iudah in that part of it which was neere adioyning & conterminate to their owne countrey, here called Lehi, which ſignifieth a cheeke or iaw-bone, and tooke the name from an act that Samſon did in that place afterwards, in ſlaying many there with the iaw bone of an Aſſe. Into Iudah, I ſay, they came, putting the men thereof into great feare, for that Samſon, who had done them ſo great hurt, had his abode among them, and was (as they tooke it) harboured and maintained in that euill which he had wrought againſt them, by them of Iudah. And when they demanded of the Philiſtims, why they did ſo come againſt them, ſeeing they had not broken their league with them; they anſwered: that they did it for the great hurt that they had ſuſtained by Samſon, and him they would haue to be deliuered vnto them, or elſe they would make warre with them.
                  The Philiſtims did in this, but as any like them, nay many farre better, Doct. verſ. 9. would doe in the like caſe. Nay, there are few to bee found, either nation againſt nation, or man by man prouoked, who are not ready enough to ſeek reuenge, yea to paſſe their bounds therein exceedingly, rather then to come behind in ſuch caſes: who though they doe euill, as the Philiſtims alſo did, yet if any man would aske whether a Chriſtian muſt put vp all wrongs and iniuries? I anſwere; he may defend himſelfe in his innocent caſe, and ſtop the courſe of his aduerſarie, ſo as it bee without malice and a reuenging mind, of which more is ſaid in another place. Neither doe I affirme, that ſin is to goe vnpuniſhed, by this debarring of euery man in his priuate quarrell from reuenge: for (as that officer of Epheſus told the ſeditious Citizens) Act. 19. 38. If ye haue ought againſt theſe men, there are aduocates; ſo I ſay, in caſes of weight, there are Magiſtrates, who are to looke to this, that neither by the impudency of the wrong doer, nor the impotency of the reuenger the common-wealth be diſturbed: And ſo much more in the ſinnes committed againſt the Maieſty of God, ought the Magiſtrate to beſtirre himſelfe, if hee doe as behoues him: wherein he is no reuenger, but rather one that ſtands in the gap to ſtay Gods hand from being reuenged vpon the whole body for the diſorder of a few bad members, as in Phinees his ſtory is manifeſt. But that which I complaine of is this: that whereas men are ſo hot one againſt Numb. 25. 8. another for bodily treſpaſſes, and temporary harmes done vnto them; yet their owne ſpeciall ſinnes, which doe themſelues infinite harme, they haue no heart to goe againſt them; no neither are wiſe enough to beleeue what Note. deadly enemies they bee vnto them. And thus wee may find it in all kinds of offenders. A thing worthy to be bewailed, if it were duly conſidered; eſpecially in thoſe who hauing found them by wofull experience to haue wrought them more ſorrow and iuſt cauſe of complaint, then their rankeſt enemy could poſſibly haue procured them.
                  As for reuenging of others; that ſhould alway be ready to feare and hold

vs from it, which is written, Rom. 12. Vengeance is mine, ſaith the Lord, and I 
                     Rom. 12. 19. 
                     will repay it. For whiles men are ouer buſie in quitting themſelues of their enemy, they both exaſperate him, and make God a party againſt them, and ſo they find the harder match of it. Dauid durſt not reuenge when he could haue done it, but anſwered; As the Lord liueth, either the Lord ſhall ſmite him, or his day ſhall come to die, or he ſhall fall by the ſword, or otherwiſe: as for me, I will 
                     1. Sam 26. 10. 
                     not ſmite him; wickedneſſe be with the wicked, but my hand bee not vpon him. But 1. Sam 24. 13. we (though wee can doe nothing) yet pleaſe our ſelues in Iezabels humour, 1. King 19. 2. and her ſonnes, ſaying, God doe ſo to me, and more alſo, if I make not Eliahs head as the head of one of theſe to morrow. So ſaid Iehoram of Eliſha. Whereas before we can bring our purpoſe to paſſe, we are our ſelues preuented by God, and 2. King. 6. 1. our nailes pared, and we laid full low oftentimes, more fit to be pitied, then to reuenge. Doubtleſſe, if we could moderate our ſelues, and take the Apoſtles counſell to the Romans [If thine enemy hunger, feed him] Rom. 12. Rom. 12. 19. 20 wee ſhould ſooner make our aduerſary ſubmit himſelfe vnto vs, and acknowledge his offence with ſhame and griefe, then wee ſhall euer doe it by oppoſition: which were a double victory both ouer him and our ſelues. See that example, 2. King. 6. 22. compared with the end of the 23. verſe.
                  Now by this their ſeeking of Samſon, and requiring of the men of Iudah Doct. verſ. 10. with threats, and in armour, to bring him bound to them, as in this verſe it appeared they did) we ſee a new trouble aroſe againſt him, for the faithfull and diligent performance of his dutie: euen as Dauid receiued many diſcouragements for his well doing, and namely by Saul, and thoſe many and 1. Sam. 17. 8. great, and before that, of Eliab his brother, in offering himſelfe to fight againſt Goliah. But ſo God hath prouided in his wiſe diſpoſing of things, that wee cannot bee forward in any good cauſe, but commonly for the humbling of vs it ſhal coſt vs trouble: as either by our owne corrupt nature croſſing and hindering vs, ſeeing we are renued but in part, & the fleſh reſiſteth againſt the ſpirit, when we ſtriue to doe well, and to renounce euill: or elſe by outward affliction befalling vs for the ſame. As oftentimes ill will of men is ready to meet vs, for labouring to keepe a good conſcience, and that many waies ſhewed and teſtified: as by railing vpon vs, and ſpeaking euill of vs, perſecuting, and other vnreaſonable meaſure offering vnto vs, becauſe wee cannot brooke, and digeſt the ſinnes of the times that wee liue in, nor walke after the bad examples of other, as Saint Peter ſpeaketh. But oh, little 1. Pet. 44. know wee or conſider, that by ſuch oppoſition the Lord trieth what courage is in vs, and whether wee were like to honour him by ſuffering greater things for him, when we can ſo eaſily beare ſmaller reproches for his names ſake, and make them our crowne, counting our ſelues happie that wee may ſuffer for well doing. Moreouer this manner of our liuing, and ſuch carriage of our ſelues, bringeth another way great reioycing. For what ioy or comfort is like to that which ariſeth from a good conſcience? which Salomon therefore compareth to the continuall feaſting of the vngodly. But this Prou. 15. 15. 2. Cor. 1. 12. hath been often vrged.
                  This bee ſaid of the firſt of theſe three things in this ſecond part of the Verſ. 10. 11. 12. Chapter, to wit, of the Philiſtims comming armed againſt the men of Iudah to require Samſon of them. Now the next point followeth thereof; that

is to ſay, how the men of Iudah, being ſore afraid of them, went and bound Samſon, to deliuer him vnto them. And this they did after they had asked of them why they came againſt them, and they had anſwered; to haue Samſon brought bound vnto them. The which they went about immediately, as ſhall further be laid out in the 11. 12. and 13. verſes.
                  But the men of Iudah demaund of them in this 10. verſe, why they took Verſ 10. vp armour againſt them, ſeeing they (according to agreement with them) ſubmitted themſelues to them, and paid their tribute, and had not prouoked them by riſing againſt them: vpon which condition, they had promiſe of the Philiſtims that they ſhould enioy peace, and liue without feare. But they anſwered for themſelues, by pleading how Samſon had ſpoiled them, who was one of them, and if they would (they ſaid) defend his doing, then they would fight and make warre with them: but if they would deliuer him bound vnto them, they would depart: for they would (they ſaid) do vnto him, as he had done vnto them.
                  They of Iudah thought they had great wrong offered them by the Philiſtims, Doct. verſ. 10. whiles they themſelues did none to them: for they did not defend Samſons fact. And the Philiſtims thought much that they ſhould be oppoſed by any of Iudah, they hauing made peace with them vpon conditions, and would hurt none but him (they ſaid) that had hurt them. By both wee learne, that it is more then heatheniſh, and a thing that reaſonable men doe marueile at, that peaceable and innocent people, who giue themſelues to leade an harmeleſſe life, ſhould be hurt by any, and that they ſhould not bee quiet and in ſafety by them with whom they liue, and to whom they do no harme. So ſaith Salomon; Intend no euill against thy neighbour, ſeeing hee doth 
                     Pro. 3. 29. 
                     dwell without feare by thee. And they who enioy ſuch peaceby them, haue that earthly benefit that God alloweth them; which how great it is, who doth not know?
                  But on the contrary, the vnpeaceable (for the moſt part) doe reape the fruit of their vnquiet liuing, anſwerably. For it muſt be granted, that vnrighteous people, and ſuch as ſhiftingly hurt & wrong others, procure to themſelues much hatred, trouble and ſorrow; and the breaking out of men that way, doth cauſe the exclamations, diſquiets and complaints that are in all places. But God doth pay ſuch home, and requite the leaud and bad dealings of vnconſcionable men oft times in this life, cauſing them to find ſuch meaſure as they offer to other. From which dealing yet how farre they ſhould be, euen this teacheth; that both the Philiſtims, and they againe, the men of Iudah, do claime couenant keeping of the heathen Philiſtims, and challenge them for the breach of it, as being againſt the light of nature. And how much more ſhould Chriſtians keepe couenants which they haue made for peace one with another, howſoeuer things fall out, and not breake and goe from them diſhoneſtly, when by Gods prouidence they ſuſtaine ſome hurt thereby. Euen as wee reade in the Pſalme. If thou haſt ſworne to thy neighbour, diſappoint him not, though thou ſhouldeſt loſe thereby. Sundry Pſal. 15 4. are the bands which tye men (otherwiſe lawleſſe) to dutie and peace. The generalleſt is the common band of humanity. Then our Baptiſme, profeſſion, the Communion (for ſo we call that Sacrament) and among ſome, Matrimony, conſanguinity, affinity, friendſhip, partnerſhip, neighbourhood;

yea the law or comprimize hath bound ſome from offering violence. Here are lincks enough, a man would thinke, to make a cord not eaſie to be broken: but where a boyſterous and vnreaſonable ſpirit, nay brutiſh, beareth ſway, what is there, either holy thing or ciuill ſufficient to containe men? Euen as Samſon did with thoſe new ropes, ſo doe theſe with ſuch bands of loue and amitie, ſhameleſly and at once, breake all in two, like flax. But here an end of this.
                  Now to goe forward, wee haue heard that the men of Iudah anſwered Verſ. 11. the Philiſtims, that they had not riſen vp againſt them, and therefore marueiled why they came to make warre with them. Whereupon ariſeth a 
                        Queſt. 1. queſtion, whether they did well in yeelding ſo to the Philiſtims, and in anſwering them ſo, to wit, that they had been ſubiect to them according to agreement. Alſo, whether they did well herein, in offering to yeeld Samſon to them? And now (as is ſaid in this verſe) in forſaking him their countrey man and auenger, nay in apprehending and binding him, and ſo to deliuer him into their hands? For God had raiſed him vp an helper vnto them, his people, againſt their enemies: and ſhould they be ſo vnthankfull as to offer him, their Iudge and helper, into their enemies hands?
                  Againe, (to make the doubt the greater) it was ſaid in verſe 4, chapt. 14. that it came of the Lord, that Samſon ſhould take occaſion againſt the Philiſtims, that he might ſore vexe them; and ſhould they of Iudah then helpe them to cut him off, who was giuen of God to be ſuch an helper to them? And whereas he was not ſo openly and profeſſedly ſuffered to ſhew himſelfe ſuch a one, as the other Iudges did; Othniel, Ehud and the reſt: but only in priuate manner to vexe them, as they gaue him occaſion,
                  To this the anſwere is; that ſo God had appointed, who would thereby haue the enemies curbed, and their force weakned, for the eaſe and quiet of his people, and yet he would not giue them a ful deliuerance, whom he had ſo often proued to be vnfaithfull and vnthankfull toward him.
                  I ſay therefore that hereupon it may ſeeme that the whole courſe of the words and deedes of the men of Iudah toward Samſon, was faultie and euill, for ought that hath yet been ſaid to the contrary, and their yeelding him vp to the Philiſtims, as they did afterward, was no better then that which they are ſaid in this verſe to haue ſpoke and done to him: to wit, that they went ſo ſpeedily about the apprehending and binding of him, and ſo ſharply rebuked him for the hurt he did to the Philiſtims, whereas they fared the better for it, and ſaw it was to the eaſing of them.
                  To all this I anſwere, that it is not certaine that the men of Iudah knew Anſw. any ſuch thing that Samſon was giuen them to auenge them of the Philiſtims, (though it was told to his mother by the Angell in the 13. Chapter, verſe 5.) and that may bee gathered by the words of the men of Iudah to Samſon, when they ſpake to him ſo ſharply and ſaid, that they muſt bind him, and ſo deliuer him to the Philiſtims: which had been abſurd for them to ſpeake, if they had knowne that he was ſet by the Lord to deliuer them. Beſides, God gaue them no commandement to breake their league with the Philiſtims, which they had made with them, being brought vnder of them, neither had hee giuen them any meanes to defend them by violence and armes againſt them, therefore they were to commit the ſucceſſe to God:

and it cannot be laid to the charge of the men of Iudah as their fault, that they did ſo to Samſon in deliuering him vp into the Philiſtims hands, notwithſtanding that God in his prouidence had called Samſon to be their auenger. And wee muſt obſerue that by this deliuerie of Samſon, the Lord ſtill gaue further heart as alſo opportunitie to him to afflict theſe Philiſtims more then before, as ſhall appeare in the fifteenth verſe. So that the Lord thus carrying the buſineſſe, wee muſt not (without apparant cauſe) condemne the fact of the people. Yet hereby I doe not altogether cleere them from blame. For there is no doubt of this, but that the men of Iudah were too much afraid of the Philiſtims, and too ready to keepe themſelues from danger by them, and to ſtay them from making warre againſt them. And though it had been commanded them of God to haue kept Samſon from them, yet ſeeing it had been with the perill of their liues, it is like enough they would not for all that haue done ſo, but would haue deliuered him vp vnto them: onely indeed they are the leſſe to be charged, becauſe (as I ſaid) they had no commandement of God to doe ſo, which excuſeth the fact, but not them, becauſe they looked not at theſe grounds, neither were guided by knowledge. So then thus I conclude (and let the reader marke): The fact of the people of Iudah had been bad and groſſe, if they had left Samſon to ſhift for himſelfe, againſt an expreſſe commandement from God, and if he had bidden them to take Samſon for their helper, and to aſſiſt him: for then they ought to beleeue, that hee would both haue directed them what to doe, and would alſo haue aſſiſted them. But this not appearing by any neceſſarie proofe, they are onely to be charged for this, that they proceeded herein vpon ſiniſter cauſes, and not by the warrant of knowledge; as appeares by their fleſhly fearing the Philiſtims, becauſe they were ſtrong: and they did not cleaue to Samſon in this reſpect, ſeeing they ſaw not that they were like to be eaſed greatly by him againſt them, and thereupon were ſo ready to goe about to apprehend him, and to aske him what hee meant to prouoke the Philiſtims againſt them, they being yet vnder their dominion.
                  So that this wee may learne hereby; That howſoeuer God promiſed to Doct. verſ. 11. be with vs in all our waies appointed to vs by him to walke in, as hee did to theſe men of Iudah, yet if we cannot doe ſo without oppoſition, diſpleaſure and reſiſtance by men, wee commonly looke, as they did, to the ſtrongeſt ſide, with fleſhly and carnal eyes, I meane, to the power of man, and not of God, and ſo we ſoone goe out of the way: which is not like to be without our great hurt. And yet marueilous it is to ſee, what ſlauiſh mindes are in vs, Note. that how plainly ſoeuer God reueile his will to vs, in and about any particular dutie, we will haue an hundred ſhifts and excuſes why we cannot (as we ſay) but indeed dare not walke in the approued beaten way, which God hath laid out for vs.
                  No tongue is able to expreſſe the innumerable breaches of Gods commandements, and fearfull ſinnes which are committed thus and by this occaſion: and all to ſhunne an outward and temporary danger and diſcommoditie; but the inward violence and ſmarting words which wee make in our conſciences thereby we doe not at all, or very little regard them: which therefore ariſe after, and ſometime many yeeres after to trouble, yea and

torment vs. As the fact of Ioſephs brethren did vex them more then twenty Gen. 42. 21. yeeres after; and Dauid was ſore troubled, when he remembred the ſinnes Pſal. 25 7. of his youth.
                  And this to bee true both Scripture and experience teach vs, that while men runne into ſinne, to auoid outward trouble and danger, and yet make nothing of it when they haue done, leſt they ſhould too much diſquiet themſelues; yet that God doth afterwards make their doings as prickes in their eyes, and thornes in their fleſh; that thereby we may know, that they who hold vp their heads moſt iollily after their ſione committed, as though nothing were amiſſe with them, ſhall not ſo eaſily goe away with it; but their ſinne which they haue made their dearling, ſhall ſting them in their boſomes, and riſe vp and ſtrangle them, as it oft doth, and make their liues weariſome, if it put not alſo an end to them; as the ſinne of Zimry and Coſby did; Corab alſo and his company. But where might one make an end of Numb. 25. 8. Numb. 16. 32. this diſcourſe? Looke more of this in the ſtorie of Gedeons demaund of the men of Succoth and Penuel, and in this Chapter, verſe 6.
                  To the queſtion of the men of Iudah, demaunding of Samſon what hee meant ſo to prouoke the Philiſtims againſt thē, by hurting them (he knowing Verſ. 11. 12 that they, euen all their land, were vnder them, and ſubiect to them) he anſwereth them; As they haue done to me, ſo haue I done to them; meaning, according to my charge. Samſon might haue been like, if hee had followed carnall reaſon, to haue fallen vpon them, for that they knowing him to haue ſo greatly hurt their enemies, and he knowing himſelfe to be their Iudge and helper, ſaw yet that he was ſo roughly dealt with by them: for they might ſeeme to deale with him as the Hebrewes dealt with Moſes; 
                     Exod. 5. 21. who being oppreſſed by Pharao, told Moſes that he made them ſtinke in the ſight of Pharao, Samſon (I ſay) knowing that which he did, might haue bin like to haue ſlaine theſe men of Iudah for their ſlauiſh fearing of the Philiſtims, and for their ſl
                        •
                     rh and daſterdlines in yeelding to them, and ſetting themſelues againſt him.
                  But he kindly anſwered them, and told them gently what he had done to them, and why. And when they ſhewed him that they muſt binde him, and carrie him to the Philiſtims, hee rageth not againſt them, neither hurteth them, he only requires an oath of them (and vpon that condition he would yeeld himſelfe to them) to wit, that they would not kill him themſelues: the which he did, becauſe hee loued his countrey, and would in no wiſe ſhed the blood of any of his citizens; which (yet) hee ſaw hee muſt doe, if hee ſhould fight with them by hand-blowes. Such was his loue to them, that he would rather be deliuered to his enemies, then that his countrey for his cauſe ſhould come into danger: and his faith in God was as firme and conſtant. In whoſe mercie he truſting, doubted not to commit himſelfe to his enemies and to defend his nation from them with the perill of his life. And this teacheth, that we ſhould haue regard of other, as well as of our ſelues, in ſo much that though we haue power in our hands to hurt them, yea and though ſome cauſe be offered vs to deale hardly with them, yet wee ſhould forbeare, and rather in godly wiſedome paſſe by an offence, except greater euill and inconuenience doe come thereby.
                  For (alas) what pleaſure ſhould we take in ſeeing euill fall vpon our brethren,

when we might haue held it from them? which Iob in no wiſe would Iob 31. 29. be brought to doe. And as we ſhould euery way haue regard of this toward our neighbour, ſo in our families we ſhould ſhew this wiſedome, care, and loue toward them that are vnder our gouernment. For the Lord ſparing vs, Note. where we haue deſerued hard meaſure at his hands, nay we receiuing many and continuall bleſſings from God, why ſhould wee not alſo deale well with other? So Iob gaue his ſeruants leaue to plead their cauſe, and hearkened Iob 31. 13. to them, if they were wronged. And of his neighbours hee ſaid; I was not moued with ioy when euill came vpon them that hate me, neither ſuffered 29. 30. I my mouth to ſinne, by wiſhing a curſe to their ſoule. All theſe commendable graces in Iob are condemnations of the ſpitefull and malicious, who glory in cruelty againſt other, and ſeck to hurt and wrong them, whom See Heſter 10. laſt verſe. they ſhould kindly regard.
                  Nature hath engrauen a loue in vs to our countrey, but grace muſt ſeaſon, ripen, and direct it. And a ſhame it were for Chriſtians to come ſhort of Heathens in this point. And yet there are memorable examples among them of ſuch as for the procurement of their countreys good, doubted not to deuote themſelues to execrable deaths, and offer themſelues of their own accord to aſſured ſlaughter. But what ſhall I ſay of this nation of ours? Thoſe Decij and Marcus Regulus ſhall riſe vp in iudgement againſt many curſed vipers, degenerate miſcreants of this our nation, who (hauing ſome of them more bonds to obliege them to loue and loyaltie then this alone, I meane, fauours from Prince, dignities and rewards more then for their deſert) yet haue attempted and taken vp armes againſt their owne parent, and ſought to ſhed her bowels vpon the ground: ſome out of pretenſed conſcience, but moſt out of helliſh rancour, diſcontent, pride, and vnthankfulnes, haue raced out the image of all loue, dutie, or allegiance to God, King, Religion and Nation: ſorting themſelues into two treacherous rankes of runnagates, the one ſhrouding themſelues as ſouldiers vnder forreine Popiſh Princes: and waiting their opportunitie to doe miſchiefe: the other creeping into Cloyſters, and there taking vpon them the mark of Antichriſt the Pope, the deadly enemie of our Religion and State, and renouncing their owne countrey and ſeruice thereto, to the end that they may returne againe and worke the ruine thereof by their curſed policie.
                  But to leaue th
                        •
                     ſe and ſhut vp the poynt, let Samſon teach vs, both Gouernours, Miniſters, and people, to vnite our loue to our nation and the Church of God therein, by almeanes wiſhing her peace, and procuring her welfare: and pray God that they may more and more doe it, whom it concerneth to roote out all aduerſarie power which might threaten it. As wee ſee, Paul cannot thinke of his nation, but he burſteth foorth into prayers for the ſaluation of it, not doubting (as a loyall ſouldier) to pledge not his life Rom. 9. 3. onely, but his ſoule for it. And Dauid when hee beheld his people ſtanding amazed at Goliah, breaketh out thus; What is this vncircumciſed Philiſtim, 1. Sam. 17. 26. that he thus brayeth againſt God, and the hoſte of Iſrael? Thus let it be with vs, and not onely content our ſelues with that common loue that ſtandeth in the communion of peace, wealth, eaſe, pleaſure, and liberties: for then the leaſt diſcontent for the want thereof may preuaile ſo farre, as to cauſe vs to forſweare all religious or ciuil intereſt in her that begat and nouriſhed vs.
                  
                     
The oath that he required of them, was for the ſecuring of him; for hee Verſe 12. thought himſelfe ſafe if he had an oath from them, that they would not kill him: becauſe then hee doubted not, but that hee ſhould breake his bands, and eſcape the hands of the Philiſtims, and vex them againe. This his example teacheth vs to take heed how wee commit our ſelues into the hands of men, and whom we cannot ſafely truſt; and ſuch as are not faithfull to God, except wee haue good ſecuritie for our ſo doing, (yea though they make ſhewes of friendſhip and loue) but much more when they bewray themſelues to be ſuch. Neither hang we the peace of our conſcience vpon men; for they that haue none themſelues, will not tender and regard vs, but put vs to our ſhirts. Looke in the former chapter more at large hereof.
                  And here wee ſee, that men venture their liues vpon the ſecuritie of an oath. He putteth his life into their hands, when they had ſworne they would not kill him. So the Gibeonites thought themſelues ſafe, when the Princes of Iſrael had ſworne to grant them their liues: and Rahab was ſatisfied, when Ioſh. 9. 15. the Spies had promiſed her by an oath, that they would ſaue her and her fathers Ioſh. 2. 12. houſe, when they came to take Iericho the citie wherein ſhe dwelt. Such an account hath been made of an oath, euen among the Heathens; as hath been noted in the ſtorie of Iphtah and the men of Gilead, chapter 11, verſe 11.) by the like occaſion. Therfore moſt fearefull it is, that ſuch as goe for Chriſtians breake and goe from their oath which they haue made to witnes their faithfulnes to their brethren, putting their truſt in them; wheras their bare word ought to haue tyed them: much more this condemnes ſuch as lay vnconſcionable oathes on people, and vrge them to ſweare to that, which is in no wiſe to be vrged vpon them.
                  Now they did as they had ſaid to him, I meane, they bound him with Verſ. 13. two new cords, and brought him downe from the rock: loe, thus they dealt with him, and deliuered him into their enemies hands. Now in that they were conſtrained thus to bring him bound to them, euen as a ſheepe to the ſhambles, (and as if men ſhould deliuer their dogges to the wolues) and ſo muſt bee depriued of ſuch a great benefit as hee had been to them almoſt twentie yeeres, in deliuering them from the oppreſſion of the Philiſtims, (God giuing them no commandement to aſſiſt him:) note wee, that it falleth out many times, that wee muſt (and cannot auoide it) be depriued (the caſe ſo requiring) of our beſt helpes and meanes of our health, peace, libertie, and other commodities. And God will haue vs feele the ſmart thereof, to make vs know our ſelues the better. And how ought this to bring vs out of loue with our ſpeciall ſinnes, which are the cauſes hereof, or of like vnquietnes and diſtraction in our liues? And if we deſire to keepe the beſt things wee haue, to our comfort, then let vs offer violence to ſuch our ſins, as looſnes, inconſtancie, hollow-heartednes, wilfulnes, ſtoutnes, worldlines, or to any other as they ſhall ſit more neere vs. Touching this fruite of ſinne, wee haue had occaſion to ſpeake often, and through this booke.
                  The men of Iudah to ſhew their diligence, and to purge themſelues from Verſ. 14. blame with the Philiſtims, brought Samſon from the rock bound vnto them in that place Lehi before mentioned, nigh the borders of the Philiſtims, and yeelding him vp ſo into their hands, at leaſt going about ſo to do: (for elſe, if he had eſcaped before they ſaw him bound, and before they had receiued

him into their cuſtody, they might haue been thought to deale fraudulently with the Philiſtims, and not to haue bound him,) I ſay when they brought him to them, in that manner, I meane faſt bound, they ſhouted with a great noiſe for ioy: ſo glad they were, when they had him their enemie, ſo neere them, euen in their hands, and (as they thought) paſt eſcaping.
                  Behold heere the ioy of the wicked, wherein it conſiſteth, and how it is Doct. cauſed. In a word, when their deſire is accompliſhed; howſoeuer it bee: as in the apprehending of a great enemy of theirs, (as heere it was with the Philiſtims, when they had got Samſon bound) ſo in their aduancement, in feaſting, in play, vaine pleaſure, and ſuch like. But as for good things, as the certainty of the fauour of God, the aſſurance of eternall life, other heauenly tidings of the Goſpell, the ſetting vp of the kingdome of Chriſt, or the ouerthrow of idolatry or ſome great ſinne, finally in holding and keeping a good conſcience (which yet is continuall feaſting) they know they cannot Prou. 15. 15. Note. reioyce in theſe. Whereby a man may iudge more certainely of their eſtate to Godward, then the Phyſitian may of the ſtate of his patients diſeaſe, by feeling his pulſe.
                  And to ſpeake as the truth is, what reſting is in ſuch ioy, how lawfull ſoeuer the things are in which they reioyce? but a ſudden ſorrow may follow as greatly ſtinging and tormenting them, or ſuch as will at leaſt a while after Note. vndoubtedly take hold of them, in this changeable world (if no other way) by loſing and forgetting that which cauſed ſuch reioycing. And theſe moods and paſſions) which are as meere extremities, as the noonetide is to midnight) are nothing beſeeming the faithfull ſeruants of God, but doe vtterly diſguiſe them, who haue learned to take vp their delight in the other things holy and heauenly, which I haue laſt mentioned, and ſuch like: and in their reioycings in and about theſe outward to bee carried alwaies in a meane, and with meaſure.
                  And becauſe I know, that vpon that which I haue now ſaide, it will anſwere theſe demands and queſtions, whether it be vnlawfull to reioyce in ſuch lawfull things as God giueth men to enioy in this life, as victory ouer enemies, promotion, wealth, and ſuch like: I anſwere, no, as I ſaid before: ſo as withall we deſire and reſolue to make right vſe of them, ſo farre as wee know how, or may learne: but to reſt in them is vnlawfull, for that were 1. Tim. 6. 17. to truſt in them, which is idolatry. Alſo to exceed in reioycing for hauing them, is to take away our ioy from better things, if we haue any, or to hinder it, that there may be none; of which fault to be conuinced, Iob in no wiſe could abide it. I thinke it not vnfit heere, (though I might bring hither Iob 31. 25. his owne words, which doe cleerely ſhew that hee was a paterne of rightly enioying riches (to ſet downe the obſeruation of the right learned Father Maſter Beza concerning this point. Hee well weighing the ſtory of Iob and his practiſe this way, ſpeaketh thus of him about this thing. Iob (ſaith he) loſt his goods without any great griefe, therfore he enioyed them when he had them, without any great loue. Thus wee haue heard in this ſecond part, how the Philiſtims preuailed thus far to the ſatisfying of themſelues in ſeeking reuenge vpō 
                     Samſon, that they cauſed the mē of Iudah to bring him bound vnto them, to their great reioycing. Now followeth the third part of this Chapter, wherein we ſhall ſee how flitting and ſhort this their ioy was.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE EIGHTIE ONE SERMON ON THE XV. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 14. And the ſpirit of the Lord came mightily vpon him, and the cords that were vpon his armes became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands looſed from off his hands.
                     
                     15. And hee found a new iaw bone of an Aſſe, and put forth his hand, and tooke it, and ſlew a thouſand men therewith.
                     
                     16. And Samſon ſaid, With the iaw bone of an Aſſe, heapes vpon heapes, with the iaw bone of an Aſſe haue I ſlaine a thouſand men.
                     
                     17. And it came to paſſe when he had made an end of ſpeaking, that he caſt away the iaw bone out of his hand, and called that place Ramath-Lehi.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe ſumme of the words which I haue now ſet downe is briefly this, that firſt Samſon broke his bands: after The ſumme. that, hee ſlew a thouſand of them: and laſtly, gaue a name to the place accordingly. To proceed firſt with this other part of the 14. verſe, for the former part was ſpoken of in the former Sermon, it is ſaid concerning the firſt of theſe three points, that while the Philiſtims were ſhouting for ioy at the deliuering of Samſon bound vnto them: the ſpirit of the Lord ſtrengthened him in ſuch wiſe, that he did as eaſily breake the cords, as if the fire had burned flax. Wherein ſtill let vs marke, that the Lord is ſaid to giue ſtrength to Samſon, that we may ſee that he was with him, and aſſiſted him in all the great acts that he did againſt the Philiſtims.
                  Which many in reading the ſtory not marking, do not vnderſtand it, but take it amiſſe, as though Samſon had done all that he did againſt them, cruelly and ſpitefully; when (yet) all may eaſily ſee, that ſtrength and rare courage and labour, which hee had not of himſelfe, were requiſite for the doing of the things that hee did, if hee had been neuer ſo malicious. And ſo in all the 
                        Doct. 1. duties that we performe, to the magnifying of the Goſpel, and our holy profeſſion of it, more then other doe attaine vnto, let vs looke that the Lord ſet vs about them, and goe before vs in them by his word, and be the perſwader of vs thereto by his ſpirit, (whereby onely wee are inabled.) that ſo neither fancy, nor moode, and paſſion may be ſaid to leade vs therein: which may eaſily come to paſſe in the doing of good things; as by the like occaſions I haue often obſerued.
                  And heere it is very profitable to note, how ſhort and momentanie the 2
                     
greatioy of the Philiſtims was at the beholding of Samſon bound: forloe, the Lord vnbound him immediately, and ſo turned al their ioy into as great ſorrow. This may be learned here, how flitting the reioycings of ſuch are as be not guided by the ſpirit of God, but follow their fleſhly humour therein; the beſt of them are fickle and momentany, yea euen the pleaſanteſt of them Eccleſ. 7. 6. as the cracking of thornes vnder a pot. Onely this caueat I would haue the reader to obſerue, that what I ſpeake of theſe vncircumciſed Philiſtims in this & the next point, I applie not vnto their particular condition (being not enlightened, but deſtitute of all feeling of their miſery, or ſinne,) but I take occaſion by the iuſt iudgement of God vpon them for other ſinnes againſt their knowledge, to put all bad perſons in mind of the woe which hangeth ouer them for their vnbeleefe, wilfull louing of darkeneſſe more then light, Ioh. 3. 19. and the ſeuerall ſinnes iſſuing thence, and by name the abuſe of earthly bleſſings. And this I ſay of all ſuch; The wicked flouriſheth (as Dauid faith) like the greene bay tree, that doth not as other trees caſt or change her leafe, no Pſal. 37. 35. 36. not in winter: ſo doth their iollity appeare aboue other mens: nay it ſeemeth in the eyes of fooles, to be ſuch, that they liue (as they ſuppoſe) in a little paradiſe: and yet within a while there is no remainder or token of any ſuch thing left behinde, but deſolation onely and confuſion to be ſeene, but of their eſtate to Godward, as a ſecret I ceaſe to ſpeake of.
                  
                     Nabal ſwimming in wealth, did make a feaſt as the feaſt of a King, and his heart was merrie with wine, but about ten daies after, he was taken from all, 1. Sam. 25. 37. and died; and his heart died the next morning, after he heard he ſhould die, and hee was like a ſtone, when his wife told him what had been intended againſt him. And how was Hamans heart lifted vp by his aduancement and great fauour with the King? So that he could not containe himſelfe, but he Eſter 5. 12. muſt needs tell forth to his friends, what proſperitie he had; and yet he had as good hold of it, as can be enioyed in this world, being backed and vpholden by the mightieſt that was in the land vnder God. But how ſoone was all his honour laid in the duſt, and his ioy ended with moſt bitter anguiſh and torment?
                  The Scriptures and experience are full of ſuch examples. Hee that hath liued and obſerued the courſes of thoſe, who in diuers ages haue ſeemed moſt happie of other of their condition, and haue moſt giuen themſelues, as their ſtate and place would giue them leaue, to take the vtmoſt of their liberty in the merriments of the world, (and yet what haue they been, but play and other vaine pleaſure taking in pampering the body with eating and drinking, company keeping with ſuch as themſelues b
                        ••
                     , or in gathering wealth, and ſuch like) they (I ſay) who haue marked ſuch things, what haue they ſeene but this, how ſoone they haue been taken from them all, neuer looking for it, not thinking of it, and yet others oft fearing it, and many of Note. them in ſuch manner plucked from all, as if a man would ſay. God would haue all to marke and ſpeake of it. For if Salomon could finde nothing in all Eccleſ. 2. 11. his royalties, dignities, and pleaſures, but vanitie and vexation, doe other comming after him, looke to find better then be euer could? no, this world affordeth no better.
                  So that it may iuſtly grieue him, that knoweth that all ſuch ſhall come to feareful iudgement, who haue made theſe fading and deceiueable pleaſures Eccleſ. 11. 9.
                     
their greateſt ioy, to thinke they haue been no wiſer, but to trifle out their pretious time, in which they might haue taken ſo much good; I meane, they might haue ſucked out of the Goſpell true comfort here, and ſaluation Note. afterward for euer. And this is the right vſe that ſhould bee made of this doctrine, to wit, of the momentanie ioy of the godleſſe and irreligious in this world, that wee ſhould ſeeke durable ioy, and that which is alſo moſt ſound and ſauorie, namely, the aſſurance of Gods fauour heere on earth, (till wee enioy it moſt perfectly in heauen;) and a Chriſtian and godly life, which is the only ſweet companion and guide, that leadeth vs thither.
                  The firſt of the three things in this third part, wee haue now heard, and Verſ. 15. 16. The ſenſe.
                      that was, how he brake the double cord wherewith he was tied. The ſecond is ſet downe in theſe two verſes, namely, that when hee had eſcaped out of their hands, yet it was ſo farre off, that all they who were there preſent could apprehend him againe, that he ſlew a thouſand of thoſe Philiſtims, there gathered together to ſee him, & reioyce at the bringing of him thither bound. But ye will aske how he could doe ſo, being but one alone, and yet naked alſo and vnfurniſhed of weapons; I ſay, the Lord, as we haue heard, ſtrengthened him: and for weapon, though he had none, a new and moiſt iawbone of an Aſſe by Gods prouidence lay by, which he tooke vp, and made that ſerue for the purpoſe, as if it it had been ſword, ſtaffe, or other weapon. And when hee had ſlaine them, hee ſhewed what heapes hee had made with ſo ſlight a helpe or inſtrument.
                  Heere we ſee that theſe Philiſtims lately ſo exceedingly ioyfull, did not onely loſe their ioy, but their liues alſo. And this may tell vs yet a heauier Doct. verſ. 15. thing then the former. For it teacheth, that for the moſt part, looke what fearefull and blind eſtate the blind and bad people liue in, and chuſe to repoſe themſelues in, in the ſame they continue for the moſt part, and end their daies. For is there almoſt any place left for amendment? Therfore the Apoſtle ſaith; The wicked and the deceiuer wax worſe and worſe, and when they crie peace, peace, and all things are ſafe, then commeth deſtruction ſuddenly 2. Tim. 3. 13. 1. Theſ. 5. 3. vpon them, before they be aware, as the trauell vpon a woman with child, and they ſhall not be able to auoide it.
                  When the rich man in the Goſpell reioyced moſt in that he had, he was Luk. 12. 20. neareſt a wofull end. So Baltazzer when he was drinking wine merrily with his Princes and Concubines, in the veſſels of the Temple, then the fearfull Dan. 5. 27. hand writing appeared on the wall, hauing this meaning, God hath finiſhed thy kingdome. So Agag. And as ſuch liue, ſo they die. Although I denie 1. Sam. 15. 33. not, but God, where it pleaſeth him, can giue a new hart, where it is ſought, and cauſe ſuch vanity to bee diſtaſted, as wherein men haue delighted, and worke found reioycing inſtead thereof. Therefore chuſe wee the beſt delights, and ſo the longer we hold them, the ſoundlier wee ſhall enioy them, vntill we keepe them vnto our end.
                  Another thing that he did, was, that when he had ſlaine an heape, he correcteth Verſ. 16. 17. himſelfe, when hee ſmote them on both ſides with the iaw-bone, they preaſing about to take him; and he ſaith, two heapes, or many: as if he ſhould haue ſaid; heapes vpon heapes had been ſlaine by him. And ſeeing hee knew that God gaue him the ſtrength thereto, hee being a godly man, Iudg. 15. 18. why doth he vtter theſe words, but that al might ſee and acknowledge what

a great worke God had wrought by him, and that by a weake meane, euen with the iaw bone of an Aſſe? To teach vs, that where the Lord will haue vs execute iuſtice without pitie vpon euill doers, we muſt not faint, nor be negligent to doe his commandement vpon them, as Samſon did here, Ioſhua before on Achan, Ehud vpon the King of Moab, and Shamgar on the Philiſtims. Ioſh. 7. 25. Iudg. 3. 21. & 3
                           •
                        . God will haue the wicked ſmart for their treſpaſſes openly committed; to ſmart (I ſay) by men according to the weight and hainouſneſſe of them, and vtterly forbiddeth fooliſh pity to be ſhewed in ſuch a caſe; according to the ſaying of Salomon: It is an abomination to iuſtifie the wicked. Prou. 17. 15. The like may be ſaid againſt that fooliſh pity which ariſeth in vs, when wee behold Gods immediate hand vpon them, and yet wee ought not then for all this to inſult ouer them: but we muſt aſcribe honour to God, with thoſe 24. Elders in the Reuelation, and Dauid vpon the death of Nabal. 
                     Reuel. 5. 14. 1. Sam. 25. 39. Verſ. 17.
                  
                  Now followeth the third point, that as Samſon honoured God in ſhewing what hee had done by him, in ſlaying heapes of men, euen a thouſand, ſo he added this thereto; that he gaue a name to the place where hee did it, as a memoriall thereof, that all poſterity comming after, might know vnto the end of the world, what great things God did for his people againſt their enemies. The name of it he called Ramath-Lehi; as if he ſhould haue ſaid, the lifting vp of a iaw-bone, which remaineth as a monument of Gods mighty worke by him euen to this day. Thus, and by this meanes Gods ſeruants haue praiſed him in times paſt, as in the booke of Numbers, Ioſhua and other, is to bee ſeene, as well as other times by ſongs and dances, that wee all may marke and remember his benefits and great workes, and praiſe him among the generations following, to the quickening and comforting of his people, and the feare of his enemies; although not in the ſame manner that ſome haue done in ages paſt. But of this before, once or twice.
               
               
                  The fourth part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 18. And he was ſore athirſt, and called on the Lord, and ſaid, Thou haſt giuen this great deliuerance into the hand of thy ſeruant: and now ſhall I die for thirſt, and fall into the hand of the vncircumciſed?
                     
                     19. But God claue an hollow place that was in the iaw, and there came water thereout, and when he had drunke, his ſpirit came againe, and he reuiued: wherfore he called the name thereof En-hakkoreh, which is in Lehi vnto this day.
                     
                     20. And he iudged Iſrael in the daies of the Philiſtims twentie yeeres.
                     
                  
                  NOw followeth the fourth and laſt part of this Chapter: wherein is ſhewed, The ſumme. what an exceeding great thirſt Samſon had after the ſlaughter of theſe Philiſtims, and that he prayed to God, and he giue him water, ſo that he reuiued: and ſo he praiſed God there. And 
                        〈…〉
                      time that hee iudged Iſrael, is in the laſt place adioyned and ſet downe, 
                        ••
                     ch was twentie yeres.
                  By this thirſt of his, the Lord would haue him to know himſelfe, and to be held vnder, leſt by that which hee had done to the Philiſtims, hee might haue been lifted vp aboue that which was meet. Thus he dealeth with his; intermixing his chaſtiſements with bleſſings, that both they may be held in humility by the one, and yet may haue ſufficient encouragement to abide Note.
                     
conſtantly in a good courſe, and not forget the Lord and become high minded, as they are eaſily brought to bee by the other, to wit, his benefits. And thus the Lord ſaw good to deale euen with Paul himſelfe, who was buffeted 2. Cor. 12. 7. by Satan, when hee had been liſted vp to the third heauen by the rauiſhing of Gods ſpirit: yet hee had that humour remaining in him, which needed ſetling and cooling, that his ioy might be kept within holy liſts and bounds. And the ſame I haue noted in that famous accident of Iphtah his daughter: Iudg. 11. 35. whom God ſet on to abaſe him, that hee might proceed on to the triumph more ſoberly. Wee muſt thinke Gods ſeruants are deare to him, when hee ſticketh not to bereaue them of their preciouſeſt delights, to the end they may hold their delight in him, and not turne their ſweetneſſe into bitternes, I meane, their holy reioycing, into fleſhly preſumption. The reaſon hereof Note. is, becauſe elſe God cannot truſt vs in the buſineſſe he ſets vs about, except hee giues vs coolings and abaſements to conſume the ſuperfluity of our hypocriſie, conceitedneſſe of our ſelues, pride and ſecurity: which are as vnfit dealers in heauenly matters, as Nadab and Abihu their ſtrange fire was to kindle Leuit. 10. 1. incenſe or offer ſacrifice withall. And ſecondly, the Lord honoreth many of his deare ſeruants (whoſe faith and ſetledneſſe in grace, and freedome from ſuch groſſe ſtaines hee is priuie vnto) by giuing them the proofe of their patience, vprightneſſe and humility, preſently after the exerciſe of their thankfulneſſe and reioycing: that ſo the croſſe ſuddenly comming vpon great bleſſings, or deliuerances, they may approue themſelues ſoundly religious, in that they are fit to goe vnder the one without murmuring, as well as they vſed the other without fooliſh lightneſſe and vaine glory. And it is a rare gift for a man by his wiſe carriage vnder ſuch kind of afflictions, to ſhew, that hee waited for his abaſement, euen in the greateſt welfare, as Iob, in the height of his proſperity looked for his change. Whereas the common ſort of profeſſors, if God endow and furniſh them with any priuiledge aboue others; as good ſucceſſe and thriuing in the world, victory ouer their aduerſary in ſute of Law, credit and good account, either for labour in the the Miniſtery, or for profeſſion of the Goſpell, liberty to heare the Word, and to enioy the Sabbaths, fellowſhip of the faithfull, or the like; they preſently are ſicke of a ſpirituall Pluraſie, and rankeneſſe of corrupt blood, which if God (by ſome ſudden change) abate not, would ſoone oppreſſe them. And this nurture wee ſhould all learne, that wee may keepe compaſſe in our liues, and neither turne to the right hand, nor to the left, which is a Note. great portion, and ſauoureth of much grace and godly wiſedome. For if we ſwell, know wee for certainty, that God will pull vs downe, and leſt wee ſhould faint and be loden with trouble to our diſcouragement, hee will put vnder his hand in due time to lift vs vp againe. And if wee regard to bee guided by his word, his handie worke and corrections ſhall bee fewer, or more fauourable, and fruitfull in vs. As for hypocrites and time ſeruers, God vſeth no ſuch diſcipline toward them, but lets them fall from one extremity into another. See that I haue ſaid of this in the eleuenth Chapter.
                  In that this extreme thirſtines did not breed in him murmuring againſt God, for that he who had done him ſuch ſeruice, ſhould now be ſuffered to 2 miſcarrie, as it were, and to fall into the hands of Gods enemies, as they fell

into his; it is to admoniſh vs, that we ſhould beware of that ſinne of impatience, and breaking out againſt God when we are croſſed, (as wee are too prone and ready to doe) as though he muſt helpe and deliuer vs when wee would, or elſe he doth vs great wrong: euen as Mary in the want of wine at the marriage, looked vnwiſely that Chriſt ſhould prouide it by miracle by Iohn 2. 3. and by. Nay rather, let vs know that we are euer vnprofitable, and that God ſeeth we haue need oft times to be ſpurred forward, and therfore with Samſon, Dauid, and other his people it behoueth vs to ſue humbly to him, that ſo his helpe may be the more ſweete vnto vs when it commeth: and that we thinke not our ſelues too good to waite vpon him patiently, but rather with importunitie call vpon him in the meane ſeaſon. We make a good ſhift while the Lord ſpares vs; but if once he lay his hand vpon vs, then we verifie that which Satan ſpake falſely of Iob, that is, we curſe him to his face. Iob 2. 5. Not vnlike in this to him, that ſeeing himſelfe and his hoſte in perill by thirſt, murmured, ſaying; What? hath the Lord brought three Kings together 2. King. 3. 10. and their armies to deſtroy them? And the like was his behauiour after in the famine, of which we reade, 2. King. 6. So the Iſraelites in their returne 2. King. 6. 30. 31. from Egypt, of whom the Prophet complaineth, Pſal. 95. And theſe (the more is the pitie) are our preſidents which we follow (yea euen in pettie trials) rather then Iob, who in the middeſt of his miſeries, was ſo far from Iob 1. 22. charging God fooliſhly, that he bleſſed him, and reioyced in ſuffering tentation, as S. Iames ſaith, are bleſſed: and therefore as wee heare of his patience, ſo we ſee what end the Lord gaue him. Farre are wee from conſidering Iam. 1. 12. Iam. 5. 11. that our owne ſinne being the cauſe why we ſuffer, we may well bow our ſhoulders to beare our affliction. Or, that he who ſent one, might haue ſent tenne, and ſet them on tenne times deeplier, and might haue begun Note. ſooner. But this I haue oft vrged by occaſion of ſhewing what the power of faith is in the well bearing the croſſe; without which patience is a ſtranger.
                  He vpholdeth and ſtrengtheneth his prayer by two maine and ſtrong pillars, that hee might be confident that God would heare him. One was 3 the acknowledging of his power and mercie in the late victorie: for thus he ſaith; Thou (O Lord) grantedſt by thy ſeruant this great preſeruation to thy people. The ſecond, this: I am thy ſeruant, and in this buſineſſe againſt the Philiſtims I haue done thy worke, which thou ſetteſt me about, therefore leaue me not now to this reproch. And this, with that in the laſt verſe, that he is ſaid to haue iudged Iſrael, doe ſtill proue that God in all this reſiſting the Philiſtims, did appoint him to it, and that hee is not to be blamed as a priuate man, that did raſhly and furiouſly take it in band, as ſome more ignorant and haſtie then wiſe, will be bold to iudge.
                  Our inſtruction is from hence twofold: firſt, that the remembring of Gods former benefits and fauour doe adde great force to, and cauſe much feruencie in our prayers, (this being added, that wee quench not the ſame by any ſinne committed againſt conſcience) for then we may be ſure God will heare vs, as he hath done oft before. And here that of the Apoſtle hath Rom. 5. 4. place, Experience bringeth hope, which maketh not aſhamed: becauſe God is not changed, and therefore wee ſuing to him feruently as in times paſt, may reſt the better perſwaded: but the forgetfulnes of Gods former kindneſſe,

and our vnthankfulnes, doth on the contrary as much weaken and coole our prayers. For we can nothing ſo confidently looke for help from God, whom by nature wee are afraid of, as when wee daily remember his former kindneſſe, and that it abides for euer towards vs: and yet (which is Ioh. 15. 9. much to bee pitied) few awake out of this drowſie forgetfulnes and vnthankfulnes wherein they lie.
                  By this wee ſee, that it ſtandeth euery Chriſtian very much vpon, to hold his confidence and comfort in the promiſes of God, whereby hee may ſtay himſelfe and be vpholden in his trials, till God giue a good iſſue. For why? The benefit hereof doth not onely reach to the preſent time, but prepareth him alſo for all croſſes in time to come, to entertaine and beare them the better. Becauſe his experience formerly, being ioyned with this, That the arme of the Lord is not ſhortned, makes euery new triall ſeeme more tollerable. Iſai. 59. 1. Whereas hee that vpon occaſion of each ſudden and vnwelcome trouble, fetcheth help rather from his head, then his heart, and falleth rather to contriue fleſhly ſhifts, how to auoid or eaſe him of his diſtreſſe, (like Saul in getting him a Muſitian to heale him of a troubled conſcience) then to meditate 1. Sam. 16. 17. of God his former mercies; doth make euery new croſſe more heauie to himſelfe then other. I confeſſe, ſuch haue an expetience, but it is like their hope, neither ſhall helpe them. For thus they argue: Such a ſickneſſe I recouered of, therefore I looke to breake this too. Loe, their experience breedeth a rotten confidence in them, and makes them preſume of that which often they faile of; and when they faile, they are either like Iehoram, very lions; or as Nabal, meere blockes. The caſe is plaine; They digge to themſelues pits which will hold no water, but forſake the Lord and their Ierem 2. 13. Iona. 2. 
                           •
                        . owne peace, for a vaine conceit; and as Ionah ſaith, While they embrace lying vanities, they forſake their owne mercie, whereof they haue no promiſe. And ſo at length that is verified of them which is written by the Prophet, Though they eſcape a Beare, yet a Lion ſhall deuoure them: yea and often that which they leaſt feare ſhall be their vndoing. Now this caueat let me Amos 3. 19. adde to the doctrine, leſt I be miſtaken. I ſay not that a Chriſtians experience breedes hope of the ſelfeſame outward iſſue and manner of deliuerance Note. out of his trouble, which hee hath before time found. Neither durſt the three children in the third of Daniel, expreſly auouch that God would worke a miracle for their deliuerie; and yet they had faith neuertheleſſe to Dan. 3. 17. beleeue that he would bring them well thorow: which I ſpeake to controle the phantaſtical ſpirits of ſome, who affirme that ye not recouerie of a diſeaſe (as it might be the plague) is the fruit alway of vnbelief. If we could beleeue the promiſe (ſay they) in Pſalme, we ſhould not feare that ſickneſſe, nor dye thereof. Contrariwiſe let vs know, that the act of faith is euer carried according to the qualitie of the promiſe. Pauls faith was not expreſly carried to beleeue, That the pricke in his fleſh ſhould be remoued, and yet he had experience 2. Cor. 12. 7. of many deliuerances) but that Gods grace ſhould bee ſufficient. And he beleeuing this had the fruite of his former experience, becauſe hee obtained an equiualent ſupplie.
                  This be ſaid by occaſion of the firſt prop of Samſons prayer, to wit, the rehearſing of Gods former goodneſſe: the ſecond followeth, that he was his 4 ſeruant, and had done his worke in that his great labour againſt the Philiſtims.

And by this we muſt know, that it is a thing very materiall to be able to proue our ſelues Gods ſeruants. For by what right can we elſe claime any place in his houſe, otherwiſe then as ſtrangers? But if we be ſo, then we doe him faithfull ſeruice (as the Apoſtle ſaith, his ſeruants yee are to whom ye obey) yea and that wee performe ioyfully and without feare all our daies, (for Rom. 6. 16. it is not a ſeruice in name, but perfect freedome indeed) and ſo doing wee may claime the benefit of ſeruants, that is, protection.
                  The Angels had this title to be called the ſeruants of God. And as he ſaid Heb 1. 14. he was his ſeruant: ſo particularly he ſhewed that he was ſo in this: for he ſaid, I haue not pleaſed my ſelfe, nor ſerued mine owne humour in killing theſe Philiſtims; but I did thy worke, and fought thy battailes: Euen ſo in our particular actions, wee are to looke to be guided by God, to proue that we are in the ſtate of ſeruants, and not hangbyes: and then we may be able with boldnes to ſay, we haue a good conſcience in all things, and where we are accuſed, yet to be at peace, elſe God might alſo diſcharge himſelfe of his promiſe vnto vs. It is no ſmall priuiledge (as I haue noted elſewhere) that whiles we are well occupied, wee may boldly ſue to God for bleſſing. And ſo did Samſon here. For if earthly maſters tye themſelues to prouide ſuſtenance for their ſeruants, not looking that they ſhould be troubled with the care of any thing, ſaue their labour; then with what boldnes might Samſon here call vpon the Lord, that he might not periſh for thirſt, being in the heat of his worke? For it might elſe haue turned to the diſhonour of the Lord, to ſuffer him to miſcarrie for want. Oh that men would trie the Lord in this, and commit their waies to him in well-doing, to ſee if he would not effect their good deſires, and elſe let them not wonder that he ſeeme an hard maſter to them.
                  Now followeth the ſubſtance of his prayer, and that was, that he hauing 5 imployed himſelfe to glorifie Gods name, might not be deliuered into the hands of the vncircumciſed: and hee ſaith further; I being ſet by thee (O Lord) to iudge ouer thy people, ſuffer me not to come into their hands and power, contrary to that which thou promiſedſt to me, till I had fulfilled thy worke. So wee ſhould be earneſt with the Lord that wee may not liue nor dye to the diſhonour of his name: but to bee kept (if it may bee) from iuſt reproch. Such requeſts can none make, that ſet themſelues on worke without God: though they counterfeit, or make great floriſhes, as Ioab did. See 2. Sam. 10. 12. 2. Sam. 10. And whereas ye will obiect, that he did yet fall into reprochfull euils afterward, for all this his prayer: the anſwere thereto is, that he neglected the nouriſhing of the grace that hee did now pray in; and further anſwere will by more fit occaſion be made hereto, in the next chapter: therefore I will deferre it to that place.
                  When Samſon had made his prayer thus, in his extreame thirſt, the Lord, Verſ. 19. The ſumme.
                      as it is manifeſt in this verſe, cauſed water to come foorth of the hollow place of the iaw, breaking out of the tooth, which ſtood therein, and ſo hee drunke and was reuiued. And therefore he gaue a name to the thing done accordingly, calling it, the Fountaine of him that prayed.
                  By this that the Lord heard Samſons prayer, and rather gaue him water extraordinarily, then he ſhould periſh; it teacheth the ſame to vs, that rather then we ſhall miſcarrie, he will prouide for vs, though we know not, neither

ſee how. As he ſed Eliah by the rauens, and the good widow with the increaſe 1. King. 17. 5. 2. King. 4. 7. of her little oyle, till it paid her debt, and maintained her and hers, and preſerued Ionah in the fiſhes belly, and againſt all likelihood brought him ſafe to land. So God hath many waies to comfort his, and vphold their eſtate, and he is as willing as he is able to doe it, and that by his extraordinarie prouidence, rather then they ſhould faile. And if he ſee it not expedient alwaies to doe ſo; yet he doth more for them a great deale, then if he gaue them their deſire; for hee worketh in them contentation and other grace: and ſooner ſhall the ſtones of the ſtreete bee turned into loaues of bread, and the water of their wels into drinke, before they ſhall periſh euen here, vnleſſe he doe better things for them. Cleaue wee therefore to him inſeparably, and be we not remoued from our ſtedfaſt confidence in him, for he that hath ſaid it, will alſo doe the ſame. But this point commeth often to hand.
                  Of this water Samſon drunk, and was reuiued againe, being neere to death 2 before, as in this verſe appeareth. Whereby wee may ſee theſe two things: One, that thirſt is a moſt deadly and intollerable paine, as wee may well ſee by the thirſt that our Sauiour complained of on the croſſe, for it is reckoned Ioh 19 28. as one part of his paine. And as thirſt is, ſo is hunger: by either of which to dye, is, as a lingering, ſo a moſt weariſome and grieuous death. Like vnto the which ſeeing there are many other kindes of death, wee may ſee from how many deaths, and thoſe moſt painfull, God keepeth vs. For we might eaſily miſcarrie both this way, as Samſon was like to doe, and by infinite other waies, if God did but hold backe his helping hand. Which is the more to condemne our blockiſh vnthankfulnes, who neuer or ſeldome reckon vp, as daily we ſhould, ſuch benefits and deliuerances among other, neither are thankfull for them. And ſeeing hunger and thirſt are ſo biting and painfull, and nakedneſſe like both, we muſt be pitifull to ſuch diſtreſſed people, and moued with bowels and compaſſion toward them: remembring Chriſts words, I was hungrie, and ye gaue me meate, &c. Matth. 25. 35.
                  
                  The other thing heere, is, what a ſmall refreſhing did preſerue Samſons life, euen a little water in ſo homely a manner prouided for him, as wee ſee here mentioned, did comfort and reuiue him. What ſhould this teach vs, but that wee ſhould marke how many comfortable refreſhings wee enioy from God, (in compariſon of the which, this was meane and ſmall) without the which we ſhould haue been much diſtempered in our bodies, and thereby vnquiet and vnſetled in our mindes alſo? as meate in our hunger, drinke in our thirſt, reſt after wearineſſe, caſe and aſſwagement of paine and diſeaſes. All which, while we be pinched with them, doe better teach vs, how much the freedome from them is to be accounted of. Oh a little intermiſſion from the paine of the ſtone, the anguiſh and extremitie of the gowre, or the like diſeaſes, how doe wee price it? euen farre aboue much treaſure that cannot be valued.
                  O then, when we bee free from all kinds thereof for a ſeaſon, yea and loden with benefits alſo, on the other ſide, to make out liues comfortable, Pſal. 68. 19. (both grace and other good things) which makes them all ſauory; what (thinke we) ſhould wee yeeld vnto the Lord for them? Therefore Samſon gaue a name to that place alſo, as he did before to the other, according to the

occaſion offered; to teſtifie his thankes to God for hearing his prayer, by ſending him water in his exceeding thirſt, in which he was neer vnto death. The doctrine out of this place hath been taught before ſundry times; and laſt of all, out of the 17. verſe. Onely this I wiſh might bee annexed to the doctrine of thankeſgiuing that it bee continued, and ſpecially for that great deliuerance from the feare of euerlaſting torment, that it bee continued all our life long. As in the ſong of Zacharias wee are taught that God will giue Luk. 1. 74. grace thereto. And great reaſon there is that wee ſhould doe ſo, ſeeing wee reape and enioy the fruit thereof all our life long.
                  But this other thing out of this place I will not omit, and that from the name of the place, which hee gaue. For hee calling it the fountaine of him 4 that prayed, meaning, which God extraordinarily prouided for him, when he prayed to him in his thirſt; it teacheth vs, not onely what rare effects and fruites ſpring of feruent prayer, as S. Iames ſaith (that feruent prayer auaileth Iam. 5. 16. much) and as we finde, that thereby wee obtaine grace againſt daily ſinne and corruption: but alſo, when ſuch fruit is obtained of God by vs, it ſhould well appeare, as it did by Samſons leauing a memoriall of his thankfulneſſe in the place. So much more ſhould we, who doe not once, but oft, yea and that in one day, receiue many bleſſings (as effects of our prayers) from God; wee ſhould (I ſay) let thoſe places bee witneſſes of our remembring Gods kindneſſe, there ſo plentifully ſhead vpon vs. That if ſuch places could ſpeak, they ſhould be well able to teſtifie, that we had not been barren nor ſilent in yeelding praiſes vnto him there. And this not our houſes onely, and chambers Note. ſhould witnes, but our gardens, & the fields, yea and the high waies, by which we haue ſo often paſſed ſafely & without danger, ſhould do the like.
                  Now for the ſhutting vp of the Chapter, the holy ſtory addeth this, that for the ſpace of twentie yeeres, while the people were vnder the dominion Verſ. 20. of the Philiſtims, Samſon did continue in his place iudging Iſrael, that is, helping them, and vexing the other; whereby wee may gather, that although the Iſraelites were not freed out of their hands altogether, yet they had many great calamities kept from them, by meanes that Samſon was euer in the way, and at hand, to croſſe and diſquiet them. And therein we are to marke, that the Lord hauing oft deliuered his people, and yet ſeeing them to reuolt from him after, and not to bee better for it; hee holds them vnder now the longer, and yet he leſſened their bondage, and made it the more tolerable by the helpe they had by Samſon.
                  
                  We may hereby learne, that ſeeing we, when we haue liberty, peace, and other bleſſings, and alſo inlargements from affliction, doe not yeeld to the Lord the fruit that is anſwerable to ſo great kindneſſe of his, and that alſo looked for at our hands, but wee forget it, and wax vnprofitable, yea and Luk 17. 17. grieue the Lord with our returning to our old euill courſe againe; therfore he doth the longer and the ſtraitlier hold vs vnder with one croſſe and trouble after another, and wee either haue not ſo good meanes to come out of them, as he would elſe giue vs; or we profit not by them, as ſome of his worthie Note. ſeruants doe; neither enioy ſweet and comfortable daies as wee might doe, and that with his good liking; for all the which wee may thanke our ſelues. And it is his great mercy that it is no worſe with vs.
                  But take we heed that we tempt not God ſtill in ſuch manner, that while

hee looketh for grapes, wee bring forth wild grapes; that wee lie not in our Eſa. 5. 2. ſinnes, which we cannot be ignorant, that they doe much diſpleaſe him, for God will not be mocked. As he left heere vpon this people a long continued bondage, ſo will hee deale with vs, as hee hath done heretofore; namely, that although he haue taken the heauie yoke of bondage from the necke of his people in this land, I meane ſubiection to Idolatry and Poperie, yet hee Note. will leaue matter of ſorrow enough by ſcattering the moſt part in ignorance, and without good and diligent teachers and guides, & caſt the ſpirit of bondage vpon the reſt. Euen as he dealt heere with this people who were vnder the Philiſtims a long time, that is, before Samſon was borne, and all the time till he grew to be able to ſet vpon them, and all the twentie yeres while he iudged Iſrael, and ſo continued after that. Yea and hee will puniſh vs yet Leuit 26. 21. ſeuen times more, if we continue in our euill courſe.
                  And let vs obſerue a farre different manner of God his viſiting the godly, and his puniſhing the wicked. The people heere by their breaches of couenant and daily reuolts from God were faine to bee inured to affliction, and particularly to bee in ſeruitude to ſuch as hated them: and yet becauſe the Lord had choſen them from among all nations, to be a peculier people vnto himſelfe; therefore his eye could not ſee their miſery, but hee muſt needs pitie them, and euen then when hee could not but bridle them, hee muſt needs prouide that their bondage may be tolerable. Wee may thanke our ſelues for any ſtraitneſſe and trouble that befals vs: but in that wee ſee any light of comfort through a creuis, or haue any breathings and relaxation, it is Gods indulgence: who thereby ſheweth that he could bee content the rod were burnt, and might not be vſed at all, foraſmuch as he is content to ſhake it ouer vs only, when as he might beate vs with many ſtripes. And to ſay the truth, he holdeth vs vnder rather to preuent greater offences, and ſorer puniſhments for time to come, then deale with vs after and according to our former and paſt tranſgreſſions. Let this teach vs to be waile and bee humbled for our hollow and falſe-hearted dealing with God in our promiſes of amendment, and for our formall thankeſgiuing for the bleſſings wee enioy, and for that wee retaine no more fruit thereof, but become as bad or worſe afterward, as euer we were before. And let vs chuſe rather by a ſound and well ordered courſe to enioy the conſtant feeling of Gods loue, and the fruition of his bleſſing, then by our breaking out, to cloud and blemiſh our Ioh. 15. 10. owne happineſſe by the mixture of many vnwelcome afflictions. And againe, let it ſerue to alleniate and qualifie our rebellious nature, which commonly deemeth that God hath quite hidden his face from vs, if all goe not currant and ſmooth with vs, as in time paſt. For why? The fauour of God is not like to his diſpleaſure, becauſe ſinne is not like obedience: but is it not much, that in the middeſt of diſpleaſure, and when he hath been ſo oft prouoked by vs, he forgetteth not to ſhew mercy to vs? whereas if we looke to the wicked, we ſhall finde that it is nothing ſo with them: for neither doth the Lord exerciſe them with afflictions alway, to reſtraine them; but ſuffereth 1. Sam. 2. 25. them to goe on to perdition: or if he doe puniſh them, yet he ſweetens not the croſſe to them, but ſmites them in wrath, and giues them euen here Mat. 27. 3. a taſte of that eternall diſpleaſure of his, which they ſhall feele endleſly and eaſeleſly hereafter.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               THE EIGHTIE TWO SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  Verſ. 1. Then went Samſon to Azzah, and ſaw there an harlot and went in vnto her.
                  
                  2. And it was told to the Azzahites, Samſon is come hither, and they went about, and laid wait for him all night, in the gate of the City, and were quiet all the night, ſaying, Abide till the morning early, and we ſhall kill him.
                  
                  3. And Samſon ſlept till midnight, and aroſe at midnight, and tooke the doores of the gates of the City and the two posts, and lift them away with the barres, and put them vpon his ſhoulders, and carried them vp to the top of the mountaine that is before Hebron.
                  
               
               
                  THe ſumme of this Chapter is thus much. The Philiſtims The ſumme of the Chapter. hauing been oft plagued by Samſon, as in part wee haue heard, they laid for him to kill him. And they hearing that he was at Azza or Gazza as it is called, (one of their chiefe Cities) they ſet watch for him in the night to take him, but were diſappointed. After that they vſed meanes in another place, and there they apprehended him, and cruelly handled him, and made themſelues paſtime in bringing him before them to be ſcorned and laughed at, till at the laſt, he pulled down the houſe vpon the chiefe Princes of the Philiſtims, and many of the people, being met together to ſport themſelues, and laugh at him, in beholding him their great enemy ſo diſguiſed and abaſed, and ſo there he loſt his life with them.
               The firſt part of the Chapter ſheweth how Samſon eſcaped the hands of The parts the Philiſtims lying in watch for him at AZza, and this to the 4. verſe. The ſecond declareth how at another time they laying waite for him, tooke him at the houſe of Delilah in the valley of Sorek, to the 21. verſe. The third part ſheweth their entreatie, euen their cruell handling of Samſon, after they had apprehended him, and what came thereof, to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  IN this part is ſhewed how Samſon came to this City AZza, and there went into the houſe of an harlot: which being heard of by the Citizens, they 
                        The ſumme of the firſt 3. verſes
                      laid wait for him, but tooke him not: (for to the great diſappointing of them) hee at midnight tooke the poſts of the gates vpon his ſhoulders, and carried them to the top of a mountaine, in the land of Iſrael, betwixt Hebron and the Azzahites.
                  
                     
Heere moreparticularly it being ſaid that he ſeeing in the City a woman Verſ. 1. which was an harlot,) for ſo the Hebrew word is to bee tranſlated heere, though it ſignifie alſo a victualler) he went in to her: which phraſe is as much as that hee being not her husband, had vnlawfull companie with her; as in chapter 15. 1. that phraſe of ſpeech is taken for the companying of husband and wife together, as alſo in many other places it doth appeare; ſo that it is cleare, that Samſon in this firſt verſe is ſaid to haue vnlawfull companie with an harlot, neither is there any ſhew of reaſon to take it otherwiſe, againſt the ſignificatiō of the phraſe, as that he ſaw a victualler, & went in to her, that is, into her houſe: for their houſes were knowne to bee for the receiuing of paſſengers by ſome ſignes, or report, & not by meeting the victuallers in the ſtreets, and ſo accompanying them home. Sure it is, that this was an harlot, whoſe houſe he went into, and he went in thither to an ill end, euen to haue company with her (as I haue ſaid) in an vnlawfull manner: therefore to ſeeke any other expoſition to ſalue the matter, is needleſſe. Doct. verſ 1.
                  
                  It hath been well ſeene in this ſtorie, that Samſon (notwithſtanding ſome faults) was one of the deere ſeruants of God, as alſo, it is confirmed that hee was ſo in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. And yet now behold, hee is ſnared Heb. 11 32. with an harlot, nay made drunke with that which was pretious to him, and deceiueable in her. This is wondred at, and raiſeth doubtfull thoughts of heart in many of Gods weake people, to ſee a man ſo beloued of God as hee was, to be left to himſelfe to fal ſo ſhamefully. They deſire therfore to know how this ſhould come to paſſe, that Samſon, otherwiſe ſo good a man, ſhould be thus bereaued of his former good mind at this time, yea ſo diſguiſed, and become ſo vnlike himſelfe, and that in ſo ſhort a time after hee had ſerued God ſo commendably in the former Chapter, verſ. 16. &c. and that he who could ouercome, and by his ſtrength ſlew a thouſand at one time, and that without weapon, ſhould become ſo impotent, thus to bee ouercome of a poore ſillie woman, yea of an harlot. But it teacheth, that ſuch a thing may poſſibly befall the deere ſeruants of God. Such frailty they are ſubiect to, and ſuch corruption remaineth ſtill in them, that they may poſſibly forget God for the time, (a fearefull thing to thinke of,) and the holy eſtate they are in, and bee ſoone carried by occaſion from their ſteadfaſtneſſe in faith, knowledge, and other grace to ſuch fearfull ſinnes, and thereby it was that Samſon fell into this ſinne of whoredome, his heart not being armed againſt vncleanneſſe, nor he vpholden in his former chaſtneſſe and grace.
                  And therefore let vs know, that the people of God (as Dauid, Salomon, Ionah, 
                     2. Sam. 11. 4. 1. King. 11. 4. Ionah 1. 3. and others did giue too good proofe of) haue not God his grace ſo pinned to their ſleeues, but that they may poſſibly fall either into this, or other reprochfull and foule ſinnes, partly by the forementioned meanes, and partly by the inward ſuggeſtion of the heart, giuing liberty thereto; beſides this, that there are many other outward occaſions and prouocations among which they walke, with bad examples, whereto Note. they are in danger of being faſhioned and made like to them, which may firſt teach vs all to ſee that there is great cauſe why the beſt of vs ſhould not truſt our corrupt nature, nor content our ſelues to deale ſlightly in looking to our vow and couenant made with God againſt al ſinne and wickedneſſe; but bee faſt knit and vnited to him by faith vnfained, and true loue

for his infinite kindneſſe to vs, ſo that wee might not bee let looſe ſo farre, as to proſtitute our ſelues to any ſuch villanie and reproch: but rather for the ſame his goodneſſe to vs to be ſo farre off from it, as that we ſhould rather be daily drawne to endeuour to pleaſe him in all things, and that with readineſſe: yea and to watch thereunto conſtantly for all power from God to arme and inable vs thereto: well conſidering with our ſelues, that they are not our great words and boaſts of our chaſtnes, honeſty, and grace, which will ſtand vs in ſtead, in the time of tentation and triall, neither are cold prayers and endeuours able to weaken ſtrong tentations in vs, but we muſt looke for ſtrength, and hearten on our ſelues by diligent and reuerent vſing of al good meanes appointed of God for this purpoſe, and yet to know that we are great gainers thereby. And to ſpeake more particularly of this ſin of Note. 
                     Samſons, we muſt (as we ſhall ſee cauſe) arme our ſelues againſt dallying with the leaſt tickling of vs thereto, and with the forementioned meanes vſing, as hath been ſaid) to attend our particular callings, and auoide idle and vnneceſſary goings abroad; (which Dinah did not, and therefore ſmarted) Gen. 34. 1. 2. whereby wee ſhall obtaine no ſmall liberty and freedome from the ſame. Theſe things being duly regarded of vs, and feruent prayers offered vp oft and conſtantly to God for aſſiſtance and bleſſing; there is no feare, (God hauing ſo ſpoken) that wee ſhall bee ſtrongly poſſeſſed of ſmaller ſinnes, as anger, impatience, &c. much leſſe tainted either with this vncleanneſſe, or with any other reprochfull euils: but rather, by daily and renued care and watchfulneſſe, wee ſhall gather experience, and hope of being vpholden Note. from the ſame vnto our end. But if good things grow in meane account with vs, yea if wee hold them not in an high price and reckoning, then begins our woe, and then we lie open to infinite dangers. The vſe of this is to make the beſt of vs to feare and ſuſpect our ſelues, leſt we ſhould fall, ſeeing we haue not grace at commandement, but as we make much of it.
                  And further heere, as in fitteſt place, I thinke good to adde this; that ſeeing Samſon did afterward recouer and riſe againe; therefore this ſhould ſecondly ſerue to hold any that haue been deere to the Lord, (and yet haue fallen as Samſon did) from diſpairing of Gods mercy toward them, and rather encourage them to cling againe in all true ſubmiſſion to him for mercy. And much more ought our knowledge hereof to ſtay vs from condemning ſuch for Apoſtates, who haue ſo offended, though it cannot bee denied but that they haue ſtained their credit which they had for godlineſſe, with ſuch blemiſhes. Sundry among vs not conſidering themſelues, are too readie to fall to ſuch raſh and vncharitable iudging of other: and it is (as they thinke) a good piece of religion (to their ſmall commendation bee it ſpoken) that they can cenſure others, vntill their vncharitableneſſe, high mindedneſſe, and raſh iudging with the diuels malice & ſubtilty together, haue brought themſelues into the like or worſe caſe, and iuſtly expoſed them to that rē
                     proch Note. which they in their diſtempered mood did moſt ſpitefully draw vp on others. But of this point the ſeuerall relapſes whereof the former ſtory is full, hath miniſtred occaſion to entreate: let the reader compare the ſeuerall places for his owne benefit.
                  Another thing in this verſe is, that it is ſaid, he was carried to this ſinne by 
                        Doct. 2. his eye. For hee ſaw a woman that was an harlot, and he went in to her. So

that the occaſion of his ſinne was his vngouerned eye, the euill heart being ſoone inflamed and prouoked thereby. And ſo it is oft times with many other. Thus was Dauid deceiued, and (though that is leſſe to bee wondered 2. Sam. 11. 2. Gen. 39. 7. at) Ioſephs Miſtreſſe. So all experience teacheth, that the eye is a glaſſe window to let ſinne into the heart, though it haue little neede of helpe, for it is it ſelfe a fountaine of filthineſſe, out of the which as ſmoake out of a fornace, all wickedneſſe doth proceed and come. Our wiſedome ſhall be here, and it is the vſe wee ſhould make of this doctrine, to keepe our eyes continent, while we walke in the middeſt of the allurements of this world, and therefore to make a couenant with Iob, not to looke vpon a woman, leſt wee be Iob 31. 1. caught and ſnared with that which is precious in her, but rather, where our eye offendeth, to plucke it out, and turne it away from ſuch alluring obiects. Matth. 5. 29.
                  
                  Oh it giueth great eaſe and reſt to vs with ſafetie, ouer that they finde, who will giue libertie to themſelues that way, I ſpeake euen of thoſe that repent for it afterward: as for other, they haue no eare to heare, till their eyes bring both ſoule and body ſo ſet on fire, to deſtruction. And the like I may ſay of the eare, the tongue, and companie, which all of them, euen as idleneſſe and venturing to meddle and deale, where we haue no calling nor warrant, threaten infinite miſchiefe to vs, as not onely that example of the foole in the Prouerbs doth teſtifie, (whoſe rouing about the ſtreetes made Prou. 7. 5. Gen. 34. 2. him a bootie to the harlot) but Dinahs alſo, and many other doe witneſſe, who, when they were catcht in the ſnare, though not the ſame, (for the neglect of this rule carrieth all ſorts into deepe danger) haue cried out bitterly, Note. when it was too late. But who could perſwade them to doe otherwiſe before? or who by ſuch examples can teach others wiſedome, till they haue brought it and paid for it dearely themſelues? For as in this ſinne of dalliance, ſo is it in the rſt: men thinke they are wiſe enough to guide their own way, though God be ſhut out, (whereas the Prophet Ieremy denieth that it Ierem. 10. 23. is in man to direct his own way) and they that are not ſo bad, yet they think they may be bold to goe vpon the brinke, though they fall not into the water, but when they are fallen in, (for what other thing may they looke for) then they wiſh they had abridged themſelues a little of their libertie, rather then to haue taken a whit too much: then no preciſenes, (which hath ſometime been ſcoffed at in others) nor any ſetting watch ouer heart and eyes is too much. And to ſay the truth, God (who is onely wiſe) knoweth what hee doth, when he lets ſuch bold perſons (ſeeing they will needes) fall dangerouſly: not onely that others might learne to beleeue thoſe admonitions concerning ſuch offences, when they ſee examples, but euen for the offendors themſelues, that their pride may bee crackt, their looſenes corrected, themſelues made more priuie to their owne corruption, and glad to liue euer after more thankfully vnder Gods gouernment.
                  And yet this I ſay further about this point, that ſome who glorie to bee counted virgins, and therefore refuſe mariage, and the rather to ſhun other diſcommodities accompanying it, they ſhall haue ſmall reward for their ſo doing of God; but their ſinne breaking out another way, as by Sodomie, and the nouriſhing of vncleane luſts, and ſo being doubled, they ſhall haue their puniſhment accordingly.
                  
                     
But ſeeing this ſin of Samſons was committed immediatly after the great 
                        Doct. 3. ſeruice that hee did to God againſt the Philiſtims, mentioned in the latter end of the former chapter, (from the which worke he came to this citie Azza, where hee ſaw the woman) by this (I ſay) wee may ſee, that when wee haue praiſed God (as he did at the victorie he had gotten) and after we haue ſerued him in any good ſort and manner, yet euen then are wee ſubiect to offend, and breake out againſt him ſome way, as occaſion may be offered, Note. and euen then are we not free from danger of falling, no, not after ſo firme ſtanding: whereas it might be thought that we be then out of perill for many daies after.
                  Indeed it were meete it ſhould be ſo, I meane, that wee ſhould be better fenced and ſtrengthened againſt euill of all ſorts, when we haue been well occupied and taken vp in dutie to God before, and I confeſſe, (as all will grant) that if wee conſider it well, that wee ſhould after and by ſuch ſeruice Note. done to God, as Samſon did againſt the Philiſtims, we ſhould (I ſay) be ſenced againſt all the ſweete baites of ſinne for a long time afterward; and it were meete, that by ſuch good ſpirituall refreſhing of our ſoules, we might be the fitter to proceed cheerefully and readily from one dutie to another, at leaſt to be farre from ſuch diſguiſings, as this of Samſons was. But as the diuell handleth the matter, who ſlightly and couertly worketh thereby in vs ſecuritie, and a pleaſing of our ſelues in the good that we haue done, we are ſometimes eaſily led to dreame, and imagine, that wee hauing now been well occupied, we may more boldly take our libertie, and by good right remit and ſlake our care that we had before: to the which wee are all prone by the rebellion of our wicked nature. To be forward any way to ſinne after we haue been fleſhed on by ill companie, and ſuch like inticements, it is a thing not to be marueiled at: but after we haue been well occupied, and haue done faithfull ſeruice to God, then to break out amiſſe, and to go (like Cain and Iudas) out of Gods preſence, as it were into the diuels ſhop forthwith, about his worke and buſines, this (I ſay) would not eaſily be thought, that wee might be brought vnto. But yet through wilfull ignorance, that wee will know no better, neither will ſee, when yet wee doe, or through ſloth, pride, looſenes and ſecuritie bearing ſway in vs, wee may poſſibly bee miſled, yea and that eaſily and full ſoone, after this manner, as I haue ſaid. The vſe of this is, to reproue them who will ſay: What? muſt wee euer be in ſeruing of God? The which ſpeech how vnſauourie it is, and vnbeſeeming profeſſors of the Goſpell, all may ſee, who know, that the ſeruice of God is perfect freedome: and they ſhall ſee alſo, when for the neglecting of it, they haue well ſmarted.
                  And if that will not ſtop their mouthes and anſwere them, let that ſaying of our Sauiour bee added to it: to wit, that when wee haue done the Luke 17. 10. moſt, we are but vnprofitable ſeruants, and that we come farre ſhort of that which we ought to doe: yea and that all meanes vſing will not fray away Satan and noyſome temptations, except we watch and pray to reſiſt him Matth. 26 41. alway, as frailtie will permit. Theſe things and the like, if they be duly conſidered, we ſhall ſee ſmall cauſe to flatter our ſelues, as though wee might take ſome libertie by authoritie to ſinne.
                  What theſe men of Azza did, when they heard that Samſon was there, is Verſe 2.
                     
ſhewed in this ſecond verſe: to wit, that they went about preſently to take him, and compaſſed the houſe, and lay in waite for him in the night, purpoſing (though they were diſappointed) to kill him in the morning. This diligence in them without delay, being heathens, to preuent a miſchiefe, putteth vs to blame and iuſt reproch, who are Chriſtians, if wee bee not much more carefull to doe the like. For thereby wee preuent, or cut off atleaſt, much inconuenience, when it is alreadie begun, if wee doe not alſo hinder and marre the growth thereof, that it goe no further. As for example more particularly, if diſorder, lewd meetings, to drinkings, gaming, whoring, and ſuch like, bee ſprung vp in our countrey townes, or houſes among vs, all ſhould be hinderers of them (that are ſuch workers of euill) as they may, and oppoſe themſelues againſt them, both Magiſtrates, Headborowes of townes, and Maſters of families: ſo for the apprehending a Ieſuite or Seminarie, and ſuch as are knowne to carrie traytors hearts againſt their Prince and land, or any that come to ſow their heretical and Idolatrous cockle and darnell among the Lords wheate, alſo if any ſhould goe about to aleniate the people from the true worſhip of God, from publike hearing the Goſpel preached; we ſhould be as forward as theſe Philiſtims, in hunting them out of their holes, and bringing them foorth, rather then to haue our ſloth, and backwardnes in ſuch good attempts to be condemned, and that iuſtly, and eſpecially by the diligence of ſuch as theſe Philiſtims were.
                  Againſt all which abominations wee ſhould ſo ioyne together for the rooting out of them, that they who can lend no other helpe hereto, ſhould yet enquire after them where there is cauſe, and to tell and bewray their haunt, as they did here tell the citizens of Azza, that Samſon was there. And ſo all of vs with the poore people at the building of the Temple, (who brought morter to ſet forward the ſame, when they could doe no greater thing) all of vs (I ſay) are to doe our beſt endeuour, at leaſt to ſhew our forward and readie mindes to doe the good we can therein. But lamentable is the ſloth and backwardnes that is ſhewed in ſetting Gods matters and buſineſſe forward, when yet no time nor labour, no, nor coſt, is enough in following our owne: much like them who are mentioned by the Prophet, who dwelt in ſieled houſes themſelues, but ſuffered Gods houſe to lie waſt. Habac. 1. 4. But more of this before oftentimes, and lately in the former Chapter by the like occaſion.
                  But it is ſaid in this verſe that Samſon eſcaped their hands, for all their labour and diligence to take him, and not onely ſo, but alſo did them further Verſ. 3. hurt: whereby we may ſee, that God did not by and by puniſh him for all his great ſinne committed, but gaue him time to thinke of it; whereas if he had forthwith chaſtiſed him, hee had dealt with him but iuſtly. But ſeeing God oft times dealeth ſo with vs, I meane, not to purſue vs by and by after ſome wilful and knowne ſinne committed, here leſt we ſhould miſconceiue of his ſo doing; learne we the end of his forbearing any of vs, when we haue prouoked him: for we know that he ſhould doe vs no wrong, if he ſhould forthwith lay his hand vpon vs, yea and that in ſome ſharpe manner. The reaſon of Gods deferring, the Apoſtle Peter ſetteth downe: who telleth vs, 2. Pet. 3. 9. that the Lord is patient to vs in ſuch caſes to this end, euen to bring vs to repentance: loe, this good he meaneth vs by forbearing vs. And though it

be no wiſe mans part to tempt him at all, in hope of being ſpared, as Samſon heere was, (becauſe ſinnes can neuer be without feare, though they may be without outward danger for a time) yet if wee haue done ſo in times paſt, for the time to come, doe we ſo no more.
                  For ſo our Sauiour ſpeaketh to the man in the Goſpel who had been healed Ioh. 5. 14. of his diſeaſe, (and the caueat & watchword is as fit for vs) Goe thy way and ſinne no more, leſt a worſe thing befall thee. So the beſt that we can do in ſuch a caſe, is, to iudge our ſelues ſpeedily, for the euill we haue done, that we bee not iudged of the Lord, which will bee ſharpe and ſmartie. Euen as Samſon found it afterward, and as other doe in the like caſe find it daily. And 1. Cor. 11. 31. yet without due regard had, our corrupt hearts will driue vs vpon the common rocke; to wit, that wee ſhall hurt our ſelues that way which many doe, euen to cry peace, peace; if God deferre to puniſh, and to thinke (for ſo wee loue to flatter our ſelues) that he fauoureth vs, when he doth not by and by ſtrike vs: euen as the wicked ſaid in the Pſalme, (becauſe the Lord did (as it Pſal. 50. 21. were) hold his tongue, and did not by and by ſmite him for his ſin) that he was like vnto him, that is, of his mind, and allowed him therein; but God anſwered him, I will reproue thee, and ſet thy bad doings before thee, that thou ſhalt acknowledge them whether thou wilt or no, and ſo I will ſhew how I fauoured thee.
               
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 4. And after this hee loued a woman by the plaine of Sorek, whoſe name was Delilah.
                     
                     5. Vnto whom came the Princes of the Philiſtims, and ſaid vnto her, Entice him, and ſee wherein his great ſtrength lieth, and by what meanes we may ouercome him, that we may bind him and puniſh him; and euery one of vs ſhall giue thee eleuen hundred ſhekles of ſiluer.
                     
                     6. And Delilah ſaid to Samſon, Tell mee, I pray thee, wherein thy great ſtrength lieth, and wherewith thou mighteſt be bound to doe thee hurt?
                     
                     7. Samſon then anſwered vnto her, If they bind me with ſeuen greene cords, that were neuer dried, then ſhall I be weake, and be as another man.
                     
                     8. And the Princes of the Philistims brought her ſeuen greene cords, that were not dry, and ſhe bound him therewith.
                     
                     9. (And ſhee had men lying in waite with her in the chamber,) Then ſhee ſaid vnto him, The Philistims be vpon thee Samſon: And he brake the cords as a threed of tow is broken when it feeleth fire: ſo his ſtrength was not knowne.
                     
                     10. After, Delilah ſaid vnto Samſon, See thou haſt mocked me, and told me lies, I pray thee now tell me wherewith thou mighteſt be bound.
                     
                     11. Then he anſwered her, If they bind me with new ropes that were neuer occupied, then ſhall I be weake, and be as another man.
                     
                     12. Delilah therefore tooke new ropes, and bound him therewith, and ſaid vnto him, The Philiſtims be vpon thee Samſon (and men lay in waite in the chamber) and he brake them from his armes as a threed.
                     
                     13. Afterward Delilah ſaid vnto Samſon, Hitherto haſt thou beguiled mee and told melies, tell me how thou mighteſt be bound. And he ſaid vnto her, If thou platteſt ſeuen lockes of mine head with the threeds of the woofe.
                     
                     
                        
14. And ſhe faſtened it with a pinne, and ſaid vnto him, The Philiſtims be vpon thee Samſon, and he awoke out of his ſleepe, and went away with the pin of the web and the woofe.
                     
                     15. Againe ſhe ſaid vnto him, How canſt thou ſay, I loue thee, when thine heart is not with me? thou haſt mocked me theſe three times, and haſt not told me wherein thy great ſtrength lyeth.
                     
                     16. And becauſe ſhe was importunate vpon him with her words continually, and vexed him, his ſoule was pained to the death.
                     
                     17. Therefore hee told her all his heart, and ſaid to her, There neuer came raſor vpon mine head: for I am a Nazarite vnto God from my mothers wombe: therfore if I be ſhauen, my ſtrength will go from me, and I ſhall bee weake, and be like to other men.
                     
                     18. And when Delilah ſaw that he had told her all his heart, ſhee ſent and called for the Princes of the Philiſtims, ſaying, Come vp once againe; for hee hath ſhewed mee all his heart. And they came vp to her, and brought the money in their hands.
                     
                     19. And ſhee made him ſleepe vpon her knees, and ſhe called a man, and made him to ſhaue off the ſeuen locks of his head, and ſhe began to vex him, and his ſtrength was gone from him.
                     
                     20. Then ſhe ſaid, the Philiſtims be vpon thee Samſon. And he awoke out of his ſleepe, and thought, I will goe out now as at other times, and ſhake my ſelfe, but hee knew not that the Lord was departed from him.
                     
                  
                  IN theſe verſes is ſet downe the ſecond part of the Chapter, wherein Samſon ſinned againe, in like manner as before, but he had not the like iſſue as The ſumme of theſe verſes. he had out of the former wicked fact. For God did not arreſt him vpon that treſpaſſe, nor purſue him; but ſeeing hee made no benefit of that his conniuence, when hee went away without puniſhment, but proceeded to the like ſinne againe; behold he now paid dearly for both, accordingly as he tempted God farre by this ſinne of whoredome. For here it is ſaid, that he loued another woman of the Philiſtims, and when they vnderſtood it, they conſidered by what meanes he vexed them, and that was by the great ſtrength of body which he had, whereby hee wrought them great miſchiefe: and they by and by enticed and flattered the woman, and eaſily wonne her, by promiſing her a great ſumme of money, and ſo agreed all of them together therein, to perſwade her to get of him by ſubtilty, where his great ſtrength lay, that ſo they might when they knew it, vſe ſome meanes to weaken him, and then handle him afterward at their pleaſure. The which practiſe ſhe being ſo hired, readily went about; and he being made drunke with the ſottiſh and inordinate loue of her, ſuffered her to moue ſuch queſtions to him about it, that although hee held her off a while, yet at laſt hee told her all his heart, euen that which ſhe asked of him, how he might bee made weake, till hee ſaw too late with Adam, that God was gone from him, and that hee had Gen. 3. 7. loſt all the great ſtrength which God had giuen him.
                  In theſe verſes (containing the ſecond part of the Chapter) ſeeing they are many, and the matter of them much; therefore for auoiding confuſion and tediouſneſſe in the handling of them, I will draw them to theſe two points. The firſt, how by a new occaſion the Philiſtims laid wait for Samſon
                     
againe. And this is to the end of the fifth verſe, and that was in this manner: to wit, by moſt earneſt ſuing to Delilah, to learne where his great ſtrength lay: The ſecond, how ſhe neuer ceaſed til ſhe had found it out, and brought them word of it, to verſ. 21.
                  And firſt touching Samſon, the holy ſtory relateth what the occaſion was of purſuing him; in verſe 4. and then how the Philiſtims thereby were moued to lay for him, in verſ. 5. The occaſion was, that he caſt his affection vpon another woman, not an Iſraelite, (but of the nation of the Philiſtims) and the holy ſtory expreſſeth the place where ſhee dwelt, which was the plaine of Sorek, and the womans name whom he loued was Delilah. By this that is ſaid of Samſon, that hee went to another woman as before; note Doct. verſ. 4. that filthy luſt is not ſatisfied, by yeelding to it (no more then anger and wrath is) that is, onely for the time, but breaketh out, and rangeth ſtill yet further. For as the fire, when it is broken out into a flame, ſtandeth not ſtill, but taketh hold of one houſe when it hath burned another: Euen ſo it is A ſimil. with wicked luſt: It is not one woman, two, or twenty, that can ſatisfie the vnbridledneſſe, and outragiouſneſſe thereof, but it would, if it might be ſerued and yeelded vnto, goe as farre as Salomon did, euen to defile a thouſand. As Iehu in his anſwere to Iehorams demand of peace, 2. King. 9. tels him that 2. King. 9. 22, his mother Iezabels witchcrafts were without number. The reaſon hereof is, becauſe the vnlawfull pleaſure of ſin doth (as the bait doth the fiſh) egge on the ſinner to goe forward, and blinds him from ſeeing the manifold vnfruitfulneſſe thereof. Like gameſters, who will neuer leaue off their trade, while there is a pennie left them. Which ſheweth, that the wickedneſſe of the heart is in that one kind, as in many other, out of meaſure ſinfull. For what though there bee no cleare proofe of this alwaies that I ſpeake of, I meane the vnſatiableneſſe of mens filthie appetite. It is ſo, partly ſeeing the ſinne is ſecretly committed, for the moſt part, and therefore can hardly be knowne to many how far it proceedeth: and partly, for that ſuch as ſinne in that kind, can hardly haue ordinary opportunity to effect that which they deſire. But the truth of that which I ſay, appeareth by this, that it hath been found out, as by other waies, ſo by the confeſſion of ſome, who haue gone farre in that wicked courſe of life, and howſoeuer they may haue come ſhort in the number of ſo many as a thouſand with Salomon, yet they haue made it vp to the full, in the longlying in the ſin with them who were their leaud companions, when they haue not been intercepted, but haue had their full ſwinge. So true is it which is affirmed of the guilt of ſinne, that it is infinite, both in reſpect of the tranſgreſſion againſt an infinite Maieſtie, and alſo becauſe the ſinners appetite (though actually finite) yet extendeth itſelfe to a deſire of multiplying ſinne infinitely, if it could. And it is death to bad men to thinke that their euill courſe ſhould bee ſtopped, or that they may not do as in times paſt they haue done: yea becauſe that age and death, if no other thing, muſt needs end all their iollity.
                  And not to inſiſt in this inſtance alone, it may bee ſeene in ſundry other kindes of ſinne, (as theft, prodigality, drunkenneſſe and the reſt) how the heart is out of meaſure ſinfull, and giueth not ouer euill doing, till it want opportunity, or till it muſt ceaſe by neceſſity, and that violence bee put vnto it. It delighteth the old ribald to ſee and heare, and report the pageants, ſtories,

and practiſes of vncleanneſſe, which he remembreth he hath wrought, and though his old bones cannot beſtirre them ſo liuely as in times paſt, yet old Adam within is aliue, and as laſciuious as euer. The angry man, when hath he done? till he haue none to be angry with, or till hee be cut off, ſo as he cannot ſhew it. But I might bee endleſſe, if I ſhould follow particulars. How oft (thinke wee) had Peter been like to haue denied his Maſter, who did ſo three times, and vehementlieſt at the laſt, when yet hee did it onely through feare, of meere infirmity, and not profeſſedly, which had been much worſe? neither yet were the occaſions very ſtrong or great by which he was brought thereto, but euen the words of a ſilly damſell.
                  The vſe of that which I haue ſaid is this; that both in tentation to the ſinne of vncleanneſſe, (and the obiect thereof) and to any other ſinne, wee Prou. 4. 18. keepe our hearts and eyes with all poſſible obſeruation and diligence from allowing or liking the offer of it, in any ſort, but that we curbe them vp and tie them ſhort. For though carnall reaſon would perſwade vs, that the giuing of a little liberty to our fleſhly affections, and couetous deſires, would content and ſatisfie them, ſo as they would not deſire to reach any further, Note. (as ſome man will ſay, If I were worth but thus many hundred pounds, &c. I would reſt content) yet this were a groſſe bewitching of vs to thinke ſo, ſeeing without Gods ſpeciall grace, as money encreaſeth, ſo doth the loue thereof alſo; yea it were the next way to bring vs into vtter and extreame bondage, and to prouoke vs further to endleſſe ingaging of our ſelues thereunto. Nay, rather ioyne we prayer with watching, and that we fall not from Mar. 26. 41. our vprightneſſe, ſo ſhall we be ſure not to fall into any ſuch tentation. I ſay the leſſe of this, becauſe I haue handled it in the ſpeech of Adonibezek, in cap. 1. verſ. 4.
               
            
         
         
            THE EIGHTIE THREE SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               TO goe forward where I left, heere note wee another thing; to wit, what vſe and benefit wee commonly 2 make of Gods long ſufferance and patience, and that is this: euen to goe forward by ſpirituall deluſion, in our ſinnes, without making any queſtion, that God will call vs to any account for them; but flatteringly to tell our ſelues, and to be perſwaded that all is well, as long as God lets vs go vnpuniſhed. Whereas, who ſhould bee ignorant of this, that the patience of God toward vs is to the end we ſhould acknowledge it with vnfained thankes: (for he might iuſtly haue puniſhed vs, as he hath done others, when he ſpared vs) and that to the

end wee ſhould turne againe to the Lord by true repentance, rather wondring Rom. 2. 4. at his lenity in ſo doing, then with much adoe enduring the penalty. and when we be enlightened, and come to our ſelues, and ſee that wee haue tempted God, we ſhould in no wiſe flatter our ſelues, leſt the Lord be forced thereby to tie vs ſhorter, and vſe more ſharpeneſſe then we ſhal like well of. The like I ſpake of Samſons eſcaping in the former verſe. Onely this I adde, that it is a fearefull thing, when the loue and conniuence of God, which is a Note. chiefe bridle to containe his faithfull people in obedience, is become an occaſion of the greateſt licentiouſneſſe in them. It argueth that their tender nature and filiall affection is waxen hardened, and degenerated into ſlauiſh and deſperate boldneſſe. Like to him who preſuming himſelfe ſure enough of his maſter, fell to waxe wearie of worke, and to take vpon him iollity, as they doe who reckon without their Hoſte. But there ſhall no one thing ſo much ſting them at the heart when God is come to take correction on them, as this; that they were neuer well, till they had turned the loue of a father, into the iealouſie of a foe: whoſe ſwift wings in taking reuenge ſhall be ſure to recompence the delay of his leaden feet, ſlow to puniſh, as Samſon himſelfe in the ſequell found to his coſt.
            Thus much of Samſons ſinne: now it is ſhewed how the Philiſtims tooke Verſ. 5. occaſion thereby to get him into their hands, and that was, by dealing with the woman whom he loued, to intice him to tel her where his great ſtrength lay, that ſo they might doe to him as they deſired; but withall, to the end they might draw and perſwade her thereto, they offer her (the chiefe Princes of them, I meane) a large ſumme of money. By this we may ſee the wiſdome and readineſſe of the men of this world in going about to remedie any bodily miſchiefe that is comming toward them. As ſoone as they heard where Samſons haunt was, the chiefe of them went thither, and tooke order for the ſuppreſſing of him, and that not without their great coſt and charge. Oh this were commendable indeed, if it might bee ſeene in vs, yea and ſo much the more, where greater miſchiefe hangeth ouer vs, I meane, if wee could offer like violence to our ſinne, and giue it no reſt, till wee had rooted it out, as they heere effected that which they went about. The which (yet) all may ſee, that we haue greater cauſe to doe, then they that are in the moſt emminent danger of any temporall or bodily euill. But here to ſee both our ſloth and our follie, it is both admirable and lamentable. But of their prouidence, together with their coſt, conſent, and diligence I haue noted more by the like occaſion in the former verſe.
            It is no maruell that they counſell her to deceiue him by inticements and 2 allurements, ſuch as harlots haue good skill in, and fooles that are woond in with them, are eaſily deluded by. For Samſon by the ſtrongeſt reaſon and perſwaſion of the wiſeſt carnall friend, would neuer haue been drawne to this ſlauerie and ſhame, which a baſe companion brought him to, by deluſion Note. and deceiuing of him. Whereby we may learne, that when we are carried away to ſinne, and are giuen ouer to our luſts, we depart not only from religion, but alſo from ſound wiſdome and reaſon, and are not in our right mindes, (as they ſay) but are deluded, mocked, diſguiſed, euen made very fooles, as Samſon was heere, if not mad and beſide our ſelues; as it was ſaid of the prodigall ſonne when hee had ſpent his goods with harlots, hee came to Luk. 15 17.
               
himſelfe at length, whereby it is cleere that he was before beſide himſelfe: and as we reade of the foole in the Prouerbs, that hee followed as an oxe to Prou 7. 22. the ſlaughter.
            And if we be ſuch, then it is our due to bee ſhoaled among ſuch, and to be driuen from the companie of ſober and wiſe men. Yet thus was Samſon deceiued and deluded, when he was drawne and inticed by that wicked woman, to vtter this ſecret, namely where his great ſtrength lay. The vſe that we ſhould make of this, is to abhorre that ſinne, and all fellowſhip with ſuch perſons, and labour to retaine godly wiſedome, to guide vs in holie feare of offending, rather then to take part in the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon, ſo ſhall we not be deceiued and deluded, as otherwiſe wee cannot chuſe but be, yea and that in moſt ſottiſh manner, as Samſon here was by her inchantment brought to bee. Let this bee ſufficient to ſhew, that there is enough in the corrupt heart of man to humble him in the ſight of God and the world, if he were not in the depth of darkneſſe, yea though there were no more but this, that there is ſuch a rebellion and deformitie in the inferior appetite of the ſoule, through originall ſinne, that whereas it was created moſt obedient and ſubiect to the pure light of the vnderſtanding in all things, now it is ſo infeebled and infatuated, that it reſiſteth the iudgement of the minde, and led away by the ſtrength of any allurement, euen contrary to that knowledge, which ſtill remaineth to guide it. So that it is degegenerate and become moſt brutiſh and ſottiſh, and ſo bewraieth it ſelfe euen in them that otherwiſe goe for none, of the ſimpleſt, or vnciuill ſort.
            This offering of her money by theſe Princes of the Philiſtims, and that alſo in ſuch liberall maner, which was as much as an hundred pound a piece 
                  Doct. 3. of our money well nigh, by the eſtimation of the ſhekell, which they reckoned by, [for a common ſhekell was as much as twentie pence with vs, and therefore eleuen hundred want little of an hundred pound at that rate.] This offering (I ſay) of ſo many hundreds to her, according to the number of the Princes that came to her, might eaſily draw on to their purpoſe ſuch an one as was but light, inconſtant, and falſe-hearted to Samſon, (as harlots are) without reſpect of the money.
            Which teacheth vs, that this hireing of people for money, hath bin, and Doct. is as readie a way to draw them to any lewd practiſe, as it is commonly offered, & hath bin in all ages, but neuer more then in this, and eſpecially by the Popiſh crue in the attempting of deſperate murthers, &c. The like hath bin noted in the fact of Abimelech, chap. 9. who hired lewd fellowes with the Iudg. 9. 4. money of the Shechemites: and that wofull example of the Prieſts preuailing thereby with Iudas one of the twelue Apoſtles, to betray his Maſter, and in hireing the watchmen, Matth. 28. to defame the Reſurrection, may be notable preſidents hereof. And I mention this point to this end, that ſeeing it Mat. 28. 12. 13. is as common as odious, that it may not reach alſo to Gods faithfull ſeruants, to doe either the one or the other, either to ſet a worke others, or to ſell their helpe either to corrupt, or to be corrupted by money, (for they go together, and are mutuall cauſes and effects of each other) to bring wicked purpoſes to paſſe; which in ſo euill an age as this is, (farre more ſubtile and skilfuller then the former to doe miſchiefe) may too ſoone preuaile by cuſtome

euen among them. Touching the coſt they were at, ſee more in chap. 17. 2.
            Thus wee haue heard how this wicked woman was hired by the Philiſtim Verſ. 6. 7. 8. 9. Princes to this wofull worke of deceiuing Samſon, which was the firſt point of the two, (as appeareth in the fourth verſe) in the ſecond part of this chapter. Now it followeth, how ſhe went to worke, and preuailed, and this is the ſecond. This is declared and laid foorth in the verſes following, to the 21. But ſhe not obtaining at one time that which ſhe ſought, ſhe ſet vpon him fundrie times. Foure ſeuerall attempts are expreſſed here to haue been made by her to this end; and the firſt of them is to bee ſeene in theſe foure next verſes. Of theſe therefore as they follow in order.
            In her firſt attempt, we muſt not thinke that ſhe went about it ſimply by Doct. verſ. 6. asking him the queſtion, where his ſtrength lay; but as they had taught her to deceiue him, ſo there is no doubt but ſhe flattered him, pretending that ſhe marueiled at his ſo great ſtrength, and that ſhe reioyced not a little, for that ſhe had a louer indued with ſuch an excellent gift and qualitie; and therefore that ſhe, as one louing him againe, and truſtie to him, for his kindneſſe towards her, deſired of him to know where that great ſtrength of his did lie. By this we ſee, what boldneſſe, men (though furniſhed with excellent gifts) doe cauſe and cheriſh in harlots, by hauing fellowſhip, and keeping companie with them. Samſon was a man ſo ſpoken of for his manhood, that ſuch as were of good courage, durſt not be bold to looke him in the face, yet ſhe a baſe houſewife, dares boldly demaund of him weightie matters, and the greateſt ſecrets. So the whoriſh daughter of an whoriſh mother, Herodias I meane, being ſo farre admitted as to dance before Herod 
               Matth. 14. 6. the King, & being permitted to demand what recompence ſhe liſted, euen to the halfe of his kingdome, ſhamed not to aske the head of Iohn Baptiſt: whom not onely all the people, but euen Herod himſelfe reuerenced and Mark. 6. 20. ſtood in feare of. And theſe are the wares which the ſtrumpets fardall is ſtuft withall, euen ſubtiltie, crueltie, falſehood (all ſo tempered together in this demaund of Delilah, that a man knowes not which qualitie of them all is predominant) and among the reſt, this (whereof we now ſpeake) inſolent impudencie and ſhameleſneſſe. It is the practiſe of this curſed kinde euen at this day with their Paramours, to demaund of them vnreaſonable pledges of vncleane loue, as appeares by the embezeling of their patrimonie for their maintenance, and ſometimes cauſing them to ſpend euen their blood in their quarrell, or by their occaſion.
            It is a true ſaying, that too much familiaritie breedeth contempt. But much more if it be in euill, and in no euill ſooner then in this kind, I meane in whoredome. A thing notoriouſly exemplified in that harlot Iezabel, 
               Note. who ſo much abuſed the remiſſenes of Ahab, as to inſult ouer him, as her 1 King. 21. 7. vnderling. It is the common phraſe of them that are the companions of harlots, to call themſelues their ſeruants, and them their miſtreſſes. But in deed they are their vaſſals and ſlaues, and yet their bondage, as great as it is, and ioyned with miſerie, is ſweete to them, although (indeed) but a ſweete poyſon: but it is a reward good enough for ſuch employment. And yet many chuſe this kinde of life, as a libertie, rather then honeſt mariage. But to returne to that which I ſaid of familiaritie, it is not meete for the beſt to

ſwell (I confeſſe) and to bee high minded, but humble and meeke toward all; yet with grauitie, whereby the bad may be afraid of them, and not think them fit companions for them, except they change their qualities, and the Note. Tit. 2. 7. good may cling and ioyne to their companie and acquaintance, without feare. But to haue familiaritie with the bad in euill, is vtterly vnlawfull, and ſerues onely to confirme and make them bold in wickedneſſe. Thus is many a man, otherwiſe worthie, as Samſon was, brought into meane account by indiſcreete and vnſeaſonable laying open his minde, where hee ſhould not: euen ſo did he imbolden this woman thereby to aske him how he may bee bound and hurt; the which how abſurd a thing it was either for him to incourage her, or for her to propound to him, who ſeeth not?
            
               Samſon in anſwering her, who ſhould not haue admitted her to ſpeake to Verſ. 7. him of any ſuch matter, and telling her how hee might be bound, did make way to all the euill that followed. For if ſhe had been repulſed and beaten back from ſuch boldnes at the firſt, ſhe ſhould haue had no incouragement, or much leſſe (no doubt) to haue proceeded further, as ſhe did afterward. It was as great wiſedome in Samſon to anſwer her in this, as it was in Balaam, when he anſwered the words of his Aſſe. It was time (he ſhould haue ſaid Numb. 22. 29. with himſelfe) for him to thinke that hee had gone farre enough in prouoking God, when hee opened the mouth of the dumme beaſt to reprooue him.
            So ſhould Samſon haue thought, that when he had imboldned a wicked woman to tamper and meddle with him about that which touched his life, and concerned his ſoule, to bereaue it of the furniture of the graces of God, he ſhould haue thought (I ſay) that it was time to ceaſe ſpeaking to her, or to admit her to ſpeake of any ſuch matter to him: yea to turne vtterly away from her rather, and vtterly to giue her ouer. Ioſeph, when his whoriſh Miſtreſſe lay at him day by day to yeeld to her wicked requeſt, the Scripture Gen. 39. 10. teſtifieth, that yet he hearkened not vnto her, neither would be in her companie.
            So if any of vs haue made vagaries and outſtrayings, yea though not ſo groſſely as Samſon did, neither in fellowſhip with lewd women, (which were horrible) but if it be but in fond and filthie lingering after them, and their whoriſh companie, when our conſciences ſhall accuſe vs for ſo doing, Note. and warne vs to deſiſt and breake off betimes, from ſuch longing and lingering after them, as they who haue nothing to doe with them, and when withall we ſet before our eyes the ſhame and ſorrow that will fall on vs by that which we long for, and haſt after: then (I ſay) let vs thinke, it is high time for vs (if wee haue vnhappily gone ſo farre) to breake the brood, and ſcatter the miſts of ſuch idle and filthie thoughts and wicked luſts, and with aſtoniſhment aske of our ſelues, what haue wee done? and by the helpe of our faithfull and ſeruent prayers to throw them all in the duſt, and not with Samſon to dally with them, as he did with his Delilah, but marke and thinke ſeriouſly vpon the end thereof. And ſo doing, wee ſhall to ſome purpoſe make our benefit of this example of Samſon: otherwiſe wee may with the common ſort wonder at, and condemne his follie, and our ſelues play the fooles in the like or a worſe kinde. It is not ſtrange, that he who purpoſely had proſtituted himſelfe to the will of an harlot, and was now in the purſuit

of his luſt, could not then breake the bands of his ſinfull deſire, when it had ſnared him: for the time of preuenting this miſchiefe was, when hee was firſt enticed: now the matter was gone ſo farre that being vnder feete, he had ſmall liſt or ſtrength to riſe vp, and call himſelfe to a ſerious remembrance Note. of his offence. And Delilahs lap and armes was no fit nor likely place or occaſion of ſuch thoughts or meditations: wiſedome was driuen out of his breaſt by corrupt affection: the blow was ſmartie enough, but hee had loſt his feeling. So that there is no more miſerable a ſight, then to behold a man when he is intangled with the ſnare of his owne luſt, or any ſin that waſteth the conſcience, for then is hee ſhiftleſſe, and cannot helpe himſelfe, but is readie to beare any burthen which ſhall be laid vpon his ſhoulders, rather then to riſe vp from vnder it. Therefore great is the loue of God to that man, who not hauing at firſt preuented the beginnings of ſinne, but been ouertaken with the deceitfulnes of it at the firſt view, yet vpon more aduiſed conſideration of the danger which it leadeth vnto, ſhall awake and rouſe vp himſelfe, and flie from it as from a ſerpent.
            And for his ſhifting her off with a lye, as though he would both ſatisfie 2 her, and yet keepe himſelfe in ſafetie, by not bewraying the ſecret; his wiſedome and commendation was alike in both. For as he dealt fooliſhly in anſwering her at all, ſo did hee as ill in looking to ſtop her mouth with a lye. Which forewarneth vs, not to ſhift for our ſelues, nor looke to make our part good by lying, though the way lie open thereto, and is then too readie at hand, when we ſee no other way; which ſinne in all kinds thereof is condemned, howſoeuer little account be made of it. And the rather it is to bee taken heed of, ſeeing we oft times runne headlong into it, (as I haue ſaid) when wee ſee no readier way to ſhift for our ſelues, and (as wee thinke) to ſaue our credit, and auoid greater danger. And ſeeing there was no other to bee looked for, then that Samſon (being in the caſe hee was at this preſent) ſhould prouide for his owne ſafetie by a lye, (a poore ſhield for him, whoſe innocencie and watchfulnes ſhould haue been his defence) let vs beware of entring acquaintance with any ſin, for it will bee coſtly in the maintaining, and draw a man by a wretched neceſſitie to adde thereto many other ſins: euen as Samſon muſt ſeeke couert and ſafegard to himſelfe by a lye (for want of better) except at firſt daſh he would haue gone through ſtitch, and haue told her the matter. Touching his dallying humour, and his playing wilie beguily with her, as if he had had wiſdome and skill enough to ſhift her off with trifling anſwers, if the hardeſt ſhould come; although it ſauoured ſomewhat of confidence and conceitednes of his ſuppoſed ſtrength, (much like Peters raſhnes, when hee was told by his Maſter that he ſhould denie him) Luke 22. 34. Mat. 26. 34. 35. yet in the ſequell it bewraied his more then common folly, as hee that had had but one eye, might eaſily haue ſeene that no leſſe euill could follow: which alſo ſhall appeare in due place hereafter.
            She, as if hee had told her the truth, as ſhe verily thought hee had, went Verſ. 8. 9. about forthwith to make proofe of his words: for whereas hee told her hee ſhould be weakened, if he were bound with ſeuen greene withes or cords, ſhe cauſed them to be brought to her foorthwith, and ſhe bound him with them, though indeed hee brake them: (oh wonderfull ſottiſhnes in him to ſuffer it!) and ſhe had certaine of the Philiſtims lying in waite in a chamber

thereby; who ſhould be ready to take him, if he had been weakened indeed, as ſhe ſuppoſed he was, and looked for it. Thus wee ſee whereto her flattering words tended, euen to ſeeke his life. And this is as good as they may looke for, who haue neere fellowſhip and ſecret company with ſuch companions.
            For though as Salomon ſaith, her lips drop as the honey combe, euen as if ſhe were pleaſure it ſelfe to a man, yet her paths leade to deſtruction, and Prou. 5. 3. an whore will hunt after the pretious life of a man. We haue read of many, who partly haue been moſt wofully handled of the ſtrumpets themſelues, whom they haue truſted with life and goods, and partly haue bin deliuered by them into their enemies hands to be ſlaine. And what maruell? For ſhe that hath ſold her ſelfe; will much eaſilier ſell her Paramour. And therefore well did the ſame Salomon giue warning, that ſhee is to bee ſhunned as hell Prou. 7. 27. mouth. But though bodily danger be ſo much to be feared by her, yet that is the leaſt; ſpirituall hurt is farre greater. But by the occaſion of this which I ſay, I adde; that the ſin of them is farre more grieuous, who abhorre common harlots, who might eaſily bewray them, yet will not refraine from making thoſe (or going about it at leaſt) who were honeſt before, to ſtoope to their lure, and ſo become whores and diſhoneſt; which thing of the better ſort is more to be feared. Of this falſhood and trecherie I haue ſaid ſomwhat in the former Chapter.
            Thus much of the firſt attempt of Delilah, by the which though ſhe preuailed Verſ. 10. not in that which ſhee ſought, yet this ſhee gained, that ſhee was the more imboldned to ſet vpō him again, as hauing receiued no check nor diſcouragement by him, for that which ſhe had done already. Therefore ſhee is not diſcouraged, but attempteth the matter the ſecond time, as in theſe next three verſes is to be ſeene. And ſhe boldly ſaid to him, that hee had deceiued her, and told her lies, which might iuſtly cauſe her, ſhe ſaid, to doubt of his loue to her, and therfore now ſhe required better dealing at his hands, or elſe ſhe ſhould be much grieued.
            This ſhameleſſe behauiour of hers ſhould teach vs, that all boldneſſe in euill 1 is an high degree of ſinne, and we ſhould keepe our ſelues farre from it: as not euen to dare open our mouthes to a woman to hearken and conſent to a filthy and vncleane demand or motion, wherby alſo ſhe may know and be priuie to the wickedneſſe that is in vs. The ſame I ſay of boldneſſe in any other ſin, as boaſting, threatning, ſlandering, lying, ſwearing, challenging of any to fight, or any other like vnto theſe, & it is fearfull to heare any of theſe, or to ſee them committed with ſuch boldneſſe as they are. Oh modeſty and baſhfulnes, what ſeemly & comely ornaments are they, euen where conſcience is as yet wrought by the word, but wanting? for they doe keepe and preſerue many from ſhamefull euils oftentimes, who haue no religion to guide and defend them. But boldnes is and ought to be vſed in the defence, commendation, and ſute making for good things, and therein to be ſhewed, Note. and when it is ſo employed, it is then in kinde. This point I will not heere enlarge, ſeeing it often commeth to hand.
            Now followeth Samſons anſwere to her ſute in the ſecond attempt. And Verſ. 11. that was much like the former. If, ſaith he now, I be bound with new ropes that neuer were occupied, I ſhall bee weake, as another man. Wherein wee

ſee he dallies with her ſtill, and ſuffers her to demand that of him which was not meet in any ſort for him to haue ſuffered, yea and anſweres her alſo about it. For what though he held her off with a lie? yet ſeeing hee did not refuſe to anſwere her about it, and charge her to ſpeake no more of it, (being a ſecret not to bee vttered) and alſo in that hee doth ſo the ſecond time, when he had tried already, that ſhe ſought to know it onely to the end ſhee might deliuer him into the Philiſtims hands; in theſe reſpects, I ſay, as it was palpable dotage in him to doe ſo, euen ſo it was the next way to ſet her forward in ſoliciting and importuning him, till ſhee got it at his hands. It was therefore a further degree both of his ſinne, and alſo of the bringing on of his miſery. He might haue been made wiſe enough to haue refuſed to heare her any more about that, hauing ſeene before, that the Philiſtims lay in the chamber iuſt by, (if opportunity had ſerued) to binde and take him.
            And this may teach vs, that it is no better then ſottiſhneſſe to bee ſo impotently Doct. giuen ouer to a mans appetite, and either this way in lingring after, or clinging to a wicked woman, or in purſuing hotly any other ſinne, ſeeking the fulfilling of a mans deſire, ſo that he can no way bee remoued from it; and that eſpecially when neither proofe of former danger thereby, nor feare of preſent euill, nor the foreſeeing of any to come, (and yet all certaine and apparent) can hold him from it. And though in this groſſe manner Gods ſeruants bee not commonly enchanted and bewitched (which were monſtrous) yet let vs not reſt in that, nor in any like impotency, as in hunting greedily after the wealth of this world, and ioying in the pride of life, &c. but ſo bridle wee and keepe vnder our wicked hearts, eſpecially when wee haue had faire warnings before, as he had, that they bring vs to no ſuch like ſlauery and bondage, but that we abhorre them more then at the firſt, (if we did then entertaine them, eſpecially we hauing had proofe, as he had, what woe will follow.
            The more I conſider this fact of Samſon, the more I thinke of that phraſe which the holy Ghoſt vſeth to deſcribe ſinne by; I meane that of drunkenneſſe. And as by other occaſions I note other properties of a drunkard, wilfully ruſhing into it; ſo I obſerue this one of venterouſneſſe and boldneſſe. Well ſaid he that deſcribed drunkennes (among many other properties of the diſeaſe) that it puts into man a marueilous confident hopes, ſo that it dareth fight with any man without weapon, whom ſobriety durſt not encounter with, though well armed. And no wonder, for when the braine is ouercharged, and nature oppreſſed, in ſtead of the purelight and vnderſtanding of mind; there is ingendred a frothie conceit and appearance of that which is not, and in ſtead of the ſpirit and vigour of the affection, ſucceedeth a degenerate boldneſſe and foole-hardie ventrouſneſſe: as all men can iudge that the boldneſſe of a drunkard comes rather for want of wit, then preſence of courage. Euen thus fareth it with Samſon in this diſtemper and ſpirituall drunkenneſſe of his. Still he makes his companion anſweres, faire and farre off, flouriſhing and caſting about, as if he had skill, and ſtrength enough to match and goe beyond her; whereas alas it fareth with him as with the man I ſpake of, who thinking himſelfe ſtrong enough to goe alone and vpright, tottereth and falleth at euery turne. For although the ſecret was not yet vttered, yet theſe preambles of dalliance and trifling, what were they

but as the nibling of the fiſh, or the hopping of the bird about the bait and ſnare which ſhe haſteneth, and yet would not ſeeme to haſten vnto? Doubtleſſe, if Samſon his grace had not been in great part imbezeled and feebled, ere his locks were cut off, he had carried a truer meaſure of himſelfe, and better iudgement of his owne caſe, then to thinke himſelfe his owne man, and able to reſiſt, when his miſtriſſe, or rather his luſt, had him bound in chaines, and laid vnder feet, as foiled and vanquiſhed. Ah poore Samſon, (it may be ſaid) thou wert ſtrong enough to match Lions, and thouſands of men: but grace ſtands not in the bigneſſe of bone, and ſtrength of armes, or greatnes of ſtomacke: thy luſt and thy harlot are ſtronger then the Lion, or mightie men. Therefore let this be enough to conuict all ſuch of folly, as are of Samſons humour. Tuſh, ye muſt not tell them of bad company, nor ſtealing of liberty which God denieth them; they would not haue you think they haue ſhaken hands with the feare of God, they would bee as loth to part with a good conſcience as others: yea, (it may bee anſwered) ſo thought Samſon; he would haunt the harlots houſe, and yet ſecretly keepe his goodneſſe too, for all that. But how, and where lay the ſtrength to effect this? Poore ſoule, onely in his fooliſh conceit and boldneſſe, and indeed onely there lay the foundation of his woe. For if he had felt his declining and weakeneſſe, then had he with aſtoniſhment ſhaken off his louer, and departed. But now hee feareth nothing till all be too late, and this makes him to ſport and play in a matter of the greateſt importance and danger. Therfore to all ſuch bold perſons as ſay, Turne me looſe to any company, and the ſtrongeſt enemie; If I be foiled, laugh at me: To ſuch I ſay; yea, we ſhal be ſure you ſhal be laughed at, though the wiſe will pitie you rather: but who ſhall giue you counſell to eſcape it before? truly he that can perſwade you to walke humbly, and with feare of your owne frailty, and to watch againſt, and ſuſpect your owne frailty and falſhood of heart: hee (I ſay) may keepe a miſchiefe from you, and hold you from venturing and dealing with ſuch an aduerſary, as you know will maſter you. But if you looke to eſcape danger, and yet reiect this grace, then know for certainty, that theſe kinds of Merchant-venturers alwaies make ſhipwracke, and bring in no better gaine. All the grace that a man hath, is little enough to quench the dart of tentation ſuggeſted; which yet is but the beginning of the ſinne: and ſhalt thou, adding fewell to the fire, and helping the diuell forward by inward prouoking thy ſelfe to ſinne, thinke to quit thy ſelfe well of it in the hotteſt aſſault? If God try thee, his grace ſhall bee ſufficient for thee: if thou wilt tempt him, and trouble thy 2. Cor. 12. 9. ſelfe, know thou haſt no promiſe of ſafety, or to be kept harmeles, but maieſt looke certainely for thy downefall: as for thy owne wiſedome, grace is not propped vp by ſuch pillers, but ſhall totter and reele as an houſe which hath loſt her foundation: yea they that goe to worke thus on their owne head, moſt aſſuredly with Samſon ſhall fall, and bewray their folly at laſt, to teach them by the experience of fooles, that wiſdome, which the word and other vnhappy men could not doe. Then ſhall they ſee there was oddes betwixt keeping innocent, and wilfull offending; they ſhall finde, that the ſtrength of the one is not like the other, though they were little aware of any ſuch matter.
            The iſſue of this ſecond attempt was altogether as it was in the former: Verſ. 12.
               
for ſhe bound him with ropes againe, and had company lying ready for the purpoſe at hand, (if there had bin any worke for them to do,) though as yet he fell not into their hands. And let this teach vs, not onely to feare and ſuſpect trechery and vnfaithfulneſſe in leaud women which we know; (as this was ſuch an one;) but generally alſo wherein ſoeuer wee haue to doe, beware we that we defile not our hearts and hands in any wicked actions and practiſes, whatſoeuer ſhewes and promiſes are giuen and offered vs. Remembring the words of our Sauiour, Bee wiſe as Serpents, and innocent as Mat. 10. 16. Doues, and beware of men.
            Which I doe not ſay, as though I would teach men vncharitableneſſe, (charity being not ſuſpitious) but to giue warning to Gods ſeruants to beware 1. Cor. 13. 5. how wee put our ſelues into mens hands, and truſt their faithfulneſſe vpon a faire word or countenance, which our Sauiour willeth vs to take Ioh. 2. 24. heed of, and giues vs example alſo, in that he would not commit himſelfe to men, though they ſpeake him faire, and giueth his reaſon thereof, For he knew what was in man. But while we doe thus, we do not iudge of men what they are, (but are warie, as we be counſelled) or what religion is in them, further then we haue proofe thereof by their words and deeds, and yet that we do not ſo, finally neither, but for the time onely, while they lie in knowne euill, or not knowne to be reformed. So that neither are wee on the one ſide, to iudge men without ground and warrant, neither yet are wee on the other ſide, to commit our ſelues into their hands, (hauing that knowledge and experience that wee haue of mens vnfaithfulneſſe how common it is) vpon a bare ſhew. But heere an end for this time.
         
         
            THE EIGHTIE FOVRE SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               THe third attempting of Samſon by Delilah followeth in Verſ. 13. 14. theſe next two verſes: For ſhee ſeeing hee dealt ſo ſlightly in the matter, and that he did not in good earneſt forbid her to meddle any more about it, but ſtill dallied with her, ſhe tooke his deniall but in ſport, and therfore ſets vpon him againe, not deſpairing, but that by importuning him, ſhee might in time preuaile and ouercome him. By this we may learne, that if we reſiſt finne houerly, (and in Doct. that ſo waighty a matter as this was, as ſtriking at our happineſſe) and deale ſlightly and looſely about it, when all that wee can doe againſt it is little enough to withſtand it, wee can giue no further token that wee will fall into, and commit the ſinne it ſelfe, and that ſhortly.
            For the diuell and his wicked inſtruments that lie in the way to deceiue

vs, and to draw vs into the ſnare; they are wiſe in diſcerning, and artificial in marking how we goe to worke, and how farre we hold backe from yeelding to tentations: If we doe it earneſtly with ſtrength of reaſon reſolutely to diſſwade our ſelues from the ſame, and be feruent and conſtant therein, we put them to their ſhifts to inuent arguments of greater force, whereby they may be in better hope to preuaile with vs. As the diuell dealt with our Saniour according to his reſolute and ſtrong deniall, in moſt ſlie and ſubtill Mat. 4. 4, 5. manner. But if we refuſe the bait but faintly, as Balaam did (for al the ſhewes Numb. 22. 38. 2. Pet. 2. 15. Iud. 11. he made) the wages of iniquity that was offered him; or if we ſhew that we feare not the danger greatly which is like to enſue, but ſtand ſtrongly in our owne conceit, that wee can eaſily withſtand the ſin in the vpſhot, and that we haue no need to be counſelled about or againſt it, as the moſt at this day do ſo deceiue themſelues; the diuell hath what he would at our hands, and doubts not but to draw vs into the ſnare to commit the ſinne ſhortly, euen as theſe that I ſpeake of do finde and feele to their coſt, for all the confidence that they ſeeme to haue.
            
               Samſon in this third attempt, was ſo far off from giuing her ouer, hauing twice tryed that ſhe ſought his life and vtter vndoing, that yet hee anſweres 
                  Doct. 2. her the third time; ſuch was his effeminate ſottiſhneſſe: ſo that howſoeuer hee thought ſtill to conceale the ſecret from her, and to keepe himſelfe free from vttering it, euen as before thitherto he had done; yet hee began now in this third attempt, to ſlide and ſlip in further, and to ſtagger as a drunken man, little conſidering what he did. For hee was tampering about his lockes now before he told her the very thing that ſhe asked, and ſo came neerer to the bewraying and vttering that which ſhee ſought of him: as if hee could hardly conceale it from her; ſaying to her, that if his lockes were faſtened to the threeds of the woofe with a pin, hee ſhould be weakened, and be as another man. And ſhe, thinking indeed that hee came now more neere the very point, ſeeing he ſpake of his lockes; ſhe by and by made triall of his words, and hauing done ſo, ſhe called the Philiſtims againe to ſet vpon him; but as yet hee held backe from yeelding to her, and once more withſtood and deceiued her, although hee had much adoe (as we ſee) to keepe it from her.
            Whereby wee may ſee, that when men giue themſelues liberty and full Doct. ſcope to talke too and fro of things dangerous and hurtfull, and take liking therein, and will auoid no occaſions, nor reſiſt no tentations drawing and leading thereto, they ſhall not chuſe but bee ſnared and caught therewith, though they intend no ſuch thing, (as it came to paſſe to him) and ſo they Note. ſhall hardly forbeare and containe themſelues from running headlong, and being giuen ouer thereto. For when they are led away of their owne concupiſcence, as Saint Iames ſaith, they are inticed alſo, and ſnared, ſo that they Iam. 1. 14. cannot well go off nor on, but more ready to conſent, as wee ſee Samſon did afterward, telling his whole heart vnto her. Euen ſo I ſay, men ſhall by oft and long tampering with the ſinne whereto they are too neerely affected, come more readily and ſpeedily to the conſenting to it, and the committing of it, who ſhould rather turne away, and weane themſelues, and that betimes, from the leaſt liking or longing after it, much leſſe ſhould they haſten it on by liberall talking of it. For if we will ſuffer our ſelues to be importuned

in all caſes, medling with them when we need not, who doubteth but that we ſhall much eaſilier yeeld thereto. Thoſe whom commonly wee call men of good natures, being once tainted by leaud company, grow firſt diſſolute, and by degrees deſperate: but they wax rotten by degrees, as wee ſee fruit by long lying doth. And as wee ſee in the running out of the houreglaſſe, that euery part of the ſands courſe is the haſtening of the houre to an end, though the laſt paſſage of it be the actuall ending the reof: ſo may we ſay of Samſon his dallying, and houering replies, that euen the firſt, ſecond, and third were the preparations to the final bewraying of the ſecret, though the fourth onely confeſſed it actually. If the fourth had been away, the matter had been whole, but the fourth was in the firſt, in the ſecond, and in the third (though more obſcurely) enfolded. Alas, at his firſt ſhifting he thought hee might haue proceeded ſtill. But as the ſecret at the firſt daſh was too waighty to vtter: ſo after two or three dalliances, the tentation preuailed, and was too ſtrong for him any longer to ſhift off, withhold, or reſiſt. And the like let vs know, euen as this alſo is, to be ſpokon vnto vs.
            The fourth attempt followeth, in the which ſhee gaue him the deadly Verſ. 15. 16. 17. blow. For when no warning will ſerue, how can a man chuſe but fall into the danger (how great ſoeuer it be) which he would by no meanes auoide while he might? But let vs heare the dealing of them both. She is growne now more ſubtill then before. For wee are not to thinke that theſe things were done betwixt them on one day, or on foure daies together, (as the acts are heere ſet downe to be in number foure) immediately following one another; but with ſome ſpace betwixt them, that ſhe might take fit occaſion in a more ſubtill manner to renue her ſuite and requeſt againe. Shee beginneth therefore with him in this manner; that whereas hee had told her hee loued her, ſhee ſubtilly anſwered, ſhee ſaw hee loued her not, becauſe his heart was not with her, but hee had mocked her now three times, and had not told her that which ſhe asked of him. And through her ſubtill and ſecret winding into him, and her impudent importunity, and earneſt vrging of him, for all his wiſedome (as he thought) in holding her off with lies and delaies, in ieſting manner; yet he thinking by her following of the matter, that ſhe was in good earneſt with him, in ſaying hee grieued her becauſe ſhe ſaw he loued her not, he was brought thereby to pitie her, and to be ſo wounded with her ſubtil flattering of him, and diſſembling with him, that he was ſore vexed to ſee her ſo grieued: and therefore as great woe as it was like to bring to himſelfe, he neuer duly conſidered it but was ouercome and told her according to her deſire, all his heart, euen how hee might bee brought to loſe his ſtrength. This for the ſumme of theſe three verſes.
            But now let vs weigh theſe things more particularly. In the 15. verſe, by Doct. verſ. 15. the ſubtilty the woman had learned now at the laſt (who told him he loued her not, when yet ſhe knew he doted on her) we ſee how artificiall the wicked do eaſily grow, (for herein we need not doubt but that ye like offenders now, are like her) and how ſoone the deceiuers in their attempts doe waxe worſe and worſe, and more ripe in ſubtilty and deceiuing, then they were before. So ſaith Paul to Timothy. So that if there were any to obſerue it, how 2. Tim 3. 12. (for the moſt part) men are fitted to this trade; to wit, that how meanely and bungerly ſoeuer they go to worke in compariſon, when they begin the

world, I meane for ſubtilty, ouer they doe afterward: but how ſoone they grow ripe in this faculty, and that in euery kinde of euill dealing, as experience ſheweth too cleerely; I ſay if men obſerued it, they would confeſſe no leſſe then I ſay.
            Whether we ſpeake of them that begin in vnlawfull trades and courſes, as in whoredome, oppreſſion, flattery, beguiling, or in any ſuch; or in thoſe which are lawfull; as buying, ſelling, letting houſe and land, or other earthly dealings, (as may bee ſeene in the vniuſt Steward, what euill practiſes are Luk. 16. 3. vſed in all theſe,) and what cunning and craft are found out and inuented, to goe one beyond another, otherwiſe then in times paſt, for the moſt part they haue done; it is admirable to conſider it. In all which they ſhew plainly, that they do not to any purpoſe, mind nor ſet their hearts vpon any better things, howſoeuer ſome of them will beare vs in hand that they doe, and that they will ſerue God as well as the beſt. And not only ſo, but (that which would leſſe be thought) how long is it, before they that imbrace the Goſpell grow to be experienced, and well ſeaſoned with ſuch true and ſauing knowledge of holy doctrine, as whereby they abhorre ſuch dregges and doings, and attaine to the finding of the Chriſtian life to be meate and drinke to them. And how few are there that doe ſo? So that it may worthily bee complained of, yea lamented with teares, if there were euery where ſuch as could doe it, to ſee both the fewneſſe of this latter ſort, and how many there be euery where ſwarming of the former. But of this ripeneſſe of ſinne elſewhere. Yet this I adde, (that which I vtter with griefe) euen theſe ripe headed and nimble fellowes, who grow ſo ſoone maſters of their trade before they haue ſerued halfe a Prentiſhip, ſhall riſe vp and condemne many of the better ſort for their block-headed backwardneſſe in matter of religion and Chriſtianity, after ſo long training vp in Gods ſchoole. This age ſhould bee ripeſt in grace and skill how to paſſe the time moſt fruitfully and ioyfully: and neuer age had ſuch dullards and dunces in ſearching into themſelues, and trying whether they be in the ſtate of ſaluation or no, and in ſeeking acquaintance with God, conſidering that it hath the helpes of all former examples, and preſent meanes to this purpoſe, greater then euer age had ſince the Apoſtles time. If it be, who ſhall domineere ouer others, and ſet vp himſelfe, who ſhall cogge and coſen, or goe beyond his neighbour to deceiue him, and who hath more ſtrings to his bow to ſhift, ſcrape, and rake pelfe together howſoeuer; then our age may commence the higheſt degree in this profeſſion. Skill and ripeneſſe in miſchiefe is not bounded only within them of Delilahs trade (though doubtleſſe the ſtrumpets of old ages were punies to them of ours for all ſubtilty and villany) but extends as farre as the Prince of this world hath any ſubiects. But if ye go to enquire who hath made the Chriſtian life eaſie, by conſtancy in obedience, who liueth a ſweet life and void of ſorrow by reſolute purpoſe and endeuour of abſtaining from all euill, and by watching ouer his heart and life alwaies, alſo who enioyeth that liberty which God alloweth, to reſt aſſured of his loue, and ſo to goe in and out before him, from one duty to another, without vnſetledneſſe, wearines, Note. and diſquietneſſe. In a word, if ye enquire who is the man that hath ſo improued the doctrine of the Goſpell, as that hee hath found that hundredfold Mat. 19. 29. meaſure of contentment for reiecting lying vanities, ſo that hee is become

a light and example to others, like thoſe Theſſalonians whom Paul 
               1. Theſ. 1. 7. calles paternes, and thoſe Saints whom Dauid calleth excellent: If (I ſay) Pſal 16. 3. inquirie be made after theſe (which yet are the beſt of all other) yee ſhall finde or meete with few, that ſee into them, affect them, or can anſwere any great matter about them: Oh, euery little is enough in godlineſſe, men are content with mediocritie heere, which in godlineſſe is a vice, and no vertue. So that there is a perfection and maſterſhip in Gods trade alſo, and without compariſon the greateſt gaine: but the worke is tedious, or men vnhappie that cannot hit vpon it.
            
               Samſon being ſo blindfolded with her beautie, that hee was now become ſicke for ſeeing her grieued, ſo that now he muſt reſt no more with her, but in good earneſt he muſt vtter his ſecret to her, or elſe he loued her not, as ſhe charged him; and how could ſhe beare that vnkindneſſe at his hands, that ſhe louing him ſo dearely, (as ſhe made him thinke ſhe did by her ſubtiltie) he on the other ſide ſhould not care for her, he being (I ſay) thus blindfolded, this oft and importunate vrging him by her, ſo wounded him, that rather then hee would haue a thought that hee was cut off from her loue, (which was death to him to thinke) hee could hold her off no longer, but told her that which ſhe asked of him, till hee felt too late that hee was vndone, to make all others afraid by his example, to make a ſport of ſinne, and to trifle in matters of ſuch conſequence.
            Here this may be learned by Samſon, that they who will be companions Verſ. 16. in ſinne ieſtingly, and in dalliance (thinking yet with themſelues, that they will goe no further) they ſhall fall to it in good earneſt, and ſhall not bee able to auoid it. This might bee exemplified in many particulars. I pray giue vs leaue to be merrie, ſaith the wanton, we meane no harme: No, but harme waiteth you by your dalliance. An angrie and moody perſon (who yet knowes how dangerous a ſinne anger is) giuing reine to himſelfe; and reſiſting no occaſions, in time ſtrikes and wounds, and at length kils in his rage; yet ye muſt let him alone, he cannot but be angry, he ſaith, being prouoked, but when he hath ſpoken he hath done. Nay, many a man hath vndone himſelfe ere he hath done, and all by dallying with his ſinne. It is ill playing with Beares, and Lions, or fierce creatures, for there is no amiable Note. qualitie in them: but ſinne of all other is the moſt hideous monſter, and no man is more in danger to be deuoured of it, then hee that playeth with it. This, not onely the prophane of the world doe proue to bee true, to the ſhame of many of them which would be better thought of, but euen the godly doe finde it ſo, when for yeelding to their luſts and bad deſires too farre, they haue no power ouer themſelues, but are brought to that point, that either their conſciences diſquiet and ſore torment them, or they bring foorth in the ſight of all men the ſinne, which they too much gaue ouer themſelues vnto, and delighted in; as we haue heard of Dauid. Let it bee a warning to all how they dally with ſinne, and ieſt about it, he is neerer them then they are aware, Satan I meane, who drawing them to goe on the brim and banck of the riuer, will plunge them headlong into the bottome and depth of it; but let men rather be farre off from treading in the ſteps that leade thereto: as I haue before obſerued out of his three-fold dallying anſwere, and therefore in this will be briefer.
            
               
Another thing heere of Samſon let vs learne, that it is euen death to men to bee put from their vnlawfull delights and pleaſures, when they haue once giuen ouer themſelues brutiſhly and ſottiſhly vnto them, as hee was vexed almoſt to the death to heare her to tell him, ſhe muſt forſake him, and could not loue him, if his hart was no more toward her, then ſhe ſaw; which yet ſhe ſpake but in groſſe diſſembling. All bondage is grieuous; but what is greater then bondage to an whore? when a man cannot but cling to her, and be at her lure, whoſe heart is falſe toward him, and ſeeketh his deſtruction. We muſt take heed that we reſt not in the beſt things that are ſubiect to change, but much more that wee hang not our ſecuritie vpon deceitfull pleaſures, & eſpecially of all other, vpon a wicked & alluring woman, whō rather then Samſon would once thinke of forgoing, behold, he ſhameth not to abandon God; conſcience and all, not to ſpeake of the outward miſchief Note. that enſued. And ſurely if this be true of Samſon, who ſinned againſt conſcience all this while, what ſhall we ſay of them who commit ſecret filthines with greedines, and yet without remorſe? What a death is it to them (think we) to be pluckt by violence from their old acquaintance, which by cuſtom is become as the poore mans lambe, whom Nathan deſcribes to Dauid, euen 2. Sam. 12. 3. as his ſonne? Therefore when men haue liued a long time in a lewd courſe without let, how welcome is death to them that makes an vtter ſeparation betweene them and their luſts, which liued before in as ſtreight league and vnion as the ſoule and body together? Oh bondage vnſpeakable! to bee inwardly Note. linked to the loue of that which can neither be enioied but with extreame miſerie, nor forgone but with intollerable vexation. Let this be one motiue among others to humble the ſinner before God, and to ſhew him how out of meaſure ſinfull his corrupt nature is: as alſo to teach him not ſo eagerly to purſue his luſts, except he will bring a world of ſorrow vpon himſelfe, when the time of forſaking them is come. For what though at the laſt caſt many a man renounces the old courſes of vngodlines, and repents him, yea and is aſhamed of his doings? this is when the conſcience is terrified by ſome violent feare or griefe: not while hee hath his will, and proſpereth in his euil. And yet, alas, who ſeeth not that theſe terrors when they ſeaze vpon any, (for we muſt not think they ſeaze vpō al, many dying ſots as they liued without feeling) for the moſt part vaniſh away and come to nothing; ſo that thoſe great penitents, if they get vp and recouer their maladie, how far doe they put from them the remembrance of the former trouble, and ſhew, that it was diſtaſtfull vnto them, and forced them in the bitternes thereof to Note. ſay any thing; but now they are at libertie they returne againe as naturally to their byas, as the ſtone falleth downward. Oh therefore pray and labour that it may bee good, which ye ſet your hearts on and delight in, being accounted of you as moſt precious: for the end elſe will be more bitter in the parting, then euer the loue was in enioying. Loue the beſt things and feare not to exceed meaſure; for beſides the vnſpeakable and ſound ioy they affoord, this they alſo yeeld, euen a perpetuitie, they ſhall neuer bee pulled away, as our Sauiour ſaith, this ioy ſhall no man take from you. Iohn 26. 22.
            
            Now he was ſo wrought on by her, that as wiſe as hee thought himſelfe, in purpoſing that ſhee ſhould neuer know that which ſhee ſought at his Verſ. 17. hands; yet becauſe he gaue place to his wicked affections, he was not onely

ſnared and in danger as before, but now told all vnto her: to wit, that there neuer came raſor on his head: but if his lockes were cut off, he ſhould loſe his ſtrength; which was as much as if he had told her, how they might take his life from him, and bring all ſhame and ſorrow vpon him, as they did in deed: and yet more then this, hee might (though to ſmall effect) haue ſaid to her, to wit, beſide all this euill which I ſhall ſuſtaine hereby, I doe alſo ſet the Lord againſt me, to depriue me of his grace, and all this for thy ſake: for thus much (doubtleſſe) he ſuffered for her.
            By which, ſo many good obſeruations ariſe, as a wiſe man may be to ſeek 
                  Doct. 1. with which to begin firſt. But briefly of two or three. One is this: that we ſhall not need to complaine of the hurt and wrong that other doe vnto vs, which how common it is, all places doe witneſſe; for none are greater enemies to vs, then our ſelues. Were hee not a monſter of men that ſhould offer Note. but the one halfe of this vnto vs, that Samſon did to himſelfe, as here may be ſeene? But behold, all this, and no leſſe, doe ſome, nay very many, offer to themſelues. We ſtorme, rage, and crie out of other, if they hold but a little of our due from vs: and much more, if wee ſuſtaine greater hurt by them; whereas we by our ſinnes, worke our owne woe, and yet through blind ſelfloue we are neuer angrie with our ſelues, when yet wee could finde in our hearts to purſue others vnto death. Oh rend we our hearts for our ſins, and be deeply diſpleaſed with our ſelues for them. All theſe Philiſtims could not haue done Samſon the miſchiefe which he did himſelfe by his owne folly, or rather madneſſe. But if they had attempted any ſuch matter againſt him, as to make him infamous, as hee made himſelfe, would he not ſtreight haue reuenged it? Nay, did hee not reuenge it in the ſequell? But, to leaue him (who ſinned not in reuenging) and come to our ſelues; who is he that dare but iuſtly reproue vs for a fault, (be it neuer ſo groſſe) but he ſhall haue our badge and liuerie preſently, and we thinke him our enemie, and watch our ſeaſon to be euen with him, as Eſau dealt with his brother Iacob. And yet Gen. 27. 41. ſo farre is a louing reproofe from hurting vs, that if wee were the men wee ſhould be, it might keepe the hurt we ſpeake of, from lighting vpon vs, and be as a precious balme vnto our heads. Well then (will a wiſe man ſay) I Pſal. 141. 5. ſee theſe men are i alous of themſelues, and their owne hurt, if they can endure no other to touch them but they will flee in his face, they will be long enough (it is to be hoped) ere they wrong themſelues willingly. Indeede the reaſon is ſenſible, but the proofe is moſt prepoſterous. For that man that will not take the loſſe of a penny at anothers hand without ſtorming, will ſpend many a pound to haue his wicked deſire ſatisfied; nay he will vndoe himſelfe and ſtrip himſelfe of all he hath; and yet thinke neuer the worſe of himſelfe when hee hath done; nay, no man may tell him of it neither. Therefore if we will preuent outcries and late repentance for time to come, (for there is a time when ſuch fooles crie out; I am loſt, I haue vndone my ſelfe) let vs learne that the way to become our owne beſt friends, is to be greateſt enemies to the ſinne which moſt preuaileth in vs, as that which threatneth our greateſt deſolation. God will take that mans part againſt Note. himſelfe, who moſt ſtriueth to hate himſelfe, I meane the corruption within him, which is as deare to him as himſelfe. And till wee be come to this point, that we can haue as heartie indignation at our ſin that we haue moſt

delighted in, as wee haue againſt others for no cauſe, or ſometime againſt Note. our ſelues for being circumuented and ouerſhot in a bargaine by a cunning coſener; we are farre from repentance, or from that eſtate that a wiſe man ſhould reſt in, though the worke bee difficult (I confeſſe) which I ſpeake of. But about this buſineſſe though a man haue many, and thoſe great enemies to hinder him; yet his ſinfull heart is more dangerous then all, and by the trecherie whereof onely, all other enemies doe him miſchiefe. And doubtleſſe the diuell and the ſtrongeſt allurements rebound backe, and hurt not, neither enter, where the heart lieth not open to euill, and vnfenced againſt it. The euill that remaineth in the beſt, occaſioneth all externall euill enemies to ſtirre it vp and encreaſe it. The pure Angels haue the diuels their enuious enemies. Nay, ſinne makes God our enemie, (not for euer, if euer we were reconciled to him) while it lieth harboured and vnremoued: but otherwiſe, though hee correct vs, yet hee loueth vs, as a father his children. The cauſe is much more the enemie, I meane ſinne, then the effect, which is Gods enmitie. And therefore when hee afflicteth for ſinne, count not him our enemie, no nor the croſſe which hee inflicteth: but patiently beare it, and ſay, I will goe vnder my triall willingly, ſeeing I haue ſinned, and turne my griefe againſt my chiefe enemie, knowing that except that, which is my ſinne, vndoe me, no other thing ſhall, but turne to my good rather.
            Alſo by this that Samſon was brought to that which hee neuer meant to 2 bee, to wit, to vtter his ſecret to a baſe houſewife, by the following him on with her importunitie; note what force is in it. The widow by importunitie Luke 18. 5. ouercame the wicked Iudge, to grant her iuſtice, though he had no mind ſo to doe. But let vs ſee that it be for good, when men be importunate with vs for any thing; or elſe turne wee away from hearing them, as Ioſeph did from his alluring Miſtreſſe. And let vs ſpecially vſe this importunitie and Gen. 39. 10. earneſt ſuite, as our Sauiour hath willed vs, that is, to God in our prayers: for if the wicked Iudge would be moued (ſaith our Sauiour) to heare the poore Luke 18. 7. widow, leſt ſhe ſhould make him wearie, ſhall not God auenge his elect that crie to him day and night? Of this more largely in the 14. Chapter by the like occaſion.
            Againe, me thinkes this anſwere of Samſon to ſuch a ſtrumpet, [I am a 
               3 
               Nazarite, &c. if my locks be cut off, I ſhall be as another man] ſauoureth of incredible ſottiſhnes, and argueth plainly, that a wretched ſinner, who breaketh not off his courſe, till he be in the heate and power of his ſinne, can no other doe then yeeld to the tyrannie thereof; as hee that is bound hand and foote is carried whither his creditor or aduerſarie, not whither himſelfe liſteth. It cannot be enough to excuſe Samſon, that if he might haue had his will, hee would rather haue choſen to haue kept his ſecret: So it is like, but who brought him into the ſtockes, and ſet him by the heeles, who brought him to this ſtreight, that hee would not but doe that which hee deſired to ſhunne? Himſelfe, his headſtrong luſt, which hauing once got the hand ouer Note. him, vſed him impotently, and made him a ſtark beaſt and ſlauiſh foole. He knew the ſorrow which muſt ineuitably enſue vpon his betraying himſelfe, yet hath he (I ſay not the grace, that was now vnder boord) but not the ſtrength to containe himſelfe. I ſaid my minde touching this vpon the 4. verſe, [Entice him, &c.] but now the execution of the plot doth more liuely

preſent to our eyes the nature of ſinne, that it takes wiſedome from a man firſt, and then impoſeth what conditions it pleaſeth: knowing that a man would neuer be ſuch a vaſſall, ſo long as he is in his right minde, and not out of his wits. As Samſon could ſay, I am a Nazarite, &c. ſo he could haue ſaid, By this ſin, I ſhall make my ſelfe of the pureſt worſhipper of God, the moſt prophane creature and execrable. But Samſon would not ſay ſo, at leaſt not weigh it, but deſperatly runnes vpon the pikes. Doubtleſſe he had not had the power, though his ſaluation had lien vpon it, at this time to preuent it: (but bleſſed bee God who holdeth his election, when men haue loſt their grace in their feeling) Samſon had loſt his eyes, ere the Philiſtims put them out. This let me a little more enforce vpon ſo iuſt an occaſion, then I did in the fourth verſe. Who will not boldly auerre and affirme this, and ſay; Tell me what ſinne is, and proue to me by good euidence, that it will bring ſuch ſorrow as Samſons, Peters, Dauids, Salomons, did to them; and then if I commit it, count me a foole indeed? Put in one thing more, and I will beleeue thee; If, when the occaſion is offered, Gods grace bee ſtirring and effectuall in thee by watchfulnes and iealouſie ouer thy ſelfe, then thou wilt abſtaine vpon that meditation. But (alas) who finds that grace in the ſtrength oftentatiō who ſought it not before? without which, yet thou maiſt haue matter enough in thy minde to diſſwade and flaite thee, (I will not denie) but thou ſhalt haue ſmall liſt or power to weigh and ponder it, nay thy intangled and drunken heart will make a ſot of thy minde, and a moſt diſguiſed beaſt of thee. An heart infatuate with luſt, ſtoppeth and freeſeth vp the paſſage of the knowledge, that it cannot ſuccour the poore diſtreſſed and embondaged ſoule, but leaue it to ſhift. We conclude then, Samſons ſin was not preſumptuous, but impotencie, yet vnauoidable, the caſe ſtanding as it did. Oh then ſtill learne; men haue not quit themſelues well, as ſoone as they haue ſpoken a bold word againſt ſinne in generall. For when it comes to particulars, what doe men? I will haue his blood (ſaith a curſed Cain) though I be hanged preſently, yet hee knoweth the ſhame and woe thereof. Of ſome Iewes (not all, for ſome knew well enough) the Scripture ſaith; If they had knowne, they would not haue crucified the Lord of life. And ſometimes, I denie not, ciuill men are kept from crimes by this meane, and good men from offending, though ſtrongly tempted to goe through ſtifly. But this is no rule. And I ſtill ſay to thee, (that ſhall reade this) beware of dalliance, and venturing farre: for thou ſhalt haue no power to withdraw, when thou wouldeſt, who wouldeſt not when thou mighteſt. Truſt not thy ſelfe, thy ſtrength in this caſe will be a bruſed reede. The beſt lawes leaue as little to the Iudge as may be, becauſe man is ſubiect to corruption: and except Gods grace be a law within thee, ſuſpect that in a ſtrong purſuite of luſt, thou who art as Iudge to aduiſe thy ſelfe, wilt hardly be a law to thy ſelfe to gouerne thee. But if thou be fearfull to giue a little libertie to thine heart in euill, a great Note. ſhall not maſter thee: if thou feare anger, thou ſhalt be no murtherer: if thou flee from the baite, the ſnare ſhall not catch thee. Euer beare this in minde; Sinne as it groweth, it will be predominant and get the maſterie. And a man may as well be mad with reaſon, as ſinne with reaſon, and think to moderate himſelf when he will yeeld once, and be euer a ſlaue: for ſinne

will force thee to yeeld after, euen as a ſtrong fit of an ague maketh him to doe, whom it ſtrongly ſhaketh. Thus much for this time.
         
         
            THE EIGHTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to proceed in the ſtory, becauſe we ſee how Samſon, though otherwiſe indued of God with ſingular Doct. 3. in verſ. 17. graces, yet was moſt impotently giuen ouer to the loue of women, when wee doe not reade, that hee was elſe tainted with other ſins; let it admoniſh vs, that we may poſſibly be more weake in reſiſting, and more prone to the committing of ſome one ſinne, then of another, and it ſhall not bee amiſſe for vs to think, ſeeing we haue ſo many examples of it in Scripture, that this ſin of his is more common among the moſt then other. The which I ſay to this end, that euery one of vs ſhould obſerue our ſelues, where we ſee our ſelues weakeſt, and there to vſe moſt meanes to ſtrengthen our ſelues againſt the ſame, as watching, prayer, reading, and this not houerly but heartily, if we ſeeke to be the better thereby, and in no wiſe to dare be bold to commit it, ſeeing we cannot but bee as ſure of ill ſucceſſe, as Samſon was before hee did it. When the husband-man ſuruaies his ground, he vſeth not to fence where the quick ſet is ſtrong and thicke, but where the hedge is thin or troden downe; wee loue to lay on load where there is no need; but if there be a blemiſh in our liues which makes all the reſt diſgracefull, and therefore requireth more labour to blot it out, wee cannot abide to ſet our ſelues to amend it, nor ſo much as to take knowledge of it. And yet one dead flie corrupts a whole pot of the ſweeteſt oyntment, and the ſweeter, the ſooner. How did Salomons 
               Eccleſ. 10. 1. exceſſiueneſſe in this kinde, defame all his other excellency and gifts? And doe we not ſee by experience the truth hereof? He is an honeſt man (ſaith one) but a couetous, an haſty, an vncharitable, a breaker of promiſe, and one or other interpoſition there is to eclipſe his light & credit. Yea and (as Paul in the like kinde ſpake of the houſe of Cloe) there is cauſe. Now in this ſo 1. Cor 1. 11. weighty a caſe what do we? euen tuſh off the matter, and ſay, One infirmity is none: and wee hope that our many good qualities (in our conceit at leaſt) muſt priuiledge vs, and licenſe vs for a few ſcapes? Alas we erre foully, one ſecret lurking companion is enough to betray the houſe: and when we are eſpied, what ſay men of vs but this, Nay, hee that will doe thus, or thus, will do worſe, I dare not truſt him in any kind, if occaſion ſerue. Oh, caſt out that diuell by watching, faſting, prayer, and oft renued couenant, which lurketh

behind to doe miſchiefe, when many others ſeeme to be caſt out. And till then, beare not thy head on high, for doubtleſſe God will not ſuffer ſuch a one to proſper: and what doe we profeſſing, if we take this liberty, except we wil haue our good deeds ſhame our euil, and become execrable becauſe of their company, as Iſrael was for Achans ſinne. Wee will not keepe a ſeruant Ioſh. 7. 12. in our houſe (otherwiſe none of the worſt, but painfull) for ſome leaud qualities ſake, though he would giue vs his ſeruice, and ſhall God endure vs? A man may feele what the ſin is, which hee cheriſheth, as well as the meate he loueth: and he that doth know it, let him know God is not mocked: let him not ſuffer that ſinne to rankle and feſter in him, but labour to purge out euery ſuperfluity of fleſh and ſpirit, and to ſanctifie the whole lumpe, that it may bee ſeaſoned in euery part, and the conſcience may bee good in all things.
            Now we haue heard that ſhe had brought him to tell her where his great Verſ. 18. 19. 20. ſtrength lay, let vs ſhut vp this ſecond part of the Chapter, and ſee what followed vpon this, which is ſet downe in theſe next three verſes. Firſt, ſhee The ſumme. cauſed the Philiſtims to come yet againe to her, in better hope then they did before. And then cauſing Samſon to ſleepe vpon her knee, his locks ſhe cauſed to be cut off, & the Philiſtims were there ready to take him, and he thinking to doe as hee had in times paſt done, and to free himſelfe out of their hands, he found too late, as Adam after eating the fruit, that the Lord was departed from him.
            Heere in that ſhee and the Philiſtims hauing been diſappointed and deceiued Doct verſ. 18. ſo oft, euen three times at the leaſt, yet for all that are not diſcouraged nor wearied, but goe on ſtill, yea and preuaile at length, we may ſee how euill perſons are not withheld nor diſcouraged from their bad attempts, but take hart, and go forward after many repulſes. The reaſon is, they haue hope to preuaile, and doe not commonly miſſe of their purpoſe, following it ſo earneſtly, and going ſo ſubſtantially to worke as they doe; God ſuffering them to goe forward, ſeeing hee is purpoſed to deſtroy them. This is moſt cleerely to bee ſeene in the ſpitefull and ſhameleſſe attempts of the Prieſts againſt our Sauiour in ſeeking his life.
            Though Pilate had three times alleaged his innocency to them, and giuen them Luk. 23. 22. 23. their anſwere to deſiſt, yet could they not bee made to leaue off, but procured by themſelues their falſe witneſſes, and other confederates, in ſuch wiſe that they had that which they ſought before they made an end. But if this diligence and vnweariedneſſe in good cauſes bee ſought for in them, who yet are ſuch as would gladly effect them, where ſhall they bee found? Nay, they are ſoone anſwered and put off, as faint ſuters. Eſter indeed, Eſter 4. 16. and ſome other did ieopard their liues, in and for a good cauſe, to preſerue the Church of God in their time: but how many followers of them may be ſeene? Indeed many logs are in the way to hinder goodneſſe, and much diſcouragement is giuen to ſuch as would bee forward, but yet mens backwardneſſe for all that, may in no wiſe be excuſed: For what know we whether the Lord may one time or other, giue ſucceſſe, and are wee too good to tarrie his leiſure? But of this often before.
            The Philiſtims hauing better hope to preuaile then in former times, as 2 ſhee had giuen them to vnderſtand, they came with their money in their

hands, ready to be paid according to their promiſe. Where beſides that we may ſee, that the wicked ſpare no coſt to bring their bad matters to paſſe, while we who follow better cauſes, looke vpon our penny and draw backe, who ſhall begin: I ſay, beſide that, ye may ſee, that they will not breake promiſe, but bee liberall to ſuch as further their buſineſſe, when they like well the ſucceſſe which they haue therein. But I would I might not truly ſay, that in better attempts there is oft times a drawing backe euen of that which was promiſed; ſo farre off are men from furthering goodnes: but they deale heerein, as the moſt doe in other promiſes, though aduiſedly made by them, for therein the like is done. Which elſewhere I haue alſo bewailed.
            When this impudent and ſhameleſſe woman had brought the Princes Verſ. 19. of the Philiſtims together, as we haue heard in the former verſe, it is ſhewed in this, how ſhe made him ſleepe vpon her knees, and cauſed the ſeuen locks of his head to be ſhauen off, and that ſhee began to vex him by calling the Philiſtims when that his ſtrength was gone from him.
            This was a moſt baſe thing and vtterly vnbeſeeming him, that hauing excellent Doct. gifts of God, he ſhould become a ſlaue to ſuch an whoriſh miſtriſſe, as to bee made to ſleepe vpon her knees. Hee that would not turne his face from a thouſand men, now to lie downe at the feet of a leaud woman. Oh ſottiſh follie almoſt incredible! Thus they who for their gifts might bee reuerenced, (that I ſay no more) and for ſuch good graces as are in them, might go before many; are brought to ſhame for their abuſing of them, and the ſins which are come in the place of them, and no way more commonly, then by a baſe houſewife. For as a mans gift bringeth him to honour, euen Note. ſo the ſame perſon, if he deface his gifts, is deſpiſed, as a faire and comely garment, A ſimil. when it is ſoiled in the filthie and lothſome channell of mire and dung. For hee that cannot keepe credit and honour when God hath giuen it him, is worthie to be without both, and be had in deriſion.
            This is memorable which the Lord ſpake of Hophni and Phinees, for this ſinne among others: Them that deſpiſe me, I will ſet light by. Mens good 1. Sam 2. 30. parts neuer ſet them vp ſo much, as their leaudneſſe defaceth them. How vile did ſinne make that traitor Iudas? What contempt was caſt vpon Demas, 
               2. Tim. 4. 10. when he had forſaken Paul? How baſe, and what a by word doth many a mans vncleanneſſe make him? nay many a profeſſour of good hope, though he haue repented, yet what a brand of contempt and diſdaine doth hee carrie about him to his dying day? As Ruben, in Geneſ. 49. his dignity Gen. 49. 4. being gone? But we are not yet come to Samſons puniſhment, the baſeneſſe we ſpeak of, is a companion rather then a fruit of ſin. But doubtles, it would neuer appeare to many a man (who thinks his ſin his ornamēt) how vile his occupation is, if ſometimes hee ſaw it not in the baſe ſeruice it puts him to. Note. Very heathens ſaw no leſſe, who deſcribe it by the ſhadow of a mighty Giant, enamored with a ſtrumpet, who made him lay aſide his harneſſe, and ſit ſpinning with the diſtaffe betweene his knees. And yet many a ciuill man, out of his diſcretion, would ſhun many a ſinne for ſhame. As for example: Seeing a man of good quality and ſort, giuen to drinking and gaming, and ſo farre giuen ouer to them, that hee will rather make the baſeſt fellow in a towne his companion then ſit out, which hee thinketh he may doe, yet hee will loathe the baſeneſſe of that ſinne and ſuch like in other, and count it as

repugning to common honeſty. But to returne to them, who being men of good parts otherwaies, doe ſhame themſelues with groſſe ſinnes, they are well enough ſerued, who will needs venture ſo farre, and for their owne luſts, will forſake the ſeruices of Gods houſe, the meaneſt whereof is honorable.
            The next thing that followed was this, that ſhee cauſed one to cut off his locks, that is, the haire that couered his head. And this is the deadly wound that ſhe gaue him. For therewith his ſtrength failed him, and grace likewiſe forſooke him.
            Heere we may ſee, that by degrees a man ſhall bee brought to the loweſt ebbe and depth of ſinne, as Samſon now was, he broke the law of the Nazarite, 
                  Doct. 2. which was ſolemne, as the law of wedlocke betwixt couples; and therby made himſelfe profane and looſe, who had liued in the moſt holy eſtate of other. Yea this ſinne, if compariſon ſhould bee made, was farre greater then the breach of the law of wedlocke, ſeeing that is but one particular, but this is a general ſetting open the doore to many ſins. Oh, how little thought he, or thinke we, that we ſhall euer commit them, before wee begin to tamper with odious and fearefull ſinnes? (as Hazael, when the Prophet told 2. King. 8. 13. him the euill that he ſhould doe, anſwered, Am I a dogge, that I ſhould doe this great thing? Yea and after we haue begun alſo to dallie with the means that leade to them, we yet thinke to keepe farre enough from them. But yet we ſee heere what followeth in the end. But wherein this abaſement ſtood ſhall appeare in the particulars that follow, the loſſe of ſtrength, and Gods preſence, when his locks were cut off. For the former of theſe, it is ſaid, after this, that his ſtrength failed, and was gone. And heereupon ſome may obiect and ſay, Did his ſtrength lie in his haire? I anſwere no: but he loſt that, becauſe it was the commandement of God to the Nazarite, (ſuch an one as Samſon was,) that no razor for the time, ſhould come vpon his head. Which commandement Samſon now brake, by telling her ſo much, as cauſed the cutting off of it: and by that he going from Gods ordinance, the Lord departed from him, and left him to himſelfe, which hee found to bee weakeneſſe, and therewith woe enough. The obiection being thus anſwered, this teacheth what followeth ſuch outrage, and cōtempt of Gods ordinance, to wit, the loſing of ſuch good things as we enioyed before. So that ſuch actions Ier. 5. 25. doe not onely hold many good things from vs, but alſo they depriue vs of thoſe which we had. Some ſinnes depriue vs of one benefit of God, and ſome of another. As riot, ill company, ſpend our goods: drunkenneſſe and whoredome waſte our bodies: cares of this world, and vo
                  •
               uptuous delighting in riches, doe as a moth eate vp our religion; and our Sabbaths are loſt by ill vſing them: euen as Samſon loſt his ſtrength, whereby hee had ſlaine a thouſand at one time, without either helpe of any man, or vſe of warlike inſtrument. All haue not Samſons ſtrength to loſe, but all wilful ſinne waſteth a Chriſtians ſtrength, alacrity I meane, and cheerefulneſſe of ſpirit to the duties of Gods worſhip. I ſaid enough of this point vpon cap. 5. in the complaint of Debora, that there was not a ſpeare found nor courage to vſe it among Iudg. 5. 8. the fortie thouſands of Iſrael. Let the reader looke backe to that place. Heere this I will ſay; The faithfull vſe and imployment of God his heauenly graces and gifts is the onely way to keepe and augment them: vſe Note.
               
a gift and haue a gift: employ it not, and loſe it. If this bee the fruit of bare ſloth and neglect, how much now of contempt and wilfull ſinning againſt knowledge? So that we ſhall not need greatly to care how we may loſe our grace, for not only the quencher, but euen he that nouriſheth it not (as fire) ſhall ſoone enough loſe it. Adam and Eue had ſtrength giuen them to ſtand in their good eſtate; and ſeeing they wilfully ſpoiled themſelues of it, they brought vpon themſelues a weakeneſſe, ſo that they could not but ſin. So they that haue had better things in them, and are now become luke-warme profeſſors, or ſecure, ſottiſh and ſleepie conſcienced, and couetous; how decline they in their zeale, and loſe their gifts, and ſauour not at all religious Note. exerciſes, but wax barren of grace, and at length fall to leaud company, follow the common faſhion of the world, nay become diſgracers of the truth, and of the louers thereof, as moſt repugnant to their practiſe? Neuer was a poore vnarmed traueller falling among theeues ſo bereft of money, of apparell and of all comfort: or a gameſter ſhrigged of all, being ouer-reacht by a falſe handed coſoner: or a tree ſo ſtript of her beautiful leaues and fruit, by the violence of a tempeſt; as poore Samſon heere was of the gratious furniture of the ſpirit, by the vnkindly aſſault of his ſinfull luſt. Oh what a difference was there betweene Samſon when he was himſelfe; and betwixt his diſguiſed nakedneſſe which his ſinne cauſed? The vſe heereof is, to teach vs, that ſeeing hee grew to this low ebbe by the degrees forementioned; therefore we promiſe our ſelues no priuiledge beyond him, otherwiſe then by preuenting the meanes leading thereto. And let vs not thinke that the grace we haue, ſeeing it coſt vs much paines to obtaine, much hearing, long practiſe, vſe of many good meanes, with watchfulneſſe and prayer, let vs not thinke (I ſay) that therefore wee need feare no ſuch ſudden loſſe of it. Ah foole, it comes in a day that came not in ſeuen yeeres: and as the houſes of Iobs children were blowne downe all at once, ſo may a mans goodneſſe and ſtrength bee all waſted ſuddenly by a dangerous fall, yea the fruit of many yeeres growth and gaine may periſh in a day; though I denie not, but vſually it paireth by degrees rather through ſinnes committed daily, and duties neglected. The ſtrength of a Chriſtian lies in his faith, as truly as Samſons did in his lockes: and if faith be quailed by wilfull ſinning, (as how can a man feele God louing him, when he giues leaue to himſelfe to offend him,) then how much more if the fruites alſo decay, as feruency, care, feare, diligence in good duties, &c. As the one growes to vnbeleefe, ſo the other degenerates to deadneſſe, careleſneſſe, and looſeneſſe, &c. Now whereas ſome cauiller lying in the wind for aduantage, might ſay, I ſee Samſon is condemned for ſhauing of his lockes, therefore long haire is no ſuch blameworthy habite, as ſome would ſeeme to make of it: I anſwere him two waies. Firſt, that this guiſe of Samſon was not common, or generall; for then it had been only permitted as indifferent to all, but perſonall and belonging to the vow of the Nazarite, which now is aboliſhed. As that other of abſtaining from ſtrong drinke was; which I ſuppoſe the greater part of them that plead for long haire will not ſo eaſily yeeld to abſtaine from. Secondly I ſay, though this liberty were to be further extended, yet in all equitie, thoſe might challenge it of moſt due, who are moſt proportionable to the Nazarite in the pure worſhip ping of God. Now theſe in the former reſpect ſee ſmall cauſe

to vſe any ſuch habite, but condemne it as moſt vnſeemly. The wearers thereof are moſt of them prophane, no worſhippers; and the beſt of them (I ſuppoſe) are none of the moſt pure worſhippers of God. Therefore let this abuſe returne to the heires of them that firſt inuented it for a couer of the ſhame, which their lewdnes firſt brought vpon them. But enough to a wiſe man was ſaid of this vpon the thirteenth Chapter: as for the foole, though hee were braied in a morter, yet would not his follie depart from Prou. 27. 22. him.
            It is ſaid further in theſe two verſes, that when his ſtrength was gone, ſhe Verſ. 15. 20. began to vexe him, by calling the Philiſtims, who were at hand, to fall vpon him, and handle him at their pleaſure; and ſo they did. Oh, wee ſee it is an eaſie matter to bring miſerie vpon one, when he ſhall not onely be deſtitute of earthly helpe, but haue God againſt him alſo. Euen ſo it was with Iudas, when the time of his viſitation came, that hee was vtterly forſaken of God: but beſide, hee had caſt off his Maſter, and the Diſciples who had been his fellowes; and the Prieſts, his pretended friends had caſt off him. So Samſon was forſaken of his louer, hated of the Philiſtims, and the Lord had left him; and therefore how neerely was the prouerb verified in him, Woe to him that is alone. Not vnlike to that thriftleſſe debtor, who by his folly is come vpon by his creditor, haled to priſon, forſaken of his friends, and deſtitute of all comfort; who might haue liued in a comfortable manner, and haue been a comfort to others, if he had been wiſe and carefull in managing his buſineſſe. The vſe of this is thus much, that if we ſhould fall into this danger, as to haue men, yea and friends againſt vs, (as ſometimes it may befall vs for a good cauſe) yet to lay this foundation ſtrongly; that the Lord forſake vs 2. Chron. 15. 2. not, which (doubtleſſe) he will not doe, if we forſake not him. Touching her cruell trecherie in betraying him thus, when he had reueiled himſelfe to her, it detecteth the like vnfaithfulnes (whereſoeuer it be found) in Chriſtians to be more then monſtrous, and ſuch falſe-hearted ones to be farre worſe then Philiſtims.
            
               Samſon being awaked by her, did not by and by ſee what was done to Verſ. 20. him, but thought hee would doe as hee had before done, namely by his ſtrength to ſhift for himſelfe, but he could not: for the Lord was departed from him, leauing him (as hath alreadie been ſaid) both without ſtrength of body, (which he had before) and the vſe of all grace to guide himſelfe, or comfort his minde. By this we ſee, that when God hath deliuered men Doct. oft times out of danger, they looke ſtill that he ſhould doe ſo, neuer thinking how iuſtly he might haue plunged them deeply into the ſame long before, neither weighing their owne ſecuritie, who little regarded to profit by their deliuerances paſt.
            This is the exceeding blockiſhnes and ſenſeleſnes of men, who (as the Prophet ſaith) are wiſe onely to doe euill, but not any good. They looke Iere. 4. 22. they ſhould doe as they haue done in all things that like them, and they will do as they haue done in all that pleaſe them. But in all this, what allowance Note. haue they from God, or libertie to do ſo? Nay rather, why do they not conſider that God is againſt them in that their bad courſe, and therefore haſt out of it, and they ſeeing the plague to hang ouer their heads, why do they Prou. 22. 3.
               
not haſt out of it, and with the good Captaine, humble themſelues to God, as he did to Elias, and craue pardon? 2. King. 1. 13.
            
            Oh! let the beſt of vs know, that wee may not neſtle our ſelues in any ill courſe, though wee haue been bold with the Lord in times paſt that way, when wee were as yet leſſe experienced, to tempt him farre, and deceiue our ſelues, (as we haue done) imagining that we ſhall doe as well as in former daies. For in this changeable world, ſuch changes come ofteſt to them that change not from their euill courſes, and beſides, God will not be mocked. As for the bad who crie peace; their caſe is much worſe. Thus Corah periſhed and his companie, when yet he thought that all ſhould haue been with him ſtill, as it had been in times paſt. And by this was Iezabel deceiued, 1. King. 19. 2. that threatned Elias ſhould loſe his head on the morrow, little weighing what one day doth bring foorth: but ſhe a little after loſt her life, and 2. King. 9. 33. that in a fearfull manner. For why? There is no peace to the vngodly, ſaith Iſai. 57. 21. God. And thus Samſon, though no reprobate, yet now a miſerable reuolter, fared; who knew not that God was gone from him, and looked to eſcape as he before had done, but was diſappointed and deceiued.
            And this palpable deceiuablenes is bred in vs, to dreame of God as hee did in the Pſalme, who ſaid, that ſeeing God did as it were winke at him and held his peace, when he did euill, therefore he was as hee himſelfe, and approued Pſal. 50. 21. his bad courſe, and would doe neither good nor euill, ſo that there was no change of his proſperitie, as he thought, to bee feared. And (I confeſſe) God ſuffereth long, and in this his adminiſtration here below doth oft times let ſuch as he meaneth to deſtroy, goe on without ſtop, and proſper, as the oxe fatted to the ſlaughter: whereas hee meeteth with his owne children in mercie, (though with ſmart and bitternes) rather then that they ſhould periſh. Howbeit, neither is this courſe generall, (as appeares in the many examples of them in Scripture and experience, whoſe ſinnes haue gone before hand) and where it doth hold for this life, yet it faileth at death. Then to be ſure their courſe is altred. The wicked man, as the Prophet ſaith, Iſai. 65. 20. (though an hundred yeere old) is accurſed: and a day commeth, whereof it ſhall be ſaid, It is not as yeſterday. Let this terrifie all vngodly ones, leſt God come vpon them at vnawares, and alter their condition to their moſt intollerable vexation. Let thē rather as men amazed by the terrors of God, ſhake hands with, and renounce their ſtale courſe, wherein they are ſetled, and as it were frozen. And let them trie whether by vnfained humbling their ſoules, and obtaining mercie with God, they finde not that it was happie for them that euer they changed their eſtate. For I doe them to vnderſtand, that there are perſons who make a farre other vſe of Gods ſparing them, then Samſon did here, and doe not occaſion themſelues to ſinne more boldly ſtill, and yet to promiſe themſelues peace as in former times. And further, I ſay, that there are men to bee found, I ſay not, who may, but who ought to looke for, and build vpon it for certaine, That it ſhall be well with them as at other times, and ſo faith teacheth them to ſpeake; and they are ſuch as haue obtained fauour with God, that they might beleeue in him, and in token thereof walke in his waies: euen they to wom God hath giuen ſuch an heart as to feare him, and endeuour to obey him in all his Commandements,

they (I ſay) may aſſure themſelues, and ſhall finde it to goe well with them alway. Marke that I ſay alway; to day as yeſterday, and now, as in times paſt. And ſo had Samſon found, if hee had walked according to this rule. For, be it knowne to all ſuch as haue fully purpoſed to cleaue vnto God without warping or falling off, (which he did not) that it is their ſinne if they doe not fully account of it and beleeue it, that their ſoules ſhall be alway Note. liking, and they to be in fauour with him, and bleſſed of him. So that if men deſire to haue to morrow to be like to day without change, (I meane any ſubſtantiall change, though otherwiſe their faith and comfort is intended or remitted through their weakneſſe) let them be reuited by faith and care of obedience, vnto him, who is the vnchangeable al ſufficient God of his elect. But let them not thinke this promiſe entailed to them by the bare bond of their election, or adoption, but by their conſtant care to keepe both, by holding faſt a good conſcience: but if they waxe diſſolute, let them look that their good daies ſhall be changed into ſorrowfull. God giueth no man any certaintie of his outward eſtate, peace, health, wealth, friends or proſperitie; much leſſe granteth any man ſecuritie in an impenitent courſe.
            And laſtly, whereas it is ſaid, that the Lord was gone from him, the meaning 2 is this, that hee had taken his ſtrength from him, and the graces which he had enioyed, were ſo feebled, darkned, and drowned in him, as if hee had loſt them altogether; and ſo (doubtleſſe) he had, if it could haue been. A fearfull ſpectacle to behold; ſuch an one as he had been, to wit, before the moſt in gifts and grace, to be brought to this point, by his ſinne, as to cauſe Note. the Lord, who had loued and done ſo much for him, ſo to leaue him in the hands of his enemies, to vſe him at their pleaſure. But what he was brought vnto, I meane, to what depth of miſerie, ſorrow, and ſhame, it ſhall better appeare in that which followeth.
            But yet God forſook him not finally, but after, he returned to him again, and brought him to repentance, as ſhall be further ſhewed in the end of the Chapter. Now to finiſh this ſecond part of it: let vs conſider of Samſons eſtate by Sauls dolefull complaint, when he vſed the ſame words, which the holy Ghoſt doth here of Samſon: namely, that the Lord was departed from 1. Sam. 28. 15. him. By both which, though the difference (I confeſſe) in the perſons was not ſmall, nor in the iſſue of their troubles like: behold, to what wofull eſtate mens ſinne brings them; and that Gods owne children are not free; but if they will follow the ſinnes of other men, they ſhall be puniſhed here Pſal. 89. 31. like other men. Oh! how doe many verifie this, who haue in their time ſhined as lights, and been the ſupporters of many weake ones, who haue bleſſed God for their counſell and example? whoſe flower was neuer ſo Note. glorious, as their fade & decay was ignominous. They haue wiſhed themſelues in the ſtate of the meaneſt of thoſe, who haue admired them in their welfare: their conſcience hath plaied the hangman within them, they haue to the aſtoniſhment of their beholders, called themſelues outeaſts from God, who hath hidden his face from them, withdrawne all confidence from them in their prayers, all ſauour in hearing, and ſenſe of his goodneſſe which in times paſt they enioyed plentifully. And why this? Themſelues haue bewraied, ſome by pride and conceit of a perfection obtained, ſeparated themſelues from the fellowſhip of their brethren, as hearing the word,

and vſe of other meanes, and ſo by degrees waxt looſe and hardned. Others beguiled with the ſnares of the world: others with pompe, not a few with voluptuouſnes, or other ſinfull luſts, haue cried out of their eſtate, not for their loſſe of ſome outward bleſſings, as Naomi did, but euen the chiefeſt, I meane inward peace toward God, and hope of pardon. And yet ſuch of them as were not hypocrites, God hath made that very affliction vnder which they haue groaned, to break their hearts & to reclaime them, though their former grace and honour they neuer recouered. And the like danger lye all open vnto, who dare tempt God as they did, and waxe wanton, as if grace ſhould abound by the abundance of their ſinne. Such as are in this caſe I ſhall ſay more to, in the handling of Samſons ſorrow and afflictions that followed his fall: but happie they, that by preuenting this diſeaſe, need no ſuch phyſick. The meanes I obſerued and ſet downe at large in the firſt verſe.
            Now it muſt not be omitted that is added, to wit, that he knew not that the Lord was departed from him. No wonder, he felt not the ſmartie effect of it as yet: he fared as he who is robbed in the night of all his treaſure, or wares of his ſtorehouſe; but till the light of the day he miſſeth nothing. 
                  A ſimilitude. Note. But then, oh what an inuentorie makes hee of his ſeuerall loſſes? And ſo did this poore ſelfe-robber in this place. When the Philiſtims came vpon him, there was no power to reſiſt, then it appeared indeed that he was robbed to purpoſe: and he might with ſorrow his belly full recount his damages at leiſure. I feare me, it is the caſe of many, (who lie as Samſon did without his locks on Delilahs lap) to conſider little what their owne ſinne hath brought vpon them. It was thus with Dauid and Ionah in their ſlumber, as with Samſon, that they were robbed: but it was night with them, they could for the time ſee no harme done. Mens relapſes from God are dangerous and frequent, and their repentances rare and few: how ſcape they then? Can they keepe the Lord cloſe vnto them, retaine their zeale, ioy, and comfort in his promiſes, more then poore Samſon, committing either the ſame or as great offences? No, no, they haue euill conſciences, cold comfort, few (and thoſe faint) prayers, and leſſe fellowſhip with God: yea in their ſenſe they feele no election, no aſſurance of ſaluation. In their ſenſe, did I ſay? They haue none: they goe on and on, and miſſe none of all theſe, during this obſtupefaction and benummednes of conſcience; but beare off all without remorſe or complaining. Oh wofull people! And yet in times paſt, while they had life and a working conſcience in them, a leſſe blow then this would haue guſtered and flaited them, and they could ſoone haue grieued for the decay of the leaſt grace, the want where of now little troubles Note. them. It is wofull to loſe grace, but more to feele no ſuch loſſe. And yet yet this and ſuch like, mens wilfull ſin cauſeth to thē. The vſe is, to teach vs not onely to abhorre the cauſe hereof; but to eſteeme it a mercie of mercies, to haue a tender conſcience, a watchfull heart, and effectuall and operatiue: which may make our liues both plentifull in good duties, and in ſound comfort ariſing therefrom. And a further vſe is to cauſe vs to feele and abhorne the leaſt temptation to that ſinne which moſt certainly will procure a ſenſeleſnes herein, and an vnprofitable lying vnder that burthen. And this of the ſecond part of Samſons apprehenſion, and the ſeuerall worthy

inſtructions ariſing therefrom, bee ſpoken. Now of the confequents thereof in the next Sermon God willing.
         
         
            
               THE EIGHTIE SIX SERMON, ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 21. Therefore the Philiſtims tooke him, and put out his eyes, and brought him downe to Azzah, and bound him with fetters, and hee did grinde in the priſon houſe.
                     
                     22. And the haire of his head began to grow againe, after he was ſhauen.
                     
                     23. Then the Princes of the Philiſtims gathered them together, for to offer a great ſacrifice to Dagon their God, and to reioyce: for they ſaid, Our God hath deliuered Samſon our enemy into our hand.
                     
                     24. Alſo when the people ſaw him, they praiſed their God, for they ſaid, Our God hath deliuered into our hand our enemy and deſtroyer of our countrey, which hath ſlaine many of vs.
                     
                     25. And when their hearts were merrie, they ſaid; Call Samſon, that hee may make vs paſtime. So they called Samſon out of the priſon houſe, and hee was a laughing ſtccke vnto them, and they ſet him betweene the pillers.
                     
                  
                  
                     IN theſe fiue verſes of this third part of the Chapter, it is The ſumme. ſhewed what manifold outward vexations were brought vpon Samſon through his many ſinnes, (though the Philiſtims, who were the inſtruments thereof, intended no ſuch thing) but yet it is ſhewed, that in theſe tribulations he did repent, as we reade Manaſſes to haue done in his afflictions. 2. Chton. 33. 12 Heere is ſhewed alſo what great ioy the Philiſtims had, (both Princes and people,) for that they had got him into their hands, (though that their ioy laſted but a while,) and how they praiſed their Idoll Dagon for it: and gathered themſelues together a great number of them, to make themſelues paſtime, by bringing forth Samſon at their pleaſure to that end, euen to be laughed at. Theſe things are ſet forth in theſe verſes: and in the laſt of them is ſhewed, that they ſet him betwixt the pillers, whereby Samſon made preparation to the miſchiefe that hee brought vpon the Philiſtims by and by after, in caſting downe the houſe vpon them.
                  And firſt, in that God thus gaue Samſon vp into the hands of his enemies, Doct verſ. 21. and puniſhed him as we ſee, it was iuſt that the Lord did to him, (be ſo prouoking him as hee did) by the vncircumciſed Philiſtims; by this (I ſay) wee learne, that if need bee, and if they breake out boldly againſt him, hee muſt

make his owne deare children to ſmart, as well as he loueth them, as the Apoſtle Peter ſpeaketh. For as he brought them into the hands of his enemies, 1. Pet. 1. 6. as is heere to be ſeene, euen ſo he vſeth to doe to other of his; when there is cauſe, and he ſeeth it meet. The reaſon is, to the end they may riſe vp againe out of their falles, and repent: for the working of the which, affliction (through Gods bleſſing) fitteth them rather then proſperity (which they are ſo ready to abuſe,) as preſently ſhall appeare in this ſtory; and in the meane while the wicked, going on in their ſinnes, are the readier for iudgement, which one time or other meeteth with them, and taketh hold of them. And if he ſhould not thus take downe the pride and boldneſſe of his in tempting him, they could not be brought to good. This being knowne to be ſo, there is no cauſe why wee ſhould diſcontentedly beare our afflictions, eſpecially we our ſelues hauing giuen iuſt cauſe thereof. And as for them that reioyce in our troubles, or (which is more) do themſelues trouble vs: I ſay no more but this, that except they repent, and ſo become true worſhippers of God with vs, the Lord ſhall trouble and vex euery vaine in their hearts, ſo farre their troubles ſhall exceed and goe beyond ours: as God threatneth in the ſecond Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, and we may ſee in the calamities of Diues, 
                     2. Theſ. 1. 6. and eſpecially if they be compared with Lazarus his comforts. But before I come to lay out his troubles in particular, let vs ſee this one thing which is not to be omitted, which is this: In Samſons puniſhment wee may diſcerne a more euident proofe of Gods iuſt and equall proceeding to reuenge, then in euery relapſe mentioned in Scripture, (which I note that we may be the more afraid to tempt him:) For as wee ſee Samſons diſeaſe was very groſſe and grieuous, and his ſinne began to bee ſeated and habited in him: hee had ſcaped once before, when the Philiſtims laid wait for him at Azza, verſe 2. and 3. and then God ſpared him, and gaue him a ſafe conduct, putting him to further proofe. So now behold his ſin not being ſubdued and abhorred, as an vnkinde itch that is not killed by a milde medicine: he prouoketh God a freſh by the ſame ſinne that hee did before; and the fire (being but raked vp as it were in hot aſhes) catching hold of new and fit matter to worke vpon, flameth out amaine the ſecond time. Therfore much water wil not now quench it, much leſſe the letting it alone was like to heale it. What then? doth God deale with him as before? no: now he taketh him in hand, and paies him home, and makes him ſee hee dallieth not with the dallier, and ſo he is faine to beare the penalty of this, and the former too. So he dealt with Dauid. It was no very extreme dealing for two ſo great and ſo rebellious ſinnes, as Adultery and Murther, to take away the child borne in adultery, eſpecailly after ſo patient a reſpit all the while betweene. But Dauid had forgot that gentle correction, for ſo hainous offences; and therefore waxed hee bold once againe with the Lord who had ſhewed him ſuch lenity: and ſo prouoked him againe in grieuous manner, by his ambitious numbring his ſubiects. But did he eſcape as cleerely then, as before? No; God remembreth both: and as the ſtory well witneſſeth, ſets himſelfe to a reſolute courſe of reuenge, and ſo hee did, till hee made Dauids heart ake, ſo that he ſaw his boldneſſe in tempting God, how little it gained him. For hee ſtayed not till the Angell had well ſlaked the matter of his ambition, by ſlaying ſeuentie thouſand of his people. Let it be a watchword to vs, that if God

haue once mercifully paſſed by ſome wilfull offence of ours, by ſparing vs, that (I ſay) we count it for a great aduantage and fauour; for if we will dare to be bold to prouoke him againe, we may iuſtly feare that his ſcourges wil bee ſmartie, as Samſon and many other found them to bee. That I ſay no more.
                  Wee haue heard of the many ſinnes that Samſon committed, and of the 
                        Doct. 2. inward vexation of his mind, in that God was departed from him, though he ſaw it not by and by: Now I will (as I purpoſed a little before) lay out more particularly his outward miſeries, as they are ſet downe in this verſe, and that is done by heapes one after another. Firſt it is ſaid, they tooke and apprehended him, who was before at liberty, and yet they did not then forthwith put him to death, they would not bee ſatisfied with ſo ſhort a reuenge, nor ſo bee rid of him, that hee ſhould ſuffer no longer paine then ſo; but they meant to keepe him aliue, and ſo hold him as vpon the racke, in much torment and vexation, which might bee worſe then any death vnto him; therefore they then plucked out his eyes, and thereby they prouided, that he ſhould not ſee any more to doe them miſchiefe: then they lead him to one of their chiefe Cities, and put him among their raſcall priſoners, and made him grinde there as an horſe. All theſe with their apurtenances duely conſidered, it may eaſily be ſeene what a depth of miſeries he was plunged into. And yet all this they did to him, beſide their mocking and laughing at him, when they were diſpoſed to make themſelues paſtime thereby, and to bring him forth to that purpoſe.
                  By this we ſee, that where many ſins are committed, there it is certaine, that many iudgements of God are to be looked for, to bee heaped vpon the perſons that doe commit them, euen heapes vpon heapes, if wee haue eyes Pſal 32. 10. to behold it, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, Many ſorrowes compaſſe ſuch about, on euery ſide; and what cauſe their many ſorrowes and troubles, but their many ſinnes? Saul though a King, yet found it ſo, and ſeeing his life was full of iniquity, he could not be free from many plagues, till the laſt of all made an vtter riddance of him. The Scriptures are full of examples, both of the godly, who haue turned aſide, and of other who tranſgreſſed many waies, and how both ſorts were puniſhed accordingly. And although many eſcape long, and other flouriſh and proſper in the world for a while, yet are they not altogether void of them; for thoſe which are inward doe ſting them for the moſt part, and the other are in a readineſſe, and ſhall bee thought to come too ſoone, how farre off ſoeuer they ſeeme to be; and the greateſt iudgement of all is, (to whom ſoeuer it ſhall ſo fall out,) that they are ſuffered to go on without any. But when deſtruction commeth vpon them, happy ſhall they be, who haue kept their hearts pure and good.
                  But further heere let vs note, that our ſinnes doe not onely keepe many benefits from vs, but alſo bring many iudgements, as ſhame, pouerty, ſorrow, 
                        Doct. 3. bondage, priſon, and any other miſery vpon vs, and beſide them all, they do quench the graces of God in vs: as faith, hope, a good conſcience, the feare of God, and the reſt; which men make little matter of, becauſe they ſee they are in little account and price in the world. But to be ſhort, he that haſteth after his wicked hearts deſire, and will giue himſelfe liberty any way which he knowes God doth not allow him; though it bee not altogether

ſo groſſe and ſhamefull as Samſons ſinne was, he haſteth his owne miſery,) as in time appeareth to himſelfe, and is alwaies to be ſeene of him, that will obſerue and conſider it. Samſon was deepely drunken, and therefore his vomit was the ſtronger. One or two ierkes makes a ſturdy body but to dance: but when hee is ſtung to the quicke, his ſtout ſtomacke comes downe, becauſe he ſees no remedie. The hardened heart cannot repent, neither without Rom. 2. 5. this violence will it be meekned. A ſubtil traitor, Ieſuite, or other, at firſt examination is as farre off as the Moone, and will bee knowne of nothing: but being held well to the racke, hee will confeſſe all. If there bee ſo much good to be done by ſeuerity, God will vſe it rather then faile of his purpoſe. Let it teach men to try God no further then they thinke themſelues well able to ſtand out in it, and to beare his angry countenance, and if by venturing too far, they finde their opinion of Gods lenity confuted, and themſelues loden with ſorrow; let them rather vſe the ſame to meeken their hearts, then to cry out of their miſery. For great trouble commonly argueth ſtrong rebellion, and long trouble an hard heart. It is a ſingular mercy of God, to haue it tamed by the continuance of the puniſhment, but ſmall cauſe of reioycing, to haue it remoued, and the heart left in obſtinacie. The more we haſten this cure, the ſhorter ſhall be our ſorrow: for God delights not to puniſh long and much together. But to returne Samſon, be it granted that Samſon needed whipping. Muſt it therefore needs bee with a whip Note. of ſo many ſtrings, and were there none meete to ſee execution done, but they that had no meaſure? who (as the Prophet complained of the Edomites) Pſal. 137. aimed at nothing leſſe then the puniſhing of his ſinne, but wholly at the ſatisfying of their reuenge. Did God bring vpon Samſon the perſonall hatred of the Philiſtims, for the publike good and his honour, in doing his owne worke vpon the enemies of the Church; and now is hee made a prey to their teeth, and an obiect of their furie? Oh! conſider thou that obiecteſt, while Samſon ſimply went about God his worke, God bound himſelfe to ſhelter him from his enemies, to the which end hee furniſhed him with extraordinary ſtrength, ſo it was literally verified in him, One ſhall chaſe a thouſand. 
                     Deut. 32. 30. God ſtood to the making good of all harmes that could befall him in his owne quarrell, and elſe Samſon might iuſtly haue complained. But hee Note. would haue his owne worke goe forward, and Gods too: he had other buſineſſe that required hotter purſuit then his maſters: euen wicked and leaud buſineſſe, which croſſed the other, and therein hee was his owne man, and not Gods ſeruant, looke what charges or damages befel him in that imployment, he was himſelfe to defray and ſtand to. And ſo we ſee, that as he vſed not his gift, but abuſed it to his owne luſt; ſo God bereaued him of it, and ſent him among other maſters to pay him his wages for his owne worke. For this, God tooke himſelfe highly wronged, and therefore hee takes Samſon in hand to purpoſe, making his worſt foes the arbiters. I denie not, but euen herein he ſhewed him fauour; but I ſpeake of his phyſicke, which procured his recouerie. And if wee thinke that God is fitteſt to miniſter that which is fitteſt for quality, let vs aſcribe this to him alſo, that can do it as wel in the quantity as he liſteth. In bodily diſeaſes this is in the ſecond place one chiefe thing: for the ſame meaſure workes not vpon all. The tenth of this would haue killed Peter, yet leſſe then this would not haue ſtirred Samſon.
                     
He had returned to his filthineſſe without doubt, if the reſtraint had not been ſo forcible. God is mercifull, and delights not in extremitie; but he is Lam. 3. 33. Exod 34. 7. iuſt, and cannot be faced out with boldnes.
                  Now in that Samſon was thus led away in paine to ſuch baſe worke, in ſo Doct 4. in verſ. 21. reprochfull a manner; we ſee that withall this, he was conſtrained to leaue and goe from his louer alſo, to whom he was ſo neerely knit, and for whoſe ſake hee ſuffered all this woe, and much more; which how ſore and hard it was to beare, who doth not ſee? All which hee might haue been free from, and haue continued in the happie eſtate wherein he was before, if he could but haue ſhaken her off, and alienated his mind from her, and yet now muſt leaue her whether he would or no; and who ſeeth not what cauſe hee had, and what faire warnings ſo to doe before?
                  Euen ſo, obſerue wee, that if no perſwaſions will ſerue to draw vs from ſome ſpeciall ſin, (whether this which Samſon was deluded with, or any other) yet that God knoweth waies enough to ſcare vs from it; and this one among the reſt, that as he was, wee ſhall be plucked from it by violence, though we would not, and that alſo as he was, with ſhame and ſorrow our bellies full, and ſhall wiſh too late that we had been wiſer in time. So ſaith Salomon, There was a young man among the fooles, deſtitute of vnderſtanding, Prou. 7. 6. going toward the houſe of an harlot in the euening, when the night began to be darke, who with her ſubtiltie inticed him, and he followed her ſtraight waies, as an oxe that goeth to the ſlaughter, and as a foole to the ſtocks for correction, till a dart ſtrooke thorow his liuer, as a bird haſteth to the ſnare, not knowing that ſhe is in danger. And this is the beſt end that commeth of following our wicked hearts deſire, to the committing of ſin, whē by no meanes we can be reclaimed frō it. And it is a great matter worth the marking which I ſay, that when the Lord puls not the vngodly from their filthie pleaſure wherein they liued, and doth not reſtraine them, it is the immediate forerunner of their finall woe. But when he plucks the godly from thoſe baites, by which they are allured and indangered, he dealeth kindly with them, recalling them from woe to repentance, and the enioying of many good things. For he is wont to deny that in fauour to his children, which he granteth to the wicked in wrath. One point hereof we ſee in thoſe two (who died one death both bodily and ſpirituall) Haman and Iudas I meane: the other in the eleuen Apoſtles, as wee ſhall ſee by and by. Concerning the two former, when the one was taken from his pompe, the other from his peeces of ſiluer (which he rid himſelfe of, as haſtily as euer he coueted them greedily:) the next newes we heare of them, after they had giuen Eſter 7. 10. ouer themſelues to the ſinne intended, is, that they both were hanged, Mat. 27. 5. and ended their curſed life in a curſed death. To whom we may adde that foole in the Goſpell, with Achitophel and infinite others. When they were Luk. 12. 20 2. Sam. 17. 23. in the top of their wickedneſſe, and were not held backe by God, then was their end neereſt at hand. But the other, to wit, the good Apoſtles were gratiouſly weaned from the purſuite of that which would haue bin their bane. For when ambitiouſly they ſought and that with ſtriuing, who ſhould be the greateſt and chiefe among the reſt, our Sauiour held them from it, ſo as Iohn 13. 14. he made them aſhamed to thinke that they had gone about it. And what loſt they by it? Nay what gained they not rather? for they learning humilitie,

found that ſauour and ſweetnes in his ſeruice afterward, and in his loue, (as appeareth by their great lamentation that they made for his departing from them) that it made way to their enioying of moſt worthy and precious benefits after their Maſters aſcenſion. Euen ſo, as hee wrought in the Apoſtles, he doth the ſame in his other elect people: who when they Note. ſee they cannot enioy their deſired vnlawfull liberties without their vtter vndoing, then they begin to thinke it is high time to looke about them, and doe ſee that it were depth of folly to refuſe and forſake their owne mercie, (as Ionah ſpeaketh) for looking after lying vanities, and ſo they reſolue to renue Ionah 2. 8. their old acquaintance with their God, and to returne to him their firſt husband, and to fall to their old diet againe. But oh mercie of God inualuable, that they may do ſo. And though it be with ſome bitternes to thē, becauſe the fleſh ſauoureth no goodneſſe; yet it is fauour on Gods behalfe toward them vnutterable, and that which could ill haue been ſpared, euen themſelues being iudges. Therefore, to returne, let all ſuch as muſt be thus roughly vſed, as Samſon was, I meane, to be bereaued and plucked from their ſinne ſo deare to them and that with violence ere they will giue it ouer, let all ſuch (I ſay) beware, leſt when God ſhall thus croſſe them, they like blind idiots and wilfull rebels fight not againſt God, and increaſe their owne miſerie by renuing their old ſinnes, and ſeeking forbidden pleaſures or gaine, which is little better then with ſwine to returne to their mire. And ſuch as 2. Pet. 2. 22. neither forbearance, nor violence will doe good vpon, they may feare their caſe to be bad, (or others for them may) ſeeing God vſeth commonly no other remedie that will cure their maladie.
                  And by this we ſee, that the end of ſinne is not as the beginning and entrance into it. For then the diuell moſt ſlighly and cunningly ſheweth a foole all the pleaſure and profit that it bringeth, (as he iudgeth it to be) yea and offereth more to their conceit then they ſhal euer finde, as it may be fitteſt to allure and blindfold them; but in no wiſe ſuffereth them to thinke of that which will in the end, that is, their vndoing; for ſuch wiſedome Note. Prou. 24. 7. is too high for a foole. And ſo the diuell, to winde vs into the ſinne, commeth as a tempter; but when he hath brought vs to commit it, and we then begin to ſee what we haue done, and in what wofull caſe we be left, then he commeth as an accuſer, leauing vs in the briars, as he did Iudas, when we are meerely deſtitute of all helpe, to ſhift for our ſelues. Of which all the former ſtories of theſe Iſraelites are a plentifull witnes.
                  And here, becauſe I am ſhewing the miſerable ends of ſinne, when men will needs follow their wicked luſts, it were (and ſo I haue thought good to admoniſh the reader) it were good (I ſay) for him that is inticed ſtrongly with the baites of any ſinne, whereby he ſeeth himſelfe in danger, to ſet before Note. his owne eyes, as particularly as he can, the wofull effects of his former yeelding to, or dallying with the deceitfull allurements thereof, the holie Ghoſt here doth ſet downe foure or fiue which followed Samſons ſinne. As if a profeſſor ſhould forcibly be haled to vncleannes with any woman, and that he ſeeth not likelihood to turne away from her; let him anſwere himſelfe thus: This my ſinne it is abhorred of God, who is my delight, and it will ſet him againſt me, and make him mine enemie: it will be a moſt grieuous reproch to my profeſſion, if I yeeld to it, it will be a burthen of conſcience

importable: the loſſe of grace by it will be vnſpeakable: the griefe of the godly vnutterable, the fleſhing and ioying of the wicked vnſatiable; and beſides all, vtter vndoing to me it will be for euer: and the iniurie to the partie, to whom I ſhould offer ſuch diſcurteſie, neuer to bee recompenſed. And let him oft, as he ſhall ſee cauſe, twit and croſſe his carnall humour, and anſwere himſelfe, what got Eue, when ſhe had taſted that which being forbidden her, was yet in her deceitfull fancie, for many cauſes to bee deſired? And let him ſay further: Doe I thinke long, till I crie out with her, that the thing I ſo impotently haſt after, hath been my great ſorrow and vndoing? All meanes ſhall be found little enough to obtaine deliuerance from ſuch bondage. And ſeeing it is no ſpeaking to vs at the very inſtant of going about the committing the ſinne, let this and ſuch like meditations be vſually and ſeriouſly thought on by vs before, if we be wiſe.
                  Laſtly, in this verſe, one thing more I thinke good to note: and that is, 
                        Doct. 5. the care that theſe Philiſtims had to ſet their priſoners to worke, as they ſet Samſon to grinde at the mill among the reſt, as they did the other: which were worthie the following them in by vs Chriſtians, (though I would they ſhamed vs not herein) that knowing how ill occupied the malefactors be in the priſon, they might by good imploying of them in ſome honeſt labour, not only get ſomewhat toward their keeping, (many of them being ſtarued for want thereof) but alſo be ſtaied and held from much idleneſſe and miſchiefe, which they otherwiſe will doe, as at this day is to be lamented and ſeene in moſt priſons. Wee ſee the commoditie of ſetting them to worke in priſon, by appointing worke to the poore who liue among vs at libertie:) who being diligently ſet to worke, doe both maintaine themſelues, and many of them a great charge, and alſo are kept thereby from many offences and ſorrowes. Nay further, if heathens haue gone ſo farre in ciuil policy (though not for hatred of the ſin, themſelues being as bad in other kindes) as to prouide for order in ſo confuſed a companie of priſoners; then might it well become Chriſtians not onely to doe the ſame, but to goe a little beyond them, and regard the welfare of their ſoules alſo, both during their impriſonment, and before the time of their execution. As that godly Captaine Ioſhua did to Achan, chap. 7. My ſonne (ſaith he) giue glorie to Ioſh 7. 19. God, confeſſe thy ſinne, and disburden thy conſcience, that though thy hodie be puniſhed and deſtroyed for a ſeaſon, yet thy ſoule may bee ſaued in the day of the Lord. A pitifull thing to conſider, that ſuch ſhould be left to themſelues, to fulfill the meaſure of their ſinne, till death approcheth, and not to be laboured nor dealt with about the moſt weightie matter of their ſaluation. Which thing would moue vs more then it doth, but that we ſee ſo little care had by many Miniſters, to teach painfully their people who walke at libertie, and are well paid for their labour.
                  In this verſe it is ſhewed; though not ſo cleerely, (that all doe ſee and Verſ 22. vnderſtand it at the firſt view) how Samſon ſitting in the irkſome priſon in paine of body, but greater of mind, did think of his euil courſe, and frō what eſtate he was falne, and what miſerie he was in, and repented for it, after due conſideration of it, as the prodigall ſonne did. But ye will aske how that appeareth, that we may reſt perſwaded of it, ſeeing it may bee doubted of as well as of any other part of the ſtorie? I anſwere: ſeeing it is not ſo cleere

in this verſe, I will ſay the more about it, fetching light heereto from other Scripture. And firſt in this verſe, thus much may be gathered, that the holy Ghoſt ſetting downe this growing of his haire againe, giueth vs this to learne by it, that it was a manifeſt token that hee returned to the eſtate of a Nazarite againe alſo: (for it being a common thing for the haire to grow againe, there was no other end of mentioning it) which was the moſt perfect ſeruing of God, and that we may know hee could neuer haue done, except he had repented.
                  Secondly, it appeareth to be ſo, by his prayer to God afterward, verſ. 28. whereby we vnderſtand, that he beleeued in him, (euen as Ionah did the like Iona 2. 2. Rom 10. 14 in the Whales bellie.) For as the Apoſtle ſaith; How can we call vpon him, in whom we beleeue not? And if he beleeued, then hee alſo repented: for faith and repentance cannot bee ſeparated. The third proofe of his repentance, is, that he was a Nazarite of Gods owne ordinance, and therefore the elect of God, and one that muſt of neceſſity returne againe after his fall, or elſe he could not haue been one of the Lords, as it is certaine he was, being a Nazarite. The fourth is, the teſtimony that is giuen of him in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, where hee is reckoned among them who liued, and died in Heb. 11. 32. faith. And now that it is proued that he repented, let vs make our benefit of that his example.
                  In him therfore, as in a glaſſe, we may ſee the vnſpeakable mercy of God, Doct. to great ſinners: for who in all likelihood would haue ſaid that hee ſhould haue come to repentance, whom wee haue heard to haue ſo odiouſly, ſo long, and ſo many waies gone from God, and to haue followed his owne Note. wicked luſts? But hee being one of Gods elect, it was impoſſible that hee ſhould periſh, though hee muſt needs ſuſtaine much woe in this preſent world, euen as we haue heard he did. Which alſo is to be ſaid of Dauid, Salomon and Ionah, with other. And as ſuch an one is to be pitied much, whom God hath called and reclaimed from his old bad courſe to faith and amendment of life, when we ſee him afterward to wallow in the filthie mire of his former euill life againe; for wee know his puniſhment is like to bee moſt fearefull and heauie; ſo the offending party muſt know, that ſuch an one ſhould, as Manaſſes did by the tribulations that hee fell into, bee broken hearted and repent, and beleeue, and ſhould haue no peace, vntill he can do ſo. And therefore iuſtly are all ſuch to bee complained of, who hauing ſo Note. faire warnings from God when they haue fallen, are not for all that brought home againe, and humbled. So then, the conſideration of this point ought little to nouriſh the conceit of preſuming to offend God vpon hope of impunity. They that plead this, and the like example of Samſon, Dauid, Salomon, and others ſuch, do ſhew that they ſinne with boldneſſe, and preſumptuouſly beare themſelues vp in hope of forgiueneſſe, becauſe thoſe forementioned ſeruants of God obtained it, who ſinned not of preſumption as theſe doe, who reaſon thus, neither do they know therefore that they ſhall finde the like mercy in their need. For how monſtrous and irregular a concluſion is it, for him whom the loue of God ſhould keepe from ſinning, to preſume to ſin, becauſe God loueth him, and will neuer dampe him? Thou that makeſt ſuch concluſions, feare that mercy belongs not vnto thee. But know it for certaine, though thou haſt thought thy ſelfe ſure of ſaluation, hauing

ſought after it, and haſt begun to reforme thy ſelfe, yet if thou degenerate and offend wilfully, (for thy vnauoidable errours and weakeneſſes I ſpeak not of) the Lord ſhall fill thy life, thy ſoule, and conſcience, with ſuch perplexity and diſtreſſe, that thou ſhalt neuer enioy good day after thy ſatiſfying of thy rebellious will: and if thou die ſo (whoſoeuer thus ſinneſt) thou neuer wert a ſonne, and beloued of God, but a baſtard and counterfeit. Doe we not ſee what death hath befallen ſuch impudent coſoners, as (being vile and baſe borne) claime to themſelues the names and inheritances of great perſons dead long ſince, as if they were yet liuing? The like penalty and far greater ſhall lie vpon thee, (oh foule impoſter and deceiuer) that pleadeſt the name of a regenerate one, being an arrant deceiuer and hypocrite. But to returne, as for the better ſort, let them often coole and quench the dart of ſuch a tentation with this, that as ſweet as liberty ſeemes, God will finde Note. a way to make it bitter enough ere he leaue them, though hee meane not to caſt them off: witneſſe heereof be this famous example of Samſon. And on the other ſide, if they haue thus fallen, let them follow the example of this man in his repentance, and ſo doing, let them apprehend him, and comfort by his recouery, (for to that end the Scriptures were written) in their owne 1. Tim. 1. 16. particular caſe. And beware they, leſt the diuell (who is euer an accuſer in the end, though a tempter in the beginning,) draw them to runne further and deeper in, becauſe they haue already aduentured ſo farre. And ſo hauing eſcaped both rockes of bold, or ſecure, or of deſperate proceeding in ſinne, they ſhal be encouraged to ſeeke till they finde mercy: the which (lamentable it is to ſee) few doe, though the number of reuolters be many, the greater ſigne that they neuer were of the number of them whom they ſeemed to goe out from, and therefore returne not, as Saint Iohn ſaith. For of 1. Ioh. 2. 19. the other it is verified, They goe farre that neuer returne.
                  But to leaue this point concerning reuolters, this doubt is as hardly anſwered, whether they who neuer were conuerted vnto God as yet, may bee in hope to obtaine mercy of him, in ſuch depth of ſinning. For as ſuch goe farre, and lie long in their ſinne before they thinke of any ſuch matter; ſo when they goe about it, they are caſt by a deadly feare, almoſt into deſperation. Therefore what ſhall ſuch doe? I anſwere as they in the Acts did, who Act. 2. 37. came, being pricked in their hearts for crucifying the Lord Ieſus, to the men and brethren, euen the Apoſtles, and asked counſell of them what they ſhould doe, and ſo obtained remedie. For there being great likelihood and hope that they are of Gods elect, when they grow wearie of their wicked liues, they haue great cauſe to be incouraged, (if they know their liberty) in broken and melting hearts to ſeeke mercy at Gods hands, and not to giue ouer Iam. 4. 9. 10. their hope, neither deſpaire.
                  In which caſe, Mary Magdalene, out of whom were caſt ſeuen diuels, did ſaty her ſelfe, and the penitent theefe did obtaine mercy, and Paul himſelfe, as farre gone in a Phariſaicall conceit of his owne righteouſneſſe, as the reſt of the Phariſies, who neuer repented, and was euen madde in perſecuting Gods ſaints, and therefore in no meane danger: yet he (I ſay) who had bin a perſecutor, an oppreſſor, and a blaſphemer, was receiued to mercy, and obtained pardon. And why was this? Surely not onely for his owne comfort, 1. Tim. 1. 13. but alſo to magnifie Gods goodneſſe, for the encouragement of other great

ſinners, that ſhould come after him, ſuch as (of whom I now ſpeake) that they (I ſay) might be heartned and encouraged to looke for the ſame vpon the like humiliation. The reſt I referre to the next ſermon.
               
            
         
         
            THE EIGHTIE SEVEN SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to goe forward with Samſon: it is to bee conſidered in this verſe (it hauing been proued that hee repented) in what place and eſtate hee was in, when God brought him backe to repentance. And that was, in the irkeſome priſon; when he was blind, and loden with paine, and ſorrow enough. But oh will ſome ſay, what encouragement could hee haue to minde repentance, in that loathſome place, and irkeſome condition, where rather all was againſt him, that might haue been an helpe therto? Indeed I confeſſe that his ſo comming home to God in humbling himſelfe, and looking for mercy in that vncomfortable eſtate that hee was in, is a thing almoſt as admirable euen as his fall was, and the depth of Note. miſery that he fell into.
            But by this and other ſuch examples, we ſee how God doth oft worke, as before we heard he went about to doe in him, that hee worketh (I ſay) that Doct. grace in a man, while he is in miſery, which in proſperity is rarely ſeene and found to be in him: as I haue occaſion to ſay oft: And it is the more worthie our noting, ſeeing hee dealeth not ſo with all in their trouble, nay it is rare to behold, and the caſe but of few. For the moſt are carried to impatience and curſing, when they feele Gods heauie hand vpon them, and to bitterneſſe, againſt God himſelfe, for his ſo handling them; neuer looking to their owne deſerts, for ſo there were hope that they might be eaſily brought to confeſſe that God did all iuſtly, yea and ſhewed mercy alſo in iuſtly puniſhing them. And thus he dealeth with men that are brought to good by trouble, I meane hee bringeth them to a due and through conſideration of their vileneſſe and prouoking of him, that they are glad to ſeeke reconciliation with him: euen thus, I ſay, hee draweth and perſwadeth them to take vp their thoughts, for their exceeding benefit, when hee meaneth that they ſhall take good by their affliction.
            And he it is (being onely able) that pulleth downe their proud and loftie lookes, by the remembring and conſidering what they haue done, (his holy ſpirit directing them) & makes them aſhamed therof, and breaketh their ſtomackes, and maketh them thirſt for mercy, after that they can thinke that there is mercy for ſuch, and loathe their leaud liues, vnto the which gratious

worke they were before moſt oppoſite. Thus in ſickneſſe ſome are brought home, that in health could not abide to heare of ſuch a returne. Thus Ioſephs brethren, Manaſſes, and others bewailed their ſinnes in trouble, who when Gen. 42. 21. 2. Chron. 33. 12. they were void of it before, could by no meanes be brought to the leaſt conſideration of any ſuch matter. Let none therefore maruell, though God purſue them hardly, after wilfull tranſgreſſion, and turning from him, and bring many troubles vpon them, for hee intendeth their good thereby, which is a great matter; and ſeeth that they will not be brought to repentance otherwiſe. And what a mercy of God is it, that when wee are in the way to vtter vndoing, and we thinke little that the end of ſuch afflictions will be any better, but rather the haſtening of our miſery? yet that hee intends to draw vs thereby to greateſt happineſſe, as in the former examples may be ſeene. And though this fell not out at the firſt, yet let vs humble our ſelues vnder Gods hand, and not harden our hearts in the leaſt manner againſt him, and in time we ſhall moſt certainly finde it ſo, euen as Samſon found the priſon, hunger, and ſhame, farre better companions for him then his ſo much deſired Delilah, as great oddes as there may ſeeme betweene them. Enough hath been ſaid heereof in the like ſtories, and particularly vpon chapter 10. verſ. 10.
            Now to returne to the Philiſtims a while, and to leaue Samſon in his ſorrowes, Verſ. 23. we ſee how they giue thankes to their god for victory ouer him. I ſay the leſſe of theſe Philiſtims, becauſe the light they had reached not ſo farre as to condemne them heerein: their enemy they got, and him they paid home to the full: no wonder: they tooke Samſons vexing of them, a great piece of wrong done to them, if they ſhould not now they had vantage ouer him, haue done their vttermoſt to deſtroy him that ſought their ruine, they ſhould haue dealt fooliſhly. And therfore they little regarded by what meanes they came by him, or how cruelly they dealt with him. But to let their cruelty paſſe, not to be maruelled at; what ſhall we ſay of many profeſſors, who ſhew little better practiſe in the like caſes: who hauing by moſt vngodly meanes and deuices obtained their deſires and purpoſes againſt ſuch as they ſpitefully purſue and hate, are ſo farre from repentance for it, that they exult and triumph as conquerers, with praiſing God for that they haue bin auenged of their enemies; herein declaring that they giue thankes for thoſe things, for which they ſhould haue been much grieued. And as theſe Philiſtims got Samſon into their hands, but by an harlots meanes, and by fraud and ſubtilty moſt ſhamefull: Euen ſo, wherein glory many of the other, but in that which is their ſhame? as in reuenge had of their enemies, in oppreſſing and peeling the innocent, in humbling and abaſing moſt vilely chaſt Matrones and Virgins, in getting their will vpon the deere ſeruants of God, (as the Prieſts did againſt our Sauiour) and other ſuch villany. Thus men ioy in things which they ſhould be aſhamed of, as the Apoſtle ſaith of worldly minded men, that their glory is their ſhame: but to reioyce & glory Phil 3. 19. in the Lord, who ſhould be our onely glory, they haue no deſire that way.
            Another thing in the Philiſtims note, that they praiſe Dagon their god, 
                  Doct. 2. offring a great ſacrifice to him, and making a ſolemne reioycing together, for deliuering Samſon into their hands. Thus they were blindfolded, as Idolaters that knew no better: This they learned of the Iſraelites, who did praiſe the Lord Iehouah. Heereof, (not to bee tedious in ſaying that which

hath oft times been taught) let this be ſufficient to ſay, by their example to our ſhame, that if we ſhould not be feruent in ſetting out the Lords mercies and deliuerances with praiſes and thankes, and that ioyfully, wee ſhall haue the Philiſtims, who were Idolaters, to riſe in iudgement to condemne vs.
            This verſe ſheweth, that as the Princes did, ſo did the people, in all things Verſ. 24. they followed them. Where we ſee, that the examples of our ſuperiors and betters are of great force to draw vs after them. It is a truth whether in good or euill, but ſpecially in euill, whereto wee are prone enough of our ſelues, without any to draw vs: and therefore much more when we haue them alſo, as patternes to goe before vs. When the people had taken them ſtrange wiues of the Idolatrous nations in the daies of Ezra, it was told to Ezra, 
               Ezra. 9. 2. but with this addition, that the hands of the Princes and rulers was chiefe in that matter. Good cauſe there was therefore that the Apoſtle required, that there ſhould be ſupplications and prayers made for ſuch to God, who being 1. Tim. 2. 2. ſet in theſe places by him, to the end wee may liue an honeſt and peaceable life vnder them, they ſhall the better performe it, and giue vs alſo the better example, when the people doe feruently craue it of God. The ſame is to be ſaid of the Miniſter, gouernours of families, and of other ſuperiours. See more chapter 9. 48, 49. and other places of this worke.
            But while I am ſpeaking of the Philiſtims, I will here, as in the fitteſt place note another of Samſons puniſhments; for as it was his great ſinne, ſo it was alſo a puniſhment of ſinne, that he opened the mouthes of the vncircumciſed, to praiſe Dagon their Idoll, as though hee had been able to haue taken him out of the hands of the God of Iſrael, and to deliuer him to them to vſe him at their pleaſure. And ſo did hee likewiſe highly diſhonour his owne God, as though he had not been able to ſaue him from Dagon. And this (no doubt) troubled Samſon when hee came to himſelfe, as much as the other puniſhments pained him. So it is certaine, that Dauid was ſore troubled, as appeareth in the Pſalme, when hee remembred and thought vpon his ſins, when among other things, after he came to repentance, among the which, Pſal. 51. 1. 2. this was none of the leaſt, that hee had cauſed the enemies of God to blaſpheme. For he being threatned of God by the Prophet, for that offence 2. Sam. 12. 14. very ſharpely, doth yet acknowledge, that God ſhould deale iuſtly in puniſhing him for it; thereby declaring that it much grieued him. And that euill ſeruant, which hauing buried his talent in a napkin, was arraigned for it, and anſwered for himſelfe, that, He knew his maſter was an hard man, reaping where he ſowed not, and gathering where he ſtrewed not; hereby defaming his maſters worke, and diſcouraging his ſeruants: what reward had he? For as a ſtarued and ill thriuing and ragged ſeruant makes all men think Luk. 19. 22. 24. that his maſter is a bare man and miſerable, and therefore they ſhunne his houſe: ſo doe theſe. And the diſhonour heere is the fouller, becauſe the diet and wages of his attendances is infinitely greater then any other. And let both theſe warne vs, that we haue our conuerſation honeſt before men, that they may not iuſtly ſpeake euill of vs, as of euill doers: for if they do, it will 1. Pet. 2. 22. goe to our hearts when we ſhall come to repentance, to thinke that we haue cauſed our holy profeſſion, and the Goſpell it ſelfe to bee ill ſpoken of. For we are not ſet heere by God to lay ſtumbling blocks in mens way, and ſo to cauſe them to fall, (woe be vnto ſuch) but to conuert ſinners from their wicked

courſe, (as Dauid promiſed to doe) and ſo by our good workes which Pſal. 51. 13. they ſhall ſee, to cauſe them to glorifie God for vs, when hee ſhall viſit and haue mercy on them.
            This verſe ſheweth, that al the indignities and iniuries that the Philiſtims Verſ. 25. had offered Samſon, with the griefe that God brought vpon him, were not thought to be enough of them to make them ſatisfaction, but when their hearts were merrie with feaſting, they muſt needs haue him brought into a ſolemne place before them, to laugh at him, being ſo diſguiſed, and loden with miſeries as he was, and to be ſcorned by them, that ſo they might ſatiſfie themſelues with ſport and paſtime thereby, euen as they deſired. And they were aboue three thouſand of them (according to the receit of the roome) and they of the chiefeſt that did thus meete there. And to this end it is ſaid here, that Samſon was fetcht out of the priſon houſe, and ſet before them.
            Here we ſee the vnnaturall crueltie of the Philiſtims, who could not bee ſatisfied with all wrongs offred to Samſon, but they muſt make him a laughing ſtocke, and loade him with taunts and reproches alſo. Which though it be a vice ſo foule, as by the light of nature ſome Heathens abhorred it, I meane to ſhew immanitie to the miſerable; yet it is of that ſort of vices as might eaſily preuaile with ſuch as put out this light by brutiſh paſſion, and impietie. As appeares by the monſtrous crueltie of the Romans, who vſed to behold with great pleaſure, the ſingle combats of malefactors condemned, and their Sword-players ſhedding each others blood. Therefore it is the leſſe to bee maruelled at in the Heathens: but by occaſion of it, let vs Doct. know who are Chriſtians, that it is to be reckoned among vs as a moſt cruell thing to adde affliction to the afflicted: And when puniſhment is inflicted, that is itſelfe anſwerable fully to the treſpaſſe, yet for all that, to be inſatiable in the deſire of reuenge. A fearefull example is that of the Prieſts againſt our Sauiour, whom when they ſhould haue highly honoured for the great workes that he did among them, not only preferred a murtherer before him, and vniuſtly got liberty of Pilate to crucifie him, being Lord of glory, but Mat. 21. 17. 1. alſo railed and ſpitted on him, and moſt ſhamefully reuiled and mocked him in the middeſt of his agonies: and indeed herein they reſemble their father the diuell, who then moſt inſulteth when hee hath a man vnder: but the Lord is alway neareſt to his, as he was to Ionah, in their extremities. Ionah. 2. 9. 10.
            
            Now although God for his euill doing doe iuſtly puniſh ſuch an one; yet we ſhould be moued with ſome pitie toward him, and not to adde vexation to ſuch as God ſmiteth. And therefore wee reade, that the Lord afflicting Iſrael for their iuſt deſerts, by ſending them through the long and vaſt wilderneſſe; yet when the King of Edom would needes vexe them alſo, by for bidding them paſſage through his coaſts, was diſpleaſed with him: And therefore the Prophet Amos writeth thus; For three tranſgreſsions of Edom, 
               Amos 1. 11. 
               and for foure, I will not be intreated, neither turne to him, and addeth that, as the reaſon, becauſe he did purſue his brother with the ſword, and did caſt off all pitie toward him. And for that cauſe ſaith, hee will not leaue him vnpuniſhed.
            The vſe is to vs, to beware of all crueltie, and eſpecially if it be mixed with enuie: for which cauſe Salomon ſaith, Anger is cruell, and wrath is raging, but 
               Prou 17. 4. 
               who can ſtand before enuie? Thus Dauid prayes againſt him, who purſued the

man whom God afflicted, ſaying; Let his daies be few, and his prayer be turned 
               Pſal. 109. 15, 16 
               into ſinne, becauſe he remembred not to ſhew mercie, but he perſecuted the poore man, and him that was contrite in his heart, &c. But theſe things wee reade and deſpiſe, as if God would be mocked. See more of this in other places of this booke, and by name vpon the fourth verſe of the firſt chapter.
            And here conſider againe, notwithſtanding ſuch diſguiſing of Samſon, as 2 wee haue now heard, and that he was thus brought into an high degree of ſhame, contempt, and miſerie, whereby it might be thought that he was no better then an abiect and caſtaway; yet conſider we (I ſay) that he was euen now reclaimed from his forementioned ſinnes, and reconciled to God againe, as I ſaid before, and ſay it againe; that none may miſtake me in ſo ſaying; and by that which I haue ſet downe of his repentance, God ſheweth how deare he was to him, for all that hath been ſaid of his fall: not that he had merited, by his patience in the priſon, forgiuenes of his ſinnes: but he acknowledged them there, beleeued the pardon of them, and, as it became a godly man, he repented, as before hath been proued; elſe theſe had turned him quite off from God. This did greatly extenuate and aſſwage his miſerie, ouer it was with him before he thus turned to God. So that the Lord who prouided for Ionahs body the ſhelter of a gourd, leſt the extremitie Ionah 4. 6. of the heate of the Sunne might haue added affliction to his diſquieted minde: euen hee (I ſay) did much more gratiouſly preuent this poore priſoner his ſeruant, with mercie and fauour, againſt the time that his enemies grew to the height of their malice; leſt it might otherwiſe haue been intollerable. Yea and hereby the Lord animated him to beare the indignitie the more quietly, becauſe his ſtrength was now alſo renewed, and thereby he knew God had called this deſpitefull rabble together, to be auenged of them.
            Heereby let vs learne, that whatſoeuer men haue been in their euill liues heretofore, and howſoeuer they haue brought vpon their own heads much miſery thereby, yet there is much comfort to bee taken in them, both by themſelues and by others, when they haue truly renounced and caſt from them the workes of darkeneſſe, to haue no more fellowſhip in them, but do ſhelter themſelues vnder Chriſts wing, as the poore chicken vnder the hen, that he may couer and remit them. And this only is able to make them hold vp their heads, when ſo many ſorrowes and troubles doe otherwiſe oppreſſe them. But oh then, how happie and ſweet is this vniting of vs to Chriſt by faith, when we are ſo reſolued that we may abide in his loue, that Iohn 15. 11. wee carefully ſeeke to enioy and preſerue it, and doe wiſely decline other things which doe make that benefit ſeeme farre leſſe gainfull and beautifull vnto vs then it is. It is truly ſaid by Salomon, that it is the wounded ſpirit Prou. 18. 14. which makes the trouble waighty; and the ſpirit of a man, free and cheerefull through a good conſcience, and ſupported by God, which beares him vp in his affliction. And howſoeuer the proofe hereof is ſweeteſt in affliction ſent vpon vs in our innocency; yet it hath place alſo euen in croſſes which are drawne vpon vs for ſome ſinne, when wee haue humbled our ſelues truly for them, and haue not delayed to ſeeke reconciliation with his Maieſty for them. For then a man recouereth his particular confidence in God, and ſeeth that his affliction hauing done that for which it came,

ſhall ſpeedily bee remoued, and a ſupply of patience giuen the whileſt, to vndergoe the triall. Therefore oh fooles, that cauſe God thus to puniſh them: but double fooles, who abuſe their correction, and lie vnder it impenitent; Note. for theſe ſhall need no Philiſtims to adde ſorrow vpon ſorrow, ſeeing they make their burthen double and treble by their ſin aggrauated, and by a conſcience hardened againſt God.
            
               Verſ. 26. Then Samſon ſaid to the ſeruant that led him by the hand; Leade me that I may touch the pillers that the houſe ſtandeth vpon, and that I may leaue to them.
               
               27. Now the houſe was full of men and women, and there were all the Princes of the Philiſtims: alſo about the roofe were three thouſand men, and women that beheld while Samſon played.
               
               28. Then ſamſon called vnto the Lord, and ſaid; O Lord God, I pray thee think vpon me: O God, I beſeech thee ſtrengthen mee at this time onely, that I may bee at once auenged of the Philiſtims for my two eyes.
               
               29. And Samſon laid hold on the two middle pillers whereupon the houſe ſtood, and on which it was borne vp: on the one with his right, and on the other with his left.
               
               30. Then ſaid Samſon, Let mee loſe my life with the Philiſtims: and hee bowed him with all his might, and the houſe fell vpon the Princes, and vpon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he ſlew at his death, were moe then they which he had ſlaine in his life.
               
               31. Then his brethren, and all the houſe of his father came downe and tocke him, and brought him vp, and buried him betweene Zorah and Eſhtaol, in the ſcpulchre of Manoah his father: now he had iudged Iſrael twentie yeeres.
               
            
            NOw it followeth in the end of this third part of the Chapter, to conſider The ſumme. the iſſue of this their dealing with Samſon, and that is, the deſtruction of many of the Philiſtims, brought vpon them by his meanes: hee himſelfe Verſ. 26. loſing his life with them. But before he did it, he tooke his beſt opportunity to bring it to paſſe. For he being ſet betwixt the pillers, as was ſaid in the former verſe, hee asketh of the ſeruant that led him, to ſet him ſo, as hee might feele them with his ſhoulders; which he ſpake, as though hee would haue eaſed and reſted himſelfe, being wearied with grinding in the priſon, and by bearing his chaines and bolts: but intending indeed to ſeeke the beſt opportunity to caſt downe the houſe vpon the Philiſtims.
            Here firſt marke this, that he notwithſtanding he had loſt his eyes, which Doct. ſhould haue guided his body, yet hee was not vnmindfull of the worke of his calling, namely, to plague the Philiſtims, Gods enemies, and therefore he vſed the help of the ſeruant to further him thereto. We ſhould all learne to remember and conſider (for all our troubles and diſcouragements) thoſe weightie charges and duties which are in our power to performe, that wee Note. leaue them not by occaſion thereof, neither lay them aſide, as wee are eaſily brought to doe thereby. So that although wee haue not all incouragement and abilitie thereto, as were to be deſired; yet we ſhould vſe that which we haue, and may come by. Rare is the example of Ionah in this behalfe, that being in the Whales belly, where for ſtreightnes of roome, noiſomenes and

ſtinch hee could (a man would thinke) doe nothing; yet euen there made his faithfull prayer to God, and vpheld himſelfe by faith.
            For notwithſtanding we are diſabled altogether to performe ſome duties by neceſſitie; yet thoſe which wee may, wee ſhould with Samſon labour to performe, and haue a care to diſcharge them. I ſpeak this, for that many profeſſors of the Goſpell hauing receiued a checke from ſome of their betters, for being more forward in religious duties then other, or then is well liked, and for making more conſcience of their waies, then the moſt; I ſay, they ſuſtaining a rebuke for the ſame, are diſcouraged, and are ready to leaue off their Chriſtian courſe altogether, at leaſt their feruencie and forwardneſſe: which is vtterly vnmeete for them to doe; for ſo they ſhew that they feare man more then God, and ſo they cut him ſhort of his due, as they thinke good, which is in no wiſe tollerable. Whereas if they were ſeruants, tenants, or otherwiſe inferiours to ſuch ſuperiours as ſhould abridge and depriue them of ſome helpes and liberties, which might further them to the diſcharge thereof; yet ought they not through feare to giue ouer the duties which they may performe, but the rather conſtantly to hold out therein, and practiſe the ſame in al points as they may. For what ſhall all help of man be to them, if God be againſt them? Moſes would not leaue the leaſt dutie Exod. 10. 26. vndone, to pleaſe Pharao. I remember what I haue read of a valiant Roman Captaine in a fight by ſea, that firſt hee aduenturing to put foorth his hands to catch at the gable of the enemies ſhip, with eagernes to ſurpriſe her, and draw her to his owne Nauie as priſoner, loſt his right hand by the ſword of the enemie: which being cut off, he haled againe with the left hand, thinking to pull her away, but in the attempt loſt his left hand alſo; when he ſaw himſelfe diſarmed of his hands, he (being neere) fell downe, and with his teeth drew the ſhip with ſuch violence, that hee wonne her in the deſpite of the defenders thereof. I bring in this as an alluſion, to ſhew the exceeding reſolution of carnall men in the aduancing of their purpoſes for honour, wealth, or fleſhly proiects: but in this matter of our holy profeſſion, wherein God is highly honoured, if wee bring forth much fruit, who takes not a repulſe by the ſmalleſt diſcouragement, either from being zealous therein, and an ordinary worſhipper of God, or for being carefull ouer his family, or a liberal relieuer of the diſtreſſed Saints, or from walking in his particular calling with a good conſcience, or to be ſhort, from ſeruing God inwardly and outwardly, with labour, and attendance as the cauſe requires? Alſo who being ſhut out one way, ſeekes paſſage another, trying all meanes rather: yea and though diſappointed in part, yet to do ſomewhat, rather then nothing? Paul indeed being reſtrained from publike preaching ſat not ſtill, but did what he could in priſon, ſo that his bands were as famous as his liberty: not ſaying with Elija (therein weake,) Take my life now (Lord) 1. King. 19. 4. for Iezabel giues no permiſſion to thy Prophets to teach openly, but makes a racket of them. If we may honour God in publike, let vs: if not, then among a few: if not ſo, yet in our family: if we be ſequeſtred from al theſe, Note. yet in our ſpirit, and that ſhall be our diſcharge before God. But if any ſhall ſay, I haue offered God my ſeruice in his Church, and hee refuſeth it, therefore he muſt pardon me if I haue the ſmaller liſt to be otherwiſe occupied: this is madneſſe and follie, or elſe ſloth and hypocriſie. Oh, ſaith many a ſon,

wife, ſeruant, ye little know what a father, husband, or maſter, or landlord I haue, to diſcourage me; otherwiſe I can tell what I could doe in ſeruing God, as well as other: Well, marke what Paul ſaith; If thou be a ſeruant, 1. Cor. 7. 21. (though ſtreitned) doe as thou maiſt: (the worſt maſter cannot make thee cold without thine own conſent) although if thou be free, vſe it rather. And therefore it was a great ſinne in Dauid when hee was driuen to his ſhifts by Saul, to offer his helpe to Achiſh againſt the Church; make the beſt of it that 1. Sam. 27. 2. we can. For, want of incouragement muſt not coole our affection (though it may hinder action) much leſſe may it excuſe diſcontentment, or that which is worſe. And ſeeing ſuch ſullennes argueth that there is no reſolute purpoſe indeed, to dutie; therefore many ſuch grow looſe and conſcienſles in their trouble: (for affliction will ſearch a man) and others being in time inlarged and ſet free; are as barren hypocrites after, as euer before they were plentifull in their complaints of their miſerie. We muſt thinke Zachary and Elizabeth had as many diſmaiments as we, vnder Herod, and in ſo corrupt a time: let vs be as they, and wee ſhall be borne with for being no forwarder. But here an end for this time.
         
         
            THE EIGHTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               HEre to goe forward, as Samſon was preparing to bring Verſ. 27. to paſſe that great ſlaughter of the Philiſtims, ſo the Lord had prepared the perſons for him to execute it vpon them. Therefore it is ſaid here, that the houſe was full of men and women, and all the Princes of the Philiſtims were vpon the houſe, prouiſion being made where they might beſt ſee: aboue three thouſand men, to behold Samſon, and pleaſe themſelues therein. Which cleerely laieth out the folly, yea the vaine and deceitfull folly of the ignorant and irreligious, who haue been, and ſtill are ſo readie to flocke together by hundreds and thouſands to ſatisfie their eye, and to behold that which may prouoke fooliſh laughter, with what danger ſoeuer.
            And yet if this be ſo to be diſliked (as who of ſound iudgement will not 
                  Doct. 1. affirme it ſo to be) what may be ſaid of them who now long after, as alſo in yeeres paſt and yet ſtill in the light of the Goſpell, haue inuented other maner of ſpectacles to delude the ſimple withall? euen ſhameleſſe ſhewes, and moſt dangerous ſtage plaies, omitting none to play a part in them, that may increaſe ſinne; as ſome to play the vice and foole, ſo diſguiſing themſelues, as if they were void of reaſon: ſome to reſemble the diuell, by which counterfeiting

they make the mentioning of diuels in the Scripture, to be onely a ridiculous ieſt, and matter to laugh at, that ſo they may be the bolder to ſinne, and the leſſe feare diuell or damnation: and ſome are brought on the ſtage in womens apparell, God hauing commanded the contrary, and ſaid, Deut. 22. 5. It ſhall not be ſo. In the which meetings they doe not onely with the Philiſtims pleaſe their eye, but alſo ſtrongly are incenſed and prouoked to lewdnes and luſt, which ſome of them were nothing ſo much acquainted with before. Whom if God ſhould ſhew ſome ſuch ſtrange iudgement vpon, as vpon theſe here, (as we haue heard that ſome of them haue had lately faire warnings in that kinde, while they haue been in the middeſt of their paſtimes) I denie not but it were lamentable; but doubtleſſe not leſſe (what doe I ſay? nay by farre more) deſerued then this. But theſe muſt be left to the Magiſtrate, who ſhould not in vaine beare the ſword, but to the terror of offenders.
            Of like ſort to the Philiſtims meetings to laugh and pleaſe themſelues in beholding Samſon brought foorth to be a gaſing ſtocke among them; of like ſort, I ſay, are the brutiſh flockings together of ſome parts of our countrey, who on the moſt Sabbaths through the ſummer haue vſed, and that very lately (I am ſure) and ſtill they may, for ought I know, to feaſt, drinke and dance, with much miſrule accompanying them: miſrule, ye may well geſſe what, by that which I haue mentioned; as if God had neuer commanded better things, ſaying yet aloud in their eares, Remember that ye keepe holy the Sabbath. All which prophane cuſtomes with the like, let them periſh and come to naught, and holy aſſemblies to heare ſermons and to pray, riſe vp, and bee duly and reuerently frequented and vſed on the contrary. Of theſe lewd cuſtomes I haue elſewhere ſpoken.
            I noted before the ſlauiſhnes which Samſons ſinne brought him to, while Doct. out of verſ. 26. 27. he committed it, in the 17. verſe, reſeruing the other, to wit, the baſenes and ſhame which followed after it, to this place, as more proper for it. That which God threatned to the whole body of his people for renouncing his ſeruice, that they ſhould loſe their headſhip ouer the nations, and become the taile, that befell this one man Samſon for his wilfulnes. Not vnlike to that which Noah (by implication) prophecieth of the Church in the two heads therof, Shem, and Iaphet, that Cham ſhould be vnder, and a ſeruant vnto them, while they dwelt in the tents of God, but otherwiſe Cham ſhould hold his dominion ouer them. Samſon was made a Lord in ſome ſort ouer theſe Heathens, to rule them, and ſo he did while he held his honour in the ſeruice of God: but being wearie of it, loe hee is made the moſt vile vnderling to them, and loden with all deſpite that malice could lay vpon him. We Note. will neither beleeue that there is honour in ſeruing God, (whereas yet the Angels haue no greater, and the greateſt Kings vpon earth hold their Maieſtie, Heb. 1. 14. in ſeruing the Lord and maintaining his truth inuiolable) nor ſhame and miſerie in the contrary. But Samſon (doubtleſſe) ſaw the former, the more cleerly, when he was ſo oppreſſed with the latter: and that in ſo foule a manner, as that he who weigheth the ſtorie, ſhall neede no further proofe of the deformed and vile nature of ſinne. Euen thus was it with Adam when he had ſinned: whereas before he was the ſoueraigne Lord ouer the creatures, hee became the vileſt and worſt of all, if God had not reſtored him.

Thus the euill Angels not content with the higheſt honour, became diuels, abaſed to the loweſt and curſedeſt ebbe of ſhame. And this particular I thought good not to omit, (though I haue ſaid meetly enough of the other parts of miſerie which this ſinne of his cauſed) to the end that ſuch as like Samſons diet ſo well, may know by that time God hath tamed them ſo, and fetcht them about as he did this poore offender, he will make them buckle and ſtoope to his lure, and be glad of the meaneſt roome in his houſe, as the prodigall that wiſhed himſelfe an hireling of his fathers, in his wretched penurie, Luk. 15. 19. whom the place of a ſonne before liked not. As for them who thinke it their reproch to weare Gods liuerie at all, they are rather to be hiſſed at, then confuted by this text, let them goe like vagabonds and Cains vpon the face of the earth; but as their true ſhame is herein, that God vouchſafes them no roome in his Church, ſo the time ſhall be, when their ſhame ſhall breake foorth to their confuſion, then when there ſhall neither be place for them to hide their heads in, nor cloakes left them to couer their ſhame, much leſſe to haue entrance into his kingdome. Let rather ſuch as goe for Chriſtians, who enioy the honour of good report among the beſt for their religion, and haue been hitherto kept from reprochfull crimes, and the fruit thereof, that is ſhame among the godly, and from being a byword to the wicked: let ſuch, I ſay, look about them by this example, and beſeech God to ſhew them yet more cleerely the priuiledges of their ſinceritie, and godly care of obedience, (which euen here are glorious, ere glory it ſelfe be obtained) that ſo they may cleaue faſt vnto him ſtill, and beware, leſt catching at ſome other ſhadow of glory, by forſaking their zeale, and following the common ſins of the time, they become moſt ridiculous pageants of ſcorne to them, whom before they held in awe and reuerence, by the admiration of their vertues. Sure it is, that if they will venture with Samſon to breake out to doe euill for the hauing of their owne pleaſure, or to auoid a little trouble, they ſhall as he did, reape a great deale for it.
            Before Samſon ſet vpon this worke, he beſought the Lord to inable and Verſ. 28. aſſiſt him, and we muſt know, that his prayer was feruent and effectuall, offered vp in faith, and obtained that he ſought. And whereas he may ſeeme to ſeeke reuenge in his prayer, wee muſt conſider, he was the Lords inſtrument to bring to paſſe his worke; and for good ſucceſſe in that, he intreateth God to aſſiſt him: Euen as the Apoſtles did in the Acts; when the Act. 4. 29. Prieſts had forbidden them to preach in the name of Ieſus, which he had commanded them, they beſought God to ſtop and hinder their threats from hauing effect, and prayed, that with all boldnes they might vtter and preach his word. The ſame did Samſon againſt theſe enemies of God, and God heard both alike; both him, and the Apoſtles. Though God had promiſed them both all neceſſarie aſſiſtance, yet his grace was not ſo pinned to their ſleeue, as that they might alway make account of it, without ſeeking of it by the prayer of faith, as in Elia and Eliſha appeareth, and wee haue toucht it in the prayer which he made for ſupply in his deadly thirſt, when he was about Gods worke in chapter fifteenth, where I alſo obſerued the ground of that libertie which Gods faithfull ſeruants haue in their acceſſe to God by prayer.
            
               
And in effect Samſon prayeth thus: O Lord, ſeeing I am brought now into ſo great a company of theſe Philiſtims, whom, I being blind, ſhall neuer be able to purſue, as thou haddeſt commanded me, they being enemies to thee and thy people; and ſeeing thou haſt reſtored my ſtrength to me in this ſo good an opportunity; ſeeing it is thus, ſaith he, in token that I beleeue no leſſe, I beſeech thee to grant, that I may now bee auenged of them, and that they may be payed home for the iniurie they haue done me, by plucking out mine eyes, and other woe which they haue wrought mee thy ſeruant, whereby I haue been hindred from doing thy worke among them. Thus we ſee how it fareth with Gods people, and what their behauiour is in their affliction: to wit, that they teſtifie their beleeuing in him, by feruent ſupplication to him in ſuch time of their need; ſhewing thereby, that they make him their onely refuge and ſtay.
            And by this we are taught, how earneſtly and diligently we ſhould go about Doct. the Lords buſineſſe, when we may, and haue opportunity, and chiefly in our tribulation; namely, with feruent prayers ſuing to him for helpe in the one, and ſucceſſe in the other; which ſeeking to him, the Lord doth much regard and commend: and (as hee here did) to oppoſe our ſelues againſt his enemies, wherein we finde and can proue that they bee ſo. For as the Lord loueth a cheerefull giuer, ſo hee loueth a cheerefull doer of his buſineſſe. 2 Cor. 9. 7. And ſo ſhould wee bee alſo, and the rather ſeeing there are but few that are forward and readily minded in Gods matters, howſoeuer in other attempts they runne when they ſhould draw backe. But of this latter point, euery where almoſt through the booke.
            In theſe two verſes is ſhewed, how Samſon ſetting his ſhoulders ſtrongly Verſ. 29. 30. to the pillers of the houſe, he ſaid; My life periſh with theirs. And the houſe fell on the Princes and the people, ſo that many more were ſlaine by him at his death, then he ſlew in his life, and he died with them.
            Here we ſee for one point, the momentanie and flitting eſtate of the ioy Doct. of both. of the wicked. And this is their bane, their vexation, and chiefe heart ſmart, that when they haue feathered their neſt, as they ſay, and prouided great wealth, pleaſure, and honour, whereby they giue ſhew to fooles that they haue gotten a pettie paradiſe here on earth, yet when they haue done, they want one chiefe thing to helpe them to hold and keepe ſtill their deceitfull Note. and pictured felicity, and that is, length of time and daies: that they may containe the enioying of it to themſelues. This they cannot buy nor compaſſe, as they can all other things to their liking, and for want of this, all the other leaue them, fade, and giue ouer their vſe, as if they had neuer been theirs, and yet withall, ſend them alſo to a farre worſe conditon. What prouiſion haue many made in ſumptuous and goodly buildings, with fat paſtures, and commodious grounds laid thereto, and all commodities more neerly adioyning, as fiſh-ponds, burrowes for coneyes, doue-houſes, parkes, orchards, gardens, and what not, that may bee deuiſed for their pleaſure? as Salomon ſpeaketh of himſelfe. Eccleſ. 2.
            
            And heerein one followeth another, as farre as by their wealth they can Note. reach, and when they looke now to enioy them, and ſo to ſhew their happineſſe thereby to other, then, or after a very little while, Time denies her

ſeruice to them, and will performe it no longer, without which all the reſt are to them as nothing, nay vexation of ſpirit alſo. Thus death the Lords meſſenger comes oft on the ſudden, as the ſergeant or bailiefe arreſting, and taking them away from all their pleaſant delights, as Samſon was violently from his Delilah, vntill they cry out againe, when they ſee how they are plucked from them, but all in vaine, ſeeing there is none to reſcue them. The ſame may be ſaid of thoſe, who haue prouided yeerely reuenewes, to auoid dangers, and maintaine fleſhly reioycings. All which though they be Gods good benefits, and may be lawfully enioyed, yet when they are ſet in Gods place, and made the delights of men, in ſtead of his fauor and gouernment, they are curſed with the vſers of them.
            And thus when they muſt be taken from them againſt their will, and they can enioy them no longer, they ſay in themſelues, O death, how vnwelcome art thou to vs, who haue taken vp our pleaſure heere? And haue they nothing elſe to ſay? where is now their wiſdome, (who went for the wiſeſt of other in their proſperity,) that hath bewrayed them to bee meere fooles, and left themſelues then nothing? Why did they not rather obey God therefore, who charged them that they ſhould not lay vp their felicity here below? Why did they not giue credit to him, who told them, as he told the Note. rich man in the Goſpell, There is no certainty of any earthly thing till tomorrow? Luk. 12. 20. 21. Therefore muſt ſuch become by words for their follie and wilfulneſſe, in euery common mans mouth, (as I know not wherfore their doings Note. ſerue, but for matter to talke of,) who looked to haue been famous here for euer by their vniatiable gatherings, and great prouiſion making of earthly abiding and proſpering.
            For he that hath ſaid to him, who was as well ſetled in momentany reſt as theſe, when he thus comforted himſelfe, [Soule, eate, and drinke, and take thine eaſe, thou haſt much good laid vp for thee for many yeeres,] Hee I ſay that Luk. 12. 19. ſpake thus to him; Thou foole, this night will they fetch away thy ſoule from thee, and whoſe then ſhall be the things which thou poſſeſſeſt? He ſaith as much daily to theſe; and who can then pitie them, if they will not be warned? Much like a great man that died a few yeeres agone, who when ſickneſſe grew faſt on him, and would not bee ſhaken off, as hee hoped it would haue been, at the firſt comming of it, when he could get no helpe againſt it, but that death approched and drew neere, hee vttered theſe words now at laſt; whereby it is cleere that he had little thinking of any ſuch thing before; Why? now I ſee that all is vanity. Another hauing builded a goodly houſe, when hee had ſhewed the commodities and pleaſantneſſe of it to a plaine countrey man, asking him how he liked it; he anſwered: I like it well, if a man might keepe it alwaies. Thereby marring the ioy of it, who could not commend it▪ but together with the deadly and vnwelcome remembring the momentanie and flitting eſtate thereof, and the vncertaintie of enioying it.
            And all the ioy of the wicked is no better then I haue ſaid; and yet that none may thinke the Lord to deale partially, bee it knowne that if his owne people degenerate, and partake with the other in their ſinne, and play the fooles with them by reioycing in euill, and things tranſitorie, as their paradiſe, they ſhall ſmart with them likewiſe, and for the time enioy no better priuiledge then they doe. Therefore let vs bee wiſer, and imbrace and proſeſſe

that ioy which cannot be taken from vs, neither ſhall euer be repented of, that we haue ſought it, and that is our reioycing in the Lord, in his word, in his ſeruice, and in his Saints; and to be ſhort, in his all ſufficiencie. And this bee ſaid more fully of this point which yet I handled by the like occaſion in chap. 15.
            Againe heere let vs marke at what time and when the ioy of the Philiſtims 2 was damped and taken from them. And that was, when they were met together to ſport themſelues, and bee merrie, and when they were furtheſt off from any thought of trouble or death, or of loſing and diſappointment of their paſtime, euen then was the houſe throwne downe by Samſon vpon them. Like to that which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh; When men cry peace, 1. Theſ. 5. 3. peace, and al things are ſafe, then ſhal ſudden deſtruction come vpon them, as trauell vpon a woman with child, and they ſhall not be able to eſcape: euen as Baltazar alſo was moſt fearefully threatned the loſſe of his kingdome Dan. 6. 25. in the middeſt of his banqueting.
            This doctrine doth mauellouſly croſſe our vile nature, who giue our ſelues leaue, when health and welfare meet together and abide with vs any time; to make our ſelues drunke with them, and to take our fill of them. And therefore we cannot away with this, to heare of any change, nor to be awaked out of our carnall drowſineſſe: and for this cauſe, ſeeing men will not hearken to the Lord, bidding vs watch, and beware of ſuch ſurfetting Luk. 21. 34. and ſpirituall drunkenneſſe; therfore he leaues many in the ſnare oft times, wherein like fooles they be taken. And by this we may ſee, when God hath Prou. 22 3. begun iudgement before with his owne, ſo that they eſcape not, that it ſhal much more grieuouſly meet afterward with his enemies; and therefore that their iudgement ſleepeth not. This I enlarge not, hauing ſpoken of it in 1. Pet. 4. 18. the place before mentioned, chap. 15.
            The caſting downe of ſuch an houſe, (we know all) it paſſed the ſtrength 3 of a common man. And as he had his ſtrength reſtored to him againe, as we ſee, ſo had hee alſo his inward grace, as appeareth by that which hath been ſaid of his repentance, and his prayer of faith. Now therefore ſince that, the caſe being thus altered with him, we muſt behold him as another man, then when he was beſotted and made drunke with the wicked woman. And here let vs marke what a difference there is betwixt the time of grace in a man while God guideth him, and the time of bondage when God letteth him follow the deuices and deſires of his wicked heart, as may bee here ſeene in Samſon. Oh, grace if it could be ſeene with eyes, as we can ſee but a darke reſemblance of it by ſome outward ſhewes thereof, it would in an admirable manner draw vs to loue it, as the meekeneſſe of Moſes, the loue of Ionathan, the zeale of Dauid, and the like: and ſo would the fouleneſſe, loathſomnes and terribleneſſe of ſinne, cauſe vs to abhorre it, as the diuell: as in Iezabels cruelty, Ioabs malice, Hamans murtherous mind is to be ſeene.
            Oh what a ſhame it is for a man that hath been reuerenced and highly regarded for his approued innocency, faithfulneſſe, and conſtancy in good carriage, to become a foole in Iſrael, a baſe, ridiculous, and contemptible perſon! And againe I ſay, oh how glorious and worthy a thing it is, to ſee Note. ſuch an one to be reformed, and caſt into the mould of the Goſpell! Looke vpon thy ſelfe, if euer thou diddeſt ſerue God vprightly, theſe vertues here

ſet downe, had place in thee, yea prayer was ſweet to thee; and hearing, with ſuch like fruites of amendment were pleaſant: but when thou haſt ſuffered thine heart to carrie thee after the corrupt inclination thereof, thou art then become vtterly diſguiſed, as if thou haddeſt neuer been the ſame perſon.
            I will here onely adde this, how ſinne maketh men impotent, and taketh heart from the committers of it, as I haue ſhewed other waies, how loathſome and odious it is. Reade that one example to this end, in this booke. When the Lord brought warre vpon his people for their Idolatry, by the Iudg. 5. 8. Canaanites, it is ſaid that the people were ſo put out of hart with the thinking of their ſinne, and ſo appalled in their conſciences, remembring how they had tranſgreſſed, that among fortie thouſands of them, there was not one that durſt take vp ſpeare or ſhield againſt the enemie. But of this point plentifully before, and particularly vpon thoſe words, [That he thought hee would doe as at other times.] But here an end.
         
         
            THE EIGHTIE NINE SERMON, ON THE XVI. AND XVII. CHAPTERS OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               
                  NOw to proceed with Samſon vpon this, that hee caſting downe the houſe vpon the Philiſtims, died alſo with 
                     Obiect. Verſ. 
                        •
                     0. them: it is demanded, if he did not kill himſelfe, which if we finde that he did, then all the commendations of his renued repentance falles to the ground, and is waſhed away by this his laſt ſo wofull a fact, and that alſo aduiſedly done. Hereto I anſwere, that it cannot bee ſaid hee killed Anſw. himſelfe: indeed he died with them, but the end that he propounded, was not that he might die, neither did he deſire it; but he ſought reuenge vpon Gods enemies, which was the worke of his calling, and that which was like to bring and procure it: but what was that but a faithfull ſeruing of God, though with the loſſe of his life? euen as the Apoſtles did. If they preached Note. Chriſt, they ſaw it would coſt them their life, and that they ſhould be ſlaine if they would needs preach him: now when it fell out ſo indeed by their preaching, ſhall we ſay therefore that they killed themſelues, and that they ſought their owne death? No, no more then a zealous and diligent Preacher, who by his paines in ſtudy and his miniſtery, empaireth and ſpendeth his ſtrength and health, can be ſaid to be the procurer of his owne vntimely death, for he hath ſpent his ſtrength in his calling, to which end God gaue it him.
               And as Paul ſaid, he was ready to be bound, and to die for the Lord Ieſus, Act. 21. 13. ſo Samſon ſaid, let me loſe my life with the Philiſtims. He runneth not raſhly to death, but followeth his vocation, and if death come therewith vnto

him, he yeelds to it willingly, and the rather becauſe he had brought this neceſſity vpon himſelfe by his owne ſinne; and hee could no otherwiſe purſue Gods enemies then with hazard of his owne life. Euen as valiant ſouldiers who ſeeke not death, but yet looke for no other. The vſe of this The vſe of it. to vs is this, that as wee ſhould abhorre the leaſt ſinne this way, yea the very ſpeech or thought intending and ſeeking our owne death, ſo yet it is our duty to walke in the eſtate in the which God hath ſet vs, in ſuch wiſe, that we be not onely ready, fit, and willing to die; but alſo if God will in our faithfull diſcharge of our duties, meet with vs by death, as hee did with the Apoſtles, then to bee readie to yeeld to it, and to remember, That hee who Mat. 16. 25. loſeth his life for Gods ſake ſhall finde it. And therefore let neither our life, nor any thing we haue, be thought too good for him who requires it. And though all loſe not their liues, yet many doe forgoe other commodities, which were not commendable in them, if it were not for Gods cauſe. Very Heathens (when they ſpake according to their light) ſaw it to be vnnaturall for men to deuoure themſelues. And as the ſouldier may not diſranke himſelfe or forſake his ſtation, without his Emperours permiſſion who hath ſet him in his place; ſo neither ought any to deſtroy his owne life and ſoule by wilfull death, but waite the time that God hath appointed. Indeed the Heathen ſaw not thus much, that a man might not auoide apparant perill of violent death, whether by an incurable diſeaſe, (as one of them ſtarued himſelfe to death to free himſelfe from the ſtone) or by the purſuit of their enemies. Plinius. This they made themſelues erroneouſly beleeue to be magnanimity, and the waiting for death (in that caſe) cowardiſe. And like to them are many brutiſh people among vs, who in ſome great diſtreſſe of mind or ſhame which their owne ſinne hath brought vpon them, bereaue themſelues of their liues, like Iudas, and Abimelech. And others being croſſed but in a ſmall matter, are ready to wiſh themſelues as deepe in the ground as they are high too. And euen Chriſtians often forget themſelues, and haue this pang vpon them to curſe the day of their birth, and to deſire death. I doubt not, but many doe it in raſhneſſe, (for if death came and offered it ſelfe, they would recant,) but howſoeuer it bee, both this raſhneſſe, and the other madneſſe is vtterly vnbeſeeming Chriſtians, and a token of an vnſauorie heart, little ſeaſoned with the doctrine of confidence, and patience. And if a wiſe man weigh it, there is more cowardlineſſe in preuenting trouble or croſſes by violence, then enduring them patiently. And let ſuch as the diuell hath woond in withall ſo farre, as to worke vpon their melancholy, and terrours of conſcience, or weakneſſe of nature, by ſuch dangerous tentations as theſe; to drowne, hang, ſtab themſelues, abuſing the Scripture, and ſuch examples as this of Samſon, to that end; let ſuch (I ſay) bee fenced well againſt his malice by this inſtruction, anſwering with our Sauiour in the like caſe; Auoide Satan, I dare not tempt the Lord my God. Mat. 4. 7.
               
               But to returne a little to Samſon: It is ſo farre off from equitie to condemne 2 that laſt act of his, in loſing his life with the Philiſtims, that it was far to be preferred before his other annoying of them, and euen his greateſt auengings of them. For he ſlew many more of them now at his death, then he did in his life. And was therein a liuely figure of our Sauiour Chriſt: who though he deſtroyed the workes of the diuell in his life, (euen as hee

came to the ſame end) and foiled him ſhrewdly many waies; yet at his 1. Ioh. 3. 8. death he triumphed ouer him, & led him captiue. Both their acts, I meane Samſons and Chriſts, doe ſhew, as in a glaſſe, what we all ſhould doe: namely, endeuour to doe the beſt good at our death: which ſhall the better bee done, if we lay for it in our life. For, liue well, and dye better: becauſe wee Note. ratifie and confirme all the good we did while we liued, when we iuſtifie it at our death. And this is one fruite and peece of honour, that a good life receiueth, that a good death followeth it. Oh therefore begin wee betimes to feare God, and as we are commanded, remember we our maker in the daies Eccleſ. 12. 1. of our youth, and let it not bee tedious to vs to nouriſh thoſe good beginnings, that our laſt end may be like both; or elſe an hundred to one, that we ſhall haue ſmall cauſe to reioyce in our end, that I ſay no more.
               And the like (in this particular) may bee ſaid of the death of the righteous, which is ſaid of Samſon, yea and much more. And it affoordeth no ſmall encouragement to al ſuch as are faithfull in the work of the Lord; I meane, in rooting out and deſtroying the enemies of their owne ſoules, eſpecially the corruption of their nature, and the fleſhly luſts which iſſue frō thence. Their watchfulnes and diligence in ſuppreſſing them ought to be daily, their prayers conſtant, their faith in Gods almightie power, (to which nothing is impoſſible) as armour, ought continually to be exerciſed in the aſſaulting of their concupiſcence and the fruites thereof. And though they yeeld not at the firſt, becauſe they are ſtrong and mightie; yet hauing receiued their deadly blow at firſt, by the death of Chriſt, they ſhal decay ſenſibly, and at death be quite aboliſhed, as the walles of Iericho fell downe the ſeuenth day of the compaſſing thereof.
               Thus Samſon dieth with the Philiſtims, but in a moſt contrary and vnlike manner. For they dyed in riot, idolatrie, crueltie and impenitencie; but he in faith, and (as Stephen did) in calling vpon the name of the Lord. So let it Act. 7. 59. be well laid for, and looked to, that though wee muſt dye with the bad, yet Eccleſ. 3. 19. we may in no wiſe dye as they doe. And ſo the outward manner of death, though in paine, diſeaſe, and kinde of death, it bee one, and the ſame, to vs and them, (as the Wiſe man ſaith, to wit, As the foole dyeth, ſo dyeth the wiſe) yet all that can iudge will ſay, that wee muſt not meaſure the godlines and happy eſtate of men by outward things, though they fall out alike to both. And by this let vs beware, that we feare not death with the wicked, who ſay in token thereof, we muſt dye; but waite wee for it, ſaying: Come Lord Ieſus, come quickly, reioycing to thinke we ſhall dye.
               This is a priuiledge beſtowed vpon the faithfull, who prouide to dye in faith, (as the Author of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes ſaith of the Patriarkes, Heb. 11. 34. and among the reſt of Samſon) to wit, that God putteth a difference betwixt their death, and the death of other; though the world cannot diſcerne it in the generall and common abaſement of the body and fleſh; yet I deny not, but ſometimes this difference appeareth alſo euen in the manner of dying. For though ſome are ſo bereft of ſenſe and reaſon by the force of their diſeaſe, and others by Gods diſpoſing ſo of them, that euen the beſt are either much diſguiſed in their ſickneſſe, or at leaſt giue no great teſtimonie of that excellent grace which is in thē; yet in the grace they liued, therein they die: and vſually, and for the moſt part, it may be obſerued, that a well paſſed life Note.
                  
bringeth a good death, and oft times ſheweth plentifull and apparant ſignification Pſal. 37. 37. of confidence, comfort, and ſpirituall triumph in death, which it is impoſſible to finde in the other. Witneſſe hereof is the death of the Martyrs, (a thing at this day much ſticking in the ſtomacke of the Papiſts, if they would ſpeake the truth) compared with the deſperate or diffident death of their Ieſuites, and Seminaries. I inſtance in theſe, becauſe they arrogate moſt to themſelues in their ſufferings for the Catholike cauſe, as they call it. But as for other bad perſons, (except deeply deluded) wee ſhall behold in them manifeſt ſignes of diſtruſt, feare, impatience: and the beſt is, crying out of their dangerous eſtate. Therefore let this be a comfort to all ſuch as hold their purpoſe entire of cleauing to the Lord in beleeuing his promiſes, and obeying his will; that as their dying may differ from the vngodly, ſo they (in Gods account) ſhall differ, though their death differ not. A great ſtay to them againſt temptation to the contrary, and againſt the baſe and common condition of their bodies, and the diſhonour thereof, lying on their deathbed, laid by the walles, or in the graue. He that hath put firſt a difference between them and others, by faith purifying their hearts, and then by his precious account that hee maketh of them; ſhall eminently teſtifie that difference Pſal. 116. 15. after he hath raiſed them out of their vilenes and ignominie, and clothed them with incorruption and glorie.
               And laſtly, to make an end with Samſon, we haue ſeene in this ſtory, how 2 grieuouſly he fell, and withall, that he turned againe to the Lord, and called vpon him, and was heard. To gather the ſtory therfore into a ſhort ſumme, according to my vſuall maner of dealing in cōtinued hiſtories, let vs learne, that if at any time we haue ſinned againſt the Lord more willingly and wittingly, then by meere infirmity in our ordinary courſe of life we vſe to doe; (for Gods ſeruants, though they attaine not to that meaſure of grace in the ſeruice of God that they deſire, yet neither doe they oft or commonly goe againſt their knowledge, and ſmother it, but yet the diuell that layeth a ſnare for them, and lyeth in wait continually to catch them therein, may eaſily, and is like ſometime to finde them worſe prouided.) Here therefore if it fall out, that they be taken in ſuch a trippe, and outſtraying, and met withall by God in purſuing them; let them not lie ſtill, as the horſe in the mire, as making light of their ſinne, and putting the due conſideration of it farre from them; but as ſoone as they can, labour they to come to themſelues againe; and conſider ſeriouſly from whence they are fallen, & how it is with them in that eſtate, and how they are eſtranged from God, and giue no reſt to themſelues, till with the prodigall ſonne they reſolue with broken hearts to goe againe to their father who is their refuge, and ſay: We haue ſinned, receiue vs graciouſly: and ſo God, who offereth to raiſe vp ſuch as are fallen, will, with the father of the prodigall, receiue and welcome them ioyfully. And ſo with Samſon, and others, who haue ſlidden as he did, let them renue their couenant more ſtrongly with the Lord, that it may hold firme for the time to come, euen to death, as his did, againſt all ſinne, and eſpecially that which hath foiled them moſt, leſt it returne back more ſtrongly vpon them, as waters which were ill ſtopped. And laſtly, let them returne againe humbly and penitently for mercie, and it ſhall be, according to their faith, granted them. But I trow, they are moſt happie, who feeling and finding how

ſweete the Lord is, and how gainfull his ſeruice is, will prouide, as they are taught, to abide conſtantly in his loue, as hee willeth them to doe, not putting Ioh. 15. 11. the matter vpon a venture, nor vrging the Lord to ſuch a ſharp manner of diſcipline, through their boldneſſe, as this of Samſon was; all this (I ſay) they will doe and that gladly alſo, except they long for woe, and ſtand vpon thornes till they haue brought ſorrow vpon themſelues, and doubled at leaſt their owne labour, and trouble in recouering their welfare againe.
               By this verſe it appeareth, that at this ſtrange ſpectacle of the caſting Verſ. 
                        •
                     1. downe the houſe vpon the Philiſtims and their Princes, the reſt of them were ſo amazed, that they ſuffered the kinſmen of Samſon to come thither and carrie him backe againe vnto their land and inheritance, and to burie him there. Which if they had conſidered aduiſedly, they would haue taken them and the reſt, being vnder their power, and haue put them to the moſt cruell death; as the Gibeonites deſired of Dauid certaine of the kindred of 2. Sam. 21. 5, 6. 
                  Saul to be hanged vp to reuenge themſelues on him, (on Saul I meane) who ſlew ſundrie of them, contrary to the league that Ioſhua made with them, Ioſh 9. 23. which was, that they ſhould not dye, but cut wood and draw water for the ſeruice of the Tabernacle.
               Thus wee ſee God ſometimes appalles the wicked, ſo as his people may fare the better by it; as by caſting them to the ground who ſought Chriſt Ioh. 18. 6. to take him, wee ſee hee might eaſily haue eſcaped their hands, if he would, and that he had ſeene it expedient. And euen ſo, by their feares, or multitude of buſineſſe, as alſo many other waies, the Lord putteth his hooke in the noſtrils of the wicked, ſo that they deſiſt and leaue off from moleſting and vexing his faithfull ſeruants, though it be ſore againſt their will: euen as Saul was called away from purſuing Dauid, when he was in great danger. 1. Sam. 23. 2. But if the Lord ſhould reuenge their wrongs vpon their aduerſaries, as hee ſeeth it not alwaies expedient to do, he ſhould make a riddance of the wicked from the earth, and ſo the innocent and righteous ſhould not haue their faith and patience tried by them, as hee hath appointed them to be. But ſeeing he is patient toward them, therefore they ſhould be much afraid to goe on in their cruell courſe againſt them, as wee ſee the Prieſts by the counſell of Gamaliel, thought good, and ſaw cauſe to be ruled by him in letting Acts 5. 35. 40. the Apoſtles goe, who had before intended moſt cruelly againſt them; what was it, that hindred them from their purpoſe, but this, that they feared that the Lord would haue reſiſted them, who (indeed) ſo terrified them, that hee conſtrained them to let them alone. Thus as well as by the death of ſome that are maliciouſly minded againſt the faithfull; other of their companie are ſo aſtoniſhed and appalled, that they deſiſt from their wicked attempts, and are in ſuch feare, that for the time they cannot tell what they may doe. Thus (to conclude) God eaſeth the ſhoulders of his ſeruants many waies, as wee ſee, of the burthens that oppreſſed them, and many other waies, that cannot be expreſſed, and not in the leaſt manner by taking their oppreſſors away in the middeſt of their floriſhing and crueltie, that wee may ſee he knoweth how to deliuer his, and ſheweth accordingly in due ſeaſon, that he doth not forget them; and all to this end, that they may not faint from their good beginnings, nor be diſcouraged in any good courſe, but hold it alwaies beſt to depend vpō him, as Iſrael by Pharaos drowning, Exod 14. 28.
                  
and Shuſhan and the Prouinces by Hamans abaſement, with the like, found Eſter 8. 17. it. And though in ſome hot and fierie trials this be hard for the faithfull to go vnder, yet after they haue borne the brunt, they would not for any good Note. haue done otherwiſe. But of the ſundrie waies whereby God vſeth to ſuccour his, and ioynt their enemies, I haue in another place diſcourſed at large. Therefore thus much be ſaid of this point, and of the whole hiſtory of Samſon.
               
            
            
               THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER.
               
                  Verſ. 1. And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whoſe name was Micah.
                  
                  2. And he ſaid vnto his mother, The eleuen hundred ſhekels of ſiluer that were taken from thee, about which thou curſedſt, and ſpakeſt of alſo in mine eares, Behold, the ſiluer is with me, I tooke it. And his mother ſaid, Bleſſed bee thou of the Lord, my ſonne.
                  
                  3. And when he had reſtored the eleuen hundred ſhekels of ſiluer to his mother, his mother ſaid, I haue wholly dedicated the ſiluer vnto the Lord, from my hand, for my ſonne, to make a grauen Image, and a molten Image: now therefore I will reſtore it vnto thee.
                  
                  4. Yet herestored the money vnto his mother, and his mother tooke two hundred ſhekels of ſiluer, and gaue it to the founder, who made thereof a grauen Image, and a molten Image, and they were in the houſe of Micah.
                  
                  5. And the man Micah had an houſe of gods, and made an Ephod and Teraphim, and conſecrated one of his ſonnes: who became his Priest.
                  
                  6. In thoſe daies there was no King in Iſrael, but euery man did that which was right in his owne eyes.
                  
               
               IN this Chapter, before I enter into the handling of it, as I vſe to do in the other, I muſt ſtay a while, and ſay ſomthing for the ſatisfying of the reader; and that not onely about this Chapter, but alſo all the other that follow to the end of the booke. That which I meane, is this: Whereas it may The acts mentioned in theſe fiue next Chapters, follow not the former in order of time. be, by the ignorant, thought, that the things mentioned in theſe fiue Chapters following were done in order of time, after thoſe things which goe before; I finde by conference of Scriptures that they were not, neither can it be that they ſhould. But it appeareth that the acts ſet downe in them, were done long before. And becauſe it may ſeeme ſtrange which I ſay, I neither will nor dare affirme it barely becauſe any other man ſaith ſo, but I will ſhew my reaſons out of the Scripture.
               I affirme therfore, that the things that are ſaid to haue been done in theſe Chapters following, were done before the times of any of the Iudges, or at the leaſt at the end, and after the death of Othniel, mentioned in the firſt Chapter, or in that vacation of thoſe eighteene yeeres vnder Eglon, while there was no Iudge in Iſrael. And they may not inconueniently bee reckoned to the ſecond Chapter, and the eleuenth verſe, and thoſe that follow it, which doe mention the horrible wickedneſſe of the people of Iſrael after Ioſhua was dead, and the chiefe rulers who ouerliued him. My reaſons that theſe things were done before the times of the Iudges, or thereabout, are theſe.
               
                  
The firſt is, that it is ſaid in the next Chapter, that the Tribe of Dan, being 
                     Reaſon 1. a populous tribe, did inlarge their borders at that time, which (if it ſhould be vnderſtood to follow the ſtorie of Samſon in the former Chapter, a reckoning being duly made, muſt be full three hundred yeeres from the diuiſion of the land. Againſt the which therefore (as nothing like to be ſo) that in the 19. of Ioſhua is oppoſed, where it is ſaid, as here it is, that the border of the Ioſh. 19. 47. children of Dan was at that time leſſe then ſufficed: therefore the children of Dan went vp and fought againſt Laiſh, euen then; and taking it, ſmote it with the edge of the ſword, and enioyed it for their inheritance, and dwelt in it. So that if they of Dan then tooke it, it followeth that the ſtory in the next Chapter, where they are ſaid then to haue taken it, is to bee referred to that time mentioned in Ioſhua 19. which was three hundred yeeres before, and not to the time following immediatly after Samſon, according to the order of the Chapter as it is ſet. And this is my firſt reaſon why theſe fiue Chapters follow not the order of time, as they be placed.
               Another reaſon why theſe Chapters cannot bee vnderſtood to bee ſet 2 downe according to the order wherein they ſtand, and the time in which they are thought to haue been done, to wit, immediately after Samſon, but are to bee referred to the former times, that were three hundred yeeres before: another reaſon for it, I ſay, is this; that Ionathan the Leuite, mentioned in theſe two Chapters, is ſaid to haue been the nephew of Manaſſeh the ſon Iudg. 18. 30. of Moſes, and the ſonne of Gerſhom nephew to Moſes, who were dead well nigh three hundred yeeres before the death of Samſon, and therefore vnlike, or rather impoſſible that he ſhould liue after Samſon.
               
               Thirdly, whereas the acts of theſe fiue Chapters followed one another 3 at the ſame time, it is manifeſt that at the war of the Beniamites, chapter 20. Iudg. 20. 28. 
                  Phineas the ſonne of Eliazar the ſonne of Aaron miniſtred before the Lord at that time, and asked counſell of him, if they ſhould go againſt Beniamin to warre. And the ſame Phineas aboue three hundred yeeres before the death of Samſon, appeaſed the wrath of God by thruſting through Zimri and Coſby 
                  Numb. 25. 8. in their tent, while the people of Iſrael were on the other ſide Iordan, and were not as yet come into the land of Canaan. Therefore the acts mentioned to haue been done in theſe fiue Chapters, could not bee done after the death of Samſon, as they by their placing may be thought to haue been; but long before: vnleſſe we grant that Phineas and the reſt, as Ionathan, and the Danites that went to Laiſh, liued three hundred and more yeeres, which none then did: for three or foure generations before that, in Moſes time, the Pſal. 90. 10. daies of a man were reckoned but threeſcore yeeres and ten, or foureſcore at the moſt, to ſpeake of, and thoſe alſo with paine and wearineſſe.
               To theſe may this be added, that the Citie Ieruſalem, then called Iebus, 4 part whereof fell to the Beniamites, at the peoples firſt comming into the land of promiſe, and part of it was in the hands of Iudah: this Iebus was now ſaid to be poſſeſſed of the Iebuſites, in the 19. Chapter. Now that Iudg. 19. 10 which was giuen to Beniamin three hundred yeeres before, and enioyed of them. Ioſh. 18. being taken from the Iebuſites, could it be in the poſſeſſion of Ioſh. 18. 28. the Iebuſites ſo long after, being driuen out ſo long before? And though Ioſh. 15. 63. they were not wholly expelled, (as Ioſh 15.) yet part of them was, Iudg. 1. And the men of Iudah who tooke it, ſlew the inhabitants with the edge of Iudg 1. 8.
                  
the ſword, and burnt the City with fire. The other part of it was, as I ſaid, pertaining to Beniamin; and though ſome remained to the time of Dauid, yet they enioyed not the City, though they could not bee wholly caſt out; but were onely in holds, as may be ſeene, 2. Sam. 5. Therefore that which 2. Sam. 5. 6. is ſaid of Iebus in the next Chapter, that it was called the City of the Iebuſites, is not to bee vnderſtood to haue been ſo called now after the death of Samſon, but three hundred yeeres before, when it was not yet giuen to Beniamin, nor taken by Iudah.
               
               I ſay therfore, that in this and the other 4. Chapters following, is ſhewed that the Common-wealth of the Iſraelites was moſt corrupt both in religion and manners, after the death of Ioſhua, and the other good rulers that ouerliued him: for in a ſhort time after, by little and little, another generation aroſe, which knew not the Lord, and the whole tribes fell to Idolatry, and horrible wickedneſſe, of both which an example is ſet downe here; one Iudg. 2. 10. of their Idolatry in the 17. and 18. Chapters; and another of the monſtrous life that was then in vſe among them, which is ſet downe in the other three Chapters following.
               This being ſaid of the time when the acts of this and the Chapters following The ſumme of the Chapter. were done: I proceed now after the manner that I vſe in the former Chapters, to ſet downe the ſumme and parts of this. The ſumme of it is this: That a woman, mother to one Micah in this Chapter mentioned, loſt a good ſumme of money, (as it might be, about an hundred poudd after our reckoning) which her ſonne Micah had ſtollen from her. This money when he (hearing how ſhee curſed for the loſſe of it) had reſtored to her againe, ſhe beſtowed it vpon idolatrous vſes. For ſhe procured a molten and grauen Image to be made with part of it; and her ſonne made other Images and ornaments for them both, of the reſt of it, and hired a Leuite for the better furniſhing and ſetting out of the matter, to be in his houſe, as his Prieſt with him. The parts of the Chapter are two: the one, concerning the Idolatry The parts, two. of the woman and her ſonne, vnto the 17. verſe: the ſecond, how Micah hired himſelfe a Prieſt for the purpoſe, to the end of the Chapter. And by this example we ſee how Idolatrie in thoſe bad times was firſt brought into a priuate familie, which after ſpread into a whole tribe.
               
                  The firſt part of the Chapter.
                  IN the firſt part, we are to conſider of the woman, in the ſixe former verſes. 
                        The ſumme of the 4 firſt verſes.
                      And here firſt of the things which are ſpoken of her before her Idolatry, as they are laid out in the text. Where (after that ſhe is ſaid to bee the mother of this Micah, a man of mount Ephraim) it is added, that certaine money which ſhe had vowed to the Lord, was ſtollen from her by her ſon: whereat ſhee curſed the theefe, not knowing who hee was that had taken it away. And when he confeſſed his fault, and that he had it, ſhee bleſſed him: who reſtoring it to her againe, ſhee anſwered him, that ſhee had vowed it to the Lord for his vſe, and therefore bad him take it againe. So ſhee tooke two hundred ſhekels therof, to make a molten Image of it, and put it in the houſe of Micah: and (as it may be gathered by her owne words) added the reſt to other like apurtenances thereunto.
                  
                     
Many things offer themſelues to vs heere worthie the noting. And firſt Doct. ver. 1. & 2 this: that this Micahs mother had of her ſuperfluitie and great wealth, wel nigh an hundred pound to vow to ſuperſtition and idolatrie, (for ſo it appeareth) and that they were both very wealthie, in as much as hee was able to make, maintaine, and furniſh an houſe or chappell of Images, (not of the meaneſt mettall) and to adorne them, and ſhe to increaſe them. This ſheweth, that howſeuer many want and are in great need, (whoſe penurie ſhould be relieued with the ſuperfluitie of others) yet in the meane while there are, who haue more then they can tell well how to beſtow or imploy. But alas, they haue no heart to doe good with it, eſpecially to others, neither wil 1. Cor. 16. 2 be taught to lay aſide, as God bleſſeth them, to good vſes and ends: nor to themſelues to doe the beſt good, namely, that they may bring foorth much fruite, that ſo their ſoules may fare well. Yet this was not the fault of theſe Ioh. 15. 9. two, that they had no heart to lay it out, for that they were ready enough to doe, but they did it amiſſe, and to idolatrous vſes. For though they thought they did well imploy it, yet they were ſuperſtitiouſly and blindly led to that which they did. And as it was the ſinne of theſe, that their zeale was carried amiſſe, through want of knowledge, (which yet excuſeth them not, ſeeing they were the poſteritie of the viſible Church, and in likelihood themſelues lately of it) ſo others, whoſe knowledge is greater, offend in their kind as groſſely. For, either they cannot depart from it at all and forgoe it, I meane, any portion of their ſuperfluitie, (which is one extremitie) or they laſh it out vnlawfully vpon their luſts, either in voluptuouſnes, as adulterie, drunkenneſſe, and ſuch like, which is another and more dangerous extremitie: and to one of theſe, though not all in a like meaſure, tend the moſt mens vſing of their goods. Few aime at the beſt manner of diſpoſing them. If they did, God hath giuen enough; that as it was in gathering the Manna, he that Exod. 16. 18. gathered leſſe then a homer, wanted not, and that hee who gathered more, had nothing ouer: So for the condition of euery man, God hath giuen ſufficient: yea, and for the ſin of men, cauſeth the ſea to drowne much wealth, and much to be loſt on the land; as if he would haue vs thereby take knowledge, that he had rather it ſhould be loſt, where only it doth no good, then Note. to be in the hands of wicked men, where it ſhould doe much euill and hurt. Therefore let vs bee ready to imploy our goods to the comforting of other euer way, and ſo, as we alſo may haue all poſſible good, by the well vſing of them. But a fitter place for the purſuit of this point, will be that which is ſaid after in the third verſe.
                  Now it is ſaid, that all this money, while ſhe had it in her poſſeſſion, was ſtollen from her. Nothing is ſaid of the manner of this fact, but barely and ſimply it is ſet downe that it was ſo. To teach vs, among other things, how fickle and vncertaine the hauing and enioying of worldly goods is, and how ſoone they be loſt, and how many waies, (for who ſuſpecteth his owne children) they being one mans today, and another mans tomorrow. As Benhadad ſaid to Ahab by his ſeruant, Thy ſiluer and gold is mine: and a very 1. King 20. 31 32 little while after, all that Benhadad had, and he himſelf was at Ahabs pleaſure, and he was driuen to begge his life of him. Thus it hath bin with good and bad in all ages. Which yet I ſay not, as though wee ſhould ſet all at ſixe and ſeuen, and not labour for commodities, (for God hath commanded vs ſo to

doe) and make ſmall account of Gods goodneſſe in giuing theſe earthly benefits vnto vs, (for they are his great bleſſings for ſingular vſes) and wee are commanded to be occupied in our callings for the obtaining neceſſaries for Epheſ. 4. 28. our life thereby.
                  But to ſuch changes hath God made the condition of earthly ſubſtance ſubiect, that we may learne not to truſt in vncertaine riches, (as we are moſt 1. Tim. 6. 17. prone and ready to doe) but in the liuing God, that we may liue with him; and that we indanger not our ſelues by wronging or offering violence to any for comming by them, which are ſo ſoone loſt; but doe good with them rather, and be rich in good workes, and not follow the example of the wicked world, who commit all miſchiefe to get them, and in vſing them. Therfore our Sauiour chargeth vs, ſaying: Lay not vp treaſure for your ſelues vpon earth, where the ruſt and moth doth corrupt, and where theeues breake through and 
                     Matth. 6. 19. 
                     ſteale: but lay vp your treaſure in heauen. We haue ſaid enough of the ficklenes of outward things, by one occaſion or other, in the moſt of the former chapters.
                  Her money was ſtollen by her owne ſonne. For many children make a light matter of ſtealing and plucking from their parents, as though it were 3 their own, euen while their parents liue. But ſuch make no conſcience, who dare ſo doe, to defraud their parents. This aggrauated Micha his ſin in that he robbed his owne mother, who yet of himſelfe was rich, and needed not to fall to ſuch practiſes, and ſhe was in houſe with him, and (as it is moſt like) they vſed all things in common together, and at leaſt the money was like to fall to him for his ſhare: and yet all this notwithſtanding, behold his ſin, that he could not forbeare, but that he muſt needs put his hand to it before the time. This ſheweth ſin to be out of meaſure ſinfull, in that they who commit it (ſetting aſide a lewd & wanton humour, and an heart ſo full of naughtineſſe, that it muſt haue vent ſome way) oft times haue no more need to do it, then to put their hand in the beares mouth. Of this ſort are the waily, idle, and needleſſe oathes and ſpeeches of ſome, the medlings of buſie bodies in other mens matters, and (that which is more dangerous) in things that are too high for them; alſo the ſtealings of rich men; as this Micha was: with Note. the whoredomes of married perſons, and thoſe lyes which we call ieſting lyes for pleaſure ſake, and the drunkenneſſe of ſuch with their lewd companions abroad, who yet may be well and with ſufficiencie ſatisfied at home, with an hundred more of like ſort.
                  Though al ſin be vile & odious, (for no ſin is neceſſary becauſe ſome are needleſſe) yet to be ſure, he that ſinneth, when he hath no need, and therefore wanteth excuſe euen to God and man, as he that committeth adultery, or the like, to be ſure (I ſay) he troubleth and deſtroyeth his owne ſoule. Remember how Nathan inlargeth the ſin of Dauid by this circumſtance, that 2. Sam. 12. 8. he hauing many wiues, robbed his poore neighbour of his onely wife, and killed her husband alſo, for the better concealement of his adulterie. And this was ſo inexcuſable euen in the cenſure of the offender himſelfe, that he abhorred it, and condemned it moſt deeply: and therefore thinke not that God will take ſuch by the hand. Beſides, this teacheth parents to traine vp their children religiouſly, and to diſgrace and make odious all ſin to them, as well as to follow them with other inſtruction, and good example; that

lying, ſwearing, ſtealing, and the like, may, through Gods bleſſing, bee farre from them; which, with ſuch other like ſinnes, will eaſily and ſoone faſten vpon them, vnleſſe by good education they be weaned from them: as ſhall appeare in the next point ſaue one more cleerely.
                  Now in that he being an Idolater, was alſo a great theefe, we may note, 4 that they who dare fall to Idolatrie and falſe worſhipping of God, are not to be truſted in duties doing to men. So Abraham ſaid to the King of Gerar, Gen. 20. 11. of all, as well as Idolaters, that where the feare of God is not, there is ſmal likelihod that the feare of man will preuaile: and ſo hee will ſay, that doth rightly conſider it. For howſoeuer a deceiuer may for a time, and while he is not greatly prouoked, neither hath any occaſion offered him, or is held in by ſtrong outward bridles or inducements from outrage, may (I ſay) ſhew good example among men, and walke without offence toward them; yet when he ſhall ſee his time, he will ſhew what he is, as wee ſee in ſeruants, in children, in friends betruſted with great matters, bewraying at length an vnfaithfull heart: and the reaſon is great: they are falſe to God, and what man then ſhall looke for any better at their hands? euen as the holy Ghoſt Luke 18. 2. ſaith of the Iudge, that hee neither feared God, nor reuerenced man. And much the rather is this true in Idolaters; ſeeing that euen he who is of ſound religion, as I haue ſaid, yet if his heart be not vpright, may poſſibly bee a deceiuer.
                  Among other vſes of this point, this is one, and not the leaſt that we pray for ſuch as are in authoritie, that they may religiouſly prouide, that their people may feare God, (at leaſt want no ordinary meanes that may draw them thereunto) and therefrom be conſcionably carried to obedience outwardly towards men. Seeing the moſt forcible meane to containe men within compaſſe, is the feare of him, who can caſt body and ſoule into hell, Matth. 10. 28. rather then him who can but deſtroy the body. Beſides, that nothing is ſecret to God, before whom all things are naked and manifeſt. Whereas the ſeuereſt Magiſtrate can proceed no further then by witneſſes, himſelfe not being priuie to the conſcience or fact of the offender. But of this elſewhere. Concerning Idolaters in particular, euen the deuout and eſpecially Papiſts, this preſident of Micah is ſufficient to ſtop the mouthes both of them, and of their abettors, who iuſtifie their innocencie and good behauiour towards men. Whereof there were more cauſe and colour, if the rotten hollowneſſe of their hearts brake not foorth into hideous and horrible vnrighteouſnes, as vncleannes, crueltie, murthers, treaſons, lyings vnder the maske of ambigious ſpeeches, and moſt ſlanderous defamations not of meane perſons, but of Princes, and their gouernment, beſides periuries, breaches of league and promiſe with many more, and ſome of them maintained by them in Schooles, as well as practiſed. The deuouteſt of them are the leaſt euill perſons, but the reſt are little better in their iudgements then in their practiſe, euen Atheiſticall and damnable in both. For who ſeeth not, but that the late monſters of opinions and poſitions which they haue broched, flow from no other fountaine, but a reſolute and malicious purpoſe to ſerue their owne turnes, and hold vp their tottering kingdome, though with the ruine and ouerthrow of all their oppoſites? So deſtitute they are of all ground of Scripture or ſound reaſon.
                  
                     
Theſe eleuen hundred ſhekels, when hee heard his mother curſe for the 
                        Doct. 5. loſſe of them, he confeſſeth he had them: but leſt ye ſhould think, that confeſſion went with any ſound repentance, yee may ſee him bewray the contrary. For as though he had been aſhamed to be taken for a theefe, (whereas the penitent theefe, like him, in the Goſpell, did freely acknowledge it, and Luke 23 40. 41. to the full teſtifie, that he was out of loue with the ſinne) hee here exten uateth his ſinne, ſaying: The ſhekels which were taken from thee, it was I that tooke them: but ye muſt marke that he ſaith, he did but take them, but not ſteale them; which extenuating of the fact, was farre from one that repented: let it be a warning to vs, that we make not light of ſinne, for then wee will fall to commit it; neither confeſſe wee it ſlightly, for then wee will returne to it againe. He that meanes to turne vtterly from it, will with Daniel in the ninth Chapter, aggrauate and deface it, and with the people in Samuels 
                     Dan. 9. 5. time, make his ſpeciall ſinne which hee is guiltie of, and confeſſeth; hee will, I ſay, make it more odious, then all his other ſinnes: ſo did they ſay to the Lord, Forgiue vs our ſinnes, eſpecially this that we asked for our ſelues 1. Sam. 12. 19. a King. But of this, to wit, the danger of extenuating ſinne, and the nature of true repentance, I haue diſtinctly ſpoken in other places.
               
            
         
         
            THE NINETIETH SERMON ON THE XVII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
            
               NOw to proceede with Micah and his mother, this is further 
                  Doct. 6. to be marked in him her ſonne, that when he ſaw his mother ſo troubled for the loſſe of the money, and heard her curſe for it, hee did not ſuffer her to lye ſtill in that eſtate, but made haſte to quiet her, by telling her that he had it. Which I note of him, though a bad man, to the iuſt condemning of thoſe, who ſeeke to vexe their parents, and to doe that which they know will grieue them at the heart, when yet they can doe otherwiſe. If ye aske how: I anſwere, beſides many wilfull parts played by them otherwaies, they doe it by their irreligious, prophane, and vnthriftie courſe, in ſpending their goods waſtfully and riotouſly: whereas not onely children ſhould not grieue their parents, but neither one neighbour or ſtranger ſhould vexe or diſquiet another. But all ſhould procure the peace and welfare of other, and not ſeeke to vex them, which a man would Note. thinke were a goodly ſight to behold, and that becauſe God is bountifull and rich in mercie toward vs, who haue ten thouſand times more prouoked him to reuenge, then the worſt enemie we haue hath proked vs. And therefore cruell and rigorous are they, who are ſo hard hearted that they can reioyce in other mens harmes, & laugh at the ſhrewd turnes that befall them,

(prouoking thereby the like to be done to themſelues) ſo farre is it off, that they either pitie or ſeeke to reſcue them in their oppreſſions.
            Further he ſaith, that when his mother miſſed the money, ſhe curſed. By 
                  Doct. 7. curſing ſo, ſhe might meane as well her hard happe, (as ſuch count it) as well as him that had ſtollen it. Both ſhe might doe: but whether of both ſoeuer it was, vnſauourie and vngodly it was. And yet hearing newes of it againe by her ſonnes confeſſion, ſhe is in another extremitie, and bleſſeth him, as faſt as ſhe curſed before. Theſe diſtinct points let vs a little conſider of, ere we goe from this verſe. And for the firſt of theſe, wee ſee in this woman, as in a glaſſe, the curſed nature that is in moſt people, (except corrected by grace) that when any thing croſſeth them, or befalles them otherwiſe Note. then they would, it driues God out of remembrance and the conſideration of his prouidence, or of their owne iuſt deſert which hath brought it vpon them, and ſo they let paſſe their dutie, which in ſuch accidents God calles them to practiſe. That which is preſenteſt with vs, is wrath and reuenge; which ſeeing we cannot haue to the full vpon the ſuppoſed wronger of vs, therefore that toole which is readieſt we draw; euen a venomed arrow out of the quiuer of a poyſoned heart, curſing, banning, and ſwearing and ſuch like. Not that men content themſelues with this, (ſaue onely to vent the ſome of their wicked hearts preſently, which elſe they thinke would burſt) for when they come neerer the partie, they will requite him ten for one, & hit him home to purpoſe, as the Philiſtims did Samſon. But till this come, they will bee doing with the other. And the greateſt impotencie men bewray in this kinde, when the caſualtie is ſuch as they ſee not how they can redreſſe it, but it muſt bee ſtood too howſoeuer. Thus did the laylor, when Act. 16. 27. his priſoners were fled. Thus men doe when their goods are impaired by ill debtors, ſuertiſhip, coſonage, ill bargaines, robberie, nay euen when Gods more immediate hand croſſeth them, as in trauell by ſea or land, in their harueſts and commodities, by vnſeaſonable weather, bad ſucceſſe or the Note. like. And then they let the arrow flye, light where it will, ſometimes vpon God himſelfe, (for he that curſeth his lot, curſeth God, and if he were within his reach, he would ſurely challenge him) and ſometimes vpon men, nay ſometimes vpon the ſenſeleſſe creature it ſelfe wherein they are croſſed, or which croſſeth them, by the ſide wherof, they wound God himſelfe. Wheras Iob ſpake not fooliſhly, neither charged God in al the euil that befell him. Iob 1 23. And Dauid looked vp to God, when all Ziglag was deſtroyed by enemies, 2. Sam. 16. 10. and in Shemies groſſe abuſing and wronging him. Let ſuch behauiour therefore be farre from vs, being fitter for Heathens or Idolaters.
            But beſides this, we ſee, that it is a very bad thing for parents and gouernours to ſhew ill example any way by curſing, ſwearing, or any like in the preſence of children or other. For that greatly aggrauateth the ſinne that was too odious of it ſelfe, though done of them in ſecret. As all open ſinnes are more dangerous then couert faults, becauſe of the extenſion, and offenſiue example; ſo no examples ſo noyſome as the ſin of parents before their children. No example is ſo forcible to draw, both becauſe nature helpeth the conueiance, and beſides, cauſeth the childe to thinke it becommeth him to reſemble his parents, and beſides it giueth hope of impunitie. And yet this is the trade and way which moſt teach their children in their youth, to

the end they may be ripe and maſters thereof in their age. For though ſinne oft doe runne in a wicked blood, (as I haue ſaid before, chap. 12. 1.) yet by daily practiſe and obſeruation children are more rooted in their parents vices by imitation. The like (if not worſe) is the breaking out of husbands before their wiues, Maſters before their ſeruants, Magiſtrates or Miniſters before their ſubiects and people: theſe examples deſcend and ſoke into the inferiours farre more deeply and infecteouſly, (I ſay not then good examples doe profitably) but more then from equals or meaner perſons. Hereof a ſhew was that of Lameg, raging and playing the mad man before his two Gen. 4. 23. 24. wiues. How ſhamefull alſo was it for Saul to ſhew ſuch wrath and reuenge in the preſence of Ionathan? For a parent to lye, raile, ſweare in the hearing 1. Sam. 19. 1. 11. & 1. Sam. 20. 30. 33. of his children? Nay to patronage ſuch ſinnes in their preſence, as ſome will tell their young ones, if they thought they would proue preciſe ſeruers of God, they would neuer giue them penny: what is this, but to ſpurre them to that which the ſtrongeſt bridle can hardly keep them from? It is as goodly a ſight, as Noahs vncouering himſelfe before his children. Oh Gen. 9. 21. men thinke, their children can ſpie nothing amiſſe in them, they may ſin by authoritie, and ſhall they ſtand in awe of their children? No, ſtand in awe of God, and then your children ſhall ſee that in your godly ſpeech and behauiour, mixed with ſobrietie, that ſhall make them ſtand in ſuch awe of you, that they dare not diſguiſe themſelues before you, or behind your backes; which elſe no terror will driue them from, though ſeueritie may make them ſimper and diſſemble in preſence. And this I adde, becauſe men thinke to binde beares, and will ſay, Though I doe ſo, or ſo, I will make my childe doe thus and otherwiſe.
            But to end theſe verſes with the other point, wee ſee by this what is the goodneſſe of thoſe who would bee taken for good people, but yet are not guided by God: Euen that which we ſee in this woman; and that is, curſing going with bleſſing: and ſo it is with the moſt; in taking their troubles, or vpon the newes and heareſay of any croſſe befalne them, they are readie to curſe; and when their humour is ſerued, and they pleaſed, then on the other ſide they bleſſe; ſo from one mouth commeth curſing and bleſſing, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, in ſuch the caſe being altered. If an affliction meete Iam. 3. 9. with them, they could finde in their heart to charge God for it; and if the contrary thing befall them, they can change themſelues into new colours, and as if they had not abuſed their lippes ſo foully, they fall to bleſſing of God: but they pleaſe him as much in ſo doing, as in the other; ſo that, as ſuch bleſſing with the tongue bringeth no bleſſing from God, ſo ſuch curſing falleth oft vpon themſelues and theirs, who ſticke not in their rage to wiſh and call for it vpon others, who ſhall bee free from the curſe that is cauſeleſſe, neither ſhall it come neere them. It is not to be wondred at, that men vnſetled and vnſauourie ſhould runne into ſuch extreames; for if their doings were laid before them, they would anſwere for themſelues without bluſhing, that they doe well herein. When we ſee ſweete ſeaſons (ſay they) and good harueſts, and all to our liking, what ſhould we do but bleſſe God, and be thankfull? Indeed when we cannot plough the ground, becauſe it is ſo ſteely with droughts, nor ſow by reaſon of immoderate wet, or when we ſee the corne and graſſe come to his perfection, then to be in hazard by

weather, who can beare it or behold the loſſe and deſtruction of the creatures without griefe? No, it is true, if there be no more then corrupt nature in thee, thou wilt finde ſome excuſe or other to ſalue thy curſed and vngodly doings withall. But if grace had once ſeaſoned thy heart, or purged old Adam in any meaſure out of thee, thou ſhouldeſt finde no ſuch diſtemper of affections, nor inconſtancie in thee, but preſently thou ſhouldeſt take thy ſelfe in the manner, and ſay; Oh what fountaine is this which ſendeth forth bitter and ſweete out of me? ſhall I receiue good things from Gods hand Note. and not euill? ſhall I ſerue him for aduantage? but if hee touch me, ſhall I then curſe him to his face? That which were groſſe to offer to a baſe man ſhall I offer to God, to count him my friend onely then when hee pleaſeth me, but if hee croſſe me neuer ſo little, then to count none ſo great an enemie? I abhorre ſuch dealing: If I did well in bleſſing him, I doe ſhamefully in the contrary, and my thankſgiuing is a ſtinking offering in Gods noſtrils, in ſtead of a ſweete ſauour: for God hateth a man of a double tongue, as well as a double heart, out of the which the tongue ſpeaketh. And if men would by ſuch qualities as theſe, learne to ſearch out the reſt, (for theſe goe not alone) and by all laid together, would giue iuſt iudgement vpon themſelues and trie their eſtate; they ſhould make good vſe of ſuch inſtructions. And to be ſure the lewd and prophane neuer heare any particular ſinne reproued, to purpoſe, till it driue them quite out of conceit with themſelues Act. 2. 37. for the ſuperfluitie of euill that lurketh in them, and the world of woe and deſolation which (without mercie obtained from God) it will at length bring vpon them.
            Now to proceede to the third verſe: The woman, when her ſonne had Verſ. 3, 4, 5, 6. reſtored the ſiluer, anſwereth him, that ſhe had dedicated it to the Lord, euen for her ſonne to make a molten and graued Image. And ſhe took part of it, and gaue it to the founder, and hee made ſuch an Image as ſhe deſired, and ſhe put it in the houſe of Micah. And he had a houſe of gods, and made with the reſt of the money all garments and ornaments fit for a Prieſt, ſignified by the Ephod, the vpper garment of the Prieſt, which was ye chiefe; and when all other things fit for Idolatrie were prouided, then he brought the Images, which are here called Teraphim, into the houſe of his gods, (as he called them) and made his ſonne his Prieſt. And whereas it might be ſaid, Was all this abomination done in Iſrael? how could that be? It is anſwered in the ſixth verſe, as the reaſon of all; there was then no ordinary Magiſtrate in the land to ſee good order, and put downe the contrary, and that was the cauſe.
            Whereas ſhe had dedicated the money to the Lord, all that heare what Doct. verſ 3. 4. ſhe ſaid, would thinke her meaning was, that ſhe had vowed it to the vſe of the Tabernacle, and ſeruice of God, which had been commendable in her; but ſhe did ſo dedicate it, to the making of an Image, not to the intent to worſhip falſe gods, but the true God, euen Iehouah, though in an vnlawfull manner. Whereby wee ſee two kindes of Idolatrie haue been, and are practiſed in the world: one, when a ſtrange god is worſhipped, or made for that end: another, when the true God is worſhipped therein, but not in ſuch manner as hee hath commanded, but by and in Images, or ſome other way that men haue inuented: and of this ſecond kinde was this womans ſinne.

So when an Image is made by any & ſet vp, to bring God to remembrance, we muſt vnderſtand, that although they doe it of deuotion, intending no other thing then to worſhippe him thereby, yet all ſuch doing of theirs is but meere ignorance, and ſuperſtition, and that which God doth vtterly abhorre.
            Such as that was of the children of Iſraels deuiſing, in making a Calfe to worſhippe, mentioned in Exodus; and ſuch as now is practiſed in Poperie, Exod 32. 4. who profeſſe when an Image is ſet vp before them, they pray not to it, but to God, whether it bee the Crucifix, or the picture of the Virgin Mary, (as they call it) or any other, neither worſhip they it, (if ye will beleeue them) they ſay, but they doe ſo, to put them in minde of their Sauiour, which is little better. But whatſoeuer they meane or intend in ſuch their doings, their worke is accepted of God, euen as this womans was; and that is, that he taketh and counteth it for Idolatrie. But let vs all, as well as Idolaters, beware that we offer not to God any ſeruice or ſacrifice, whereby we ſhould but mocke him, as Micahs mother did. Whether it bee will-worſhip which he neuer allowed, or done in hypocriſie, which he deteſteth, as well as Idolatrie moſt of all condemned: but let vs alwaies be guided by his word in the worſhip which we offer him.
            As ſhe had dedicated the whole ſumme of the money to the Lord, which 2 ſhe tooke againe of her ſonne, ſo accordingly ſhe put to the founder a part of it, to make a molten Image, and the reſt of the eleuen hundred ſhekels ſhe gaue backe to her ſonne for the like vſe, to wit, for the maintenance of his Idolatrie. The which doing of hers (ſeeing ſhe was ſo franke in beſtowing, and yet reaped no fruite of all her coſt) doth giue iuſt cauſe of wondring, and lamenting, that ſuch Idolaters as they were, and as they of our time be, can ſo readily laſh out their money vpon that for which they ſhall neuer be the better, (for in vaine doe all ſuch worſhip God) and yet many of vs are Eſay 55. 2. ſo ſlow and backward to lay out our money (that may bee well ſpared) to comfort the hearts of Gods people, and to other good vſes, when wee yet may reape and enioy moſt certaine yea and that vnſpeakable fruite thereof. I meane when we beleeuing that we are beloued of God, do ſhew this fruit of our loue and thankfull heart to him againe, that wee maintaine his true worſhip with our goods, and alſo pitie and incourage the true worſhippers of him, I meane his poore members, as he requireth, of which poore ſort he might haue made our ſelues to be. But oh, it grieueth me to ſpeake it, that for ſuch good vſes, to wit, for the refreſhing of Gods poore Saints, and the furthering of the true preaching of the Goſpel, men haue ſo ſmall deuotion, Iere 48. 10. that they thinke all too much that is beſtowed that way. But they ſhall receiue their reward accordingly: though they hold the truth in the letter, as long as they ſerue God negligently and pinchingly: whereas we haue learned of our Sauiour, that his heauenly father is not honoured of vs, (neither Ioh. 15. 9. then ſhall we of him be) except we bring foorth much fruite. And becauſe in the entrance vpon this chapter I referred the reader to this place, as a fit occaſion of vrging ſo important a dutie: therfore I will here adde ſomwhat to the former. This I ſay therefore: there is not that lauiſh expence and needleſſe laſhing out of mens money in ſome kinds through the land (God be thanked) which hath been, I meane in beſtowing much meate & drinke

vpon idle ones, and gameſters, and rogues; but wherfore is it ſpared, which was wont to bee ill ſpent? To clothe the poore naked members of Chriſt, thinke we? or to feed their hungrie bellies? to relieue either poore ſtudents in the Vniuerſitie, or Chriſtian poore and diſtreſſed ones in the countrey, or any other good way? This were a good change indeed, and a wiſe frugalitie, to ſpare from the wicked and vile vſes, to the making of friends that may receiue men into eternall habitations. No, no, but the Popiſh rout ſpareth for the maintenance of fugitiue Ieſuites and Seminaries, and the vpholding of the Popes kingdome: the other, that they may the better defray the great charge which the ſeruice of their luſts puts them to, I meane pride of life, the luſt of the couetous heart, and vncleane eye, all which neuer ſo ſwarmed in this land as at this day, and yet neuer ſo great and generall complaints, and penurie, nor ſo many and daily vſes of reliefe as now, in ſo great increaſe of pouertie, as the people is increaſed. Well, gorgeous apparell, royall feaſtings, coſtly pleaſures, great ſummes laid vp, and purchaſes made for the vſe of poſteritie, may preſently giue contentment to the fleſh; but Note. when the Lord ſhall call for a reckoning, theſe expences wil not be allowed, nor this account taken for currant, but a wofull backe reckoning ſhall bee exacted at the hands of theſe euill ſtewards, for ſuch waſting of their Maſters goods. And that pinching and niggardly contribution to Chriſts vſe, being laid with the huge ſummes that men beſtow vpon their luſts, ſhall be an inditement ſufficient againſt them, to their condemnation. Few there Matth. 25. 26. are alas, able to doe any thing to purpoſe towards the eaſing of the generall burthen: and therefore that among thoſe few, the moſt ſhould want an heart (as a wofull miſer confeſſed vpon his death-bed) oh how lamentable is it? Till better prouiſion be made by the Church, I grant tis no eaſie thing to be brought to paſſe (moſt men being ſo wedded to the penny) but in the meane time let vs know the law of God bindeth all his people, that as they are freed from Ceremoniall coſt in ſacrifices, Temple and the like, ſo the Lord Ieſus himſelfe hath ſubſtituted in their roome his poore members, vndertaking the payment of all which they take vpon his ſcore, to the infinite aduantage of their creditors. And this ſhould be enough to perſwade them that be not deſperatly couetous, to inlarge themſelues in mercie and loue to Chriſt, by comforting the bowels of the religious poore, except they will proclaime that if Chriſt himſelfe were preſent, they would ſuffer him to pine and ſtarue for any helpe he were like to haue from them, when yet they are well able to helpe. They that are rich in good workes, I wiſh them the true fruite of their practiſe, as I nothing doubt but they ſhall enioy it, euen mercie with God in time of need: And for other, ſeeing euery penny to good vſe commeth ſo hardly off with the moſt of them, I aduiſe them to take a better courſe with themſelues againſt their owne vncheerefulnes, by a ſolemne ſetting a part of ſomewhat, as the Apoſtle willeth, (according to 1. Cor. 162. their abilitie, or yeerely receits) when it commeth to hand, for the ſeuerall vſes, which by their owne obſeruation, or the information of others, they ſhall ſee to be moſt needfull to beſtow vpon.
            To conclude, let many of vs Proteſtants beware, that the bountie of many carnall or Idolatrous perſons, riſe not vp in iudgement againſt our niggardlines. They hauing nothing to ſet them on work, ſaue ciuilitie or blind

deuotion, are bountifull to others, and yet themſelues not a whit the betret for it. But we (though we pretend that wee haue obtained mercie at Gods hand, which ſhould ſet vs forward to ſhew mercie to others) are ſo ſhut vp in our ſelues, that if we may fare wel, little care we what becomes of others. Let vs amend, by being wiſe for our owne good, in ſhewing mercie, and that with cheerefulnes.
            But I proceed in this firſt part of the Chapter. When Micahs mother had Verſ. 4. 5. cauſed the Image to be grauen, and then couered it with ſiluer, ſhe put it in her ſonne his chappell or houſe of gods, (for he had ſuch a place, as we haue heard, where hee did his deuotion) and furniſhed it with ſuch manner of ſtuffe, as with Prieſts garments, the Ephod, and other ornaments; and there he put Teraphim, that is, Images which he made with the reſt of the money of his mothers. And that hee might want nothing for the purpoſe within his owne doores, he made his owne ſonne, who was neither of the order of Aaron, not yet of the tribe of Leui, (who onely might miniſter before the Lord) yet he made him his Prieſt rather then he would want one. And in deed the Prieſt was good enough for the ſeruice he was put to, both being abominable. In this mirror we may behold what confuſion was growne after the good gouernours Ioſhua and the reſt were dead. It may well bee ſaid in the ſecond chapter of this booke, verſe 10. that then another generation aroſe after them, who knew not the Lord, but ſerued Idols; in which times theſe curſed doings of Micah and his mother had place in all likelihood, as in the entrance of the chapter I haue declared.
            So that we ſee how it was there and then, when the people declined and turned away from the religion of their forefathers, and when the times grew to be corrupted, we ſee what ſhamefull examples there aroſe of ſuch things, as a little before could not haue been abidden; among whom this Micah is to be reckoned, who was alreadie come to be one that had brought ſtrange and falſe worſhippe into his houſe, and was fallen farre from Ioſhuas practiſe, who ſaid in his time, whatſoeuer other did, he and his houſe would ſerue the Lord. And let it teach vs (if we be wiſe) that if ſome good meanes faile among vs, diſorder will ſoone winde in, to our great diſcomfort. Wherby let vs be warned, we I ſay, who deſire to pleaſe God in the vprightnes of Note. our hearts, that while we haue the light, we walke in it: and that not onely we do ſo, while the light is among vs, and good examples remaine to incourage vs, but let vs then, euen before the times of danger come, ſtrengthen and vnder lay our ſelues in ſuch wiſe with reſolutions and purpoſes daily renued ſo to continue; that if declinings from good courſes ariſe among vs in our daies either in religion or manners, yet we may abide ſtedfaſt in both, and turne not aſide with the vnſtable and inconſtant multitude, and thoſe that degenerate, that ſo our old age, by a conſtant walking with God, may Note. be crowned with honour, as (no queſtion) it ſhall by ſo doing. Wee little know what may fall out to be done, yea euen of vs who intend againſt all euill, if the times grow corrupter, and wax worſe and worſe, except we make faire worke before hand by clinging cloſe vnder Gods fauour and gouernment.
            And although by Gods mercie wee are freed from the greateſt yoke of bondage, I meane Idolatrie; yet as they that touch pitch, cannot chuſe but

be defiled, ſo they who haue to doe, and conuerſe with the prophane and filthie ones of the world, where they may doe what they liſt, how can they keepe their garments vndefiled? I meane their liues vnſtained, and their conſciences pure and good? Wee haue too much proofe of that which I ſpeake, in our owne parts of the countrey, how many of good hope and forwardnes, haue by bad examples, yea and by their owne declinings in the middeſt of ſo many prouocations, been brought to be diſguiſed in their liues moſt ſhamefully: and yet I am certified, and I eaſily beleeue it, that there are farre worſe people in countries further off.
            But to goe forward, in that it is ſaid, that he being but a priuate man, had 2 yet an houſe of gods, and all furniture for the ſame, (of which point I ſpake in part before in the ſecond verſe) we may ſee in what baſe things men take their delight, to wit, in ſuch as doe not profit them, (as the Prophet Eſay 
               Eſay 55. 2. complaineth) yea and in ſuch as bring great hurt and annoiance vnto them. He complaineth in his time thus of the people: Wherefore do you lay out your ſiluer, and not for bread? and your labour without being ſatisfied? And what better may bee ſaid of the moſt in theſe times? but if they bee ſuch as profeſſe any religion, (the reſt are (I confeſſe) further off from God then they) how is their care and coſt beſtowed, with their labour and trauaile, but vpon the falſe worſhip of God? whether we regard the ſubſtance, it is with a great many Poperie, ſuperſtition, or ſuch like: or the manner of it, it is lip-labour, and hypocriſie. But ſuch ſeruing of God though hee abhorre it, agreeth well with their prophane humour, and croſſeth not their carnall corruptions. But for the varietie of good bookes, whereby they may doe themſelues much good in deede, how many rich men be at coſt, or take vp their delight that way, to furniſh their houſes with ſuch precious ornamēts, as Micah filled a chappell with Idols and all furniture for them? Is there not (thinke we) good incouragement giuen to ſtudents and Preachers, to ſet Note. foorth their godly labours, to be buried in the duſt, and couered with cobwebs, and to lie vnoccupied? But to leaue them, and to come to men of meaner eſtate, who cannot doe much that way, in being at coſt with good books; yet what pleaſure take they in keeping ſome conſtant courſe in ſeruing of God, by praier, recording ſuch good inſtructions as they haue heard in publike, or in reading good bookes of ſmaller price, which they may eaſily come by? No, no: theſe are weariſome and vnwelcome: and why ſo? euen to the end that they may trifle out their precious time, & ſo loſe their part in the happineſſe which is both promiſed by God, and preached.
            Furthermore by this that Micah and his mother, being both Idolaters, had trained vp his ſonne after the ſame manner, and more then ſo, had 3 committed another great ſinne, to wit, to make him Prieſt to ſerue in his houſe of Idols, contrary to Gods commandement in a double reſpect, wee may ſee the heauie eſtate of the children of Idolaters, and of ſuch as haue no acquaintance with God, whoſe lot is for the moſt part, to be trained vp (poore innocents) vnder ſuch as they are, which is a very deuoting them to the diuell. Whereas mens poſteritie ſhould bee through their many generations, conſecrated to God and his ſeruice, as Samuel was by his mother; 1. Sam. 1. 27. and Timothie was not only brought vp by his vertuous mother to know the Scriptures from a childe, but he had alſo his grandmother commended by 2. Tim. 1. 5.
               
               Paul for her religion. Whereas they who are Idolaters, or wicked in their life, depriue their children of their due, I meane godly education, and as much as in them lieth, corrupt and ſpoyle them betimes. To teach the children of religious parents, to count their portion great, when they ſee that by ſubmitting themſelues to the godly education of their parents, they in ſo doing ſubmit themſelues to God alſo, and pleaſe him in the ſame, wherein they pleaſe them. And for the other, they receiue their deadly wound by their bad bringing vp for the moſt part, obſeruing the ſuperſtitious precepts of their parents, as of Omry, or beholding their bad examples and abiding in their religion and ſteps, (for ſo they muſt doe, they ſay, yea and wil doe, as their fathers did) euen to the day of their death. Now touching this inormitie of making a common man a Prieſt, it was as monſtrous vnder the Law, as if in our time a man of occupation without gifts ſhould boldly take vpon him to diſcharge the Miniſters office. And the like corruption crept in when Ieroboam ſuffered euery baſe perſon to thruſt himſelfe 2. Chro. 13. 9. into office to ſerue at Dan and Bethel. Of which more God willing in the next verſes. In the meane while, note we that a baſe and ragged ſhift will ſerue mens turnes, for fault of a better, if they beſet to commit any ſin which is for their profit or pleaſure, or the ſatisfying of their corrupt affection. As in moſt ſinnes we ſee it verified, and ſuch patcherie well becommeth ſuch tradeſmen. If a man of worſhip be addicted to his pleaſure, riot, gaming, vncleannes, or the like, tis a baſe and vnſeemly companion that wil not ſerue the turne with him for a need, rather then the buſineſſe ſhould be hindred. And whereas this Micah hauing broken the maine Commandement which concerned the ſubſtance of Gods worſhip, made no bones of breaking the ſecondary law of Ceremonie, touching the qualitie of the perſon who was to miniſter: let it teach vs to beware how we pull out any maine ſtone of Gods building, leſt therewith wee pull it downe vpon our heads, and many ſmaller with it out of the building.
            The reaſon is added in this verſe, why ſuch ſtrange and groſſe abuſes Verſ. 6. grew vp ſo ſoone after good order in the daies of the good gouernours Ioſhua and the reſt: namely, for that now there were no ſuch in the daies of Micah, that is, no ordinary Magiſtrate, for ſo the word is taken, Gen. 36. and Gen. 36. 31. therefore euery one did what ſeemed good in his owne eyes. And this ſheweth (beſide that which I haue ſaid thereof) that it was an horrible part which that Micah and his mother wrought. Now this is that which this place doth doth cleerely ſhew vs, and giueth occaſion to be noted among other things, to wit, what confuſion groweth when good gouernours faile and are wanting: of which I haue ſpoke at large in the beginning of the peoples declining after the death of Ioſhua, in the ſecond and the Chapters following.
            But that which I will now ſay, is this, that although there bee Chriſtian Magiſtrates, yet except they execute the lawes carefully and conſcionably, defending the good, for which end they are ſet in place, and purſue the vngodly, Rom. 13. 1. without partialitie, it will be by the many foule inormities which may lie vnpuniſhed, that much iniquitie will ſwarme, though it cannot be compared to the hauing of none. And what the people will then doe, we may ſee here: that euery one doth that which liketh him, following his

owne minde and will. And what is more dangerous then ſo to do? Therfore howſoeuer it bee with others, our Sauiour hath taught vs to deny our Matth 7. 21. ſelues, to haue no fellowſhip with the vnfruitfull workes of darkneſſe, and to renounce our owne will and to be ſubiect to his; the obeying whereof Epheſ. 5. 11. is the direct way to happineſſe: for ſo hee teacheth, He that doth the will Luke 9. 23. of my father which is in heauen, he ſhall enter into the kingdom of heauen. Matth. 5. 22.
            
         
         
            
               THE NINETIE ONE SERMON ON THE XVII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOKE OF IVDGES.
               
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     Verſ. 7. And there was a young man out of Bethlehem Iuda, of the family of Iuda who was a Leuite, and he ſoiourned there.
                     
                     8. And the man departed out of the citie from Bethlehem Iuda, to ſoiourne where he could finde a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to the houſe of Micah, as he iourneyed.
                     
                     9. And Micah ſaid vnto him, Whence commeſt thou? And he ſaid vnto him, I am a Leuite of Bethlehem Iuda, and I goe to ſoiourne where I may finde a place.
                     
                     10. And Micah ſaid vnto him, Dwell with me, and be vnto me a father and a Prieſt, and I will giue thee ten ſhekels of ſiluer by the yeere, and a ſute of apparell, and thy victuals. So the Leuite went in.
                     
                     11. And the Leuite was content to dwell with the man, and the young man was vnto him as one of his ſonnes.
                     
                     12. And Micah conſecrated the Leuite, and the young man became his Prieſt, and was in the houſe of Micah.
                     
                     13. Then ſaid Micah, Now know I that the Lord will doe me good, ſeeing I haue a Leuite to my Prieſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     THis ſecond part of the Chapter ſheweth that this Micah 
                     The ſumme of theſe verſes. hauing brought that new and ſtrange worſhippe, namely Idolatrie into his houſe, ſo pleaſed himſelfe therein, that now wanting nothing to the ſetting of his new trade on worke but a worke man, I meane a Prieſt; now (I ſay) he tooke the opportunitie offered by a Leuite, who ſought a ſeruice, and takes and entertaines him. Before he was content (as we heard) with his ſon to ſerue for a Prieſt, though none might be by the law, but ſuch as came of Aaron: wherby we ſee, that the law of God is little regarded where men are ſet to haue their owne will. But now behold, accordingly as hee wiſhed, there is offered him a Leuite, as little to his commendation, which hee much better liking,

(as the taking of his ſonne before for that buſineſſe) and him he took, and therefore receiued him into his houſe, neuer examining him, nor prouing him by inquiring about him further, that he might well & throughly know his behauiour, but makes him his Prieſt forthwith, applauding himſelfe in his ſucceſſe, and reioycing not a little in his ſuppoſed well doing.
                  But firſt in theſe two verſes it is further ſhewed, how Micah got him a Verſ. 7. 8. Leuite to be his Prieſt in his ſonnes roome, and that was thus: This young man Ionathan, who is here deſcribed by the place where hee dwelt, and the familie he was of, and by his tribe, (for the Leuites were ſcattered, through all their tribes, in their dwellings) went about to ſeeke a place where hee might ſtay himſelfe, hee wanting maintenance, and (as it fell out) came in his trauell to this Micahs houſe, and by that meanes hee ſtaied and abode there. Where firſt wee may ſee another note of the badneſſe of the times which then were; in that the Leuites, which were appointed by God to ſerue in the Tabernacle, and were alſo prouided for by him of maintenance (of whom this man was one) they, I ſay, (many of them at leaſt) were now (as appeareth by him) left deſtitute of both. So this man had neither imployment, dwelling, nor maintenance, but went about to ſeeke them all.
                  By this we ſee, when it goes ill with the Magiſtracie, that it goes not hard Doct. verſ 7. with the Common-wealth onely, as wee haue ſeene in part, but with the Miniſtery alſo. For when there are either none, or when they be not carefull in their places to do the good they are ſet for, the Miniſterie which ſhould bring foorth many children to God, maketh his houſe but a barren family: for ſome are driuen to ſeeke a place, as this Leuite did, which is a very baſe and vnmeete thing, and vnfit for thoſe that are to ſerue God in ſo holy a calling: ſome come into their places by money, which cauſeth them to be leſſe regarded of the people, neither do the moſt of them any good among them: although they haue ſome gifts: and many of them are not able for want of fitneſſe, to direct the people aright, I meane ſoundly and plainly, vnto true happineſſe, and many are offenſiue by their ſcandalous life. In ſtead of all theſe, and many other abuſes, good gouernours will ſeeke for, and incourage thoſe that bee worthie onely or of good hope, and prouide that they may preach and attend on their charge with cheerefulnes; to the which end they are appointed by God, and ſee that they may not go about to ſeeke a place, as wandring perſons; whereas they who are beſt backed and incouraged, doe good little enough. And as the Church and Common-wealth are knit together as the ſoule and body into one, ſo that they (like enemies) laugh and weepe, fare ill and well together, as two in one ſhip either enioy ſafetie or miſcarrie alike; ſo ought they to conſent and accord ſweetly together, for the preſeruation of each other. The ſoule we ſee followes the temper of the body: and the body is as much affected with the diſtemper of the ſoule, neither of both well; if either be out of frame. And it is as true, that ſeldome that Common-wealth is happy, wherein the Church and Miniſterie hangeth downe the head. And that is, partly by the prouidence of God, iuſtly puniſhing the neglect of his ſeruice, and partly by a naturall reaſon: namely, becauſe the light of knowledge not reſtraining, and the rule of conſcience not gouerning; the corrupt nature of man can not but breake ſquare, to commit all vnrighteouſneſſe with greedineſſe, although

there be law and penaltie to keepe men in awe; much more where Anarchie and confuſion is. Therefore let the Magiſtrate backe the Miniſter with authoritie, and by the ſword of iuſtice, ſharpen the edge of the ſword of the word, that it be not deſpiſed and made vnprofitable; and let the Miniſter requite him againe, in forcible perſwading the conſcience, and working vpon the ſoule, till hee haue brought mens thoughts into ſubiection to God, ſo that they neither preſume to deſpiſe authoritie, nor forbeare to tranſgreſſe for terror ſo much, as for Gods ſake, and conſcience, which is no ſmall vantage to the Magiſtrate, as ſome will themſelues confeſſe. But ſome will aske perhaps, Why? what confuſion was there in this, that the Leuite thus trauailed to ſeeke liuing and worke? Indeed I thinke well, there be ſome that thinke no otherwiſe of the Miniſter then of another tradeſman, who goes about the countrey to enquire for worke: and they are ſuch as thinke that a Miniſter ſhould doe like Paul, that is, worke with his owne hands, that they might be the leſſe troubled to maintaine him. But to leaue ſuch Gargarites, I anſwere to the point, firſt this diſorder there was in it, that as I haue ſaid, the Leuite was not employed (if he had been worthie) in the priuate inſtructing of the people, and the publike at the Alter, or the like. The like diſorder it were that the Miniſter ſhould, as this Leuite, goe ſeeke himſelfe a place; it is ſufficient that he is willing to giue the Church an account of the gifts which God hath giuen him for her vſe, (being demanded lawfully) but a place muſt ſeeke vp him, (and not he it) and approue, welcome and entertaine him in the beſt manner fit for the well diſcharging and executing of his dutie. Such as call themſelues, let them ſhift as they can: Gods ordinance they haue violated, if diſcredit, diſcouragement, or Note. ill ſucceſſe befall them, the mends is in their owne hands. If God had ſent them, he would haue ſeene to them. But ſecondly there was confuſion in this, that the Leuite was compelled to runne about to ſeek reliefe, although he had been ſetled. For what a ſhame is it for the people, (if their neglect be the cauſe) or for a Miniſter (if prouided for) that he forſakes his ſtudie, publike teaching, and watching ouer the people, and roues about the countrey, tendring his ſeruice to preach here and there among ſtrangers for money, as ſome baſe ſtraglers doe? Whereas the Lord hath wiſely prouided an exemption not onely from rouing, but euen from ordinary domeſticall employments, buying, ſelling commonly, marketting alſo and traffique in the world, and all to the end that he may be wholly taken vp in the worke of God; whereto who is ſufficient? as the Apoſtle ſaith. But 2. Cor. 2. 16. wee haue them that are ſufficient for all things now adaies, which makes them ſufficient for little or nothing (God helpe) that they ſhould be.
                  This young man is here deſcribed by the place of which hee was, to wit, Doct 2. verſ. 7. of Bethlem Iuda, as being borne, and brought vp in a familie there: as alſo by his ſtock, tribe, and profeſſion, that he was a Leuite: As if the holy Ghoſt would tell vs, it was no ſtrange thing, for in likelihood there were in other places that went wandring vp and down without calling, and maintenance (Leuites I meane) as well as he. For it was at this time as in the daies of Nehemiah; that is, when the Leuites had not that ſufficiencie (which by the law I haue before ſhewed they ought) to maintaine them, they went (by Nehem 13. 10. an vnwelcome neceſſitie) from their ſeruice, ſeeking where they could be better
                  
                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
               
            
         
      
   