
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A
Garden of spirituall
Flowers. PLANTED BY
                     
                        Ri. Ro.
                        Will. Per.
                        Ri. Gree.
                        M. M.
                        and Geo. Web.
                     
                  
                  LONDON,
Printed for T. Pauier, and are
to be sold at his shop entering
into the Exchange.
1610.
               
               
                  
                  
                  A Direction vnto true happines,
standing of three parts: published
especially for the vse of those
that haue heard the same
handled in the course of
the Ministerie.
                  Admonition to the Reader.
                  
                     
                        I
                      Pray thee (gentle Reader)
first learne to vnderstand
this direction,
examining it in euery
poynt, so that thou finde
it true, & agreeing with the holy Scripture.
Then consider how thou likest and
allowest of it. Both which if thou doest,
thou shalt easily finde and feele the
whole to worke vpon thee, as it is to be
desired. The first part by diligent meditation,
will humble and bring thee low
in thine owne sight, and raise in thee a
true sorrow of heart, by seeing thy deadly

miserie. The second part, by the
working of Gods Spirit, shall settle thee
in most cleare safety and peace, by seeing
thy selfe deliuered from the same misery.
The third part will shew thee how to
chang thy life, and conforme it vnto
the will of God, and giue thee direction
how to walke with God dayly. If thou
dealest not soundly with thy selfe in the
two former partes, neuer set vpon the
third. And although thou attaine to the
vse of them both, yet shall it be meete for
thee to prooue thy selfe dayly by them,
that thine estate may be found good indeed,
and after make the third part instead
of a dayly direction for thee, vntill
thou see thy selfe reformed, and made
like vnto it; which is the true vse of it.
For hee that is come to repentance in
trueth, must make dayly▪ vse of them all
three.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A GARDEN OF
Spirituall Flowers.
                  
                     The first part.
                     
                        EVery one that will be
saued,Rom. 5. 12. must first know
and be perswaded in
heart of his miserable
estate, lay de foorth in
these eight poynts following,
& be truly humbled thereby.
                     1 That we were created happy in
the loynes of Adam:
                        Gen. 2. 6. which happinesse
he lost by his fall,Ephe. 2. 1. 2. 3. and we through him,
and so are brought to vtter miserie.
                     2 That this our miserie consisteth
first,Rom. 5. 12. in our guiltinesse by Adams transgression,Psal. 5. 5.
& our owne both originall &
actuall sinnes: and secondly, in the desert
and punishment thereof,Rom. 5. 12. which is
death temporall of the body, & eternall
both of body & soule; with all the calamities
that appertaine to them both.
                     
                        
3 That our sinfulnesse is such,Gen. 6. 5. as it
continually defileth all our actions, our
thoughts, wordes and deedes; and that
the punishment,Deut. 27. 27 which is Gods curse,
is such, as lieth vpon vs alwayes, and in
all places; so that we are nothing but a
lumpe of sinne,Rom. 1. 18. and vnder the wrath of
God continually.
                     4 That no man is able to satisfie for
his sinne,Mat. 1. 26. to appease Gods wrath, and to
come out of this miserie, by any thing
that he can doe,Psal. 49. 7. 8. 9. or that may be done by
any other man for him. And that none
is able to beare and ouercome the intollerable
waight of that curse of
God,Psal. 130. 3. which hangeth ouer him for his
sinne.
                     5 That they which know not this,
still goe forwards in it without trouble
of minde, thinking their case good enough.
They that onely know it, being
full of poyson and rebellion,Rom. 7. 8. 9. for the
most part rage against the doctrine
thereof, & become more greedy to goe
on in all euill, when they see their sinne
forbidden; or at least they abide still in
it.Act. 2. 37. But if any be pricked in conscience,

and humbled by this, he maketh a right
and profitable vse of it; as shall be seene
in the sixt poynt.
                     6 That seeing it is thus with men;
they who haue not mourned, and yet
see they haue cause, must sorrow and
weepe,Act. 2. 37. turning their laughter into
wayling,Ioel. 2. 12. 13. and their ioy into heauinesse,
till they see themselues deliuered from
this woe;Mat. 11. 28. for they are not to be ignorant,Ezra. 10. 2.
that there is hope.
                     7 That to attaine this mourning,
(which is hardly wrought in vs) these
meanes, and such like, are to be vsed.
1. That we harden not our heartes in
hearing the Law,Psal. 95. 7. but suffer it to worke
vpon vs.Heb. 4. 7. 2. To be willing to examine
our heartes and liues for the finding out
of some speciall sinnes:Psal. 4. 4. and when wee
see them,Lament. 3. 40. wee do not lightly passe them
ouer and confesse them,1. Sam. 15. 30 but aggrauate
them to humble vs.Dan. 9. 3. 5. 3. That wee consider
the greatnesse of the punishment,
with the eternitie thereof. 4. An holy
despaire of any remedie from our
selues, or any other creature. 5. A perswading
of our selues, that many are

damned for those sinnes which we liue
in.Luk. 1. 26. 6. That wee weigh and consider our
mortalitie in this life, & the vncertaintie
of our death;Psal. 90. 12. and finally, vse all the
afflictions which God layeth vpon vs
vnto this end.1. Cor. 11. 32.
                     
                     8 That this mourning & sorrowing
for sinne,Heb. 12. 16. 27. and the woe it hath brought
vpon vs, cannot appease Gods wrath
towards vs: but is required of all vnbeleeuers
to breake their hearts, and cause
them to lament after God; not to iustifie
them before God,1. Sam. 7. 1. but to make them
fit to receiue the Ghospell, and prepare
them to heare his voyce that sayth:
Come vnto mee all yee that trauell,Act. 2. 37. and
are laden,Math. 11. 28. and I will giue you rest. For
although men can not make account
of the remedie,Math. 9. 12. except they feele their
need and miserie; yet if any rest in this
sorrow, and seeke not the remedie following,
in the next part, he shall neuer
be happie: For it shall either vanish
and be forgotten in time, leauing no
Fruite behinde,1. Kin. 21. or driue them to vtter
despayring.Mat. 27. 5.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Second part.
                     HEE must know and be persvaded,Iohn. 3. 16.
that he is as fully and clearely
restored vnto happinesse,1. Tim. 1. 14. 15. 16. as
he was deeply plunged into miserie:1. Pet. 1. 18. 18.
which is declared in the eight
poyntes following.
                     1 That God hath prouided a remedie
against all this miserie▪
                        Mat. 1. 21. by which we
may be set free from it. This remedie is
perfect satisfaction, and perfect righteousnesse;1. Ti. 2. 16.
whereby onely wee may be
freed from death, and restored vnto life:
so as Gods iustice may be fully answered,
all our sinnes forgiuen, and wee adopted
vnto euerlasting life.
                     2 That this remedie is not to be
found but onely in Christ Iesus,Act. 4. 12. who
being both God and Man hath in our
Nature,Esa. 53. 5. suffered the punishment due
vnto our Sinnes, to deliuer vs from the
same, and fulfilled the righteousnesse
of the Law,Rom. 5. 18. to iustifie vs before God:
and so deliuering vs from sinne and
death,1. Cor. 1. 30. 31. hath restored vs to righteousnes

and life; being made vnto vs from God
his Father, Wisedome, Righteousnesse,
Sanctification, and Redemption; that
whosoeuer glorieth, may glory in the
Lord.
                     3 That the onely meanes to receiue
Christ, and in him saluation, is Fayth in
the Person,Ioh. 1. 12. mentioned in the former
part of this Direction: seeing Christ
hath plainely affirmed, that he is a Phisition
to such sicke ones,Luke. 5. 31. and calleth
them to receiue;Mat. 11. 28. that is, to beleeue it.
Which Fayth,Rom. 10. 14. 17. is a woonderfull and supernaturall
grace of God, whereby we
receiue Christ & all his benefites, and is
ordinarily wrought in mens heartes by
the outward Preaching of the word,
and the inward operation of the Holy
Ghost.Act. 16. 14. Therefore such as seeke this,
must heare Sermons often & diligently,
they must be much mooued & drawne
by the reports of other Godly;Ioh. 1. 43. 47 as Andrew
by Peter, and Nathaniel by Philip.
And they must be encouraged to beleeue,Act. 19. 
                              •
                           6.
by the example of others, who
were as farre off as they:1. Ti. 1. 16. they must vse
good company,Act. 9. 26. 27 as Paul when he was

cast downe, sought to ioyne himselfe to
the Apostles: and reuerence Gods graces
in the Ministers, and in his people.
By these meanes many haue been added
to the Church and beleeued.1. Cor. 14. 24.
                     
                     4 That by this glad tidinges,Actes. 2. 47. preached
in his name, and the other meanes,
God draweth the hearts of such as shall
enioy it,Ioh. 7. 37. after they know that there is a
remedy, to hunger after it, and desire it
aboue all other thinges,Iohn. 6. 44. not fleetingly
nor houertly, but feruently and constantly,
so as nothing can satisfie them
without it; & to prize it aboue all other
things: which grace being a peculiar
gift of the Spirit,Mat. 13. 46. is not without Fayth
in some measure. And though it be not
in full assurance by and by, yet so, as
they neuer cease till they can apply it to
themselues. Which shall be, when they
haue felt the sweetnesse of Christ, when
they see they take the yoke vpon them,Mat. 11. 29.
and be willingly subiect to his word
and commaundement: Then they shall
finde rest vnto their Soules.
                     5 That we therefore feeling what
great need wee haue of it, as hauing

been pricked in our hearts for our sinne
and damnable estate, and beene broken
hearted, and hauing this feruent desire
after it, & so highly esteeming it, as nothing
more, may apply it to our selues,
and doe rest perswaded (for all our vnworthinesse)
that it is ours, & freely bequeathed
to vs of God,1. Ioh. 3. 23. because Christ
is giuen of God, and hath giuen himselfe
for such. And for our better encouragement
hereunto, wee are to know, that
Christ commaundeth, exhorteth, and
beseecheth vs to beleeue in himselfe; so
that wee neede not feare that it is presumption
thus to doe.
                     6 And seeing we are so fearefull at
our first calling, that we dare not thinke
we haue fayth,Iudg. 6. 17. know that these are sure
tokens of it, if we striue against doubting:Iudg. 6. 13.
if we not feeling it, complaine bitterly
of the want of it;1. Pet. 2. 2. if we seeke feruently
to be setled in beleeuing;Psal. 32. 5. if we
desire to search out the sinne which
may possibly hinder vs, to expell it:
and some one of these, or other graces
like them, shall euer be seene in the beleeuer
by such as can iudge, though not

alwayes perceiued of the partie himselfe:
euen as by moouing breathing,
feeling, &c. it is gathered, that life is in
the body, which lyeth for dead.
                     7 That by all good meanes we confirme
this fayth in vs dayly:Heb. 10. 38. the meanes
are partly those which are set downe in
the third poynt of the third part, and
namely the examples of others, who of
weake became strong;Heb. 11. 34. the often and due
considering of Gods loue, that it is vnchangeable,Ioh. 13. 1.
and our owne experience,
who beleeuing the Promise when wee
thought it impossible,Psal. 77. 1. 12. may much more
now be perswaded of it, and of the fauour
of God, especially seeking it penitently
as we did then. But if we grow
not, we began but counterfaitly.
                     8 That if our Fayth be confirmed,
and we perswaded of our saluation and
Gods fauour, it will appeare in vs by
these signes, which may be called inseparable
companions to it.Rom. 5. 11. First, that we
haue peace with God,1. Pet. 1. 8. and reioyce for
it sensibly.Cant. 5. 8. Secondly, that we loue the
Lord most dearely,1. Ioh. 3. 14. and Gods People
heartily.Psal. 77. 6. Thirdly,Psal. 126. 12. that wee haue our

heartes enlarged to prayse God secretly
and openly, for so great kindnesse, as to
preferre vs before so many thousandes.
Fourthly,Iohn. 14. 22. to woonder at it in giuing
thankes▪
                        1. Thes. 5. 14. Fiftly if we pittie, comfort, and
strengthen others. Sixtly, if we long
to goe hence,2. Cor. 5. 6. 8 where we are absent from
the Lord. And seuenthly, desire to goe
home to him.Ier. 31. 18. 19. And lastly, if we mourne
for our vnkindnesse past,Rom. 5. 8. towardes
God, who was so kind to vs, euen while
we wandred from him.
                  
                  
                     The third part.
                     
                        HEe must vnderstand and practise
to the end of his life,Tit. 2. 11. that maner
of conuersation, which GOD
hath appoynted and commaunded
euery faythfull Christian to walke
in,Ephes. 2. 10. after he hath once beleeued;1. Pet. 1. 17. as it is
shewed in the eight poynts following.Rom. 6. 4. 5. 6.
                     
                     1 That he that is saued by Christ, is
also by him mortified vnto sinne,2. Cor. 5. 17. and
regenerate vnto righteousnesse & true
holinesse; and finally is become a new

creature,1. Ioh. 5. 20. and being now by Fayth in
Christ, made the childe of God, doth
withall receiue of God, a mind to know
him,Rom. 6. 2. 4. 5. 6. an Heart to loue him, a Will to
please him;Rom. 6. 25. and in some measure also
Strength and power to obey him:Rom. 7. 14. and
although with imperfection, yet with
manifest difference from his former
estate: and contrarily he doth hate sin,
as he loueth goodnesse.
                     2 That the beleeuer being thus sanctified
and changed,Pro. 4. 23. must giue all diligence
to keepe his Heart in that estate
afterward, & endeauour to practise the
godly life in his particular actions; that
is,Mat. 4. 10. deny all vngodlynesse in his behauiour,
and worldly lustes in his heart: and
contrarily liue soberly himselfe, in moderating
his affections in all lawfull lyberties,
righteously towardes men, in
giuing euery one their due;Act. 26. 18. and holily
towards God, in worshipping and seruing
him onely. In which thinges standeth
our true repentance.
                     3 That vnto euery one that hath
Fayth, and is truly (though in weakenesse)
reformed, God giueth willingnesse,

readinesse, and desire to vse the
meanes which he hath ordained for the
keeping and confirming of himselfe in
this Christian course.1. Pet. 2. 2. Vnto which are
necessarie these two thinges:1. Pet. 2. 2. a certaine
direction and order of proceeding in
this estate by obseruing our selues, that
in one thing as well as another, wee
keepe a good Conscience:Act. 13. 1. or if wee be
ouertaken and step out of the way, yet
that wee lie not still,Ier. 8. 6. 7. but returne. And
that Armour of a Christian set downe;
the chiefe partes whereof are these sixe:
Sinceritie,Ephe. 6. 14. Righteousnesse, Fayth,
Hope, Preparation for afflictions, and
Knowledge of Gods word to descerne
the deceitfulnesse of Sinne. For the
keeping of these, wee must pray often
and earnestly,Luke. 18. 1. with watching; adding
thereunto Hearing of the Word preached,
and the vse of the Sacramentes,
Reading,Luk. 22. 17. Meditation, Conference,
Good example of others, Gods benefites
and chastisements dayly meditated
of, and rightly vsed, and our owne experience.
                     4 That out of all that hath been

before set downe, and namely in these
three former poyntes, wee gather out a
direction, to guide our selues euery day
vnto our end: a summe whereof is this.
First,Iob. 1. 5. that euery day as wee search and
finde out our sinnes, we heartily dislike
and renounce them, & repent. Secondly,
that euery day we be raysed vp in assured
hope of the pardon of them, by
the promise of God in Christ.Heb. 11. 6. Petition. 5. Thirdly,
that euery day we keepe our heartes in
frame, weaned from carnall libertie, and
fitte to any duetie.Heb. 3. 12. Fourthly,Act. 24. 
                              •
                           6. that euery
day we be strongly armed against any
knowne sinne. Fiftly, that euery day we
endeauour to do any duety commaunded.Deut. 5. 20.
Sixtly, that euery day we pray for
all necessaries; and namely that wee
watch and pray to be strengthned against
sinne,Mat. 26. 41. Petition 4. and steadfast in our Christian
course. Seuenthly, that euery day
our thankes for benefites already receiued,Thes. 5. 18.
and other still certainely hoped
for, be continued. Eightly that euery
day we hold fast and keepe peace with
God;Rom. 5. 1. and so lie downe in it.Phil. 4. 4. These are
not so enioyned euery day, as though it

were enough barely to thinke of them
euery day; but that we be accompanied
with the most of them through the
day, and strengthned with the rest; I
meane Prayer and Thanksegiuing. So
that by the helpe of them all, wee may
be made able to passe the day both in
company & solitarinesse; at home and
abroad, in afflictions and prosperitie;
and in all our actions of the day to honour
God therein, according to that
which is written;1. Cor. 10. 31. Whether we eate or
drinke, &c.
                     5 That wee be watchfull to withstand
and auoyd all the lets which may
hinder this course, as want of the
meanes, and namely the helpe of the
word preached, slouthfulnesse, carelesnesse
in obseruing our wayes, a yeelding
to temptation, commonnesse and
boldnesse in sinne,Apo. 3. 17. and a thinking that
we are well enough already; wearinesse
in doing good, vntowardnes, custome
in sinne, & long lying in it; the vsing of
ill Company, worldlinesse, prophanenesse
of heart,Iere. 13. 23. loosenesse of the eye, eare,
tongue, &c.
                     
                        
6 That the Lord hath commaunded,
and doth promise to performe,1. Pet. 1. 5. that euery
one of his faythfull seruantes, shall
perseuere in this course, by that power
he giueth them by Fayth. This perswasion
is no small encouragement vnto
continuance and constancie, in hope,
patience▪ and well doing.
                     7 That least we deceiue our selues,
we be able to proue & doe often indeed
proue as we shall see cause, that our repentance
is sound, which may appeare
to vs by these notes: First, if our heartes
be changed.Rom. 12. 2. Secondly, if we auoyde one
sinne as well as another.Iam. 2. 10. Thirdly, if we
keepe our hearts with all diligence (hauing
so often found them false and deceitfull)
so that good life may come frō
thence.Pro. 4. 13. Fourthly, if we labour to please
God according to his word, as well in
well doing,2. Chr. 25. 2. as in the deedes themselues.
Fiftly,Prou 4. 18. if wee still goe forward in this
course without fainting or discouragement,
as our knowledge increaseth; and
if we fall asleepe, & offende against our
knowledge that we complaine of our
corruption,Can. 5. 2. and be not quiet,Can 3. 4. vntill by

relenting for our sinne, and earnest suing
to God, he returne to vs againe and
receiue vs; which he will doe, and then
be more carefull afterwards against the
least occasions.
                     8 That this course bringeth sound
Wisedome, Experience, and Comfort;
and teacheth vs how to carry our selues
in all estates & conditions of life: whether
of trouble or peace, and to answere
all the ca
                           •
                        els and quarrels of the Diuell
and his Instruments. it bringeth vs into
most inward acquaintance and communion
with God and Christ; maketh
vs ready to die, fit to liue, and to finde
greater gaine in both,1. Ioh. 1. 3. then in any other
estate. And in one word, happy heere,
and happy euer. Whereas without it,
the beautie and benefite of the Christian
life,Phill. 2▪ 21. is smally or not at all enioyed:
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 1. 2.
nor after the Kingdome of Glory possessed.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            19. 28.  29.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Conclusion.
                     I Haue set before thee (gentle Reader) a frame of
a Christian course, in these three partes. Now
when in knowledge, liuing, and going about
the practise hereof, it is entred vpon, & thus farre
raysed vp; yet it is but an house vntiled, & vndawbed,
without windowes, doores, implements and
other furniture: and therefore not so to be left.
Some neuer doe so much as enter vpon it▪ some
beginning, doe not finish it. And yet the first sort
may be long beating about it: The last are grosely
deceiued to let it stand vnperfected, & therefore
neuer reape the benefite of it. Such are they,
who hauing begun in all these three partes, leaue
off, as though they had done all. But the true
Christian, hauing laide for himselfe this good
foundation, buildeth therevpon proportionably,
as the Apostle sayth,Ephse. 4. 16. and so reapeth a sure & constant
fruite of his labour: notwithstanding all
the troubles and dangers that may assayle him.
And if thou go about to be directed by this,Mat. 7. 24. take
heed it waxe not loathsome to thee in time; and
so vsed for fashion, and not to gouerne thee, for
then thou loosest the benefite of it, (as one that
eateth meate with a full stomacke, and not for
hunger) and it shall loose her beautie with thee.
And yet through slouth,Pro. 27. 7. negligence, and loue of
this world, with the pleasures of it▪ and manifold
discouragements, this will come to passe.
                     FINIS.
                     By RICHARD ROGERS.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Directions how to liue well,
and to die well.
                  
                     IN the Morning awake
with God; and before
all other thinges, offer
vp vnto him thy Morning
sacrifice of prayer;
therein remembering:
First, to giue heartie thankes vnto him
for all his mercies, bodily and spirituall;
and namely, for thy late preseruation:
Secondly, make an humble Confession
of thy sinnes: with earnest desire of pardon:
Thirdly, aske such necessaries as
are requisite for thy soule and body,
with feruent request to be relieued in
them: and namely, desire his blessing
vpon thy labours in thy calling in the
day to come.
                  In what place soeuer thou art, let this
perswasion abide in thine heart, that
thou art before the liuing God: and let
the remembrance hereof, strike thine

heart with awe & reuerence, and make
thee afrayde to sinne.
                  Make conscience of idle, vaine, vnhonest,
& vngodly thoughts: for these
are the seedes and beginnings of actuall
sinne in word and deede.
                  Haue speciall care to auoyde those
sinnes which thou findest thy nature
most prone vnto; and eschew those
prouocations which were woont most
to preuaile against thee.
                  Follow with faythfulnesse and diligence,
thy lawfull particular calling, in
which thou art placed.
                  Thinke euer-more thy present estate
and condition to be the best estate for
thee, what soeuer it be; because it is of
the good prouidence of God.
                  Looke well to thy carriage in company,
that thou do no hurt by word, or
example; nor take any from others: but
endeauour rather to doe good.
                  Vse ciuill honestie towardes all men:
Good Conscience and good Manners,
must goe togeather.
                  If at any time against thy purpose
thou be ouertaken with any Sinne, lie

not in it, but speedily recouer thy selfe
by repentance.
                  When any good m
                        •
                     tion or affection
doth arise in thine heart, suffer it not to
passe away, but feed it by reading, meditating,
or praying.
                  Esteeme of euery present day, as of
the day of thy death: and therefore liue
now, euen as though thou were now
dying: and doe those good duties euerie
day, which thou wouldest doe if this
were thy dying day.
                  At the end of the day, before thou
lie downe in thy bedde, call to minde
how thou hast spent the day that is
passed: thy misdoinges repent, and
prayse God for assisting thee with his
grace in the dueties which thou hast
performed.
                  Sleepe not at night, before thou hast
commended thy selfe by prayer, into
the handes of God: for thou knowest
not whether (falne asleepe) thou shalt
rise againe aliue.
                  Let Prayer be the Key to open the
Morning: and the Barre to shut in the
Euening.
                  
                     Walke as the Children of light.Ephe. 5. 8.
                  
                  As the iust liue by fayth, so the iust
liue the life of Fayth. Now they
liue the life of Grace; one day they
shall liue the life of Glory.
               
               
                  DIRECTIONS HOW
TO DIE WELL.
                  THinke that the greatest worke
thou hast to finish in this world, is
to die well; and to make an happie
departure out of this World.
They which die well die not to die, but
to liue eternally.
                  Be euery day readie to leaue this life.
That man doth finish his dayes in best
sort, that euery day esteemeth the last
day of his life, to be present & at hand.
                  Endeauour before death come vpon
thee, to pull out this sting; & take from
him his power & strenght by humbling
thy selfe in the time present, for all thy
sinnes past; & by turning thy selfe vnto
God for the time to come. That man can
neuer die ill, that hath a care to liuewel.
                  Inure thy selfe by litle & litle to die,

before thou come to that poynt that
thou must needes die. He that leaues
the World, before the World leaues
him, giues Death the hand like a welcome
Messenger, and departs in peace.
                  Chiefly when thou art visited with
Sicknesse, or Old-age, thinke either of
these, a Summoner, warning thee ere
long, to appeare before the great Lord,
Iudge of all the World; therefore now,
prepare to set all things in good order,
and make thine accountes ready.
                  Make a new examination of thy life
and conuersation passed. Make a new
confession vnto God of thy new and
particular sinnes, as God sendes new
corrections and chastisementes. Make
new Prayers, and more earnest then euer
before, for pardon of thy sinnes, &
reconciliation with God in Christ▪ By
all meanes auoyde those sinnes, which
thou findest and feelest to incense the
wrath of God against thee.
                  Seek reconciliation with thy neighbour,
by free forgiuenesse of them that
haue offended thee; and earnestly desire
to be forgiuen of all that haue been

offended by thee. Set thine House and
Familie in order, by disposing of thy
worldly goodes in thy Will and Testament;
thereby shalt thou die not the
more quickly, but the more quietly;
and preuent the brawles and iarres that
otherwise (when thou art gone,) may
arise among thine Heires. Thou partest
from earthly possessions, and art going
to take possession of Heauenly. In the
last agonie of Death, when all things in
and of the World doe fayle and forsake
thee, rest thy selfe by Fayth, on the fauour
and mercie of God in Christ, and
comfort thy selfe in the Lord thy God:
What shall separate from the loue of
God in Christ? nor life nor death.
                  Let thine Heart and Tongue be still
imployed in prayer to the Lord: First,
for patience in thy trouble: Second, for
Comfort in thine affliction: Third, for
Strength in his mercy: Fourth, for Deliuerance
at his pleasure. Yea, endeauour
euen to die praying. When thou art in
the deapth of Miseries, and at the gates
of Death, there is a deapth of Gods
mercy; which is ready to heare & helpe

thee: Miserie must call vpon Mercie.
                  Be willing and ready to depart out of
this world without murmuring or repining,
whēsoeuer, wheresoeuer, or howsoeuer
it shall please the Lord to call
thee. For why shouldest thou vnwillingly
suffer a short Death, that will
bring thee to the fruition of eternall
Ioyes? Perswade thy selfe, that if thou
liue by the mercie of God, thou shalt do
well: But if thou die, doubt not but
thou shalt doe better. And with a free
heart speake it: Come Lord Iesu.
                  
                  Lastly, when thou feelest Death approaching,
commende thy departing
soule into the holy hands of God: Hee
gaue it, to him surrender it againe. So,
laying thy selfe downe to sleepe & rest,
God shall make thee dwell in euerlasting
safetie.
                  
                     The Graue is radie for mee.
                     A good life till death;Iohn. 17. 1. and a good
death after a good life: are the best
meanes to attaine an eternall happie
life in heauē. As Death leaueth
thee, so shall Iudgement find thee,

Christ is to mee both in life and death,Phil. 1. 21.
aduantage.
                  
                  
                     To preserue thine heart in cleannesse.
                     Often meditate of God, & good things.
                     Carefully watch ouer thine outwarde
Senses; chiefly thine Eyes, and thine
Eares.
                     Be alwayes doing something that is
good.
                  
                  
                     To preserue thy Tongue from sinne.
                     Forethinke whether it be lawfull and
fit to be spoken.
                     Auoyde all superfluitie of wordes, and
needlesse speaches.
                     Affirme no more then thou knowest to
be true.
                  
                  
                     To keepe thy life in holynesse.
                     Doe all things as in Gods sight.
                     Eschew the company of those that are
ill disposed.
                     Thinke dayly of thy death; and that
last great account.
                     FINIS.
                     
                        By Wil. Perkins.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CONSOLATIONS
For all troubled Consciences.
                  Written in manner of a Dialogue.
                  
                     Sinner.
                     
                        GOOD Sir,Esa. 50. 4. I know the
Lord hath giuen you the
tongue of the Learned,
to be able to minister a
word in time, to him that
is wearie: therfore I pray
you, helpe me in my miserie.
                  
                  
                     Minister.
                     Ah my good Brother!
What is the matter with you? and what
would you?
                  
                  
                     Sin.
                     I liued a long time (the Lord he
knoweth it) after the manner of the
world, in all the lustes of my filthy flesh,
and then I was neuer troubled; but it
hath pleased God of his infinite mercie,
to touch my heart, and to send his owne
Sonne that good shepheard Iesus Christ,
to fetch me home to his owne fold, euen
vpon his owne necke: and since that
time, it is a woonder to see, how my

poore heart hath bin troubled, my corruption
so boyles in mee, and Sathan
will neuer let me alone.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Your case is a blessed case: for,
not to be troubled of Sathan, is to be
possessed of him;Col 1. 13. that is: To be helde
captiue vnder the power of darkenesse,
and to be a slaue and vassall of Sathan.
For as long as the Strong man keepes
the Hold,Luk. 
                              〈…〉
                           
                         all thinges are in peace. Contrariwise,
he that hath receiued any true
sparkle of Fayth,Mat. 16. 18. shall see the gates of
Hell (that is) the Deuill and all his Angels,
in their full strength to stand vp against
him, & to fight with an endlesse
hatred, for his finall confusion.
                  
                  
                     Christian.
                     But this is my trouble of
minde, hath made me oftentimes feare,
least God would reiect me, and vtterly
depriue me of the kingdome of heauen.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     But there is no cause why it
should so doe: for why, or how should
Heauen bee your resting place, if on
Earth you were not troubled? How
could God wipe away your Teares
from Heauen, if on Earth you shedde
them not? You would be free from Miseries:

You looke for Heauen vpon
Earth.Bradford. But if you will go to Heauen, the
right way is to saile by Hell. If you will
sit at Christes Table in his Kingdome,
you must be with him in his temptations.
You are as Gods Corne; you must
goe vnder the Flaile, the Fan, the Milstone,
and the Ouen, before you can be
Gods Bread. You are one of Christes
Lambes, looke therefore to be fleeced,
and to haue the bloody Knife at your
throate all the day long. If you were a
Market-sheepe brought to be sold, you
should be Stalled and kept in a fatte
Pasture: but you are for Gods owne
occupying; therefore you must pasture
on the bare Common, abiding stormes,
tempestes, Sathans snatches, the worlds
woundes, contempt of Conscience, and
frettes of the flesh. But in this your miserie,
I will be a Simon vnto you, to helpe
you to carry your Crosse; so be it you
will reueale your minde vnto mee.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I will doe it willingly: my temptations
are either against my fayth in
Christ, or against repentance for my
sinnes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Min.
                     What, is your Temptation as
touching Fayth?
                  
                  
                     Chri.
                     Oh woe is mee! I am much afrayde
least I haue no Fayth in Christ
my Sauiour.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     What causeth this feare?
                  
                  
                     Chri.
                     Diuers thinges.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     What is one?
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I am troubled with many doubtinges
of my saluation; & so it comes into
my minde to thinke, that by my incredulitie,
I should quite cut off my
selfe from the fauour of God.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     But you must know this one
thing, that hee that neuer doubted of his
saluation, neuer beleeued; and that hee
which beleeueth in truth, feeleth many
doubtinges and wauerings, euen as the
sound man feeles many grudginges of
Diseases, which if that hee had not
health, he could not feele.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     But you neuer knew any that
hauing true Fayth, doubted of their saluation.
                  
                  
                     Min
                     What will you then say of the
man that sayd;Mat. 9. 24. Lord, I beleeue; Lord
helpe my vnbeliefe? And of Dauid,
                        
who made his moane after this manner:
Is his Mercie cleane gone for euer?
Doth his Promise fayle for euermore?
Hath God forgotten to be Mercifull?
Hath he shut vp his tender Mercie in
displeasure?Psal. 77. 9. Yea (he goeth on further) as
a man in dispaire. And I said, this is my
death. Hereby it is manifest, that a man
indued with true Fayth, may haue not
only assaults of doubting, but of desperation.
This further appeareth, in that
he saith in an other place: Why art thou
cast downe my soule? Why art thou disquieted
in me? Waite on God, for I will
yet giue thanks: he is my present helpe,
and my God.Psal. 42. 11. And in very trueth, you
may perswade your selfe, that they are
but vnreasonable men that say, they
haue long beleeued in Christ, without
any doubting at all of their saluation.
                  
                  
                     Chr
                     But Dauid hath more in him then
I haue: for mee thinkes there is nothing
in this wicked heart of mine, but rebellion
against God: nothing but doubting
of his mercie.
                  
                  
                     M.
                     Let me know but one thing of you:
These doubtinges which you feele, doe

you like them, or do you take any pleasure
in them? and do you cherish them?
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     Nay, nay; they appeare very vile
in mine eyes, and I doe abhorre them
from my heart; and I would faine beleeue.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     In Man, you must consider his
estate by N
                              ••
                           ure, & his estate by Grace:
In the first, he and his flesh are all one,
for they are as Man and Wife;Rom. 7. 5. therfore
one is accessarie to the doinges of the
other: When the flesh sinneth, the man
also sinneth, that is in subiection to the
flesh: yea, when the flesh perisheth the
man likewise perisheth, being in this
estate with the flesh a louing couple,
they liue and die togeather. But in the
estate of Grace, though a man haue the
flesh in him, yet he and his flesh are diuorced
a sunder. This diuorcement is
made, when a man begins to dislike and
hate his flesh, and the euill fruites of it.
This separation being made, they
are no more one, but twaine; and the
one hath nothing to do with the other.
In this case, though the flesh begette
sinne, & perish therefore; yet the Christian

man shall not endure damnation
for it. To come more neare the matter:
You say, the Flesh begets in you wauerings,
doubtinges, and distrustinges:
what then? it troubleth you, but feare
not, remember your estate; you are diuorced
from the flesh, and you are new
married with Christ. If these sinnes be
layd at your doore, account them not
as your Children, but renounce them as
Bastardes: Say with Paul, I doubt indeed,
but I hate my doubtinges: and I
am no cause of these; but the Flesh in
mee, which shall perish, when I shall be
saued by Christ.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     This which you haue said, doth
in part content mee. One thing more
I pray you shew mee concerning this
poynt, namely how I may be able to ouercome
these doubtinges?
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     For the suppressing of doubtinges,
you are to vse three meditations.
The first, That is Gods commaundement,
that you should beleeue in Christ.
So S. John sayth:Iohn. 1. 3. 23. This is his Commaundement,
that we beleeue in the name of
his Sonne Iesus Christ. Thou shalt not

steale, is Gods Commandement; & you
are loath to breake it, least you should
displease God, and pull his cursse vpon
your head. This also is Gods Commandement;
Thou shalt beleeue in Christ,
and therefore you must take heed of the
breach of it, least by doubting & wauering,
you bring the cursse vpon you.
Secondly, you must consider, that the
promises of saluation in Christ, are generall;
or at the least indiffinite, excluding
no particular man; as in one for al,
may appeare; God so loued the world,
that he gaue his onely begotten Sonne,
that whosoeuer beleeueth in him shoud
not perish, but haue euerlasting life.
                     Now then, so often as you shal doubt
of Gods Mercie, you exclude your
owne selfe from the promise of God,
whereas he excludeth you not. And as
when a prince giues a Pardon to all
Theeues, euery one can apply the same
vnto himselfe, though his name be not
set downe in the Pardon: So the King
of Kings hath giuen a generall Pardon
for free remission of sinnes, to them that
will receiue it. Beleeue therefore that

God is true in his Promise, doubt not
of your owne saluation, challenge the
Pardon to your selfe. Indeed your
name is not set downe or written in the
Promise of Grace; yet let not any illusion
of Sathan, or the consideration of
your owne vnworthinesse, exclude
you from this free Mercie of GOD:
which he hath also offered to you particularly;
first in Baptisme, then after in
the Lordes Supper; and therefore you
are not to wauer in the applying of it to
your selfe.
                     Thirdly, you are to consider that by
doubting and despayring, you offende
God as much almost, as by any other
sinne:Rom. 4▪ 18. You do not aboue hope, beleeue
vnder hope, as you should do. Secondly,
you robbe God of his glorie, in that
you make his infinite Mercie to be lesse
then your sinnes. Thirdly, you make
him a lyer, who hath made such a Promise
vnto you. And to these three meditations
adde this practise: When
your heart is toyled with vnbeliefe and
doubtings; then in all haste draw your
selfe into some secret place, humble

your selfe before God, poure out your
heart before him; desire him of his endlesse
mercie to worke Faith,Rom. 10. 12. and to suppresse
your vnbeliefe; and you shal see,
That the Lord ouer all, is ritch vnto all
that call vpon his name.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     The Lord reward you for your
kindnesse; I will hereafter doe my indeauour
to practise this your counsell.
Now I wil make bold to shew an other,
that makes me to feare, least I haue no
Fayth: And it is, because I doe not feele
the assurance of the forgiuenesse of my
sinnes.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Fayth standeth not in the feeling
of Gods mercie, but in the apprehending
of it: which apprehending,
may be when there is no f
                           •
                        eling: for
Faith is of inuisible things.Heb. 11. 1. And when a
man once commeth to enioy the thing
beleeued,Rom. 8. 23. then he seaseth to beleeue:
and this appeareth in Jobs example,Iob 13. 15, 16▪
                        
when he sayeth: Loe though hee slay
mee, yet will I trust in him, and I will
reproue my wayes in his sight: he shall
be my saluation also: for the hipocrite
shall not come before him; hee declareth

his Fayth: Yet when he sayth presently
afterward: Wherefore hidest
thou thy face, and takest mee for thine
enimie▪ hee declareth the want of that
feeling which you speake of.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     Yet euery true beleeuer feeles the
assuraunce of Fayth: otherwise Paul
would not haue said: Proue your selues
whether you be in the fayth or not.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Indeed sometimes he doth, but at
some other times he doth not: as namely
at that same time when God first calleth
him, and in the time of temptation.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     What a case am I in then? I neuer
felt this assurance: onely this I feele,
that I am a most rebellious wretch, abounding
with a whole sea of iniquities.
Mee thinkes I am more vgly in the
sight of God, then any Toad can be in
my sight. O then what shall I doe? Let
mee heare some comfort from thy
mouth, thou man of God.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Tell mee one thing plainely?
You say you feele no assurance of Gods
mercie.
                  
                  
                     Chri.
                     No indeed.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     But doe you desire with all

your heart to feele it?
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I doe indeed.
                  
                  
                     Mi.
                     Then doubt not, you shal feele it.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     O blessed be the Lord, if this be
true.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Why? It is most true, for the
man that would haue any grace of God
tending to saluation, if he doe truely
desire it, he shall haue it: for so Christ
hath promised: I will giue to him that
is a thirst,Reue. 2. 6. of the Well of the Water of
life freely. Whereby I gather, that if any
want the Water of life, hauing any appetite
after it, he shall haue enough of it:
and therefore feare you not; onely vse
the meanes which God hath appoynted
to attaine Faith by, as earnest Prayer,
reuerent hearing of Gods word, and
receiuing of the Sacramentes; and then
you shall see these thinges verified in
your selfe.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     All this which you say, I finde
in my selfe, by the mercy of God; my
heart longeth after that Grace of God
which I want. I know I doe hunger after
the Kingdome of Heauen, and the
righteousnesse thereof: and further,

though I want the feeling of Gods mercie,
yet I can pray for it, from the verie
roote of my heart.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Be carefull to giue honour to
God, for that you haue receiued alreadie:
for these thinges are the motions
of the spirit of God dwelling in you.
And I am perswaded of this same
thing, that God which hath begun this
good worke in you, will perfect the
same vnto the day of Iesus Christ.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     The third thing that troubles
me,Phil. 1. 6. is this: I haue long prayed for manie
Graces of God, and yet I haue not
receiued them: whereby it comes oft
to my minde, that God loues mee not,
that I am none of his Child: and therefore
that I haue no Fayth.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     You are in no other case then
Dauid himselfe was,Psal 69. 4. who made the same
complaint: I am wearie of crying; my
throate is dry, mine eyes faile, whiles I
waite for my God.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     But Dauid neuer prayed so many
yeares without receiuing an answere,
as I haue done.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Good Zachary waighted longer

on the Lord, before he graunted his
request, then euer you did. It is like he
prayed for a Child in his younger
yeares, yet his prayer was not heard,
before he was olde. And further, you
must note▪ that the Lord may heare the
Prayers of his Seruantes, and yet they
be altogeather ignoraunt of them: For
the manner that God vseth in graunting
their request, is not alwayes knowen;
as may appeare in the example
of our Sauiour Christ:Heb. 5. 7. who in the
dayes of his flesh, did offer vp Prayers
and Supplications, with strong crying
and teares vnto him, that was able to
saue him from death, & was also heard
in that which he feared: and yet wee
know that he was not freed from that
cursed death, but must needes suffer it:
How then was he heard? On this manner.
Hee was strengthned to beare the
death: Hee had an Angell to comfort
him: Hee was afterward freed from the
sorrow of death. And so it is with the
rest of Christes bodie, as it was with the
head. Some being in want, pray for
Temporall blessinges: God keepes

them in this want, and yet he heares
their Prayers, in giuing them patience
and strength, to abide that want. Some
being in wealth and aboundance, pray
for the continuing of it, if it be the will
of God: The Lord 
                           •
                        linges them into a
perpetuall Miserie, and yet he heares
their Prayers, by giuing them blessednesse
in the life to come. You pray for
the increase of Fayth, and Repentance,
and such like graces: you feele no increase
after long prayer; yet the mercifull
God hath (no doubt) heard your
praier, in that by delaying to performe
your request, he hath stirred vp in you
the spirit of Prayer, he hath humbled
you, and made you feele your owne
wantes, the better to depende on his
mercie, for the beginning & increasing
of euery particular Grace.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     the fourth thing that troubles
me, is that I can not feele Fayth purifie
my heart, & to worke by loue, in bringing
foorth liuely fruites.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     If this be so continually, that
Fayth bringes foorth no fruite, it is verie
dangerous, & argueth a plaine want

of Fayth: yet for a certaine time it may
be so. Fayth hath not onely a Spring
time, and a Summer season, but also a
Winter, when it beareth no fruite. And
there is many a true Christian, like the
brused Reed, that is ouerturned with
euery blast of Wind: and like the Flaxe
that hath Fire in it, which by reason of
weakenesse, giues no heate nor light,
but onely a smoake.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     Thus much shall suffice for my
first temptation, wherein I take my selfe
satisfied. Now if you please, I will be
glad to rehearse the second.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     I am content, let vs heare it.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I am afrayd least I haue not truly
repented: and therefore that all my
profession is onely in hipocrisie.
                  
                  
                     Mi.
                     What mooueth you to thinke so?
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     Two causes especially: The first
is. They which repent, leaue off to
sinne: but I am a miserable sinner, I do
continually displease God by my euill
thoughts, wordes, and deedes.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     You need not feare: for where
Sinne aboundeth, (that is, the knowledge
and feeling of sinne,Rom. 5. 20.) there Grace

aboundeth much more.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I finde not this in my selfe.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     But yet you finde thus much in
your selfe: Those corruptions which
you feele, and those sinnes which you
commit, you hate them, you are displeased
with your selfe for them, and you
endeauour your selfe to leaue them.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     Yea that I do with all my heart.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Then how miserable soeuer
you feele your selfe, by reason of the
masse of your sinne, yet you are not
subiect to condemnatiō: But shall most
certainely escape the same.Rom. 8. 1. Take this
for a most certaine trueth, that the man
that hates and dislikes his sinnes, both
before & after he hath done them, shall
neuer be damned for it.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I am euen heart-sicke of my manifold
sinnes and infirmities; and those
good wordes which you speake,Cant. 2 5. are as
Flagons of Wine, to refresh my wearie,
laden, & wealtring soule. I haue begun
to leaue sinne and wickednesse, and to
detest it long agoe. I haue been oft displeased
with mine infirmities and corruptions.
When I offend God, my heart

is grieued; I desire to leaue sinne, I flie
the occasions of sinne: I would faine
fashion my life to Gods word: and I
pray vnto God, that he would giue mee
grace so to doe: and yet (which is my
griefe) by the strength of the flesh, by
the sleight and power of Sathan, I am
verie often ouertaken, and fall marueylously
both by speach and by deed.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Haue courage (my good brother)
for whereas you haue an affection
to doe the thinges that are acceptable
vnto God, it argueth plainely, that you
are a member of Christ, according to
that of Pau
                              •
                           . They which are of the spirit
sauour the thinges of the spirit.Rom. 8. 5. Well
then, if Sathan euer obiect any of your
sinnes to you, make answere thus: that
you haue forsaken the first husband the
flesh, and haue espoused your selfe to
Chri
                           ••
                         Iesus: who as your head & husband,
hath taken vpon him to answere
your debtes: and therefore if he vrge
you for them, referre them ouer vnto
Christ: for there is no sute in Law against
the wife, the husband liuing. Yea
I adde further. If you be ouercarried

with Sathans temptation, and to fall
into any sinne, you shall not answere
for it, but Sathan; it shall surely be reckoned
on his score at the day of Iudgement;
for he was the author of it. If you
fall by the frayltie of your flesh, it shall
perish therefore; but you shall still haue
Christ your aduocate.
                  
                  
                     Ch.
                     Indeed (as you say) I haue in mee
an aflection to please God; but when I
come to performe my obedience, there
I fayle.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     Therefore marke this further,
as long as the Children of God are in
this life, God regardeth more the affection
to obey, then the obeydience it
selfe. And they shall be vnto mee, sayth
the Lord of Hoastes, in that day I will
doe this for a flocke, and I will spare
them, as a man spareth his owne Sonne,
that serueth him. The Father when he
shall set his Child to doe any businesse,Mal. 3. 17.
though he doe it neuer so vntowardly,
yet if he shew his good will to doe the
best he can, his Father will be pleased:
And so is it with the Lord toward his
Children. You looke to haue some perfection

in your selfe, but in this life you
shall receiue no more but the first
fruites of the spirit:Rom. 8. 25. which are but as
a handfull of Corne, in respect of the
whole Corne-field: And as for the accomplishment
of your Redemption,
you must waite for it after this life.
You would be kissed with the kisses of
Christes mouth: but here in this world,
you must be content, if you may with
Mary Magdaline, kisse his feete; for
the perfection of a Christian mans life,
standes in the feeling and confession of
his imperfections: And (as Ambro
                              •
                           e
saith,) That the obedience due vnto
God, standes more in the affection, then
in the worke.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     But why will God haue those
whom he hath sanctified, labour still
vnder their infirmities?
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     The causes are diuers. First,
hereby he teacheth his Seruantes to see
in what great need they stande of the
righteousnesse of Christ, that they may
more carefully seeke after it. Secondly,
he subdueth the pride of mens heartes,
and humbleth them by counteruayling

the graces which they haue receiued,
with the like measure of infirmities.
Thirdly, by this meanes, the godly are
exercised in a continuall fight against
Sinne, and are daily occupied in purifiing
themselues.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     But to goe on forward in this
matter: There is an other cause that
makes mee feare least I haue no true repentance.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     What is that?
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I often-times find my selfe like
a very Timber-log, voyde of all grace
and goodnesse, froward and rebellious
to any good worke; so that I feare, least
Christ hath quite forsaken mee.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     As it is in the straight Seas, the
Water ebbes and flowes; so is it in the
Godly: in them, as long as they liue in
this World (according to their owne
feeling) there is an accesse and recesse of
the Spirit. Otherwhiles they be troubled
with deadnesse and dulnesse of
heart, as Dauid was, who prayed to the
Lord;Psal. 1
                              •
                           9. 88. To quicken him according to
his louing kindnesse, that hee may
keepe the testimonie of his mouth.

And in an other place hee sayth,Psal. 119. 5. that
Gods promises quickned him. Which
could not be, vnlesse he had been troubled
with great dulnesse of heart. Againe,
somtime the spirit of God quite
withdraweth it selfe, to their feeling, as
it was in Dauid: In the day of my trouble
(sayth hee) I sought the Lord, and
my soule refused comfort: I did thinke
vpon God, and was troubled. I prayed,
and my spirit was full of anguish.
Againe: Will the Lord absent himselfe
for euer, and will he shew no more fauour?Psal. 77. 2. 3. 7.
Hath God forgotten to be mercifull,
&c. The Church in the Canticies
cōplaineth of this:Cant. 3. 1. In my bed I sought
him by night, whom my soule loued;
I sought him, but I found him not. And
againe: My Welbeloued put in his
hand by the hoale of the Doore, and my
heart was affectioned towardes him:
I rose vp to open to my Welbeloued, &
my hands did drop downe Mirrhe, my
fingers poure Mirrhe vpon the handles
of the Barre. I opened to my Welbeloued,
but my Welbeloued was gone and
past: Mine heart was gone when hee

did speake. I sought him, but I could
not finde him:Cant. 5. 4. 5. 6. I called, but he answered
me not. Contrariwise, God at some other
times,Rom. 5. sheds abroad his loue most
aboundantly in the heartes of the faythfull.Cant. 1. 13.
And Christ lyeth betweene the
Breastes of his Church, as a Poesie of
Mirrhe giuing a strong smell.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     But how can he be a Christian,
that feeles no grace nor goodnesse in
himselfe?
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     The Childe which as yet can
vse no reason, is for all that, a reasonable
creature: and the man in a swounde,
feeles no power of life, and yet he is not
dead. The Christian man hath many
quames come ouer his heart, and he
falles into many a swounde, that none
almost would looke for any more of
the life of Christ in him: yet for all that,
hee may be a true Christian. This was
the state of Peter,
                        Luk. 22. 31. when he denied our
Sauiour Christ with cursing and banning:
his Fayth only fainted for a time,
it fayled not.
                  
                  
                     Chr.
                     I haue now opened vnto you
the chiefe thinges that trouble mee, and

your comfortable answeres haue much
refreshed my troubled minde. The
God of all mercie and consolation, requite
you accordingly.
                  
                  
                     Min.
                     I haue spoken that which God
out of his holy word hath opened vnto
me; if you find any helpe thereby, giue
God the prayse therefore, and carrie
this with you for euer:Act. 24. 22. That by many
afflictions both in the body and the
minde, you must enter into the kingdome
of heauen. Raw flesh is noysome
to the stomacke, and is no good nourishment
before it be sodden: And vnmortified
men and women, be no creatures
fit for God; and therefore they
are to be soaked and boyled in afflictions,
that the fulsomenesse and ranckenesse
of their corruption may be delayed,
& that they haue in them some rellish
acceptable vnto God. And (to conclude)
for the auoyding of all these
temptations, vse this sweete Prayer following,
which that godly man M.
Bradford made.
                  
                  
                     
                     A comfortable and godly Prayer, for
a troubled Conscience.
                     OH Lord God, and deare Father,
What shall I say, that feele all
things to be (in maner) with me
as in the wicked; Blinde is my
Minde, crooked is my Will, & peruerse
Concupiscence is in mee as a Spring of
stinking puddle. O how faint is Fayth
in mee; How little is my loue to thee, or
thy people? How great is my selfeloue?
How hard is my heart? By reason
whereof, I am mooued 
                           •
                        o doubt of thy
goodnesse towardes mee, whether thou
art my mercifull Father, and whether I
be thy Child or no: Indeed, worthily
might I doubt, if that the hauing of
these were the cause, and not the fruite
rather of thy Children: The cause why
thou art my Father, is thy mercifull
goodnesse, grace, & trueth in Christ Iesus;
which can not but remaine for euer.
In respect whereof, thou hast borne me
this good-will, to bring mee into thy
Church by Baptisme, and to accept me
into the number of thy Children, that I

might be holy, faythfull, obedient, and
innocent: and to call mee diuers times
by the ministerie of thy word, into thy
Kingdome: beside the innumerable other
benefites alwaies hitherto powred
vpon me. All which, thou hast done of
this thy good will, which thou of thine
owne mercie bearest to mee in Christ
before the World was made. The
which thing as thou requirest straightly
that I should beleeue without doubting,
so wouldest thou that I in all my
needes, should come vnto thee as to a
Father, and make my moane without
mistrust of being heard in thy good
time, as most shall make to my comfort.
Loe therefore to thee deare Father, I
come through thy Sonne our Lord,
our Mediatour, and Aduocate, Iesus
Christ, who sitteth on thy right hand,
making intercession for me. I pray thee
of thy great goodnesse and mercie in
Christ, to be mercifull to me a sinner,
that I may in deed feele thy sweete mercie
as thy Child. The time (O deare
Father) I appoynt not, but I pray thee
that I may with hope still expect and

looke for thy helpe: I hope that as for a
litle while thou hast left me, so thou wilt
come and visit me, and that in thy great
mercie, whereof I haue great need, by
reason of my great miserie. Thou art
wont for a litle season in thine anger, to
hide thy face from them whom thou louest:
but surely (O Redeemer) in eternall
mercies thou wilt shew thy compassion.
For when thou leauest vs, O
Lord, thou dost not leaue vs very long,
neither dost thou leaue vs to our losse,
but to our lucre and aduantage, euen
that thy holy Spirit with bigger portion
of thy power and vertue, may lighten
and cheare vs, that the want of feeling
of our sorrow, may be recompenced
plentifully, with the liuely scent of
hauing thee to our eternall ioy: And
therefore thou swearest, that in thine
euerlasting mercie thou wilt haue compassion
on vs: Of which thing, to the
end wee might be most assured, thine
Oath is to be marked; for thou sayest:
As I haue sworne, that I wil neuer bring
any more the Waters to drowne the
World; so haue I sworne, that I will

neuer more be angrie with thee, nor reprooue
thee. The Mountaines shall remooue,
and the Hilles shall fall downe;
but my louing kindnes shal not mooue,
and the bond of my peace shal not faile
thee: Thus sayest thou the Lord our
mercifull redeemer. Deare father therefore
I pray thee remember, euen for
thine owne trueth and mercies sake, the
promise & euerlasting couenant, which
in thy good time, I pray thee to write
in my heart, that I may know thee to be
the onely true God, and Iesus Christ,
whom thou hast sent, that I may loue
thee with all my heart for euer: that I
may loue thy people for thy sake: that
I may be holy in thy sight through
Christ; that I may alwayes not onely
striue against sin, but also ouercome the
same dayly more and more, as thy Children
doe, aboue all thinges desiring the
sanctification of thy Name, the comming
of thy Kingdome, the doing of
thy will on Earth, as it is in Heauen, &c.
through Iesus Christ our Redeemer,
Mediatour, and Aduocate. Amen.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Short Rules sent by M. Rich.
Green-ham, to a Gentlewoman
troubled in minde, for her better
Direction and Consolation,
as also very necessary for
euery Christian to be exercised
withall.
                  
                     THose temptations shall
be laide to your charge
wherevnto you yeelde,
&c. Yeelde not therefore,
but resist, as Saint
I
                           •
                        mes biddeth.
                  2 No motion shall hurt you wherevnto
you giue not consent in heart:
You haue no sinne which in heart you
long to be freed from; you want no
goodnesse, which in heart you couet to
haue.
                  3 Where Sicknesse is at the highest,
there is hope of diminishing: so likewise

in temptation.
                  4 It is a great mercie of GOD, to
discerne a temptation, in time of temptation.
                  5 When you would doe any good,
or receiue any good, offer vp your endeauours,
actions, and meanes, in a Sacrifice
to God in Christ: beseeching
God to giue his holy Spirit to sanctifie
his owne Sacrifice.
                  6 If you haue receiued but a litle release
of temptation, giue thankes, and
you shall haue more.
                  7 It is a sinne aswell to denie Gods
giftes▪ as to presume of them.
                  8 Temptations smoothereth as fire:
burnes more inwardly.
                  9 Be perswaded alwayes you are in
the presence of God & his Christ: and
frame your actions accordingly.
                  10 Be more afraide of secret sinnes,
then of open shame: lay this foundation
sure, that there is mercie with Christ
Iesus.
                  11 Remember the former mercies
you haue receiued, and thinke your
present estate, to be none other then the

estate of Gods Children: if you be grieued,
pray to God: if relieued prayse
him: there is a vicessitude of griefe and
comfort, as of light and darknesse.
                  12 Beware of a discontented minde
in any case: yea, be contented to haue
your desires denied you of God: and if
your Prayer be not heard of God, vexe
not your selfe too much; neither vehemently
couet, nor be grieued for any
thing, sauing the hauing, or losse of the
fauour of God.
                  13 Labour for meeknes & patience,
and be readie to kisse the Rodde, and to
offer vp all to him, of whom you haue
receiued your selfe: for if you struggle,
it will fare with you as with a Birde in a
Grinne, the more she striueth, the faster
she is. We must vse the Word in troubles
& temptations, as a sicke man doth
his meat, which though he eate against
the stomacke, and presently feeleth no
benefite of it, yet we know by experience,
it doth him good, and himselfe afterwards
shall perceiue it.
                  14 The patient bearing of Miserie,
is an acceptable Sacrifice to God; for

when the Gold-smith putteth a peece
of Gold into the fire to make better vse
of it, it seemeth to the vnskilfull, that he
vtterly marreth it. So the Children of
God in affliction, seeme to the iudgement
of the naturall man, vndone and
brought to nothing: but spirituall
thinges, are spiritually discerned.
                  15 Beleeue alwayes your estate to be
the worke of God; and vary not therein:
for your humiliation, your consolation,
is the glory of God, and the good
of many others.
                  16 Beware that you doe not often
alter your iudgement of your estate: as
saying sometimes, It is Gods worke,
sometimes Melancholy, somtimes your
Weakenesse and simplicitie, sometimes
Witcherie, sometimes Sathan: for the
diuers thoughts wil much trouble you:
You may thinke Melancholy to be an
occasion, but no cause; & so of the rest.
Therfore looke steadfastly to the hand
of God surely trusting on this; that hee
not onely knoweth thereof, but that
whatsoeuer is done directly or indirectly,
by meanes or immediatly, all is

done and gouerned by his Diuine prouidence,
for our good.
                  17 Say not you cannot be helped:
for that may hinder the worke of God.
Say not, If I were in such a place, and
such a place, I should be well; for God
is infinite, and therefore euery where:
aswell where you are, as where you
would be.
                  18 Whereas in consideration of the
falling away of many, excelling you
both in the ages and graces of the new
birth, you feare you shall not perseuere
vnto the end: your meditating and
collection is good, so long as it preserues
you from the carelesnesse of the
flesh: but it is euill when it would dissolue
the assurednesse of your Fayth.
Indeed so long as you looke vpon
your selfe, you haue cause to feare, because
you are vnable to prolonge, as
you are to begin new birth: but if you
looke to God, you haue nothing but
matter of Fayth; for that when he once
loueth, he loueth for euer. Againe, as
a man swimming in the deepe of Waters,
is neuer in danger of drowning so

long as his head continueth aboue the
Water: so though you swim in deepe
seas of dangerous temptations, yet are
you sure and secure, because Christ Iesus
your head, is still aboue all your
troubles; and therefore able to draw
you his Members to the Shoare of
Saluation, without all perill of perishing.
                  19 Beleeue that GOD the Father
doth gouerne your temptation, that the
holy Ghost shall and doth assist you,
that Iesus Christ was tempted to ouercome
in you, that the Saintes on earth
doe pray for you; euen those which neuer
knew you; but doe pray for the
tempted ones.
                  20 None can iudge of the worke of
the Spirit, but by the light of the Spirit:
as none can iudge of the Sunne, but by
it selfe.
                  21 Dispute not with God, least you
be confounded: nor with Sathan, least
you be ouercome.
                  22 Be euer perswaded, your punishment
is farre beneath your sinne.
                  23 In such multitudes of Gods mercies

as you inioy, maruell not you haue
some crosses, least wee should despaire:
likewise crosses with blessinges, least
we should presume.
                  24 In any outward blessing which
you see you can not haue, beseech God
you may neuer be vexed for it.
                  25 No shame, griefe, or sorrow, pleaseth
the Lord, which goeth altogeather
separated from a sweete perswasion of
his fauour. Againe, our pleasing our
selues in the assurance of pardon, is not
acceptable to God, which altogeather
respecteth the care of espying, bewayling,
and auoyding of sinne. Wherefore
let this be the barre and bond of your
affection in these cases: so long as
Christ goeth with you, so long as the
Mercies of God accompanie you, so
long as the Grace of the Spirit shineth
vpon you, be dealing with your sinnes,
& condemne thē vnto death. Likewise
while you are tender of Conscience,
afrayde of Sinne, reuerently perswaded
to walke holily with your God,
laugh at Sathans accusation, despise destruction
                        •
                     ,
set at naught the terrours of

Hell. You neuer erre, but by fayling of
one or both these poyntes, that is; eythere
in your griefes, you are grieued
without comfort; or in your ioyes, you
reioyce without reuerence: and as in
vnnecessarie griefes, you find no spirituall
pleasure; so in vnaduised ioyes,
you can finde no spirituall profit.
                  26 It is the pollicie of Sathan, to
blind and besot with a quiet possession
of an vniust mirth, thereby to keepe
them from the true sight of their sinnes,
so to oppresse the sweete flocke of
Christ, with false and causelesse feares,
thereby to keepe them from the glorious
feeling of their Redemption. Hee
knoweth (to his griefe) that Ioy may be
temporally interrupted, but not finally
or eternally be denyed you. Therefore
he plyeth himselfe, though he cannot
extinguish it; yet to diminish your iust
and royall right in your Christ: In regard
whereof you stand guiltie of not
maintayning the Lordes royaltie giuen
to the Elect, if in the least measure you
yeeld to these slauish feares of the aduersarie.
This subtill Serpent is not ignorant

that by these pensiue practises,
he doth weare to a dulnesse the edge of
your prayers, & that he draweth from
you with an vncomfortable teadiousnesse,
the fruites of your fayth; and consequently
by these meanes, you are depriued
of the fruite of a more comfortable
seruice to your God. The weake
ones fearing also by your example, the
profession of Christ to be strickt and
comfortlesse.
                  17 A straight course of Religion is
somewhat an vncomfortable companion;
but blessed be that mortification
which so farre estrangeth vs from the
world▪ that it changeth vs to the similitude
of Christ; to whom we must be
confirmed in sufferings, that wee may
be like him in glory: Suffer not your
heart to be straight, narrow, and vncomfortable
in heauenly thniges, this
draweth away both the breath, blood,
and life of true godlinesse: the Lord
keepe you from euill. The Lord satisfied
you with gladnes. The Lord giue
you the spirit of prayer, and heare your
prayers. The Lord be your teacher, and

your comfort: Oh pray, pray, pray, It is
the best sacrifice to God, and the most
comfortable duetie you can doe: I am
not loath to put you in mind of these
things, you haue many carfull for you
in other thinges. Oh pardon mee if I
be bold in this one thing: I trust I reioyce
more in the good of your soule,
then euer I should reioyce in the fruite
of mine owne body. It should bee a
thousand deathes; yea a thousand hels
vnto mee, to see your soule miscarrie.
Oh let me be accepted more then a
ciuill Friend, more then a Frind
of the world. Giue mee this
benefite, to be thought
further then a friend
of the flesh.
               
               
                  
                  That Man may thankefully receiue,
patiently beare, and ioyfully
ouerpasse the crosse of Sicknesse:
it is profitable for him to
meditate principally (among
others) of those poyntes
following.
                  
                     1
Who is the author and sender
of Sicknesse.
                     THe Scriptures doth teach vs, that all
Sicknes of body, proceedeth from
God: as appeareth by these places.
                     The Lord shall make Pestilence to cleaue
vnto thee,Deut. 28. 21. 22. vntill he hath consumed thee from
the land whither thou goest to possesse it.
                     The Lord shall smite thee with the Consumption,
and with a Feuer, and with a burning
Ague, and with feruent heate.
                     The hand of the Lord was against the Citie
with a very great destruction:1. Sam. 5. 9. and he smote
the men of the Citie both small & great; and
they had Emrods in their secret partes,
                     
                        1
In that God is the author of Sicknesse, we
may learne these Lessons.
                     1 Wee must not ascribe our Sicknesse
to Chaunce or Fortune: for it is
the will of God.
                     2 Looke not too much to the meanes
of thy Sicknesse: as to Cold, Surfeting,
infected Houses, &c But lift vp thine
eyes to Heauen, remembring that the
Lord hath sent it.
                     3 Storme not against Sicknesse with
murmuring or impatience: for thou
canst not resist it:Rom. 9. 19. The Lord hath sent
it, and who hath resisted his will?
                     4 Iu Sicknesse seeke to the Lord for
remedie: for he sent it, & he must take
it away:
                        Hos. 6. 1. 
                        so it is written; Come and let vs
returne to the Lord; for he hath spoyled, and
he will heale vs: he hath wounded vs, and he
will binde vs vp.
                     
                        Wee must
not therefore
either,2. King. 1. 3.
                        
                           1 Seeke ease by vnlawfull
meanes, as by Witchcraft,
Coniuring, Charming, &c.
For Ahazia is rebuked for
that in his sicknesse he sent
to aske counsell concerning
his recouerie, of Baal-zebub
the God of Ekron.
                           
                           2 Depend too much vpon
the lawfull meanes: as vpon
the Phisition,1. Chro. 16. 12. &c. It is noted
for the sinne in Asa, that being
diseased in his feete, hee
sought not the Lord in his
disease, but to the Phisitiōs:
that is, the Phisitions onely.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     2
What prouoketh God to strike man
with Sicknesse.
                     The Scripture doth teach vs, that the
Sinne of man, is commonly the cause
why he is smitten with sicknesse.
                     If you will not obey me,Leuit 26. 14, 15, 16. nor doe all the commaundementes, &c. then will I also doe this
vnto you: I will appoynt ouer you fearefulnes,
(or a hastie Plague,) a Consumption, and the

burning Ague, to consume the eyes, and to
make the heart heauie.
                     
                        Dauids mistrust in numbring the
people,2. Sam. 24. 15. was scourged with a Plague of
three score and ten thousand men.
                     Of the Plague, we haue among the
rest these particular sinnes set downe,
as the causes of it.
                     
                        
                           1 The neglect of Gods seruice.
                           
                              Moses and Aaroa desire Pharaos
leaue to goe and sacrifice to the Lord
in the Desart,Exod. 5. 3. least for want thereof,
he bring vpon them the Pestilence.
                        
                        
                           2 The abuse of the Sacraments.
                           
                              For this cause (saith Paul) that is,
                              1. Cor. 11. 30. for
abusing the Lords Supper, (as is before in
that Chapter) many are weake and sicke
among you, and many sleepe.
                        
                        
                           3. Disobedience to Gouernours.
                           The Israelites for rebelling against
Moses and Aaron,
                              Num. 16. 49. dyed of the Plague,
fourteene thousand, and seauen hundred.
                        
                        
                           4 Murmuring against God.Numb. 14. 3. 12.
                           
                           The Israelites murmured against

God, because he led them no sooner
into the Land of Canaan; and because
the Land was no better: therefore
threatned to smite them with the
Pestilence, and to destroy them.
                        
                     
                     And no doubt these sinnes and offences
principally, are among others:
the most sensible & apparant causes
of the Plague among vs.
                     
                        1 The contempt of the hearing of
the Word.—
                        2 The neglect of the communication
of the Sacramentes.
                        3 Our vnrulinesse, and disobedience
to Magistrates.
                        4 Our murmuring against God
in the late time of Famine.
                     
                     In that Sinne is commonly the cause of
Sicknesse, learne these Less
                           •
                        ns.
                     1 Looke not too much on the meanes
whereby, or the manner how thou art
afflicted: but looke especially to thy
Sinne, as the principall cause of it. Wee
say commonly, I tooke my Sicknesse
by such a Iourney, by such a Surfet, in
such an infected House, &c. True, those
were the outward meanes: but it was

thy Sinne within thee, which prouoked
God to offer those meanes to thee, and
to make them strong and effectuall to
afflict thee.
                     2 When thou art visited with Sicknesse,
enter into examination of thine
owne Heart, what Sinnes do principally
raigne in thee, and doe prouoke God
to smite thee in that maner.
                     3 By Fasting, and Prayer, & Repentaunce,
turne to the Lord thy God, that
he may in mercy forgiue thy sinne; and
consequently, take away thy affliction.
                     4 Learne thereby to loath & auoyde
Sinne, which so incenseth God, and afflicteth
thee.
                     But note
by the
way, that,
                           1 Sinne is not alwayes the
cause of the crosse;Iohn. 9. 2. 1. as may appeare
by the answer of Christ
to his Disciples cōcerning the
man which was borne blind.
                           2 Those that are afflicted,Luk. 23. 1. 2. 3.
are not alwaies greater sinners
then others; as appeareth by
the answere of Christ to those
which shewed him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had

mingled with their owne Sacrifices.
                        
                     
                     Therefore when thou seest thy neighbour
afflicted, neither iudge him rashly
to be worse then thy selfe: nor excuse
thy selfe presumptuously, to be better
or more righteous then hee.
                  
                  
                     3
To what end God smiteth man
with Sicknesse.
                     God which is infinitely good, seeketh
nothing in afflicting his children, but
their good: as namely, he doth visit vs
with Sicknesse for these causes.
                     1 To draw vs to repentance & amendement
of life;1. Cor. 11. 32. least our sinne be our destruction,
when we are iudged: we are
chastened of the Lord, because wee
should not be condemned of the world.
                     2 To humble the pride of our hearts,
by the feeling of our owne frayltie and
miserie:Psal. 107. 12. when he humbled their hearts
with heauinesse, they fell downe, and
there was no helper.
                     3 To try & examine vs, whether we
still stand as fast to God in the time of
aduersitie, as we seemed & promised to
stand to him in the time of prosperitie.

Christ when he suffered,Psal. 21. 18. is sayd to be
tempted: And they that suffer, are sayd
to be tempted; that is, tryed and prooued
in affliction, as Gold is tryed in the
Furnace.
                     4 To shake off from vs carnall securitie:
for prosperitie maketh vs carelesse.
                     In my prosperitie I sayd,Psal. 30▪ 6. I shall neuer be
m
                           •
                        oued, for thou Lord of thy goodnesse, hadest
made my mountaine to stand strong: but thou
didest hide thy face, and I was troubled.
                     Therefore this must teach vs to apply
our sicknesse vnto the right end:
Not the more the hand of God is vpon
vs, the more to harden our heartes
(as Pharaoh did in Aeg
                              •
                           pt.) But our
visitation must make vs better: namely,
it must make vs more penitent for
our sinnes, more humble in heart,
more steadfast in fayth, and more
watchfull ouer our soules; least that
if wee profite not by so effectuall a
meanes, our sicknesse be vnto vs but
the beginning of euils.
                  
                  
                     
                     4
How a man may gather comfort to himselfe
in Sicknesse.
                     1 Let the Sicke man consider that his
visitation is sent of God,Ephes. 2. 4. who is rich in
mercie,Exod. 34. 6. & abaundant in goodnesse and
trueth,Heb▪ 12. 7. and loueth him in Christ.1. Cor. 10. 13
                     
                     From
thence he
shall gather,
that,
                           1 God correcteth him of
loue, as a Father; and punisheth
him not as a Iudge.
                           2 God will lay no more
vpon him, then he will make
him able to beare.
                           3 God will giue an issue to
the temptation in due time, as
shalbe best for him.
                        
                     
                     1 Let the sicke man consider how little
his paine is,Iob. 2. 7. in respect of that which
God could send. Doth thy Head ake, or
thy Heart pant, or thy Foote or Belly
grieue thee? Is one member distressed?
Yet is not thy case like Iobs: all his members
were afflicted at once. Hee was
smitten with Boyles from the soale of
his foote vnto his crowne. Is thy whole
body afflicted? yet is not thy case like
Dauids, when being distressed in soule,

he cryed out saying:Psal. 55. 4. 5. 
                        My heart trembleth
within me,
                        Mat. 12. 50. 
                        and the terrours of death are come
vpon me:
                        Luk. 16. 24. 
                        Feare and trembling are come vpon
me, and an horrible feare hath couered me.
                     
                     Is thy soule distressed? yet is not thy
affliction like those which lie yelling in
Hell in fire inquenchable, weeping and
wayling, and gnashing their teeth; and
haue not so much as a drop of cold Water
to coole their tongue.
                     Then thinke thus with thy selfe: Is
one member grieued? GOD could
smite all. Am I heart sicke? God could
inlarge mine heart, and therewith, all
my paine seauen-fold more. Am I
distressed in soule?Luk. 12. 5. God could giue
me ouer into desperation. Am I distressed
both in body and soule? God
could throw both body & soule into
Hell fire. Thus mayest thou gather
comfort in thy greatest paine,
by considering how much lesse thy
paine is, then God is able to inflict.
                     3 Let the Sicke man consider,Psal. 14. 3. how
much lesse his paine is,Iam. 2. 3. then he deserueth.Rom. 6. 23.
All are gone out of the way: And
in many things,Deu. 27. 26. we offend all. Now the

reward of sinne is death: that is, the
curse of God, Hel-fire, vtter confusion
both of body & soule. The damned in
Hell would gladly suffer the panges of
death for euer, that they might be eased
of their tormentes but for a while. Thus
mayst thou gather comfort to thy selfe,
by considering how sparingly the
Lord scourgeth thee, when as for thy
desert, he might vtterly confound thee.
                     4 Let the sicke man consider, that
the best Saintes of God haue been subiect
to the like distresse; and haue been
visited with the like crosse of sicknesse.
                     
                        Jacob wrestled with God,Gen. 48. 1. and preuayled
with men: yet subiect to sicknesse.
                     
                        Job an vpright man and a iust;Iob. 27. yet
was he smitten with Vlcers, from the
head to the foote.
                     
                        Elizeus an holy Prophet,2. kin. 13. 14. the spirit
of Elias was double vpon him: yet
he sickened and dyed.
                     
                        Hezekiah,
                        2. kin. 20. 1. an holy King, there arose
none like him, either before or after
him: yet was he sicke to the death.
                     
                        Jesus loued Lazarus;
                        Ioh. 11. 15. yet he sickened
and died of it.
                     
                        Of this Meditation, the sicke man may
gather this comfort.
                     Surely, notwithstanding my sicknesse,
my part may be among the holy
Patriarkes,Heb. 12. 6. Prophets, and Saints of
God, beloued of Iesus Christ; for
thus were they visited. Yea, this argueth
that I am of their number: for
God scourgeth euery Sonne that he
receiueth.
                     5 Let the sicke man consider how
great the ioyes of Heauen are,1. Cor. 2. 9. which
are layd vp in store for him, if he patiently
abide the Lordes visitation, euen
such as the eye hath not seene, neither
hath the eare heard, neither is the heart
able to conceiue; so will hee say with
Paul,
                        Rom. 8. 28. 
                        I count that the afflictions of this present
time, are not worthy of the glory which
shall be shewed to vs. Thus will the hope
of the ioy to come, asswage the paine of
the present maladie.
                     6 Let the sicke man consider,Luk. 24. 26. that
such thinges Christ himselfe suffered,Heb. 4. 15.
                        
and so entred into his glorie. And now
being in his glorie, he seeth, feeleth, and
pittieth the distresse of his members.
For we haue not an High-priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all thinges
tempted in like sort; & therefore knoweth
the better to pittie vs.
                     From this
Meditation
will arise
this comfort. Doth hee which redeemed
mee, both see and feele mine
afflictions? Surely then will
the same my Redeemer,
comfort me in measure sufficient,
& release me in time
conuenient.
                  
                  
                     5
How a man should hehaue himselfe
in the time of Sicknesse.
                     Concerning spirituall thinges, let the sicke
man thus exercise himselfe.
                     Let him be
occupied in
prayer: In
which prayer,
let him
craue of
God,
                           1 The sight of his sinnes.
                           2 Sorrow for his sinnes.
                           3 Forgiuenes of his sinnes.
                           4 Fayth to beleeue that his
sinnes are forgiuen.
                           5 Patience and constancie
in his trouble.
                           
                              
6 Deliuerance in good time,
which way it pleaseth God.
                        
                     
                     So are we commaunded to doe, and so haue
the Sainctes left vs an example.
                     Is any man afflicted?Iam. 5. 13. let him pray.
                     Is any merrie? let him sing Psalmes.
                     
                        Ezekiah being sicke,2 king. 20. 2 turned his face to
the wall, and prayed to the Lord.
                     2. Let him
be occupied
in reading
of the word,
for he shall
find,
                           1 Examples of Gods mercie,
shewed vpon the afflicted.
                           2 Comfortable promises of
strength and deliuerance
made to the Saints.
                           3 Instructiō how to beare,
and what vse to make of
his visitation.
                        
                     
                     All these (and more then these) shal he
find in the Word: whereof Dauid sayd.
                     Thy Word is sweeter then Hony,Psal. 19. 10. and the
Hony combe.
                     Except thy Law had been my delight,Psal. 119. 92. I
should haue perished in mine affliction.Esa. 66. 23.
                     
                     3 Let him meditate of the other life
which he is passing vnto, where he shal
haue Saboth vpon Saboth:Reue. 21. 4. that is Rest
for euer-more. Where the Lord shall

wipe away all teares from his eyes: and
there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, neither crying; neither shall
there be any more paine: for the first
thinges (that is, the worst thinges) are
there passed ouer.
                     Concerning temporall thinges, let the sicke
man obserue these poyntes.
                     1 Let him seeke the helpe of the
Physition; & all other lawfull meanes
of recouering health.Eccle. 38. 1. 
                        Honour thy Physition
for thy necessities sake, for God hath
created him.
                     
                     The Lord healeth not now either
miraculously (as he did Peters wiues
mother) or contrary to meanes,Mat. 8. 15. (as he
did Hezekiah,
                        2. kin. 20. 7. with a cluster of Figges,
or the eyes of the blind with Clay.)
But he smyteth by meanes,Ioh. 9. 6. and he
healeth by meanes. To that end hath
he giuen to man the knowledge of
the secrets and properties of naturall
thinges: and to that end also hath he
put that nature and strength into
Hearbes, Spices, Rootes &c. that they
may be soueraigne to our Diseases.

So that whosoeuer despiseth in sicknesse,
the lawfull meanes which God
offereth for recouerie, that man is
guiltie of his owne blood in the presence
of the Lord.
                     2 Let him dispose the goods of
this world which God hath giuen
him, by his Will and Testament.
                     
                        Isaiah the Prophet willeth Hezekiah
to put his House in order,2. king. 20. 1. because he
should die and not liue. Of this so doing,
will follow this good.
                     1 Hee may dispose of his Goodes
which God hath lent him, as they
may most glorifie God (which gaue
them,) after his decease.
                     2 Hee shall cut off much occasion
of contention and strife among those
whom he leaueth behind him.
                     3 His minde shall be the quieter,
and the more heartily bent to God,
and to an other world: when he hath
set at a stay, the goods of this life, according
to his Will.
                     So
                           •
                        i Deo Gloria.
                     FINIS.
                     
                        By M. M.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A short Direction for the dayly
exercise of a Christian, both on
the Saboth day, and also on
the weeke dayes.
                  
                     And,
Heere first, what Exercises are to be
done vpon the weeke day, vnto the dayly
practise of a Christian life.
                     EVery Morning so soone as thou
hast broken off thy sleepe, though
presently thou doe not arise; yet
presently remember so soone as
thou doest awake, thou do awake with
God: that is, enter into holy and diuine
meditation; and let thine heart be
taken vp about heauenly thinges: As
for example. 1. To meditate of Gods
kindnesse and loue towards thee. 2. To
meditate vpon the great refreshment
which by that nightes rest thou hast
receiued,Psal. 5. 3. 4. and the manifold dangers of
the night which thou hast been preserued
from, by the which many haue miscarried;
and so mightest thou, had not
the Lord defended thee from it. 3. To

meditate vpon thy sinnes, thy deliuerance
from the guilt and punishment
thereof by Christ: As also vpon the
changes and alterations in the World,Psal. 119.
vpon the paines of Hell, & the ioyes of
the World to come. These, & such like
meditations, will keepe thy minde from
idle and wandring wicked thoughtes,
they will reuiue thy soule, and take order
for the better keeping of thy life in
a godly and religious course all the day
after.
                  
                  
                     The second Exercise.
                     For Morning prayer.
                     AFter thou art risen, let it be the first
worke thou takest in hand in the
Morning, to betake thy selfe to Prayer
vnto Almightie God, that throughout
the whole day following,Dan. 6. 10. God may
blesse thee in thy labours,Hos. 14. 2. & thou mayest
be in safetie vnder his protection.Psalm. 3.
And let this be done solemnely vpon
thy knees,Psalm. 116. (and not as many doe, lazing
vpon their Beddes) that it may be done
with an humble, pure, and sincere deuotion.

If thou be an House-holder, or
Maister of a Familie, let it be thy care to
be stirring with the earliest, and so call
togeather thy Familie; and there with
them, solemnely and vpon thy knees,
offer vp to God the sacrifice of Prayer
& Thanks-giuing, either in that forme
of Prayer which in the latter end of this
small Treatise I haue set downe, or in
some other, tending to the same effect.
                  
                  
                     The third Exercise.
                     Imployment in our calling.
                     AFter Prayer ended,Gen. 3. 19. betake thy selfe
to thine ordinarie Calling and Vocation,Ephe. 4. 28.
or doe that wherevnto thy ordinarie
businesse calleth thee;2. Thes. 3. 6. 10. and so
that thy Familie doe the like:1. Cor. 7. 20. remember
that thou must giue account for the
time idlely spent;Pro. 20. 4. and yet in thy labour
take heed that thou do not minde thine
owne profit in such wise,Colos. 3. 14. as that thou
coole any Grace thereby,Dan. 12. 3. or quench
holy affection in thee.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Rules for the behauing of thy
selfe Christian-like, in imployment
about thy worldly businesse,
and enioying the
benefite of the same.
                  
                     1
                     
                        KEepe a narrow watch ouer
thy heart, wordes,
and deeds, continually;
and see that thy time be
not idlely, carelesly, or
vnprofitably spent: follow
thine owne businesse, shunne medling
in other mens matters: bee not a
tale-bearer, nor a tale-receiuer: deale
iustly and vprightly with all men: let
thy conuersation be without couetousnesse,
and without prodigalitie: serue
the Lord in singlenesse of heart: be doing
good, and abstaine from all appearance
of euill.
                  
                  
                     2
How to behaue our selues in company.
                     IN all companies, whether it be of
thine owne Familie or strangers;Pro. 20, 5. be
they superiours,Col. 3. 12. equalles, or thy inferiours,

haue a speciall regard so to carrie
thy selfe,Iud. 20. as to be harmelesse and free
from giuing any euill example,1. Sam. 23. 16▪
                         either
by word or deed:Iames. 3. 6. but carefully marke
and shunne the occasions thereof,Heb. 10. 24. and
prouocations thereunto.
                  
                  
                     3
How to behaue our selues in solit
                           •
                        rinesse.
                     WHen thou art free from company,
and in solitarinesse alone by thy
selfe,1. Tim. 6. haue a care that thou do not spend
that time ill;Ephes. 5. 16. that is, that in thy behauiour
thou attempt none euill and vnlawfull
thing;Mat. 13. 8. and that thy thoughts be not
ranging or wandring,Psal. 19. 14. but keepe within
compasse:Psal. 119. Be frequent at such time,
in diuine meditations and soliloques
vnto God,Soliloque. Aug aph. 5. redeeming the time to the
best vses that thou canst.
                  
                  
                     4
How to vse Prosperitie.
                     IF thou be in prosperitie,Ier. 9. 23. and hast store
of this worlds good,Luk. 6. 29. be circumspect
and warie,Luk. 6. 23. that thou doest neither swell
and be insolent;1. Tim. 4. 8. neither idlely or loosely
abuse the same to carnall libertie:Iosh. 15. 9. butPsal. 3. 2.
                        
vse them soberly, and to the good of
Gods Children:How to carry our selues in aduersitie. and be so much the
more fruitfull in good workes, by how
much the more thou hast receiued
them.Psal. 37. If thou be in miserie, affliction, or
calamitie,Iames. 1. 2. fret not, neither be impatient
in them;1. Pet. 1. 6. but receiue it meekely, & make
good vse thereof.
                  
                  
                     The fift Exercise.
                     Giuing thanks both before and after meales.
                     VVHen thou adressest thy selfe to
Dinner, or to Supper; or when
thou receiuest any good blessing at the
hands of God, remember that thou be
still thankfull vnto him: put not a morsell
of any thing into thy mouth in thy
meale,Ephes. 5. before thou hast desired Gods
blessing vpon it;H
                              •
                           b. 13. and after that tho
                           •
                        
hast receiued it,Psal▪ 1
                              •
                           3. & fedde thy selfe with
it,Psal. 11. forget not to returne thankesgiuing
vnto the Lord for it: And thinke not
this sufficient if thou thy selfe performe
this dutie, but haue a care to cause thy
Children, thy Seruantes, and all thy Familie,
to doe the same.
                  
                  
                     
                     The sixt Exercise.
                     Euening Exercise of Reading, Catechising,
Singing, &c.
                     IN the Euening, when thou makest an
end of thy bodily worke, be not thou
vnmindfull to separate some time, for
the putting in practise of the exercises
of Religion in thy Familie:Gen. 18. 19. cause thine
Household to come togeather;2. Ti. 30. 15. then either
read thy selfe,Col. 3. 16. or cause some of thy
Familie to read something either out of
the Bible,Psal. 55. 17. or out of some godly Booke,Dan. 6. 10.
expounding the same:Iosh. 24. 13. Examine thy
Familie in that which they heare read,Act. 10. 2.
Catechize them in the principles of
Religion,Deut. 6. 7. sing Psalmes togeather with
them▪
                        1. Pet. 3. 5. to Gods glory. So shalt thou find
the Euening thus spent, in this kind of
exercises, will bring much more ioy &
comfort to thine heart, then spending
of the euening in Cardes, Dice, & other
kind of Gaming; wherein worldlinges
doe take their felicitie.
                  
                  
                     
                     The seuenth Exercise.
                     Euening Prayer.
                     AS thou begannest the day,2. Thes. 9. 17 so end it
with Prayer: cause thy Familie to
come togeather, meekely vpon your
knees, let heartie Prayer be made vnto
Almightie God. And suffer none of
any vnderstanding in thy Familie to
goe to their Beddes (vnlesse Sicknesse,
or some other extraordinarie necessitie
mooue them to it) before this Exercise
be performed.
                  
                  
                     The eight Exercise.
                     Meditation in our Bedde.
                     IN thy Bedde before thou fall asleepe,
looke backe vnto the former workes
of the day; call thy soule to a scrutinie,
to giue vp an account how thou
hast spent the day past,Ioh. 5. 14. how thou hast
past it ouer:Ephes. 4. 26. And how farre thou hast
walked with God,Heb. 3. 12. and wherein (as
thou art able to remember) thou hastIob. 1. 5.
                        
offended, and then crauing pardon for
those sinnes wherevnto thou art priuie,
and entring into a resolution (as much
as possibly thou mayest) for the time to
come, to abandon and forsake them.
Commit thy selfe, both body and soule,
into the hands of God; who after these
exercises thus spent, will giue vnto thee
an holy and sanctified rest and sleepe.
                     Wisedome shall commune with thee when
thou wak
                           •
                        st, & guide thee when thou walkest.
                  
               
               
                  Saboth Exercises; or a short Direction
how that day, may be best sanctified
and kept Holy.
                  
                     The first Exercise.
                     Early sanctifying the Saboth day.
                     AS euerie day a true Christian so
soone as hee is waking, should
awake with GOD; so specially
vpon this day, which the Lord
commaundeth so straightly to be kept
Holy vnto himselfe: And therefore vpon

the Saboth day early, thou must awake
with God, and separate thine affections
from all earthly thinges;Psal. 92. and
thou must haue a care to be stirring
somewhat more betimes vpon this day,Leuit. 23. 23
then vpon the other dayes;Act. 20. 27. That so
thou mayest beginne to keepe it holy,
euen at the very beginning of the day.
                  
                  
                     The second Exercise.
                     Priuate Prayer.
                     BEing risen,1. Thes. 5. 16, 17. assemble thy Familie togeather,
ioyntly vpon your knees,
with humble & sincere deuotion make
your prayers vnto him; humbly thanking
his diuine Maiestie for all his benefites,
particularly for his protection ouer
you the night past, desiring pardon
of your sinnes, &c. and crauing his assistaunce
to direct you for the better
keeping of the Saboth holy.
                  
                  
                     The third Exercise.
                     Priuate exercise before the publike meeting.
                     THe time before the publike Exercise,
spend with thy Familie in reading,
Catechizing, singing of Psalmes,

&c. preparing thy selfe and them, against
the publike Exercise.
                  
                  
                     The fourth Exercise.
                     Timely comming to Church.
                     WHen the time is come for the publike
assembly,Act. 10. 33. to meete there togeather
at the publike Exercise,Pro. 8. so that
both thy selfe,Psal. 110. and those which doe belong
vnto thee, assemble timely, there
to be with the foremost; that so thou be
not wanting at any part of the Exercise
performed there by the assembly. Beeing
there assembled, learne to demeane
thy selfe after this manner.
                     
                        Reuerence in behauiour in the Church,
and at the entring into it.
                        1 When thou art entring into the
House of God, into the Church the
place of publike meeting, looke vnto
both thy feete (sayth Salomon,)
                           Eccle. 4. 17. that is
Consider whither thou art going, and
what to doe;Isa. 6. 9. for the place thou art going
into,Gen. 28. is Gods House, there thou goest
to heare God speaking vnto thee by

his Minister; and to speake vnto him
by Prayer. And therefore looke that
thou come thither, with a zealous and
godly preparation.
                        2 When thou art thither come, if the
publike Exercise be not yet begunne,
then as soone as thou commest into thy
Seate, fall downe vpon thy knees, and
make this, or some such like oratorie
Meditation.
                     
                     
                        A Prayer to be said before the publike
Exercise doe begin.
                        O Most mightie and eternall GOD,
before whose presence, togeather
with the rest of this Congregation, I
vile and sinfull wretch, at this time, doe
present my selfe to heare thy holy
Word: and to offer vp the sacrifice of
Prayer and thankes-giuing vnto thee:
blesse (I beseech thee) this our meeting;
sanctifie and prepare my heart, that it
may be apt and fitte for this Exercise,
which now we haue in hand: enflame
my heart with zeale, and teach me how
to pray: open mine eares, that I may

heare; and mine heart, that I may vnderstand
that which shall at this time,
out of thine holy Word be taught vnto
mee. Take from me all wandring and
by-thoughts, and graunt that now and
euer, I may heare thy Word effectually,
and pray vnto thee sincerely, through
Iesus Christ.
                     
                     
                        How to pray in the Church.
                        THis preparation made, and the publike
Exercises beginning, in the publike
Prayer of the assemble, bee not
rash with thy mouth,Eccle. 5. to vtter a thing
before God; for God is in the Heauen,
and thou art on Earth, therefore let thy
wordes be few. Thinke not that the
mumbling ouer a few Prayers doth
merit at Gods hands; or that thou shalt
be heard for thy much babling; but let
thy prayer come from thine heart.
When the Minister prayeth in the behalfe
of the whole Congregation, let
thine heart ioyne with him. Oft times
stirre vp thy selfe in Prayer, and rouze
thy selfe vp from thy naturall dulnesse
and backwardnesse in this kind, by inward

sighes and grones; and take heed
that thy heart be not tossed about with
vaine imaginations and fantasies, when
thou shouldest lift vp pure handes and
heart (as the Apostle speaketh) vnto
God.1. Tim. 2. 8. The like obserue in the singing of
Psalmes, which is a kind of Prayer.
                     
                     
                        How to carry our selues in Sermon time.
                        THen after publike Prayer, in time of
the Sermon, when the word of God
is preached before thee, remember the
counsell of the Wise man:Eccle. 4. 17. 
                           Be neare to
heare; that is, be attentiue, hearken with
reuerence to that which shall be deliuered:
which that thou mayest the better
doe, obserue these Directions: haue
thine eye fixed most commonly on the
Preacher, that so thou mayest keepe it:
and thy thoughts from idle wandring;
marke the Text, obserue his Deuision,
marke how euery poynt is handled,
quote the place of Scripture which he
alleadgeth for his doctrine proofe, fold
downe a leafe in your Bible, frō whence
the place is recited, that so at your leasure,

after your returne frō the Church,
you may examine it: apply that which
is spoken, to thy selfe; and endeauour
to be bettered by it. Continue in thy attentiue
hearing, without wearinesse,
from the beginning vnto the end of the
Sermon; and see that thou depart not
(vnlesse infirmitie of health, or some other
very necessarie occasion call thee
away) before with the rest of the Congregation,
by after Prayer and singing
of Psalmes, thou hast rendred thankes,
for the comfort and instruction which
thou hast receiued.
                     
                  
                  
                     The fift Exercise.
                     How to carry our selues after our departure
from Church.
                     AFter the returne from Church, reuiue
thy memorie with a briefe repetition
in thy minde, of that which
thou hast heard, before thy sitting
downe to dinner:Luk. 24. 13. & then with thanksgiuing▪
receiuing the blessing of God
to thy bodily comfort,Deut. 6. be mindfull to
season the same with good and godly
talke, to the glory of God, the comfort

of thy soule, and the edification of those
which are about thee.
                  
                  
                     The sixt Exercise.
                     Mixt Exercises to be done betweene or
after the publike Exercises.
                     BEtweene the publike Exercises,Deut. 6. 6. as also
when both of them are finished,Act. 17.
vse meditation,Psal. 147. and conference about
heauenly thinges;Heb. 6. 1. assemble thy Family
togeather, conferre with them what
they haue learned at the Sermon; instruct
and catechize them; read or cause
to be read somewhat of the Bible, or
some other godly Booke vnto them;
sing Psalmes togeather with them, and
keepe them in from idle and vaine Exercises.
                     And withall, remember vpon this day
especially,1. Cor. 16. 1. the workes of Mercie As
God hath blessed thee with earthly
things,Nehe. 8. 10. so remember to helpe the poore
and those which are in miserie.Actes. 36. If any
of thy neighbours be sicke,Iames. 3. visite him:Iob. 31.
if any be at 
                           •
                        arre, endeauour as much as
in thee lyeth, to be a make-peace betweene
them.
                     
                        
And so with godly Christian exercises,
conferring, reading, and singing of
Psalmes, with priuate Prayer also, and
calling thy selfe to account how that
day hath bin spent, continue the residue
of the day; that so after an holy keeping
of the Lordes day, the Lord may giue
thee an holy & quiet rest: and prosper
thee the better the weeke following;
yea, the whole residue of thy life.
                  
                  
                     For the Sacraments.
                     How to vse the Sacraments.
                     AS concerning the Sacraments; when
the Sacraments of Baptisme is to be
administred; haste not foorth of the
Church (as many doe) but continue thy
presence, that there thou mayest aright
(vnto thy comfort) consider with thy
selfe thine owne receiuing heretofore
into the visible body of Christs Church
and Congregation: as also that thou
mayest offer Prayers vnto God for the
Infant which is to be Baptized, like as
others did heretofore for thee. And for
the Sacrament of the Supper of the

Lord so prepare thy selfe according to
the direction in the Catechisme, as to be
ready to receiue it (if it may be) euen so
often as thou shalt perceiue it to be administered.
And when thou approchest
to the Table of the Lord to receiue it,
come with all reuerence; and let thine
heart be rapt with heauenly meditation:
when thou seest the Bread & Wine
deliuered, let thine heart within thee
meditate so zealously & feruently vpon
the Passion of our blessed Lord and
Sauiour for thy redemption; as if with
thine owne eyes thou diddest then behold
his Body nayled on the Crosse,
and his precious Blood shedde for thy
sake: let this, and such like meditations,
enter into thy minde; and be not found
vnthankfull.
                  
                  
                     Rules as concerning Reading.
                     IN reading, first; Take heede what
Booke thou doest read; that they be
not leawd and wanton, nor needlesse
and vnprofitable, not sauouring of Popish
superstition. But either the holy
Scriptures, or other sound and godly

Authors. In reading of the Scriptures,
read not heere, and there a Chapter,
(except vpon some good occasion) but
the Bible in order throughout, and that
as oft as thou canst, that so by litle and
litle, thou mayest be acquainted with
the whole course and Historie of the
Bible.
                     3 In reading of other good Bookes,
read not heere a leafe of one, & a Chapter
of an other (as idle Readers vse to
do for nouelties sake) but make choyse
of one or two sound and well pende
Bookes; which reade againe and againe,
for confirming of thy memorie, and directing
of thy practise.
                     4 Before reading, pray vnto God
to blesse thee in that action.
                     5 In reading, settle thy selfe to doe
attention.
                     6 After reading, apply it to thy
selfe for thy instruction, in thy practise
and imitation.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer to be vsed before reading.
                     O Lord, whose word is a two edged
sword, to cut downe all thinges that

shall rise vp against the same, blesse me,
I beseech thee, in the reading of this thy
holy and heauenly Word; prepare me
with reuerence to read it, enlighten
mine vnderstanding to vnderstand it;
worke in mee, worke in mee, true obedience
to submit my selfe vnto it; that I
may lay it vp in the closet of my heart,
and bring it foorth in life and conuersation,
through Iesus Christ, &c.
                     This Prayer is to be made, before the
reading of the Bible: which holy Booke
of God (beside other priuate readinges
of it) it shall be very good if thou read it
after this manner, in thy house before
thy Familie; one Chapter in the morning,
an other at meales, an other in the
euening before Prayer: Beginning at
the beginning of the Bible, & continuing
to the end.
                  
                  
                     Of singing of Psalmes.
                     How to carry our selues in singing
of Psalmes.
                     OFten sing vnto the Lord,Col. 3. and to
thy Soules comfort,Iames. 3. in Psalmes,
Himmes,1. Cor. 14. and spirituall Songes: behaue

thy selfe reuerently in that action, bare
headed, and with all due reuerence, as
in the presence of the Lord: remember
to sing Dauids Psalmes with Dauids spirit;
sing with spirit, and sing with vnderstanding;
regard that, more then
the tune. All the Psalmes be very good
and comfortable; yet more especially
thou mayest vse this choyse.
                     Sing
                           In the Morning. Psal. 3. 5. 16.
                           In the Euening. Psal. 4. 92.
                           In time of heauines. Ps. 6. 13. 31. 91.
                           After benefites,

                                 publike. 80. 90. 137.
                                 priuate,

28. 126.
                              
                           
                           Commonly
at all times,
Psalmes
1. 8. 12. 15. 23. 25.
26. 30. 34. 46. 47.
67. 84. 100. 101. 103
116. 119. 146. &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     A thankes-giuing before meate.
                     O Lord our God & heauenly Father,
which of thy vnspeakable mercie
towardes vs, hast prouided Meate and
Drinke for the nourishment of our

weake bodyes; Giue vs grace to vse
them reuerently, as from thy handes,
with thankfull hearts: Let thy blessing
rest vpon these thy good creatures to
our comfort & sustentation: and grant
we humbly beseech thee, good Lord,
that as we do hunger and thirst for this
food of our bodyes, so our soules may
earnestly long after the food of eternall
life, through Iesus Christ our Lord and
Sauiour, Amen.
                  
                  
                     A thanks-giving after meate.
                     TO thee O Lord, O God, which hast
created, redeemed, continually preserued,
and at this present time fed vs, be
ascribed all honour, glory, power, might
and dominion, now and euermore. O
Lord preserue thy Church vniuersall,
this Church in which we liue, the Kings
Maiestie, the Queene, the Prince, and
the Realme: Graunt thy Gospell a free
passage; confound Antichrist and all
Heresies; finish soone these dayes of
sinne, and bring vs to euerlasting peace,
through thy Sonne our Lord and Sauiour
Iesus Christ. Amen.
                     
                        
Whether you eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer
you doe, doe all to the glory of
God.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Morning.
                     O Lord prepare our heartes to pray.
                     O Most mightie and eternall GOD,
who art the creator, guider, gouernour,
and preseruer of all thinges, both
in Heauen and in Earth, vouchsafe we
humbly beseech thee, to looke downe
with the eye of pittie and compassion
vpon vs, miserable & wretched sinners;
who at this time are prostrate heere before
thee, to offer vp this our Morning
Sacrifice of Prayer and Thankes-giuing
vnto thee. And although wee be
vnworthy, by reason of our manifolde
transgressions, to present our selues before
thee: yet we humbly beseech thee,
for thy Sonne Christ Iesus, our blessed
Lord and Sauiours sake, to accept of vs,
and to graunt these our Prayers and petitions
which we do make vnto thee.
                     Wee render vnto thee Lord, most

mightie and most mercifull, humble
and heartie thankes for all thy Blessinges,
and thy Benefites from time to
time bestowed vpon vs; for our Election,
Creation, Redemption, Iustification,
Vocation, that measure of Sanctification
in this life, and the assured
hope of Glorification in the life to
come: As also for our Health, Wealth,
Peace, and Prosperitie: for the free
passage of thy glorious Ghospell; for
sparing vs thus long, and giuing vs so
large a time of Repentaunce; as also for
all other thy Benefites, whensoeuer or
howsoeuer bestowed vpon vs: Wee
giue thee humble and heartie thankes
more particularly for thy gracious
protection of vs this night past, and
deliuering vs from all the perilles and
dangers of the same. And seeing thou
hast brought vs to the beginning of
this present day, wee humbly beseech
thee Lord, to protect and keepe vs in
the same: watch ouer vs with thy prouidenc;
Shelter & defende vs from all
the assaultes of the world, the Flesh, &
the Diuell. Keepe vs from all sinne,

especially from those sinnes whereto by
nature we are most addicted; Make vs
sorrowfull for our sinnes past, and seale
vnto our heartes, we humbly beseech
thee, full assuraunce of the forgiuenesse
of them, in thy Sonne our Sauiour
Iesus Christ: Increase our Fayth, our
Zeale, and our Knowledge, and make
vs dayly more and more to increase in
pietie, and true holinesse. Set a watch
O Lord, before the doore of our Hearts,
that they thinke not; before the doore
of our Lippes, that they speake not;
before all the partes of our body, that
they doe not any thing which is amisse,
or may breed offence. Blesse vs also
we beseech thee, in our calling wherein
thou hast set vs: prosper that which
thou hast giuen vnto vs, and which in
thy feare we set our handes vnto. Stirre
vs vp to imploy our selues faythfully,
religiously, and industriously, in our
calling: giue vs all thinges needfull for
this present life; and grant that we may
so passe through things temporall, that
our affection by them may not be withdrawne
from thinges eternall.
                     
                        
Neither doe wee pray for our selues
alone, but for thy whole Church, and
euery particular member thereof. Comfort
ô Lord them that are comfortlesse,
strengthen the weake, vpholde them
that stand, raise vp them that are fallen,
send helpe, comfort, and consolation in
thy good time, to all thy Children that
are in need, miserie, sicknesse, trouble,
or aduersitie. Blesse this Church and
Common-wealth wherein we liue: enter
not into Iudgement with the great
and crying sinnes of this Land, but first
remooue from vs our Sinnes, and then
take away thy heauie Iudgementes,
which either already are fallen vpō vs,
or shortly wee must needes feare that
they will befall vs. Giue thy Ghospell a
free passage dayly more & more: conuert,
or else confound those which repine
and hinder the propagation of the
same. Reforme those thinges which are
amisse, and graunt that thy glorious
Maiestie may be exalted in this Nation
euermore in sincere, pure, and holy
worshippe: powre downe all thy Blessinges
both spirituall & temporal vpon

our dread Soueraigne Lord the King,
the Queene, the Prince, & all their royal
issue: graunt them a long, happy, prosperous,
and religious life heere in this
world, and in the world to come, life
euerlasting. Blesse (good Lord) with
all blessinges the Nobilitie of this Land,
the Magistracie, Gentrie, and Commonaltie
of the same: be mercifull vnto all
those whom thou hast made neare and
deare vnto vs; sende foorth painefull
Labourers into thy Haruest, and blesse
those whom thou hast alredy sent;
particularly, good Lord in mercie behold
thy Serueant whom thou hast ordained
to breake the bread of life vnto
vs; giue to him O Lord, the Doore of
Vtteraunce, let thy blessing rest vpon
his labours; assist him in his Mediation,
and in his Studies, that both by life
and doctrine, he may be a guid vnto vs
in the way which leadeth to eternal life.
These things, and all other, which thou
knowest meete and requisite for vs, for
thy whole Church, and euery particular
member thereof, we humbly craue
at thy hands, in the name of thy Sonne

our Lord and sauionr Iesus Christ, concluding
these our Petitions with that
forme of Prayer which hee himselfe
hath taught vs, saying. Our Father
which art in Heauen, &c.
                  
                  
                     A Prayer for Euening.
                     O Eternall God, and in Christ Iesus,
our louing and mercifull
Father; Wee poore, wretched,
and miserable sinners, doe prostrate
our selues before thy diuine Maiestie,
humbly acknowledging, & from
the bottome of our heartes confessing
our manifold sinnes and wickednesse,
which from time to time we haue committed
against thee. O Lord wee haue
sinned, we haue sinned; our sinnes are
more in number then the Sandes of the
Sea, or the Haires of our Heads; neither
doe we know whither to flie for comfort
and helpe against the same, but
onely by appealing from thy Iustice, to
thy Mercie. To thee therefore doe we

come, in the name and meditation of our
Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, humbly
beseeching thee for his sake, to pardon
and forgiue vs all our sinnes, whether
they be sinnes of omission, sinnes of
commission, sinnes of ignorance, or
sins of wilfulnesse; whether in thought,
word, or deed, committed against thy
diuine Maiestie. O Lord throw them
out of thy remembrance, that they may
neuer hereafter rise vp in iudgement
against vs to condemne vs. And grant
vnto vs, we beseech thee, the assistance
of thine holy spirit, that we make a better
conscience of our wayes, and walke
more zealously and sincerely before
thee then heretofore we haue done. O
make vs heartily sorie as becommeth
thy children, for that we haue offended
thee so mercifull and louing a Father.
Frame vs dayly, and fashion vs to the
likenesse of thy welbeloued Sonne
Christ Iesus our Lord and Sauiour, that
in knowledge and true holinesse wee
may glorifie thee before the world, and
by the fruites of pietie and righteousnesse,
may be assured & certaine of thy

spirit, and of thy loue wherewith all
thou louest vs: worke in vs a certaine
Fayth & an assured Hope of thy Promises,
the true feare of thy Maiestie; a
perfect hatred & detestation of all sinne
and wickednesse: worke in vs a sincere
loue toward thy children, and amongst
our selues Patience, Knowledge, Vertue,
Loue, Compassion, with all other
graces of thy Kingdome, that in all our
behauiour, thou our good God, mayest
be glorified by vs, and in vs.
                     Stirre vp, O Lord, our dull and sluggish
nature to call vpon thee continually:
Frame vs wholly vnto thy will, and
make vs to be content in what estate
soeuer it shall please thee to set vs; that
so we liuing here in this world, in thy
feare, and dying in thy fauour, in the
end, may attaine to a ioyfull resurrection
vnto eternall life.
                     In the meane while, good Father, be
mercifull vnto vs, in the thinges of this
life euen so farre foorth as thou shalt
see it most meete and requisite for vs.
Graunt vs, if it be thy blessed will, the
continuance of the blessing of Health,

Peace, & Maintenance; and togeather
with them, we beseech thee, let vs haue
thy holy Spirit, to instruct vs in the true
and lawfull vse of them, that wee may
more earnestly and seriously labour in
our places and callinges wherein thou
hast set vs, to the promoting & increase
of thy Kingdome, and to the benefite
and comfort of thy Children. Be mercifull,
good Lord, vnto thy Church vniuersall,
scattered abroad vpon the face
of the whole Earth; send helpe & comfort
to all our Brethren wheresoeuer,
which are in need, affliction, or miserie:
beat downe the furie and rage of Antichrist,
and his Kingdome, and dayly
more and more increase the number of
thy faythfull flocke.
                     And forasmuch as it hath pleased
thee in mercie, aboue all other Nations
of the earth, to powre downe the sweet
streame of thy blessinges vpon this
litle Iland in which wee liue, by promoting
of thy Ghospell, & ouerthrowing
of Idolatrie. Wee beseech thee, to
continue towardes the same, and to
establish in this thy Church a pure,

perfect, and sincere Regiment thereof,
that in the same, thy most glorious Maiestie
may be exalted in sincere, pure,
and holy worship; and that this thy
Church may flourish and increase, being
through thy safe protection ayded,
supported, and miraculously defended.
Guide and rule, we beseech thee, with
thy holy Spirit euery part and member
thereof, especially thy gratious Seruant
our dread Soueraigne Lord and
King; graunt vnto him, O Lord, a pure
and perfect zeale aboue all thinges to
promote thy glory; giue vnto him the
spirit of Wisedome, Discretion, and
Gouernement, that with all equitie and
iustice hee may see this whole Realme
peaceably and quietly gouerned: Deliuer
him, O Lord, as hitherto most
wonderfully thou hast done, from all
forraigne, and home-bred Traytors;
and graunt vnto him, if it be thy will,
a long and quiet raigne ouer vs, to the
benefit of thy Church, and the aduancement
of thy glory. Blesse also, wee
beseech thee, with aboundance of blessings,
both spirituall and temporall, the

Queenes Maiestie, the young prince,
with the rest of the King and Queenes
royall issue, and make them worthy instruments
of thy glory, when time and
occasion shall serue thereunto. Blesse O
Lord, the Nobilitie, the Gentrie, the
Commonalty, all the Estates of this
land. Comfort al them that be comfortlesse;
and remoue thy heauy iudgements
from those places on which they
are fallen: lastly, for our selues, wee become
againe humble petitioners vnto
thy diuine Maiestie. Blesse vs O Lord,
and this whole Family with thy grace
and peace; make vs thankfull for all thy
blessinges from time to time bestowed
vpon vs; forgiue vs the sinne which
this day past we haue cōmitted against
thy diuine Maiestie. And as thou hast
brought vs to the beginning of this
present night, so protect, guide, and defend
vs wee beseech thee in the same.
Deliuer vs, and all that doth belong vnto
vs, from Fire, Robberie, or any other
perill or danger, which this night may
befall vs: giue vnto our bodyes quiet
rest & sleepe, that they may be the better

enabled to vndergoe those places
and callinges, wherein thou hast set vs:
watch ouer vs, ouer our soules, & keepe
them from all sinne and vncleannesse,
from all euill motions, idle fantasies,
vaine dreames, and sinister imaginations,
and prepare vs daily more & more
against the comming of thy Sonne
Christ Iesus. And now, O Lord, wee
haue commenced our suites vnto thee;
our Vnderstanding is weake, our Memorie
is frayle, and wee are not worthy
to pray vnto thee; more vnworthy to
receiue the thinges wee pray for: and
therefore wee commend our selues and
our prayers vnto thee, in the name and
mediation of thy Sonne our Sauiour,
humbly beging and crauing both these
our former Petitions, and all things else
needfull for vs, in that forme of prayer
which he hath taught vs, saying: Our
Father which art in Heauen. &c.
                     FINIS.
                     GEORGE WEBBE.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Good Counsaile.
                  
                     1
                     DOe nothing but by good aduise,
take counsai
                           •
                        e of the Wise:
                     So that the cloudes of ignorance
may vanish from thine eyes.
                  
                  
                     2
                     Whose hap it is to haue a friend,
that faythfull is indeed,
                     Is worth much more then kinsmen are,
that fayle when we doe need.
                  
                  
                     3
                     For Kinsmen gape for Kinsmens death
in hope to reape the gaine
                     Of that they neuer labour for:
by any kind of paine.
                  
                  
                     4
                     The companie of him that's wise,
although he be but poore,
                     Is better then the Foole that's rich,
who layes vp craft in store.
                  
                  
                     5
                     Spare not to spende thy Gold and wealth
for meat & drinke, & cloth:
                     For Wisedome, Learning, & for health,
or else to spend, be loth.
                     
                     And ten times blest the man is thought,
that from leawd Women flies:
                     And can correct his Eare sometime,
and Eye, from what he sees.
                  
                  
                     7
                     The Wisemen seekes vnto the Rich,
The Rich not to the Wise:
                     And why? because that worldly folkes
good Science doe despise.
                  
                  
                     8
                     He that hath Wit & Learning both,
and cannot guide the same.
                     Is like a Bell that wanteth sound,
or Cripple that is lame.
                  
                  
                     9
                     Loose not thy Friende for slender cause,
but keepe his friendship still:
                     For if thy Foe thee friendlesse know,
then will he worke his will.
                  
                  
                     10
                     Sith life is short, then liue at rest,
loue quietnesse alway:
                     For he that is aliue to night,
may die within a day.
                  
                  
                     11
                     Do good with riches while they last
least when thou wouldst, thou want:
                     A litle thing doth helpe them much,
with whom all thinges are scant.
                  
                  
                     12
                     The greatest wisdome in thy wealth
is for to watch thy Foe,
                     For euery man is not thy Friend,

that like a friend doth show.
                  
                  
                     13
                     When Markets barren be of Corne
and Victuals to be sold,
                     There hunger is: so is there griefe
with him that hath a Scold.
                  
                  
                     14
                     Thy secrets seeme not to impart,
not to thy onely Child:
                     We see by proofe, where men haue trust
that oft they be beguild.
                  
                  
                     15
                     Make of men, that be more worth
then any Gold or Treasure:
                     In bragging Doults no wise man can
take any kind of pleasure.
                  
                  
                     16
                     The Couetous Man is neuer rich,
but stil he scrapes for more:
                     To see his Neighbour liue at ease,
doth make his eye-sight sore.
                  
                  
                     17
                     The Patient haue euer prayse;
the Proud doth reape disdaine:
                     And Iacke will be a Gentleman,
if Office he obtaine.
                  
                  
                     18
                     The liberall man he couets not
the thing that is not his:
                     For still in wishing others goods,
no liberall dealing is.
                  
                  
                     19
                     A wise man learnd may knowledge giue,
and minish not his store:
                     
                        
The Rich man if he giue his goods,
receiuers make him poore.
                  
                  
                     20
                     The sicknesse sore is perilous,
when men be sicke for Riches:
                     It spoyles them of their sleepe by night,
and them from conscience twitches.
                  
                  
                     21
                     Hee that will call vpon thy cost
so fast for Wine and Beere;
                     Will be full loth to thee or thine,
to make but halfe the cheere.
                  
                  
                     22
                     Thy trencher neighbor euer marke▪
he loues thee for his panch:
                     Of thankes to grow tenth part againe,
from him there springes no branch.
                  
                  
                     23
                     Likewise the godly meaning man,
which doth the others good:
                     Those that doe taste thereof (we see)
desireth most his blood.
                  
                  
                     24
                     But if thou giue, giue thē that want
that shalt thou haue againe:
                     To giue to them that needeth not,
thy gift is lost in vaine.
                  
                  
                     25
                     Let no Man weepe for him that's slaine,
but weepe for him that slue:
                     The danger of the one is past,
the other doth ensue.
                  
                  
                     26
                     Beware thou keepe not company

with such as be too stout;
                     Nor with such men as quarrell much,
the end is bad no doubt.
                  
                  
                     27
                     Nor to be angry with the man
that's prouder then thy selfe:
                     For Pride consisteth not in birth,
in goods, in land, or wealth.
                  
                  
                     28
                     Ten times vnhappy is the man,
that dwels in malice still;
                     For he shall neuer liue in rest,
that lookes to haue his will.
                  
                  
                     29
                     Before thou sleepe, cal thou to mind
what thou hast done all day:
                     And if thy Conscience be opprest,
to God for mercie pray.
                  
                  
                     30
                     Lead such a life that still thy soule
may stand in state of ioy,
                     Although the world a thousand wayes,
thy carefull conscience noy.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A godly Meditation to be had in
minde at our going to bedde.
                  
                     BEware, let not the sluggish sleepe,
close vp thy waking eye,
                     Vntill such time with iudgement deepe
thy dayly deedes thou try.
                  
                  
                     Hee that one sinne in conscience kepes
when he to quiet goes,
                     More ventrous is, then he that sleepes
with twentie mortall foes.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore at night, call well to minde,
how thou the day hast spent:
                     Thank God if nought amisse thou find
if ought, betime repent.
                  
                  
                     The frisking Flea resembleth well
the crawling Worme to mee:
                     Which in the Graue with me shal dwel
where I no light shall see.
                  
                  
                     The nightly Bell which I heare toule,
when I am layd in Bedde,
                     
                        
Declares that Bell which for my soule,
shall sound when I am dead.
                  
                  
                     And sith my Bedde a patterne is
of Death, and fatall Hearse;
                     Beware, it shall not be amisse,
thus to record this Verse.
                  
                  
                     My Bedde is like my Graue so cold:
                     And Sleepe, which shuts mine eye,
                     Resembleth Death: Cloathes which me fold,
declares the Mould so dry.
                  
                  
                     The rising in the Morne likewise,
when sleepie night is past,
                     Puts me in minde how I shall rise
to Iudgement at the last.
                  
                  
                     I goe to Bedde as to my Graue,
                     God knowes when I shall wake:
                     But Lord, I trust thou wilt me saue,
and eke to mercie take.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE SOLACE OF
THE SOVLE.
                  
                     VVIth fierie winges sublime thy selfe my spright,
                     Mount to the throne where neuer change shall bee:
                     The Earth despise, in that take no delight,
                     Where nought but change, presentes it selfe to thee:
                     Low shadowes heere, true substaunce raignes aboue:
                     Then scorne the worst, and learne the best to proue.
                  
                  
                     Let not Conceit, deluded with Vaine-showes,
                     Transport thy doome, to fixe assured trust
                     In brittle stuffe, by course which ebbes and flowes,
                     And must dissolue in end, to rotten dust.
                     Such subiect base, and matter vile by kinde,
                     Should not subdue the force of heauenly minde.
                  
                  
                     From liuing Fire, thou first eternall came,
                     Not thrall to Death, a vassall to thy good,
                     A Lampe of light with euer burning flame,
                     Infusde with Grace, and nurst with Angels food:
                     Staine not thy birth, nor worth of so high price,
                     Nor bastard prooue, to follow cursed vice.
                  
                  
                     
                     Great be thy giftes, and vertues, if thou please,
                     To know, to iudge, to rule all thinges at will:
                     The World was made for thine aspect and ease,
                     And nought therein, might breed thee harme or ill:
                     In liew of these, there is requir'd but this.
                     To loue and feare the Lord of ioy and blisse.
                  
                  
                     Then wake my soule, exalt thy selfe on high,
                     Bee blinde no more, but vse thy force and might:
                     Let Follie sincke, let painted Pleasure die:
                     Shunne Darknesse deepe, and seeke the blessed Light:
                     For Earth yeeldes toyle, care, discord, paine, and griefe:
                     But Heauen giues rest, peace, comfort, and reliefe.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                  A
GARDEN
of Spirituall
Flowers.
                  2 Part.
                  Yeelding a sweet smelling sauour
in the Nosthrils of each
true-hearted Christian.
                  LONDON:
Printed by T. S. for T. Pauier,
dwelling at the signe of the
Catte and Parrets neare
the Exchange.
1613.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A GARDEN OF
Spirituall Flowers.
               
                  A Threefold Alphabet of
rules concerning CHRISTIAN
practise.
                  
                     A
                     1 AWake with GOD in the
morning, and before all
things giue him your first
fruits and calues of your
lips, 1. in Confession of sinnes: 2. Petition
of necessaries for body and soule. 3 Thankefulnesse for mercies receiued,Iosh. 24. 15.
especially your late preseruation,
rest, and protection of you and yours.
                     2 Account it not enough that your
selfe serue GOD,Gen. 14. 14. and 18. 19. vnlesse you see all in
your charge doe the same.
                     3 Arme your selfe against vvhatsoeuer
the day may bring forth, and vpon
all occasions thinke on your happy redemption,
with much thankfulnes for so
happy coniunction of iustice & mercie.
                  
                  
                     
                     B
                     1 BEware of occasions of sinne,
and wisely inure your selfe in
subduing the least, that at length the
greater may be foiled.
                     2 Beleeue all that God speaketh vnto
you out of his word,1 Sam. 10. 16. but not all that
man telleth you: nor tell to another all
that you heare; but onely the truth, and
that neither all nor alwayes.
                     3 Before you doe take in hand any
thing,2 Sam. 2. 1 counsell with Gods word if it be
lawfull, & then performe it with prayer,
that it may be as successefull as lawfull.
                  
                  
                     C
                     1 CArefully set your selfe in Gods
presence all the day long, that
setting him at your right hand you may
not fall.
                     2 Carrie your selfe vnto all as the
weake may be wonne,1 Cor. 10. 32. the strong comforted,
and the wicked ashamed.
                     3 Consider the dignitie of your
soule,Mat. 15. 18. how beautifull it is to God and his
Angels, so long as you keepe it vnspotted;
that so you may clense your heart
from the first motions of sinnefull

thoughts, as Lust, Anger, Enuie, Pride,
Ambition, Couetousnes, and the rather
because the least sinne deserueth death.
                  
                  
                     D
                     1 DAily, Morning and Euening at
least, solemnely on your knees
make confession & requests with thanksgiuing:
first, preparing your heart to
seeke the Lord. In the Morning thinke
that that day may be your last day: and
when you goe to bed you know not whether
you shall rise, vnlesse it be to iudgement.
It is safest therefore to vse prayer,
as a key to open the Morning, and as a
barre or locke to shut in the Euening.
                     2 Delight to doe all the good you
can to Gods children;Gal. 6. 10. and to receiue all
the good you can from them.
                     3 Distrust not Gods prouidence in
any matter,2 Chr. 16. although you see the meanes
wanting; neither when you haue them
let them be relied on more then GOD
himselfe; but let him be prayed vnto
for the prosperous vse of them.
                  
                  
                     E
                     1 EXercise your minde in meditating
often on the workes ofIer. 12. 2.
                        
God, as his creating and gouerning of
the world, his prospering and punishing
the wicked, his blessing and correcting
his children, his preparing of vnspeakeable
ioy for the one, and vnutterable torment
for other. But especially on the
Sabbath adde to these meditations the
holy exercises of prayer, preaching, Sacraments
holy conference, & such like.
                     2 Esteeme of euery one better then
your selfe,Rom. 12. 16. and the more you excell another,
be so much the more humbled.
                     3 Examine your thoughts well whither
they tend before you fulfill your
owne desires;Rom. 14. 23. if you finde them vnprofitable,
curious, vaine, or such as you cannot
yeeld a sufficient reason to God or
man for, kill them in the shell, let them
not liue or breath longer in you.
                  
                  
                     F
                     1 FEare GOD and keepe his commaundements:Eccles. 12. 23.
for, this is the
whole dutie of man.
                     2 Flie and auoyd places and persons
infectious,Pro. 5. 8. & 6. 27. 28. vvanton, idle, vnthrifty and
bad companie, which are to the soule as
poisoned and infected ayre to the body.
                     
                        
3 Follow with faithfulnes & diligence
your owne busines in the lawfull & particular
calling wherein God hath placed
you;Eccles. 1. 13. onely be carefull in your earthly
businesse to carrie an heauenly minde.
                  
                  
                     G
                     1 GRow vp daily in the practise of
euery commandement, and in
the faith of euery promise of God; seeing
God would haue the planted in his
house thriue, well liking & more fruitfull
in their age. Hee that is not best at last
may seate whether euer he were good.
                     2 Giue no offence iustly vnto any
man whether within or without:1 Cor. 10. 32. for woe
to them by whom offences come.
                     3 Grieue for nothing in the world so
much as for your owne sinnes,Rom. 7. 8. and in
them for nothing so much as for offending
so louing a God; and that not onely
in committing of euill, but also in omitting
of good.
                  
                  
                     H
                     1 HVmble your selfe for your sins,2 Cor. 11. 31.
that the Lord may raise you vp;
for he that iudgeth himselfe aright, shall
neuer be iudged of the Lord.
                     
                        
2 Honour all men in their places;1 Pet. 2. 17.
but no man so much for his greatnesse
as for his goodnes: and thus shall you
imitate the Lord himselfe, who accepteth
not persons;Act. 10. 35. but in euery nation accepteth
him that feareth him.
                     3 Haue speciall care to auoid the sins
which you haue found your selfe most
inclined vnto, and which haue in times
past most preuailed: for sinne is loth to
be said nay, and Sathan seeketh reentrie.
                  
                  
                     I
                     1 IVstifie Gods wisedome in all his proceedings
concerning your selfe and
others, his power in sustaining, his prouidence
in maintaining, his Iustice in
punishing, his loue in correcting, his
bountie in promising, his faithfulnes in
performing, his grace in giuing, his mercy
in taking away: and in all things from
the heart, blesse the name of the Lord.
                     2 In euery companie receiue some
good, and doe some also to your power;
leaue no ill sauour behind, you, neither
doe hurt by speech, silence, countenance
or example. In your praises be discreete
in saluting courteous, in admonishing

brotherly; and wise in mouing and entertaining
speech or conference.
                     3 It is feareful to sin,Psal. 15. 3. but more to liue in
it; & therefore register all your sins daily,
bewaile them all times, pray for pardon
of them and strength against them; contemne
none as counting it little, because
God hath condemned it, & Christ hath
died for it, or else must you eternally.
                  
                  
                     K
                     1 KNow GOD in Christ,Iob 17. 3. which is
life euerlasting: kisse the sonne
of GOD, lest hee be angrie; and know
your selfe to bee a beleeuer, and that
Christ is in you and you in him.
                     2 Keepe as your vowes with God,Psal. 15. 4. so
your lawfull promises vvith men; for
faith and truth must kisse each other in
Christian conuersation.
                     3 Keepe out wandring and worldly
thoughts as much as possibly may bee,Prou. 4. 23.
narrowly watching your heart; for such
as you suffer that to be, such will be your
words, deeds, and whole conuersation.
                  
                  
                     L
                     1 LOue all things for Gods sake, &
GOD onely for his owne; and

looke you make him your friend, whosoeuer
be your enemie for it: this you
shall doe, if as an obedient childe you
liue in the eye of your heauenly father.
                     2 Looke vpon the liues and behauiours
of the wicked, to auoyd them, of
the godly to imitate them, vpon the life
and death of them both, as also your
owne not far off; to make you lothe this
world, and long after the life to come.
                     3 Let your meate,Luk. 24. 34. apparell, recreation
be lawfull, needfull, and moderate.
                  
                  
                     M
                     1 MAke no mention of God,Deut. 28. 58. or
any word or worke of his,
but with feare and reuerence; nor of any
man but with loue, and carefulnesse,
vsing his name as you would haue him
to vse yours.
                     2 Marke other mens profiting in religion
to prouoke your selfe, their slips
to make your selfe more wary, their risings
to be thankfull to God for them.
                     3 Meditate often vpon the foure last
things, 1. Death, 2. Iudgement, 3. Heauen,
4. Hell.
                  
                  
                     
                     N
                     1 NEuer make shew of more holines
outwardly,Rom. 12. 11. then inwardly
you haue in your heart, vvhich GOD
seeth, in which hee desireth truth: nor
please your selfe with your vnprofitablenes,
vnfitnes, or vnwillingnes to good.
                     2 No man is owner but steward of that
he hath: you must therefore impart of
the blessings you haue to those that
stand in need, wisely, heartily, and in due
season.
                     3 Note your owne speciall corruptions,1 Cor. 11. 28.
vvhether they grow strong or
weaker, and how your selfe can resist
them; & if any assault you more strongly,
pray and make the matter knowne to
God. The best way for a woman solicited
to folly, to be rid of the tempter, is
to tell her husband.
                  
                  
                     O
                     1 OFten speake to the praise of
GOD, neuer of your selfe;Prou. 17. 27. & 10. 19. for
other things, because many words want
not iniquity, speake as few as you can, or
rather none then vnprofitable.
                     2 Open not your mouth to speakePsal. 15. 3.
                        
of other mens infirmities especially behinde
them, nor before them without
griefe and sorrow.
                     3 Of euery idle word,Mat. 12. 36. account must
bee giuen, and much more of euery
vvicked vvord: and therefore let your
speech be gratious, poudred with salt,
and tending to edification.
                  
                  
                     P
                     1 PRaise the Lord for euery new
benefit bestowed,1 Thes. 5. 18. and then by
it promote his glorie, the Churches
good, and your owne saluation; esteeming
of graces giuen as spurres to godlynesse,
and pledges of eternall life.
                     2 Preuent anger before it kindle,Eccles. 7. 11. it is
wisedome to quench the first sparkle of
fire before it begin to flame. Consider,
1. The originall of anger, being pride or
selfe-loue: 2. The cursed fruits, by giuing
place to the Diuell: 3. Gods patience:
4. Gods image in your brother: 5. Your
owne weaknesse in the same kinde: 6.
The wrong is not remedied by reuenge,
but inlarged; nor the wrong doer amended,
but imitated.
                     3 Prepare your selfe for death, and

pull out his sting:1 Cor. 15. 56. first by bewayling
sinnes past: 2. turning to God in time to
come: 3. purposing a new life. None
can die ill that bath had a care to liue
well. Perswade your selfe, if you liue well
you shall doe well; but if you dye well,
doubt not but you shall doe better.
                  
                  
                     Q
                     1 QViet your heart and be still vnder
the correcting hand of
God;Psal. 39. 9. because, 1. he doth it: 2. for your
best: 3. hee will moderate it: 4. supplie
strength: 5. seasonably deliuer out of it.
                     2 Question not whether others
should doe you good,Math. 5. 39. or you them first;
it is praise worthy to be first in well doing:
and if you doe good to your enemies,
your reward is with God.
                     3 Quench not the spirit,1 Thes. 5. 19. nor suffer
any godly motion arising in your heart
to passe away, but feed it by reading, meditation,
prayer and practise.
                  
                  
                     R
                     1 REade daily something of Gods
booke for the increase of knowledge
and conscience;Psal. 1. 2. and adde hereto
meditation and prayer: for these three,

saith Luther, make a diuine: all time thus
spent is well redeemed. As for lasciuious
and idle bookes, shunne them as rockes.
                     2 Reioyce in the good you know by
another; prayse God for it, pray for the
increase of it. But if you know any euill
by any, mourne for it; and if you can, by
brotherly admonition amend it.
                     3 Refraine your eares,Iob 31. 1. eyes, mouth
and hands, from hearing, seeing, speaking,
or performing any wicked and
vaine things; knowing that death often
entreth in at the windowes.
                  
                  
                     S
                     1 STicke to God as well in aduersitie
as prosperitie,Iam. 1. 2. the one being
as necessary as the other. If you want
necessaries, humble your selfe for them:
if you haue them, be humble with them;
and vse them well lest you forfeit them.
                     2 Seeke reconciliation vvith your
neighbour,Mat. 5. 23. freely forgiuing those that
haue offended you, and earnestly desiring
to bee forgiuen of all that haue bin
offended by you.
                     3 Studie to approue both your heart
to God,Mat. 23. 26. and your life to Gods children

in your particular calling, and especially
to such as to whom God hath ioyned
you: as if a seruant, in obaying; if a Master
in ruling; if an husband in louing;
if a wife in reuerencing: for a good conscience,
a good name, and good manners
must goe together.
                  
                  
                     T
                     1 TAke heed of performing holy
duties for fashions sake,Heb. 3. 12. or
without feeling and profit, for this is hypocrisie
or prophanenesse.
                     2 Thankfully requite,Rom 1. 12. 16. &. 1. 12. at least with, 1.
acknowledgement, 2. hearty affection,
3. prayer, the good you get by any man;
for there is no member of the body but
standeth in neede of other mens gifts.
                     3 Thinke it the greatest worke in
the world to dye well: which to doe you
must invre your selfe to die before hand;
1. by dying to your sinnes: 2. leauing
the world in affection, before it actually
leaue you: 3. in your last leauing of it,
doe it willingly, yea ioyfully, whensoeuer,
wheresoeuer, or howsoeuer God
shall call you.
                  
                  
                     
                     V
                     1 VOw to God and keepe it,Eccles. 5. 3. 4. especially
striue in performing
the solemne vow of your baptisme, and
the couenants which you renew in the
Lords supper.
                     2 Variance and discord with men
will not stand with your peace with God.1 Ioh. 4. 20.
If you loue God you will loue men also,
for Gods image, or els for his Commandements
sake.
                     3 Vse the world as not vsing it,1 Cor. 7. 31. and
your prosperitie and liberty to be bettered
by them. That is not gained which
is gotten with the losse of your soule:
and then is the soule exchanged with
an handfull of the world, when it is not
gotten and held: 1. in Christ restoring
it: 2. with Christ the chiefe gaine: 3. for
Christ the Lord of it.
                  
                  
                     W
                     1 VVAit vpon the Lord and
hee will direct your way,Psal. 37. 34.
become his seruant, for this is the way to
attaine your truest libertie.
                     2 Weepe with them that weepe, and
fellow-feele the afflictions of the brethren

that are in the world.Ezech. 9. 4. Christ in heauen
accounteth the sufferings of his
Saints his owne: and wee his members
vpon earth must doe the same. Religion
and mercie are well matched by God,
and must not by man bee diuorced. As
for the miseries and sinnes of the age
wherein you liue, mourne also for them,
and pray to God for remedie.
                     3 Wish not a long life so much as a
good life. He hath liued long who hath
liued well. A short life in grace setteth into
the euerlasting life of glory.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  Fiue Rowes of Precepts, both for
the inward and outward ordering of
a CHRISTIAN life.
                  
                     The first ROVVE, concerning
our thoughts.
                     1 THat I be carefull to keepe a better
vvatch ouer my thoughts,1 Cor. 6. 20.
words, or deedes, then heretofore I haue
done, to doe them more vvarily, for
Gods glory, mine owne comfort, and
my brethrens benefit.
                     2 That I cleanse my heart from the

very first motions of all sinfull thoughts
as of lust, anger, enuie, pride, couetousnesse,
malice, stubbornesse, euill suspicion,
knowing that the least sinne deserueth
death, and doth depriue me of part
of the comfort of my saluation.
                     3 That all my lawfull affections be
moderate and without excesse,Ephes. 4. 1. and
greater alwayes vpon heauenly things
then on earthly.
                     4 That I fulfill not my minde in all
things: for then shall I often sinne. I
must therefore consider whether that
be lawfull which I doe desire, and for the
glory of God.
                     5 That I bestow no more care or
thought vpon the world then I must
needs, for the moderate maintayning of
my selfe,1 Tim. 6. 8 and those that belongs to mee,
lest my thoughts be too much distracted
from heauenly things.
                     6 That I suffer not my minde to be
occupied with vnprofitable cares, or
vaine meditations, for which I cannot
giue a sufficient reason to God or man,
if I were asked.
                     7 That I thinke better of my brethrenRom. 12. 16.
                        
then of my selfe: and the more
that I excell in any thing, the more
humble I be before God and men.
                     8 That I take some time euery day to
meditate vpon the word of God,Psal. 69. 9. or some
other good bookes, and the rather for
the miseries of the time, and the iniquirie
of the age wherein I liue, and pray to
God for remedie.
                     9 That I thinke often on the vanitie
of my life,Tit. 2. 3. vpon my departure hence,
daily looking for my Sauiour in the
clouds, and wishing rather a godly life
then a long.
                     10 That I carefully meditate and remember
euery good thing that I heare
or learne,Acts 17. 11 that I may readily practise it
when time and occasion shall serue.
                  
                  
                     The second Rowe of Precepts, for
our SPEECHES and WORDS.
                     1 THat I remember, that such as
my speech is, such is my heart:
for out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaketh. And that both my
heart and mouth goe together.
                     
                        
2 That my speech be gracious,Col. 4. 6. to the
edification, good, and benefit of them
with whom I speake, and not to their
euill or sinning.
                     3 That my speech be alwayes more
and more ioyfull, earnest, and comfortable
when I speake of heauenly things,
then earthly things and matters.
                     4 That I remember I shall answere
for euery idle word.
                     5 That multitude of words be often
sinfull:Iam. 1. 16. let me speake therefore as few as
I may; yea to be rather silent then to
speake vnprofitably.
                     6 That my words be no greater or
any more then my matter deserueth,
nor beare a shew of vice in me, or of any
excessiue affection.
                     7 That as I beleeue not all things that
are told mee,Luke. 2. 19. so I tell not all I heare, but
tell the truth onely: though not alwaies.
                     8 That I delight not to speake of other
mens infirmities, especially behinde
their backes, and speaking before them
with griefe and wisedome.
                     9 That I speake not of GOD but
with reuerence,Rom. 9. 5. knowing that I am not

worthy to take his name in my mouth.
                     10 That in praises I be discreete,Gal. 6. 1. in
salutations courteous, in admonitions
brotherly.
                  
                  
                     The third ROVVE, concerning
actions respecting GOD.
                     1 THat I vse daily prayer to God
euery Morning,Psal. 55. 17. Noone, and
Euening, that he would guide me in my
affaires, for his glory and mine owne
comfort.
                     2 That I register vp all my sinnes
committed against him in euery matter,
and with griefe bewaile them at fit time,
crauing pardon for them, and strength
against them.
                     3 That euery day something of Gods
word be read,Psal. 1. 2. and meditated on, that I
may thereby increase in godlinesse.
                     4 That whatsoeuer I take in hand, I
first take counsell at GODS word, whether
it be lawfull or no, be it for my profit,
or pleasure, and then that I doe it
with prayer, at least in my heart.
                     5 That I giue thankes to God for euery
benefit I receiue, and then dedicate

the same for promoting of his glory and
the benefit of his Chruch.
                     6 That I sanctifie GODS Sabbath
duely,Exod. 20. 8. in vsing the holy exercises of
prayer, preaching, meditating, and receiuing
the Sacraments at their time.
                     7 That any meanes that God hath
appoynted for any matter, be not more
relied vpon then God himselfe: but that
hee be first prayed vnto for the prosperous
vse of the meanes.
                     8 That I sticke to God as well in aduersitie,Psa. 65. 11.
as in prosperitie, knowing the
one to be as necessary for mee as the other:
yet let me pray for my necessaries,
and be humble when I haue them, that I
vse them well that I lose them not.
                     9 That I marke my profiting in religion,
prepare my selfe to heare Gods
word, attend when I am there, consider
and meditate of it after my departure.
                     10 That I loue all things for Gods
sake,Psal. 3. 8. and God onely for his owne: that I
make God my friend, and then nothing
can bee mine enemie, and couet in all
things to serue God sincerely.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourth ROVVE, respecting
our LIVES.
                     1 THat I refraine my eares from
hearing,Exo. 23. 1. my eyes from seeing,
my soule and body from fulfilling,
any vaine or wicked thing.
                     2 That my apparrell,Eph. 5. 1. 6. 1. meate, and recreation
be needfull, lawful, & moderate.
                     3 That with all care I redeeme the
time, knowing that I shall answer for euery
idle houre.
                     4 That I bee as sorrowfull for the
good deedes I haue omitted, as I am ioyfull
of the good deedes I haue fulfilled.
                     5 That my especiall sinnes and corruptions
be inquired into,1 Cor. 11. 28. and thought
vpon vvith griefe, vvhether they are
weakned in me, or remaine still in their
olde strength, and whether I resist them
with more & more faithfulnes euery day.
                     6 That I remember with humility,
all the good motions: and actions God
worketh in me, that they be pledges of
my saluation, spurres to godlinesse, and
comfort against tentations.
                     7 That I suffer not my selfe to bee

pleased with vnprofitablenesse, that is,
with vnwillingnesse toward good.
                     8 That I follow my lawfull calling so
carefully for the good of Gods Church,Gen. 3. 19.
or Common-wealth as feeling my misery
by Adam, I be humble thereby.
                     9 That I take reuenge of my selfe for
my slippery sinnes, or sinning, beating
downe my body that I sinne not againe.
                     10 That I neuer make more shew of
holinesse outwardly,Esay 58. 5. 6. then I haue inwardly
in heart.
                  
                  
                     The fift ROVVE, concerning our
actions towards others.
                     1 THat I remember, that whatsoeuer
I haue which may be vsed
toward others, God hath bestowed the
same vpon me for others benefit.
                     2 That I count it not sufficient that I
my selfe serue God onely,Gen. 18. 17. but also that
I cause all that are in my charge, by all
meanes, to doe the same.
                     3 That I consider that I am but Gods
steward in his benefits he hath lent me, &
therefore I ought to imploy them vvisely,
to those that need, heartily & intirely.
                     
                        
4 That I behaue my selfe toward all
so sincerely,1 Cor. 10. 32. 33. that I may win the weake,
comfort the strong, and make ashamed
the wicked.
                     5 That as I receiue good in companie,
so I doe them some good to my power.
                     6 That when I know others to sinne
I mourne for it,1 Cor. 5. 2. and amend it if I may, by
brotherly admonition.
                     7 That I reioyce and praise the Lord
for any good thing that he sendeth vnto
men, acknowledging it is for mine and
other godlies sake, through Christ, that
God vpholdeth the world.
                     8 That I striue not vvhether they
should do good to me,1 Thes. 5. 15. or I to them first:
but that I benefit euen mine owne enemies;
knowing my reward is with God.
                     9 That I be carefull to vse the good
I can receiue by any man, knowing I am
but a member of the body, and stand in
need of other members.
                     10 That I carefully craue the prayers
of other brethren,Rom. 15. 16. 30. and their praises to
God also, for the gifts I haue receiued:
and so shall I feele my fellowship in the
body more effectually.
                     FINIS.
                  
               
               
                  
                  An order for the gouernment
of Hous-holders and their families,
according to the word
of GOD.
                  
                     THe word of the Lord teacheth
vs, that it is not onely required
of Maisters, Parents, and Hous-holders,
that they them-selues
haue a care to liue in the feare of God:
but also they ought to see their whole families
to doe the same. And that this
charge is laide on them, note these
places of Scripture following.
                  
                     Exod. 13. 8. Thou shalt shew thy Sonne
in that day.
                  
                     Deut. 4. 9. Deut. 6. 7. Deut. 11. 9. Thou shalt rehearse my
will and commandements
to thy Children.
                  For as we are Maisters and Fathers in
earth, and looke to be serued and obeyed:
So I acknowledge for mine owne
part, that I haue a Father and Maister in
heauen; whose will I must obey, in gouerning
the people committed to my
charge, according to his will. This did

faithfull Abraham, called the Father of
the faithfull (Genes. 18. 19.) whose example
(by Gods assistance) I intend in
some measure to follow, to shew my dutifull
obedience, that the Lord may shew
his mercy on me and mine, as he promised
and performed to Abraham; And
therefore haue taken this order for the
gouernment of my house as followeth.
                  
                     FOR THE SABBATH.
                     1 FIrst, because our God hath sanctified
one day to himselfe, that is,
the Sabbath: I ordaine & command that
all my people shal repaire to the church,
accompanying me both fore-noone and
after-noone; there to stay & abide, during
the exercise of the word of GOD read
and preached; prayers, and partaking of
the Sacraments: And shall behaue themselues
there reuerently, as those that
come to appeare before Gods Maiestie.
                     None shall trauell on the Sabbath
without vrgent necessitie, nor absent
themselues from the Church, without
iust cause made knowne before to me.
                     None shall vse at that day running to

Reuels, haunting of Ale-houses, &c. But
spend the time after the publique exercise
of the word, in such godly manner,
as God teacheth in his word; as reading
the Scriptures,Iam. 5. 12. singing of Psalmes,
talking of his Commaundements,Dent. 6. 7. and
meditating of GODS creatures,Isa. 85. 13. to his
glory.
                     Againe, seeing the Sabboth is the market-day,
or day of preparing food for our
soules: euery one shall (being demanded)
giue an accompt of some thing that hee
hath learned, as wel in the Church to the
Minister, as also in my priuate house
when I my selfe, or some other by mine
appoyntment, shall examine him, that
I may know how he hath spent the Sabboth,
and profited in knowledge.
                     2 SEcondly, I ordaine and take order,
that euery Morning there be a generall
meeting of my seruants, before
they goe about their ordinary businesse,
(all excuses set apart) ioyning themselues
together, and commending themselues
to God by faithfull and hearty prayer &
blessing, without which our watching
and labour is in vaine,Psal. 127. 2 as Dauid noteth.
                     
                        
Also our rest and sleepe being a gift of
God, for the obtayning whereof, I appoint
in like manner, that there shall be
euery Euening the like assembling of all
my people (worldly excuses put apart)
to bestow together some conuenient
time in Prayer, singing of Psalmes, and
reading the Scriptures, or some other
godly matter.
                     3 THirdly, seeing the creatures of
God are sanctified vnto vs by
the word of GOD and prayer, and that
wee ought not to receiue them without
giuing thankes to GOD for them, as
SAINT Paul teacheth:1 Tim. 4. 4. 5. Therefore
I commaund that some one (in the
behalfe of the rest) both before and after
meate whensoeuer they receiue it, doe
with all reuerence praise GOD for the
same, the residue yeelding consent by
their reuerent silence.
                     4 FOurthly, concerning the common
behauiour of my people
euery where; I straitly forbid to sweare
in vaine by the reuerend name of GOD,
or otherwise to vse it vainely and vnreuerently:
I vtterly forbid all iesting and

scoffing at Gods most sacred word, his
true religion, the Preachers and the professors
of the same, all cursing, lying,
slandering, and filthy and vncleane talking:
I vtterly forbid all maintenance of
Popery and Superstition, and what else
soeuer may offend the Maiestie of God.
                     If any offend against these or any of
these orders aboue mentioned, through
weaknesse and not of malice, he shall be
once gently admonished, Mat. 18. 17.
If he offend the second time, to be more
sharply reproued: 1 Timoth. 15. 20. But
if he offend the third time, he shall confesse
his fault before the vvhole household
assembled together, shewing himselfe
sorrowfull for his fault, crauing pardon
of God, and reconcile himselfe to
the houshold whom he hath offended.
                     But if there be any of my family that
obstinatly refuse to beare this the Lords
yoke, and to be subiect to his ordinance,
he shall not continue in my house, but I
learne of Dauid, (Psal. 101. 6. 7.) a man
chosen after Gods owne heart, to driue
such wicked ones out of my house and
sight, and seeke for such as feare God,

and will make such my seruants; least entertaining
and nourishing the wicked into
my house, my negligence be punished
as was Elies; who being a hous-holder &
a Father, was said to haue honoured his
children more than God; because he entertained
them without punishment, hee
was depriued of both his sons in one day,
and himselfe brake his necke, &c. 1 Sam.
2. 31. 1 Sam. 3. 13. 1 Sam. 4. 17. 18. And
Salomon saith,Pro. 3. 33. that the curse of God is in
the house where the wicked are, but he
powreth his blessings vpon the habitation
of the righteous.
                     Therefore I further adde, that such
guests as repaire to my house, refusing
to be subiect to these ordinances of the
Almightie, and will not ioyne with mee
and my people to serue the Lord. I refuse
to be companion with such, or to receiue
him to be my guest, (for such procure
Gods wrath, as afore is said,) but I will say
with Dauid, Psalmes 119. 63. Those shall
be my companions that feare God, and
keepe his commandements: and those
shalbe my guests that be godly, iust, and
feare God. And as for the wicked and

rebellious against the ordinance of God,
seeing they are darknesse, with whom
light hath no communion, and seeing
they are as pitch, very likely to defile a
man, I will say to such, as our Sauiour
said of the like: away from mee ye workers
of iniquitie. And with that godly
house-keeper Dauid;
                        
                           Psal. 119. 115. Away from me ye
wicked, for I will keepe the commandements
of my God.
                     
                     
                        Ios. 24. 15. I, and my house will serue the LORD.
                     
                        Hest. 4. 16. I, and my maides will serue the Lord.
                     
                        Cornelius with his houshold feared God.Act. 10. 1.
                     
                  
               
               
                  A Scoare of wholesome Precepts,
or Directions for a Christian life.
                  1 ACcompt not of your selfe better
then you are, for the more base
you are in your owne conceit, the more
glorious are ye in the sight of God; for
God regardeth a lowly minde, as the
poore Publican that did deny himselfe
had more fauour in the sight of GOD,
then the proud Pharisie, that boasted
of himselfe.
                  2 Speake not of God but with reuerence,
knowing that wee are not worthy

to take his name in our mouth, much
more we ought not to take it vainely.
                  3 Hold fast to God, aswell in prosperitie,
as in aduersitie; for in aduersitie we
come to God, but in prosperitie we forget
our selues often: Also, if you be in aduersitie
despaire not, but waight vpon God
for deliuerance, and he will send it when
there is no hope of it, to the glory of
his owne name, and for the good of his
children, as Daniell from the Lyons.
                  4 Buy and redeeme the time past
with repentance; looke to the time present
with diligence, and to the time to
come with prouidence.
                  5 Let not malice make you to reueale
that vvhich friendship bound you
once for to conceale.
                  6 In Praysing be discreet: In saluting
courteous: and in admonishing brotherly,
not hastily and angerly.
                  7 Reade something of Gods word
daily, and doe not onely count it sufficient
that you serue God truely your selfe
but also looke that all your charge and
houshold doe the same truely.
                  8 Whatsoeuer blessings yee craue of

God, aske them in the name of Christ.
For no man commeth to the Father but by
me,
                     Ioh. 14. 6. 
                     saith Christ.
                  
                  9 Whatsoeuer you take in hand, before
you doe it aske counsaile of God,
vvhither it be lawfull, and then doe it
with peace of heart, if it be lawfull.
                  10 Looke that Meate, Apparell, & Recreation,
be needful, lawful, & moderate.
                  11 Take heede of presumptuous sins,
for though many presume that God is a
God of mercy, yet though he be a God
of mercy to the penitent, yet he is a God
of Iustice also.
                  12 Forsake the World, & flye to God;
for it is vnpossible, that a man louing the
World, should haue any comfort from
God, for the loue of the World is enmity
with God; besides keepe not any thing of
the World to you, that may draw you
from God; for God will not haue part of
the Man, but the whole Man.
                  13 Be alwayes armed against temptations,
for those that belong to CHRIST
must looke for temptations alwayes: and
thinke not if that ye haue ouercome any
temptation, once or twice, or often, that

then you are freed: for Christ was tempted
often, so were the Apostles, they had
one time peace and then persecution;
and then peace and after persecution, so
alwayes an intercourse: and when they
were in peace, they made ready to be armed
for temptation, knowing that they
should haue temptation: therefore this
life is called a Christian warfare.
                  14 Besides, if yee are tempted and tryed,
it sheweth manifestly that ye belong
to God: for God scourgeth euery Sonne
that hee receiueth: Besides, those that
haue no temptation or tryall, it sheweth
manifestly they belong to the Diuell:
for what need hath bee to tempt them
whom he hath already in bondage?
                  15 Flye from all sinnes in generall,
indeuour, and then God will accept your
indeuours though weake and imperfect,
through the perfection of Christ; and
sticke to no darling sinnes; for the Diuell
can as well hold a man insubiection
by one sinne, as by all sinnes.
                  16 Let the words that you speake
proceede from the good Spirit, and
not from the flesh, for if they doe,

GOD abhorreth them.
                  17 As God doth abound in mercy
and goodnesse towards you, so be you
inlarged to him in obedience.
                  18 When ye are tempted at any time
by the Diuell, or his Ministers, be sure
to haue the word of God to answere
him: for the word is compared to a two-edged
sword, that doth not onely defend
vs, but also offend our enemies.
                  19 Christ, he vsed Scripture to repell
the diuel, he could haue driuen the diuel
away with the breath of his Nostrils,
but hee did answere him with Scripture,
to shew vs example, that if wee were
tempted at any time, wee should with
Scripture repell him And that euery
one may know them the better, they
must reade them often, vse conference,
and marking the true meaning of the
vvords, and conferring one place of
Scripture with another, and praying to
God for to giue them the blessing of vnderstanding
it truely, and the like.
                  20 Follow your Betters, obserue
and marke the Wise, accompany the
honest, and loue the godly.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  
                     PSALME 90. 31.
                     Lord teach vs to number our dayes, that
we may apply our hearts vnto wisdome.
                  
                  THE Text is a Prayer of Moses, and
it hath three parts.
                  
                     1 A Lesson.
                     2 Scholler.
                     3 Schoole-master.
                  
                  1 The Lesson, to number our dayes,
which may be numbred foure wayes.
                  1 The account which Moses maketh:
the dayes of our life are threescore yeeres
and ten, this number euery child can tell.
                  2 By comparison of three times:
                  1 Past, which being once gone and
and past is nothing now it is past, were it
a thousand yeeres it is but a thought.
                  II Future, which being to come, it is
not yet certaine whether it will be to vs
or no.
                  III Present, which is but at the instant.
                  3 Deduction, or Abstraction: thus,
take from 70. yeeres 35. spent in sleepe,
and fifteene yeeres of our child-hoode,
the time of our vanitie; and tenne yeeres

allowed for eating, recreating, idle talke,
iourneyes, &c. then there will be found
but tenne yeeres remaining well spent:
whereof Lord how little is spent in thy
seruice? These three wayes of numbring
may be taught vs by men: the fourth
way God onely can teach.
                  4 By a Christian and heauenly Arithmeticke,
that is, so to number as we may
by due consideration of the shortnes and
vncertaintie of our life, apply our hearts
vnto wisedome.
                  The Lesson contains an eleauen points
of wisdome, to be learned from the vanitie
of our life: for if by Gods Spirit we be
perswaded that euery houre may be our
last, it will cause vs:
                  1 To set our house in order, that is, to
haue our last Will alwayes ready, as God
charged Ezechia, Esay 38. 1. lest death
preuent vs.
                  2 To repent speedily: with haste to
turne from all our sinnes, lest hereafter it
be too late:Psal. 95. 
                     while it is called to day harken.
                  
                  3 To beare all affliction with quiet
and patient mind, seeing they cannot be
long;Phil. 4. 
                     Patient, the Lord is at hand.
                  
                  
                     
4 To redeeme our time hauing mispent
much,Ephes. 5. and the remnant being so little
and vncertaine: as haruest-men and
trauellers which haue loytered the forepart
of the day, the more bestirre themselues
the latter part.
                  5 To be fruitfull in all good workes,
and constant in wel-doing, without wearinesse:
seeing the time is short, and there
will be an end, and the hope shall not perish,
and that wee shall finde all our good
workes in life eternall.
                  6 To esteeme wisely of the things of
this life which tarry with vs but a while,
as comforts of our pilgrimage, and testimonies
of Gods loue, and pledges of better
things layd vp in heauen for his.
                  7 So to vse the world, as if we did not
vse it, fixing our delight on GOD, and
the things of heauen, which wither not.
                  8 To be more studious of holy Scripture,
seeing the things which we are to
learne are many and weighty, and our
space to learne in so little.
                  9 To busie our selues much in the religious
education of our children, seeing
we are shortly to leaue them, and religion

is the best inheritance vvee can leaue
them, and wee to leaue them to a wicked
world.
                  10 To be full of good counsell toward
others, and our selues to bee more
capable of counsell.
                  11 To thinke euery word of God to
be sweet and comfortable to our selues,
and to feare God.
                  2 The Scholler, Moses, vvho had
learned the wisedome already; yet desireth
to be taught: how much more cause
haue we so to doe?
                  3 The Schole-maister, God, by his spirit,
to whom wee must therefore pray in
faith, & submit by our obedience.
                  Finis.
               
               
                  The degrees whereby Gods
eternall Councill proceedeth in
the sauing of them who are
to be saued.
                  ROMANS 8. 29. 30.
                  
                     THE most iust and mercifull
GOD hauing from euerlasting
propounded to glorifie
himselfe by mankind.
                  
                     
And to that end decreed to create all
men righteous in Adam.
                     Gen. 1. 26.
                  
                  Also to suffer Adam (for iust cause
being left to his owne vvill) to fall, and
by his will in disobedience to enwrap his
whole kinde in sinne and death.Rom. 5. 12.
                  
                  Setting all men (being now a lumpe
of corruption) in his sight,1 Fore-knowledge. there vvere
some of them in vvhom he tooke pleasure:1 Pet. 1. 2.
setting his loue on them, for no other
reason but because he vvould, and
was pleased so to doe.
                  Being pleased vvith some hee chose
them,2 Election. and seuered them from the rest,Rom. 9. 11.
by eternall election.
                  Whom he had thus chosen and culled
out (as it were) of the whole lost Masse,3 Purpose.
them hee purposed to saue,Ephes. 11. to the glory
of his mercy. Vessels of mercy.
                  After this he predestinated,4 Predestination. that is, fore-ordained
or appointed afore, to giue
them a Sauiour, euen his owne son to be
incarnate, and dye for their redemption.
                  And to giue them to him as his peculiar,
to be grafted in him as his members,
and made partakers of all his graces.
                  According to this fore determination5 Calling.
                     
and appointment, hee called them in
time, putting faith into them to receiue
Christ, being offered in the word and
Sacraments.
                  Then,6 Iustification. euen at the same time, he iustifieth
them by faith in his Sonne.
                  He sanctifieth them also by his sp
                        •
                     r
                        ••
                     
to liue a new life.7 Sanctification.
                  
                  Lastly,8 Gloryfication. at the end of their life he glorifieth
them.
                  As a builder comming to a heape of
stones.Note that foure of the former 8. degrees are executed in time, though they were decreed before all worlds. First, he liketh some: Secondly,
he chuseth them: Thirdly, he purposeth
to vse them: Fourthly, he fore-ordaines
with himselfe to hew them: Fiftly, hee
sets men on worke to square them. So is
Gods proceeding.
                  Those that shall be glorified are predestinated
to be like to Christ. First, in
the end, which is glory, ioy, and dominion
in heauen. Secondly, in the meanes,
which be, 1. Holinesse of life, 2. Suffering
affliction.
                  Christ, the first borne, excelleth all
his brethren: first, in Nature: 1. Diuine,
being the onely begotten SONNE of
God. 2. Humane, his manhood being

conceiued by the holy Ghost.
                  Secondly, in Office: being, 1. that
Prophet, to teach the Church perfectly
the whole will of GOD. 2. That high
Priest, by Sacrifice and Intercession to
pacifie Gods wrath. 3. That King, mightily
to protect and rule his people.
                  Thirdly, in Glory, blisse and dominion.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  The Examination and tryall
of our Christian estate: whereby we
may easily discerne whether wee abide
in the state of Nature, or the state of
Grace; whether slaues to Sinne and
Sathan, or seruants and heyres to
Christ and his Kingdome.
                  
                     YOu who haue walked in this
little Garden, and gathered
such flowers as may make a
Nosegay smelling sweet vnto
your soules, & to expell such stinking
weeds of sinne as might bring poyson to
the same; be not lesse mindfull to apply
the soueraigne salue of these sacred comforts
to the vpholding of your soules,

then men are vsed to be for the preseruing
and curing of their weake and decayed
bodyes: and for this purpose,
behold the carking care of vvorldly
men, who to aduance themselues
in these outward things, neuer cease
to afflict both soule and body, so they
may effect what themselues so much
desire. And that they may the better
perceiue the increase of their laborious
toyle, who doeth not often with
a serious eye behold and see into his
present estate, whereby they may discerne
in what estate they stand? If therefore
men be thus carefull and prouident
for those things which concerne this
present life, both which (euen life and
estate) in a moment may be taken from
them, and the inioying of them bringeth
no true comfort, but manifold griefes
and sorrowes to the soule: how carefull
then should wee bee to take an account
of our spirituall estate (by considering
how much more precious the
soule is then the body, the estate of
Grace then the state of Nature) how we
haue growne rich in the graces of Gods

spirit, which bring not onely true comfort
to vs for this present life, but giue
assured testimonie of eternall happines
in the life to come? And as no man can
truely know his profit or losse in temporary
things, but by knowing his first and
present estate, so no man can vvell discerne
his progresse and gaines in spirituall
things, till he truely know his first
and naturall estate.
                  For the better examination and triall
of our spirituall estate, let vs consider,
vvhat wee are by Nature. The Apostle
Ephes. 2. 3. telleth vs, that all men by nature
are in the state of condemnation:
euery man by nature is dead in sinne,
Ephes. 2. 1. he is as a loathsome carraine,Mans misery in the state of nature.
or a dead corps, lying rotting and stinking
in the graue, hauing in him the seede
of all sinne. From this estate none are
exempted, as Iob 15. 14. Which wofull
estate came vpon mankinde by the fall
of Adam, Rom. 5. 1. we being then in
him, and now of him, that is, wee are so
descended out of his loynes, that of him
we haue not onely receiued our naturall
and corrupt bodyes, but also by propagation

haue inherited his foule corruptions,
as it were, by hereditary right.
                  This infection extendeth it selfe vniuersally
through the whole man, both
soule and body, both reason, vnderstanding,
will, and affections, Ephes. 2. 1. For,
First,Sinne extendeth it selfe to the whole man, both soule and body. in the minde there is nothing but
blindnesse and ignorance concerning
heauenly matters. Secondly, the Conscience
is defiled, being alwayes eyther
benummed with sin, or turmoyled with
inward accusations and terrors. Thirdly,
the will of man onely willeth and lusteth
after euill. Fourthly, the affections of the
heart, as Loue, Ioy, Hope, Desire, &c. are
moued and stirred to that which is euill,
to imbrace it; and they are neuer stirred
to that which is good, vnlesse it be to
eschew it. Lastly, the members of the
body are the Instruments and tooles of
the minde for the execution of sinne.
                  In this estate no man can please God
in whatsoeuer he doth:Man in the state of nature cannot please God. for till we be in
the state of grace, our best actions are
sinnefull, as Preaching, Prayer, Almesdeedes,
and the like: as it is written, Iob
14. 4. Who can bring a cleane thing out

of that which is vncleane?
                  
                  A man in the state of Nature may doe
those things vvhich are of themselues
good,A naturall man may doe that vvhich is in it selfe good, but not good to him that doth it. but they vtterly fayle in the manner
of doing them, they doe them not
as they should be done, that is, in Faith,
Loue, Zeale, conscience of obedience;
neither yet with cheerefulnes, delight, or
feeling, but euen as it were, forcing themselues
to do the outward action, as Caine,
the Pharises, Ananias, and Saphira.
                  
                  So long as men be meerely naturall
they haue no sight of their owne miserable
estate,A meerely naturall man cannot see his misery. or of the blessed estate of the
godly. For, the naturall man vnderstands
not the things that be of God: he
being at enmity with God, and so depriued
of his fauour. Consider his estate.
                  In the soule of man there are but two
faculties,A naturall man hath a minde that neither sees nor can see the things that be of God. the vnderstanding and the will:
the spirit of God so discribes his vnderstanding,
that not onely he saith the naturall
man vnderstands not the things
that are of God, and as if it were not sufficient
to expresse mans miserable estate,
he addeth, neither indeed can he vnderstand
them, because they are spiritually

discerned:A will that neither is nor can be subiect to the law of God. and againe, his will hee describes
it, that it is not subiect to the law
of God, neither in deede can be.
                  Hereby we may perceiue the miserable
estate of those who are strangers
from God;This sets forth Gods povver and grace to be the greater because it restores mans nature being so farre peruerted. what an vnhappy condition
of life it is that a man should liue in such
an estate, wherein doe what hee can hee
cannot please God? Let Caine sacrifice
with Abell; let Esau with teares seeke a
blessing from his father; let the Pharisie
pray in the Temple with the Publican,
yet all nor any of these shall please God,
or goe home iustified: and for worldly
glory let him be neuer so high amongst
men, he is but abhominable vnto God.
                  In this state he is not onely an enemy
to God,The best affections of vvicked men please not God. but in bondage and a slaue to the
Diuell, hauing him to raigne in his heart
as God, which may be perceiued in that
he giueth obedience to him in his heart,A naturall man a slaue to the Diuell.
and expresseth it in his conuersation: and
this appeareth if he take delight in the euill
motions that Sathan puts in his hart,Hovv, to perceiue our subiection to the Diuell.
and doe fulfill the lusts of the diuell.
                  And in this estate he continueth, neither
seeing nor feeling his misery, nor

desirous to come out of it, neither can he
be perswaded that hee is in such a wofull
case; as appeareth in the example of the
Ruler, Luke 18. 21. and by the Church
of Laodicia, which being poore, wretched,
miserable, blinde and naked, yet she
thought hir selfe rich, and wanting nothing.None can be saued but the regenerate.
Thus he remaineth vnder Sathans
dominion till he be regenerate & borne
againe, and so brought into the state of
grace: so that man liuing & dying in the
state of nature, for any thing I see, cannot
be saued: I speake not of infants and children,
whereof some no doubt are saued
by vertue of the promise and couenant,
through the election of grace.
                  Seeing then that the estate of a Naturall
man is most miserable, and none
growne to yeeres of discretion can be
saued (for any thing vve know) but the
regenerte, and such as are in the state of
grace, I vvill therefore) for the better
tryall of our present estate) shew vvhat
regeneration is, and the properties of
those in whomsoeuer this new birth is
wrought, & such quallities as doe vsually
shew forth themselues in those in whom

soeuer the spirit of Christ dwelleth.
                  Regeneration is renewing & repayring
of the decayed estate of our soules,What Regeneration is. or an
act of the holy Ghost in Gods elect,
whereby they are entred into a constant
and faithfull exercise of a godly life.
                  As there is a Naturall birth of the
whole man, so there is a spirituall birth of
the whole man, which is, where as the
Naturall faculties of the soule, as Reason,
Vnderstanding, Will, Affection, and the
members of the body also, are so sanctified
and purged by grace,The quality of regeneration. that we vnderstand,
vvill, and desire that vvhich is
good: for till a man be borne againe, he
can no more desire that which is good,Till a man be borne againe he cannot desire that vvhich is good.
then a dead man can desire the good
things of this life.
                  The signes of regeneration are. First, a
true touch of conscience for our sinnes,
both originall and actuall: Secondly,
a godly sorrow and griefe of heart for
offending GOD by our transgressions:Signes of regeneration.
Thirdly, an earnest desire after Christ
and his righteousnesse, testified by a
constant and diligent vse of the meanes,
the word, prayer, and Sacraments, wherein

GOD giues grace and assurance of
mercy: Fourthly, an vnfained turning to
God from all sinne by new obedience in
life to please God in all things.
                  Further there are eight signes and
tokens whereby all men may certainly
know that they are sanctified, regenerated,Eight infallible signes of regeneration.
and shall be saued. First, a loue to the
children of God. Secondly, a delight in
his vvord. Thirdly, often and feruent
prayer. Fourthly, zeale of Gods glory.
Fiftly, denyall of our selues. Sixtly, patient
bearing of the Crosse, with profit and
comfort. Seauenthly, faithfulnesse in
our callings. Eightly, iust and conscionable
dealings in all our actions amongst
men.
                  In whomsoeuer this worke of regeneration
is wrought,Where there is regeneration there is also mortification. there is euer found
the action of mortification, for he that is
resolued to endeuour his godly repentance,
and laboureth the reformation
of his sinfull life, must labour two things
principally and of necessirie, Mortification
and Regeneration: hee must first
destroy his sinnefull estate, before hee
can obtaine the estate of grace: for God

and the gifts of God, are so absolutely
holy, as that they cannot admit any mixture
with sinne and wicked actions.
                  Mortification is a decay and perishing
of the deeds of the flesh by the grace and
operation of Gods Spirit,What Mortification is. vvhich deeds
of the flesh are not onely our euill actions,
but our desires and carnall affections
also:Mortification consists in two things. which mortification of a Christian,
consists in two things: first, in subduing
by an holy discipline our inordinate
lusts, which naturally rebell against
the loue of God: Secondly, in a patient
bearing of the crosse of Iesus: except we
make some profit in the first, it is certaine
we shall neuer proceede in the second:
wheresoeuer Mortification is, there is also
Sanctification.
                  Seeing that Mortification is the forerunner
of Sanctification,A tryall of Mortification. hereby we may
try how farre we haue gone in the same.
Experience teacheth that the nearer a
man drawes to death, the lesse motion is
in him, but being dead, he moues not at
all: so is it with the spirituall man, the farther
he goes in Mortification the greater
is his progresse in Sanctification.
                  
                     
By which Sanctification trie thy selfe,Sanctification a true marke of a liuing soule.
and see whether or no thou hast gotten
life, by the righteousnesse of Christ: deceiue
not thy owne hart in the matter of
saluation; assure thy selfe so farre forth
thou dost liue as thou art sanctified. As
health is in the body, so is holines in the
soule: a body without health fals out of
one paine into another, till it dye: and so
a soule without holines is polluted with
one lust after another, till it dye.
                  Our Sanctification must be both in
Soule and Body:Wee must sanctifie both body and soule to the Lord. it is not enough to
cleanse the hands, feet, eyes, and tongue,
but we must goe yet further, and be penitent
in heart: for blessed are the pure in
heart, such shall receiue the blessing.
                  We must consider in this worke of sanctification,What is required to be sanctified.
from the direction of Gods
word, whether our thoughts, words and
workes be cleansed from their inward
and outward corruptions, and that they
be sequestred, and made impropriate to
God: so that if wee haue set our very
thoughts apart to God, then there is holinesse
begun, and then we are meete for
a sanctified vse: so if we be to serue for a

holy vse, wee must not be for when and
for what we list, but taken vp in thought,
word, and deed, to serue the Lord: wee
are not to bestow our thoughts on all
things, but refer them to the Lord mediately
or immediately.
                  If our Sanctification be effectually
wrought in vs,Our sanctification must be constant and continuall. it will be constant and
continuall: so that we shall not deliuer
an holinesse to GOD for a time, or in
some causes, or for some persons, but
we must throughly fulfill the dayes of
our holinesse,It must not be maymed. not presenting a maymed
holinesse. As in the Law it was not permitted
to offer a lame or maymed beast,
though it wanted but the tayle, which
was a small thing; yea, euen for that defect
the Lord refused it.
                  There are many professors vvhich
would needes be men sanctified, but they
are loath to be cleansed. Others when
they cannot away with this strictnesse
to continue say on this manner; Let vs
prepare riuers of sinne, for Christ shed
streames of bloud, the more we sinne, the
greater glory will come to Christ. And
thus they stand at a stay, their holinesse

is a standing holinesse, it fils not▪ they
still lye in their pollutions: their motion
is but from the house to the Church,
and from the Church home againe; and
at the yeeres end they are as at the beginning,
like a horse in a mill, that makes
many circuits, from Morning till Night,
and then is but where he was at first.
                  From Sanctification ariseth repentance;From sanctification ariseth repentance.
for a man cannot hate his sins before
he be sanctified, & he cannot truely
repent for them before he hate them.
                  Repentance is a constant returning
from all sinne vnto God,What repentance is. or an inward
sorrowing and continuall mourning for
sinne, ioyned with faith and humiliation,
and both inward and outward amendment:
inward, in changing the thoughts
and affections of the heart, and outward,
in changing the words and workes, from
euill to good: I say it is a turning, not
from one sinne vnto another, as from
whoredome to theft, and the like, neither
is Repentance euery sorrow, but sorrow
for sinne: not for some sinne, but for all
sinne: not for an houre but for euer.
Euery sorrow is not repentance, for so

should worldlings repent: euery pant for
sinne is not repentance, so should Pharaoh
repent: all weeping and lamenting
is not repentance, so should Esau, Iudas,
and Caine, repent: euery little humbling
of our soules is not repentance, for so
should Ahab repent: all good wordes
and good purposes is not repentance, for
so should euery sicke man repent: euery
cry to God for mercy is not repentance,
for so should euery foole repent.
                  Hereby it may appeare what repentance
is,Many are deceiued in repentance. as also how many are deceiued
in repentance; and therfore that we may
the better try our repentance, let vs
know that repentance is when a man
turnes to GOD,How to try our repentance. and brings forth fruits
worthy amendement of life.
                  This turning to God hath two parts;
the first is a purpose of heart and resolution
neuer to sinne any more, but to
leade a new life: the second is an holy
endeauour and labour in mans life and
conuersation to purifie and cleanse himselfe
from sinne: for a man must be renewed,
and come to an vtter disliking of
his owne sinne, before he will turne from

them and leaue them.
                  By this it may appeare that there is
one manner of sinning in the godly, and
another in the vngodly, though they
fall both into one sinne.
                  A wicked man when hee sinneth,The difference betweene the godly and wicked in one and the same sinne. in
his heart hee giueth full consent to the
sinne, but the godly, though they fall
into the same sinne with the wicked, yet
they neuer giue full consent: for they are
in their vvills, mindes, and affections,
partly regenerate, and partly vnregenerate,
and therefore their wils doe partly
will, and partly abhorre that which is
euill, according to that of Paul, Rom.
7. 22. And that the Godly man neuer
giueth full consent to sinne, it is euident
by three tokens.
                  First,Three tokens manifesting this difference. before he come to doe the sinne
hee hath no purpose or desire to doe it,
but his purpose and desire is to doe the
will of God, contrary to that sinne. Secondly,
in the act or doing of the sinne,
his hart riseth against it, yet by the force
of temptation, and by the mighty violence
of the flesh hee is exhaled on, and
pulled to doe wickednesse. Thirdly, after

he hath sinned, he is sore displeased with
himselfe for it and truely repenteth.
                  A manifest example hereof wee haue
in Peter and Iudas: Peter before the
denying of his Maister had no purpose
so to doe, but rather to dye in his cause:
in the act, he had a striuing with himselfe,
as appeares, by this, that first hee
answered faintly, I know not what thou
sayest, and yet after, when the assault of
Sathan more preuayled, he fell to swearing,
cursing, and banning; after his
fall, he repented and wept bitterly for it:
all was contrary in Iudas, who went with
a full intent to betray his Maister, for the
Diuell made him yeeld & fully consent
to doe it, hauing long tempted him vnto
it, and entred into him: afterwards when
Christ was betrayed, Iudas was not sorrowfull
for his sin with godly sorrow, but
in a dispayre of mercy hung himselfe.
                  Although this which hath beene said
may be sufficient to proue our repentance,Seauen signes of true Repentance.
whether true or false, good or bad:
yet to make it more apparant, consider
seauen special signes, set downe by the Apostle,The first is Care.
2 Cor. 7. 11. The first is, care; Euery

one that hath a godly sorrow, and true
repentance, is not sloathfull but diligent;
not carelesse, but carefull to auoid all
sin as well as any one: as also he is most
carefull to doe that which is good, not
for feare, but for loue; not because man
but because God commandeth.
                  The second is,The second is a clearing of our selues. a clearing of our selues,
that is to say, when a man hath the feeling
of sinne, and shunneth it, and Sathan
accusing him, he cannot abide and beare
that accusation, but is disquieted till hee
haue gotten pardon of his sinne, with
as much earnestnesse as for the most
waightiest thing in the world, confessing
the action and inditement, and desiring
the pardon of it, by which hee may be
able to answere his accusers.
                  The third is Indignation,The third is Indignation. making
men angry against those sinnes which
before they liked: yea, to be out of patience
vvith themselues, that they vvere
such wretches, and so carelesse to be ouer-taken
with them, and to take on, as
it were, with themselues, that they haue
slipped into such sins: for true godly sorrow
doth euer bring such Indignation.
                  
                     
The fourth is Feare,The fourth is Feare. that is, an affection
fearing sinne, because it is sinne, fearing
to offend God because of his mercy
and goodnesse, and benefits receiued,
not flying or departing from God, but
drawing neerer vnto him when they
haue offended him.
                  The fift is a Desire,The fift is Desire. which is a feruent
affection to God and his word & to spirituall
and heauenly things. This is manifest
in the example of the Iaylor, who
after he was smitten with sorrow and true
repentance, came with this note to Paul,
saying, What shall I doe to be saued?
                  
                  The sixt is Zeale,The sixt is Zeale. which maketh men
zealous for God and his worship, zealous
of pietie and good workes, not to
doe them carelesly and negligently, but
it maketh them doe (though with great
labour and cost, yea danger and hazard)
those things which they see they ought
to doe.
                  The seauenth is Reuenge,The seauenth is Reuenge. that is, the
penitent man is so offended with the sin
hee hath committed, that hee will be reuenged
of himselfe for it, as for example,
if hee haue offended in gluttony, he will

reuenge himselfe by fasting two or three
daies after; if he haue offended in whoredome,
hee will be reuenged of his lusts
by bewayling of them euer after: and so
of other sinnes. By these it may appeare
what true repentance is.
                  In whomsoeuer true Repentance is
thus found, it euer proceedeth from a
true and iustifying Faith: for none can
repent or practise this duety of Repentance,
but those vvho haue Faith and
Grace: without Faith it is impossible to
please God. I will therefore first declare
vvhat Faith is: Secondly, the tryall of
Faith: Thirdly, the fruits of Faith: and
lastly, how Faith is kept.
                  Faith is a wonderfull grace of Gods
Spirit,What Faith is. whereby the elect doe apprehend
and apply Christ and all his benefits vnto
themselues particularly.
                  To make tryall in our selues whether
our Faith be true and sound or not:Try it tvvo waies. This
will appeare two wayes: first, by the beginning 
and degrees of the workes of
the Spirit, which goe before a true and
liuely Faith; which be three: first, a true 
sight of our sinne, with an apprehension

of the wrath of GOD for the same. Secondly,
 a true sorrow and griefe of heart
for offending God by these our sinnes:
 and lastly, an hungring and thirsting
after the mercy and grace of GOD in
Christ, aboue all worldly things: where
these things are, there is grace; but where
these things are wanting, there is no true
faith, but presumption.
                  
                      Secondly, faith wil appeare by the work
of loue; for in loue will saith bring forth
all the duties of the Morall Law, both to
God and man: for faith worketh by loue,
and loue is the fulfilling of the Law.
                  Further,A further tryall. for the tryall of our Faith,
Christ tels vs that the more we are distracted
with worldly cares, the lesse is
our beliefe in God; for distrustfull care
comes from vnbeliefe in Gods prouidence,
and the lesse we trust in God for
temporall things, the lesse doe wee beleeue
eternall mercies, for the same faith
layes hold on both: but if we can truely
depend vpon God for temporall blessings,
in the sober vse of lawfull meanes,
then wee shall relie vpon his mercy for
the saluation of our soules.
                  
                     
This tryall is not made in prosperitie,The tryall of our faith is not made in the time of prosperity.
for when God sends aboundance, euery
one will trust in him, but vvhen vvant
comes then is tryall of thy faith: if then
thou relie on God, though meanes fayle,
thy faith is strong, but if thy heart be
opprest vvith sorrow and feare, and
thou make no conscience of vnlawfull
meanes, then suspect thy selfe, thy faith is
none at all: for the Iust shall liue by faith.
                  Thus much of faith,Our vnion vvith Christ. and the tryall
thereof: now follow the fruits and benefits
thereof. By meanes of this speciall
faith the elect are truely ioyned vnto
Christ,Three especiall benefits had by our vnion vvith Christ. and haue a heauenly communion
vvith him, and therefore doe in
some measure feele his holy spirit mouing
and stirring in them.
                  The elect being thus ioyned to
Christ,What Iustification is. there ariseth three wonderfull benefits
from it: Iustification, Adoption,
and Sanctification.
                  Iustificationn is,From Iustification arises diuers benefits both outvvard and invvard. when the elect being
in themselues rebellious sinners, and
Gods owne enemies, yet by Christ they
are accepted of the Lord, as perfectly
pure and righteous before him.
                  
                     
From true Iustification proceedeth
 many other benefits: the first is Reconciliation,Reconciliation.
by vvhich a man Iustified is
perfectly reconciled to God, because his
 sinne is done away, and hee is perfectly
arayed with the righteousnes of Christ:Afflictions are not punishments for sinne but fatherly chastisements.
the second is, that afflictions to the faithfull
are no punishments for sin, but onely
fatherly and louing chastisements: for
the guilt and punishment of sinne vvas
boren in Christ; now therefore if a Christian
be afflicted it is no punishment: for
then God should punish one fault twice,
once in Christ, and the second time vpon
the Christian, which thing doth not
agree with Gods Iustice: the third is, that
the man Iustified doth merit and deserue
at Gods hands the kingdome of heauen:
for being made perfectly righteous in
CHRIST, and by his righteousnesse, he
must needs merit eternall life, in and by
the merit of Christ.
                  Inward benefits proceeding from
Iustification are those which are inwardly
felt in the heart, and serue for the better
assurance of Iustification, and they
are cheifly foure.
                  
                     
The first is, peace of conscience, arising 
from this perswasion,Peace of conscience. that his sinnes are
freely pardoned, & the wrath of God fully
appeased by the merit and suffering of
Christ Iesus, by a liuely faith applyed.
                  The second is, enterance into Gods fauour,Enterance vvith boldnes into Gods presence.
                     
and a preseuerance in it, vvhich is
indeed a vvonderfull benefit, vvhen a
man, that is freely pardoned and iustified
in Christ, doth boldly, approch to
Gods presence, and they are ready to
aske and sue and also to obtaine any benefit
that is their good.
                  The third is, a spirituall Ioy in their 
hearts,A spiritual Ioy in the heart. euen then when they are afflicted,
because they looke certainly to obtaine
the kingdome of heauen.
                  The fourth is, that the loue of God is 
shed in the hearts of the faithfull by the
holy Ghost,Feeling of Gods loue. that is, that the holy Ghost
doth make the faithfull very euidently
feele the loue of God towards them, and
doth as it were fill their hearts with it.
                  In whomsoeuer these singular benefits
are thus to be found,The graces of God & his spirit are not seuered. there is euer to
be found assuredly that the spirit of God
dwelleth in them, and in that the spirit

of God dwelleth in them, it imports not
onely a familiar presence, but also a continuance
thereof: hee dwels not for a
month, as a guest for a Night, but for
euer: how euer by temporall distractions
he humble vs, yet shall he neuer depart
from that soule vvhich once hee hath
sanctified to be his owne habitation: and
this comfort is confirmed to vs by three
sure arguments.
                  The first is taken from the Nature of
God:3 Arguments to proue that the regenerate are sure of perseuerance. hee is faithfull, saith the Apostle,
by whom we are called to the fellowship
of his sonne, who will conserue vs to the
end, and againe, saith he, I am perswaded
that hee which hath begun his good
worke in you,First, from the nature of God, that begets vs. will performe it, vntill the
day of Christ.
                  The second argument is taken from
the nature of that life which Christ communicateth
to his members,The second, from the nature of the thing begotten. it is no more
subiect to death: we know that Christ raised
from the dead, dyes no more: this life
is communicated to vs, for it is not wee
that liue, but Christ that liues in vs.
                  The third is taken from the nature of
that seed whereof wee are begotten:The third, from the nature of that seede vvhereof we are begotten. for

as the seede is, so is the life that comes of
it: now the seed saith the Apostle is immortall;
Wee are borne anew, not of mortall
seed, but immortall; our life therefore
is immortall.
                  As the first greatest question in religion
is concerning the Sauiour of the
world,The second main question in religion is, who are Christians. 
                     Mat. 11. 3. so the second is concerning
them who are to be saued: if the
iudgement be referred to man, euery
man accompts himselfe a Christian; if
iudgement be sought for from the Lord,
hee giues an Answere to all, If any man
haue not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.
                  
                  Hereby euery Christian may haue a
notable rule how to try his owne estate:A soueraigne rule whereby Christians of all sorts must bee tryed.
for to destroy the pride of all their glory,
(with one word) who esteeme somewhat
better of themselues for the priuiledge
of their estate, when they excell others,
here it is said, Rom. 8. 9. If any man, he
speakes without exception, be what thou
wilt beside, neuer so noble, neuer so rich,
neuer so learned, if thou hast not the spirit
of Christ, thou art none of his.
                  Againe, we see that Christ and his spirit

cannot be sundred: let no man say hee
hath Christ, except he haue the spirit of
Christ: hee is not a man who hath not a
soule, so hee is not a Christian who hath
not the spirit of Christ, Iohn 4. 13. And
as CHRIST and his spirit cannot be
sundred, so cannot the spirit be sundred
from the fruits of the spirit. Now the
fruits of the spirit, are Loue, Ioy, Peace,
long suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse,
faith, meekenesse, temperance: if the
spirit of Christ dwell in vs, and if we liue
in the spirit, let vs walke in the spirit: and
this may be a conuiction to carnall professors,
that while they say the spirit of
Christ is in them, they declare none of
his fruits in their liues and conuersations.
                  We are to know that the operations of
the spirit are two-fold;The operations of the spirit are twofold. the one is general,
and the common operation which hee
hath in the wicked, for hee illuminates
euery one that commeth into the world.
 That Caiaphas,
                     Externall, common to all men. and Saul can prophesie,
and Iudas can Preach, it is from him:
this way hee worketh in the wicked, not
for any good to them, but for aduancement
of his owne worke: the other

kind of the holy ghosts operation is speciall
& proper to the godly, by which he 
doth not onely illuminate their mindes,Internall, proper to the godly.
but proceedes also to their hearts, and
workes this three-fold effect in it, Sanctification,
Intercession & Consolation.
                  First,3 Effects wrought by the speciall operation of the spirit in the godly. he is vnto them a spirit of sanctification,
renewing their hearts by his effectuall
grace: he first rebukes them of
sinne, awakes their consciences by the
sight thereof, and giues them a sence of
that wrath which sinne hath deserued;
whereof arises heauines of heart, sadnesse 
in their countenance,Sanctification. lamentation in
their speech, & such an alteration in their
vvhole behauiour, that their former
pleasure becomes painefull vnto them,
and others who knew them before, wonder
to see such a change in them.
                  From this he leades them to a sight of
Gods mercy in Christ, he inflames their
hearts vvith an hunger and thirst for
that mercy, and workes in their hearts
such a loue of righteousnesse, and hatred
of sinne, that now they become
more affrayd of the occasions of sinne,
then they were before of sinne it selfe:

This resistance of sinne, and care to auoid
the occasions of sin, are vndoubted
testimonies that Christ dwels in vs.
                  This is the first operation of the spirit,
but it is not all, he proceedes further
by degrees: for the kingdome of God is
as if a man should cast seed into the earth,
which growes vp hee cannot tell how:
first, it sends forth the blade; secondly,
the eares, & then the corne: so proceeds
the kingdom of God in man by degrees.
                  
                      In the second place, the holy spirit becomes
a spirit of Intercession:Intercession. so long as
we are bound with the cord of our transgression
we cannot pray, but when hee
looseth vs from our sinnes, hee openeth
our mouth to God, hee teacheth vs to
pray, not onely with sighes and fobs
which cannot bee expressed, but also
puts words in our mouthes, such as wee
our selues who speaks them are not able
to repeate them againe.
                  
                      And thirdly, he becomes vnto them
the Spirit of Consolation:Consolation. if he be vnto
thee a sanctifier and intercessor, he shall
not faile at last to be thy comforter: if at
first, after thou hast sent vp supplications

thou finde not his consolation descending
vpon thee, be not discouraged, but
be more humbled: for our sin shortens
his arme, and the hardnes of heart holds
out his comforts: wee must fall downe
with Mary, and lye still washing the feete
of Christ with our teares, before he takes
vs vp in his armes to kisse vs: and if wee
finde these effects of his grace going before
the humiliation of the heart,That christian vvho hath Gods spirit knowes he hath him. & the
grace of prayer, we may be out of doubt
that this consolation shall follow after.
                  By this it is euident, that he that hath
the spirit of Iesus knowes that hee hath
him: and herein consisteth the chiefe
glory of a Christian,It is the glory of a Christian that Christ dwels in him. that he hath such a
guest to abide with him for euer, whereby
vnspeakeable blessings are vouchsafed
vnto him.
                  First, where this holy spirit comes to
dwell,The benefits that come by Christs dwelling in vs. he repayres the lodging: man by
nature being like to a ruinated pallace,
is restored by the grace of Christ: as to
the soule the Lord stirres vp new lights
in the minde, restores life to the heart,
communicates holinesse to the affections,
so that vvhereas before the soule

                      vvas an habitation for vncleane spirits,
that is,Repayres the lodge. defiled with all sorts of vilde and
vncleane affections, the Lord Iesus hath
sanctified it to be a holy habitation to
himselfe: the body is repayred partly
vvhen the members thereof are made
weapons of righteousnes in this life, and
partly in deliuering them from mortality,
vvhich shalbe done in the resurrection.
 Againe by his dwelling in vs we haue
the benefit of prouision: hee vvill neuer
suffer vs to vvant any thing that shalbe
good for vs,Prouides all necessaries. he is not burthenable, after
the manner of earthly Kings, but his reward
is with him.
                  We may further consider those excellent
benefits that vvee haue by the spirit
of Christ dwelling in vs:3 Three speciall comforts by Christs dvvelling in vs. first hee giues
life to the soule, and makes it to liue the
life of Christ, Gal. 2. 20. secondly, when
soule and body are sandred by death, he
leades the soule to liue with him in glory:
and thirdly, he casts not off the care of
the body, but preserueth the very dust
and ashes thereof till the day of the resurrection:
O what a kindnesse is it that
the Lord will honour the dead bodyes

of his children!
                  Surely there was neuer a house so well
paid for in the world: O how happy is he
who hath such a guest to dwell with him:
vvhat recompence hast thou to looke
for? he dwells with thee on earth, thou
shalt dwell with him in heauen; he a few
yeeres with thee, thou with him for euer.
                  The second maine benefit arising from
our vnion with CHRIST,The second maine benefit is Adoption. is Adoption,
whereby they which are iustified are also
accounted of God as his owne children.
                  From Adoption proceeds many other
benefits:From Adoption proceedes many benefits. first, the elect childe of God is
hereby made a brother of Christ: secondly,
he is a King, & the kingdome of
heauen is his inheritance: thirdly, hee is
LORD ouer all creatures saue Angels:
fourthly, the holy Angels minister vnto
him for his good: fiftly, all things, yea,
grieuous afflictions, & sin it selfe, turne to
his good, though in it owne nature it be
neuer so hurtfull: and lastly, being thus adopted,
hee may looke for comfort at
Gods hands answerable to the measure
of his afflictions, as God hath promised.
                  The inward assurance of Adoption

is by two witnesses:The assurance of adoption by two notes. the first, is our spirit,
which being often feeble and faint, God
hath giuen vs of his owne spirit to be a
fellow-witnesse with our spirit: this testimony
of the holy Ghost is best discerned
in the time of tryal, & at the houre of
death, which a reprobate cannot haue at
all, though indeed a man flattering himselfe
and the diuell imitating the spirit of
God, doth vsually perswade carnall men
and hipocrits that they shalbe saued. But
that Diuellish illusion, and the testimony
of the spirit, may be discerned by
two notes.
                  The first is,The first is, feruent prayer. feruent and hearty prayer
to God, in the name of Christ: for the
same spirit that testifieth vnto vs that we
are the adopted children of God, doth
also make vs cry, that is, feruently, with
sighes and groanes, pray to God: now
this feruent praying, can the Diuell giue
to no Hipocrite, for it is the speciall
worke of the spirit of God.
                  The second is,The second is, a Filliall loue. they which haue this
speciall testimony, haue also in their
hearts the same affections to God which
children haue to their father: namely,

Loue, Feare, Reuerence, Obedience,
Thankefulnesse, and the like: for they
call not vpon God as vpon a terrible
Iudge, but they cry Abba, that is, father:
and these affections they haue not
whom Sathan deludeth with a fantasticall
imagination of their saluation.
                  The third maine benefit is,Sanctification, the third maine benefit. inward sanctification,
by vvhich a Christian in his
minde, in his will, and in his affections, is
freed from the bondage of sinne and Sathan,
and is by little and little inabled by
the spirit of Christ to discerne & approue
that which is good, and to walke in it.
                  Now this Sanctification is through
the whole man, in the spirit, soule, and
mind.Sanctification of the minde. The sanctification of the mind is
the inlightning of it with the true knowledge
of Gods word: it is of two sorts,
eyther spirituall vnderstanding, or spirituall
wisedome.
                  Spirituall vnderstanding is a generall
conceiuing of euery thing that is to be
done,The difference betvveene spirituall vnderstanding, and spirituall vvisedome. or not done, out of Gods word.
                  Spirituall wisedome is a speciall grace
of Gods spirit, peculiar only to the elect,
whereby a man is able to vnderstand out

of Gods word, what is to be done, or not
to be done in any particular things or action,
according to the circumstances of
the person, time, and place: the principall
point of this wisedome is to determine
of true happinesse, whereunto the whole
life of man ought to be directed: which
happinesse is the loue and fauour of God
in Christ.
                  To obtaine this heauenly wisedome
we must be carefull of these two things:How to get true wisedome.
first, to get the Feare of God into our
hearts: which is a reuerent awe of the
heart towards GOD,What the Feare of God is. whereby a man is
fearefull to offend, and carefull to please
God in all things: & this we shall get if we
receiue the word of God with reuerence,How to obtaine it.
and apply it to our owne soules when we
heare it, trembling thereat vvhen it
toucheth our consciences, and humbly
submitting our selues vnto it, vvithout
raging or repining: secondly, wee must
close vp the eyes of our mindes, that is,
we must deny our owne wisedome, and
suffer our selues in all things to be ouerruled
and ordered by the written word
of God.
                  
                     
To walke in the course of our liues by
this heauenly vvisedome,How to walke wisely. wee must in
euery good action obserue these foure
Rules: first, the thing wee doe must be
iust: secondly, the meanes of effecting it
must also be iust: thirdly, we must keepe
our selues therein within the lymits and
compas of our calling: fourthly, we must
doe the thing with an honest and vpright
heart, and for this purpose we must
alwayes heare the word of God, to tell
vs what is iust.
                  The sanctification of the Memory is,Sanctification of the Memory.
when it can both keepe and remember
that which is good & agreeable to Gods
will, where as naturally it best remembers
lewdnesse, wickednesse, and vanity.
                  Sanctification of the Conscience may
be discerned by this,Sanctification of the Conscience. that it checkes for
the least sins, before actuall repentance
be performed, and likewise approues our
vpright walking in the whole course of
our life: it procures peace with God and
with man, so farre as it is profitable & expedient,
and breedes contentment in the
life, in all occasions it procures cheerfulnesse
in the countenance, and readinesse

in all our businesse it makes vs couragious
in the truth, and willing to defend
the same, it makes vs victorious in troubles,
and ready to yeeld vp our liues into
the hands of God.
                  Sanctification of the Will is descerned
hereby,Sanctification of the Will. that it is so far forth freed from
sin, that it can will and chuse that which
is good and acceptable to God, and resist
that which is euill: it is further perceiued
by our cheerefulnesse in well-doing
not by compulsion, but of a willing
minde, by resisting as well the occasions,
as sinne it selfe, and by yeelding to sinne
with griefe, rising by repentance out of
the same.
                  Sanctification of the affections are
knowne by this,Sanctification of the Affections. that they are moued and
inclined to that which is good to imbrace
it, and in that wee can more ioy or
grieue for spirituall causes then carnall;
that they tend to the crucifying of the
flesh, and building forward of the new
man, and are not commonly affected
and stirred with that which is euill, vnlesse
it be to eschew it.
                  Amongst these sanctified affections,

foure especially are to be marked:Of our sanctified affections especially foure to be marked. first,
Zeale of Gods glory, by which a Christian
is thus affected, that rather then God
should lose his glory, hee could be contented
to haue his owne soule damned,
as it was with Moses, Exod. 32. 12. and also 
                     Paul.
                     Zeale of Gods glory.
                  
                  The second is, the feare of God: without
it a man cannot be vvise: it is the 
first step to vvisedome. In this feare of
God their be two parts:Feare of God. the first is, a perswasion
of heart that we are in Gods presence:
the second is, that being in Gods
presence, we stand in awe of him, which
is when a man takes heed to his wayes,
lest he offend God.
                  The third is, the hatred of sinne, because 
it is sinne,Hatred of sinne. and especially of a mans
owne corruptions, wherewith a Christian
is so turmoyled, that in regard of
them, and for no other cause, he desireth
to be out of this most miserable world,
that he may leaue to displease God.
                  The fourth is, Ioy of heart, in consideration 
of the neerenesse of the terrible
day of Iudgement and second comming
of Christ:Reioycing at the day of Iudgement. in regard whereof they shall lift

vp their heads, because the full accomplishment
of their redemption is at hand
                  The sanctification of the body is,Sanctification of the body. when
all the members of it are carefully kept
and preserued from being meanes to execute
any sinne▪ and are made the Instruments
of righteousnesse: for euery member
is to be kept pure and holy.
                  To maintaine and keepe a true and
iustifying faith (by vvhich wee are vnited
to Christ,How to keepe faith. and thereby inioy all blessings)
is to maintaine true religion, both
in life and death, and for this end these
rules must be remembred.
                  
                      First, we must haue in our hearts sincere
loue to God in Christ, to his Church
 and true religion: secondly, we must not
onely know and beleeue that Christ died
for our sinnes, and rose againe for our
iustification, but we must labour to feele
the power and efficacie of his death killing
sin in vs, and the vertue of his resurrection,
raising vs vp to newnesse of life:
 thirdly, wee must not content our selues
to know and professe that God is mercifull,
but withall we must take obseruation
of his louing fauour towards vs particularly,

adding one obseruation to another,
so our hearts may be grounded in
the loue of God.
                  Because there is nothing that doth
more euidently distinguish between the
regenerate and vnregenerate man, then
such fruits as each of them doe vsually
bring forth in their liues and conuersations,
I will therefore shew the vertues of
the one, and the vices of the other, with
their seuerall discriptions: whereby euery
man may perceiue in what estate hee
stands, whether the childe of God, or the
childe of the Diuell, whether in the state
of grace, or in the state of Nature.
                  The graces of GODS spirit euer in
some measure appearing in the childe of
God effectually called, iustified, and sanctified,
are: Loue, Mercy, Meekenesse, Patience,
Humilitie, long-suffering, Peace.
                  Loue,What loue is. is properly an affection of the
heart, which bindes vs to loue God, because
hee hath loued vs, and to doe vnto
men as we would be done vnto, or wherby
one man is well pleased with another.
Now our loue to God must appeare by
the effects thereof.
                  
                     
First,The first property of loue, it longs to obtaine that which is beloued. it is the nature of loue, that it
earnestly desires and seekes to obtaine
that vvhich is beloued: hereby thou
shalt know whether thy affection of loue
be ordered by Christ, or remaine as yet
disordered by Sathan.
                  The affection which Christ hath sanctified
vvill follow vpward, seeking to be
there where he is: so carnall loue will carry
miserable man captiued to the bottomles
pit of hell: but holy loue being as
a sparkle of heauenly fire kindled in our
harts by the holy Ghost, ascends continually
towards God from whom it came
not suffering vs to rest till we inioy it.
                  The second tryall of our loue is Obedience,The second effect is obedience.
and an holy care in all our callings
to serue and honour the Lord.
                  The third tryall of loue is Bountifulnes:The third effect is bountifulnesse.
experience proues that euery louer
bestoweth bountifully on that which he
loueth.
                  The fourth tryall of loue is readinesse
to suffer affliction for the cause of God.
                  
                     For the farther tryall of our loue, let
vs consider vvhat our Sauiour Christ
saith, Math. 5. 44. I say vnto you, loue your

enemies; blesse them that curse you; doe
good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that hurt and persecute you.
                  The loue here commanded,How to loue our enemies. comprehendeth
these two things: first, to be
louingly affected in heart towards an enemie:
secondly, to be louingly affected
in speach & action. For the first: loue in
heart comprehendeth all good affections
that one man beareth to another,
as mercy, compassion, meekenesse, and
desire to doe him good: for the second,
it is set out vnto vs in three branches:
first, blesse them that curse you: vvhere is
commended all good speach, both vnto,
and of our enemies: secondly, doe
good to them that hate you: where is prescribed
all louing vsage in action, by affording
all the helpe and comfort vvee
can: thirdly, pray for them that persecute
you: that is, for their good estate in this
life, so farre forth as it serueth for Gods
glory, and for their conuersion, and saluation,
in the world to come.
                  For the affection of the heart,Examples of loue. take
Christs example, who so loued his enemies,
that he shed his owne heart bloud

for their saluation. For loue in courteous
speech,In Dauid.
                      see Dauids practise towards Saul,
his professed enemie, 1 Sam. 24. 7. and
Chap. 26. 9. 10. For doing good in action
read, Exod. 23. 4. 5. If thou meete thine
enemies Oxe or his Asse going astray, thou
shalt bring him home againe: and Pro. 25.
21. If thy enemy be hungry giue him bread
to eate, if he be thirsty, giue him drinke: see
the practise hereof in Elisha,
                     In Elisha.
                      when GOD
deliuered them into his hands that did
seeke his life, he brought them to Samaria,2 Kings 6. 14. 19. 21.
and when the King of Israell would
haue slaine them, he forbad him; nay, he
caused the King to refresh them with water
and bread▪ and so sent them away to
their owne Master.In Christ.
                      For praying for our
enemies, we haue the example of our Sauiour,In Steuen.
                     
the Prophets, and Steuen, vvho
prayed for them that put him to death.
                  Mercy,What Mercy is. is an holy compassion of the
hart, whereby one man is moued to help
another in his misery: first, I call it a compassion
of heart, because it makes one
man to put on the person of another, &
to be grieued for the miserie of another,The effects.
as if it were his owne: secondly, it is called

the bowels of compassion, because when
a mans heart is touched therewith, his
very Lyuer and intrailes doe stirre in his
body, and are troubled in him: thirdly,
this vertue of mercy moueth the heart
to helpe another that is in miserie: for
helpe in misery is a notable fruit of true
compassion, neither can they be seuered,
for in the compassion of the heart, and
in the act of reliefe stands true Mercy.
                  The duties of Mercy are answerable
to mans misery:The duties of Mercy. now mans miserie is eyther
in soule or body: the greatest miseries
of man are in his soule as ignorance,
impenitency, and trouble of conscience.
Mans bodily miseries are sicknes, thirst,
nakednesse, and the like: and to these
the workes of Mercy are answerable:
Mercy towards the Soule is when a man
is carefull for the saluation of another,
vsing meanes to bring a man from spirituall
darkenesse vnto light, from the
power of Sathan to God; from the estate
of sinne and danger of Hell-fire, to the
state of grace, in true faith & repentance,
and so eternall life: and looke how far the
soule is more excellent then the body,

so farre doth this vvorke exceede any
vvorke of Mercy that concernes the
body: Mercy towards the body is called
almes, or releefe, whereby a mans outvvard
necessity, for foode, rayment, or
such like, is supplied.
                  Hereby it may appeare who is a mercifull
man:Who is a mercifull man. namely, such a one as hath
his heart touched vvith compassion
towards the misery of another & thereby
is moued to help and releeue him in
soule and body, according to his estate:
and such a man is blessed by the testimony
of Christ himselfe, howsoeuer in the
vvorld he may be dispised.
                  To moue vs to this duty,Motiues to mercie. let vs marke
these things: first, the state of the merciful
is here pronounced blessed of Christ:
secondly, mercy is a gift of the spirit,
and the grace of Gods elect, vvhich alwayes
accompanyeth the happy estate
of those that be in Christ: thirdly, hereby
vve become like vnto God our heauenly
father: fourthly, hereby wee are
made Instruments of GODS mercy to
them that be in misery.
                  For the furtherance of vs in this so excellent

a duty,Rules for the exercise of Mercy. we must obserue certaine
Rules. First, wee must exercise three of
our Senses: Seeing, Hearing, and Feeling,
in other mens miseries. For seeing, Deut.
15. 9. we must be very wary it grieue vs
not to looke vpon our poore brother,1 Rule.
but wee must see and behold his misery
& distres, whether it be in soule or body:
this is the Lords practise, Exod. 3. 7. 9. Secondly,
if we cannot come to see a mans
misery, then we must be content to here
of it, and giue heed and credit to the true
reports that others make thereof to vs:
this was the practise of Nehemiah: Nehem.
1. 3. 4. and Ch. 2. 5. Thirdly, for Feeling,
if the Lord shall afflict our bodies
with sicknes, or our soules with temptations,
wee must be willing to suffer the
same patiently, that thereby wee may be
fitted to take more compassion vpon
others in like case, and to comfort them
the better, this did Paul and Timothie.
                  
                  Secondly,2 Rule. we must make our particular
callings wherein we liue, the Instruments
of mercy, and in doing the duties
thereof shew forth compassion towards
others: first, the Maiestrate must rule and

gouerne in mercy: secondly, the Minister
must Preach in mercy: thirdly, euery priuate
man must make the duties of his
calling, workes of mercy; the rich man
must know himselfe to be, not a Lord,
but a steward of GODS blessings, and
therefore must imploy the same in mercy,
by giuing & lending vnto the poore
freely, as God shall minister vnto him
iust occasion. The Trades man must buy
and sell in mercy, dealing iustly with the
rich, and shewing liberality to the poore.
The Maister must thus in mercy vse the
labour of his Seruant; and the Seruant
thus in mercy doe seruice to his Maister,
for conscience towards God: and happy
were it with all estates if this rule of Mercy
were obserued, the want whereof is
the bane of all societies.
                  Thirdly,3 Rule. for the more chearefull practise
of mercy, wee must lay aside some
part of our goods, for the releefe of them
that be in misery: many are giuen to
great excesse in fare, and attyre, but they
may doe well to abate somewhat thereof
to bestow it on the poore: for hereby
will the rest be sanctified to their more

free and comfortable vse. Nay in case of
necessity wee ought to sequester some
part of our necessaries, for the refreshing
of the poore; so did the Church of Macedonia
giue aboue their power to the releefe
of the afflicted brethren. 2 Cor. 8. 2.
                  Meekenesse is a gift of Gods spirit,What Meeknesse is.
whereby a man doth moderate his affections
of anger, and bridle in himselfe
impatience,The effects thereof. hatred, & desire of reuenge:
it is a vertue, whereby a man is gentle in
behauiour towards all persons, both
good and bad, it makes a man with patience
and a quiet heart to beare GODS
Iudgements, and to put vp iniuries, and
to beare wrongs, when occasion of reuenge
is giuen him.
                  Meekenesse is not to be shewed in the
matters of God,Wherein meeknesse must not be shewed. when his glory is impeached:
for therein we must haue Zeale as
hote as fire: but in the wrongs and iniuries
that concerne our selues. Moses was
the meekest man on earth in his time,
Numb. 12. 5. 3. and yet when the Israelits
had made a golden Calfe. Exod. 32. 19.
in Zeale of Gods glory, hee brake the
two tables of stone, and put to sword the

same day two thousand men that had so
dishonoured God: the like we see in Dauid,
Psal. 119. 139. and in our Sauiour
Christ, Math. 21. 12.
                  The ground or cause of meekenesse
is affliction and pouerty of spirit:The cause of meekenesse. for,
hardly can hee be meeke and patient in
spirit, that hath not beene acquainted
with the Crosse.
                  To induce vs vnto this vertue,Motiues to meeknesse. let vs
first consider Christs precept and example,
bidding vs to learne of him, for he is
meeke and lowly: againe, consider Gods
own dealing with vs, we daily wrong him
with our offences, and yet he beares with
vs: lastly, the fruition and practise of this
grace hath the promise of blessednes belonging
to it, and therefore as we vvould
be happy, so we must get into our hearts
the spirit of meekenesse, and expresse the
vertue and power thereof in our liues.
                  Patience,What Patience is. is a voluntary and continuall
suffering for the loue of vertue and honesty,
and therefore whatsoeuer hapneth
a wise man, by this vertue he is prepared
to digest & turne it to the best. Or othervvise
it is a grace of the spirit, flowing

from grace and hope: whereby we so suffer
things that are euill, that we forsake
not those things that are good, by which
we may attayne to those that are better.
                  Amongst all the graces of Gods spirit,Without Patience no grace can be preserued.
this prayse may be giuen to patience,
that it is the keeper of the rest; if our patience
be not first broken, vvee cannot
be induced to the committing of any
sinne: sinnefull concupiscence proceeds
from the impatiency of continence; couetousnesse
from this that wee are impatient
of our sober estate.
                  It is the will of God that through manifold
afflictions wee should enter into
the kingdome of heauen:How to suffer patiently vnder the Crosse. and therefore
when any crosse befals vs, walking in our
lawfull callings, we must indeuour to subiect
our selues patiently to the vvill of
God: in prosperity we are cherefull and
thankefull, but vvhen affliction comes
our nature vvill repine. O remember,
vvee say in all estates. Thy will be done:
and therefore in the most bitter Crosses
that can befall vs we must labour to say
with Iob: the Lord giueth, and the Lord
taketh, blessed be the name of the Lord. The

practise whereof we see in Dauid, 2 Sam.
16. 10. 11. touching Shimei.
                  
                  Long-suffering is a vertue,Whar long suffring is. whereby a
man doth beare with other mens wants,
as morositie and hastines, and in bearing
yeelds, for the maintenance of peace:
thus dealt Abraham with Lot,
                     Example thereof in Abraham.
                      when their
herdsmen were at variance, though hee
were the superiour, both for age and
place, yet for peace sake, hee put Lot to
choose the place of his abode whether
on the right hand or left.
                  Humilitie is a vertue,What Humilitie is. whereby one
man thinkes better of another then of
himselfe: for this makes a man thinke
basely of himselfe,The effects thereof. in regard of his owne
sinnes and corruptions, whereupon he is
contented to giue place vnto others, and
to yeeld of his owne right, for the maintenance
of peace: when as on the other
side, pride causeth men to seeke for more
then their due, & so causeth contention.
                  Peace is a vertue,What Peace is. whereby wee haue
vnitie and concord with God, and one
with another.A twofold peace. Now Peace is two-folde,
good or euill: good peace is that which
standeth with a good conscience and

true religion: euill peace is an agreement
and concord in euill, as in the praise of
any sin against Gods commandements,
and is such as cannot stand with true religion
and good conscience.Good Peace three-fold. The good
peace is three-folde: peace with God,
with our selues, and our Christian Brethren;
this peace hath sixe heads.
                  First peace betweene man and God,True peace hath sixe heads.
which is properly called reconcilation,
whereby GOD, in Ghrist, is at one with
man, and man, through Christ, is at one
with God: of which when a man is once
perswaded in his heart, then comes this
peace: secondly, peace vvith the good
Angels, for men being at peace vvith
God, then Angels become Seruants and
ministring Spirits vnto them: thirdly,
peace with a mans selfe, consisting of
two things: first, when the conscience
sanctified ceaseth to accuse, and assurance
of Gods fauour beginneth to take
his part, to excuse and speake for him
before God: secondly, when the Will,
Affection, & Inclinations subiect themselues
to the enlightened minde: of
which if eyther be wanting, man is at

warre with himselfe, & the peace of God
ruleth not in his heart: fourthly, peace
of true beleeuers amongst themselues,
who before they beleeue, vvere as Lyons
and Cockatrises: but now in the
kingdome of Christ haue put off that
sauage nature, and become peaceable:
fiftly, peace of the faithfull vvith professed
enemies, namely, vvhen they indeauour
to haue peace with all men: sixtly,
concord of the enemies themselues with
the true Church, for often the Lord restraineth
the mallice of his enemies, and
inclines them to peace.
                  The way to get and keepe true peace
for euer is this:How to get and keepe true Peace of conscience first, vvee must call vpon
GOD for the pardon of our sinnes
euery day: secondly, we must follow after
peace vvith men in the practice of forgiuenesse
and reconciliation vvhen offences
grow: for when we are at one with
God and man, vve haue a blessed peace,
and hence will follow peace in our owne
hearts, vvhich is that peace vvhich the
world cannot giue, which while wee retaine,
we need not feare any euill, no not
death it selfe: for if God be with vs, who

can be against vs?
                  There are many other vertues propounded
in the Scriptures, which might
here be discribed: but these may be sufficient
to declare in whom the spirit of
Christ dwelleth: for where Christ dwelleth
by his spirit, there are euer the fruits
of the spirit perceiued; for the spirit and
the effects thereof cannot be sundred: for
euery thing bringeth forth that vvhich
is of his owne nature: fire sendeth forth
nothing but heate, the fountaine nothing
but cleere water, and the like.
                  Now that these vertues may the more
apparently shew themselues to bee the
fruits and effects of the spirit in the regenerate
man: I will therefore set downe
and discribe such vices as commonly
shew forth themselues in the wicked, and
are the fruits and effects of the vnregenerate:
for hereby the childe of GOD
renewed by grace, and the vnregenerate
remayning in the state of nature, may as
easily be distinguished, as white from
blacke being layd together.
                  I will first begin with Pride, because,
as one saith, it may well stand in the forefront,

sith it is a Maister Diuell, and the
very bane of the soule.
                  Pride is said to be the timpany of the
soule,What Pride is. because it is a puffing vp of the
heart and minde, proceeding from the
opinion of some good thing in vs more
then in others.
                  His companions are Enuie,Companions of pride, fiue. Anger, Impatience,
Indignation, Selfe-will, and Obstinacy.
Pride is full of Enuy, because the
 proud man thinketh himselfe onely the
worthiest, and that euery mans greatnes
 is a hinderance to his: it is full of Anger,
supposing himselfe neuer so wel thought
 of as he deserues: full of Impatience, in
that he will not suffer himselfe to be reproued,
but will haue his vices accounted
vertues, & lookes to be commended
 for them: full of Indignation, esteeming
euery man vnworthy of any good that
befalles him, in comparison of himselfe:
 full of Obstinacie, by stifly holding his
owne opinion, notwithstanding any
proofe alledged to the contrary.
                  This sinne of Pride of all other is
the most dangerous,Pride of all other sins most dangerous. because other
sinnes proceede from euill deedes, but

Pride is to be feared euen in good and
vertuous actions.
                  Of Pride their are nine branches:Nine branches of Pride.
Presumption, Obstinacy, Hipocrisie,
Boasting, Ingratitude, Contempt, Disobedience,
Ambition, and Curiosity.
                  Pride,How to detest Pride. if we consider the cause thereof,
is momentary and very vncertaine: for if
it proceede from Riches, who knowes
not, that they may be lost in a moment?
If from Nobility or great birth, it may be
stayned: If from knowledge, it is full of
error: If from strength, it may soone decay:
If from Honour, it is but a ceremony:
If from Beauty, Age may wrinckle
it: If from good successe, time may alter
it: If from dainty foode, it may breed
surfetting, vvhich commonly bringeth
death: If from clothing, what is it but
skinnes, and wooll, nay the very excrements
of bruit beasts and stones of the
earth? If from health, sicknesse may destroy
it: If from multitude of friends, are
they not like to vvater brookes that in
Summer become dry, and in Winter
frozen? If from sharpnesse of wit, there
is no man liuing but is guilty of folly.
                  
                     
The onely and chiefe remedy against
Pride is Humilitie:How to auoyd Pride. for as by Pride
vve are banished from the presence of
God, so by Humilitie we are recalled to
him againe; because without Humility
no other vertue vvhatsoeuer, is acceptable
in his sight.
                  The second maine and capitall sinne
 is Couetousnesse, which we may call the
dropsie of the soule,What couetousnes is. because the couetous
man, the more he hath, the more
still he desireth: it is also a kinde of bad
motion whereby the diuel intiseth vs vnlawfully
to withholde our owne goods,
or vniustly to couet other mens.Foure sorts of couetousnesse.
                  
                  Of this sinne there are foure sorts: the
 first is, to desire that vvhich is another
mans, not caring how we get it, by right
 or wrong: the second is, when vve study
to get mony, wealth or fauour by wicked
 means: the third is, vvhen vve will not
restore that which vve know to be another
 mans: the fourth is, when we treasure
vp much vvealth and neither vse it
our selues, nor imploy it to the benefit
and reliefe of others.
                  This viper hath nine heads, by which

it snatcheth at the trash of the vvorld:
Fraud, Vnquietnes, Periury, Bribes, Sacriledge,
Theft, Vsury, Rapine, and Simony.
                  Consider that the matter thereof
(which is riches) is most vild and abiect,How to detest couetousnes.
or else our Sauiour would neuer haue
committed the purse to Iudas: Christ
chose not his Apostles and best beloued
from amongst Princes, but poore fishermen:
that no man can serue two Masters,
GOD and the World, no more
then hee can at one time behold heauen
and earth: that riches for the most part
are gotten with paine, preserued vvith
feare, and lost with sorrow: that the couetous
or most wealthiest man, is but as
the Mill-wheele, which though it turne
all day about, yet at night is found where
it vvas in the morning: so howsoeuer
we runne about this world for wealth, yet
at our death we shal be found as poore as
wee were at our birth: that the couetous
men are but as Camels, that all day carry
the Kings treasure, and at night are turned
into a filthy stable, being able to
shew no signe or appearance thereof but
their galde backes.
                  
                     
The onely remedy against couetousnesse,How to auoid couetousnesse.
is liberalitie, which is a distribution
of those good things that are in our possession,
to the benefit of others: for we
haue nothing which wee haue not receiued
from God, who hath giuen them for
the good of others, and will require an
accompt thereof at our hands.
                  The third Capitall sinne is Luxurie,What Luxury is.
which may be called the Leprosie of the
soule, and is an inordinate appetite of lasciuious
and fleshly pleasures.
                  There are sixe kindes of this sinne:Sorts and kindes of Luxury. the
first is Fornication, which is an vnlawfull
 societie of one single person with an
 other: the second is Rape or rauishment,
when a Virgin is deflowred, either
with her consent or against her will; for
although it be with her consent, yet it is
counted Rauishment, in respect of the
haynousnesse thereof, by reason it violently
breakes the lists of Chastitie, and
opens a gap many times to further vncleannesse:
 a third is Adultery, when
the maried body is defiled: and this is of
two sorts, either simple, as when the maried
sinnes with the vnmaried, or double

when the maryed sinnes with the maried:
the fourth is Incest, when the abuse 
of fleshly lust is committed by such as
are of one kindred, bloud, or affinitie,
which sinne makes men of the nature of
bruit beasts: the fift is Sodomie, which 
is of two sorts, when man iusteth after
man, or man after beast: this is a crying
sinne, calling for vengeance vpon the
offenders: the sixt is Excesse of carnall 
action, euen amongst the maried, which
although it seeme lawfull, yet it offends
God, if it exceed measure or modesty.
                  There are nine fore-runners of this sin:Nine fore-runners of Luxury.
voluptuous eating, scurrulous talke, a
discouered dug, a naked breast, frizled
hayre, artificiall paynting, costly Perfumes,
a rowling eye, an vnchaste foote.
                  Consider that the obiect whereto it
tendeth,How to detest Luxurie. (which is the corporall fruition
of vnchaste persons) is though candyed
with a faire out-side, inwardly the receptacle
of vilde and corruptible basenesse:
that lust is neuer satisfied, but alwayes
poore, euen in plenty.
                  That the pleasure thereof is momentany,
the punishment eternall, that it defileth

the temple of the holy ghost, which
is mans body, consecrated vnto Christ
by his precious bloud: that it is no sooner
inioyed, but it breeds annoy: that it
weakens the powers of the soule, and fils
the body vvith many diseases: that it
shorteneth the life; and shadoweth good
report: that it is a fire whose substance
is Gluttony, whose flame is Pride, whose
sparkles are corrupt speeches, vvhose
ashes filthines, and whose end is Hell.
                  The best remedy against Luxury is
chastity,How to auoid Luxurie. which is of foure sorts; either of
nature, as of such as are borne chast; or
by art, as such as are made chast by men;
or by prayer and industry, as of such as
haue made themselues chast for the
kingdome of heauen; or by marriage, as
of such as liue chastly in wedlocke.
                  
                      Enuy, the fourth capitall sinne, may
be said to be the canker of the soule,What Enuie is. for
that it eates and frets into the inward
man, no otherwise then rust doth into
iron; it is a reioycing at another mans
hurt, and sorrowing at his good.
                  It is of two sorts,It is twofold. good and bad:
good Enuy is that when beholding the

perfections of another we are angry with 
our owne imperfections, and labour seriously
to be equall,Good enuie. or at least to imitate
the good qualities which we see to flourish
more in others then in our selues:
this is called emulation.
                  Bad Enuy is, when we grieue that the 
like good qualities are not in vs,Bad enuie, which hath fiue branches. or not
as vvell in vs as in another, and of this
there are fiue branches, Detraction, Discord,
Murmuring, Hatred, Hurt.
                  Consider that Enuy is the bagge and
cognisance of the Diuell,How to detest enuie. for the Diuell
is not better knowne then by his enuious
disposition, and therefore such as
giue place in their harts to this vice, are
said to be the seruants of the Diuell, if
seruants of the diuell they are enemies to
God, if enemies to God, they become
subiect to eternall damnation.
                  Of all other sinnes it is accounted the
iustest, for that it taketh vengeance vpon
it selfe, for although it euer leuels the
dart of mischiefe against others, yet it
vvounds it selfe, and is to the heart of
man as the vvorme bred in the tree, to
the wood thereof, by whom at last it is

deuoured: but say it were pleasing and
plausible in it selfe, yet consider God will
be reuenged vpon it, as by the example
of Caine his enuie towards Abel, Saul
towards Dauid, Haman towards Mordechay▪
                     
it is to be loathed and abhorred, but
being so that it consumeth the heart,
dryeth vp the body, vexeth the minde,
and indangereth the soule, what can be
thought more detestable?
                  The remedy against Enuie is Charity,How to auoyde Enuie.
or loue to doe vnto others as we vvould
be done vnto.
                  Gluttony,What gluttony is. the fift capitall sinne, may be
called the deluge or inundation of the
soule, because it is a rauenous desire to
see & fill the stomacke beyond the rule
or bonds of nature:Tvvo sorts thereof & there are two sorts
of it: the first, consisteth in greedy, often
& immoderate desire of delicate meates
and variety of dishes: the second is, when
instead of refreshing the body vvith sufficient
moysture,How to detest gluttony by eleuen dangerous effects. we drowne it in the superfluity
of drinking.
                  Of this sinne there are eleuen dangerous
effects: the first, is dulnesse of wit,
 whereby we are made vnfit for any duty

of good Christians: the second, is Impotencie,
vvhen through gluttony our
bodies are infected with many diseases:
The third, is Scurrility, which is an impudent 
behauiour of the Body, whereby
we prouoke men to laugh vs to scorne:
The fourth, is fury, when through this ill 
disposition of excesse we spurne at reason
& good counsell: The fift, is superfluous 
talke, when through the force of Wine,
we vomit out detractions, cursings, and
horrible oathes, and blasphemies, filthy,
idle, & vnchast words: The sixt, is drousinesse,
when vve are fit for nothing but
sleepe: The seuenth, is Beastly nastines,
when our surcharging stomackes bewrayes
our intemperance, by vomiting,
belching, & stinking of the breath: The
eight, is lust; for belly-cheere, and drunkennesse,
are the bellowes to concupiscence:
The ninth, is pouerty, when for 
abusing of plenty, we are plagued and
pinched with penury: The tenth, is the 
losse of credit & estimation in the world:
The eleuenth and last, is the wrath and 
indignation of God, whom of a mercifull
and louing Father, vve make a rigorous

and punishing Iudge.
                  Besides the reasons before mentioned,Eight circumstances to cause a detestation of it.
there are eight other circumstances,
inducing vs to the detestation of it:
First, it hasteneth the desolation of the
Body: Secondly, it taketh part with the
Flesh in the combat betweene it and the
Spirit: Thirdly, it inureth the body to
an euill custome: Fourthly, it playes the
hipocrite with vs, appearing sweet and
pleasant at the first, but in the end it byteth
like a Scorpion: Fiftly, it liues continually
vnder the curse of God: Sixtly,
it destroyeth the sence: Seuenthly, to be
subiect to the desire of the belly is a perpetuall
slauery: Eightly, because of the
Iudgements of God inflicted vpon offenders
in his kinde.
                  To auoyd Gluttony,How to auoyd gulttony. we must imbrace
temperance and sobriety, which consisteth
in chastning and taming the body
by fasting and abstinence.
                  
                      The sixt capitall sinne is Wrath, which
may be called the frensie of the Soule,What wrath is.
and is defined to be a vehement motion
of the heart, tending to reuenge, whereby
the blood boyling exceedingly, sendeth

vp hot and burning vapours to the
braine, so that Reason is smothered, and
the will made obedient to the affections.
                  Of this sin there are eleauen branches:Eleauen Branches of Wrath.
Malice, Fury, Impatience, Malediction,
Blasphemy, Reproch, Reuenge, Contention,
Threatning, Crueltie, and Murther.
                  The meanes whereby wee are taught
to detest Wrath and Anger are these:How to detest wrath.
First, the example of bruite Beastes,
though neuer so fierce, will alwayes shew
themselues meeke and gentle to them of
the same kinde: the Lyon will not hurt
the Lyon; nor the Dragon, the Dragon.
Secondly, in that wee are brought forth
naked and vnarmed, signifies we ought
to loath crueltie. Thirdly, to remember
what Christ hath done for vs, & to think
that if we expect mercy at his hands, wee
ought to shew mercy to others. Fourthly,
so long as wee continue in wrath all
our actions are abhominable to God.
Fiftly, the wrathfull man liues in a continuall
Purgatory and Hell of conscience.
Lastly, wee must not let the Sunne goe
downe vpon our wrath.
                  Anger, or wrath, is to be auoyded two

manner of wayes.How to auoid vvrath, or anger. First, in respect of others:
Secondly, in respect of our selues:
we shall the sooner auoid the wrath of
another man, if eyther wee giue place to
his fury, or staying by him, vse milde
and gentle speeches.
                  The best way to auoid Anger in our
selues, is patience, in suffering of euill
with a quiet minde: thinking whatsoeuer
is laid vpon vs in this life, whether affliction,
persecution, or the like, yet nothing
can touch our Soule, and therefore
not to be regarded of vs. Besides, to bridle
anger, consider the party with whom
we are displeased: if it be a stranger impute
it to his ignorance: if a childe, to his
folly: if a Master or Father, to his authoritie:
if a Wife, to her loue: if a
friend, to his care: if a brother, to his
boldnesse: if a seruant, to his negligence:
if a neighbour, to his rashnesse; no doubt
vpon better consideration they will repent
them of their ouer-sight.
                  
                      Idlenesse, or sloth, the seauenth Capitall
sinne,Idlenesse what it is. may be called, The Lethargie
of the Soule, being a lazy deiecture of
the whole man, from the laudable exercise

of vertue: for that in a manner hee
becomes sencelesse, but in truth, altogether
vnprofitable.
                  Of this sinne there are eleauen branches:Eleauen branches of it.
Protraction, Remissenes, Negligence,
Improuidence, Indeuotion, Sluggishnesse,
Persillanimitie, Irresolution,
Desperation, Misprision, and Omission.
                  Remember that Sloth is a vice which
impouerisheth both soule and body:How to detest it. the
soule, of naturall graces; the body of externall
goods. Remember likewise, it
captiuates, and brings vs vnder the slauish
tiranny of our worldly and spirituall
enemies. Remember, it is the root & nest
of many other vices; as by the example
of Dauid, who no sooner gaue himselfe
to rest, after his painefull warres, but he
fell into the sinnes of Adultery and Murther.
Remember, it is a vice that the very
bruite beasts abhorre; as may be seene
by the Bee, the Ant, and other small contemptible
Creatures. Lastly, consider all
other Creatures not hauing life, are so
opposite to sloth, as they continually
keepe their first course in which they
were created, without intermission, vn-vnlesse

it be vpon some violent and accidentall
cause, as we may see by the Sun,
Moone, and Starres: by the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, and by the iust returne
of Summer and Winter, Spring
and Autumne, and the like.
                  Consider that we enter into this world,
as it were to runne a race: if therefore
wee runne not so as wee may get the
Goale, wee lose the reward. The best remedy
therefore against sloath and idlenesse,
is Deuotion; which is a ready and
willing performance of the seruice of
God, and of all other duties required of
vs in this life.
                  The off-spring or branches proceeding
from these seauen master-sinnes,How to auoid sloth. are
seuerally described in a Booke, called,
Two guides of a good life: wherein you
may see and learne how to auoid sinne,
and follow vertue, to delight in the one
and to detest the other.
                  If you should not aske me, (hauing
shewed how to detest and auoid some
sinnes in particular) what sinne is, and
the reward thereof: as also, how to auoid
sin in generall: Ile tell you briefly,

what I haue learned from the mouth of a
right worthy instrument in the Church
of God.
                  Sinne is euery breach of the Law of
God;What sin is. if it be no more but the least omission
of what the Law requireth:What the punishment thereof is. and the
punishment thereof is plagues in this
life, death in the end of this life, and eternall
damnation after this life.
                  S. Iames,
                     How to resist sin in generall. Chap. 4. vers. 7. saith, resist
the diuell, and hee will flye from thee: in
vvhich wordes is both a precept and a
promise: in the precept is two things to
be considered, the action and the obiect:
the action is, to resist: the obiect is, the
Diuell.
                  
                  For the performance of this action,
three things are requisite: first, a preparation
before the combat:What we are to doe before the combat with the Diuell. secondly,
how vve are to demeane our selues in
the combat: thirdly how to carry our
selues after the combat.
                  First, for the preparation, obserue
these rules set downe in the sixt Chapter
of the Ephesians,
                     7. weapons wherewith to fight with the Diuell. from the 14. to the 19.
verses: which weapons there prescribed,
are both defensiue and offensiue: those

                      defensiue are fiue. First, for this combat
wee must stand fast, hauing our loynes
girt about with veritie, which is, to be
grounded in the setled truth of GODS
 Word without vnconstancy. Secondly,
vve must put on the Brest-plate of Righteousnesse;
which is a setled purpose not
to displease God in any thing, though
 neuer so seeming good in it selfe. Thirdly,
wee must haue our feet shod with preparation
of the Gospell of peace, which
is a constant resolution to professe the
truth, euen vnto death: yea, if it should
procure the losse of life, goods, vvife,
 children, and all. Fourthly, aboue all
to take the shield of Faith, which is such
a Faith as vvholy relieth on GOD in
Christ, with particular application, which
will quench the fiery darts of the wicked.
 Fiftly, to take the Helmet of saluation;
which is, to stand assured that our saluation
is sealed vp vnto vs: which assurance
vvill cause vs, with confidence, to withstand
all Sathans assaults vvhatsoeuer.
 Sixtly, we must get the sword of the Spirit,
(which is an offensiue weapon) which
is the word of God, wherewith our Head

and Captaine Christ repeld the Diuell.
Seuenthly, and lastly, that we pray with 
all maner prayer and Supplication in the
Spirit and watch thereunto,What to doe in the combat. with all perseuerance:
which two vveapons being
added to the rest, are of force to strike
through the very heart of the Diuell.
                  The second thing to be obserued, is
the manner how vve must behaue our
selues in this combat;First, we must kill sin in the very conception. and herein obserue
these rules. First, kill sinne in the
very conception (for it is like a Canker
which groweth not to ripenesse but by
degrees) otherwise it vvill grow from
motion to liking,Sinne like to a canker. from liking to consent,
from consent to action, from action
to custom, from custom to hardnesse
of heart, and from hardnesse of heart to
the height of all sinnes. If the Serpent
once get in his head, he will afterwards
wring in all his body. Timothy giueth
warning to take heed of couetousnesse
vvhich being once entertayned, giueth
vvay to many noysome temptations.
Ahab desiring Nabaoths Vineyard, no
sooner imbraced that euill motion, but
presenting it vvith a further desire,

brought forth fearefull and euill effects.
That man that vvill first vvalke in the
counsell of the vngodly, will next stand
in the way of sinners; and lastly will sit
in the seate of the scornefull. Iudas was
first a cunning dissembler: secondly, a
secret theefe: thirdly, an impundent lyer:
fourthly, a bloody traytor, and lastly, a
desperate reprobate. Peter, first denied
Christ faintly: secondly, with an Oath:
thirdly,We must deny our owne strength. vvith cursing and swearing;
wherefore, kill sinne in the conception.
                  Secondly, be sure to put no confidence
in thy owne strength, for thereby
Peter fell grieuously.We must not beleeue the Diuell though he speake truth.
                  
                  Thirdly, beleeue not the Diuell, although
hee bring truth in his mouth:
our Sauiour Christ could not abide the
Diuell to speake the truth in the mayd,
hauing a spirit of diuination.
                  Fourthly,We must make resistance, which is two waies. be carefull euer to make resistance
vnto it; and this is performed
either by weakening the abilitie of sin, or
els by opposing his contrary vnto sinne.
                  First,First, weakening the ability of sinne. to weaken the ability of sinne,
is by taking away all occasions to sinne,
and by remouing all the sustainements

thereof, and also making a holy couenant
with euery member of our bodies
and soules, euer to repell it, neuer to
admit it, by vvhich meanes sinne may
come to be as a lake, into which the current
of no streame runneth, which must
needes be dryed vp.
                  Secondly,Secondly opposing his contraries. it is done by opposing his
contraries vnto sinnes, as Charity to Melice:
Temperance and Sobriety to Gluttony
and Drunkennesse: Liberalitie to
Niggardice: Vigilance to Security: Confidence
to Distrust: Faith to Infidelity:
Truth to Lying: Chastity to Intemperance,That we compare not the paine of resistance with the pleasure of sinne.
and so of the rest: the practise of
one particular was in Ioseph with Potifars
wife, How (saith he) shall I commit this
euill and sinne against God?
                  
                  Fiftly, that thou be carefull neuer to
compare the paine of resistance with the
pleasure of the sin, for sin is sweet in committing;If the Diuell once be foyled, he is much quailed, & thou more strengthened.
                     
but rather compare the horror
and gripings of the conscience, with the
paine of resistance, which will be a good
meanes to keepe thee from sinne.
                  Sixtly, be assured, that if once thou
giue the Diuell the foyle, he will be afterwards

lesse able to assault thee, & thou
more able to resist him, and that with
more courage.
                  
                      Seuenthly, & lastly, thou must be carefull
and diligent to finde out the subtiltie,To marke the Diuels subtilties and cunning deuises.
deuices, and sleights of the Diuell, by
which he doth assault thee very cunningly;
for he hath a neare coniecture vnto
what sins thou art most inclined by nature,The Diuel fitteth his temptations to our inclinations.
and accordingly he fits his temptations.
If thou be inclined to couetousnes,
he will offer thee Naboths Vineyard, and
rather then faile, he will plot meanes to
slay him, so thou may effect thy desire:
If vaine glorious, he will make thee thirst
after the life of poore Mordecay: If ambitious,
he will stirre vp meanes to driue
Dauid out of his kingdome, that Absolon
may enioy it: & thus he fitteth his temptations
to mens naturall inclinations: &
thus much of the second place, namely,
how we should behaue our selues in the
combate, when we are grappling hand to
hand with the Diuell.
                  The third and last thing to be considered,What to doe after the combat.
is what wee are to doe after the
combate, and that is, presently to prepare

our selues for a new combat:To prepare our selues for a nevv combat. For,
if wee shall consider the malice of the
Diuell, how he euer seeketh our subuersion
and ouer-throw, and hauing once
taken the foile, yet is not at rest, but by other
meanes seeketh againe to assault vs,
(for so he did with our head and captaine
Christ Iesus three seueral times one after
another) it should in this case teach vs
to take heed of carelesse securitie,Sathans subtiltie should make vs to shun carelesse securitie. as not
to thinke our selues safe when wee haue
giuen the Diuell the foyle, but euer to
stand vpon our guard, (for if hee dealt
thus with Christ our Head, vvhat vvill
hee doe with the members?) which being
conscionably and carefully regarded,
we may then expect an happy issue,
which is, that the diuell will flye from vs:
whereby we may obserue and note Gods
especiall care ouer vs, who euer giues a
happy issue with the temptation, to those
that vvalke in holy Obedience before
him:A speciall meditation in the time of temptation. and if we would alwayes in temptations
call to minde Gods goodnesse,
his mercy, and kindnesse, formerly bestowed
vpon vs, it would be as a bulwark
of defence against the temptations of

the Diuell. This did Ioseph when he was
tempted to filthinesse by his Mistresse,
Gen. 39. hee instantly considered how
God had exalted him to great honour,
making him chiefe of his Masters house,
and ruler ouer all. How (saith he) shall I
commit this euill, and sinne against my God?
                  
                  By this that hath beene said we may
learne how to auoid sinne; as also to repell
the Diuell, which if (through the
blessing of God vpon our carefull endeuour,
through the vse of the meanes) we
shall in some measure attaine vnto; yet
wee are not to thinke vvee haue done
enough, and there to rest, but wee must
labour and endeuour to doe good, and
to bring forth fruits vvorthy amendement
of life:It is not enough to auoid euill, but vvee must doe good. for euery Tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit is hewen
downe and cast into the fire: it is not
said, euery Tree that bringeth forth euill
fruit, or that bringeth forth no fruit, but
that bringeth not forth good fruit: now
what those fruits are, vvhich the trees of
Righteousnesse doe vsually beare, hath
beene formerly declared.
                  Now, because vvee may bring forth

such fruit as in themselues may seeme
to be good, yet for want of knowledge
fayling in the manner of doing of them,
they are displeasing and dishonourable
to the Lord: know, that in euery action
pleasing and acceptable to the Lord, in
the doing thereof these fiue rules are to
be obserued:Fiue rules specially to be obserued in euery action that shalbe pleasing to the Lord. First, the person of him
must be pleasing to the Lord who performes
any action to him. Before Abels
sacrifice vvas accepted, his person vvas
accepted: It may be demaunded, how
we shall know when our persons are pleasing
vnto God. Consider by nature we
are enemies vnto him, and so long our
persons cannot please him, as we be not
of Christ, therefore finde thy selfe to be
in Christ, and then thou art acceptable
vnto God: for God sayth, This is my beloued
Sonne, in whom I am well pleased.
Looke how CHRIST is vnto God, so is
euery one being in Christ: If then thou
would know whether thou be in Christ,
looke to thy Faith, whether it be a iustifying
faith. Secondly, thou must haue
the word of God for thy warrant, being
sure that the action thou doest be such

as his word alloweth. Thirdly, the end of
the action must be intended to the glory
of God. Fourthly, it must be done in
loue, which respecteth the good of others:
& lastly, it must be done within the
compasse of our callings. It is not lawfull
for one to doe that which another may;
euery man may not preach, nor euery
man may not gouerne: therefore content
thy selfe with thy calling, and know
what the duties are that God requireth of
thee within the limits and bounds thereof:
if these be wanting, either Faith, the
Word, the end, or Loue, or out of our
calling, the action, though neuer so seeming
good, cannot please God.
                  If any shall looke backe to that which
hath beene sayd (and considereth the estate
of the regenerate, and vnregenerate
man, as also thereby beholdeth his
owne present estate) and cannot finde in
himselfe faith and the graces of Gods
Spirit so apparant as hath beene shewed,
and so doubteth whether he be the child
of God or not,The graces of Gods spirit apparant in some, should make vs labour to finde them in our selues. remembring the Zeale
of Moses, the faith of Dauid, the repentance
of Peter, as also finding in himselfe

that hee can power forth teares more abundantly
for a temporary losse, as of
vvife children, friends, goods, and the
like, then for committing many grieuous
sins, whereby God is dishonoured,
and himselfe in danger to incurre the
losse of his fauour for euer; and heerevpon
remembring, that nothing should
be more deare vnto him then the honour
of God, nothing more precious
and delightfull then his Word, his Sacraments,
and Sabbaths, wherein as yet, he
seeth in himselfe but small delight, and
doubteth of his own saluation: therefore
yet know this for thy comfort,Comforts to the weake Christians. and be
assured, that to doubt of Faith is a testimony
of Faith; for he that neuer doubted,
neuer beleeued: and although thou
hast not the zeale of Moses, the faith
of Dauid, the repentance of Peter, inso
full a measure as they had. Consider,
they had a great measure of Gods Spirit,
and accordingly the graces thereof appeared
in them: For God requireth according
to the grace giuen: and, although
thou hast not these appearing
in thee, yet if thou doest vnfaynedly desire

them, and labourest in the vse of the
meanes to attaine them, thou hast them
all in some measure, and they are true in
thee.Faith and the graces of Gods spirit may be true in him who yet desires them not. The scruple of gold may be perfect
gold as well as the whole wedge: so faith
though but as a scruple, may be true faith
as vvell as the greatest measure: and
whereas thou doubtest of thy Saluation,
in that thou canst more grieue for a
temporary losse, then for the committing
of some sinne, whereby thou mayst
loose Gods fauour: consider, to the one
thou hast both nature and Grace to help
thee;Note. but to the other, Grace onely. If
then thou findest not this great measure
of Grace in thee, be not discouraged: for
if any man haue a desire to obey God in
all his commandements, he hath the spirit,
and he who hath the spirit is in Christ
and hee who is in Christ shall neuer see
damnation:He who hath the spirit of Christ dwelling in him shal neuer see damnation. and though he faile greatly
in the action of obedience, yet God will
accept his affection to obay, as obedience
acceptable vnto him, and will approue
of thee for his owne worke which
he hath wrought in thee, and not reiect
thee for thine. So be it.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Twelue Steps, which a man
may stride towards Heauen; and being
in the first step, he may thinke himselfe
a good Christian: yet except he
stride the thirteenth, hee shall misse
Heauen-gate, and fall into the
fire of Hell, for euer.
                  1 HE may haue a measure of knowledge
of the true God, and of
his workes, and gouerning the world: also
of the Trinitie, and that Iesus Christ
dyed for the sinnes of mankinde. Which
knowledge euen the Pagans had, yea,
euen so as few Christians attaine vnto so
great knowledge,Mat. 4. 3. 6 and yet hee may be
damned if he goe no further;Marke 5. 7 for Sathan
knoweth all this better then any man,
being a spirit, and hauing the knowledge
of Angels and of the Scriptures.Heb. 4. 2. & 6. 4. 5. Also the
reprobates haue the like knowledge.
                  2 Hee may not onely know these
things before named,2 Pet. 2. 20 but also confesse
them publikely, and beleeue them to be
true. Also he may be able to talke and dispute
of any point of Diuinitie very cunningly,

and be so great a maintainer of it,
that he may be a publike preacher:Iam. 2. 19. yet
if he goe no further he may be damned;Marke 5. 7. & Mark. 1. 24
for the Diuell beleeueth, and publikely
confesseth CHRIST, Agrippa also beleeued
all these things:Mat. 8. 29. also Iudas was a
Preacher and worker of Miracles.Act. 26. 26 27. So
shall many reprobates.
                  3 Thirdly,Mat. 10. 7. 8. hee may come to the
hearing of Gods word preached,Mat. 7. 22. which
few of the world commonly doe, or will
doe; yea, he may receiue the word, and
that gladly, not scorning of it, or thinking
hardly of it or of the preachers: but
the cursed ground did so;Mat. 13. 20 21. so Herod also
heard Iohn Baptist.
                  
                  4 Fourthly,Mark. 6. 20 at the preaching of
Gods Word hee may be so wonderfully
affected, that hee may tremble againe,
which most men neuer come vnto, desiring
to heare it, as a tale, or for newes, or
for bare knowledge: but euen this did
cursed Felix;
                     Act. 24. 26 And Agrippa cryed out
that hee was almost perswaded to be a
Christian,Act. 26. 28 both reprobates.
                  5 Hee may haue a knowledge of his
grieuous sinnes,Gen. 4. 13 and a feeling of them,

and complaine of them to be great and
grieuous:1 Sam. 15. 24. 25. & 26. 21. but so did damned Caine.
                  
                  6 After hee hath committed sinne,
he may be very sory and troubled before
he commit a sinne, & vse all meanes
not to doe it, which few Christians doe,
committing sinne without remorse: yet
if he goe no further he may be damned.
For wicked Pilate did this, striuing to set
Christ free,Mat. 27. 17. 23. and pleading for him. Also
Herod, being to behead Iohn Baptist.
                  
                  7 After he hath committed a sinne,Mat. 14. 9.
he may be very sory for it, yea, mourne
and make satisfaction: yet if he goe no
further he may be damned;1 King. 21. 27. for Achab
did this, mourning and fasting. And Iudas
also,Mat. 27. 3. 45. who was so sory that he hanged
himselfe, and made satisfaction.
                  8 He may be accounted so glorious
a member of the visible Church, as the
best Minister may haue nothing to say
against him: yea, hee may make such a
good confession of his Faith, as he may
be partaker of the Sacraments, yet a reprobate:Ioh. 13. 2.
for Iudas was such a one, and
Simon Magus.
                     Acts 8.
                  
                  9 He may leade such a godly outward

life, that the true children of God may
thinke him so good as themselues: he
may reuerently vse all holy and Diuine
exercises: he may make much of Preachers:
he may shew great Zeale at the beginning,Mat. 26. 22.
yet a reprobate, for Iudas was so
thought of by the Apostles: he vsed all
holy exercises with the Apostles and our
Sauiour,Math. 6. 20 
                     Herod made much of Iohn Baptist:
                     2 King. 10. 16. 18.
                     Iehu was zealous at the beginning.
                  10 He may not onely pray publikely
at the Church, which most men doe for
fashion, feare, shame, or company; but also
alone betwixt God & himselfe, which
few doe, and God may heare his prayers,
also he may desire the godly to pray for
him, if he goe no further he is but a reprobate:
for the Pharises went alone to
the Temple to pray:1 King. 21. 29. also God heard Achab,
Pharao desired Moses to pray for
him.Exod. 9. 28 Also Simon Magus, Peter.
                  
                  11 He may thinke in his owne heart
that he is a very good Christian and beloued
of God,Acts. 8. 24. and thanke God for it, and
excell in the vvorkes of a Christian,
mooue himselfe to thanke GOD, vse
Prayer, Fasting, Almes, and vpright

dealing with all men, and yet may be
damned if hee goe no further, for the
Pharises had all these: whom if our righteousnes
exceed not,Luk. 18. 11 we shall not enter
into the kingdome of Heauen.
                  12 After all this godly life led, lying
on his death-bed, he may often remember
God & call vpon him: he may talke
of the ioyes of Heauen, and thinke them
happy that be there, and wish himselfe
there: yea, he may dye like a lambe, and
yet for all this be a damned creature: for
many shall say, Lord, Lord, and yet not
enter into the Kingdome of Heauen,Mat. 7. 21.
And assuredly, they neuer sayd it oftner
then when they were sicke: and the foolish
VIRGINS desired to enter in vvith
Christ,Mat. 25. 12 and yet were shut out: feare therefore
and tremble till you stride the
thirteenth step.
                  13 The thirteenth step, without the
vvhich no man can enter into Heauen,
and be saued, is true repentance, which
whosoeuer hath not is yet no true Christian.
And that is a true and vnfained turning
of the heart & soule vnto the Lord
God from all our sinnes, and is caused in

vs by the fearefull sight of Gods iudgement
hanging ouer our heads, moouing
vs to lament our sinnes from our hearts
bitterly: hauing a stedfast faith in the
mercies of Christ Iesus: applying them
to our selues, for our agreement vvith
God: and leading a godly life according
to Gods Commandements till our
death: vvhich true repentance
vvhen it is in any, hath the
seauen properties
which are before
spoken
of.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   