
      
         
            
            
            THE English Creede, CONSENTING WITH the true, auncient, Catholique, and Apostolique Church in al points, and articles of Religion, which euerie Christian is to know and beleeue that would be saued.
            THE SECOND PART, in most loyal manner to the glorie of God, credit of our Church, and displaieng of al haeresies, and errors, both olde and newe, contrarie to the faith, subscribed vnto by Thomas Rogers.
            
            
               Allowed by auctoritie.
            
            3. ESDR. 4.
            Magna est veritas & praeualet.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for Andrew Maunsel, at the Brasen Serpent in Pauls Church-yard. 1587.
         
         
            
            
            TAM GENERE, QVAM VIRTVTE PRAECELLENTI, D. CHRISTOPHERO HATTONO EQVITI AVRATO, REGNI ANGLIAE SVMMO CANCELLARIO, ALIIS QVE MVLTIS NOMINIBVS HONORATISSIMO VIRO, SVO OPTIMO MAECENATI AC PATRONO: THOM AS ROGERIVS, POSTERIOREM HANC SYMBOLO ANGLICANO SVBSCRIPTIONIS SVAE PARTEM, HONORIS GRATIQVE ANIMI TESTIFICATIONIS ERGO, DEVOTE CONSECRAVIT.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               20. ARTICLE. Of the auctoritie of the Church.
               
                  THe Church hath power 1 to decree rites or ceremonies, and auctoritie 3 in controuersies of faith. And yet it is not laufull for the Church 2 to ordaine anie thing that is contrarie to Gods worde, 4 neither maie it so expounde one place of Scripture 5 that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although 6 the Churche be à witnesse, and à keeper of holie writ: yet, as it ought not to decree anie thing against the same, so besides the same 7 ought it not to enforce anie thing to be beleeued for necessitie of saluation.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The Church hath power to decree rites or ceremonies.
                  2 The Church maie not appoint what rites or ceremonies it will.
                  3 The Church hath auctortie to iudge in controuersies of faith.
                  4 The Church hath power to interprete, and expound the worde of God.
                  5 The Analogie of faith must bee expected in the exposition of the Scripture.
                  6 The Church is the witnesse and keeper of Gods word.
                  7 The Church may not enforce any thing to be beleued, as is necessarie vnto saluation, that is either contrarie, or besides the word of God.
               
               
                  
                  1 The Churches auctoritie to decree rites or ceremonies.
                  Is warranted in the worde of God,

                        By th'example of the Apostles who did ordaine rites or ceremonies, as among other thinges, that in the Church

                              Men should not be couered. 1. Corinth. 11. 4. &c.
                              VVomen

                                    Should be couered. 1. Corinth. 11. 5.
                                    Should keep silence. 1. Corinth 14. 34.
                                 
                              
                              A known tongue should be vsed. 1. Cor. 14. 1. &c.
                           
                        
                        By the general, & perpetual commaundement of God himselfe whoe at al times wil haue euery thing in the Church to be done

                              As being the auctor not of confusion, but of peace. 1. Cor. 14. ver. 26. 33. 40.
                              Honestlie,
                              By order,
                              Vnto aedification,
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Is graunted in the publique Confessions of the Churches protestant, as Confession of

                        Heluet. 1. Artic. 13.
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 22. 23. 24.
                        Basil▪ art. 10.
                        Bohem. cap. 15. 17.
                        France artic. 32.
                        Fland. artic. 32
                        Ausburg. artic. 4. 5. 7. 15.
                        Sax. artic. 20.
                        Sucuia. cap. 8. 14.
                        VVittem. cap. 27. 35.

                              This power being giuen by the supreme auctoritie vnto the Churche, theie doe greatly offend,
                              VVho by an extreme detestation conceaued against ceremonies, do condemne

                                    Generallie, al rites or ceremonies, as do some fantastical spirites.
                                    Particularlie some commendable ceremonies: so is the celebration of the Sabbat disliked of certaine Familists.
                                 
                              
                              VVhiche thinke the Church is tied precisely to obserue the ceremonies,

                                    Of the Iewes, so

                                          Did the

                                                False Apostles,
                                                Cerdonits
                                                Cerinthians.
                                                Nazarens.
                                             
                                          
                                          Doe the

                                                Iewes.
                                                Turkes.
                                                Armenians.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Of the Romish synagogue, in which error be

                                          The hot Papists.
                                          The halfe Papistes, the Fam▪ of Loue.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              VVhich holde that either any one man, or any certaine callinge hath power to decree & appoint rites or ceremonies, though of themselues good vnto the whole Church of God.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. As it is à cleere truth that the church maie ordaine ceremonies: So true it is also that the Church hath no power to appoint what rites or ceremonies it will, but they must make
                  To the

                        Nourishing and increase of loue and friendship among men, Such
                        Reteining of the faithful in the holie feare of God Such

                              In the primatiue Church were the rites principalie about

                                    Baptisme.
                                    Excommunication.
                                    The L. Supper.
                                 
                              
                              In these dais in the reformed Churches, are the ceremonies touching

                                    For the Church to meete in.
                                    The times.
                                    The places.
                                 
                                 
                                    In the Church.
                                    The praiers.
                                    The seruice.
                                    The persons.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Not to the vpholding of vice, or superstitious vanities among the people, as theie do

                        If of themselues theie be meetlie wiked and vngodlie, as are

                              Popish Masses.
                              Images in the Church.
                           
                        
                        If being in their owne nature indifferent, yet being supersticiouslie vsed are vngodlie, as are the difference of daies, and meates, and apparel, &c. when it is thought that such rites

                              Do deserue remission of sinnes.
                              Are th'acceptable seruice of God.
                              Be of necessitie, vnder the paine of Gods eternal cursse, to be obserued of al and euerie man.

                                    This is consonantor agreeable
                                    To the worde of God

                                          Eze 20▪ v. 18. 19
                                          Matth. 15. 13.
                                          Mat. 7. 7: &c.
                                          Luke. 11. 46.
                                          Gal. 51.
                                          Col. 2. 8. &c.
                                          Tit. 1. 14.
                                       
                                    
                                    To the sound Cōfessions of Christ his church. Cōfes. of

                                          Heluet. 2. c. 15.
                                          France art. 33.
                                          Flan. art. 32.
                                          Ausb. art. 7. 15
                                          Sax. art. 20.
                                          VVittē. art. 35.
                                          Sueuia. c. 14.

                                                But, as light is vnto darkenes cō
                                                   traeie to al such
                                                As are of opinion that the Church hath absolute auctoritie to ordaine what lawes, rites, or ceremonies it thinketh good.
                                                As wil make (and that as theie saie by th
                                                      •
                                                   auctoritie giuen vnto the church) of à ceremonie, à matter of substance, and of à thing of substance, à ceremonie, as theie do which turne the 2 commandemēts of the Decaloge into à ceremonial lawe.
                                                As both obscure the glorie of God by their Masses, inuocatiō of creatures, &c. and frustrate the merits of our Sauior by their meritorious pardons, fasting, pilgrimages, &c. & deface the holie Sacraments of Christ, by the vain ceremonies of Antichrist; & hinder the preaching of Gods word by ouer m
                                                      •
                                                   nie & tedious traditions; and keep the people of God in dā
                                                   nable ignorance, by preferring the ordinances of mē before th'institution of God, and leaue that vndone which God hath commanded to be done, to performe that which the Church hath cō
                                                   manded; such are the Papists.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 Auctoritie is giuen to the Church (and to euerie member of iudgement in the same) to iudge in controuersies of faith, and so in their places
                  To embrace the truth.
                  To auoid and improue Antichristianitie & errors.

                        And this is not the priuate opinion of our Church but
                        The straight cō
                           mandemēt of God himselfe

                              To teachers

                                    
                                       
                                          •
                                        Tim. 4. 7.
                                    1 Tim. 6. 20
                                    Tit. 1. 9.
                                    Tit. 3. 10.
                                 
                              
                              To heaters

                                    Hier. 23, 16.
                                    Matth 7. 15
                                    Ioh. 10. 3 &c
                                    Phil. 3, 2.
                                    Heb. 13, 9.
                                    2. Pet. 3, 17.
                                    2 Iohn. ver. 10.
                                 
                              
                              To the whole Church

                                    Matt. 24. 23
                                    1. Cor. 14. v. 20. 23. 24.
                                    1. Thes. 5, 21
                                    Iam. 5, 19.
                                    Iudes epist.
                                    Reuel. 18, 4.
                                    1. Cor. 10. 15
                                 
                              
                              The iudgement of our godlie brethren in other places of the reformed Church; name lie in the Confes. of

                                    VVittem. art. 32.
                                    Sueuin. art. 15.

                                          Sound in iudgment therefore theie are not
                                          VVhich being not of the Church of Christ, wil notwithstanding take vpon them to iudg, yea to condemne the doctrine of the Church of God, as do

                                                The Machiauils.
                                                The Iewes.
                                                The Turkes.
                                                The Papists.
                                                The Fam. of Loue.
                                                The Anab.
                                             
                                          
                                          VVhich hold that the Pope alone hath power

                                                To iudg al men, and matters, but maie be iudged of none.
                                                To make & reuoke at his p
                                                      ••
                                                   
                                                   su
                                                      •
                                                   e what articles of Religion him listeth, and that without controlment.
                                             
                                          
                                          VVhich suppose there is

                                                No iudgment but in the Clergie, so called.
                                                None auctoritie to determine of controuersies in Religion, but by the bookes of the dead

                                                      Fathers.
                                                      Doctors.
                                                      Schole men, as

                                                            Th
                                                                  ••
                                                                Aquinas.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  •
                                                               co
                                                               
                                                                  •••
                                                               , &c.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        4 To interpret the word of God is à peculiar blessing giuē by God onelie to the church or companie of the faithful, though not to al and euerie of them. For
                        Saith our Sauiour

                              Of men in general. No man knoweth the Sonne, but the Father; neither knoweth anie man the Father, but the Sonne, and he to whom the Sonne wil reueile him. Mat. 11. 27.
                              Of his faithful disciples. It is giuen to you to know the secrets of heauen, but to them it is not giuen. Matth. 13, 11.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Saith S. Paul vnto the church at Corinth
                        The manifestation of the Spirit is giuen to euerie man to profit withal. For to one is giuen by the Spirit, the worde of wisedome, &c. And to another prophecie. 1. Cor. 12. 7, &c.
                        If anie thing be reueiled to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace. 1. Cor. 14. 30.
                     
                  
                  The Apostles, Iames and Iohn, do write vnto al the Church, or people of God.

                        If anie man lacke wisdome, let him aske of God. Iam. 1, 5.
                        Ye haue an ointment from him that is holie, and yee haue knowne al things, &c, ye know the truth, &c, ye need not that anie man teach you. 1. Iohn. 2. ver. 20, 21, 27.

                              Hereunto subscribe the Churches in
                              Heluet. Confes. 2. c. 7.
                              Bohem. Confes. c. 1.
                              VVittē. Confes. c. 30.

                                    Al of vs iointlie opposing our selues
                                    Against those men which thinke that to expound the word of God is so easie à matter, as anie student, indued with à good natural wit, by diligence maie do the same
                                    Against them that teach how to interpret or expound the Scriptures is too hard à thing for anie mortal man to attaine vnto: such

                                          VVas Iohannes de VVessalia.
                                          Are manie of the Anabaptists.
                                       
                                    
                                    Against the fam. of Loue, who though they grant some can expound or open, so far as is conuenient for man to know, the meaning of God in his word: yet that Some, there saie, are themselues, and none other.
                                    Against the Papists

                                          VVhich thinke that to interpret the holie scripture is not so much à special gift of God vpō some chosen persons, as an ordinarie power annexed to the state of

                                                Popes.
                                                Bishops.
                                                General Councels
                                             
                                          
                                          That are so far from giuing the people of God, not being of the Clergie, power to expound▪ that theie vvil not suffer them to read, no not so much as to haue the Scriptures in à vulgar tongue, except it be their ovvne most corrupt, and barbarous translation, vvhich but of late yeeres neither, and that in part too, is granted. But for the Scripture of God in place theie obtruded

                                                Festiuals
                                                Legends
                                                Rosaries
                                                Horaries
                                                Psal
                                                      •
                                                   eries of our Ladie.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  5 Forsomuch as no prophecie is of anie priuate motion (2. Pet. 1. 20.) and whatsoeuer interpretation man giueth, not agreeing to Th'analogie of faith (which S. Paul from God gaue in commandement to be obserued, Rom. 12. 6.) is à priuate interpretation, special heed is to be had that one place of Scripture be so expounded as it agree with another, and al to the proportion of faith. This do the Churches protestant so like of, as theie approue the same by publique Subscription, as maie appeare in the Confession of
                  Heluet. 1. art. 2.
                  Heluet. 2. c, 2.
                  France. art. 7.
                  Saxon. art. 1.
                  VVittem. ca. 30. 31. 33.
                  Sueauia. art 1.

                        This wil not be granted of the Antichristian synagogues whereof
                        Some thinke that the Scripture may be expounded in what sense, and to what purpose we wil, as the

                              Helchesaits.
                              Papists: among whome theie be which from this opiniō do tearme the most holie word of God in reproch

                                    A shipmā
                                       
                                          •
                                        hoase.
                                    A leaden rule.
                                    A nose of waxe.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Some condemne al interpretation of the word, as vnnecessarie, theie being taught, as theie saie, of God himsēlfe: such are the Libertines.
                        Some depend vpon visions, and Reuelations, as the

                              Euthusiasts.
                              Anabaptists.
                           
                        
                        Some dislike of the literal, calling it à Grammatical sense, and so prefer the Allegorical exposition, that theie cal it the spiritual sense of Gods word, and therbie make vvhat them list of the Scriptures most monstrouslie, as the

                              Originists.
                              Fam. of Loue
                           
                        
                        Some vvil haue of euerie place of Scripture an exposition

                              Analogical.
                              Allegorical.
                              Historical.
                              Moral.

                                    As the curious
                                    Thomists.
                                    Monches.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Some are addicted to an interpretation vvhich theie cal mystical, and prophetical, as the B
                              •••
                           ardists.
                        Some thinke th'interpretation vvhich the Church of Rome maketh of the Scripture, vvhatsoeuer it be, is the od, and the onelie true sense of Gods vvord, as Harding doth.
                        Some deeme that as the Church by time doth alter, so th'interpretation of the Scripture also maie varie: vvhereby that vvhich in Th'apostles time vvas à truth, in theis daies shal be an error, and contrarivvise: in this error vvas Cardinal Cusanus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  6 Though the church hath power to heare & determine in controuersies of saith (as alreadie hath bine prooued): yet hath the Church auctoritie nei ther to iudge the worde of God, not to iudge otherwise than the word of God doth iudg. For it is said,
                  To the church

                        Novve I besceche you brethren, marke thē diligentlie which cause diuision and offences, contrarie to the doctrine which ye learned, and auoid them, Rom. 16. 7.
                        Heare him (euen Christ) Math 17. 5.
                        To him giue al the Prophets vvitnesce. Act. 10. 43.
                        Search the Scriptures. Iohn. 5. 39.
                        VVhosoeuer transgresceth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God 2. Iohn. vers. 9.
                        Yee are no more straungers and forreners &c. and are built vpon the foundation of Th'apostles, and Prophets, &c. Ephes. 2 19.
                        Heereby shal yee knowe the spirite of God &c. 1. Iohn. 4. 2.
                     
                  
                  Of the holie Scripture

                        The worde is the truth. Iohn. 17. 17.
                        The whol Scripture &c, is profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God maie be absolute, &c. 2. Tim. 6. ver. 16. 17.
                        They haue Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them. Luk. 16. 29.
                        VVee haue also à most sure vvorde of the Prophets, to the which ye do wel that yee take heede. &c. 2. Pet. 1. 19.
                        If anie man teache otherwise, & consenteth not to the wholsome wordes of our L. I. Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godlines, he is pust vp, & knoweth nothing, &c. 1. Tim. 6. v. 3. &c.

                              Thus thinke vve of the Scriptures, and of the Churche. So vvith vs do other Churches. Confes. of
                              Heluet. 2. cap. 1.
                              Bohem. cap. 1.
                              Fran. art. 5.
                              Flan. art 7.
                              VVit. tem. art. 30 31. 32.
                              Sax. art. 11.

                                    Yet al of vs doe grant that the Churche.
                                    As à faithful witnes maie yea, of necescitie must testifie to the world, vvhat hath bine the doctrine of God his people from time to time. But be it far from vs that we should euer somuch as thinke, which the Papistes vvil not sticke to write, and say, that

                                          The Church is to iudge the Scripture, and not the Scripture the Church.
                                          The Scripture is not of the escence of the Church, for vvithout it à Church mai
                                                •
                                              be thought and veri
                                                •
                                              vvel. So said Cusanus à Cardinal.
                                          It had gonne better vvith the Church, had there bine no scripture at al.
                                          The scripture because (as they say)

                                                It is vnperfect cannot Be the iudge.
                                                It is obscure, maie not Be the iudge.
                                                It is ambiguous, ought not Be the iudge.
                                             
                                          
                                          He is an haereticke that cleaueth to the Scriptures, as did Horstatus.
                                          Such as bare witnesce vnto the truth.

                                                By the shedding of their bloud in the daies of Q Marie, are not martyrs, but murtherets of them selues.
                                                In this time

                                                      By the sword, are tyrans.
                                                      By life and doctrine, be heretikes.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    As á trustie register is to keepe and make knowen, what the vvord of god which it hath receiued, is This carefullie hath bine performed,
                                    Before the worde vvas vvritten, by the Patriarches.
                                    After the vvord vvas commited to writing,

                                          Before Christe his incarnation by the Iewes.
                                          In christe his life time,

                                                Luk. 4. 16. &c
                                                Act. 13. 27.
                                                Act. 15 21.
                                             
                                          
                                          In the primitiue church

                                                2. Cor 3. 15.
                                                2. cor. 8. 18.
                                                Colos. 3. 16.
                                             
                                          
                                          From Th'apostles time by the godlie Christians in th'uniuersal world.

                                                This carefulnes in keepinge the vvord of God, de clareth,
                                                That the mother Churche of Rome is not the onely keeper of the holy write.
                                                How cursedly theie offende vvhich so greatly esteeme,

                                                      The Ethiks of Aristotle as the S. scripture.
                                                      The Ods of Pindar, as the Psalmes of Dauid.
                                                      The writings of men, as the word
                                                            •
                                                          of God.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  7 Of the people of God nothing must be obtruded vpon the Church to be beleeued as necessarie vnto saluatiō, which is either contrarie or besides the worde of God,
                  So saith the scripture.

                        Deut. 4. 2.
                        Prou. 30. 6
                        E
                              ••
                           k. 20.
                        vers. 18. 19.
                        1. Cor. 3. 11.
                        Gal. 1. 8.
                        Gal 3. 15.
                        Ephe. 4. 14
                        Col. 1. 23.
                        Heb. 13. 9.
                        2. Iohn. v. 9. 10.
                        Reu. 22. 18
                     
                  
                  So vvitnes the Churches reformed. Confes.

                        Heluet. 2. art. 2.
                        Heluet. 1. artic. 4.
                        Basil. art. 10.
                        Bohem. c. 1
                        France. art 5.
                        Fland. ar. 7
                        Saxon. art. 1.
                        VVittem. cap. 30. 33
                        Sueuia. art. 1.

                              VVhat soeuer is grounded thereon, though not by expres tearmes to be red therin, we doe reuerendlie embrace. This maketh vs not to denie
                              In doctrine.

                                    The Consubstantialitie of our S. Christ with the Father and the holie Ghost, as the Arians did.
                                    A trinitie of persons in the Godhead vvith the Sabellians
                                    The iustification of faith onelie with the Papists.
                                    The baptisme of Infantes, with Anabaptists.
                                 
                              
                              In ceremonies anie thing that tendeth vnto

                                    Comlines
                                    Order.
                                    Edification.

                                          But from the hart vve abhor vvhatsoeuer agreeth not with the cannon of the Scripture, nor is grounded thereon. Hence detest we
                                          Al the old haereuks

                                                The phatisies.
                                                The Escees.
                                                The Sadduces.
                                                The Simoniās.
                                                The Menandeans.
                                                The Ebeonits.
                                                The Cerinthians.
                                                The Gnostikes.
                                                The Valentinians.
                                                The Martians. &c. with

                                                      The newe prophets of Basilides The manifestatiōs of Marcian.
                                                      The misteries of the Manichies The Idolaea of the Scithians. The Symbonia of Th'archō
                                                         tikes.
                                                      The Cabala of the Iewes.
                                                      The Alcaran of the Turkes.
                                                      The Decretals of the Popes
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          Al were hae
                                                •
                                             etiks vvith their curssed opiniōs

                                                The Anabaptists, & of them namelie,

                                                      The Daui-geo
                                                            •
                                                          gain
                                                            •
                                                         .
                                                      The Libertines
                                                      The Viteleis.
                                                      The Nicholaitans of Harrie Nicholas.
                                                   
                                                
                                                Papistes wherof

                                                      Some commaunded that all the lawes of the Pope shoulde bee taken, as confirmed by the mouth of God himselfe, so did Pope Agatho the first.
                                                      Some write, as Busgrad▪, that if the pope beleue there is no life to com, as som Popes haue done, wee must beleue it as an article of our faith: and if the Pope carrie innumerable soules to hel with him, yet he maie not be iudged: so thought Pope Boniface the 8.
                                                      Some haue published à newe Gospel, called, Euangeli
                                                               •
                                                            m aeternum, & spiritus, S. which some saie, doth so far excel the gospel of Christ as the ca
                                                            •
                                                         nel surpasceth the shel; the Sun the Moone; and the light darknes.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               21. ARTICLE. Of the auctoritie of generall Councels.
               
                  GEneral Councels 1 maie not be gathered together with-out the commaundement and wil of Princes. And when theie be gathered together 2 (for as much as theie be an assemblie of men, whereof al be not gouerned with the Spirit & word of God) theie maie erre, and some-times haue erred,3 euen in things pertaining vnto God. Wherefore4 thinges ordained by them, as necessarie vnto saluation, haue neither strength, nor auctoritie, vnlesse it maie be declared that theie be taken out of holie Scripture.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 General Councels must be gathered together, by the commaundement and wil of Princes.
                  2 General Councels maie erre.
                  3 General Councels haue erred euen in great matters of Religion.
                  4 The things ordained by general Councels, are so far to be embraced and beleeued, as theie are consonant to Gods holie word.
               
               
                  
                  1 Great is the povver, and auctoiti
                        •
                      of Kinges and Princes by the word of God. For, as the defence of Religion is committed vnto thē: so must they see that al men do their duties. That theis thinges maie the better be performed, they are as iust occasion is offered, not as men vnder the power of others to summon, but as supreme gouernors within their territories and dominions to commaund al sortes of men to meete together, and that either to th'inplanting of the truth where it is not, or to the supprescing of sin, errors, idolatrie, and superstition where, or in whom soeuer it doth arise, or is rooted. Such Councels were holden,
                  In the time of the Mosaical gouernment by the commaundement of the most godlie Kinges.

                        Asa. 2. Chro. 15 9. &c.
                        Ezekiah. 2. Chr. 29. 4 &c.
                        Iosiah. 1. Chro. 34. 29. &c.
                     
                  
                  Since the Gospel hath bine receaued into Kingdomes and common-weales, by Christian Princes, and Emperors, who gathered Councels

                        General, so called was the Councel of

                              Nice by Constantinus Magnus.
                              Constantinople, by Theodosius the elder.
                              Ephesus, by Theodosius the yonger.
                              Calcedon by Marcian.
                           
                        
                        National, and prouincial, such (for al) were held at

                              By the wil of Charles the Great
                              Franco
                                    •
                                 urt.
                              Rhems
                              Turon
                              Cabilon.
                              Arelot
                              Moguntia
                           
                        
                        Auernia by Theodorit. Matiscon, by Gnutranus.

                              By 
                                    •
                                 hil debert
                              Aurelia
                              Paris,

                                    And neuer yet hath there bine à councel either general or national, either publique, or priuate (I onlie except the Councels held by the holie Apostles in à troblesome state, & time of the church, when as yet ther were no christian Princes coū
                                       tenauncing the truth) either begunne or ended to the glorie of God. But it hath bine, I say, not onelie called, but confirmed also by some godlie Emp. King. or Queene. This in effect is granted by the confes.
                                    Heluet. 2. cap. 30.
                                    Heluet. 1. art. 26.
                                    Bohem. cap, 16.
                                    Fland. art. 36.
                                    Sax. art. 23.
                                    VVittem cap. 35.
                                    Sueuia in the Perorat.

                                          As al other godly and true propositions besides; So hath this bine oppugned, & that diuers lie. For some thinke
                                          That Emperors and Princes be the Pope his Summoners, and not of themselues absolute commanders of Councels.
                                          There ought no Councel to be kept without the determinate consent of the Bishop of Rome. Harding.
                                          No Councel euer yet had firme auctoritie, which was not cōfirmed by the Bishop of Rome. Du
                                                •
                                             aeus.
                                          The Popes of Rome, vvhome theie cal the successors of Peter (and not christian Princes) haue auctoritie and power of making laws of calling Councels &c. The Rhemists. vpon the 16 of Mathevv.
                                          That vvere the Pope à good man as he is Antichrist, he might, or he being wiked, other good Bishops (though subiects vnto the ciuil Magistrate) maie cal Councels together at their discretion; vvhich derogateth not à little from th'auctoritie of à christian King, or Prince.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 General Councels consisting,
                  Of men, who maie erre, nothing more easilie.
                  Of manie men and they differing in

                        VVhereby distractions of opinions oftē do arise.
                        Yeates.
                        Riches.
                        Learning.
                        Iudgemēt.
                        Calling.
                        Auctoritie
                     
                  
                  Of manie men, whereof the wiked are for number commonly the maior part, and the better in outwarde countenance of the world.
                  Of men, not al, nor alwaies

                        Gouerned with the

                              Of god.
                              Spirit
                              word
                           
                        
                        Gathered together in the name of Christ.

                              None of soūd iudgement in Religion, do dout but they may erre.
                              If Paphnutius had bin absent, at Nice the Councel had erred.
                              If Hierome had bine avvay, at Calcedon the Councel had erred
                              At a
                                    •
                                 ie time, if some be beleeued, be the Pope not present either perse, or per Legatum, no Councel but must erre.

                                    Therefore Councels may erre. That vvhich one Councel doth establish another vvil disanul. Theie vvil not (vve must thinke,) reuoke, that vvhich is vvel decreed. Therefore Councels may erre. Therefore erre do the Papistes vvhich say
                                    The holie Spirit alvvaies is the director of Councels.
                                    That Councels cannot erre.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 Councels both general and particular haue erred and that in matters of faith, (Confes. VVittemb. cap. 33.) For
                  In the scripture we finde that

                        It was ordained if any man did confesse that Iesus was the Christe, hee shoulde bee excommunicat, Iohn 9. 22 Iohn. 12. 42. which could not be but by à Councel.
                        A Councel was gathered to suppres Christ, and his doctrine. Iohn. 12. 47.
                        A Councel consulted how they might take Iesus by subtlety & kill him. Mat. 26. v. 3. 4.
                        A Councel sought for witnesse against Iesus to put him to death. Mar. 14. v. 53. 55.
                        A Councel bound Iesus, and led him awaie, and deliuered him to Pilate, Mar. 15. 1.
                        A Councel iudged our S. Christ

                              A deceauer, Mat. 27. 63.
                              A blasphemer, Luk. 22. 71.
                           
                        
                        A Councel corrupted the soldiers, and willed them to tell à lie. Matth. 28. ver. 12. 13.
                        A Councel with-stood Peter and Iohn, and commuanded them that in no wise they should speake or teach in the Name of Iesus. Act. 4. vers. 5. 6. & 18.
                        A Councel

                              Caused Th'apostles to be beaten. Act. 5. 40.
                              Commaunded that Th'apostles should not prech in the Name of Iesus. Act. 5. 40.
                           
                        
                        In aunciēt writings of credit we maie read how, contrary to Gods word

                              By Councels A
                                    ••
                                 ianisme hath bine confirmed.
                              By Councels the books of foolish men haue bin made of equal auctoritie with the word of God.
                              By Councels

                                    Hath bin established.
                                    Adoration of images
                                    Inuocation of creatures, &c.
                                 
                              
                              By Councels th'auctoritie of Princes hath bine depresced, and the Pope and Clergie aduaunced aboue all Princes.

                                    The truth heereof moued
                                    Hilary to call the Synode of Mediolane, the Synagogue of the malignant.
                                    Saint Augustine vnto Maximinus to write, Neither ought I to obiecte against thee the Synode of Nice, nor thou against mee the Synod of Ariminum.
                                    Nazianzen openlie to pronounce that he neuer sawe anie good end of à Councell.
                                    The Frenche King his Embassador to sa
                                          •
                                       e in the chapter of Trent, that scarsely anie good at all, or verie little came by Councels to the state of christendome.
                                    Cornelius, Bishop of Bitonto, to break out into theis words in the face of the Church at Trid
                                          •
                                       t: I would that with one consent they had not altogether declined from religion vnto superstition, from faith vnto infidelitie, from Christ vnto Antichrist, from God vnto Epicu
                                          •
                                       us. This notwithstanding the Papists do continue in an erroneous opinion that Councels cannot erre.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               ¶ The Antithesis in this and the other part of the subscription, wil easilie make apparant what by this proposition is set-downe.
               
                  
                  4 General Councels we simplie condemne not; yet do wee not ground our faith vppon anie Councel, but onelie vppon the word of god. Therfore in general Councels
                  VVhat-soeuer is agreeable to the written vvord of god, we do reuerendlie embrace.
                  VVhat-soeuer is contrarie vnto, or besides the vvil of God reueiled in his vvorde, vve do carefullie auoide. And

                        So are vvee commaunded to do euen by God himselfe.

                              Deut. 12. 32▪
                              
                              Iohn. 1. 7.
                              Ezek. 20. v. 18. 19.
                              Gal. 1. 8.
                           
                        
                        Thus think the godlie churches reformed. Confes. of

                              Heluet. 2. c. 18.
                              Bohem. cap. 1.
                              Fraunce art. 5.
                              Flan. art. 7.
                              VVittem. c. 33.

                                    Contrarie heere vnto th'opinion of the Papists concerning coū
                                       cels is, that
                                    Theie do binde al nations. So did Pope Hormisda decree.
                                    Some coū
                                       cels, and namelie the Councel of

                                          Nice.
                                          Constantinople.
                                          Ephesus.
                                          Chalcedon. So thought Pope Gregorie the great
                                       
                                    
                                    Al Councels, so did Campion suppose. were of aequal auctoritie with the worde of God.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               22. ARTICLE. ❧ Of Purgatorie.
               
                  THe Romish doctrine concerning 1. 2 Purgatorie, 3 Pardons, worshipping, and adoration 4 aswell of images, 5 as of reliques, 6 and also inuocation of Saincts, is a fonde thing, vainelie inuented, and grounded vpon no warrantie of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  The Romishe doctrine touching

                        1 Purgatorie,
                        2 Purgatorie,
                        3 Pardons,
                        4 Worshipping and adoration of Images,
                        5 Worshipping and adoration of Reliques,
                        6 Inuocation of Saincts,
                     
                  
                  Is a thing

                        Not warranted by the Scripture.
                        Contrarie to the worde of God.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  1 It is graunted aswel of the Romish, or false, as of the true Church, that none vncleane thing can enter into the kingdome of God. And because al mē either haue bine, or stil remaine vnclean, therefore theie are or must bee purged from sinn. But in the manner of purging them who are vnpure, thei do greatlie differ. For the true church looking into the vvorde of God, doeth finde that vvee are sanctified, or made cleane in diuers respects diuerslie.
                  By Baptism. Ephes. 5. v. 25. 26.
                  By the word preached. Iohn. 15. 3.
                  By the bloud of Christ▪ 
                     
                        •
                     . Ioh 1. 7. Tit. 2. 14. Heb. 1. 3.
                  By the spirite of God. 1. Cor. 6. 11.

                        And that in this life, and not in the other world. For in the Scripture there is mention but onelie
                        Of tvvo vvaies. Mat 7. 13. 14.

                              One leading vnto destruction
                              One bringing vnto life.
                           
                        
                        Of tvvo sortes of men. (Mar 16. 16. Io
                              •
                           . 3
                              •
                            8.) vvhereof

                              Some beleeue and theie are saued.
                              Some beleeue not, and theie are damned.
                           
                        
                        Of tvvo states in the life to come. Lu. 16.

                              One blessed where Lazarus is
                              One cursced vvhere Diues doth abide.

                                    A Third waie, or sort or state cannot bee founde in the vvord of God. And therefore the Purgatorie in an other world denied,
                                    Hath alvvaies bine by the Greeke Churches.
                                    Is at this daie by the mouthes of al, and by the publique Confes. of some churches in theis parts of the vvorld

                                          Heluet. 2. cap. 26.
                                          France▪ art 24.
                                          Saxon. ar 11.
                                          VVittem. cap. 25.
                                          Ausb. art. 11 Therefore the Romish doctrine touching purgatorie established by the late conuenticle at Trent. (Decret. de Purgat. ses. 25. & ses. 6. c
                                                   •
                                                n. 30.) cannot be warranted by the holie Scripture.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 The Papists sliding backe from the truth of God, haue fallen in to manie noisome, and diuers opinions in the matter of Purgatorie, agreeing among themselues neither
                  About the place where Purgatorie should be, some placing the same

                        In the bottom of the sea.
                        Neere vnto the mounte Hecla in Ireland.
                        Vpon the mount A
                              •
                           tna in Sicil.
                        In Hel.
                     
                  
                  About the tormentors in Purgatorie, who by some are thought to be

                        Holie Angels.
                        Verie diuels.
                     
                  
                  About the torments. For some dreame how theie are tormented

                        VVith fire onelie.
                        VVith water, and with fire.
                     
                  
                  About the causes of Purgatorie torments. Because manie do thinke

                        For which in this life men haue done no penance, are there punished.
                        Onelie venial sinnes.
                        Venial, and deadlie sinnes.
                     
                  
                  About the time which theie that are tormented, shal abide in Purgatorie. For some haue giuen-out that the poore soules there

                        Be continualie in torments.
                        Haue rest sometime, as vpon

                              Sondaies.
                              Holy daies.
                           
                        
                        In time shal be set at libertie, because their punishment is but temporarie.
                        Maie be deliuered at anie time if

                              Their friends with monie wil buie-out their paines.
                              The Priests wil praie for them.
                              The Pope wil but saie the word.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  About the state of the soules in Purgatotie. For

                        Our English Papists at Rhemes do thinke those in Purgatorie to be in à more happie and blessed state than anie that do liue in this world.
                        Some, as Thomas Aquinas, saie the paine of hel fire, and the paine of the fire of Purgatorie are al one, and that theie differ nothing but that th'one is but temporal, and th'other not so. And others, put in choise either to tar
                              •
                           ie in Purgatorie à daie, or to suffer the miseries of this world an 100▪ yeeres, haue chosen th'affliction of this life, for an hundred yeeres together, than the paines of Purgatorie for one winters daie.

                              Therefore in this contrarietie of opiniōs, some of them th'aduersaries themselues cannot denie, must be, wee saie al of them are, contrarie to the worde of God. Besids they nourish most cursed, and damnable errors, as that
                              Al the soules of the faithful, separated from their bodies, are not at rest.

                                    Theis are purged in purgatorie▪
                                    
                                    Al sinnes in their owne nature, are not mortal, or deadlie.
                                    Some sinnes deserue not euerlasting punishment.
                                 
                              
                              One sinful man may saue another, and that easilie by

                                    Some thing for them
                                    Praieng,
                                    Saieng,
                                    Doing,
                                 
                              
                              If friends in this world wil do nothing for poore soules in paine, yet maie they come vnto life at length by abiding their deserued torments vntil th'end in purgatorie.
                              The Pope is God in that he can at his pleasure deliuer

                                    From the guil
                                          •
                                        of sinne.
                                    From the punishments due to sinne.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 Such hath bine th'exceeding mercie and loue of God tovvards man, that as hee hath purged vs from all guiltines of sinn by the bloud: So hath he pardoned vs from th'euer lasting punishment due to sinn by the pains of Christ. For
                  There is saluation in none other. For among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen vvhereby wee must be saued. Act. 4. 12.
                  Through his Name al that beleue shal receiue remiscion of sinnes. Act 10. 43.
                  Hee hath purchased the Church by his owne bloud. Act. 20. 28.
                  VVith his stripes vvee are healed. Isa. 53. 5.
                  Hee that beleeueth in him shal not

                        Be condemned, Iohn. 3. 18
                        Be ashamed. Rom. 10. 11.

                              Therefore
                              Come vnto me, al yee that are wearie, and laden, and I wil case you, &c. And yee shall finde reste for your soules, saith our Sauiour Christ. Mar 11. v. 28. 29.
                              If thou shalt confesce vvith thie mouth the Lord Iesus, and shalt beleeue in thine heart that God raised him vp frō the dead, thou shalt bee saued, saith S. Paule. Rom. 10. 9.

                                    This beeing the doctrine of god himselfe, and of his Church, (See art. 2. proposit. 4. art. 11. proposit. 1. art. 22. proposit 1.) we maie euidentlie perceaue hovve not onelie vain; but besides, not onelie besides, but against the word of god the Romish doctrine concerning Pardons is. For that doeth teach vs
                                    To seeke saluation not at God alone, but at the handes of sinful man. For would vvee haue pardon
                                    That we maie be our ovvne Sauiors: So did that of purgatorie.

                                          For the sinnes of 40. daies? A Bishop maie giue it.
                                          For the sinnes of an 100▪ daies? A Cardinal maie graunt it.
                                          For al our synnes committed or to be committed? From the Pope wee maie haue it. Here are his pardons if you respecte

                                                Time for yeares.

                                                      40
                                                      50
                                                      100
                                                      1000
                                                      1000
                                                      10000
                                                   
                                                
                                                Offences. For

                                                      Parricide.
                                                      Homicide
                                                      Treason.
                                                      The sinne of Sodome
                                                      Periurie, &c.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          Howe the precious blood of Christe was shed in vaine. For corruptible golde and siluer maie and wil saue vs.
                                          That repentance is not of necessitie to the saluatiō of man. For without the same à popishe pardon maie saue; but without either à pardon from the Pope, or absolution of á Priest, there is no saluation.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        4 Images are such an abomi natiō
                           
                              •
                            to the Lord, that he
                        To make them among al men odio
                              ••
                           , describeth the vanitie of thē by his prophets, as that

                              Theie are

                                    Ierem. 10. vers. 8. 15.
                                    The doctrine of vanitie.
                                    The work of errors.
                                    The teachers of lies. Hab. 2. 18.

                                          Psal 135. 15.
                                          Siluer and golde.
                                          The work of mans hands.
                                       
                                    
                                    Vanitie. Isa. 44. 10▪ &c
                                 
                              
                              Theie haue
                           
                           
                              Psal. 135. 16.
                              A mouth and speake not.
                              Eies and see not.
                              Eares and heare not.
                           
                           
                              Psal. 115. 7.
                              Handes, & touch not
                              Feete, and walke not, Theie that make them are like vnto them: so are al thei which trust in thē. Psalm. 115. 8. 135. 18.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Giueth á straight commandement.

                        Not to bowe down to them, not worship them Erod. 20. 5. 1. Cor. 10. v. 7. 14
                        Not to make them. Exod. 20. 5. Deut. 4. ve. 14. 15. &c.
                        To flie from them. 1. Iohn, 5. 21. 1. Cor 10. 14.
                        To destroie

                              The images. Deut. 7. 5. 12 ve. 2. 3. Iosh. 24. 24.
                              The idolaters. Deut. 17. vers. 2. &c.
                              The enticers vnto idolatrie. Deut. 13. 5. &c.
                           
                        
                        Commended greatlie and praiseth such as haue

                              Destroied images. 
                                    •
                                 . King. 18. v. 3. 4. 2. Chron. 14. 3. 34. 2. &c.
                              Not bowed vnto idols. 1. Kin. 19. 18▪ 2. Chro. 34. 2. Dan. 3. Rom. 11. 4. &c.
                           
                        
                        Curseth

                              The images. Deu. 7. 25. 27. 15. Iere. 51. vers. 47. 51. 10. 11.
                              The image makers, Deu. 27. 15. Isa. 44 9. &c.
                              The image seruers, or vvorshippers. Deut. 27. 26. Psal. 97. 7. Isa. 42. 17. 44. 11.

                                    Hereunto with vs the Protestant Churches euerie vvhere do subscribe, & namelie, Confes. of
                                    Helue 2. c 3. 4
                                    Basil. art. 10 6. 3.
                                    Bohe. c. 3. 17
                                    Franc. art. 1.
                                    Ausburgh art. 1.
                                    Sax. art. 22
                                    VVit. c. 1. 23
                                    Su
                                          •
                                       a. art. 22

                                          The Romishe doctrine contrarie to the word of God, doth allowe; and not onelie allow, but publiquelie erect, and not onelie erect, but adore; and not onelie adore images, but accursce, & more than so, condemne to the fire as haeretiks, such as wil not wor shipp images, and th'images too (which is most abhominable)
                                          Of God himselfe euen of god

                                                The whole & blessed, and incom prehensible Trinitie with three faces in one head.
                                                The Father, and that in the likenes of an old man with à long white beard
                                                The sonne, in the similitude of à man hanging on the Crosce.
                                                The holie Ghost in the shape of à Doue.
                                             
                                          
                                          Of God his creatures

                                                Of Angels.

                                                      Alwaies with wings.
                                                      Sometimes with à pare of ballance, as S. Michael.
                                                   
                                                
                                                Of men. as of

                                                      as it were
                                                      Moses with hornes
                                                      Th'apostles with trenchers
                                                   
                                                
                                                The B. virgine with

                                                      Haire f
                                                            •
                                                         isled.
                                                      Costlie garments
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          Of base thinges

                                                Agnus Deis of ware.
                                                VVafer cakes of flower
                                                Crosses of

                                                      Gold.
                                                      Siluer.
                                                      Stone.
                                                      VVood.
                                                      Paper, &c.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  5 Of al the erroneous opinions among the papists vvhich are infinite, none is more to the illusiō of wel meaning christians than their doctrine concerning worshiping, and adoration of the Reliques of Saints. A doctrine,
                  In the Scripture,

                        No where to be found
                        Forbidden Deut. 6, 13▪ Matth. 4, 10.
                     
                  
                  In the purer time of the Church no where to be heard.
                  In al reformed Churches at this time vtterlie condemned, as in part by some testimonies extant, euidentlie maie appeare. Confes. of

                        Hel. 2, c. 5.
                        Hel. 1. art. 11.
                        Basil. ar. 10.
                        Bohem. c. 17.
                        Franc. ar. 24.

                              Yet such is the Satanical boldnes of that Antichristian Synagogue, that as theie wil delude men with the reliques of Saincts, which are not so: So likewise theie teach the people, which is most abominable, to giue diuine adoration & honor vnto them. Hence
                              Saith one, and that in 
                                    •
                                  general Councel. In like 
                                    •
                                 ort do I worship, and honor, and salute the R
                                    ••
                                 ques also of Saincts, as of the champions and fighters for Christ; & as of them who haue obteined fauor from God both to minister remedie, to heale diseases, to cast-out diuels, &c.
                              Some do praie vnto S. Benedict, whose reliques theie had stolen. O Benedict after God our onlie hope, leaue vs not orphans, who art come hether not through our merits, but for the saluation of manie soules.
                              Haue some published, That the bodies of Saincts, and specialie the Reliques of the blessed Martyrs, are with al synceritie to be honoured as the members of Christ, &c. If anie denie this sentence, he is to be thought not à Christian, but an Eunomian, and Vigilautian.
                              The Councel of Trent hath decreed, that theie are to bee taken for damned, which affirme howe worship and honor is not to be giuen vnto the Reliques of Saincts, &c.

                                    Of this preposterous deuotion
                                    Theie haue appointed à certaine Seruice for the holie Crosce, where-on Christ was hanged.
                                    Theie haue made à feast for the Speare and Nailes wherewith Christ was launced.
                                    Theie haue canonized for à Sainct, the Chains which bound the Apustle Sainct Peter.

                                          To saie nothing of the adoration theie giue
                                          To the Hair, Milk, Smock of the B. virgine.
                                          To the Head, Haire, Thombe, Coate of Iohn Baptist.
                                          To the Breaches of Ioseph.
                                          To the Sworde, Hand-kirchiefe of S. Paul.
                                          To the Keies of S. Peter.
                                          To manie things which of modestie I wil not mention, but ouerpasse.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  6 The Christian exercise of praier is à dutie which may not be securelie omitted, or vainlie abused. And though manie things in praier be necessarilie to be obserued: yet à special point is that in our supplications and praiers we cal onelie vpon God. For so to do we are
                  Commanded euen of God himselfe. Psal. 50, 15. Matth 6, 9. Luke: 11, 2.
                  Allured by manifold

                        Promises of large blessings. Psal. 50, 15. Matth 7, 11. Luke. 11, 13. 18. 7. Iohn 16, v. 23, 24.
                        Examples of godlie men, of

                              Patriarchs.

                                    Abraham. Gen. 13, 4.
                                    Isaak. Ge. 26. 25.
                                    Iaacob. Gen. 32, 9, &c.
                                 
                              
                              Prophets.

                                    Daniel. Dan. 9, 16, &c.
                                    Elias. 1. K. 17, 
                                          •
                                       .
                                    Ieremie. Ier. 14, 7. &c.
                                 
                              
                              Centurions, Acts 10, 2.
                              Publicans. Luke 18, 13.
                              Apostles.

                                    Paul. Act. 16, 25. and al his Epist.
                                    Peter. &c. Acts 1, 24.
                                 
                              
                              Al the elect in this world. Luke 18, 7.

                                    On th'other side to praie vnto anie creature that dead is, beside Iesus Christ.
                                    In the Scripture there is no

                                          Law to command

                                                To prouoke.
                                                Promise of blessing
                                                Example of godlie men, or women
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    As the church of God in the pure
                                          •
                                        times haue: so in theis daies the Protestant Churches vtterlie mislike. See Confes. of

                                          Heluet. 1. art. 
                                                •
                                             1.
                                          Heluet. 2 c. 5, 23.
                                          Basil. art. 10.
                                          Bohem. c. 2. 17.
                                          France. art. 14. 24.
                                          Fland. art. 20.
                                          Ausburg. art. 21.
                                          VVittem▪ ca. 23.
                                          Sueauia. art. 11. 21.

                                                Therefore the Romish doctrine that Saints at to be praied vnto, & their dailic praieng as occasiō serueth, vnto
                                                S. Agatha, for fore breasts.
                                                S. Benedict for poisoning.
                                                S. Clare for fore eies.
                                                S. Damian for phisick.
                                                S. Erasmus, for health in th'intrals
                                                S. Feriol, for Geese.
                                                S. Giles for ba
                                                      ••
                                                   ennes of women.
                                                S. Hubbert for dogs.
                                                S. Iob, for the poxe.
                                                S. Katherin for knowledge.
                                                S. Loy, for horses.
                                                S. Margaret for women in 
                                                      •••
                                                   uel.
                                                S. Nicholas, for children.
                                                S. Otilia for the head.
                                                S. Petronil, for th'ague
                                                S. Quintin, for the cough.
                                                S. Ruffine, for madnes
                                                S. Sebastian for the plague.
                                                S. Thomas of Canturburie for sinners.
                                                S. Valentine for the falling sicknes.
                                                S. VVinefield for virginitie.
                                                S. ✚, or Crosce for al things.

                                                      It is
                                                      Vaine.
                                                      Not warrā
                                                         table by the worde of god.
                                                      Repugnant to the holie Scripture.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               23. ARTICLE. Of Ministring in the Congregation.
               
                  IT is not lawful 1 for anie man to take vpon him th'office of publike preaching, 3 or ministring the Sacraments in the Congregation, 2 before hee be lawfullie called, and sent t'execute the same. 4 And those wee ought to iudge lawfullie called, and sent: which be 6 chosen and called to this worke 5 by men who haue publike auctoritie giuen vnto them in the congregation, to cal and sende Ministers into the Lordes vine-yard.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 None publiquelie maie preach, but such as are auctorized thereunto.
                  2 Theie must not be silent, who by office are bound to preach.
                  3 The Sacraments maie not bee administred in the Congregation but by a lawful Minister.
                  4 There is a lawful Ministerie in the Church.
                  5 Theie are lawful Ministers which be ordained by Men lawfullie appointed to the calling▪ and sending-forth of Ministers.
                  6 Before Ministers are to be ordained, theie are to be chosen, and called.
               
               
                  
                  1 Manie are the duties enioined to euerie christian: yet so is it ordained by the wisedome of God, that none should as gouerne in the Cōmon-weale: so teach publiquelie in the Church, but such as lawfully be called and sent to execute the same. This
                  By the Scripture is apparent where

                        The godlie are commanded to preach, before theie would speake: so was
                        The wiked are blamed for preaching before theie were sent. Iere. 14, 14. 23, 21. 27, 15. 29 9.

                              Samuel. 1. Sam. 3, 4, &c.
                              Ieremie. Iere. 1. 4. &c.
                              Ezekiel. Ezek. 2. 3, &c.
                              Iohn Baptist. Iohn. 1. 6.
                              Iesus Christ, who as he was sent, (Ioh. 20, 21) so did he to preach, send

                                    The 12. Apostles. Mat. 10. 5, &c. Mat. 28, 19. &c. Iohn. 20, 21.
                                    The 70. disciples. Luke. 10. 1.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        A commaundement is giuen vs to praie the Lord of the haruest that he would send-forth laborers into his haruest. Matth. 9. 38.
                        VVe do read that

                              God hath ordained some in the Church to be

                                    1. Cor. 12, 28.
                                    Apostles
                                    Prophets.
                                    Teachers.
                                    VVorkers of miracles, &c.
                                 
                              
                              Christ ascended gaue some

                                    Ephes. 4, 11.
                                    Prophets.
                                    Euangelists.
                                    Pastors.
                                    Teachers
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  By the publique Confession of manie Churches reformed, is granted; as Confes. of

                        Heluet. 2. c. 18.
                        Bohem. c. 9.
                        France art. 31.
                        Fland. art. 31.
                        Ausb. art. 14.
                        VVittem. art. 20.
                        Sueaui. art. 13.

                              VVherebie we signifie our selues to be aduersaries
                              To all such as to their power do seeke th'abolishing of publique preaching, as do subtile Papists, and worldlie men.
                              To al such as publishe how the worde is not taught by the holie Scriptures, and Sermons, but onelie by the reuelation of the Spirit, so did Muncer.
                              To al such as runne before theie be sent, as do manie

                                    Anabaptists.
                                    Schismatikes, to carie disciples after them
                                 
                              
                              To al such as hold how theie which are able to teach, and instruct the people, maie, and must so do, and that not priuatlie, but publiquelie, though theie be not ordinarilie called, and sent thereunto. The doctrine of R. H.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 As publiquelie to preach before men are sent, is à gre
                        •
                     uous fault: so not to preach being sent, is as great a sinne. Hereunto 
                        •
                     eare witnes
                  In the Scripture

                        Iesus Christ whose wordes are theis, Surelie I must also preach the kingdome of God to other cities: for therefore am I sent. Luke. 4. 43.
                        Peter and Iohn, who being charged to speake no more in the name of Iesus, said, VVe cannot but speake that which we haue heard, and sene. Act. 4. 17. &c.
                        S. Paul. For he writeth, Necessitie is laid vpon me, and wo is vnto me, if I preach not the Gospel. For if I do it willinglie, I haue à reward: but if I do it against my will, yet the dispensation is committed vnto me. 1. Cor. 9. v. 16, 17.
                        Th'apostles. For though theie were beaten for so doing: yet ceassed theie not to teach and preach Iesus Christ. Act. 5. 42.
                     
                  
                  The godlie Churches at this present in the vvorld. Confes.

                        Heluet. 2. c. 18.
                        Heluet. 1. art. 15.
                        Bohem. c. 9.
                        France. art. 25.
                        Ausburge. art. 7.
                        VVittemb. art. 20.
                        Sueau
                              •
                           
                           ▪ art. 13.

                              This condemneth al such as take vpon them the office of publique preaching without performance of the same, either through
                              Ignorance, that theie can not
                              VVorldly busines that they maie not
                              Negligence that theie wil not
                              Feare of troubles, that theie dare not Preach the word of God.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. To minister the Sacramēts in the Cōgregation euerie man maie not presume; but theie are so to do as be lawfullie called, & sent for that purpose (Heb. 5, 4.) as they be whose office publiquelie is to teach & instruct the people of God. For so we maie read
                  In the Scripture that the preachers of the word, are to be the ministers of the Sacraments. For both

                        Christ by his auctoritie did command his disciples, as to preach▪ so to

                              Baptize. Matth. 28, 19.
                              Celebrate the Lord his supper

                                    Luke. 22, 19.
                                    1. Cor. 11, 
                                          •
                                       . 24, 25.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Th'apostles & other ministers in the purest times, whome the godlie ministers in theis d
                              •
                           ies do succeed, did not 
                              •
                           nclie preach but also

                              Baptize,

                                    Act. 2. 38 &c
                                    Act. 8. v. 12, 13.
                                    Act. 9, 47.
                                    Act▪ 16, v. 31. &c.
                                    Iohn. 1, 25.
                                    1. Cor. 1, 14. &c.
                                 
                              
                              Minister the Supper of the Lord

                                    Act. 20, 7.
                                    1. Cor. 10, 16.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  In the Christian Confessions of the Churches reformed. Confes.

                        Heluet. 2. c. 18.
                        Bohem. c. 9.
                        France ar. 25. 31
                        Ausb. art. 7.
                        VVittē. art. 20.
                        S
                              •••
                           ia. art▪ 13.

                              In saieng that none maie minister the Sacraments in the Congregation before he be lawfullie called, and sent to execute the same, the meaning is not, as I take it, that priuatelie in houses either lawful ministers, vpon iust occasio
                                    〈…〉
                                  
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                 aie not, or others, not of the ministrie, vpon anie occasion, in the peace of the Church, maie administer the Sacraments. For though it be lawful for almen in their places to teach, to exhort, to reprehend, to praie, and that continuallie, and in al places: yet maie none minister the Sacraments but such as are publiquelie auctorized so to do. The contrarie where of neither by anie commandement from God, no
                                    •
                                  example in Th'apostles time can be shewen. Hereby we declare our selues not to fauor th'opinion that
                              Publiquelie some maie minister the Sacramēts which are not meerlie, and ful ministers of the

                                    word.
                                    Sacraments.
                                 
                              
                              Priuatelie the Sacrament of baptisme maie be ministred by anie man, yea by women, if necessitie 
                                    •
                                 o vrge.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4 God for the gathering, or erecting to himselfe á Church out of mankinde, and for the wel-gouerning of the same, hath from time to time vsed▪ yea, doth also, and to th'ende of the worlde wil vse the ministerie of men lawfullie called there-vnto by men. A trueth most euident
                  In the holy Scripture

                        Mark. 16. 15
                        Ephes 4. 11.
                        1. Cor. 12. 21
                        Matt. 28. 20
                        Iohn. 14. 16.
                     
                  
                  In the sound Confessions of the pure
                        •
                      Churches of this time Confes.

                        Heluet. 1. art 15.
                        Heluet. 2. ca 18.
                        Bohem. c. 8. 9. 14.
                        France. art. 25. 29. 30. 31
                        Fland. art. 30. 31.
                        Ausburgh. art. 7.
                        Sax. art. 11.
                        VVittem. art. 
                              •
                           0.
                        Sueaue. art. 13. 15.

                              This proposition I had ouerpassed in silence, had I not read in á certaine booke, that in theis daies
                              No Ministers haue the

                                    Pertaining to á Minister.
                                    
                                       
                                          〈…〉
                                       ng
                                    Sending,
                                    Auctoritie,
                                 
                              
                              It wil hardlie be sound in al the world, that anie Minister,

                                    Lawfull
                                          •
                                       e called.
                                    Is
                                    Shalbe
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  5 S. Paule in the beginning of his Epistle vnto the Galathians, giueth vs to obserue the diuers sendingforth of men into the holie Ministerie: whereof some are sent
                  1 By god For by

                        God the Father,

                              Iesus Christ, Iohn. 20. 21.
                              Iohn Baptiste, Iohn. 1. 6.
                           
                        
                        God the Sonne in his state,

                              Mortal, the 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . Apostles, Math 10. 5. 28. 19.
                              Glorious & immortal, S. Paule Act. 9. v. 3. 15.

                                    VVere called and sent This calling is special, & extraordinarie. And thei so called were
                                    Adorned with the gift of miracles, as wer I. Christ, & his Apostles, but not Iohn Baptist.
                                    Inioined to preache not in one or a fevve places, but ouer the whole vvorlde: so were th'apostles, but not Iesus Christ.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2 Of men, as they be who are sent, of men not auctorized thereunto▪ by the vvord of God, & that to the disquieting of the good estate of Christ his Church, such

                        In Th'apostles time vvere the false Apostles,
                        In our daies are the

                              S. Augustine saith Al which are thus sent are Liars. And their calling is vnlawful.
                              Annabaptistes
                              Iesuites.
                              Seminarie priests.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  3 By men: so in the primi
                        •
                     lue Church by Th'apostles, vvere Pastors and Elders ordained, vvho by the same auctoritie ordained other Pastors and teachers. VVhence it is that the Church as it hath bine: so it shal 
                        ••
                     l th'end of the vvorlde 
                        •
                     e prouided for. They who are thus called, haue povver neither to vvorke miracles, as Th'apostles had; no
                        •
                      to preach and minister the Sacraments vvhere theie vvil, as Th'apostles might: but the
                        •
                     e are tied euerie man to his charge, vvhich the
                        •
                     e must faithfullie attende vpon, except vrgent occasion do enforce the contrarie. The calling of theis men is tearmed à general calling, and it is th'ordinarie, and in theis daies the lawful calling allowed by the word of God. So 
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     fie with vs the true Churches else-where in the vvorld. Confession of

                        Heluet. 1. art. 17.
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 18.
                        Bohem. cap. 9▪
                        
                        France. art. 31.
                        Fland. art. 31▪
                        
                        Ausburg. art. 1
                              •
                           .
                        VVittemb. art. 20.
                        Sueaue. art. 13

                              This truth manie vvaies hath bine resisted. For there be which thinke
                              There is no calling, but th'extraordinarie, and special calling in theis daies.
                              Al are to be taken for

                                    which are not sacrificing Priestes, annointed by the Antichristian Bishops of the Romish lynagogue
                                    VVolues.
                                    Hie
                                          •
                                       lings.
                                    Lai-men.
                                    Intruders.
                                 
                              
                              That so manie as are sent by the Church are sent of the holie Ghost: vvhen vve knovve hovve often times the CHVRCHE sendeth for

                                    Laborers▪ idle workmen Frendes, enemies.
                                    Phisitions, murtherers.
                                    True Pastors▪ vvolues and Apostataes.
                                 
                              
                              Theie maie take the charge of Congregations, and yet performe no duetie.
                              That no Bishop, or Minister should remaine still in one place, but vvander. An error of the Familie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  6 Though it bee in the power of them which haue publique auctoritie in the Church t'appoint Ministers in the Congregation: yet maie theie admit neither whom they wil nor as they wil themselues; but they are both deliberatelie to chuse, and orderlie to cal such as theie haue chosen
                  This made Th'apostles & Elders in the primitiue Church

                        Straightlie to charge that suddenlie hands should be laid vpon no man. 1. Tim 5. 22.
                        To make special choise oftwaine, where of one was to be elected into the place of Iudas. Acts. 1. 23.
                        By election to ordaine Elders in euery church; and by

                              To commend them to the Lord. Acts. 14, 23.
                              Praier
                              Fasting
                           
                        
                        Laieng on of hands (1. Tim. 4, 14.) to consecrate them.
                     
                  
                  To describe who were to be chosen, & called. For theie are to be

                        Men, not

                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 oies.
                              VVomen. 1. Tim 2. 12.
                           
                        
                        Men of good behauior

                              1. Tim. 3. 2, &c
                              Not incontinent
                              Not giuen to vvine
                              Not strikers
                              Not couerous
                           
                        
                        Not proud. 1. Pe
                              •
                           . 5. 3.

                              Titus. 1, 7.
                              Not froward.
                              Not i
                                    •
                                 e
                                    •
                                 ul.
                           
                        
                        No giuers of offence. 2. Cor. 6, 3.
                     
                  
                  Men of special gifts

                        Apt to teach. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
                        Able to exhort. Tit, 1. 9.
                        VVise to diuide the vvord of God a
                              •
                           ight. 2. Tim. 2. 15.
                        Bold to reproue▪ 1. Tim. 5. 21. Tit. 1, 9.
                        VVilling to take paines. Matt. 9, 38. 2. Tim 4, 2.
                        VVatchful to ouersee. Acts. 20, 28.
                        Patient to suffer. Acts. 5, 41. 2. Tim. 4, 8.
                        Constant to endure al maner of afflictions▪ 2. Cor. 11, 23. &c.

                              They who are 
                                    •
                                 o chosen, & called, maie fightlie be numbred among the lavvful ministers. On th'other side, in an error they remaine vvhich thinke
                              That the due election and calling of Ministers according to the vvorde of God, is of no such necessitie to the making of Ministers.
                              That women maie bee

                                    In vvhich error the Pepuzians vvere.
                                    Elders
                                    Bishops
                                 
                              
                              That à special care is not to bee had both of the life, and of the learning of men; or that vviked men of euil life; or ignorant men vvithout learning, or Asses of no gifts; or loitere
                                    •
                                 s vvhich do no good; or fauourers of superstition, vvhich do great hurt, are to bee admitted into, or maintained in the holie ministerie.
                              That they are causes vvhich in deede a
                                    •
                                  none, to keepe men fró the Ecclesiastical function, as if men

                                    They may not bee priests, say the Papists
                                    Be maried.
                                    Haue had certaine wiues
                                    Haue not al outvvarde gifts of the bodie, thogh endued with heauenlie talents.
                                    Haue bine baptized of haeretiks, &c
                                 
                                 
                                    Theis ought not to busie themselues about the word, saie the Familists.
                                    Haue not bine trained vp in the Familie.
                                    Are not Elders in the Familie of Loue.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  This do the Churches protestant by their publike Confessions approue

                        Hel. 2. c. 18.
                        Hel. 1. ar. 25.
                        Bohem. c. 9.
                        Franc. ar. 3. 1.
                        Fland. art. 31.
                        Ausb. art. 14.
                        VVitt. ar. 20.
                        Sueau. ar. 13.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
               24. ARTICLE. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue as the people vnderstand not.
               
                  IT is à thing plainlie repugnant to the worde of God, and the custome of the primitiue church, to haue publike praier in the church, or to minister the Sacraments in à tongue not vnderstanded of the people.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  Publique praier, and the Sacraments must be ministred in á knowen tongue.
               
               
                  
                  This article needeth smal proofe. For who so is perswaded (as al true christians of vnderstanding are) that what is done publiklie by á strange language in the Church not vnderstood of the people,
                  Profiteth not the Congregation. 1. Cor. 14 ver. 6. 9. 14.
                  Aedifieth not the weake. 1. Cor. 14. ver. 4 17 26.
                  Instructeth not th'ignorant. 1. Cor. 14. 19.
                  Inflameth not the zeale. 1. Co 14. 9.
                  Offendeth the hearers. 1. Cor. 14. ver. 7. 
                        •
                     1.
                  Abuseth the people. 1. Cor. 14. ver. 1. 16.
                  Displeaseth God. Matth. 15. 8.
                  Bringeth religion into contempt. 1. Cor. 14. 23.

                        Easilie wil thinke that where the praiers be said, or the Sacraments administred in à tongue not vnderstood of the people, there
                        The word of God is not regarded.
                        The custome of the primitiue churche is not obserued.

                              This article, as al true Christians doe beleeue: so some by pub. Confessions doe graunt. Con. of
                              Helnet. 2. c. 22.
                              VVittem. cap. 27.
                              Ausburg. de Misca. art. 3.
                              Sueaue. c. 21.

                                    But there is nothing so apparent which hath not by some aduersaries bine denied. So contrarie to this article,
                                    Some, as the Marcosians, at the ministration of Baptisme, haue vsed certaine Hebrue wordes not to aedifie, but to terifie, and astonishe the mindes of the weake and ignorant people.
                                    Some, & theie be the papists, wil haue al seruice, praiers and Sacraments, & that throughout the world, ministred in an vnknowen tongue. And among theis papists,

                                          There bee which holde that the lesse theie vnderstande, the more deuout the people wil be. For ignorance is the mother of deuotion.
                                          There bee which write, that praiers not vnderstood of the people, are acceptable (of Satan I grant, but not of God) such are the Rhemists.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               25. ARTICLE. ❧ Of the Sacramentes.
               
                  SAcramentes ordeined of Christe1 bee not onely badges, or tokens of christian mens profession, but rather theie bee2 certaine sure witnesses, and effectual signes of grace, and Gods good-wil towards vs, by which he doth worke inuisiblie in vs,3 and not onely quicken, but also strengthen, and confirme our faith in him.
               
                  4There bee two Sacramentes ordeined of Christe our Lorde in the Gospel, that is to saie, Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord. Those fiue commonlie called Sacraments, that is to saie,5 Confirmation,6 Penance,7 Orders,8 Matrimonie,9 and extreme-Unction, are not to be coupled for Sacramentes of the Gospel, being such as haue growen partlie of the corrupt following of Th'apostles, partlie are states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet haue not like nature of Sacramentes with Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper, for that theie haue not anie visible signe or ceremonie ordained of God.
               
                  10 The Sacramentes were not ordained of Christe to be gazed vpon, or

to be carried-about, but that we shoulde duelie vse them.11 And in such onelie, as worthelie receiue the same, theie haue à wholesome effect, or operation: but theie that receiue them vnworthilie, purchase to themselues damnation, as Sainct Paule saith.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The Sacraments ordained of Christe, be badges, or tokens of our profession which be Christians.
                  2 The Sacramentes be certaine sure witnesces, and effectual signes of grace, and God his goodwil towarde vs.
                  3 By the Sacramentes God doth not onely quicken, but also strengthen, and confirme our faith in him.
                  4 Christ hath ordained but two Sacramentes in his holie Gospel.
                  5 Confirmation, Is no Sacrament.
                  6 Penance, Is no Sacrament.
                  7 Orders, Is no Sacrament.
                  8 Matrimonie. Is no Sacrament.
                  9 Extreme-Vnction, Is no Sacrament.
                  10 The Sacramentes are not to be abused, but rightlie to bevsed of vs al.
                  11 Al which receiue the Sacramentes, receiue not there-withal the thinges signified by the Sacrament.
               
               
                  
                  1 The Sacraments be not meere and onelie tokens of à Christian profession, as shal appeare: yet are the Sacraments badges or tokens
                  Of Christians. For by them are visiblie discerned

                        The faithful from infidels.
                        Christians. from

                              Pagans.
                              Iewes.
                              Prophane Atheists.
                           
                        
                        The true seruants of God, from enemies to the truth.

                              See a
                                    •
                                 . 19. proposit. 5. where it is declared howe the true Church is knowne by the due administration
                              Of the worde preached.
                              Of the Sacraments.
                           
                        
                        Of Christianitie. For

                              As Circumcision in th'old lawe, was à token howe al the corrupt, and carnal affections of the mind should be subdued; and that the Lord required not so much an outwarde of the bodie, as an inwarde circumcision of the harte (Deut. 10, 16. 30, 6. Iere. 4, 4. Acts. 7, 51. Rom. 12, 28. Phil. 3, 3. Col. 2, 11) so Baptisme 
                                    •
                                 elleth vs, that being once dead vnto sinne, we are to liue vnto righteousnesse; that al wee which haue bine, baptized into Iesus Christ, haue bine baptized into his death, &c. and must walke in newnesse of life &c. (Rom. 6, 3. &c.) for wee haue put on Christ, (Gal. 3, 26.) by baptisme.
                              As the Paschal Lambe was to the Iewes à token that the flight of sinne should alwaies be fresh in memorie, and that it should be celebrated not with old leauen, neither in the leauen of maliciousnesse, but with the vnleauened bread of synceritie and truth, (1. Cor. 5, 8:) So the participating of one loafe, and of one cup in the Lord his Supper▪ doth commend vnto our consideration à sweet concord, à brotherlie vnanimitie, and à constant continuance in the true worship, and seruice of God, without 
                                    •
                                 a
                                    •
                                 ouring idolatrie in anie 
                                    •
                                 espect (1. Cor. 10, 17, &c.)

                                    This do the godly learned euerie where teach, &c Some reformed Churches by pub. Conses. do testifie
                                    Heluet. 1. ar. 10.
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 19.
                                    Ausburg. ar. 13.
                                    Saxon. ar. 12.

                                          Vngodly therefore, & in à cursed state are thei
                                                •
                                             
                                          
                                          That contemne the Sacramēts as of none accompt, & regard not what men do thinke thē to be, whether

                                                Haeretlkes.
                                                Schismatikes.
                                                Epicures.
                                             
                                          
                                          VVhich think the Sacraments are but only bad ges of an outward Church, & therfore either securelie neglect them, or at the most care but onlie to seeme, though in truth theie be not christians. Such are

                                                Generalie, al hypocrites.
                                                Particularly the

                                                      Messalians.
                                                      Svvermeniās.
                                                      Familists vvho thinke that for obediēce sake to magistrates the Sacramēts are to be receiued but are of none effect to the perfect ones in the Familie.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        2 Infinitlie doth God declare his vnspeakeable and incomprehensible good-wil to man ward: yet in theis daies by none outward thing more notably, and effectuallie, than by the Sacraments. For
                        Of Baptisme.

                              Saith Christ, he that beleeueth and is baptized, shal be saued. Mar. 16, 16.
                              Peter saith, Amend your liues, and be baptized euerie one of you, &c. for the remission of sinnes. Acts. 2, 38.
                              Paul writeth, Husbands loue your wiues, euen as Christ loued the Church, and gaue him selfe for it, that he might sanctifie it, and clense it by the washing of water through the worde, &c. Ephes. 5, 25 &c.
                           
                        
                        Of the Lord his Supper, saith Christ touching

                              The bread This is my bodie

                                    VVhich is giuen for you. Luke. 22, 19.
                                    VVhich is broken for you. 1. Cor. 11. 24▪
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The cup, This is my bloud of the newe Testament, that is shed for manie for the remission of sinnes. Matth. 26, 28. Luke. 22, 20.

                                    This truth do the purer Churches of this time euerie where acknoledge. Confession of
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 19. 20. 21.
                                    Heluet. 1. ar. 20. 22.
                                    Bohem. c. 11. 12. 13.
                                    France. art. 34. 35 36. 37. 38.
                                    Fland. art. 33. 34, 35.
                                    Ausburg. art. 9. 13.
                                    Saxon. art. 12. 13 14.
                                    VVittem. art. 10. 19.
                                    Sueaue. art. 16. 17. 18.

                                          Cōtrarie herevnto the Papists erroneouslie do hold, that the Sacraments are not seales, but causes of
                                          Grace
                                          Iustification.

                                                Out of which, as one error en gendereth another ariseth,
                                                That theie which are partakets of the Sacraments, are vndoubtedlie saued.
                                                That so manie as are not incorporated into the visible Church by the Sacraments, at the least of Baptisme, are assuredlie condemned.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        3 The Sacraments be not meerlie tokens either of our dutie towards God and man; or of God his good wil to vsward: but besids by them he doth
                        Quicken.
                        Strēgthen.
                        Confirme.

                              Our faith in him So we maie read
                              In the Scripture.

                                    Acts. 2, 38. &c.
                                    1. Cor. 6, 11.
                                    Ephes. 5, 26.
                                    1. Cor. 10, 
                                          •
                                       6.
                                    1. Cor. 11, 28.
                                 
                              
                              In the godlie Confes. of this time

                                    Heluet. 2. c. 19. 20 21.
                                    Heluet. 1 art. 20.
                                    Basil. art. 6.
                                    Bohem. c. 11. 12.
                                    France. 34.
                                    Flan. art. 33. 34.
                                    Ausb. art. 13.
                                    Saxon. art. 13.
                                    Sueau. cap. 17.

                                          Howbeit this faith in God is not necessarilie tied vnto the visible signes and Sacramēts. For
                                          VVithout the Sacraments manie haue liued, and died, who yet pleased God, & are no doubt saued, either in respect

                                                Of their faith; so are we to thinke of a
                                                      •
                                                    the godlie

                                                      Men

                                                            VVhich were borne, & died before th'institution of Circumcisiō.
                                                            VVhich were borne, & died in the wildernesse.
                                                            VVhich were borne, & died in the time of Grace, & yet by some extremitie could not receiue the seale of the couenant.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      VVomē, who before and vnder the law for manie yeeres were partakers of no Sacrament, and neuer of one Sacrament.
                                                   
                                                
                                                That they be heirs of the promes
                                             
                                          
                                          Some haue faith before theie receiue anie of the Sacraments▪ So

                                                Had

                                                      Abraham. Rom. 4. v. 9, 10.
                                                      The Iewes vnto whom Peter preached. Act. 2, 4
                                                            •
                                                         .
                                                      The Samaritans. Act 8, 12
                                                      Th'eunuch. Acts. 8, 37.
                                                      Cornelius the Centurion with his companie. Acts. 10, 47.
                                                   
                                                
                                                Haue the godie of discretion not yet baptized.
                                             
                                          
                                          Some neither before, not at th'instant, nor yet afterward, though dailie theie should receiue the Sacraments, wil haue a true faith, such are like vnto

                                                Iudas Iohn. 13, 26.
                                                Ananias, and Sapphira. Acts. 5.
                                                Simon Magus. Act. 8. 13.
                                                Th'old Israelites. 1. Cor. 10. 5.
                                                The wiked Corinthians. 1. Cor. 11▪ 27. &c.
                                             
                                          
                                          In some the Sacraments do effectualie worke in processe of time, by the helpe of the word preached, which engendereth faith (Rom. 10, 14.) Such is the state principalie of infants elected vnto life, and saluation.

                                                Greatliie therefore do theie erre, who teach or hold, that
                                                Thei are damned, which dies with-out the seales of the couenaunt, albe it theie haue the promise of aeternal li
                                                      •
                                                   e, whereupon theie build. An error of the Papists.
                                                The Sacraments ex opere operato, bring faith. So teach the Papists.
                                                Infants haue faith; or that faith can bee where no knoledge of Iesus Christ is; or that anie can haue such knoledge with-out the preaching of the word.
                                                The Sacraments are not ordinarie means to raise vp good motionsin the harts of the faithful, but only meer and outward signes of spiritual things.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        4 A Sacrament.
                        According to th'etymologie of the worde, as the Schoole-men do write, is á signe of an holie thing, which being true, then haue here bine, and stil are, by so manie aboue either two, or seuen Sacraments, as there be, and haue bine aboue two or seuen things, which are signes of sacred and holie things.
                        According to the nature of à Sacrament indeed, is à couenant of God his fauor to manward, confirmed by som outwarde signe, which also hath bin sometime

                              Special to some

                                    Men, and that extraordinarilie by things

                                          Natural, as the

                                                Tree of life to Adam. Gen. 3. 3.
                                                Rain-bow, to Noah. Gen. 9. 9, &c.
                                             
                                          
                                          Supernatural, as the

                                                Smoking fornace, to Abram. Gene. 15. 17.
                                                Fleece of wool, to Gedeon. Iud. 6, 37.
                                                Dial to Ezekiah. 2. King. 20, 11. Isa. 38. 8.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Nations, as were

                                          To the Iewes.
                                          The Sacrifices.
                                          Circumcision.
                                          The Paschal lamb.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              General to the whole church militant, perpetual, and ordinarie, as in the time of the Gospel. And then is à Sacrament defined to be à Ceremonie ordained immediatlie by Christ himself, who by some earthlie, and outward element doth promise euerlasting fauor & felicitie to al such, as with true faith and repētance do receiue the same. Such in the newe Test. we find onelie to be

                                    Baptisme, mencioned

                                          Matt. 2
                                                •
                                             , 19.
                                          Mat. 16, 16.
                                          Iohn. 3, 5.
                                          Act. 2, 38.
                                       
                                    
                                    The Lords supper, as

                                          Luke. 22, 19.
                                          Iohn. 6, 53.
                                          1. Cor. 11, 24.

                                                This is the iudgment al so of the Churches Protestant. Confes.
                                                Heluet. 2. c. 19.
                                                Heluet. 1. art. 20.
                                                Basil. ar. 5. sect▪ 2.
                                                France. art. 35.
                                                Fland▪ art. 33.
                                                Saxon. art. 12.
                                                Sueau. art. 16.

                                                      In à contratie opinion are diuers, and namelie
                                                      For theie denie al the Sacraments of the Church, as we hold them.
                                                      The Turks.
                                                      The Iewes.
                                                   
                                                
                                                The Euchytes, who say the Sacraments are not profitable, & to be vsed, but onelie praier.
                                                The Schuenk-feldians, which cōtemne not onelie the word preached, but the Sacraments besides as superfluous, depending vpon Reuelations.
                                                The Bannisterians, who think there vvil be à time, and that in this vvorlde too, vvhen vve shall need no Sacraments.
                                                The Papists, vvho publish

                                                      As Hovvlet doth, that vve leaue ou
                                                            •
                                                          no lesse than sixe of the seuen Sacraments.
                                                      Hovv there be seuen Sacramēts of the nevve Testament.
                                                      That he is accursed that shal saie there be either mo, or lesse than seuen Sacramēts; or that anie of them is not verelie, and properlie à Sacrament; or that theie be not all seuen instituted of Christ himselfe.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  5 Touching Confirmation the sentence & iudgement
                  Of the Church of God is

                        That rightlie vsed, as it was in the primitiue Church, it is no sacrament, but à part of Christian discipline profitable for the whole Church of God. For th'ancient Confirmation was nothing els, than an examination of such, as in their infancie had receiued the Sacrament of Baptisme, and were then, being of good discretion, able to yeeld an account of their beleefe, and to testifie with their owne mouthes that which their suerties in their names had promised at their Baptisme. VVhich confessiō being made, and à promise of perseuerance in the Faith by them giuen, the Bishop by sound doctrine, graue aduice, and godlie exhortation, confirmed them in that good profession; and laieng his hands vpon them, praied for th'increase of God his gifts, and graces in their minds.
                        That Popish Confirmation is no Sacrament of the Church of Christ: and this is apparent, as in the former proposition of this 25 art: so besides Confession of

                              Heluet. 2. c. 19.
                              Saxon. art. 19.
                              VVittem. c. 11.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Of th'antichristiā synagog is▪ that Cōfirmation is à Sacrament, whereby the grace that was giuen in Baptisme is cō
                     firmed, & made strong by the 7. giftes of the holy Ghost. Of which their Confirmation theie giue vs to obserue foure things

                        The substance, or matter; which is holie
                        Chrisme cōfect, as theie saie, and made of

                              Consecrated by a Bishop.
                              Oile oliue
                              Baulme.
                           
                        
                        The form & manner of ministring the same; consisting of

                              The words of the Bishop, vvhich are, I signe thee vvith the signe of the Crosse, and confirme thee vvith the Chrisme of saluation, in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, & of the holie Ghost
                              Actions

                                    Of à God-father, or Godmother that is confirmed, holding vp the child to the Bishop.
                                    Of the Bishop

                                          Crossing him, that is to be confirmed on the fore-head vvith oile.
                                          Striking the partie cōfirmed on th'eare.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        The minister, vvho must be à Bishop, & none inferior.
                        Th'effect, or affects rather. Theie saie by Confirmation

                              Sinnes are pardoned, and remitted.
                              The grace of baptism is made perfect. Such become men in Christ, vvho before vvere but children.
                              Grace is giuen boldlie to confesse the name of Christ, and al things belonging to a Christian man.
                              The holie Ghost is giuen to the ful. Perfect strength of the mind is attained.

                                    This laieth open to the vievv of the vvorld the most dangerous, and damnable errors of the Church of Rome concerning Cō
                                       firmation. For
                                    It is an error to saie that Confirmation is à Sacrament, because it hath none institution from God, vvhich is necessarie to al, & euerie Sacrament, inasmuch as à Sacrament can be ordained of none but of God himselfe, euen as th'aduersaries them selues do confesse. Catech. Trid. tit. de Confir.
                                    To saie that Popish Cō
                                       firmation is grounded vpon the word of god, is to speake soule errors, & vntruths. For in al the holie Scripture there is no mention
                                    It is an error to saie there is anie other ointmēt giuen to the strengthning of the church militant besides the holie Ghost. 1. Iohn. 2, 27

                                          Of the matter that it must be Chrisme, & that made of Oliue oile, and Baulme, and consecrated of à Bishop.
                                          Of the forme, that either the Bishop must signe him that is to bee confirme
                                                •
                                              vvith the signe of the Crosse; or that anie Godfather, &c, should be th
                                                •
                                              at. &c.
                                          Of the minister, that 
                                                〈◊〉
                                              must be à Bishop, tha
                                                ••
                                              to confirme.
                                          Of th'effects, that therebie

                                                Sinnes are pardoned, 
                                                      〈◊〉
                                                    
                                                   
                                                      •
                                                   emised.
                                                The grace Baptisme i
                                                      •
                                                    made perfe
                                                      ••
                                                    &c.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    It is an error to thinke that anie 
                                          〈…〉
                                        can giue heauenly graces to any 
                                          〈…〉
                                       
                                    
                                    It is an error t'ascribe saluatiō to 
                                          〈…〉
                                        and not onelie to Christ.
                                    It sauoreth of Donatisme to measures dignitie of the Sacraments, by the 
                                          〈…〉
                                        thinesse of the Ministers.
                                    It is an error, that men cannot be 
                                          〈…〉
                                       
                                       fect Christians vvithout Popish C
                                          ••
                                       
                                       mation.
                                    It is an error that by Confirmation holie Ghost is giuen to the ful.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      The Sacrament of Repentance, which is baptisme, (Luk. 3, 3.) we allow: but that Popish poenance is à Sacrament we altogither denie. As of Cōfirmation, so of Poenā
                     
                        •
                     e, th'aduersaries do publish foure things to be noted, and none of thē trulie grounded vpon the word of God
                  First the matter, which of the Papists some do saie is

                        Th'actiōs of the poenitent person, that is to saie
                        Th'absolution by the Priest

                              Sufficient contrition of hart.
                              Perfect Cōfession.

                                    Of al sinnes, and that in particular.
                                    Of al circumstances, as of place, time, &c
                                 
                              
                              Satisfactions in works; vvhich maketh à ful amends for al offences.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Secondlie the forme, which

                        In the Priest is the words of absolutiō, which the priest vttereth ouer the sinner.
                        In the persō poenitent is

                              His kneeling down at the priests feet
                              His making the sign of the crosse vpō his breast.
                              His saieng benedicite to his ghost lie father.

                                    The priest beareth the person of God, & is the lavvful iudge ouer the poenitent and may
                                    Absolue from the gilt of sinne.
                                    Inflict à punishment, according to th'offence.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Thirdly, the Minister, who

                        Ordinarilie is the Curat of euerie parish.
                        Extraordinarilie, and in the time of extreeme necessitie, or by licence, anie Priest

                              Yet some sinnes are so grecuous that non may absolue them, but
                              The Pope, o
                                    •
                                  his Legat as
                              Burning of Churches, Violent striking of à Priest. Coūter fe
                                    •
                                 ting the pops Buls.
                              The bishop or his poenitentiarie, as
                              Incest. Breaking of vowes. Robbers of churchs Haeretikes. Adulterers, &c.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Fourthlie, th'affect. Hereby they say à poenitent sinner is

                        Frō al sin, as when he was newly baptized.
                        Purged
                        Absolued.
                        Made cleane
                     
                  
                  Enriched vvith spiritual gifts and graces.

                        The consideratiō here of hath moued the churches reformed to condemne this Antichristan Sacrament of paenance, as hauing no vvarrant frō the word of God. Confes. of
                        Heluet. 2. c. 14. 19.
                        Behem. cap. 4.
                        Ausburg. art. 3. 11. 12.
                        Saxon. ar. 16. 17.
                        VVittem. art. 13. 14. 15.
                        Sueaue. cap. 20.

                              The blasphemies are outragious, and th'error manie, & monstrous comprised in this doc trine of popish poenance. For
                              VVhereas they saie, the Sacrament of poenance was instituted by christ himself, it is most false. For, as they teach it, neither the matter, no
                                    •
                                  the form, no
                                    •
                                  the Priest, no
                                    •
                                  th'effect thereof can bee drawne from the vvord of God.
                              They say Poenance is a Sacrament, yet can they shevv no element it hath to make it à Scacrament.
                              Popish Contrition is against the truth. For none is sufficientlie contrite for his sinnes.
                              To confes al sinnes, and that one after another, with al circūstances, vnto à priest, as it is vnpossible, so is it erroneous, and neuer enioined by God, nor practised by anie of God his Saints, that vve can find in the holie Scripture.
                              That anie man can satisfie for his sinnes it is blasphemous, & against the merits of Christ, yet do the Papists teach it; and besides, that one man maie satisfie for another.
                              An vntruth is it, that any priest Bishop, or Pope, hath povver to forgiue sinnes, or can enioine anic punishment that can make an amends to God for the least offence.
                              If Poenance purge men, and make them cleane from al sin, then is there à time when mē in this life be perfect, which tendeth greatlie to th'error of the Catharans, Donatists, and Pelagians.
                              That Baptisme is à token that original sinne onelie, and not actual sins besides, vvhich th'elect seruants of God shal commit, are pardoned, it is against the vvord of God.
                              The doctrine that they vvhich vvillinglie depart out of this vvorlde vvith-out shrife, are damned, vvhich thing the Papists do hold, is à damnable doctrine, and to be eschevveda.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      The church of England and of other places reformed. do acknoledge an order of making mi
                     
                        •••
                     ers in the Church of God, where al things are to be done by order. But, that order is à Sacrament, none but disordered Papists wil grant: and yet they obserue none order in speaking of the 
                        •
                     ame. For among them
                  Some do make 7. orders, whereof some be

                        Inferior, as th'order of

                              Porters, whose office is

                                    To keepe the doore.
                                    T'expel the wiked.
                                    To let-in the faithful.
                                 
                              
                              2 Exorcists, or Coniurers, which haue power t'expel diuels.
                              3 Lectors or Readers, who are to read lessons and scripture in the Church.
                              4 Acolytes, or Candle-bearers, hauing auctoritie

                                    To beare cruets to th'altar with wine and water.
                                    To beare candles and tapers.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Superior, as th'order of

                              5 Subdeacons; who are

                                    To read Th'epistle.
                                    To prepare necessaries for ministration.
                                    T'assist the Priest in ministration.
                                 
                              
                              6 Deacons; their dutie is

                                    To read the Gospel.
                                    T'assist the Priest in ministration.
                                 
                              
                              7 Priests to whom auctoritie is giuen to minister Sacraments, that is to saie

                                    Baptisme.
                                    Poenance.
                                    The Sacramēt of Th'alter, and to sacrifice for the quicke and the dead.
                                    Annealing of the sicke.
                                    Matrimonie.

                                          Theis 7 Orders say some of the Papists
                                          Are 7. Sacraments, as Lombardus; & so there be 13. Sacraments.
                                          Make but one Sacrament.
                                          VVere not onelie instituted, but entered-into by Christ himselfe.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Some numbring the seuen Sacraments, do quite ouerpasse in silence the Sacrament of Order, and in place thereof mention the Sacrament of Priest-hood.

                        Alwhich things are both besides, and also cōtrarie to the word of god. For in the Scripture
                        VVhere can it bee showen that either Orders, as some, cā make either one or 7. Sacraments; or Priest-hood, as others thinke, is à Sacrament? what element hath it? what forme? what promise? what institution from Christ▪
                        
                        VVhere can anie of those hideous titles of Porter, Exorcists, &c. be found ascribed to any minister of the new Testament? or the maner of creating, or their offices established? Some papists do write that al th'inferior Orders are not grounded vpō scripture, but come by traditiō (Clypeus Milit. Ec. l. 1. c. 9; & Lomb. saith plainlie, that fiue of the 7. Orders neither can bee read in the worde of God, nor yet were heard of in the primitiue Church. lib. 4. dist. 24.
                        VVhere maie it bee found that th'office of a Deacon is to read the Gospel?
                        VVhere is the minister of the word & Sacraments of the nevv Testament called priest, in the popish sense?
                        VVhere is it appointed to the ministers of the nevv Testamēt onlie to minister the Sacramēts? or to minister mo than two, baptisme, and the L. Supper? Or if there bee mo than two, as there be not, by what Scripture maie they not minister al of them, but must onlie minister Sacraments, that is, certaine Sacraments?
                        By what one place haue priests auctoritie to offer sacrifice, and that for the quicke, & dead also?
                        VVhere with-out extreme sacriledge, can theie shew that our S. Christ was a Porter, an Exorcist &c. and not alwaies à King▪ à Prophet, and a Priest?
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  8 Marriage is à state of life holie, and honorable among al men, (Heb 1
                        •
                     . 4) & 
                        •
                     o forbid the same, s
                        •
                     uoureth of an e
                        ••
                     on
                        •
                     ous spirite, and is the doctrin of diuels (1. Tim. 4 1. &c.) Howbeit to saie that Marriage is à Sacrament instituted. and that by christ as the papists doe, we cannot be induced, & that for sundrie reasons of importaunce. For Marriage, o
                        •
                      the wedded state
                  VVas neuer commanded to bee taken for à Sacrament.

                        As á Sacrament should, & Baptism, & the L Supper haue.
                        Hath none outwarde element,
                        Hath no prescribed forme,
                        Hath no promise of saluation, or damnation,
                     
                  
                  Maie bee entered into or not, at our discretiō: but it is not at our chois to be pertakers, or not to participate of the Sacraments, i
                        •
                      wee maie come by them.
                  Marriage was ordained by God himselfe in paradise: but the Sacraments of the nevv Tes. were instituted by christ in the time of the Gospel.
                  It vvas no Sacrament to the Fathers before, and in the time of the Lavve, and therefore no Sacrament v
                        •
                     to vs.

                        Herevnto in effecte subscribe the Churches of god elsewhere Conf.
                        Heluet. 2. c. 19. 29.
                        Heluet. 1 art. 20 37
                        Basil. art. 5.
                        Bohem c. 9
                        France. art. 24. 35.
                        Flan. art. 33.
                        Ausburg. art 2. 5. 6.
                        Saxon. art. 12. 18.
                        VVittemb. c. 21. 26.
                        Sueau. cap. 12. 15.

                              As of vs opposing our selues against the manifolde aduersa
                                    •
                                 ies of this trueth, whereof
                              Some haue too highlie conceiued of the wedded state, as

                                    The Papistes sometime, when theie wil haue it to be a Sacrament.
                                    Certaine Vigilantian Bishopps▪ that woulde take none into the Cleargie, except they would be Married first.
                                 
                              
                              Some haue too baselie and wikedly thought of Marriage. And therefore some doe holde that it is not meete▪
                                 
                                    That anie man or woman should marrie, such were

                                          The Gnostikes.
                                          The Mar
                                             
                                                •
                                             ionites.
                                          The Tatians.
                                          The Montanists.
                                          The Manichies.
                                          The Hieracites.
                                          Th'aposto likes.
                                       
                                    
                                    That anie shoulde twice marrie the husbande or wise being dead, as,

                                          The Catharans.
                                          Origen.
                                          Tertulian.
                                       
                                    
                                    That some should marrie at al. & namelie,

                                          Such are the papists
                                          Such as haue taken Orders.
                                          Spiritual kinsfolks.
                                          Kinsfolks with in manie degrees.
                                          That man who is lawfullie diuorced from an adulteresse.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  9 The Papists furthermore take Annoiling of the sick which theie cal E
                        •
                     treme vnction, for à Sacrament. VVhereof, as theie vvrite
                  The matter is onelie hallowed by a Bishop, vvherevvith the sicke is annoiled vpon th'eies, eares, mouth, nose, hands and feete.
                  The forme is the vvordes which the priest speaketh when he doth anoin
                        •
                      the sicke in the foresaid places: as

                        By this holie oile, God forgiue thee thy sinnes, which thou hast committed by thine eies, nose, eares, and mouth, by thine hands, and by thy feete.
                        All the

                              teach thee.
                              Angels.
                              Archangels
                              Patriarch
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              Prophets
                              Apostles
                              Euangelists
                              Martyrs
                              Confessors
                              Virgins
                              VVidovves and Infants
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Minister

                        Is the Priest, as some Papists do think, vvho is

                              To heare Confession.
                              To giue Absolution.
                              To minister the Sacrament of Th'altar.
                              To annoile.
                           
                        
                        If anie Christian, as Papists in chiefest place do permit.
                     
                  
                  Th'effect is to purge and put-awaie

                        Venial sinnes committed by mispending of our senses.
                        Sinnes forgotte
                              •
                           .

                              In this Antichristian doctrine manie errors do concur. For (to omit in silence how nothing which the Papists deliuer concerning extreme vnction can bee found in the hohe Scriptures, as neither the matter nor the maner, nor the Minister, nor anie institution at al from Christ; nor anie commaundement that either al which are sicke, or in al ages to the worlds end, some sicke persons should be annoiled)
                              In respect of the matter, the Papists make of à grosse element, à spiritual ointment, whereas there is none ointment spiritual, but the holie Ghost.
                              In respect of the forme

                                    The onelie propitiator, and Mediator betweene God and man Christ Iesus is blasph
                                          •
                                       med, and the merit and power of his death ascribed to greasie oile.
                                    Christ is not acknoledged for the onelie Sauiour of mankind, and physition of our soules, but other physitions be receiued besides him.
                                 
                              
                              In respect of the Minister

                                    It appeareth that man hath power to forgiue sinnes, which belongeth vnto God alone.
                                    Other men, yea women, besides the ordinarie Ministers of the vvord▪ maie be ministers of the Sacraments.
                                 
                              
                              In respect of th'effect we maie gather, that

                                    Al sinnes be not mortal.
                                    Christ hath not cleansed such as be his from al their sinnes, by his precious blood.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  10 In the worde of God the right vse of the Sacramēts and th'ends of their institution, are euidentlie set downe. For concerning
                  Baptisme, Christ he saith

                        Teach al nations, baptizing them, &c. Mat. 28, 29.
                        He that shal beleeue, and be baptized, shal be saued. Ma
                              •
                           . 16, 16.
                     
                  
                  The Lord his Supper saith

                        Our Sauiour. Ma
                              •
                           . 26, v. 26, 27.

                              Of the bread, Take, eate, &c.
                              Of the cup, Drinke yee al of it.
                           
                        
                        S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10, 16.

                              The cup of blessing, which we blesse, is it not the cōmunion of the blood of Christ?
                              The bread vvhich vvee breake, is it not the cōmunion of the bodie of Christ?

                                    This truth doe the Churches reformed by publike Cōfession subscribe vnto. Confes.
                                    Hel. 2. c. 20. 21.
                                    Helue 1. art. 22.
                                    Bohem. c
                                          ••
                                       . 12. 13.
                                    France. ar. 35. 38
                                    Flan. art. 34. 35.
                                    Ausb. art. 2. 9.
                                    Sax. art. 13. 14. 15
                                    VVitt. c. 10. 19.
                                    Sueau. cap. 13. 18.

                                          Therfore greatlie do theie sinne
                                          VVho wil not vse the Sacraments at al, but contemne them, as

                                                The Libertines.
                                                Th'euchites.
                                                The Schuenkfildians.
                                             
                                          
                                          VVho abuse the Sacrament

                                                Of Baptisme, as they do

                                                      VVhich thinke that

                                                            No children. as Th'anabaptists.
                                                            No married folks, as the Marcionits.
                                                            None that are sicke, as Chrys.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      VVhich hold that

                                                            things without life, euen

                                                                  Dead bels, as the Papists.
                                                                  Dead bodies of mē, as the Calaphrygians.
                                                                  Are to be baptized
                                                               
                                                            
                                                            The liuing are to be baptized for the dead as the Marcionites.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                Of the Lords Supper par tlie

                                                      By thrusting it into the mouthes of dead men, as did some condemned long ago by à Councel at Carthage.

                                                            Such are the Papists.
                                                            By strawing the Sacrament vpon graues and tombes.
                                                            By vsing it magicallie, as a salue against bodilie sicknesse, adue
                                                                  •
                                                               sitie, &c.
                                                            By carieng it about pompouslie, & supersticiouslie to be adored of the beholders, like an Idol.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        11 True it is that euerie one which receaueth the Sacraments, receiueth not therewithal the things signified by the Sacraments, that is, Forgiuing of sinnes, or other spiritual graces freelie for Christ his sake. For we do find that
                        Some do receiue the Sacraments, and the things signified by the Sacraments. So did

                              Cornelius receiue the Sacrament of Baptisme. Acts. 10, 47.

                                    The Lords Supper.
                                    The good disciples.
                                    The godlie Corinthians.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Some receiue the Sacraments, but not the things signified by the Sacraments

                              So receiued

                                    Simon Magus baptisme. Acts. 8, 13.
                                    Iudas the L. Supper. Iohn▪ 13. 26.
                                 
                              
                              So receiue the

                                    1. Cor. 11, 27. &c.
                                    Atheists.
                                    Libertines.
                                    Impenitent persons.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Some receiue not the Sacraments, and yet are partakers of the thing signified by the Sacraments

                              Such à communicant vvas the theefe vpon the Crosse Luke. 23▪ v. 43. 44,
                              This maketh vs to conceiue vvell

                                    Of those men and vvomen vvhich vvold and cannot communicate with the godlie.
                                    Of the children of Christian parents vvhich die afore theie be baptized.

                                          Furthermore it is appatent, hovv
                                          Saluation is promised to thē vvhich are baptized, yet not simply, but if theie do beleeue. Mar. 
                                                •
                                             6, 16.
                                          VVhosoeuer shal eat the bread, or drinke the cup of the Lord vnvvorthilie, shalbe giltie of the bodie and bloud of Christ. 1. Cor. 11, 27

                                                The same do the god lie Churches in their Cō
                                                   fes testifie vnto the vvorld. Confes.
                                                Heluet. 
                                                      •
                                                   . c 19. 21,
                                                Heluet. 1▪ ar. 
                                                      •
                                                   0.
                                                Basil▪ ar. 5. 6
                                                Boem c. 11. 13.
                                                Fran. ar. 34. 36. 37
                                                Flan. art. 33 35.
                                                Ausb. art. 3. 13.
                                                Sax. art 13 14.
                                                VVit. c. 10.
                                                Suea. c. 17.

                                                      The Papists therefore be in à vvrong opinion vvhich deliuer that
                                                      The Sacraments are not onelie seales, but causes of grace.
                                                      The Sacraments giue grace, euen because theie be deliuered, and receiued, ex opere operato.
                                                      
                                                      That is, à cause of vnvvorthie receiuing the Sacraments, vvhich in deed is none, as if a man, or vvoman do communicate before he haue made à ful confession of al his sinnes vvith their circumstances vnto à Priest.
                                                      The lacke of à true and liuelie faith is not à cause, vvhich in deed is the greatest cause in th'elder sort of vnvvorthie receiuing the Sacraments.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               26. ARTICLE. Of th'un vvorthines of the Ministers, which hinder not th'effect of the Sacraments.
               
                  ALthough, in the visible Church the euil be euer mingled with the good, and sometime the euil haue chiefe auctoritie in the ministration of the worde, and Sacramentes: yet for asmuch as theie doe not the same in their owne name, but in Christes, and doe minister by his commission and auctoritie, 1we maie vse their ministerie, both in bering the word of God, & in the receiuing the Sacraments. Neither is th'effect of Christes ordinance taken awaie by their wikednes, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith, and rightlie doe receiue the Sacraments ministred vnto them, which are effectual, because of Christes institution and promise, although theie be ministred by euilmen.
               
                  2Neuerthelesse it appertaineth to the Discipline of the Church, that inquirie be made of euil Ministers, and that theie be accused by those that haue knowledge of their offences, and finallie, being founde guiltie by iuste iudgement, be deposed.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 Th'effect of the worde, and Sacramentes is not hindered by the badnesse of the Ministers.
                  2 Euil Ministers are to be searched out, conuicted, and deposed, but orderlie, and by the Discipline of the Church.
               
               
                  
                  1 Of the ministers ecclesiastical, the church is to conceaue
                  Not too sinisterlie, as though their vnworthines could make the word and Sacraments the lesce effectual to such as vvorthelie do heare and receaue them.
                  Not too high lie, as if the dignitie of their calling vvere cause good enough that what thei do or saie▪ 
                     ex officio take happie effects

                        This by
                        The scripture is autorized which teacheth vs, that▪ euen

                              The wiked

                                    Are to be heard
                                    The scribes and Pharises sitting in Moses chaire. Math. 23. 1.
                                    Preaching Christe, though through enuie, strife, and contention. Phil 
                                          •
                                       . 15.
                                 
                              
                              Maie minister the Sacraments, as did th'ordinari Iewish Priests and of them verie manie moste wikced, both afore, and vvhen Christe came into the world.
                           
                        
                        The beste are but

                              The ministers of God. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
                              Gods laborers. 1. Cor. 39.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The purer churches of our time is abundantlie testified. Confes.

                        Heluet. 1. art. 15. 20. 22.
                        Heluet. 2. c. 18. 19. 20. 21.
                        Bohem. c. 11. 12.
                        Franc. ar. 26. 28. 34. 36 38.
                        Fland. art. 33. 34. 35.
                        Ausburg. art. 8.
                        Saxon. art. 11. 13.
                        VVittem. art. 32
                        Sueau. art. 13.

                              Neither is hee (whosoeuer that planteth, anie thing, neither he that watereth, but god that giueth the increase, saieth S. Paul (1. Cor 3. 7.) And à signe of à good spirit it is to regarde not so much who speketh, or ministreth, as what is vttered, and offered from God. The due consideration heereof vvill both settle vs the more deeplie in the truth, & make vs the more earnestlie to abhorre th'unsound opinions
                              Of the

                                    VVho taught that the Sacraments are holie, vvhen theie be administred by holy men, & not els.
                                    Donatists
                                    Pe
                                          •
                                       lians.
                                 
                              
                              Of Th'anabaptists which

                                    wil not haue the people to vse the ministrie of euill ministers.
                                    Thinke the seruice of wiked ministers vnprofitable, and not effectual.
                                 
                              
                              Of R. H. publishing that it is the calling or dutie of euery Christian not to communicate where there is a blinde & dumme ministerie.
                              Of the Papists. For who seeth not that theie tie the graces of God to the worthines of persons, when theie deliuer that

                                    Some sacraments Bishops, and non els (as Confirmation and orders) must minister.
                                    From som sinnes the Priest, from some the Bishop, and from some, the Pope onelie must absolue.
                                    Hee which entereth into holie wedlock, being afore in orders, turneth▪ backe after Satan and becommeth an Apostata▪
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Though vvee hold that the ministerie of vviked ministers is not vtterlie to bee condemned; yet thinke vve not that in the Church of God theie must alvvaies bee suffered. For theie are
                  Th'euil and vnprofitable seruaunts. Math. 25. 26.
                  Theis vvhich offend. Math. 18. 8.
                  Th'unfauorie salt. Math. 5. 13.

                        VVhich are carefullie to bee seene vnto, and if admonitions vvill not serue, deposed: yet orderlie, and by the discipline of the Church. For that God vvhich appointed à gouernment for the ciuil state, hath giuen auctoritie also to his Church, to punishe offenders according to the qualitie of their offence. And so vvee maie read
                        In the worde of God

                              Math. 18. v. 17. 
                                    •
                                 8.
                              1. Cor. 5. 4. &c.
                           
                        
                        In the confessions of our neighbour churches. Confes.

                              Hel. 2. c. 18.
                              Bohem. c. 9.
                              Sax. art. 11.
                              Sueau. art. 13

                                    Then haue not (as R▪ H. writeth▪ the people of God in euerie congregation auctoritie.
                                    To depose vn
                                          •
                                       cet Ministers.
                                    To punish offenders, against the word of God.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               27 ARTICLE. Of Baptisme.
               
                  BAptisme is 1 not onelie à signe of profession and marke of difference, wherebie Christian men are discerned from other that be not Christened: 2 but it is also à signe of regeneration or newe birth, wherebie as by an instrument, theie that receiue Baptisme rightlie, are graffed into the Church, the promises of forgiuenes of sinne, and of our adoption to bee the sonnes of God, by the holie Ghoste, are visiblie signed and sealed, faith is confirmed, and grace encreased by vertue of praier vnto God.
               
                  3 The Baptisme of yong children is in anie wise to bee retained in the Church, as most agreeable with th▪institution of Christ.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 Baptisme is á signe of profession, and marke of difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from other men that be not Christians.
                  2 Baptisme is à signe or seale of the regeneration, or newe birth of Christians,
                  3 Infants are to be Baptized by the word of God.
               
               
                  
                  1 Howe the Sacramentes are tokens, and therefore Baptisme is á signe of the true Church, which be christians, it maie be read,
                  Out of the vvord of God, in the fifth proposition of the 19. Article.
                  In the publique vvritinges of the Protestant Churches. Confes.

                        Heluet▪ art. 20.
                        Heluet. 2. cap 19. 20.
                        Basil. art. 5. sect. 2.
                        France. art. 35.
                        Flan. art. 34.
                        Ausburg. art. 13.
                        Saxon. art. 1
                              •
                           .

                              This declareth that vvee are Christians, and
                              Not Nazarens, who were

                                    And so, as Hierome noted of them, wet neither Iewes, no
                                          •
                                        Christians
                                    with the Iewes circumcised.
                                    VVith the christians baptized
                                 
                              
                              Not Euchyts who condemn Baptisme.
                              Not Mani
                                    •••
                                 ans, vvhich baptize not anie.
                              Not Cataphrygians, vvhich baptize the dead.
                              Not Papists, that baptize B
                                    •
                                 l
                                    •
                                 , and babels, where-as none but reasonable creatures, to be incorporated into the visible Church, are to be baptized.
                              Not of Tho. Aquinas opinion, that maketh the vovv, or profescion of Moncherie as good à token of Christians, as baptisme.
                              Not of Origē his mind, vvhich

                                    De
                                          •
                                       endeth à Baptisme of fire.
                                    Thinketh hovv after the resurrection vvee shall haue neede of Baptisme.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Baptisme, of S. Paul is called the washing of the nevve birth (Tit. 3. 5.) of others, the Sacrament of the nevve birth: to signifie hovve theie which rightlie, as al do not (See art. 25. pro. 3 
                        ••
                     .) receaue the same.
                  are ingrafted into the church 1. Cor. 12. 13.
                  Are, as by a seal from God assured

                        That their sins be pardoned, & forgiuen. Act. 2 38.
                        Hovv theie are addopted to be children of god Tit. 3. 5.
                     
                  
                  Are confirmed in faith. Mat 16. 16.
                  Doe encrease in grace by vertue of praier vnto Cod. Act. 22. 1. 9

                        This do the Churches reformed by subscription approoue. Confes. of
                        Heluet. 1. art. 21.
                        Heluet. 2. c. 20.
                        Bohem. cap. 12.
                        France. art. 35. 38.
                        Flan. art. 34.
                        Ausburgh. art. 9.
                        Saxon. art. 13
                        VVittem. c. 10
                        Sueau cap. 17.

                              But no parte of the true Church doth thinke
                              That Baptisme is onely à badge of our profession, and nothing auaileable vnto euerlasting life, as some Libertines do hold.

                                    which the Bannisht do saie.
                                    That the vvater at Baptisme is not holie in respect that it is applied to an holie vse.
                                    That th'ordinarie, and common vvorthines among the Turkes and Ievves is the same to them that baptisme is to vs.
                                 
                              
                              That of so great efficacie is the Coole or hood of S. Francis, as the Baptisme of Christe, as the Franciscanes do reach.
                              That Original sin is not pardoned in infants at Baptisme, because theie haue none original sinne at al, vvhich the Pelagians deliuer.

                                    As the Papistis do publish.
                                    That none can enter into the state of grace vnlesee he bee baptized.
                                    That Baptisme serueth to the putting▪ avvaie of Original sinne onelie, and not of actual sinnes besides, vvhich the children of God do, and shal commit.
                                    That Baptisme bringeth grace exopere operato, euen because it is ministred and receaued.
                                 
                              
                              That being once baptized vvee can no more be tempted, vvhich error the Iouinians did maintaine.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 Although by expres
                        ••
                      tearmes vvee bee not commaunded to baptize yong Children: yet, vvee beleeue, theie are to bee baptized For in asmuch as in the word of God vvee finde that
                  The grac
                        •
                      of God i
                        •
                      vniuersal, and partaineth vnto al, therfore the si
                        •
                     ne, or seale of gra
                        •
                     e is vniuersal, & belongeth vnto al, so vvel yong, as old.
                  Baptisme is vnto vs, as Circumcision was vnto the Iewes but th'infantes of the Iewes, vvere circumcised, therefore the children of Christians are to be baptized.
                  Children belong to the kingdom of heauen. Mat. (19. 14.) & are in the couenant; Therefore the signe of the couenant is not to bee denied them.
                  Christ gaue in commaundement that vvithout exception al should be baptized (Math. 28. 19.) Therefore yong children are not to be exempted.
                  Christe hath shed his blood aswel 
                        ••
                     r washing-awaie the sinnes of Children as of th'elder sort: Therefore it is verie necessarie that the
                        •
                     e should be partakers of the Sacrament thereof.

                        This good Christians which 
                              ••
                           aue renounced poperie, as theie like of, so theie allovv the Baptisme of yong Children, as maie appear in the Confession of
                        Heluet. 
                              •
                            a
                              •
                            21.
                        Heluet. 2. c. 20,
                        Bohem. c. 12.
                        France. art 35.
                        Fland. art. 34.
                        Ausb. art. 9
                        Saxon. art. 13.
                        VVittem. cap. 10.
                        Sueau. cap 17.

                              Oppugned i
                                    •
                                  this truth by
                              The pelagians
                              The Her
                                    •
                                 deon
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪
                              
                              Th'anabaptists
                              The F. of Loue VVho denie the baptism of infants, or yong children
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               28 ARTICLE. Of the Lordes Supper.
               
                  THE Supper of the L. is not 1 onelie à signe of the loue that Christians ought to haue among themselues one t'another, but rather 2 it is à Sacrament of our redemption by Christs death. Insomuch that such as rightlie, worthilie, and with faith receiue the same, the bread which we break, is à partaking of the bodie of Christ, and likewise the cup of blessing, is à partaking of the blood of Christ. 3 Transubstantiation (or the chaunge of the substaunce of bread and wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proued by holie writ: but it is repugnaunt to the plaine wordes of Scripture, ouerthroweth the nature of à Sacrament, and hath giuen occasion to manie superstitions. 4 The bodie of Christ is giuen, taken, and eaten in the Supper, onelie after an heauenlie and spiritual manner, and the meane whereby the bodie of Christ is receiued, and eaten in the Supper is Faith. 5 The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christes ordinance reserued, carried-about, lifted-up, or worshipped.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The Supper of the L. is à signe of the loue that Christians ought to haue among themselues
                  2 The L. Supper is à Sacrament of our redemption by Christes death, and to them which receiue the same worthelie by faith, à partaking of the bodie and blood of Christe.
                  3 The bread and wine in the L. Supper, be not changed into another substance.
                  4 The bodie of Christe is giuen, taken, and eaten, after an heauenlie and spiritual, and not after à carnal sorte.
                  5 To reserue, carie-about, lift-up, or worship the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is contrarie to th'ordinaunce of Christe.
               
               
                  
                  1 The Supper of the Lord is à token of the loue that Christians ought to haue among them selues. For vvhich cause it is called
                  The Lordes table. 1. Cor 10. 21
                  The Lordes Supper. 1. Cor. 11. 20.
                  A communion of the Saints of God 1. cor. 10. v. 16.

                        This is the doctrine also of other Churches besides, as mai appear by the 
                              •
                           onfession of
                        Heluet. 2. c. 21.
                        Basil. art. 6.
                        Bohe. c. 13
                        Fland. art. 35.
                        Saxon. art. 14.
                        Sueau. c. 18

                              So think not those men
                              VVhich contemne this Sacrament of Loue, with Th'anabaptistes.
                              vvhich rail vpon it, being vsed after the institution of Christe, and call it

                                    VVith the Papistes.
                                    A

                                          Table
                                          Prophane.
                                          Detestable
                                       
                                    
                                    The cup of diuels,
                                    A kinde of idolatrous meates.
                                 
                              
                              VVhich denie it manie Christians, and all owe it onelie to à few Antichristian shauelings.
                              VVhich abuse it, with Halters, and hollow harted Christians, & Corinthians, that wil

                                    Drinke the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the diuels.
                                    Participate at the Lords table, and at the table of diuels.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 The Supper of the Lord
                  Is to al christians à Sacrament of our redemption by Iesus Christe

                        Math. 26. 28.
                        Luke. 22. ver 19. 20.
                        Marke 14. 24
                        1. Cor. 11. 24
                     
                  
                  To such as receue the same

                        It is the partaking of the bodie, & blood of Christ. 1. cor. 10. 16.
                        worthelie. 1. Cor. 11. 28. &c.
                        By faith. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Iohn. 6. 35

                              A trueth, this is, not onelie in harte beleeued, but by publik writings al so testified to the vvorld by our neighbour Churches. Confes. of
                              Heluet. 2. cap. 11.
                              Heluet. 1 art. 22.
                              Basil. art. 6.
                              Bohem. ca 13.
                              France. art 37.
                              Flan. art. 35.
                              Ausb. touching the Masce, art. 1. 3.
                              Sax. art. 14.
                              VVittem cap. 19.
                              Suca. c. 19.

                                    This proposition diuerslie hath bin assailed. For
                                    Some either deniing, or not acknowledgeing the benefits of this so heauēly à Sacrament doe saie.

                                          It is not à seale of spiritual graces, but onelie à signe of Christian profession.
                                          It is to bee receaued onelie for obedience take to the Princes procedings, but is of non effect to the perfect ones: an opinion of the Family.
                                          It doth neither good, nor hurt to the receauers; the Mescalians error.
                                          It is not à signe assuring the harts of the faithful hovv their sinnes bee forgiuen. For vvee must alvvaies doubt of the remission of our sinns, saie the Papists.
                                          It is to bee receaued to the comfort of the bodie onelie, but is no refreshing of the soule.
                                       
                                    
                                    Som haue conceaued, & doe hold most erroneous opinions touching the manner of receuing the same, deliuering to the world, that

                                          It can profite such as haue no faith, euen

                                                Babes, or infants; in this error wer the Nectorians Graecians, Moranians, that I saie not Cyprian, Origen. Austine.
                                                VViked men, destitute of al knoledge, & true sense of godlines, and for no cause, but onlie because theie receaue the same.
                                                The dead bodies of men, th'error of certaine, condemned long agoe.
                                             
                                          
                                          It can benefit such as recaue it not at al, if it be ministred on their behalf, being

                                                Theis errors the Papistes stifelie doe defend.
                                                Absent vppon the seas in wars, yea, by death.
                                                Praesent, and yet do not participate but the Priest for them.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 Transsubst
                        •
                     tiation▪ or the change of the substance of bread and wine in the supper of the Lorde, we do vtterlie denie, and the reasons mouing vs thereunto, are, for that
                  It is repugnant to the plaine wordes of the Scripture. For

                        I wil not drinke hence-forth of this fruit of the vine, saith our Sauiour Christ (Matt. 26, 29. Mar. 14, 25.) which fruit had it realie bine either the blood, o
                              •
                           , by waie of concomitance, the verie bodie and blood of Iesus Christ, then our Lorde and Sauiour had▪ eaten himselfe, vvhich is not onelie blasphemous to be spoken, but also impossible to be done, and directlie against the word of God, vvhere commandement is often giuen, that the blood with flesh (not of beast, much lesse of man) must not bee eaten. Gen. 9, 4. Leuit. 17, 14.
                        The heauen muste conteine Iesus Christ vntil the time that al things be restored, saith Saint Peter, Acts. 3. 21. If Christ corporalie, according to his humanitie, be in heauen, then is he not in the Sacrament.
                        As often as yee shal eate this bread' (not Christ his real bodie) and drinke this cup, (not the real blood of Christ) ye shew the Lords death til he come, saith Saint Paul, 
                              •
                           . Cor. 11, 20. Therefore he is not come, which he must be, being vnder the formes of bread and wine.
                     
                  
                  It ouerthrovveth the nature of à Sacrament. For where there is none element, there can be no Sacrament. Because the word comming vnto Th'element, maketh a Sacrament.
                  It hath bine the occasion of manie superstitions. For from hence proceeded

                        The reseruing of the transsubstantiated bread, for sundrie superstitious ends.
                        Th'adoring of the bread, euen as God himselfe, and that of priest and people.
                        The carieng-about in pompous procession of their wa
                              •
                           er God.
                        The popish feast, called Corpus Christi daie.

                              The due cō
                                 sideration hereof hath moued the reformed Churches to detest transsubstantiation as in hart & word: so by writing Confes. of
                              Hel. 2. cap. 21.
                              Hel. 1. art. 22.
                              Basil. art. 6.
                              Bohem. c. 13.
                              VVittem. c. 19.

                                    Abominable therfore be the popish errors, that
                                    In Th'eucharist there is not the substance of bread and wine, but onelie the meere accidents and qualities.
                                    Substancialie, & realie the bodie & blood together with the soule, and diuinitie of our L. Iesus Christ, and therfore whole Christ is conteined in the sacrament of Eucharist.
                                    Vnder each kind, and vnder euerie part of each kinde seueralie, whole Christ is comprised.
                                    After the consecration in the wonderful Sacrament of Th'ucharist, the bodie & blood of our Lorde Iesus Christ is, and that not onelie in the vse, while it is taken, but afore also, & after in the hostes or consecrated peeces, reserued or remaining after the communion.
                                    In the holie Sacrament Christ, th'onelie begotten sonne of God, is to be adored with the verie worship of Latria. Marcus also, that detestable haeretike, held that the wine of the lords Supper was conuerted into blood.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4 Although our Sauior Christ bee in heauen, as hath bine proued, and therfore can not corporalie be giuen, taken▪ and eaten, yet we beleeue that by à secret, and incomprehensible vertue of th
                        •
                      holie Ghost, hee doth nurish & quicken vs by his verie bodie and blood apprehended by à liuelie faith For the better vnderstanding of this great mysterie, wee are to note that the regenerate haue à double life with▪in them, whereof
                  One is carnal, and temporarie, vvhich theie haue brought with them from their first comming into the world. This life is common to al men, good & bad; and is praeserued by earthlie and material bread, common also to al and euerie man.
                  One is spiritual and heauenlie, giuen vnto them in their second birth, which is through the worde. 1 Pet. 1. 23. This life is peculiar onlie to the elect of God, and maintained by the bread of life vvhich came-downe from heauen, which is Iesus Christ (Iohn. 6, 51) He nurisheth and susteineth the spiritual life of all Christians, if he be eaten, that is receiued of them spiritualie through faith. (Iohn. 6, 35. Rom. 3, 25▪) vvhich spiritual bread that he might the better repraesent, hee hath instituted earthlie and visible bread, and vvine, for à Sacrament of his bodie and blood; vvhereby he doth testifie, that as verelie as we receiue the Sacrament vvith hands, & eat the same with mouth and teeth, to the nurishing of this transitorie life: euen so trulie by faith (vvhich is in place of handes, and mouth to the soule) we receiue the true bodie, and the true blood of Christ our onelie Sauiour, to the cherishing of the spiritual life in oursoules▪
                     
                        The churches of God elsewhere reformed agree with vs in this point. Confes. of
                        Heluet 2. cap. 21.
                        Heluet. 1. art. 22.
                        Basil. art. 6▪
                        
                        Bohem. c. 13.
                        France. art. 36.
                        Fland. art. 35.
                        Saxon. art. 14.

                              And iointlie vvee withstand th'errors
                              Of the Capernaits, vvhich thought the flesh of the Lorde might bee eaten with mans mouth.
                              Of the

                                    Synusiasts
                                    Vbiquitaries.

                                          VVho thinke the bodie of Christ so is praesent in the supper, that his verie bodie vvith bread and wine, by one and the same mouth▪ at one and the same time, is eaten corporalie, and deuoured.
                                       
                                    
                                    Of the

                                          Metusiasts.
                                          Papists.

                                                VVhich beleeue the substance of bread and vvine is so chāged into the substance of christ his bodie, that nothing remaineth but the real bodie of Christ, besides th'accidents of bread and wine.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Of the Symbolists, Figurists, or Significatists, so called, because theie are of opinion that the faithful receaue nothing but the naked and bare signes.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        5 The true and lawfull vse of the Sacramēts hath bine set dovvne afore. Therefore it shall suffice in this place onlie to saie, that the Lordes Supper vvas ordained to th'end that
                        The bread should be

                              Broken.
                              Eaten.

                                    As it is
                                    Math. 26. 26.
                                    Mark 14. 22.
                                    Luke. 22. 19.
                                    1. Cor, 10. 16.
                                    1. Cor. 11. 24.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        The cup should be

                              Giuen
                              Drunken.

                                    As vve maie read
                                    Math. 26 27.
                                    Marke. 14. 23.
                                    Luke. 22. 17.
                                    1. Cor. 10. 16.
                                    1. Cor. 11. 25.

                                          And al this in remembraunce of Christ (Luke 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. v. 24. 25. Confes. of
                                          Heluet. 2. c. 21.
                                          Basil. art. 6.
                                          Bohe. c. 13
                                          Ausb▪ touchhing the Masse. art. 1.
                                          Saxon. art. 14.
                                          VVittem. ca. 19.

                                                Against th'ordinance therfore of our S. Christ do the Papistes.
                                                In reseruing.
                                                In carrieng about.
                                                In lifting vp.
                                                In worshipping.
                                                The L. Supper. Reade more in this Art. and in the 25. art. proposit. 10.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               29 ARTICLE. Of the vviked vvhich doe not eate the bodie and blood of Christe in th'use of the Lords Supper.
               
                  THE wiked, and such as be voide of à liuelie faith, although theie do carnallie, and visiblie presse with their teeth (as S. Augustine saith) the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christe: yet in no wise are theie pertakers of Christe, but rather to their condemnation, doe eate and drinke the signe, or Sacrament of so great à thing.
               
                  The Proposition.
                  The wiked and such as be void of à liuelie faith, do not eate the bodie, nor drinke the blood of Iesus Christe, in th'use of the Lords Supper.
               
               
                  
                  S. Paul declareth hovv the Supper of the Lord is receaued
                  VVorthelie of some which do

                        Hovve theis do participate of the bodie, and blood of our Sauiour Christ, it hath bine alreadie shewen in the former art. proposit. 4.
                        Themselues. 1. Cor. 11, ver. 28, 31.
                        Examine
                        Iudge
                     
                  
                  Discerne the Lords bodie. 1. Cor. 11, 29.
                  Abstaine from the table of diuels. 1. Cor. 10, 21.
                  Of some vnvvorthelie, (1. Cor 11, 29.) as of them

                        VVhich themselues do not

                              1. Cor. 11 v. 38, 31.
                              Examine
                              Iudge
                           
                        
                        VVhich discerne not the Lords bodie. 1. Cor. 11, 29.
                        VVhich wil communicate at the table. (1. Cor. 10, 21.)

                              Of the Lord
                              Of diuels.

                                    Theis mai receiue the sacrament, but not the true bodie of Christ. The reasons be for that
                                    Theie lack the vvedding garmēt, which is faith, & the righteousnes of Christ.
                                    Theie are no members of the true Church, the head whereof is Iesus Christ. Ephes. 4, 15, &c.
                                    Theie haue no promise of heauenlie sustenance because theie are with-out à liuelie faith. Iohn. 6, 35.

                                          Therfore theie procure vnto themselues most heauy punishments (1. Co. 1
                                                •
                                             , 27.
                                          Sicknesse.
                                          death
                                          Guiltines of the bodie and blood of christ.
                                          Damnatiō.

                                                This is the iudgement of other christian churches be sides. Confes. of
                                                Heluet. 2. ca. 21.
                                                Heluet. 1. in the declaration of the Lords Supper.
                                                Basil. art. 6.
                                                Bohem. cap. 13.
                                                France. art. 37.
                                                Fland. art. 35.
                                                Saxon. art. 14.

                                                      Th'aduersaries of this doctrine be
                                                      Th'ubiquitaries, which thinke that al communicants as vvel bad as good, do eat the verie & natural bodie of Iesus Christ.
                                                      The Papists which deliuer that not onelie in th'use of the L Supper, the wiked do eat the real bodie of Christ, but also nut of vse the verie vermine, as mice & rats, may deuour the same.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               30 ARTICLE. Of both kindes.
               
                  THE cup of the Lorde is not to be denied to the laie people. For both the partes of the Lords Sacrament, by Christes ordinaunce, and commaundement, ought to be ministred to al Christian men alike.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  The people must be pertakers not onelie of the bread, but also of the wine, when theie approch vnto the Lorde his Table.
               
               
                  
                  Our Lord & Sauiour Christ hath so instituted his Supper that hee wil haue not on lie the bread but also the Cup to bee deliuered vnto al Communicants.
                  So finde vve in the vvord of God, that

                        The bread must bee giuen to all, and eaten of al

                              Math. 26. 26.
                              Mark. 14. 22.
                              Luke. 22. 19.
                              1. Cor. 10. 16.
                              1. Cor. 11. 24.
                           
                        
                        The Cup it is to bee giuen to al▪ and to be drunken of al.

                              Math. 26. 27.
                              Marke. 14. 23
                              Luk. 22. 17.
                              1. Cor. 10. 16.
                              1. Cor. 11. 25.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Theis vvitnes
                        •
                     e the publique confessions of other Christian Churches. Confes. of

                        Helue. 2. c. 21
                        Hel. 1. art. 22.
                        Bohem. c. 13
                        Fran. art. 36. 37. 38.
                        Flan. art. 35
                        Ausb. concerning the Masse. ar. 1. 2.
                        Saxon. art. 15
                        VVitt. c. 19.
                        Sueau. c. 18.

                              Though it bee but à mans couenant when it is confirmed, yet no man doth abrogate it or addeth anie thing thereto, (saith S. Paul Gal. 3. 15.) what impudencie then, yea, what impiety do they show, which alter this institution of God? Some
                              By adding there-to

                                    So do the Artotarites add chees
                                          •
                                       
                                    
                                    So do the Ca
                                          •
                                       aphrygians add blood, and the seede of man.

                                          Vnto the bread
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              By taking there from so

                                    The S
                                          •
                                       uerians wil vse no wi
                                          ••
                                       
                                    
                                    The Manichies minister but bread onelie, and not the cup also.
                                    The Papistes, though theie vse both kindes; yet theie denie the Cup vnto the people, yea, and to Clergie men too, when theie saie not masse.
                                 
                              
                              By chaunging th'elements. So Th'aqu
                                    ••
                                 ian
                                    •
                                  tooke for vvine, water, to the end theie might seeme the more sober, as theie saide.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               31 ARTICLE. Of th'oblation of Christ finished vpon the Crosse.
               
                  TH'offring of Christe once made 1 is that perfect redemption propitiatiō, & satisfaction for al the sinns of the whole world, both original and actual, and ther is none other satisfaction for sinne, but that alone. 2 UUherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonlie saide that the Priestes did offer Christe for the quicke and the dead, to haue remission of paine and guilt, were blasphemous fables, and daungerous deceites.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The blood of Iesus Christ once shed for mankinde vpon the Crosse, is à perfect redemption propiciation and satisfaction for al the sinnes of the whole world.
                  2 The Sacrifices of Masses are most blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceites.
               
               
                  
                  1 Of the benefits redounding vnto mā kind by christ his offeringvp of himselfe vpō the crosse we haue in sundrie places else-where written, and proued by the word of God, that Iesus Christ is that perfect and onelie
                  Redemption

                        Act. 20, 28.
                        Rom. 5, 6. &c.
                        Gal. 3, 
                              •
                           3.
                        1. Cor. 6, 28.
                        1. Pet. 
                              •
                            v. 18, 19.
                     
                  
                  Propitiation.

                        Acts. 10, 43.
                        Rom. 3, 25.
                        Heb 9, 12 &c. 28
                        1. Iohn. 2, 2.
                        1. Iohn. 4, 10.
                     
                  
                  Satisfaction.

                        Iohn. 1, 29.
                        1. Pet. 3, 18.
                        1. Iohn. 1, 7.

                              For al the sinnes of the whole world both original and actual. Here▪ vnto beare witnesse the Churches of God. Cō
                                 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 l. of
                              Heluet. 1. art. 11.
                              Heluet. 2. c. 11. 15
                              Basil. art. 4.
                              Bohem. cap. 6.
                              France. art. 1
                                    •
                                 . 16. 17.
                              Flan ar. 20. 21. 22.
                              Ausb. art. 3. 4.
                              Saxon. art. 3.
                              VVitt. cap. 2. 5.
                              Sueaue. ca. 2. 3.

                                    Herebie it is open to the eies of al men, that most cursed be th'errors of thē which if you respect
                                    Time, do saie that from the beginning of the world vntil the 15▪ yeere of Tibe
                                          ••
                                       us Th'emperor, none were saued. Th'error of Manes the haeretique.
                                    Persons that

                                          Shal bee saued; do giue out, how al men and women that sinne after baptisme, are vndoubtedlie condemned. In this error

                                                VVere the

                                                      Montanists.
                                                      Nouatians.
                                                   
                                                
                                                Are manie of the Anabaptists.
                                             
                                          
                                          Do saue; do 
                                                •
                                             each that

                                                Our saluation is of our selues; so saith Melchies Hoffman, an arch-haeretique.
                                                The Sauiour

                                                      Of men from the time of Saint Francis, is Saint Francis.
                                                      Of women, from her time vntil th'end of the world, Saint Clare.
                                                      Of men and women.

                                                            Saint Marie by her virginitie.
                                                            S. Christina through her passion.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                Though Christ haue suffered for al men in general: yet euerie man must suffer for himselfe in particular. Yea, one man maie satisfie for another by the Papists doctrine.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Sinne, do hold that

                                          Christ hath satisfied & was of fered onelie for original sin & not for actual. An error of Tho. Aquinas.
                                          Sins actual and

                                                Venial are to bee taken awaie

                                                      By sacred Ceremonies.
                                                      By à Bishops blessing.
                                                      By à Priests absolution.
                                                   
                                                
                                                Mortal bee forgiuen sometime by à pardon from

                                                      A Bishop▪
                                                      
                                                      The Pope
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 The Papists do 
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                      that the Masse is
                  A Sacrifice.
                  A Sacrifice propitiatorie.
                  A Sacrifice propitiatorie for the

                        quicke
                        Dead.
                     
                  
                  The same propitiatorie Sacrifice that was offered by Christ himselfe, vpon the crosse.
                  A Sacrifice, in which▪ by the vertue of à few, euen fiue wordes mumbled-vp of a Priest, Christ, euen that Christ, which hung vpon the Crosse, is contained.
                  A Sacrifice seruing

                        For al persons.

                              Quicke
                              Dead

                                    To purge thē from their sins
                                    T'ease them of their pains▪
                                    
                                    To satisfie for their punishment.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        For all necessities

                              Corporal.
                              Spiritual.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  A Sacrifice propitiatorie of Iesus Christ realie offered to God the Father, and that often and onelie in the honour of dead Saints.
                  A Sacrifice where▪ in Christ is so gloriouslie, that it is to bee adored euen with diuine worship both of Priest and people.
                  A Sacrifice meritorious to al them for whom it is offered, though there be not among the liuing, but dead; and though liuing, yet absent; and though present, yet with-out zeale, knowledge, or faith, and that ex opere operato.
                     
                        VVher bie we maie note
                        Blasphemous fables. For it is

                              A fable that the Masse is a Sacrifice, and that propitiatorie.
                              A fable that a few vvordes of à Priest, can chaunge bread into a liuing bodie, yea, manie bodies, vvith their soules, and that of Iesus Christ, God & man
                              A fable that one, & the same sacrifice is offered in the Masse vvhich vvas offered on the Crosse.
                              A fable that it is anie vvhit profitable for the quick, much lesse for the dead▪
                              
                           
                        
                        Dangerous deceits. For herebie among other things men are to beleeue that

                              Creatures maie be adored: the contrarie is, Exod. 20. 4,
                              Christ is often offered▪ contra. Heb. 19 12. &c.
                              The Priest offereth vp▪ Christ; contra. Heb. 9. 14.
                              Sinnes be forgiuen vvithout blood; contra. Heb. 9. 22
                              Christe died not once, but daily; contra Heb. 9. 27.
                              Faith is not necessarie in cōmunicants; for vvhether there beleeue or no, their sinnes maie bee remitted by à Masse; cōtra. Heb. 11. v▪ 4. 6
                              VVe are not to remember Christ absent, but to adore him praesent; contra. Luk. 22. 19. 1. cor 11. 25.
                              The fauour of God maie bee purchased with monie from à Priest: contra. 1. Pet. 1. v. 18. 19.

                                    VVhich their fables, and deceites 
                                          •
                                       ēd to th'abolishing of true religion. Therefore iustly haue vve & our godlie brethren abandoned the Masse Confessi. of
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 19. 21
                                    Helue. 1. art. 22.
                                    Basil. art 6.
                                    Bohem. cap. 13.
                                    Flan. ar. 35.
                                    Ausb. touching the Masse. art. 1. 3.
                                    Saxon. art. 14.
                                    Vvitt. cap. 19.
                                    Sueaue. ca. 19.

                                          Accursed thē 
                                             
                                                •
                                             e those Papists which either de
                                                •
                                             ēd or fauour the Masse as
                                          The sacrifice of christ his bodie, and blood.
                                          The on lie soue raigne worship due to God & his Church
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               32 ARTICLE. Of the marriage of Priestes.
               
                  BIshops, Priestes, and Deacons 1 are not commaunded by Gods law, nether to vow th'estate of single life, or to abstein from marriage. Therefore it is lawful also for them 2 as for al other Christian men to marrie at their owne discretion, as theie shal iudge the same to serue better to godlinesse.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 By the word of God it is lawful for Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Ministers, to marrie at their owne discretion.
                  2 It is lawful by the word of God for al Christian men, and women, to marrie at their discretion in the feare of God.
               
               
                  
                  1 Neither 
                        •
                     he single▪ nor the wedded life is enioined any 
                        •
                     an, much lesse anie 
                        •
                     alling of 
                        ••
                     ē by the worde of God: but 
                        •
                     hat mariage is allowed of 
                        〈◊〉
                      diuine 
                        •
                     aiestie, & 
                        •
                     hat to the Ministers of his ho
                     
                        •
                     y word, & 
                        •
                     acramēts 
                        〈◊〉
                      is euident
                  In the olde Testament by the

                        Commandements giuen vnto the priests from the mouth of the Lord concerning the choise of their wiues. Leuit. 
                              〈◊〉
                           , 7. &c.
                        Examples of the moste

                              Religions Priests that were maried. &c.

                                    Aaron. Leuit. 22, 1. &c.
                                    Elias. 1. Sam. 3, 
                                          •
                                       3.
                                    Samuel. 1. Sam. 8, v. 1, 2.
                                    Zach
                                          ••
                                       i
                                          ••
                                       . Eu
                                          •
                                       . 1, 5
                                 
                              
                              Diuine Prophets, al which were maried, as it is thought, except Ieremie.
                           
                        
                        In the nevve Testament
                        By the words of S. Paul, vvho doth write that

                              A Bishop. (1. Tim. 3) is to be

                                    The husbande of one wife.
                                    One that hath children vnder obedience▪
                                    
                                 
                              
                              An Eldedr (Tit. 1. v. 5▪ 6.) must be

                                    Vnreproueble.
                                    The husband of one wife.
                                    Hauing faithful children.
                                 
                              
                              Deacons. (1. Tim. 3. v. 11, 12.) must

                                    For their owne part be the husbands of one wife.
                                    Haue wiues that be

                                          Honest.
                                          Not euil speakers, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        By th'examples of Peter (Matth. 8, 14.) Paul. (Phil▪ 4, 3.) and the rest of Th'apostles (1. Cor. 9, 5.) which vvere al maried men, Iohn Th'auangelist onelie except, as some do suppose.

                              The syncere churches of God, both by practise do honor, & by writings commend the wedded state, of ecclesiastical Minister
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ Confes. of
                              Heluet. 2. ca. 
                                    •
                                 9.
                              Heluet. 1. ar. 37.
                              Basil. art. 10. sect. 1. 2.
                              Bohem. c. 9. 19.
                              France. art. 14.
                              Ausb. art. 4. 5. touching abuses.
                              Saxon. ar. 18. 21
                              VVitt. c. 21. 26.
                              Sueaue. cap. 12.

                                    And no Protestant church is of the mind of the
                                    Vigilantians, that al, and euerie one of the Cleargie is necessarilie to be maried, or not to be admitted for à Minister.
                                    Of the Papists wherof some do say, that

                                          From Th'apostles time it was not lawful for anie Priest to marie. Ma
                                             
                                                •
                                             oranus report.
                                          The 3 Orders.

                                                Of Deacons
                                                Of Sub deacōs
                                                Of Priests

                                                      Are bo
                                                            •
                                                         d to chastitie (that is, not to marie)
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          After Orders taken to marie

                                                It is not lawful
                                                It is to turne backe vnto Satan.
                                                It is Apostacie
                                             
                                          
                                          None maie be made à Priest, though he wil vovv à single life, if hee haue bin (not à whoremonger) but à maried man.
                                          Mariage is not à Sacrament, & yet

                                                Sacred persons maie not marie.
                                                For à Priest to plaie the whoremonger, it is à lesse offence than to take an honest woman to wife. The blasphemie of Pighius.
                                             
                                             
                                                The darnel of the Rhemish Seminaries.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 As maie the ministers Ecclesiastical: so are al other men & women to marrie together at theire owne discretion in the fear of god
                  So faith the spirit of god in the holy scripture, vnto al men & womē in all ages,

                        Bring▪ forth fruit, and multiplie, & fil th'earth Gen. 1, 28.
                        Mariage is honourable among al men, and the bed vndefiled. Heb. 13, 4.
                        1. Co
                              •
                            7▪ 2. T'auoid fornicatiō.

                              Let euerie man haue his wife.
                              Let euerie woman haue her husband.
                           
                        
                        If theie can not absteine, let them marie 1. Cor 7, 9.
                     
                     
                        Particularlie, because most questions are about them, marie maie
                        Bishops. 1. Tim. 3. 2. &c.
                        Elders. Tit. 1, 9.
                        Deacons 1. Tim. 3, v. 11, 12.
                        Virgins, 1. Cor. 7, v. 28, 36.
                        VVidows 1. Cor. 7, ver 8, 9. 1. Tim. 5, 14.

                              In saieng that Christians may marie at their discretion, the meaning is not, that anie marie, if theie thinke good,
                              within the degrees of kinred, and affinitie prohibited by wholesome lawes.
                              VVithout the consent of parents, or other in the room of parents if theie bevnder tuition.
                              To other ends thā God hath prefixed
                              So testifie the reformed Churches by their publique writings. Confes. of

                                    Heluet. 1. ar. 37
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 29.
                                    Bohem. cap. 19.
                                    France. art. 24.
                                    Ausb. tuching abuses. ar. 4. 5.
                                    Saxon. art. 18.
                                    VVitt. cap. 21. 26.
                                    Sueaue. cap. 22.

                                          Nothing liked, and instituted of God hath euerie way bin more inuaded than holie Matrimonie. For

                                                Some vtterlie condem
                                                      •
                                                    mariage as

                                                      The Gnostikes.
                                                      The Hieracites.
                                                      The Priscillianites.
                                                      The Montanists.
                                                      The Saturnians.
                                                      Th'apostolikes, who excōmunicated out of their assemblies al maried folkes.
                                                   
                                                
                                                Some alowed the wedded life, yet

                                                      Not

                                                            To euerie state, or calling
                                                            Betweene spiritual kinsfolks, as

                                                                  The godfather, & the goddaughter
                                                                  The godmother, and the godson.
                                                                  The godbrother and the godfather, &c. As the Papists
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Alow theie no man to marie-again, his first wife beeing dead; such haeretiks were the

                                                            Catharans
                                                            Originists.
                                                            Tertulianists.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Theie thinke that al wiues should be cō
                                                         mon; th'error of the

                                                            Nicalaitans
                                                            Dauigeor gians.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Theie are of opinion that neither the husband should knovve his wife, nor the wife her husbande, as man and wife are to know one th'other: A fancie of Th'abeloites.
                                                      Theie wil not marie according to Gods word, but think that one man, at one and the same time maie haue manie wiues: in which error are

                                                            The Her mogenians.
                                                            The Turkes.
                                                            The Ochinites
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               33 ARTICLE. Of Excommunicate persons, how theie are to be auoided.
               
                  THe person 1 which by open denownciation of the Churche, is rightlie cut-of from th'unitie of the Church, and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the faythful, as are heathen and Publicane, 2 vntil he be openlie reconciled by Poenaunce, and receiued into the Church by à iudge that hath auctoritie thereunto.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The person that is rightlie by the Church Excommunicate, is of al the faithful to be taken for an Heathen and Publicane.
                  2 An Excommunicate person, truelie repenting, is to be receiued into the Church againe.
               
               
                  
                  1 The most seuere, & vttermost punishmēt that the visible Church can inflict vppon the vviked and vngodlie o
                        •
                      this world, is excommunication à part of discipline to be exercised, & that vpō most vrgent occasions; and it is
                  Cōmended to the Church euen by God himself; who in his word hath prescribed

                        VVho are to excomunicate, 
                              •••
                           elie, such as haue auctoritie in the Church. Matth. 18 vet. 17▪ 1. Cor. 5, ver. 4, 5. 2. Cor. 3. ver. 13, 14. 2. Thes. 3. 6.
                        VVho are to be excommunicate, euen tvvo sorts of mē wherof

                              Some p
                                    •
                                 ru
                                    •
                                 rt the sounde doctrine of the truth. (
                                    •
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 im. 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 20) as

                                    Hymeneus.
                                    Alexander.
                                 
                              
                              Some are de
                                    •
                                 iled with notorious wickednes, as that incestuous person. 1. Cor 5, 1.
                           
                        
                        The maner of proceeding in excommunication name lie

                              First, if the fault bee not notoriouslie knowen, by gentle admonition, & that

                                    Once or twice giuen Tit 
                                          •
                                       , 10 Matt. 18, 15.
                                    VVith the spirit of me
                                          •
                                       knesse. Gal. 6, 1.
                                    Euen as to à brother. 2. Thes. 3, 15.
                                 
                              
                              Next, if nothing wil serue, and the crime, and person be verie offensiue

                                    By open reprehension. 1. Tim. 5, 20.
                                    By publike sentence of the church

                                          To put him awaie from the cōpanie of the faithful. 1. Co. 5, 
                                                •
                                             3
                                          To deliuer him vnto Satan. 1▪ Cor. 5, 5.
                                          To denunce him

                                                An heathen.
                                                A publican
                                                A cursed.

                                                      A man so cut off frō the church and excommunicated, is of euerie man to bee auoided (Rom. 16, 17) and
                                                      Not to be eaten with al 1. Cor. 5, 11.
                                                      Not to bee companied withal 1. Cor 5, 8.
                                                      Not to bee receaued into house 2. Ioh. v, 10.

                                                            Adue
                                                                  •
                                                                sa
                                                                  •
                                                               ies vnto this excommunicatiō of christ bee al theie
                                                            VVhich simplie condemne al excommunication, saieng, the vviked are not to be excommunicate, such vvere the Paulicians.
                                                            VVhich excommunicat either vvhome theie should not, or to à wrong ende

                                                                  So

                                                                        Th'apostolikes did excommunicate al that were married, and for no cause, but for that theie vvere married.
                                                                        Christ prophecied that his disciples, and faithful people, should be excommunicated. Iohn. 16. 
                                                                              •
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        Dio
                                                                              ••
                                                                           ephes did thrust out the brethren out of the Church. 3. Iohn. ver. 10.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                                  So

                                                                        The Papistes did, vvhen theie excommunicated, and that being dead the dead bodies of

                                                                              VVicklie
                                                                                    •
                                                                                 .
                                                                              Bucer.
                                                                              P. Fagius
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        The Papistes do in thundering theire Buls of excommunication against the most godlie

                                                                              Kinges.
                                                                              Queenes.
                                                                              Princes.
                                                                              States.
                                                                              Men.
                                                                              VVomen.
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        Theie do which exercise excommunication not of anie conscience, but for gaine; where it commeth that excommunication is

                                                                              Not regarded of inferiors.
                                                                              Derided of Superiors.
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                            VVhich sauour the right excommunication, but exercise it not, beeing bound thereunto. Theis are to be rebuked as was

                                                                  The Corinthians of S. paul 1. Cor. 5. v. 1. 2.
                                                                  Th'angel of Pergamus for suffering the Balaamites, & Nioclaitans. Reuel 
                                                                        •
                                                                      14.
                                                                  Th'angel of Laodicea, for beeing neither hot, nor cold▪ Reue. 
                                                                        •
                                                                     . 14.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Had in great reuerence, and estimation of the faithful seruants of Iesus Christ, as maie appeare in the Confessions of the Godlie. Confes of.

                        Heluet. 1. art. 19.
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 17. 18.
                        Bohem. c. 8. 14.
                        France ar. 29. 33.
                        Fland. art. 30. 32.
                        Sa
                              •
                           on ar. 11. 17.
                        Ausburg. touching ab uses. art 7.
                        VVittem. art 31.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Sundrie bee the reasons and 
                        •••
                     es vvhic excommunication is vsed, as
                  That à vviked liuer, to the reproch of the Gospel, bee not suffered among the professors of true religion; and manie good bee not euil spoken of, for a 
                        •
                     evve bad.
                  That the good be not corrupted, or infected through the continual, or often familiaritie of the vviked. 1. Cor. 
                        •
                     , 6.
                  That he vvhich hath fallen, through shame of the world maie at the length

                        Learne to to blaspheam no more. 1. Tim. 1. 20.
                        Through repentāce be saued. 1 Cor. 5. 5.

                              Among al other causes therefore of excommunicatiō, one is, that the person excommunicate maie not bee condemned vtterlie, but returne vnto the Lord by repentance, and so bee receaued▪ againe into the visible Church, as S. Paul willed th'incestuous mā shuld be (1. Cor. 2. 7. &c) This truth I knovve none that denieth, vnlesse it be certaine
                              Montanistes.
                              Nouatians.
                              Fantastical Anabaptistes.

                                    vvhich are of opinion that al theie vvhich sinne after baptisme, vvithout al hope of reconciliation, bee damned.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               34 ARTICLE. Of the traditions of the Church.
               
                  IT is not necessarie that traditions and ceremonies 1 be in al places one, or vtterlie like, for at al times theie haue bin diuers, and maie be changed according to the diuersities of Countries, times and mens maners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods word. 2 Whosoeuer through his priuate iudgement, willinglie and purposelie doth openlie breake the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, 3 which be not repugnant to the worde of God, and be ordained and appointed by common auctoritie, ought to bee 
                     •
                  ebuked openlie (that other maie feare to do the like) as he that offendeth against the common order of the Church, and hurteth th'auctoritie of the Magistrate, and woundeth the consciences of the weake brethren. 4 Eue
                  
                     •
                  e particular or national Church hath auctoritie to ordaine, chaunge, and 
                     •
                  bolish ceremonies, or rites ordained onelie by mans auctoritie, so that al 
                     •
                  hings be done to aedifieng.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  The same traditions or ceremonics are not to be like in al places.
                  No priuate man of à selfe-wil, and purposelie maie in publike, violate the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which by common auctoritie be allowed, and are not repugnaunte to the word of God.
                  Ceremonies and traditions, ordained by th'auctoritie of man, if theie be repugnant to Gods worde, are not to be kept and obserued of anie man.
                  Euerie particular, or national Church male ordaine, change, and abolish ceremonies, or rites ordained onelie by mans auctoritie, so that al things be done to aedifieng.
               
               
                  
                  1 If à necessitie were laid vpon the church of God to obserue one, & the same traditions & ceremonies at al times, and in al places, assuredlie
                  The ceremonies of th'old Law had not bine▪ as theie are novv abolished: Acts. 6, 14. 10, 13. &c. 15, 1. &c. Gal. 2, 3. &c. Ephes. 2. 14. Col, 2. 16.
                  Th'apostles wold neuer haue giuē such praesidents of altering them vpon special reasons, as theie haue don. For wee find that they chā
                     ged

                        The times and places of their assembling togither. For the people of God 
                              •
                           et, and Th'apostles preached

                              Sometime

                                    In the weeke daies. Acts. 2, 46. 5, 42.
                                    On the Sabboth daies Acts. 13, 14, &c. 43, &c 17, 2. 18, 4.
                                 
                              
                              Sometime

                                    Publikelie

                                          In the temple Acts. 2, 46. 3. 1. &c. 5, 26.
                                          In the Synagogues. Act. 9, 20. 14, 1. 17, 10 18, 4▪ 19▪ 8.
                                          In the scholes. Acts. 19, 9.
                                       
                                    
                                    Priuatlie

                                          In house after house. Acts. 5, 42.
                                          In chambers. Act. 1, 13. 20, 8. 28. v. 30, 31.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Sometime

                                    In the daie time, Acts. 2, 46. 3, 1. &c.
                                    In the night▪ Acts. 20, 7, &c.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        The ceremonies in th'administration

                              Of baptisme if good occasion was offred. baptising.

                                    In publike assemblies. Acts. 2. 41.
                                    In priuate houses. Act. 16, 33. 10. v. 27, 48.
                                    Before manie. Act. 8. 12. 10. ver. 27. 48.
                                    VVhen none of the faithful were praesent. Acts. 8. 36.
                                 
                              
                              Of the L. Supper; ministring the same

                                    Not alwaies at one time, but sometime.

                                          At midnight Acts. 20, 11.
                                          In the daie time. Acts. 2, 46.
                                       
                                    
                                    Not alwaies in one place, but sometime

                                          In the churches. 1. Cor. 
                                                •
                                             . 17. &c.
                                          In houses. Acts. 20, 7. 2, 46.

                                                So nothing therfore is done against gods word, no doubt traditions and ceremonies, according to the diuersitie of countries, times, and mens maners maie be changed Of this iudgment with vs bee the Churches of God about vs. Confes. of
                                                Heluet. 2. cap. 17, 27.
                                                Bohem. c. 15.
                                                France. art. 32.
                                                Fland. art. 32.
                                                Ausburg. art. 15, and art. 7. touching abuses.
                                                Saxon. art. 20.
                                                VVittem. art. 35.
                                                Sueaue▪ ca. 14.

                                                      Herebie it is euident that they are greatlie deceiued vvhich thinke that
                                                      The Iewish ceremonies prescribed of God himselfe for à time vnto the Iewes are vnuiolablie to be obserued of vs christians▪ such are the

                                                            Ievves.
                                                            Turkes.
                                                            Cerdonites.
                                                            Cerin
                                                                  ••
                                                               ians.
                                                            Nazari
                                                                  ••
                                                               .
                                                            Armenians.
                                                            Familists.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      The popish ceremonies of the Romish Antichrist, are vniuersa
                                                            ••
                                                          to be kept in al place
                                                            •
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Traditions and ceremonies must euerie where be the same.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Great is the priuilege, greate also the libertie, and freedom of Gods Church. For it is deliuered
                  From the cursce of the Law. Gala. 3. 13.
                  From the law

                        Rom. 8. 2.
                        Of sinn
                        Of death.
                     
                  
                  From the Iewish

                        Act. 15. 24. &c.
                        Rites.
                        Ceremonies.
                     
                  
                  From al humaine ordinaunces, & traditions, so far forth as there binde the consciences of men. Hereof speaketh S. Paul. Colos. 2. 8. &c.

                        yet is the Churche bounde to th'obseruation of al traditions, and ceremonies which are allowed by lavvful auctoritie, and are not repugnant to the vvorde of God For he that violateth them, contemneth not man, but God, who hath giuen power to his Church to establish whatsoeuer thinges make vnto (1 Cor. 14. ver. 40. 26)
                        Comlines.
                        Order
                        Aedification.

                              This of our godlie brethren, some doe not let by publique vvritinges to testifie. Confes, of
                              Heluet. 1. art 25.
                              Bohem. c. 15 18.
                              Ausb. art. 4. 15.
                              Fran. art. 32.
                              Heluet. 2. c. 24.
                              Saxon. ar. 20
                              Sueau. cap. 4

                                    Others gon-out from vs, do hold that
                                    Christian Magistrates haue none auctoritie▪
                                       
                                          T▪appoint anie ceremonies & Rites for the due seruice of God.
                                          To exact outvvarde obedience vnto ceremonies righthe or dained.
                                       
                                    
                                    The people of God are 
                                          ••
                                       ee

                                          From all Ecclesiastical iurisdiction.
                                          From the obseruation of al ceremonies, and Rites.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 Of ceremonies and traditions repugnant to the word of God, there be tvvo sortes, vvhere of
                  Some are of things meer lie vviked such

                        VVas

                              Th'israelites calfe. Exod 32. 4 &c.
                              Nebuchadnezar
                                    •
                                  Idol. Dan. 3. 1. &c.
                           
                        
                        Are the Papistical

                              Images.
                              Reliques.
                              Agnus deis.
                              Crosces.

                                    To vvhich theie giue diuine adoration.
                                    Theis are flatlie forbidden of the Lord. Exod. 20. 4.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Some are of things neither commanded, nor forbidden, as

                        Of eating, or not eating fleshe.
                        Of wearing, or not wea ring some apparel.
                        Of keeping or not keeping of some daies holie &c.

                              VVhich are not to bee obserued, vvhen it is deliuered as sound doctrine, that such workes
                              Do merit remission of sinnes,
                              Are th'acceptable seruice of God.
                              Do more please than th'obseruation of the lawes of God.
                              Are necessarilie to be done insomuch that theie are damned which do them not.

                                    For th'auoiding of al theis, vve muste remember that vvee are bought with a price, and therfore maie not be the seruaunts of men (1. Cor. 7. 23.) and that none humain constitution in the church, doth binde anie man to break the least commaundement of God. Act. 5. 29. The consideration heere of, hath caused other Churches also with à svveete consent to cō
                                       demne suche wiked ceremonies of man. Confel. of
                                    Heluet. 2. c, 2. 24. 27.
                                    Heluet, 
                                          •
                                       , ar. 4.
                                    Basil art. 5 sect 3. art. 10,
                                    Bohem. c. 15
                                    Franc. art. 24. 33.
                                    Flan. art. 7. 29 32,
                                    Ausb. art. 
                                          •
                                       5.
                                    VVittem. art. 28. 29. 32. 3
                                          •
                                       .
                                    Suca. c. 8 &c. 14 15

                                          Such vngodlie traditions, and ceremonies in à manner, be al the ceremonies, and traditions of Th'antichristian Synagogue of Rome; and therefore to be abandoned of vs al.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4 It hath pleased our most merciful Lord, & Sauior Christe, for the maintenance of his Church militant, that tvvo sortes of rites, or ceremonies should be vsed, wherof
                  Some, God his most excellent maiestie himselfe hath ordained, such is the ceremonie of.

                        Baptisme.
                        The L. Supper.

                              VVhich are til th'end of the vvorlde vvithout al addition, diminution & alteration with al zeale, & religion to bee obserued.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Some bee ordained by the auctoritie of each prouincial, or nationall Church, & that for

                        The Comlines of the Church that is to saie▪ that

                              By those helps the people of God maie the better be inflamed with à god lie zeale.
                              Sobrenes and grauitie maie appeare in the wel handling of Ecclesiastical matters.
                           
                        
                        Order sake, euen

                              That gouernors maie haue rules & directions how to gouerne by.
                              That auditors may know how to prepare, and behaue themselues in diuine seruice.
                              That à ioiful peace maie bee among al men by the wel ordering of Church affaires. VVe haue proued alreadie that such traditions maie bee made, and changed, augmented and diminished as fit time, and oportunitie shalbee ministred; and that not by the Catholique (for that is, and hath alwaies bin impossible) but by particular Churches

                                    Th'effect here of vvee maie reade in the Confes. of
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 27
                                    Bohem. c. 15.
                                    Fran. art 32.
                                    Flan. art 32.
                                    Ausbur. touching abuses ar 7.
                                    VVitte. art. 35.
                                    Sueaue. ca. 14.

                                          This sheweth th'intolerable arrogancy of the Church of Rome, which dare take vpon her
                                          To alter the Sacramentes ordained euē by Christe himselfe.
                                          To praescribe rites and ceremonies, not to some particular churches but to the whole church militant.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               35 ARTICLE. Of Homilies.
               
                  THE seconde booke of Homilies, the seueral title whereof, we haue ioyned vnder this article, doth containe à godlie, and wholsome doctrine, and necessarie for these times, as doth the former booke of Homilies, which were set forth in the time of Edwarde the sixte: and therefore we iudge them to be read in Churches by the Ministers diligentlie and distinctlie, that there maie be vnderstanded of the people.
               
                  Of the names of the Homilies.
                  1 Of the right vse of the Church.
                  2 Against peril of Idolatrie.
                  3 Of the repairing, and keeping clean of the Churches.
                  4 Of good workes, first of Fasting.
                  5 Against gluttonie, and drunkennes.
                  6 Against excesse of apparel.
                  7 Of Praier.
                  8 Of the place and time of praier.
                  9 That common prayers, and Sacraments ought to be ministred in à knowen tongue
                  10 Of the reuerent aestimation of gods word
                  11 Of Almes doing.
                  12 Of the Natiuitie of Christe.
                  13 Of the Pascion of Christe.
                  14 Of the Resurrection of Christe.
                  15 Of the worthie receiuing of the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christe.
                  16 Of the giftes of the holie Ghoste.
                  17 For the Rogation daies.
                  18 Of the state of Matrimonie.
                  19 Of Repentaunce.
                  20 Against Idlenesse.
                  21 Against Rebellion.
               
               
                  The seconde booke of Homilies, as also the former, I doubt not, containe godlie and wholsome doctrine, necessarie for this time. But for somuch as this is none Article of the Catholique Religion, but à priuate Article for our Church, neither yet for the whol church of England, but for some places, where, and for some time, when able and fit Ministers are not praesent to preach the worde of God, and serueth onelie (as both from the booke of Cōmon praier, maie wel be gathered (Obseruat. nexte after Nicen Cr
                        •
                     ed) & experience proueth) for an Interim as it were, til fit Pastors be prouided for: and again, because most of those Homilies, according to their seueral titles, haue bine alreadie handled in this, and th'other part of my subscription, I cease from further wrighting of the same in this place.
               
            
            
               
               36 ARTICLE. Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
               
                  THE booke of Consecration of Archbishopps, and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and deacons, latelie set forth in the time of Edward the sixt, and confirmed at the same time by auctoritie of parliament, doth containe al things necessarie to such consecration and ordering: neither hath it anie thing, that of it selfe is superstitious or vngodlie. And therefore, whosoeuer are consecrated, or ordered according to the rites of that booke, since the second yeere of the afore-named K. Edward, vnto this time, or hereafter shalbe consecrated, or ordered according to the same rites, we decree al such to be rightlie, orderlie, and lawfullie consecrated and ordered.
               
                  
                     This Article simplie is none Article of the Catholique Church; and so much thereof as vniuersalie is receiued, hath alreadie both by the holie Scripture bin confirmed, & alowed by our neighbour Churches, in the 23. Article.
                  
               
            
            
               
               37 ARTICLE. Of the ciuil Magistrate.
               
                  THe Queenes M. 1hath the chiefe power in this realme of Eng. and other her dominions, 2vnto whom the chiefe gouerment of al estates of this realm, whether theie be Ecclesiastical, or ciuil, in al causes doth appertaine, and is not, nor ought to be subiect to anie foraine iurisdiction. Where we attribute to the Queenes M. the chiefe gouerment, by which titles, we vnderstand the mindes of some slaunderous folks to be offended: 3we giue not to our Princes, the ministring either of Gods worde, or of Sacraments, the which Th'iniunctions also latelie set forth by Elizabeth our Q. doth most plainlie testifie: but that onelie prerogatiue, which we see to haue bine giuen alwaies to al godlie princes in holie Scriptures by God himselfe, that is, that theie should rule al estates, and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether theie be Ecclesiastical, or temporal, 4and restraine with the ciuil sword, the stubborne and euil doers. 5The 'Bishop of Rome hath no iurisdiction in this realme of Eng. 6The lawes of the realme maie punish Christian men with death for heinous and grieuous offences 7It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandement of the Magistrate, to weare weapons, and serue in the warres.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The Queenes Maiest. hath the chiefe power in this realme of Eng. and other her dominions.
                  2 The Queenes Maiestie hath the chiefe gouernement of al states, Ecclesiastical and ciuil, in al causes within her dominions.
                  3 The ciuil Magistrate maie not execute th'ecclesiastical duties of preaching, and of ministring the Sacraments.
                  4 The ciuil Magistrate is to restraine with the material sword, and to punish malefactors, whosoeuer theie bee.
                  5 The Bishop of Rome hath no iurisdiction in this Realme of England.
                  6 By the lawes of this Realme Christian men, for hainous and greuous offences, maie be put to death.
                  7 It is lawful for Christian men, at the commaundement of the Magistrate, to weare wepons, and serue in the wars.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                      Diuers & sundrie bee the forms of cōmon weales and magistracie. For some where
                  Manie, & the
                        •
                     e of th
                        •
                     n seriot people, bear the swaie, as in à Democratie.
                  A sevve and that of chois, and the best mē, do gouerne; as in an Aristocratie.
                  One man or woman hath the prae
                        •
                     minence, as in à Monarchie. Such is the gouernement of this realme at this present.

                        VVhat soeuer the state be, the worde of God 
                              •
                           ea cheth vs, that
                        There is no power but of God,
                        The powers that be are ordained of god.
                        Vvhosoeuer resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God.

                              Rom. 13. v. 12.
                              VVe must

                                    Be subiect and obedient to the principalities, and powers, sit. 3, 
                                          •
                                       .
                                    Submitt our selues vnto al manner ordinance of man for the Lordes 
                                          •
                                       ake. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
                                    Praie for kings and for al that be in auctoritie, 1. Tim. 2. v. 1. 2.
                                    Giue to all men their dutie Rom 13. 7.

                                          Tribute, to whom tribute.
                                          Custom, to whom custome.
                                          Feare, to whom feare.
                                          Honor, to whom honor is due.

                                                But of the regiment of Kings and Queenes, special mention is made,
                                                By the prophet 
                                                      •
                                                   saie, saying, chap. 49. 
                                                      •
                                                   3.

                                                      Kings shalbe thi nowri shing Fathers
                                                      Quee nes shalbee thie nurces.
                                                   
                                                
                                                By Saincte Paule, who exhorteth, that supplications and praiers bee made for Kinges, 1. Tim▪ 2. 1 &c.
                                                By Peter, For hee calleth the King, the Superior, or him that hath the chiefe power (as our Queene Elizabeth hath in he
                                                      •
                                                    dominions) 1. Pet. 2. 13.

                                                      Of this iudgement al
                                                            •
                                                         o be other Christian Churches, Confes of
                                                      Helue. 
                                                            •
                                                         . art. 26.
                                                      Heluet. 2 cap. 30.
                                                      Basil. art. 7.
                                                      Bohem. ca. 16. and in the conclus.
                                                      Fland. art 36.
                                                      Ausburg. art. 16. 17.
                                                      Saxon. art. 23
                                                      Sueau. in the perorat.

                                                            whereby thei with vs▪ and we with them do condemne th'opinions
                                                            Of the
                                                            Manichies
                                                            Fra
                                                                  •
                                                               ricel lians.
                                                            Flagelli
                                                               
                                                                  •
                                                               eries.

                                                                  whiche altogither, & simplie condemne Magistracie.
                                                                  Of the dreamers which

                                                                        Despise gouernement.
                                                                        Speake euil of them which are in auctoritie.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                                  Of Th'anabaptists, that holde howe Christians are not to be magistrats
                                                                  Of al thē which dreame or disalowe the Regiment of women.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 VVe ascribe that vnto our Queene by this proposition, which is giuen to euerie king and Queene in their dominions, by the vvorde of God, as appeareth
                  In that theie are

                        Fortitles

                              Gratious Lords. Luke. 22, 25.

                                    Rom. 13. ver. 3, 4.
                                    Princes.
                                    The Ministers of God.
                                 
                              
                              The nurses of the Church. Isa. 49, 23.
                              Gods. Psal. 82, 1.
                           
                        
                        For auctoritie the chiefe, 1. Pet. 2. 13. which moueth Saint Paule t'exhort that supplieations &c▪ be made for al men, but first for Kings, as for the chiefe. 1. Tim. 2, 1.
                     
                  
                  By the comaundement of God vnto al states and callings without exception

                        Let euerie soule be subiect to the higher power, &c. Rom. 13, 1. &c.
                        Submit your selues, &c. vvhether it be to the King, as vnto the superior, or vnto gouernors that are sent of him, &c. 1. Pet. 2. v. 13, 14.
                     
                  
                  By the famous examples

                        Of the high Priest

                              Aaron, who calleth Moses his Lord. Exod. 32, 22.
                              Abimelech, which termed Saul his Lord. 1. Sam. 22, 12.
                           
                        
                        Of Iosaphat, who appointed Iudges, Leuits and Priests. 2. Chro. 19, 5. &c.
                        Of Ezechias

                              He sent to al Israel and Iudah, that theie should come to the house of the Lord at Ierusalem, to keepe the Passeouer, &c. a. Chro. 31. 2.
                              He appointed the courses of Priests, & Leuits by their turnes. 2. Chro. 31, 2.
                              He commanded

                                    The Priests, the sons of Aaron, to offer sacrifice, &c. & they obeid him. 2. ch. 23, 21
                                    Al the cōgregation to bring offrings, & they brought them. 2. Chro. 
                                          •
                                       9, 31.

                                          The same do the churchesreformed attribute to Christian magistrats Confes. of
                                          Helue. 1. art▪ 26.
                                          Heluet. 2 cap. 30.
                                          Basil. art. 7.
                                          Bohem. ca. 16.
                                          Fland. art. 36.
                                          Ausburg. art. 16. 17.
                                          Saxon. art. 23.
                                          Sueaue. in the Perorat.

                                                This being so, hovve dare the papists, as they do, saie that
                                                The kings excellencie of power is in respect of the Nobilitie, and laie Magistrates vnder him, and not in respect of Popes, Bishops or Priests, as they haue rule of soules?
                                                Kings▪ & princes, bee 
                                                      〈…〉
                                                    neuer so great must bee subiect to some

                                                      Bishop?
                                                      Priest?
                                                      Praelate?
                                                   
                                                
                                                The whole Clergie ought to bee free from paieng tribute.
                                                No man is to bee subiect to his temporal Prince, & superior in matters of religion or regiment of his soule, but in such things onelie as concerne the publike peace & policie?
                                                The Papists now in Englang bee dulie discharged from subiection, and the Prince from dominion by the soueraignt auctoritie of the common pastor of Religion, whiche is the Pope.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 K. Ezechias saide vnto the Priestes and Leuites of his time, My sonnes, be not deceaued, for the Lorde hath chosen you to stand before him, to serue him▪ and to be his Ministers, and to burne incense (2 Chron. 29. 1
                        •
                     .): So do we saie. The Lord hath appointed à companie to teach the people, to celebrat the Sacramentes, to handle the keis of the coelestial kingdom; in somuch that he that shall praesume to doe theis things, not called there unto and that lavvfullie, though he be à King, hee maie feare that punishment vvhich 
                        •
                     el vpon Vzzah (2. Chro. 26. 19) Notvvithstanding Kinges, Queenes, & Princes in their places, maie, yea and must, as occasiion serueth
                  VVith K. Salomon

                        Build an house for the Lord, 
                              •
                           . Chron. 1. 1
                        Set the courses of the Priests to their offices, &c. 
                              •
                           . Chron. 8▪ 14.
                     
                  
                  VVith K. Ezekiah.

                        2. kin. 8. 4.
                        Breake th▪images.
                        Cut down the groues
                        Take avvaie the hie places
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           . C
                              •
                           h 31 v. 2 4.
                        Appoint the courses of the Priests and Leuites.
                        Inioine al the people to minister sustenāce for the Priests, and Leuites.
                     
                     
                        Thus did Ezechiah throughout al Iudah▪ and did wel, and vprightlie, and trulie before the L. his God. 2. Chro. 31. 20▪
                        
                        VVith K. Iosiah,

                              Put-downe, and burne the horses of the Sunne. 2. Kin. 23. 11,
                              Breake-dovrne the houses of the Sodomites. 2 King. 23. 7.
                              Purge Iudah, and Ierusalem (2. Chron. 34▪ 3) from the

                                    Hie places.
                                    Groues.
                                    Karued images.
                                    Moltē images, &c.
                                 
                              
                              Appoint the Priestes to their charges, &c. 2 Chro. 35. 2.
                              Compel al that are found in Israel to serue the Lord their God. 2. Chro. 34. 33.
                           
                        
                        VVith the K. of Nihiuch, for th'auoiding of th'imment vengeance of God, Ionas. 3. 7. &c.

                              Proclaime a general Fast.
                              Command euerie man to turn from his euil waie, and from the wikednes that is in his handes.

                                    Herun to subscribe the Churches ptotestant. Confe of
                                    Heluet. 1▪ ar
                                          •
                                       . 26.
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 30
                                    Basil. art 7.
                                    Bohem. cap. 16.
                                    France. art. 39.
                                    Flan. art 36.
                                    Saxon. art. 23.
                                    VVitte. cap. 35.

                                          The Papists, as in other pointes so herein discēt altogether from the true Church of God. For thei teach that
                                          No Queen
                                          No King.
                                          None Emperor.
                                          Hath anie 
                                                •
                                             ucto
                                                •
                                             tie to deliberate, or define in m
                                                •
                                             tters of Religion; or to make anie lawes for th'aduancemēt of the same religion; yea, vvhat Prince soeuer doth so, he shalbee damned, saie theie vndoubtedly except theie do repent.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        4 Th'office of the ciuil Magistrate hath in part alrea die bin declared in this article; in part also this proposition she vveth, namely, that hee is to restraine, and if need be, to punish the disturbers of the quiet, & peace of his Commonvvealth; and that if occasion do require
                        By force of armes, if th'enemies of his State be

                              Foraine
                              Domestical.

                                    And theie gathered together be
                                    Manie.
                                    Mightie.

                                          To this end principallie theie haue
                                          Men
                                          Munition.
                                          Subsidies.
                                          Tributs.

                                                Thus against th'enemies of God, & good men vvent of Israel & Iudah
                                                The valiant Iudges
                                                The noble and puissant Kinges & Princes.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        By executing of wholsome lawes vpon the

                              Goods
                              Cattel
                              Lands
                              Bodies

                                    Of their disobedient subiects For he is the minister of God to take vengance on him that doeth euil. (Rom. 13. 4.). Therefore Princes are to be feared
                                    Not of them vvhich do wel. Rom. 13. 3.
                                    Of such as doe vvickedlie. Rom. 13. v
                                          ••
                                       . 3. 4.

                                          Theie vvhich haue profited in the schoole of Christianitie novvhit doue heereof. Confe. of
                                          Heluet 1 ar. 24. 26▪
                                          
                                          Heluet. 2. c. 30.
                                          Basil. art 7.
                                          Bohem. cap. 16.
                                          France. art. 39.
                                          Flan. art 36.
                                          Ausb. ar 16.
                                          Saxon. art. 23.

                                                But
                                                The Cresconians are of an opinion that the Magistrates ar to punish no malefactors.
                                                Rabanus drea meth that magistracy is not th'ordinaunce of God, for the good, but an humane inuention for the hurt of man.
                                                Th'anab aptists deliuer that before the resurrectiōther shalnot be anie magistrats; for al the wiked shal be rooted out. The like fancie haue the Fam. of Loue.
                                                The Papists think that the Cleargie are not to be punished, or corrected of the ciuil magistrate.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        5 The Bishop of Rome did he
                        Preach the Gospel (1. Cor 9 v. 16, 17. 1. Tim. 4, 2. Mat. 28. 19
                        Labor in the Lorde his haruest Mat. 9, 38.
                        Diuide the word of God a
                           
                              •
                           ight. (
                              •
                           . Tim. 
                              •
                           , 15.)
                        Minister the Sacraments, instituted by Christ, & that syncerelie. (Matt. 28, 19. 1. Cor. 10, 16.)
                        Shew by his life the goodfruits of à godly Bishop (1. Tim. 3, 2. &c. Tit. 1, 7. &c)

                              Doubtles hee were worthie of double honor by the word of God (1. Tim▪ 5. 17) yet wil not the same worde of God, were he neuer so holie & religious, warrant him anie iurisdictiō within this realme, much lesse when hee doth execute no part of à Christian, but euerie part of an Antichristian Bishop
                              In corrupting the doctrin of the truth with errors & cursed opinions.
                              In defacing the sacramēts of the church by supersticious ceremonies.
                              In persecuting the Church of Christ with fire and sword.
                              In making marchandise of the soules of men, thorough couetousnes. 2▪ Pet. 2, 3.
                              In pl
                                    •
                                 ieng the Lorde ouer gods heretage. 1. Pet. 5. 3.
                              In sitting in the temple of God, as God, shewing himself that hee is God. 2. Thes. 2 4.
                              In exalting himself against al that is called god, or that is worshipped. 2. Thes. 2, 4.

                                    In respect of which fruits of impietie, the pope of Rome
                                    He is described in the holie scripture to be verie Antichrist, euē
                                       
                                          The wikedman.
                                          That man of sinne.
                                          The son of p
                                                •
                                             idition.
                                          Th'aduersarie of God.
                                          2. Thes. 2, 3. &c.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Hee was openlie proclaimed Antichrist by à councel in France in the raigne of Capet.
                              He is called by the godlie learned

                                    The prince among al the children of pride.
                                    Verie Lucifer.
                                    The Basiliske of the Church.
                                    The plague of the world.
                                    Neither the head, nor the taile of the Church of God.
                                 
                              
                              His iurisdiction hath bine, and is banished out o
                                    •
                                  Englande by manie kings & parliments, namelie by K.

                                    Edwarde the 1. 3. 6.
                                    Richard the 2.
                                    Henrie the 4▪ 8.
                                 
                              
                              His pride and intollerable supremacie is renounced by al the true seruants of God by mouth and writing. Confel. of

                                    Hel. 1. 2. 18
                                    Helue. 2 c. 17. 18.
                                    Boh. c. 8. 9
                                    Fland▪ art. 28. 31.
                                    VVittem. art. 31.
                                    Ausburg. touching abuses. 1 art. 7.

                                          And that vpon good cause he is thus detested, it appeareth as by that alreadie setdowne: so by that which the Papists themselues giue out of their holie father, as namelie that
                                          The pope is

                                                In supremacle, Abel.
                                                In gouerning of the
                                                A
                                                      •
                                                   ke, Noah.
                                                In patriarkship, Abraham.
                                                In Order, Melchisedech.
                                                In dignitie, Aaron.
                                                In auctoritie, Moses.
                                                In iudgement, Samuel.
                                                In zeale, Helias
                                                In humilitie, Dauid.
                                                In power, Peter.
                                                In respect of his vn
                                                      •
                                                   
                                                   tion, Christ.
                                                The general pastor.
                                                The common father of al Christians.
                                                The high pastor of
                                                Gods vniuersal Church.
                                                The prince of Gods people.
                                                God

                                                      In title God, euen the Lorde God the Pope.
                                                      For power god

                                                            By him kings raigne.
                                                            He maie iudge al, but must be iudged of none.
                                                            He can do what him list▪ as wel as God, except sin.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          He hath vniuersal iurisdiction ouer the whole world.
                                          Vpon paine of damnation al christians are to yeeld obedience to the Pope.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  6 As the natures of men be diuers, and sometimes in some countries more abund than in other: so are the punishments to bee imposed vpon malefactors according to the quantitie and qualitie of th'offēce; and anie countrie and realm maie punish offendors, and that with death is the laws thereof do so command, and the case requireth. For
                  Al that take the sword shal perish with the sworde. Matth. 26, 52.
                  Gouernors are sēt of the king. 1. Pet. 2, 14. For

                        The punishmēt of euil doers.
                        The praise of them that do wel.
                     
                  
                  A wise king scattereth the wiked, and causeth the wheele to turne ouer them. Rom. 20, 26.
                  The magistrate. Rom 13, 4.

                        He beareth not the sworde for nought
                        He is the minister of God to takeven geance on thē that do euil.

                              In regarde wherof in some places before the magistrats are borne.
                              Rods, to correct them which be reformable.

                                    To cut of such as are past recouerie, and rotten mē
                                       bers.
                                    Axes
                                    Hatchets
                                    Halberds
                                 
                              
                              Swords, but not bare and naked, but in the scabberd, to signifie, That theie are to haue death which deserue the same: yet cōmeth the magistrate to that execution vrged therunto by necessitie, rather than willinglie.

                                    VVhich punishments do testifie to the world, that
                                    God is al iust, which wil haue

                                          Some sinnes more seuerelie punished than others.
                                          The magistrat to cut of dangerous, and vngodly members.
                                       
                                    
                                    God is merciful and hath à care

                                          Of his seruants.
                                          Of humane societie.
                                       
                                    
                                    God is

                                          VVise
                                          Holie

                                                In that he wil haue it knowne who are iust, who wiked, who holie, who prophane: by preseruing of the one, and punishing of th'other

                                                      Herevnto our neighbour churches do set their hands. Cōfesof
                                                      Hel. 1. art. 24. 26.
                                                      Hel. 2. ca. 30.
                                                      Basil. art. 7.
                                                      Bohē. cap. 16
                                                      France art. 39.
                                                      Fland. art. 36.
                                                      Ausb. art. 16.
                                                      Saxon. art. 23.

                                                            Th'aduersaries hereof are
                                                            They which thinke the magistrate maie correct none at al, much lesse by death dispatch any offenders, as Crescon
                                                                  •
                                                               ons
                                                            They which denie that anie Christian maie iustly be put to death by the Magistrate for blasphemous haeresies, yea for any offence: the latter whereof Th'anabaptists do hold, the former the Fam. of Loue.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  7 There is faith Soloman (Eccl 
                        •
                     . 8) à time
                  Of warre
                  Of Peace

                        And Magistrates are
                        By lawes to condemne, yea, and by death to punish male factors for hainous, and greeuous offences, and sinnes, as hath bine alreadie proued in the proposition immediatlie afore going.
                        By vvar and weapons to represse the power of enimies

                              Foraine
                              Intestin

                                    For theie are in auctoritie placed
                                    To defend the good & quiet subiects against al oppression
                                    To remooue the violence of the wiked who soeuer theie be

                                          For this cause haue theie
                                          Horses praepared for the battel. Pro. 21. 31
                                          Munitions, to defend themselues, and to annoie th'enemies.
                                          Subsidies to beare out charges
                                          Subiects to fight for theire Prince and contrie.

                                                And better it is to haue vvar, than to come into bondage and thraldome worset than warit selfe. This is granted in the Confes. of.
                                                Heluet. 2. c. 30
                                                Bohem. cap. 16.
                                                Saxon. art. 23.

                                                      Among other th'aduer saries of this proposition are
                                                      The Manichies vvhich saide it vvas vnlavvful for anie man to make war; and therefore theie saie, Moses did not wel in subduing th'enemies of Th'isra elites by force of armes.
                                                      Th'anabaptistes, who thinke it vnlawful for à Christian, either Magistrate or subiect to go à vvar-far.
                                                      The Spiritualuts, vvhich so detest war that there thinke it vnlawful for à Christian to vveare à vve
                                                            •
                                                         
                                                         pon: in vvhich error was the Fam. of Loue for à season.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               38 ARTICLE. Of Christian mens goodes vvhich are not common.
               
                  THE riches and goodes of Christians, 1 are not common as touching the right, title, and possession of the same, as certaine Annabaptistes doe falselie boaste. Notwithstanding 2 euerie man ought of such thinges as he possesseth, liberallie to giue almes to the poore, according to his habilitie.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The riches and goodes of Christians, as touching the right, title, and possession of the same, are not common.
                  2 Euerie man is to giue liberal almes of that which he possesseth, according to his habilitie.
               
               
                  
                  1 That which is alleaged in the next proposition folowing doth altogither confirm that which here is affirmed: yet for further proofe that the riches and goods of Christians, as touching the right, title, and possession of the same, are not to be common, it is apparent (to saie nothing out of th'old Testament, nor to set-downe examples of godlie Christians vvhich kept priuate houses, and had goods priuatlie to themselues) in the nevve Testament, where condemned is
                  Couetousnesse.

                        1. Cor. 5, 11.
                        Ephes. 5, 3
                     
                  
                  Theeuerie

                        1 Cor. 6, 2
                        1. Pet. 4, 15.
                     
                  
                  Extortion

                        1. Cor. 5, 11
                        1. Cor. 6, 10
                     
                  
                  Idlenesse. 2. Thes. 3, 10.

                        Commended is
                        Liberalitie

                              Acts. 20, 35.
                              2. Cor. 9. 6. &c.
                              Iam. 2, 16.
                           
                        
                        Free lending

                              Mat. 5, 48.
                              Luk. 6, 34.
                           
                        
                        A lawful vocation. 1. Cor. 7, 20.
                        Labor

                              Ephe 4, 28
                              2. Thes. 3, 10.
                           
                        
                        Frugalitie. 1. Tim. 5, 8.

                              VVhich declareth that the riches and goods of Christians neither were, nor ought to be commō. So thinke thereformed Confes. of
                              Heluet. 2. ca. 19.
                              Fran. art▪ 40.
                              Flan. art 36.
                              Ausbur. art. 16.
                              VVittē. cap. 21.

                                    This notwithstā
                                       ding the cō
                                       trarie defended
                                    Hath bine in times past by the

                                          Esseis.
                                          Manichies
                                          Pelagians.
                                          Apostolikes.
                                          Fratricellians.
                                       
                                    
                                    Is in theis daies by the

                                          Familists.
                                          Anabaptists.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Vnto liberalitie toward the poore, according to our habilitie, wee are prouoked in the holie Scripture
                  By commandements from God, euen

                        The Father.

                              Prou. 5. 15
                              Deu. 10, 19
                              Deu. 15. 11
                              Eccl. 11, 2.
                           
                        
                        The Son.

                              Mat. 5, 
                                    •
                                  2.
                              Matth. 6. v. 2. 3.
                              Luke. 6, 30.
                           
                        
                        The holie Ghost.

                              Rom. 12, 13.
                              1. Cor. 16, 2.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  By sweete promises of ample blessings

                        Eccle. 11, 1.
                        Prou. 11. v. 24, 25.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Cor. 9, 8, &c.
                     
                  
                  By threatnings of punishments

                        Pro. 21, 13
                        Pro. 28, 27
                     
                  
                  By th'examples of the

                        Apostles.

                              Gal. 2, 10.
                              Rom. 15, 25.
                           
                        
                        Primitiue Church

                              Act. 11, 29
                              2. Cor. 8, 
                                    •
                                 . &c.
                              2. Cor. 9, 2. &c.

                                    This liberalitie or cheerful giuing of almes is commended in the Confes.
                                    Heluet. 2. c. 23. 28. 29
                                    Saxon. art. 21.
                                    VVittem. cap. 18.

                                          None there bee which dislike, or else repine at this liberalitie toward the poore, but
                                          Anabaptists, that would haue no man either to giue, or receaue: for al things, in their opinion, should bee common, and none bee either poore 
                                                〈◊〉
                                              wealthie men.
                                          The stonie hearted, and miserable

                                                Oppressors.
                                                Vsurers.
                                                Extortioners.
                                                Couetous men.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               39 ARTICLE. Of a Christian mans othe.
               
                  AS we confesse 1 that vaine and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: 2 So we iudge that Christian religion doth not prohibite, but that à man maie sweare, when the Magistrate requireth, in à cause of faith and charitie, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching, in iustice, iudgement and truth.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 We maie not sweare vainelie, and rashlie.
                  2 A lawful othe maie be giuen, and taken according to the word of God.
               
               
                  
                  1 The better t'auoide vaine and rash swearing it is good to haue in remembraunce that vvhich is said
                  By our Sauior Christ in the 5. of Math. ver. 34. Svveare not at al, neither

                        By heauen, for it is the throne of God.
                        By th'earth; for it is his foot-stoole.
                        By Hierusalem; for it is the Citie of the great King.
                        By thin head, because thou canst not make one heare vvhite, or black.

                              But let your cō
                                 munication be yea▪ yea; nay, nay
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  By Th'apostle Iames Before al thinges, my brethren, Sweare not

                        Neither by the heauen.
                        Not by th'earth.
                        Not by anie other othe
                        But let your yea, bee yea, and your nay, nay least yee fal into condemnation.

                              The churches of Heluetia, and Basil, by their publique Confessions do speake against all vaine and rash othes and swearing
                              Heluet 1 cap. 5
                              Basil. art 11.

                                    This condē
                                       neth
                                    The

                                          VVantons which for pleasure.
                                          Couetous that for profite.

                                                Blush not to take the name of god in vaine by idle, and rash othes.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    The

                                          Basilidians.
                                          Helchisaits.
                                          Priscillianists.
                                          Familie of Loue.

                                                VVho for ease, and libertie dread not to forsweare themselues.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    The Papistes vvhich cōmonlie vvil sweare either by

                                          Saincts.
                                          Idols.
                                          God and creatures.
                                       
                                    
                                    The Banist▪ vvho deeme it hypocrisie for one Christian to reproue an other for common, & rash swearing and othes, which are but trifles, as theie saie.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Thought it be vnlawful to sweare vainlie and rashlie: yet ar
                        •
                      meere persons to take à lawful oth, whē iust occasion is giuen. For in his word▪ God
                  Hath giuen expresse cō
                     maundement so to do, as

                        Deut. 6. 13. Thou shalt seare the Lord thy God, and serue him, and shalt sweare by his name.
                        Deut. 10. 20. Thou shalt sweare the Lord liueth, and thou shalt cleaue vnto him, & shalt sweare by his name.
                     
                  
                  He hath praescribed à manner how his people shoulde sweare, as

                        Not by Baal. Ier. 12, 16.
                        Not by strange gods, Iosh. 27, 7.
                        Not by the Lorde, and by Molchom. Zephan. 1, 5.
                     
                  
                  Not by creatures.

                        Matt. 5, 34.
                        Heauen
                        Earth
                        Hierusalem.
                        The head.
                     
                  
                  By the name of the Lord. Deut. 6, 13. Deut. 10. 20.
                  The Lord liueth. Ier. 12, 16.
                  The Lord liueth, and that in

                        Iere. 4, 2
                        Truth.
                        Iudgement.
                        Righteousnes.

                              VVhich also must be taken when the magistrate requireth Exod. 2
                                    •
                                 , 11. 1. King. 8. 31. This letteth not, but if it fal-out, as it did with them, we may though not commanded by the Magistrate
                              VVith Christ affirm our doctrine with religious asseuerations

                                    Verelie
                                    Verelie.
                                 
                              
                              VVith Paule take to witnes

                                    Christ, Rom. 9, 1.
                                    God, 2. Cor. 1. 23.

                                          VVee haue that ioine with vs in this assertiō manie churches. Confes. of
                                          Heluet. 1 art. 26
                                          Heluet. 2. ca. 30.
                                          France. art. 40.
                                          Basil. art. 11. sect. 1.
                                          Ausbur. art. 16.

                                                Aduersaries hath this truth many For
                                                Th'esseis deeme al maner of swearing so bad as forswearing.
                                                In no case is it lavvful to sweare, saie Th'anabaptists, although th'aduauncement of Gods glorie, & charitie toward our neighbor do require the same.
                                                The Papists teach, that an oth for t'accuse th'aduersaries of true Religion, and this state, whō theie cal Catholiques, is not to be taken, if it be, it may and must be broken vnder paine of aeternal damnation.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  1. Tim. 1. 17.
                  Now vnto the King euerlasting, immortal, inuisible, vnto God onlie wise (be) honor (and) glorie for euer, and euer, Amen.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The faultes which marre the sense committed in the printing, in the absence of the Auctor, are thus to be corrected.
            
            
               
                  
                     Fol.
                     Fault.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     1
                     
                        Must be expected
                     
                     
                        Must be respected.
                     
                  
                  
                     1
                     
                        As is necescarie
                     
                     
                        As necessarie▪
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     6
                     
                        Whome theie be
                     
                     
                        Whome there be
                     
                  
                  
                     7
                     
                        Maie be thought and verie well
                     
                     
                        Maie be thought not verie wel
                     
                  
                  
                     7
                     
                        As did Horstatus
                     
                     
                        As did Hocstatus.
                     
                  
                  
                     8
                     
                        Al were haereticks
                     
                     
                        Al the new haereticks
                     
                  
                  
                     8
                     
                        The Idolaea of the Scithians
                     
                     
                        The Iobolaea of the Sethians.
                     
                  
                  
                     10
                     
                        Auctoitie of Kings
                     
                     
                        Auctoritie of Kings
                     
                  
                  
                     10
                     
                        To the glorie of God. But it
                     
                     
                        To the glorie of God, but it
                     
                  
                  
                     10
                     
                        Matiscon by Gnutranus
                     
                     
                        Matiscon by guntranus.
                     
                  
                  
                     17
                     
                        Here are his pardons
                     
                     
                        Hence are his pardons.
                     
                  
                  
                     30
                     
                        Coupled for Sacramentes
                     
                     
                        Compted for Sacraments
                     
                  
                  
                     36
                     
                        Th'effects or affects rather
                     
                     
                        Th'effect or effects rather
                     
                  
                  
                     37
                     
                        Fourthlie, th'affect
                     
                     
                        Fourthlie th'effect
                     
                  
                  
                     39
                     
                        As of vs opposing
                     
                     
                        Al of vs opposing
                     
                  
                  
                     40
                     
                        The matter is onelie hallowed
                     
                     
                        The matter is oile hallowed
                     
                  
                  
                     40
                     
                        Teach thee
                     
                     
                        Heale thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     40
                     
                        If anie Christian
                     
                     
                        Is anie Christian
                     
                  
                  
                     41
                     
                        Calaphrigians
                     
                     
                        Cataphrigians.
                     
                  
                  
                     42
                     
                        Or other spiritual graces
                     
                     
                        And other spiritual graces
                     
                  
                  
                     48
                     
                        Worthines among the Turkes
                     
                     
                        Washings among the Turkes
                     
                  
                  
                     49
                     
                        This good Christians
                     
                     
                        The good Christians.
                     
                  
                  
                     52
                     
                        The Mescalians error.
                     
                     
                        The Messalians error,
                     
                  
                  
                     52
                     
                        Nectorians.
                     
                     
                        Nestorians.
                     
                  
                  
                     61
                     
                        Melchies Hoffman
                     
                     
                        Melchior Hoffman.
                     
                  
                  
                     62
                     
                        Due to God and his Church
                     
                     
                        Due to God of his Church.
                     
                  
                  
                     63
                     
                        Neither to vow th'estate
                     
                     
                        Either to vowe th'estate.
                     
                  
                  
                     64
                     
                        (Not a whoremonger) but
                     
                     
                        (Not à whoremonger, but)
                     
                  
                  
                     64
                     
                        Marriage is not à Sacrament & yet
                     
                     
                        Mariage is à sacrament, and yet
                     
                  
                  
                     65
                     
                        That anie marie if theie thinke good,
                     
                     
                        That anie maie marrie if theie thinke good.
                     
                  
                  
                     64
                     
                        No-thing liked & instituted of God
                     
                     
                        No one thing liked and instituted of God.
                     
                  
                  
                     66
                     
                        As are heathen and Publicane
                     
                     
                        As an heathen and Publicane.
                     
                  
                  
                     67
                     
                        Where it commeth that excommunication is.
                     
                     
                        Whence it commeth that excommunication is.
                     
                  
                  
                     67
                     
                        And Nioclaitans
                     
                     
                        And Nicolaitans.
                     
                  
                  
                     79
                     
                        Of al them which dreame or disalow.
                     
                     
                        Of all them which denie or disalowe.
                     
                  
                  
                     80
                     
                        Haue rule of soules?
                     
                     
                        Haue cure of soules?
                     
                  
                  
                     84
                     
                        And sometimes in some countries.
                     
                     
                        And some sinnes in some countries
                     
                  
                  
                     84
                     
                        As Cresconians,
                     
                     
                        As the Cresconians.
                     
                  
               
            
            You shal finde also for VVitnesse, VVitnesce, for Necessitie necescitie, for essence escence for Crosse, crosce &c. in the ort
                  •
               ographie which fel out by mistaking the original; and we praie you beare therewith til theie maie be corrected.
         
      
   