
      
         
            
            
            A TREATISE OF GODS EFFECTVAL CALLING:
            WRITTEN FIRST IN THE LATINE tongue, by the reuerend and faithfull ſeruant of Christ, Maister ROBERT ROLLOCK, Preacher of Gods word in Edenburgh. AND NOW FAITHFVLLY TRANSLATED for the benefite of the vnlearned, into the Engliſh tongue, by Henry Holland, Preacher in London.
            
            
               2. PET. 1. 10. 
               Giue diligent heede to make your calling and election ſure.
            
            
            
               AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1603.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE Prince, IAMES the ſixt, now by Gods free mercie, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. grace and peace by Ieſus Christ.
            
            
               AFter ſome aduiſing with my ſelfe, in whoſe name I ſhould publiſh this litle worke, your Maieſtie (my moſt dread Soueraigne) aboue all others came firſt into my mind, for that you may iuſtly challenge as your owne right, the firſt fruites of my labours, of what kinde ſoeuer they be. Hauing then heretofore conſecrated the firſt fruites of

the firſt kind of my writings vnto your Highnes: I thought it meete alſo, that this ſecond kinde of meditations (in the common places of diuinitie) ſhould be preſented to the ſame your Maieſtie. From this purpoſe although many things feared me, among which your princely Maieſtie (to ſpeak as the truth is) adorned with rare knowledge of diuine things, did moſt occupie my minde: your Maieſtie, I ſay the greatnes whereof, my owne meannes, and the ſlendernes of this work, were not able to endure. Yet when I recounted with my ſelfe how great your curteſie and gentlenes was alwaies accuſtomed to bee towards all men, but eſpecially towards my ſelfe; I determined rather to incurre ſome ſuſpition of ouermuch boldnes, then not to giue teſtimonie of my dutie, and of my moſt humble deuotion towards your Maieſtie, euen by the dedication of this ſmall worke of mine how meane ſoeuer it be. Reſpect therefore (moſt noble King) not ſo much this ſmal worke, as the teſtimonie of a mind moſt dutifully affected towards your Maieſtie in the Lord, and as my dutie

requireth, moſt readie according to my ſmall abilitie, with all lowlines to do your Maieſtie moſt humble ſeruice in any thing that I can during life. But what is there wherein I can do your Maieſtie better ſeruice then in ſtriuing with my God, with continuall & earneſt prayers, that through his grace and ſingular goodnes you may for euer maintaine, continue, and make good that excellent opinion which you haue (not vndeſeruedly) alreadie gotten, in forraine nations amongſt ſuch men, as are moſt eminent in this our age, both for learning and godlines: that ſo you may haue a happie raigne in this preſent life, and in that other life may be a fellow heire of that heauenly kingdome: in compariſon of the glorie of which kingdome) that I may ſpeake this by the way) I my ſelfe a good while ſince, haue heard you deſpiſe al theſe earthly kingdoms, at ſuch time as amongſt other matters, in a certain familiar conference, where there were but a fewe preſent, you diſcourſed of many things learnedly (I ſpeake the truth to the glorie of God, without any flatterie) and

godlily, and delightfully, concerning Chriſt, and of praying to him onely, and not to Angels, or Saints departed out of this life) you may, I ſay, be a fellow heire together with your head, euen that moſt high King, Lord, and heire of all things Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe grace, mercie and power defend and protect you both in bodie and ſoule, from all your enemies, bodily and ghoſtly for euermore.
            
               Your Maieſties moſt dutifull Seruant,
ROBERT ROLLOCK.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT GODLY, LEARNED, AND HIS REVERENT GOOD FRIEND Maiſter Iohn Iohnſton.
            
            
               
                  I
                May ſeeme ſlow in aunſwering your letters (good Maister Iohnſton) for that they were long in comming to my hands; I vnderſtoode by them, to my great ioy, that you are ſafely arriued in your owne countrie: and haue found your Churches there in ableſſcd and peaceable ſtate, wherein, I deſire in heart, they may long continue. And why may I not confidently hope that this my deſire ſhall be fulfilled? ſpecially ſeeing they were from the beginning The bleſsing of God on the Churches of Scotland. ſo happily, ſoundly, and excellently founded by thoſe faithfull and worthie ſeruants of God, thoſe skilfull maiſter-builders which begun the worke: and they whoſeconded them, brought no ſtubble or hay, but ſiluer, gold, and precious ſtones to the building: Nay which is more, the Lord himſelfe hauing ſo clearely and apparantly fauoured, and furthered their holy labours, that whoſoeuer haue ſtumbled at this building, haue not onely miſſed and failed of their purpoſe, but haue been (as it were) by the ſtrong, and powerfull hande of God, ſcattered and throne out into vtter darkenes. To theſe we may adde that ſingular,

and moſt precious gift of God, which the ſame good God hath beſtowed vpon you, I meane your worthie King, 
                  Maiſter Bezas iudgement, and commendation of the Kings Maieſtie in the happie gouernment of the Churches of Scotland.
                whom he hath likewiſe miraculouſly preſerued from many and great perils, who hath ioyned to his ſingular, and admirable care, and watchfulnes, in defending the Goſpell, and preſeruing the puritie, and vnſpotted ſinceritie of this Church, ſo great and exact knowledge of Chriſtian religion from the very grounds and principles thereof, that the Lord it ſeemes hath made his Maieſtie both a Prince and preacher to his people: ſo that your 
                  Our bleſſed King may in veritie, be well accounted a ſecond Salomon, who was both King and preacher.
                Realme of Scotland is now become of all other moſt happie, and may iustly hope for increaſe of tranquillitie and felicitie, if onely (as we are perſwaded ſhe will) ſhe can diſcerne, and thankfully acknowledge the great bleſsing ſhe inioyeth; and as ſhe hath begun, ſo continue to direct them all, to the right ſcope and end, which is to his glorie, who is the father and fountaine of all goodnes.
            And I aſſure you, I reioyce from my heart, that occaſion was giuen me to congratulate by theſe my letters your happie condition with the reſt of my reuerend brethren, both by your countrie man Maister Dauid Droman, a man both godly, and well learned, whoſe preſence though but for a few dayes, was moſt acceptable to vs here, who is now vpon his returne to you with theſe letters; as likewiſe in that I chaunced of late to meete with a great treaſure, which I know not by what miſhap being frequent in other mens hands, hath hitherto miſſed my fingers. For why ſhould not I eſteeme as a treaſure, and that moſt precious, the commentaries of my honorable brother Maiſter Rollocke, vpon the epistle to the Romans and Epheſians, 
                  Maiſter Beza commendeth Maiſter Rollockes workes.
                both of them being of ſpeciall note among the writings Apostolicall? for ſo I iudge of them, and I pray you take it to be ſpoken without all flatterie or partialitie, that

I neuer read, or met with any thing in this kinde of interpretation more pithilie, elegantly, and iudiciouſly written: ſo as I could not containe my ſelfe, but muſt needes giue thankes, as I ought, vnto God, for this ſo neceſſarie, and ſo profitable a worke, and reioyce that both you and the whole Church enioy ſo great a benefit; deſiring the Lord to increaſe with new gifts, and preſerue in ſaftie this excellent inſtrument, eſpecially in theſe times wherein thorow the ſcarcitie of skilfull workemen which labour in the Lords vineyard, and by the deceaſe of thoſe well exerciſed and experienced ſouldiers, and worthie Christians, Sathan and his companions begin againe to triumph ouer the truth.
            Concerning the eſtate of our Church and ſchoole, we yet continue, and proceede in our courſe, by the mightie hand of our God and Sauiour, protecting vs, which is admirable to our very enemies, being deliuered from the iawe of death. But in truth, for ought we ſee, it is like to laſt but one yeare, our eſtate depending on thoſe acts which ſhall bee concluded in the Or meeting at Roane. Or the Prince our neighbour. diet of Roane betweene the French King, and our neighbour Duke, either concerning peace or warre, wherein we hope to be comprehended vpon equall condition. In this fraile, and vncertaine eſtate that is our principall conſolation, that we are ſure this ſlender and twined threed, whereupon we reſt, is ſustained by the hand of our good God, who will not ſuffer that to be falſified which we haue learned of the Apostle, that all things worke together for the 
               Rom. 8.
                
               good of thoſe that loue him. In the meane while I beſeech you brethren continue your remembrance of vs in your daily prayers. I for my part, for ſome moneths, though I be not much pained with any Feuer, Gout, Stone, or any of thoſe ſharpe diſeaſes which be the vſuall

companions of old age, yet I feele my ſelfe ſo infeebled and weakned, that I am constrained in a manner to giue ouer both my publike duties, to keepe houſe and home, looking euery day for that ioyfull and happie diſſolution whereunto age it ſelfe calleth me, being now ſeuentie eight yeares old. And herein I deſire your prayer with the reſt of my brethren, by name of my reuerend brother Maister Meluin, and Maister Peter Iunius, whom (vnleſſe memorie faile me) Maister Scringer of bleſſed memorie, was wont to call his coſen: vnto whom, remembring withall my hartie commendations, I deſire you to communicate this my letter, deſiring the Lord (my deare, and louing brother) to preſerue your whole Church there with his mightie, and bleſſed hand, againſt all both forren, and domesticall dangers. Fare ye well from Geneua the Calends of Nouemb. after our olde computation. CIC. IC. XCVI.
            
            
               Yours wholy THEODOR BEZA.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND HIS VERIE CHRISTIAN LOVING FRIEND, MAISTER WILLIAM SCOT of Ely, grace and peace by Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               WHen I had finiſhed my laſt ſommers worke of reuiſing, and correcting Maſter Rollockes readings on the Coloſſians, I was inwardlie much affected with the holy ſpirit of the man, which I found as in that, ſo in the reſt of his workes. Then my heart deſired that as forraine Churches greatly reioyce in him, and bleſſe God for him; ſo the Churches of England and Scotland, might to their greater ioy heare him ſpeake yet more vnto them in their owne natiue language.
            This is the cauſe (right worſhipfull) that mooued me the winter paſt, to gaine ſome houres from mine ordinarie labours, to giue this little

booke a new coate, that it might be knowne alſo in all this Iland, where it was firſt conceiued and borne.
            It hath the protection of our moſt mightie King, for ſaftie and free paſſage into other parts of the world, where it hath been intertained with kinde acceptation: and ſo now, no doubt, it ſhall be no leſſe in both theſe kingdomes, when as all true hearted ſubiects ſhall ſee, with what chriſtian affection our moſt noble King affected this faithfull ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt, and his holy workes. Now bleſſed bee God for being thus mindfull of vs; and for annoynting his ſacred breaſt with ſuch a meaſure of the ſpirit of iudgement, as an 2. Sam. 19. 27. Phil. 19. 10. Eſa. 11. 3. 4. Angel of God, to diſcerne the things that differ, and ſo to reſpect the meeke ones of the earth, to the vnſpeakable ioy of the good, and terror of the wicked.
            Behold now, praiſe the Lord with vs, and let vs magnifie his name together, for the Lord hath done great things for vs: the Lord hath ſo ſet the wheeles of his admirable prouidence, and ſo carried his bleſſed hand this yeare paſt in all his proceedings round about vs, and ſo touched the hearts 1. Sam. 10. 26. of all this kingdome, as hauing a purpoſe to accompliſh a great worke in the building of his Church, and in his good time to lift vp ſuch ſtrokes as ſhall deſtroy for euer, euery enemie that doth euill to the ſanctuarie. Pſal. 74. 3.
            
            The Lords compaſſions faile not: O Lord withdraw 
               Pſal. 85. 3. 4. 
               thine anger, and turne backe the fiercenes of thy wrath: Turne vs O God of our ſaluation, turne thou vs 
               Lam. 5. 21. 
               vnto thee that wee may bee turned, and cauſe thy face

to ſhine vpon vs, that we may be ſaued. Ceaſe not to pray for vs, that we may not returne to our olde ſecuritie and vnthankfulnes any more, but that wee may attend what the Lord ſaith, for now he begins to ſpeake peace vnto his people, and vnto his Saints, crying in their doores euen as it Prou. 1. Pſal. 85. 8. were in the open ſtreetes, that they returne not againe to folly.
            
            Now we ſee that the counſell of the Lord ſhall ſtand for euer, and that the thoughts of his heart ſhall continue throughout all ages: for he hath broken the counſels of the wicked, who haue euer ſought to be poſſeſt of Gods habitations: but the Lord ſhall make them as ſtubble before the wind, the Lord will perſecute them with his tempeſt, and make them afraid with his ſtorme. O Lord fill their 
               Pſal. 83. 16. 
               faces with ſhame, that they may ſeeke thy name. Finally, the Lord hath made our corners full and abounding with diuers forts of bleſſings: hee hath made Pſal. 144. 13. the barres of our gates ſtrong, and hath ſetled peace in our borders: he hath ſtabliſhed his Goſpell and holy couenant with vs: he hath taught vs to obſerue his iudgements, and his wonderfull adminiſtrations both of his iuſtice and mercie: he Pſal. 147. 13. hath not dealt ſo with any Nation round about vs. Wherefore, O praiſe the Lord with vs: let England and Scotland now with one heart, as with one mouth praiſe God in all the aſſemblies: Pſal. 6. 8. 26. 
               O praiſe the Lord ye that are of the fountaine of Iſrael, praiſeye the Lord.
            
            To returne to our purpoſe, as touching this ſweete treatiſe in hand, I ſay no more but this, (I truſt the reader ſhall finde my words true) that ſo

many common places of diuinity as be here briefely couched, as branches appertaining to this one head, the religious and wiſe (I hope) ſhall finde them as iudicially, comfortably, and compendiouſly ſet downe and knit together, as any one thing of this kinde as yet extant in the Engliſh tongue.
            Next, as for the argument of this booke, our effectuall calling is one principall linke of the golden chaine of the cauſes of our ſaluation. And it is the very firſt (in the execution of Gods eternall decree of our election) which manifeſteth the euerlaſting loue of God in Ieſus Chriſt vnto the heart of euery beleeuer: that almightie God ſhould loue him being his enemie, ſeeke him, and finde him, when he wandered in the maze and vanitie of his owne minde, quicken him when hee lay dead in ſinne, looſe him when he lay faſt bound in the bonds of death, inlighten him when he ſate in extreame darkenes: giuing him the ſpirit of grace, and of faith by the Goſpell, to attend his holy calling, and in time to reioyce with an exceeding ioy Rom. 5. 2. 3. therein.
            Laſtly for the tranſlation, albeit I haue not followed the authors words, yet haue I endeuoured faithfully to deliuer his meaning, in the plaineſt forme, and in words moſt in vſe among the people. Horat. art. non verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus interpres. The Lord giue it a bleſſing, whereſoeuer it ſhall reſt, among Gods elect of both theſe kingdomes.
            Now (right Worſhipfull Maiſter Scot) I come vnto yourſelfe: your moſt chriſtian and holy loue in theſe cold and euill times, as vnto all the Saint,

ſo ſpecially to this good ſeruant of Chriſt, like as it comforted him greatly in his latter dayes: ſo aſſuredly it ſhall much refreſh your owne heart, not onely all your life, but alſo much more (I doubt not) in the very houre of death.
            There be three infallible notes knit together in one Scripture, to iuſtifie our pretious faith vnto our owne hearts, that we may be truely perſwaded we are poſſeſt of that faith which ſhall iuſtifie vs before God: loue to the brethren, hoſpitalitie of loue, and chriſtian ſympathie to the Saints in their 1. 2. afflictions. Loue to the holy members of Chriſt, 3. is often commaunded and commended in Ioſeph, in Moſes, in Nehemias, in Daniel, in Dauid, who being aduanced to great dignities, yet eſteemed they nothing more then the good of the Church, and to become ſeruiceable (as it were) by all meanes to the Saints. To loue the ſeruants of Chriſt, and to be beloued of Rom. 15. 31. Philip. 1. 9. them, it is (as Saint Iohn ſaith) an infallible argument that God hath taken vs by the hand, looſened our 1. Iohn. 3. 8. bands, and tranſlated vs from death to life, and from 1. Pet. 2. 9. darknes into the glorious light of God. All that talke of Charitie, doe not loue the Saints, that is, the liuing members of Chriſt on earth. We may diſcerne our loue to be ſound by theſe notes. Firſt, it is a flame which comes downe from God into our Rom. 5. 5. Luk. 7. 47. hearts, kindling (as it were) within vs, and giuing vs no reſt, till we performe duties to the Saints. And this is that which the Apoſtle meaneth, when he willeth vs to Heb. 10. 24. 
               ſtirre vp one another vnto a paroxyſme of loue. Secondly, hence it comes to paſſe, that loue to the Saints, being neuer colde, is neuer

idle in well doing, and therefore proceedes the ſecond note which the ſame Apoſtle calles Heb. 6. 10. 
               labour 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Pſalm. 16. 4, 5. 
               of loue: for that this loue trauailes by all meanes poſſible, to doe good to the members of Chriſt. Thirdly, next, this loue is ſincere Rom. 12. 9. voide of all diſſimulation. Fourthly and laſtly, it is Hebr. 13. 1. Act 2. 42▪ 46. conſtant, conſuming, as a fire, all offences, Phil. 1. 9. 10. and cannot bee quenched.
            The ſecond marke, in the ſame Scripture, of our moſt holy faith, is Hebr. 13. 2. 
               hoſpitalitie of loue (as the Syriack tranſlation hath it) not of lucre. The Lord gaue often Rom. 12. 10. 11 1. Pet. 4 9. 1. Tim. 3. 2. 15. 20. charge by his Apoſtles concerning this, foreſeeing the neceſſitie and afflictions of the Saints in the tenne bloodie perſecutions, which euen then began and were to follow. The practiſe Hilariter excipere, affabiliter tractare, ami
                     ••
                   dimittere. of this we ſee commended in all ages: in Abraham and Lot receiuing Angels, they receiue them cheerefully, they intertaine and vſe them courteouſly, they diſmiſſe them louingly. So did Bethuel Eleazar, ſo did Iethro Moſes, ſo did Manoah the Angell of God, ſo did the good olde man of Gibeah, the Leuite and his wife; ſo did Obadiah the Prophets, ſo did the widow of Zarephath Elias, ſo did the Sunamite Eliſha, ſo did Mary often receiue Chriſt, ſo did the Tanner and Cornelius Peter, Lydia and the Iayler the Apoſtles, Aquila and Priſcilla, Paul; Phebe, and Stephanus many, and Gaius the whole Church at Corinth. All theſe are Chronicled in the booke of God as moſt memorable preſidents for all ages.
            The third note of the precious faith of Gods elect, in the ſame place annexed: is Chriſtian ſympathy to the ſeruants of Chriſt in all their afflictions.

This grace is found, when loue hath ſet on fire our very Matth 9. 36. Philip. 1. 9. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . bowels (as the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh) that in all their paſſions, it fils vs with a feeling and a tender compaſſion. This ſtirres vp men to Matth 25. 36. viſit the members of Chriſt in all their miſeries, to conſider Pſalm. 41. 1. wiſely of their afflictions, to Rom. 12. 15. mourne when they mourne, to Rom. 12. 13. diſtribute to their wants: and ſo to proceede on to the duties of inſtruction, admonition, conſolation, inſtant and Iam. 5. 13. 20 feruent in prayer, and to adde confeſſion of ſinnes, with faſting, if the ſtate and heauines of the affliction ſo require.
            Theſe things I write vnto you (right Worſhipfull) firſt not ſo much for your inſtruction, as for the edification and confirmation of others, in this frozen age, wherein carnall and ſelfe loue, and all iniquitie increaſeth, and loue to the Saints decreaſeth and waxeth cold, as Chriſt hath Matth. 24. 12 forewarned vs: a manifeſt ſigne that ſauing faith faileth, in moſt places, euen where it is profeſſed moſt. Secondly, I write thus vnto you, for that you haue been taught of God (as I heare) to practiſe theſe things, and to obſerue the Canons of Chriſt in his Goſpell concerning loue to the Saints. This holy ſeruant of Chriſt Maiſter Rollocke, if he were liuing, could and would teſtifie of your ſincere loue, when you intertained him into your owne familie, reſpecting his wants with all compaſſion and tendernes of heart.
            The moſt prouident ruler of Heauen and earth, which hath ſhed, by the working of his holy ſpirit, this precious loue into your heart, will fully repay and recompenſe this your loue, with manifold

comforts of his ſpirit, euen then ſpecially when the comforts and props of this preſent life ſhall moſt be wanting. Now the God of hope fill you with all ioy and peace in beleeuing, that ye may abounde in hope, through the power of the holy Ghoſt, that ſo ye may perſeuer in this your holy faith in Chriſt, and loue to the Saints vnto the end.
            Amen.
            
               Yours to vſe in the Lord Chriſt Ieſus,
HENRIE HOLLAND.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               ALthough the greater part both of authors and tranſlators of bookes may be taxed of officiouſnes, and not a few of vngodlines: yet are there ſome whoſe merits in this kinde doe out-way the demerits of the other. Theſe are either thoſe worthie lightes themſelues, or elſe thoſe ſecond candleſtickes to tranſlate the light into, which God ſpecially in theſe latter yeares hath beſtowed as gifts (to vſe Saint Paules word) vpon his Church to the edification of it. It is true indeede in one ſenſe, that both the one and the other are but candleſtickes, for the light is Gods: but otherwiſe comparatiuely the author is the light, and the tranſlator is as it were an other candleſticke, to tranſlate the light into, and that for thoſe which thorough ignorance of the tongue, could not attaine to the light when it ſhone out of the authors owne lampe. Now although there ſeeme no great gifts to be required in a tranſlator; yet the truth is, that if he be not of good diſcretion, to chooſe the fitteſt workes, of good ſpeech to expreſſe the authors ſentence with fitteſt wordes, and of ſo great apprehenſion, and former ſtore, that by that which he ſeeth in the author, he hath attained to more, then paraduenture the author himſelfe ſaw or minded: his defectiuenes will bring him in daunger of ſhewing what gifts are required in a tranſlator: for a good tranſlator is neither a paraphraſt, nor a periphraſt, which is committed by needeles chaunging or adding words. He ſo behaueth himſelfe that the comparing of the originall, will commend his fidelitie, and that they which know of no originall would take the tranſlator for the author himſelfe. He muſt naturalize his tranſlation for the reader, without miuring the gift of the author in the natiue worke. But theſe ſeeme criticke rules to the irregular, which offend againſt their authors, to pleaſe themſelues: for as there are many tranſlations of vnworthie workes; ſo are there many tranſportations of worthie workes, which like plantes ill taken vp, reioyce not to growe in the ſoyle into which they are tranſlated. And yet neuertheleſſe it cannot without iniurie be denied, that this age hath afforded many excellent tranſlations of excellent and learned authors to the benefit of our people: amongſt whom Maiſter Rollocke the reuerend Author of this worke deſerueth an eminent place, as alſo this worke it ſelfe is very acceptable together with the tranſlators godly labour

in this, and other things commodious to the Church of Chriſt. This inclined me the rather to commend it to thee, in theſe few lines, not as taking vpon me any thing, but as a poore man where he is better knowne, is ſometimes engaged for a rich. This labour is become ours not onely becauſe it is thus well engliſhed, but alſo becauſe the Author is a Scottiſhman, which is now to the wiſe hearted a ſynonymie of an Engliſhman. And it ſhall be to the praiſe of both the Nations to receiue both mutuall and common benefits, without that emulation which was betwixt Iſrael and Iuda. It is a comely thing, (to ſpeake in the words of that King that was ſo miraculouſly reſtored) to declare the ſignes and wonders of the high God, which we ſee this day, euen this vnanimitie in receiuing the King wrought (no doubt) by diuine inſtinct, rather then grace in ſome, which otherwiſe, mendaciter deduntie, as Dauid ſaith. Let vs on the otherſide goe out in our ſinceritie and meete the King of Kings with Hoſanna. And I beſeech you by the wonder of our neighbours, which is our innocent aggregation to this ſcepter: let the ſolution of an obiection by King Henry the ſeuenth of noble memorie, and of ſo renowned wiſedome, be our ſatisfaction, that the ſoueraigntie is deuolued where it is, (not onely by the prouidence, but alſo by the ordinance of God) to the comfortable vniting of that Nation, rather then Nations which at the firſt vpon the matter was indeede but one, though for ſome yeares paſt it were diuided by conceit. Let vs take vp the argument of Abraham: We are brethren, &c. And as this is a worke of vocation, ſo let vs hold the comming of our King to bee the worke of reuocation, to call vs backe to vnitie. And ſo gentle reader I commit thee to the God of peace and vnitie.
            
               Thine in Chriſt,
Francis Marbury.
               
            
         
         
            To the Reader.
            CHriſtian reader, I pray thee pardon all faults in this firſt impreſſion: I could not well be preſent with the workemen for their direction. Some ſchoole poynts and phraſes of ſchoole men doe not ſo well reliſh in the Engliſh tongue, nor could be rendred to my content, whatſoeuer is wanting in word or matter in this edition I will amend in the next if the Lord permit: farewell.
            
               Thine in Chriſt Ieſus,
Henry Holland.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Contents.
            
               
                  1 
                  OF our effectuall calling. 1
               
               
                  2 Of the word of God, or of the couenant in generall; and of the couenant of workes in ſpeciall. 6
               
               
                  3 Of the couenant of Grace. 11
               
               
                  4 Of ſuch as be comprehended in, may truely be ſaid to be vnder, the couenant of God. 27
               
               
                  5 A compariſon of our iudgement and of the aduerſaries, concerning both theſe couenants. 31
               
               
                  6 Of the written word, or of the written couenant of God. 38
               
               
                  7 Of the number of the controuerſies which are concerning the written word: and firſt whether the ſcripture be the word of God. 40
               
               
                  8 How it may appeare that the ſcripture is the word of God, 45
               
               
                  9 Of the firſt proprietie of the ſacred ſcripture. 54
               
               
                  10 Of the ſecond proprietie of the ſacred ſcripture. 57
               
               
                  11 Of the third proprietie of the ſacred ſcripture. 62
               
               
                  12 Of the fourth proprietie. 66
               
               
                  13 Of the fift proprietie of the ſcripture. 70
               
               
                  14 Of the ſixt proprietie of the ſcripture. 74
               
               
                  15 Of the ſeuenth proprietie of the ſcripture. 77
               
               
                  16 Of the eight proprietie of the ſcripture. 80
               
               
                  17 Queſtions more accidentall concerning the holy

Scripture, and firſt of the bookes wherein the ſame is contained. 82
               
               
                  18 Of the authenticall edition of the Bible. 90
               
               
                  19 Of the Greeke edition of the new Teſtament. 97
               
               
                  20 Of the tranſlations of the old Teſtament. 102
               
               
                  21 Of the Syriacke tranſlation of the new Teſtament. 108
               
               
                  22 Of the Latin tranſlations of both teſtaments. 110
               
               
                  23 Of the tranſlation of the Bible into the mother tongue. 113
               
               
                  24 Of ſinne in generall. 127
               
               
                  25 Of originall ſinne. 133
               
               
                  26 Of concupiſcence. 144
               
               
                  27 Of actuall ſinne. 146
               
               
                  28 The controuerſie concerning the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. 153
               
               
                  29 Of iuſtifying faith. 158
               
               
                  30 Of the improper ſignifications of faith. 167
               
               
                  31 The opinion of the aduerſaries concerning faith 176
               
               
                  32 Of hope. 191
               
               
                  33 Of Charitie or Loue. 198
               
               
                  34 Of Repentance. 202
               
               
                  35 How farre a wicked man may proceede in repentance. 210
               
               
                  36 What the iudgement of Papiſts is of repentance. 213
               
               
                  37 Of mans free-will. 216
               
               
                  38 Concerning the free grace of God. 226
               
               
                  39 Of the meanes whereby God from the beginning hath reuealed both his couenants vnto mankinde. 238
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TREATISE OF OVR EFfectuall Calling, and of certaine common places of Theologie contained vnder it.
            
            
               CHAP. 1. Of our effectuall Calling.
               
               
                  GOds effectual calling is that, wherby God calleth out of darkneſſe into 1. God cals by his word preached.
                   his admirable light, from the power of ſatan vnto God, in Chriſt Ieſu, thoſe whom hee knew from eternitie, and predeſtinated vnto life, of his meere fauor, by the promulgation of the couenant of grace, or preaching of the Goſpell.
               Such alſo as be called by the ſame grace of God, anſwer, 2. Man anſwers by beleeuing.
                   and beleeue in him through Ieſus Chriſt. This anſwer is of faith, which is, in verie truth, the condition of the promiſe which is in the couenant of grace. Wherefore our effectuall calling doth conſiſt of the promiſe of the couenant (which is vnder condition of faith) and in faith alſo, which is nothing els but the fulfilling of the condition.
               Therefore there be two parts of our effectual calling, the firſt is the outward calling of ſuch as are predeſtinate Two parts of our effectual calling. vnto life, from darkneſſe vnto light, and that of Gods meere grace; and that, I ſay, by the publication of the couenant

of grace or preaching of the Goſpell. The latter part is their inward faith wrought in them by the ſame grace and Spirit of God, whereby they are conuerted from Sathan vnto God: for I cannot ſee how this ſecond part of our effectual calling, can differ from faith it ſelfe.
               In the firſt part of our effectual calling, firſt we are to conſider the perſons, calling & called. The perſon which calleth vs, properly to ſpeake, is God himſelfe: for he only promiſeth in his couenant, calling thoſe things which bee not as though they were, Roman. 4. ver. 17. The perſons called, are they whom God knew before, and hath predeſtinated vnto life; for whom he hath predeſtinated, them he hath called, Rom. 8. Secondly, in the firſt part of our effectuall calling, the cauſe which moued God hereunto, is his owne ſpeciall grace: for the cauſe of all Gods bleſſings vpon vs is in himſelfe. For as hee did predeſtinate vs in himſelfe, according to the good pleaſure of his owne will, Ephe. 1. 5. ſo hath hee called and iuſtified vs in himſelfe, and ſhall glorifie vs in himſelfe, to the praiſe of the glorie of his grace; that all glorie may be wholy aſcribed vnto him. Thirdly, we be to obſerue the inſtrument of our vocation, which is the couenant publiſhed, Inſtrument of our vocation. or the Goſpell preached. Fourthly, in this former part of our effectuall calling, we bee to conſider the eſtate from which; and the eſtate whereunto we be called. The condition from which we be called, is darkneſſe, the power of Sathan, and that miſerable plight, which is without Chriſt in ſin and death.
               The ſtate whereunto we be called, is light, God himſelfe, and that bleſſed condition of man in Chriſt. Hence it is euident that theſe common places of Diuinitie, Of Gods word, and of ſinne, and the miſerie of mankind, muſt bee referred to this argument of our effectuall calling, as to a moſt generall head in religion.
               In the ſecond part of our effectuall calling, theſe branches muſt be noted. Firſt, that the cauſe wherefore

we anſwer Gods calling, or beleeue in God, is Gods own grace, which worketh in vs this faith by the holy Ghoſt, which is giuen vs with his word: For like as God of his meere grace calleth vs outwardly vnto himſelfe; ſo the ſame his grace and free loue in Ieſus Chriſt kindleth this faith in vs, whereby we anſwer his heauenly calling.
               And in this 2. part of our calling (which we ſay doth 2. Part of our calling faith.
                   conſiſt in faith) if we deſire yet more deeply to ſearch it, there is a double grace or working of God in our hearts▪ The 1. is whē he inlightneth vs by his holy ſpirit, pouring a new & a heauenly light into our mind before ſo blind, as that it neither ſaw, nor could ſee the things which doe belong to the Spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14. 15. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are fooliſhneſſe vnto him, neither can he know them. In the wil which is altogether froward and quite fallen from God, he worketh an vprightneſſe, and in all the affections a new holineſſe. Hence proceedes the new creature, and that new man which is created after God in righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe Ephe. 4. 24.
               The Papiſts call this firſt grace in the faith, and work of the holy Ghoſt, not the creation of any new creature, which was not before, but the ſtirring vp of ſome goodneſſe and ſanctitie, which (as they ſay) was left in nature, Free-will. after the firſt fall of man, which they call alſo free-will, which (they ſay) was not quite loſt in the fall, but leſſened and weakened. But this free-will whereof they ſpeake, is in verie truth nothing els, but that holineſſe of nature and life of God, and the ſpirituall light of man in his firſt creation and innocencie. But of this more in place conuenient. This they ſay then, that after the fall, man retained not only the faculties of his ſoule, but alſo the holy qualities of thoſe powers, only hurt and weakened. And this is that free-will, which they ſay is quickned by Gods preuenting grace, which they define to be an externall motion, ſtanding as it were without, and beating at the

doore of the heart.
               In this firſt grace of God, which we call a new creation of diuine qualities in the ſoule, man ſtandeth meere paſſiuely before God, and as the materiall cauſe of Gods worke. For in this firſt renewing of the ſoule of man, what diuine vertues hath man to work with Gods Spirit, or to helpe the worke of grace? Yet we ſay not that man in this new birth is no more then a trunke or dead tree: for that there is in man (that ſo I may ſpeake) a paſſiue power to receiue that diuine grace, and life of God; as alſo the vſe of reaſon, which dead trees haue not. The aduerſaries ſay, that in quickening of free-will, there is a libertie or ſtrength in it to reiect, or to receiue, that grace which they call preuenting grace. Therefore they giue a fellowworking vnto grace, and a fellow-working vnto freewil.
               The ſecond grace, or the ſecond worke of Gods ſpirit The action of faith. in the ſecond part of our effectuall calling, or in faith, is the verie act of faith, or an action proceeding from this new creature, the action of the mind enlightned in knowing God in Chriſt; of the will ſanctified, in imbracing and apprehending God in Chriſt. And here the principall agent is that verie Spirit of Chriſt, who after the firſt grace and creation abideth and dwelleth in vs, not idle, but euer working ſome good in vs, and by vs. The ſecond agent working with Gods holy Spirit, is the very ſoule of man, or rather the new man, or the new creature in the ſoule and all the faculties thereof. By this the holy Ghoſt (that ſo I may ſpeake) knoweth God; or otherwiſe to ſpeake the ſame; to know God, the holy Ghoſt vſeth the new creature in man: and by this the holy Ghoſt doth embrace and apprehend God in Chriſt. Thus ſpeakes the Apoſtle, Rom. 8. The holy Ghoſt (ſaith hee) maketh interceſſion for vs with ſighes which cannot be expreſſed. Obſerue here how he aſcribeth this action of ſending forth ſighes vnto the Spirit, as to the principall agent.
               In this ſecond grace, which is the action or worke

of faith, we ſtand not as meere paſſiuely, but being moued by the holy Ghoſt we worke our ſelues, as being ſtirred vp to beleeue, we beleeue; and in a word, we worke 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . with Gods Spirit working in vs.
               The Aduerſaries ſay, this ſecond grace in faith is an action of free-will, when as we by our own free-will diſpoſe and prepare our ſelues to a iuſtifying grace, in beleeuing, in hoping, in repenting. In this action they ſay, not the holy Ghoſt is the principall agent, or any motion (to vſe their owne word) of the Spirit; but free-will it ſelfe, which (as they ſay) goes before, whē as that motion of God working together with their free-will, muſt follow after. They ſpeake not a word here of Gods Spirit, either in the firſt or ſecond grace, who works effectually in both, as is aforeſaid: but in ſteede of the holy Ghoſt they talk of, I know not what motion ſtanding without and knocking at the doore. They ſay, this motion ſtirres vp free-will; they ſay it worketh with free-will when it worketh, and prepareth vs vnto the grace of iuſtice or iuſtification. This their doctrine is ſtrange; it ſauoureth not the holie Scripture of God, nor the phraſe of Scripture. Thus farre of Gods grace in faith, or of the ſecond part of our calling, and of the two ſpeciall branches of it.
               Next, in it we are to conſider of the points or conditions before noted, which are the verie ſame with thoſe in our calling afore-going. To this ſecond part of our effectuall calling, referre the doctrine of faith, which in verie truth is the ſame with it. Hope, loue, and repentance follow faith; and Free-will is a common place in diuinitie ſubalterne, or to bee referred vnto that of Repentance.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II. Of the word of God, or of the couenant in generall, and of the couenant of workes in ſpeciall.
               
               
                  THE common place in religion which is concerning The common places of religion how they follow in order. Gods word or couenant, is to be referred vnto this of our effectuall calling, as to a moſt generall heade: next follow theſe points, of ſinne, and of the miſerie of mankind: thirdly, that of faith; then follow hope, loue, and repentance.
               
               Now therefore we are to ſpeake of the word, or of the couenant of God; hauing firſt ſet down this ground, that all the worde of God appertaines to ſome couenant: for God ſpeaks nothing to man without the couenant: for which cauſe al the ſcripture both old and new, wherein al Gods word is contained, beares the name of Gods couenant or teſtament.
               The couenant of God generally is a promiſe, vnder Couenant defined. ſome one certaine condition. And it is twofold: the firſt is the couenant of works; the ſecond is the couenant of grace. Paul Galath. 4. verſ. 24. expreſſelie ſets downe two couenants, which in the olde Teſtament were ſhadowed by two women, as by types, to wit, Hagar the handmaide, and Sarah the freewoman: for ſaith he, theſe be thoſe two couenants. Let vs then ſpeake ſomething of theſe two couenants, and firſt of the couenant of works. The couenant of workes, which may alſo be called a legall or Couenant of works, the firſt ground of it. natural couenant, is founded in nature, which by creation

was pure and holy, and in the law of God, which in the firſt creation was ingrauen in mans hart. For after that God had created man after his owne image pure and holy, and had written his law in his minde, he made a couenant with man, wherein he promiſed him eternall life, vnder the condition of holy and good workes, which ſhould be anſwerable to the holineſſe and goodneſſe of their creation, and conformable to his law. And that nature thus beautified with holineſſe and righteouſnes, and the light of Gods law, is the foundation of the couenant of works, it is very euident: for that it could not well ſtand with the iuſtice of God, to make a couenant vnder condition of good works & perfect obedience to his law, except he had firſt created man pure and holie, and had ingrauen his lawe in his hart, whence thoſe good works might proceed. For this cauſe, when he was to repeat that couenant of workes to the people of Iſrael, he firſt gaue the law written in tables of ſtone: then he made a couenant with his people, ſaying; Doe theſe things, and ye ſhall liue. Therefore the ground of the couenant of works was Note. not Chriſt, nor the grace of God in Chriſt; but the nature of man in the firſt creation holy and perfect, endued alſo with the knowledge of the law. For as touching the couenant of workes, there was no mediator in the beginning betweene God and man, that God ſhould in him, as in and by a mediator, make his couenant with man. And the cauſe that there was no need of a mediator was this: that albeit there were two parties entring into a couenāt, yet there was no ſuch breach or variance betwixt them that they had neede of any mediator to make reconciliation betweene them: for as for the couenant of works, God made this couenant with man, as one friend doth Note. with another. For in the creation we were Gods friends, and not his enemies. Thus far of the grounde of the conant of works.
               The thing promiſed in the couenant of works, is life eternall

firſt, not righteouſnes: for that man, in his creation, was euen then iuſt and perfect, by that original iuſtice, as they call it: vnleſſe you will ſay that the righteouſnes of works was promiſed in that couenant, for which righteouſnes ſake, after that man had wrought it, God would pronounce and declare him to be iuſt. For we are to vnderſtand, that in this couenant there is a double righteouſnes: the firſt is that originall iuſtice, which is nothing elſe but the integritie of nature in that firſt ſtate of man. This iuſtice out of all doubt is not promiſed in the couenant of works, for it is the ground of it. The ſecond iuſtice is that which was to follow the good workes of nature in that integritie, & might be called the iuſtice of works: for after that man had liued godly and iuſtly according to Gods law in that integritie, then he might be ſaid to be iuſt againe, and to be declared of God to be iuſt by his good workes well pleaſing vnto God, and ſo eternall life might be ſaide to be giuen vnto him, as iuſtified by his works. For Paul to the Rom. teacheth, that there may be ſome imputation of righteouſneſſe by good works, if ſo be that works be perfectlie good: Hence come theſe manner of ſpeeches; Abraham was not iuſtified by his works: by workes no fleſh ſhall be iuſtified. Thus far of the promiſe Rom. 4. 2 of the couenant of workes, or of the things promiſed in the couenant of works.
               Now to come vnto the condition: the condition of ye couenant of works, is the condition of good works; of good works, I ſay, not which proceed from Chriſt, or from his The condition of the couenant of works. grace, but frō nature only in the integrity thereof, & being informed with the knowledge of the law, and perfectlie good, as it was in the firſt creation; proceeding, I ſay, from that ground of the couenant of workes. Therefore works meere naturallie good, onlie are required as the condition of the couenant of works. So then by this condition, doe you exclude hence faith in Chriſt? I doe ſo. And do ye except here from the condition of the couenant of

works, all the works of grace and regeneration? I doe except theſe alſo. But the couenant of works is often propounded in the Goſpell, to ſuch as be in grace and in Chriſt Ieſu? for how often is the reward of eternall life promiſed to ſuch as do well? wherefore it may ſeeme that the works of regeneration appertaine alſo to the couenant of works, for that ſuch works be required of them which be vnder grace? I anſwer, the antecedent is falſe: for if at any time we heare or reade in the Goſpell of grace, that good works be required of them which be in Chriſt and iuſtified by him, to that end that they may obtaine eternall life, we may not thinke that God ſpeakes Note. vnto them after the forme of the couenant of works: for in the Goſpel, good works are required of them which be in Chriſt, not ſuch as proceede from their owne nature, or ſuch as they can yeelde of their owne ſtrength, but onely ſuch as proceede from the grace of regeneration. For we neuer finde in the new Teſtament, that they which are in Chriſt, be commanded to do the workes aforeſaide of the couenant of works, which bee naturallie good; or that the couenant of works is ſet before thē, that by it, & the works therof acted by the ſtrēgth of nature, they may receiue eternall life. For thou ſhalt neuer finde it ſaide to them which are in Chriſt: Do this of your own ſtrēgth, that ſo ye may liue: which is the very ſum of ye couenant of works.
               As for that place Math. 19. 17. where Chriſt ſaid to a certaine young man, which called vpon him, ſaying: Maiſter, what good ſhal I do that I may haue eternall life? The Lord anſwered, and ſaide. If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commandements: I graunt that heere hee vnderſtandeth the couenant of works, and that the Lord propoundeth to the young man the forme of the conenant of works. But obſerue that the Lord ſo anſwereth to one that ſought his life and ſaluation by the law, and which did before cleaue vnto the couenant of works, and truſted to works as meritorious. For ſo the couenāt of works

and the rule of the law of works muſt be ſet before euery one which is without Chriſt, ſeeking righteouſneſſe by the law and the works of the law, to this end, if it may be, that by the ſenſe of ſin & the feeling of his owne miſery, he may be prepared to embrace the couenant of grace in Chriſt. For to returne vnto his words: that young man ſaide to the Lorde, What good ſhall I doe? Therefore he ſought ſaluation by workes, and not by faith in Chriſt. So then the Lord anſwered fitly to his queſtion, Doe this, and thou ſhalt liue: Which manner of ſpeaking is neuer wonted to be propounded in the Goſpell to them which haue once imbraced and profeſſed Chriſt. For thoſe good works of nature be neuer required of them, according to the forme of the couenant of works, neither be the promiſes made vnto them vnder condition of any ſuch workes.
               I confeſſe good workes be required of them which be in Chriſt, and iuſtified by him: but all ſuch works belong to grace and regeneration; to grace, I ſay, only; and they be not the works of free will nor of nature. Know this thē, that to ſuch as be in Chriſt, the couenant of works to thē is aboliſhed, & of none effect ſo far forth as by it iuſtificatiō & ſaluation is obtained. I graunt, the law abideth which is the rule of thoſe works, which properlie & ſpecially How far the law is aboliſhed. did firſt appertaine to the couenāt of works: but now it hath another ſpeciall vſe; for it ſerueth for our direction in the workes of grace and ſanctification. So then the law hath ceaſed, as it was the rule of the works of nature required in the couenant of works: but it is ſtill in vſe to them which are in Chriſt, as it is the rule of the works of grace. For the ſame iuſtice of God is vnchangeable: and the law of God is the very image of diuine iuſtice: wherefore the law of God muſt abide for euer, albeit it haue not euer the ſame vſe, nor be not alwaies the rule of the ſame works. But of this we ſhal ſpeak more at large hereafter. It is a queſtion heere, whether in the firſt creation,

good works in the couenant of works, were required of man, as meritorious for the promiſed life? I anſwer, not ſo: But they were due in the creation, as pledges of thankefulneſſe in man to his creatour, for that excellent worke of his creation, and to glorifie God his creator. But it may be obiected, that Paul to the Rom. diſputing againſt the works of nature (for in that epiſtle he diſputing principally againſt this kind of works) he reaſoneth againſt thē, as ſeeming meritorious, & not as duties & teſtimonies of mans thankfulnes vnto God: wherfore it may ſeeme they were commanded vnto man in his creation as meritorious. I anſwer, true it is, Paul diſputes there of thē as of merites, not for that this was his iudgement of them, but becauſe the Iewes had that conceite of them, which were ſo farre blinded, that they thought the good works of nature were not only good and iuſt, but alſo might merit iuſtification and life. But of this blindneſſe of the Iewes, we ſhal ſpeake more at large herafter. Thus farre of the condition of the couenant of works, and of this kinde of couenant accordingly, and as we purpoſed in this preſent treatiſe.
            
            
               CHAP. III. Of the couenant of grace.
               
               
                  IN the free couenant of grace, or of the Goſpel, the firſt grounde is our mediator Ieſus Chriſt, 1. Ground of the couenāt of grace.
                   crucified alſo, and dead: or (which is the ſame in effect) the bloud of the mediator, the vertue whereof is twofold. The firſt ſerues to ſatiſfie the iuſtice and wrath

of God for our ſinnes, for the breach of that couenant of works. The ſecond is, to purchaſe and merit a new grace & mercie of God for vs. And this grace or mercie of God 2. Grounde.
                   obtained by the bloud of the mediator, is ye ſecond ground of the couenant of grace, wherby we ſtand reconciled vnto God, and in grace with him. Wherefore the firſt immediat grounde of the couenant of grace, is Gods free ſauour or mercie (whereby mans miſerie is preſuppoſed) and not nature, or any good thing in it: For that all our naturall goodnes, after the breach of that couenant of works, is quite vaniſhed: that is to ſay, nature as touching holines, iuſtice and wiſdome is vtterlie loſt. For we are not to approue their iudgment which ſay, that the freedome of will, that is, the goodnes and holines of nature, is much worne and weakened (as they ſpeake) in this corrupt nature.
               And thus far of the ground of the couenant of grace. Vpon this ground I ſay, firſt of the bloud of Chriſt; next of God free mercie in Chriſt, the couenant of grace (vſually ſo called) is founded.
               The firſt and principall grace promiſed in this couenant, is righteouſnes; which muſt neceſſarily heere haue the firſt place, for after the breach of the couenant of works, that one firſt originall iuſtice (as they call it) was quite loſt; and vniuſtice did ſucceede into the place thereof. And this iuſtice which is here promiſed in the couenant of grace, is no inherent righteouſneſſe, as that originall iuſtice was: but it is the righteouſneſſe of our mediator Ieſus Chriſt, which is ours by faith, and by the imputation of God; for which cauſe the Apoſtle cals it the righteouſnes of God: for without this imputatiue iuſtice we can not Rom. 3. 20. poſſiblie ſtand before the tribunall of God; and by the imputation of this righteouſneſſe are we ſaid to be iuſtified before God. Next after this kinde of righteouſnes which is by imputation, there is another kind of inherent iuſtice promiſed in the couenant of grace, euen ſuch a

ſanctitie and goodnes of nature as was loſt in the fall of man, and this is but begunne in this life, but perfected in another. And this inherent iuſtice is nothing elſe but life eternal in vs, begunne, I ſay, in earth; and perfected in heauen: And this heauenly and ſpirituall life doth proceede from that righteouſnes of Chriſt which is imputed vnto vs by faith: For that righteouſnes of Chriſt is effectuall in vs vnto eternall life by the ſpirit of Chriſt, who ſanctifieth and quickneth vs. And thus far of the promiſe, which is in the couenant of grace.
               Now it followeth that wee ſee what the condition is of this couenant. The verie name of the couenant of grace, might ſeeme to require no condition; for it is called a free couenant, becauſe God freely, The condition of the couenant of grace. and, as it might ſeeme, without all condition, doth promiſe herein both righteouſnes and life: for he which promiſeth to giue any thing freely, he bindeth not to any condition. But we are to vnderſtand, that grace, here, or the particle freely, doth not exclude all condition, but that only which is in the couenant of workes, which is the condition of the ſtrength of nature, and of works naturally iuſt and good, as we may call them, which can in no wiſe ſtand with Gods free grace in Chriſt Ieſu. For neither that freedome of will, which doth import ſome purity & holines in nature, nor the works of free-will as they call them, can agree with the grace of God in Chriſt Ieſus. What is the condition then, which this word grace or freely, will admit in this couenant of grace? I anſwer, aſſuredly none other thē that which may ſtand with Chriſt, and with Gods free grace: and that is faith only, which is alſo by grace (for it is Gods free gift, Phil. 1. 29. It is giuē vnto you, not onely to beleeue in him, but alſo to ſuffer for his ſake) hauing Chriſt firſt the obiect thereof; and next, Gods free mercie in Chriſt: for faith embraceth Gods mercie in Chriſt, and makes Chriſt effectuall in vs vnto righteouſneſſe and life. For this cauſe Paul, Rom. 4. 16.

ſaith, our inheritance is by faith, that it might come by grace. Ephe. 2. 8. Ye are ſaued by grace, by faith, and that not of your ſelues: that is, as he after expoundeth it, not of works: ſo he concludeth, that ſaluation, becauſe it is of Gods free grace by faith, is the free gift of God. Wherefore we ſee faith ſtands beſt with the grace & mercie of God; as without 
                     Rom. 6. 23. which, Chriſt, and Gods mercie in him, cannot bee effectuall vnto righteouſneſſe and life. For if we receiue not Chriſt by faith, and Gods mercy in Chriſt; Chriſt and the mercie of God can profit vs nothing vnto iuſtification and life. Howbeit we be heere to remember, that whereas God offereth righteouſneſſe and life vnder condition of faith; yet doth he not ſo reſpect faith in vs (which is alſo his owne gift) as he doth the obiect of faith, which is Chriſt, and his owne free mercy in Chriſt, which muſt be apprehended by faith: for it is not ſo much our faith apprehending, as Chriſt himſelfe, and Gods mercy apprehended in him, that is the cauſe wherefore God performeth the promiſe of his couenant vnto vs, to our iuſtification and ſaluation. Wherefore the condition of the couenant of grace is not faith onely, nor the obiect of faith only, which is Chriſt; but faith with Chriſt, that is, The condition of the couenant of grace. the faith that ſhall apprehend Chriſt; or Chriſt with faith, that is, Chriſt which is to bee apprehended by faith. Note then briefly this, howe theſe three are one in ſubſtance, the ground of the couenant of grace; the condition of it; and the cauſe wherefore God performeth the condition: yet in reaſon they differ ſomething. For Ieſus Chriſt is the ground, being abſolutely conſidered, without any reſpect of application vnto vs. But Chriſt is the condition of the couenant, as he is to be applied vnto vs, and muſt be embraced by faith: for euerie condition is of a future thing to be done: And the cauſe alſo of the performance of the couenant, is Ieſus Chriſt alreadie embraced, and applied vnto vs by faith, Wheras Paul then ſaith, that we are iuſtified by faith, his meaning is, that wee are

iuſtified by Chriſt applied vnto vs by faith alreadie in our effectuall calling; which by order of nature goeth euer before the benefite of iuſtification.
               It may be heere demaunded, whether the works of grace and regeneration (as they are called) haue not ſome place in the condition of the couenant of grace: for all the good works of nature are hence excluded. I anſwer, that the very works of regeneration are not contained in the condition of the couenant of grace. Firſt, for that the couenant of grace is made with the vniuſt and vnregenerate: now how can their works be iuſt & good? Next, in the couenant of grace both regeneration it ſelfe, and all the holy fruits thereof are promiſed: for in it all the benefits of Chriſt be promiſed the beleeuers: Now then, the promiſe of the couenant muſt neceſſarily differ from the condition of the couenant. But this you will Obiection. ſay: It is euident, & that in many places of the new Teſtament, that life eternall, or, as they ſay, the reward of eternall life is often promiſed vnder the condition of good works, that is, the works of regeneration, as 1. Timoth. 4. Godlineſſe is profitable vnto all things, hauing the promiſes both of this life, and of the life to come. Luke 14. It ſhall be repaid thee in the day of the reſurrection of the iuſt. Matth. 5. Your reward is great in heauen. Matt. 19. He ſhall not loſe his reward. Gal. 6. Let vs not be wearie in weldoing, for in due ſeaſon we ſhall reape, if we faint not. Ephe. 6. Knowing this, that what good ſoeuer euerie man doth, that he ſhall receiue of the Lord. Heb. 6. The Lord is not vniuſt to forget your worke, and the loue which ye miniſtred vnto the ſaints. 2. Theſſ. 1. 6. Notwithſtanding it is a righteous thing with God to render affliction in like manner to them which afflict you, and vnto you which are afflicted reſt with vs. To theſe I anſwer: In my Anſwer. Three kinds of promiſes in the Goſpell. iudgment there are three diſtinct kinds of promiſes in the Goſpell. The firſt, is the promiſe of the couenant of works, wherein eternall life is promiſed vnder condition of works done by the ſtrength of nature. Theſecond,

is the promiſe of the couenant of grace, which is propounded vnder condition of faith. The third kind of promiſes, are thoſe particular and ſpecial promiſes, which are to be referred to the couenant of grace, found euery where in the Goſpell, and made vnder condition of the works of grace and regeneration.
               Theſe three kinds of promiſes differ firſt in conditiō; next, in propriety; thirdly, in ſubiect; fourthly, in end and vſe. Firſt thē, they differ in condition: for ye promiſe in the Firſt difference. couenant of works, is vnder condition of ye works of nature, & the ſtrength therof: In the couenant of grace, the promiſe is vnder condition of faith in Chriſt: In the promiſes which I cal particular or ſpecial promiſes, there is a cōdition of works indeed, but of the works of grace and regeneration, and not of the works of nature, or any naturall facultie. Secondly, theſe promiſes differ in proprietie: for the promiſe in the couenant of workes is Second differēce. meerely legall, and requires the condition of works done only by the ſtrength of nature, commanded in the lawe, and to be done according to the ſtrict rule of Gods law: and the works of nature, or wrought by natural ſtrength, are properly called the works of the law, Rom. 9. 32. And the promiſe in the couenant of grace is not legall, but meerely Euangelicall, for the condition here is not of any worke morall and naturall, but of faith in Chriſt, and of Chriſt himſelfe to bee apprehended by faith. Laſtly, thoſe particular promiſes, they are partly Euangelicall, partly legall: for the condition is of workes which proceed from grace and regeneration, and therefore of ſuch works as in regard of their originall, may truly be called Euangelicall works: but becauſe the law morall is the rule of them, in this reſpect they may alſo be called legall works. Thirdly, theſe promiſes differ in ſubiect, becauſe Third differēce. the promiſe in the couenant of works, is propounded to them, which now after the breach of that firſt couenant of works, lie dead in ſins & offences, hauing notwithſtanding Ephe. 2. 1.
                  
for the time no ſenſe of ſin nor death. The promiſe in the couenant of grace is giuen to them, which are alſo dead in ſinnes and tranſgreſſions, but hauing ſome feeling of ſinne, of death, and of their owne miſerie wrought in them, by the law and legall couenant: and as for thoſe particular promiſes, they are propoſed to them which are alreadie iuſtified & renewed by faith in Chriſt. Laſtly, theſe promiſes differ in vſe and end; for the end of the couenant of works is, that wretched ſinners, which 4. difference.
                   are void of ſenſe of their ſin and miſerie, may be awakened to feele and acknowledge their owne ſinne and miſerie, that is (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh Rom. 7. 9. 10.) that ſinne may reuiue in them, and that they may die, that is, they may feele that they be dead in ſinnes and offences. Of this vſe of the law, ſee Rom. 3. 19. 20. 11. 32. Gal. 3. 22. and 5. 23. This is the vſe then of the couenant of works, to worke in vs the ſenſe of ſinne and miſerie, and to prepare men to receiue grace. Therefore the doctrine of the Goſpell begins with the legall doctrine of works, and of the lawe morall: for the Goſpell ſhould preach and promiſe in vaine righteouſneſſe and life to the beleeuers, if they were not firſt prepared by feeling their owne corruption, and miſerable condition to heare and receiue grace by the Goſpell. For this cauſe Chriſt himſelfe firſt, Matth. 5. 17. and after; freeth and reſtoreth the law as pure from the leuen of the Phariſees, expounding 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the perfection and exact ſeuerity thereof, for this very cauſe, that men by this light of the couenant of works & law morall, might acknowledge how miſerable they be by nature, and ſo might hereby bee prepared to embrace the couenant of Grace. So did Chriſt prepare that rich young man (which came vnto him to be ſchooled, as hee made ſhew) to entertaine the couenant of grace: Wilt thou (ſaith he) enter into life? Keepe the commandements. Paul begins his doctrine in the Epiſtle to the Romans from the law and couenant of works, and ſpends neere

his three firſt chapters of his Epiſtle in this doctrine, to this end, that he might conclude all vnder ſinne and condemnation, and ſo might prepare men to the doctrine of grace, which begins Rom. 3. 21. So Gal. 4. 21. he teacheth the Galathians that would be vnder the law (as he ſpeaketh) their miſerable ſeruitude, which be in that condition; and how at the laſt they are caſt out of Gods kingdom: for this verie cauſe, that the Galathians renouncing all confidence in that righteouſneſſe, which is by the law & couenant of works, might lay hold on that righteouſneſſe which is by faith and grace. This might appeare by manie arguments, which now I willingly paſſe ouer. The end and vſe of the promiſe in the couenant of grace is, that men caſt downe and humbled in the ſight of their owne ſinne and miſerie by the legall couenant, might be raiſed vp and comforted by hearing and receiuing that righteouſneſſe and life, which is freely promiſed and offered to the beleeuers in the Goſpell. Of this vſe reade Rom. 5. 1. Therefore being iuſtified by faith, we haue peace with God. This is the proper end of the Euangelical doctrine: therefore the ſecond and principall part of the Goſpell doth conſiſt in the doctrine of the couenant of grace, which is properly and principally to beare this title of an Euangelicall doctrine; teaching vs what Chriſt our mediator is; what his humiliation firſt, next his glorification; and then what benefits, life, and righteouſnes we get by him: and theſe be the ſpeciall branches of the Goſpell, and of that ioyfull meſſage of our ſaluation. Laſt of al, the vſe of thoſe particular promiſes is, that Gods Elect, iuſtified, renewed, comforted, and quieted in their conſciences, may teſtifie their thankfulneſſe by their holy obedience and good works. The Apoſtle noteth this end, Tit. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14. For that grace of God which bringeth ſaluation vnto all men hath ſhined: teaching vs, that renouncing vngodlineſſe and worldly luſts, we liue ſoberly, iuſtly, and godly in this preſent world. And for that this is the end

of theſe promiſes, they haue alſo their place in the third part of the doctrine of the Goſpell, which concernes the life and Chriſtian conuerſation of the Saints: for which cauſe ye haue theſe promiſes often in the Goſpell, annexed to exhortations, admonitions, and inſtructions concerning manners, as Gal. 6. after that (verſ. 6.) he had giuen in charge, that he which is catechiſed in the word, ſhould miniſter vnto him which teacheth him, of all his goods: hee forthwith addeth, verſ. 7. and 8. a promiſe and a threatning. Againe, verſ. 9. hauing warned them not to waxe wearie in weldoing, he addeth this promiſe, We ſhall reape in due time, if we faint not. So, Ephe. 6. after that his charge giuen to ſeruants to ſerue their maiſters in al vprightnes, ver. 5. 6. 7. he addeth a promiſe v. 8. Whatſoeuer good thing euery man doth, that ſhall he receiue of the Lord. The like teſtimonies are euery where, in which ye may find admonitions, exhortations and inſtructions confirmed with promiſes and threatnings. Of this kind then are al thoſe promiſes before mentioned, which muſt be carefully diſcerned, firſt, from the couenant of works; next, from the couenant of grace, whereſoeuer we find them in reading the new Teſtament.
               And finally, concerning the aforeſaid promiſes wee are to obſerue, firſt, that the condition of the works of regeneration and grace is required of beleeuers, not as merits, but as duties only, and teſtimonies of their thankfulnes to God their redeemer: like as the conditiō in the couenant of works is not of merits, but of duties onely, and of teſtimonies of their thankfulnes to God their creator. I grant that the works of regeneration are neceſſarie vnto eternall life promiſed in the Goſpell, but not as merits, or meritorious cauſes: but as the means and way, wherein we are to proceed on frō iuſtification and regeneration vnto glorie and life eternall. They may alſo be ſaid to bee cauſes, after a ſort: for they pleaſe God in Chriſt, and in ſome reſpects moue him, but not as merits,

but as effects of the only merit of Ieſus Chriſt, whereof they teſtifie. But of this wee ſhall ſpeake in place more conuenient. Secōdly, note in this third kind of promiſes, that the condition therein is of the works of regeneration, which are alſo moſt perfect in their kind: for the great iuſtice of God cannot beare the leaſt defect. The rule alſo of all works is the iuſtice of God, whereof ye haue a certaine expreſſe image in the morall lawe. Wherefore the condition here is of works moſt abſolute, but not in thē
                  ſelues, but in Chriſt, and in the perfection of his ſatisfaction and merit. If ye obiect: Doth not the lawe require that perfection of works, which is in works themſelues? I anſwer, it doth ſo; of them which are vnder the couenant of works, vnder the law, and without Chriſt: but as for ſuch as be in the couenant of grace and in Chriſt, it doth not require a perfection in the works of regeneration, but is content with the good beginnings which the beleeuers haue, the perfection of whoſe obedience is ſupplied, and to be found in Chriſt Ieſus. For like as hee iuſtified vs of his meere grace in Chriſt, and by his merit, being his enemies: ſo now much more will he accept vs, 
                     Note. Rom. 5. 9. 10. 11. 12. being iuſtified and regenerate; I ſay, much more will he accept vs, being his friends, and our obedience in Chriſt euen for his merit ſake. For ſo the Apoſtle concludeth, Rom. 5. 9. Being iuſtified therefore by his bloud, we ſhall now much more be preſerued from wrath by him. And thus farre of theſe three kinds of promiſes which are diſtinctly ſet downe in the New Teſtament.
               And here this might alſo be demāded, whether theſe 3. kinds of promiſes be not as diſtinctly to be found in the old Teſtament? I anſwer, they may ſo be found; yet not without ſome difference: for that the old Teſtament did ſerue ſpecially to prepare men to receiue Chriſt, which in his appointed time was to come. For the law was a ſchoolemaiſter vnto Chriſt, Gal. 3. Therefore the greateſt part of the old Teſtament is ſpent in propounding, repeating,

expounding the couenant of workes. And becauſe Chriſt was not as yet manifeſted in the fleſh; therefore the doctrine of the couenant of grace, is more ſparinglie and darkelie ſet forth in it. Finallie, as touching the faithfull in the old Teſtament which embraced Chriſt the mediator of the couenant of grace, howſoeuer then but ſhadowed before their eies in types and figures; to them, I ſay, being iuſtified in him which was to come, & regenerat by his grace, the promiſes of eternal life were made vnder condition of the works of regeneration: as this promiſe made to Abraham Gen. 17. 1. Walke thou before 
                  
                     Rom 4▪
                   
                  me and be thou vpright, & I wil make my couenant with thee. This promiſe was made to Abraham being before iuſtified by faith and renewed by grace. The like promiſes are often in the old Teſtament annexed to moral precepts, as in the books of the Prouerbs and Eccleſiaſtes. And thus farre of the couenant of grace, the ground thereof, the promiſe thereof, and the condition thereof.
               Now it remaineth that we anſwere a queſtion or two concerning this couenant: The firſt, whether the couenant of works be aboliſhed, and of none effect to ſuch as 1. vſe of the couenant of workes or of the Morall lawe.
                   be vnder the couenant of grace? I anſwer, the couenant of works hath two endes and vſes. The firſt and proper end & vſe of the couenant of works is, that men by it may be iuſtified and ſaued, or otherwiſe, condemned. The couenant of works had this vſe in Adam before his fall, that Adam by it might be iuſtified and liue: After the fall, it hath the ſame vſe in the vnregenerate, elect and reprobate, to wit, to iuſtifie and ſaue them, or to condemne them. And for as much as it can not iuſtifie them becauſe of their corruption, Rom. 8. 3. it followeth that it muſt neceſſarilie condemne them: And the verie vnbeleeuing and vnregenerat doe otherwhiles feele this condemnation in themſelues. Of this vſe, read Rom. 3. 19. where he ſayth, that by the law Euery mouth is ſtopped, and made obnoxious to the condemnation of God. And of the experience

of this condemnation reade Rom. 7. 10. I, ſaith he, when the commandement came, was dead, that is, condemned in my conſcience; ſo that I felt in my ſelfe preſent condemnation and death. And albeit this firſt vſe of the couenant of works be cōmon to al vnregenerat, elect and reprobate; yet this wants not ſome difference: for in the elect the acknowledgmēt of ſin and condemnation which they haue by the couenant of works, is vnto them a preparatiue to imbrace the couenant of grace: but in the reprobate it is the way to extream deſperation. Thus far of the firſt vſe.
               The ſecond end of the couenant of works is this: It 2. End of the couenant of works.
                   ſerues to driue on and to ſtir vp al beleeuers to march on forwardes in all faith and godlineſſe. This vſe it hath I ſay in the regenerat, who in the legall couenant, or morall law doe deſire principallie to behold as in a glaſſe euermore firſt the holineſſe, maieſtie and iuſtice of God. 1. The vſe of the morall law to the beleeuers.
                   Ro. 7. 12. Therefore the law is holy, and the commandement is holy, iuſt & good. Next they ſee here that which they call the originall holines and iuſtice of man, to wit, 2. the ſame which was in the creation, which is defined to conſiſt, of iuſtice, holines, and wiſdome. Thirdly, they behold here that life eternall, which was to follow that 3. firſt originall iuſtice. Fourthly, they ſee that corruption and vnrighteouſnes which is now in nature after mans 4. fal, but this they ſee by conſequent, as we ſay, one contrary is diſcerned and knowen by another: for while we conſider firſt that infinit iuſtice of God; next our original iuſtice, which are properlie diſcerned by that glaſſe of Gods law and couenant of works, by the light and brightnes of theſe, I ſay, we may take a view of the groſſe darknes, filthineſſe, and deformitie of our corrupt nature. For this cauſe it is ſaid Ro. 3. 20. By the law commeth the knowledg of fin. Fiftly, they ſee herein Gods wrath kindled againſt yt deformitie of nature, ſo contrarie both to Gods iuſtice & to mans original iuſtice: For this cauſe it is ſaid,

Rom. 1. The wrath of God is reuealed from heauen againſt all the vngodlines and vnrighteouſneſſe of men: and Rom. 4. The law cauſeth wrath. Sixtly and laſtly, they behold how preſent death followeth that wrath of God: Ro. 1. 32. Which men though they knew the law of God, how that they which commit ſuch things are worthie of death, yet not onelie doe the ſame, but alſo fauour them that doe them: & Chap. 7. 9 10. When the commandement came, I dyed.
               
               The regenerate when they conſider theſe things in the law and couenant of workes, they are forthwith terrified with that heauie ſpectacle 1. of their ſinne; 2. of the wrath of God againſt ſinne; 3. of eternall death which followeth Gods wrath: And then doe they more & more relinquiſh and renounce 1. that legall righteouſnes required in the couenant of workes; 2. that originall iuſtice and all opinion of free-will; 3. that life and ſafety which followeth that legal righteouſnes of works. And hauing renounced all confidence in theſe thinges, with like in deuour they follow hard after Chriſt by conuerſion and faith, to this end, that they may finde in him, firſt that mercie of God in Chriſt, contrarie to that iuſtice of God: ſecondlie, they ſeeke for that imputatiue iuſtice (as they call it) ſo contrarie to their owne righteouſnes, & to that originall iuſtice of the law or of works. Thirdly, they labour for that ſanctification and regeneration, that ſo they may bring forth the fruites of the ſpirit. Fourthly, they waite for to attaine that life eternall, which is giuen vs of Gods free grace in and by that imputed righteouſnes of Chriſt.
               If we were poſſeſt in this life of a perfect faith in Chriſt, A perfect faith we haue not. and ſo of perfect holines; then I graunt the beleeuers ſhould not need this terrible glaſſe of the law and of the couenant of works. But becauſe vnbeleefe ſtill reſteth in this our nature, and the reliques of that inherent contagion ſtill abide in vs, and for that ſo long as wee liue here, neither our faith nor holineſſe can be perfected:

Therfore to weaken more & more our vnbelcefe and inherent ſinne in vs, and more and more to increaſe faith and holineſſe, we haue euer need of this terrible glaſſe, as a continuall ſeuere Schoolemaiſter, which euer caſting many feares before vs may driue vs to the faith of Chriſt, and to ſanctimonie of life.
               Now then ſeeing it is euident that there is a double vſe of the couenant of workes, the anſwer to the queſtion aforegoing is eaſie. For this we auouch, that, as touching the former vſe, the couenant of works is aboliſhed to them which are vnder grace. To this the Apoſtle pointeth when he ſaith Ro. 6. 15. Yee are not vnder the law, but vnder grace. Gal. 4. that he might redeeme them which were vnder the law. Rom. 7. Being dead to the law we are now free from the law. 2. Cor. 3. 11. For if that which ſhould be aboliſhed was glorious. But as for this ſecond vſe it is not aboliſhed. This diſtinction is commonlie receiued, that the law & legall couenant is aboliſhed, as it is a condemning tyrant: and not to be aboliſhed as it is a Schoolemaiſter to chaſten vs, and with terrours to driue vs vnto Chriſt. For this ſecond vſe we haue an example in Paul after his regeneration. Ro. 7. 14. &c. For when he conſiders in the glaſſe of Gods law the ſpiritualitie (that ſo I may ſpeak) the holines and goodnes of the law firſt: next his owne carnalitie (to vſe that worde) and rebellion, and laſtly death it ſelfe: firſt he breaks forth into theſe wordes, Miſerable man that I am, who ſhall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? Next he flieth to the mercie of God in Chriſt Ieſu, ſaying, I giue God thanks in Chriſt Ieſus. And 2. Cor. 5. 11. Paul ſayth of himſelfe, he was inforced and mooued forwardes to doe duties in his calling becauſe of the terrors of the Lord ſet downe and offered vnto him in and by his law: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we bring men to the faith. The ſame Apoſtle Galath. 4. 21. when he ſaw that the Galathians which began to beleeue in Chriſt, notwithſtanding not to cleaue vnto

him only by faith, but to make a mixture of the law with Chriſt; he ſets before them this glaſſe of Gods law, or of the couenant of works: wherein he layeth open firſt the miſerable bondage of ſuch as are vnder the law; next their finall reiection: to this end and purpoſe, that they might be mooued by this fearefull ſpeculation to ſtick to Chriſt only, and to the couenant of grace.
               Hereunto refer thoſe cōminations which we find partly annexed to the couenant of grace in the ſecōd part of the Euangelicall doctrine: partly put to the particular promiſes, inſtructions, exhortations in the 3. part of the doctrine of the Goſpell. For this is the duty of the moral law & of the couenant of works, to containe ye beleeuers with threatnings and terrors within the bounds of the grace of Chriſt, and of his Goſpell. Io. 3. 18. we haue a commination of the law or of the couenant of works, added to Note the office of the law to beleeuers. the couenant of grace: He that beleeueth in him, is not condemned, this is the conenant of grace: He that beleeueth not, is condemned already: This commination doth properlie appertaine to the law or couenant of works. Rom. 8. 13. He conioineth a threatning of the law or couenant of works with a particular promiſe, wherein life is promiſed vnto ſanctimonie. If ye liue according to the fleſh, ye ſhall die: but if ye mortifie the deeds of the bodie by the ſpirit, ye ſhall liue. See Gal. 6. 8. And thus farre of the firſt queſtion.
               The ſecond queſtion is this: whether the morall law, which we call the decalogue, be aboliſhed to them which 
                     The 2. queſ. whether the lawe be aboliſhed to the regenerat.
                   be vnder the couenant of grace? I anſwer by way of diſtinction: The morall law as it commandeth workes done by the ſtrength of nature, and as it is the rule of all works of this kinde, to wit, of ſuch works as be required in the couenant of works, that is, in reſpect of the firſt and proper vſe thereof (for it concernes properlie the works of nature, which make the condition in the couenant of works) in this reſpect (I ſay) the morall law it ſelfe alſo is aboliſhed to them which are in Chriſt, euen in like manner

as the couenant of works is cancelled and of none effect againſt them. For which cauſe Paul vſeth theſe phraſes, We be not vnder the law, we are dead to the law, we are freed from the law, to wit, either as touching iuſtification, or condēnation. And looke how farre the couenāt of works ſerueth for their vſe which be in grace; ſo farre the law of workes is in vſe for them: And what vſe the beleeuers haue of the couenant of works, we haue alreadie ſhewed. Againe, looke how farre forth the ſame morall law ſerues to giue rules for the works of grace, and attendeth not on the couenant of works, but of grace, and of the Goſpell; ſo farre it reſteth in vſe for the ſeruants of Chriſt. For there is but one rule and law of all good works whatſoeuer, whether they proceede from nature or from grace: like as there is but one and the ſame iuſtice of God, euer like it ſelfe, whereof the law of God is a verie expreſſe image, or a liuelie repreſentation. Thus then the lawe morall abideth for ſuch as bee vnder the Goſpell, yet in ſome reſpect (that is in vſe) changed: for like as all things are become new in Chriſt Ieſus; ſo alſo the law it ſelfe after a ſort is renued. And that the law ſerueth and is in vſe for them which be vnder the couenant of grace, it is very cleere by many ſcriptures. This may appeare by thoſe very teſtimonies which are before produced for the couenant of works, and other ſcriptures many, where the works of the law are commended. Rom. 13. Loue one another; for he that loueth another hath fulfilled the law. Gal. 5. 13. 14. By loue ſerue one another, for all the law is fulfilled in one worde, which is this, Thou ſhalt loue thy Neighbour as thy ſelfe: See Iames 2. 8. &c. And thus farre as we purpoſed, haue we ſpoken of the couenant of grace.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. Of ſuch as be comprehended in, or may truly be ſaide to be vnder, the couenant of God.
               
               
                  NOW it followeth that we ſpeake briefelie of ſuch as be vnder the couenant of God, or (if I may ſo ſpeake) confederates with God. Euery reaſonable creature muſt of neceſſitie be liable to one of both couenants, either that of works, or this of grace. For the very Angels are vnder the couenant of works: but becauſe the Scripture ſpeaks ſo ſparinglie of them, therefore we ſay this onelie in a worde, that they alſo be vnder the couenant of workes, Againe, man muſt bee vnder ſome one couenant. Adam in the ſtate of his innocencie, was vnder the couenant of works: man after the fal, abideth vnder the couenant of works; & to this day life is promiſed him vnder condition of works done by ſtrength of nature: But if he wil not do well, death and the euerlaſting curſe of God is denounced againſt him, ſo long as he is without Chriſt, and without the Goſpell. And being freed from the couenant of works, he is not become a libertine, or not ſubiect to Gods people in grace be not law-les libertines. any couenant, or as it were law-leſſe, but forth with he is admitted to the couenant of grace, and thence forth liueth vnder it. Therefore concerning Angels and men, it is euident, that they are vnder ſome one couenant.
               It is a doubt indeede concerning Chriſt, whether he were then vnder any couenant, when he dwelt among men, and did conuerſe on earth? I anſwere, there be two natures in Chriſt, a diuine and humane: Chriſt as hee is

God, and the Sonne of God, is not vnder the couenant of works or of grace: for that he is no creature, but the bleſſed Creator, to whom, to whoſe couenant and law euerie creature is and muſt be ſubiect. But as he is man, he is vnder the couenant of works; and that in two reſpects. Firſt, Chriſt vnder the couenat of works in what reſpect. in reſpect of himſelfe, becauſe he is a creature; becauſe he is a ſeruant, and made man, and was in the loines of Adam, when that couenant of works was firſt made with him. But wee be to ſpeake ſparingly of that ſtate of the man Chriſt, which is in reſpect of Chriſt himſelf, whether that his humane nature as touching itſelfe, were vnder the couenant of works? whether this nature did purchaſe for it ſelfe life eternall by obſeruation of the couenant of works? Next, I ſay the Or chriſt the Mediator hath ſubiected himſelfe in his humanitie to the law for our ſake.humane nature of Chriſt, is vnder the couenant of works in reſpect of vs; for being vnited to that diuine nature, it is become a mediatour for vs, to  make interceſſion and peace betweene God offended, and man offending. For Chriſt our Mediatour, albeit he be God and man in that perſonal vnion, yet was he made ſubiect to the couenant of works, and to the courſe of the law for vs, properly in reſpect of his humane nature, that, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, he might redeeme vs from the law, and the curſe of the law. See Gal. 4. 4. and 5. After that the fulneſſe of time was come, God ſent his Sonne made of awoman, made ſubiect to the lawe, to redeeme them which vvere vnder the lawe. And Galath. 3. ver. 13. But Chriſt ſaith he, hath redeemed vs from the curſe, while he was made a curſe for vs. Chriſt therefore our mediator ſubiected himſelfe vnto the couenant of works, and vnto the lawe for our ſake: and did both fulfill the condition of the couenant of works, in his holy and good life, euen in the higheſt degree of perfection, as being God and man (euen that moſt holy one of God) in one perſon: and alſo he did vndergoe that curſe, which was denounced againſt man in that couenant of works, if that condition of good and holy works were not kept: for in the couenant

of works ye haue together with the promiſe of life to him who doth well, a commination of euerlaſting death to him who doth not well. For this cauſe Chriſt our mediator, both did wel according to the promiſe, & died alſo according to the curſe denoūced. Wherefore we ſee Chriſt in two reſpect, to wit, in doing & ſuffring, ſubiect to the couenant of works, & to haue moſt perfectly fulfilled it, & that for our ſake, whoſe mediator he is become.
               It may be demaunded, Had it not beene ſufficient for our good, and to the end he might redeeme vs, if he had only liued well and holily, and not alſo ſo to haue ſuffered death for vs? I anſwer, it had not ſufficed: for all his moſt holy & righteous works had not ſatisfied the iuſtice and wrath of God for our ſins, nor merited the mercie of God, reconciliatiō, righteouſnes & life eternal for vs: the reaſon is, for that the iuſtice of God did require, for our breach of Gods couenant, that we ſhould be puniſhed with death eternall, according to the condition denounced and annexed to the promiſe of that couenant. Therefore no good works of our owne, or of any Mediator for vs, after the breach of that couenant of works, could haue ſatisfied the iuſtice of God, which of neceſſity after aſort required the puniſhment and death of the offender, or certainly of ſome mediator in his ſteed. If then all the good & holy works of the Mediator could not satisfie that wrath and iuſtice of God for ſin, it is cleere they could not meritany new grace or mercy of God for vs.
               But you will ſay, that the good and holy works of Chriſt our Mediatour haue wrought ſome part at leaſt of that ſatisfaction, whereby Gods iuſtice was appeaſed for vs: and ſome part of that merit whereby Gods fauour was purchaſed for vs? I anſwer, theſe works did ſerue properly for no part of ſatisfaction or merit for vs: for that to ſpeake properly, the death of Chriſt and his paſſion onely did ſatisfie Gods iuſtice, and merited his mercie for vs.
               
                  
If anie will yet further demaund: May we not diuide the ſatisfaction and merit of Chriſt, into his doings and ſuffrings, that we may ſpeake on this manner, Chriſt by his death and paſſion hath ſatisfied Gods iuſtice, and by his good and holy works he hath merited Gods mercie for vs, that ſo ſatisfaction may bee aſcribed to his death, and merit to his workes; that the righteouſneſſe wherewith wee are iuſtified before God, may bee partly the ſatisfaction which Chriſt perfourmed by his death for vs, partly the merits which he obtained by his works for vs? I anſwer, to ſpeake properly, the ſatisfaction and merit which is by the only paſſion of Chriſt, both He ſaith, we are iuſtified only by the paſſiue righteouſneſſe of Chriſt. was and is our righteouſneſſe, or the ſatisfactorie and meritorious death of Chriſt, or the ſatisfaction which was by Chriſts death, or the merit of his death, or the obedience of Chriſt, as being obedient to his Father vnto the death, the death alſo of the Croſſe; to bee ſhort, that iuſtice of Chriſt, which he obtained when in his paſſion he ſatisfied his Fathers wrath, this is our righteouſneſſe. For we may ſay, that either the death of Chriſt, or his ſatisfaction, or his merit, or his obedience, or his righteouſneſſe is imputed vnto vs for righteouſneſſe. For all theſe are taken for one and the ſame thing.
               But here it may bee replied: If the works of Chriſt cannot properly procure for vs any ſatisfaction, nor merit, nor anie part of ſatisfaction or merit; then it may bee demaunded: What hath beene, and what is the vſe of Chriſts works, or of his actiue obedience, or of the obedience of his life? I anſwer, that the holineſſe of the perſon The actiue obedience of Chriſt, or the righteouſnes and holineſſe of his perſon and life, how it is the ground of the ſatisfactorie and meritorious paſſion of Chriſt. of Chriſt, and of his natures diuine and humane, and of his works, is the verie ground or foundation of the ſatisfaction and merit which wee haue in the paſſion of Chriſt, that is, the excellencie and worthineſſe of that perſon, and of his works did cauſe that his paſſion was both ſatisfactorie and meritorious: for if this perſon which ſuffered, had not beene ſo holy and excellent, as

alſo his life ſo pure and godly, it is moſt certaine that his paſſion could neither haue ſatisfied Gods wrath, nor merited mercie for vs. For which cauſe the Apoſtle Heb. 7. 26. ſpeaking of this ground of this meritorious paſſion of Chriſt, ſaith, that ſuch an high Prieſt it became vs to haue (which is) holy, blameleſſe, vndefiled, ſeparate from ſinners, and made higher then the heauens. And thus farre of Chriſt, and how hee may bee ſaid to be vnder the couenant of works.
               And that he was not vnder the couenant of grace, the matter is ſo cleare, that it needs no diſputation. For the couenant of grace was made in him, and eſtabliſhed in his bloud, and the promiſe in the couenant of grace is made to them, which were vniuſt and dead in ſinne, becauſe of the breach of that couenant of works: and laſtly, Chriſt not vnder the couenant of grace. the condition in the couenant of grace is faith in Chriſt the mediator. Wherfore if ye reſpect either the ground, or condition, or promiſe of the free couenant, Chriſt can not be ſaid to bee vnder it. And thus farre of both couenants, & of them which are vnder the couenant of God, either of works, or of grace.
            
            
               CHAP. V. A compariſon of our iudgment and of the Aduerſaries, concerning both theſe Couenants.
               
               
                  NOw we be to compare a little our aſſertion with the aduerſaries, and to conſider which of both ſides is of ſoundeſt iudgment touching both theſe couenants of works and of grace. A rule to trie the

opinion of the aduerſaries & ours by, can none better be found, thē the doctrine of Paul, ſpeciallie that in the Epiſtle to the Romans, and namely, in that diſputation which he hath of iuſtification in the 3. firſt Chapters, againſt the Iewes of that time. If after conference we ſhall find that our aſſertiō doth conſent with Paules mind and doctrine, and that the aduerſaries are of the ſame minde and iudgment with the Iewes which liued in Pauls time; then it ſhall plainly appeare, that our iudgement is better then the aduerſaries concerning the couenant of God.
               Wherefore in this diſputation of Paul, we are to conſider firſt the mind & purpoſe of ye Apoſtle; next by Pauls doctrine we ſhall gather what the opinion was of thoſe Iewes, againſt whom hee diſputed: this done we will applie both his and their aſſertion, to our ſelues which liue in this age, and to the doctrine & concluſions which we maintaine concerning both theſe couenants. By this means if it ſhall appeare that our doctrine is agreeable to Pauls minde, and that our aduerſaries follow the Iewes; themſelues being witneſſes, it ſhal (I ſay) be manifeſt, that our iudgement is better then theirs in this argument.
               To come then to the point: Paul in that place to the Romans, diſputeth againſt thoſe Iewes which were obſtinate and peruerſe, defending firſt Chriſt and his merit, which is the firſt ground of the couenant of grace; next he diſputeth for grace or the mercie of God, which is the Paules diſputation. Rom. 1. 2. & 3. Chap. ſecond ground of the free couenant; thirdly, he auoucheth againſt thoſe aduerſaries, that the couenant of grace was founded in Chriſt, and in the grace of God; fourthly, he proueth the iuſtification of man, and ſo conſequently the ſaluation▪ which is according to the couenant of grace: he diſputeth, I ſay, for theſe things, firſt againſt nature, which is the grounde of the couenant of workes; next againſt the very couenant of works it ſelfe founded on nature; thirdly, againſt the iuſtification of man, and ſaluation which is by it, ariſing of the iuſt and

good works of nature, according to that couenant of works. I graunt he doth expreſſely fight againſt that iuſtification and ſaluation, which is by the works of nature, required in the couenant of works; and for the iuſtification of faith, which is required in the couenant of grace: but by one and the ſelfe ſame diſputation he concludes both againſt nature and the couenant of works, and for Chriſt, and for Gods grace in him, that is, for the couenant of grace. For the doctrine of antecedents muſt neceſſarilie be included in the doctrine of the conſequent.
               By this purpoſe of Paul, we may ſee what was the drift of thoſe aduerſarie Iewes, and what was their iudgment againſt whom he diſputeth in the Epiſtle to the Rom. Thoſe Iewes, they on the contrarie part did ſtriue for nature, as being the ground of the couenant of works; as alſo for the very couenant of works or of nature; for iuſtification and ſaluation by works, and according to the forme of the couenant of works: They did (I ſay) contend for theſe things, againſt Chriſt, againſt the grace of God in Chriſt, and againſt the couenant of grace, and againſt iuſtification and ſaluation of men, which is according to the couenant of grace. Igraunt, that (as is aforeſaid) the queſtion was of this laſt point, which is iuſtification: but this queſtion includes al the former branches, as is before ſhewed. Wherefore let vs conſider againe that old controuerſie, and the very ground thereof.
               In this controuerſie, by the way note how great the The ſtate and blindneſſe of the Iewes in Pauls time. blindneſſe was of the Iewes of thoſe times: firſt they did not vnderſtand, that mans nature after the fall was loſt, as touching goodnes: they ſaw not their own corruption, neither were they touched with any ſenſe of ſinne or of their owne miſerie. Next, they knew not Chriſt the mediator, and the mercies of God in him. Thirdly, beeing ſo blinde in the premiſſes, they could not conceiue alſo how that couenant of works was aboliſhed in Chriſt. Fourthly, they vnderſtood not that there was any couenant of

made with man in Chriſt Ieſus. Fiftly, they did not conſider that thoſe works of nature (whereby they would be iuſtified, according to the preſcript forme of the couenant of works) they did not conſider, I ſay, that they were but duties only, and teſtimonies of thankfulnes, according to the firſt inſtitution of that couenant; but they did aſcribe ſome meritorious vertue vnto them: for which cauſe the Apoſtle diſputeth againſt the workes of nature, as againſt merits, becauſe of this blinde conceite of the Iewes. And that they were of iudgement that theſe works were meritorious, may appeare by their glorying in workes, againſt which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh often. Where is then the glorying or reioicing? it is excluded, Ro. 3. 27. If Abraham were iuſtified by works, he hath wherein to glory, Rom. 4. 2. Not by works, leaſt any ſhould glory, Eph. 2. 9. For he which glorieth, doth not deeme that he hath receiued that of God, for which he glorieth; and therefore he iudgeth it to be meritorious: What haſt thou, that thou haſt not receiued? And if thou haſt receiued it, wherefore boaſteſt thou, as if thou haddeſt not receiued it? 1. Cor. 4. 7.
               Thus farre of the queſtion in controuerſie, which was betweene Paul and the old Iewes of his time, concerning the couenant of God. How like to this is that, which at this day is controuerſed betweene vs and the Papiſts? We in this age conclude wholy for the onely merit of Our defence at this daie againſt the Papiſts. Chriſt, for the ſole and meere grace and mercie of God in Chriſt, for the couenant of grace, for iuſtification and ſaluation by Chriſt only, by grace only, by faith only (for all theſe Phraſes ſerue to one effect) we diſpute, I ſay, for theſe things againſt the ſtrength of nature, the liberty of free-will, that is, the goodneſſe and holineſſe of nature, againſt the couenant of works, againſt iuſtification by works, euen that which is according to the rule of the couenant of works. The Romaniſts of this age defend that nature is holy in it ſelfe; yet hurt, impoueriſhed, and

weakened (for this is their freedome of wil) they defend, I ſay, the couenant of works, and the works which proceed Free-will. from free-will, Iuſtification by works of free-will, meritorious alſo according to the couenant of workes; for they ſay, the ground of euery merit, whether it be of congruitie or condignitie (to vſe their owne tearmes) is free-will: Theſe things, I ſay, they ſtriue to defend, againſt Chriſt only, and his merit, againſt the only grace of God and mercie in Chriſt, againſt the only couenant of grace, againſt iuſtification which is by Chriſt onely, by the grace of God only, by faith only: for al theſe haue one reſpect and purpoſe.
               Obſerue then here by the way, what the palpable blindneſſe of the Papiſts is, in this cleere light of the Goſpell. Popiſh blindnes. Firſt they ſee not how nature is plainlie loſt, as touching ſanctitie. Secondly, they know not the ſole grace and mercie of God, neither do they vnderſtand what the excellency is of Chriſts merit. Thirdly, they perceiue not how that couenant of works is aboliſhed to them which are in Chriſt, as touching iuſtification. Fourthly, they conceiue not, that the only couenant of grace is made with mankinde after the fall, ſpeciallie now after the incarnation of Chriſt, in the Goſpell, and that vnto iuſtification and life eternall. Fiftly, they ſee not that the works of free will; as they call them, if there were any ſuch, to be duties only and teſtimonies of thankefulneſſe, according to the firſt inſtitution of the couenant of works, which be done by the ſtrength of nature: but aſcribe ſome ſpeciall meritorious vertue vnto them. Wherefore we conclude concerning theſe men, that albeit they be not iuſt of one minde with thoſe old Iewes, againſt whom the Apoſtle diſputed in the Epiſtle to the Romans; yet they hold much on their ſide, ſtriuing to defend that nature is in part good and holy, ſo contending againſt the pure and only grace of God, and to diuide iuſtification and The popiſh iuſtification. mans ſaluation, betweene Chriſt and Gods free grace &

the vertues and workes of nature: whereas notwithſtanding theſe two, nature and grace, can neuer ſtand together in the worke of our ſaluation. For whoſoeuer ſhall conioine or make a mixture of grace and nature in this matter, ſhall quite ouerthrow and extinguiſh grace, which either is alone, or not at all, as Rom. 11. 6. If it be of grace, it is no more of works; for otherwiſe grace were no more grace. And in the Epiſtle to the Galathians, he doth purpoſelie diſpute againſt thoſe Iewes, which did couple together in the matter of iuſtification, the guifts and works of nature, with Chriſt, with the grace of God, and with the Goſpell: And theſe Iewes (as I iudge) the Papiſts ſeeme moſt to reſemble; I meane thoſe Iewes, againſt whom he wrote in the Epiſtle to the Galathians. For in that other epiſtle to the Romans, he diſputeth againſt ſuch Iewes, as did openly deny Chriſt, and reiect him: but to the Galathians his diſputation is againſt ſuch Iewes as were not content with Chriſt only, but would haue Chriſt and the law ioined together. Thus far of the compariſon betweene Paul and vs on the one ſide, the old Iewes and the Papiſts on the other.
               Now becauſe it will be demanded, what Paul thought of the works of regeneration, and what we, and what the aduerſaries thinke alſo; therefore I will touch this queſtion in few wordes. Here then, ſome one will ſay, did Paul then in that diſputation to the Rom. and to the Galathians oppugne the works of grace and regeneration? I anſwer, Paules chiefe purpoſe in that diſputation is againſt the works of nature, which the Iewes thought to be holy and iuſt, and alſo meritorious: he did not reiect the works of regeneration, as they be duties and teſtimonies of thankfulneſſe vnto God, but in that reſpect commends them, Rom. 6. 7. 8. Chapters, and in other places. But as touching the cauſe of iuſtification, he would not haue theſe workes (as we call them) of regeneration, coupled with the grace of God, or with Chriſt, or with faith, as

anie cauſe, or as part of anie meritorious cauſe of ſaluation. To this purpoſe he ſaith Rom. 4. that Abraham himſelfe being regenerate, was not iuſtified before God by anie works of his regeneration: And Rom. 6. hauing commended the works of ſanctification, in the end verſ. 23. where he attributeth death to the merit of ſinne, hee doth not there notwithſtanding aſcribe life eternall to the merit of the works, or fruits of ſanctification: but when he had ſaid, that the wages of ſin is death; he doth clearely auouch it, that eternall life is the free gift of God in Chriſt Ieſu. In which place, if the Apoſtle had beene of this iudgement, that the works of regeneration be in anie reſpect meritorious, aſſuredly he would not ſo paſſe ouer the commendation of the works of regeneration, ſpecially for that this heere is principally intended. Wherefore the Apoſtle to the Romans ſo reiecting the works of nature, which the couenant of works requireth: yet hee vnderſtandeth alſo all kinds of workes, morall, and naturall going before grace and faith, as alſo all ceremoniall works, and the very fruits of regeneration which follow grace and faith; that faith onely, Chriſt only, grace only, may herein be all in all. Thus far of S. Paules iudgment.
               We at this day are of one and the ſame mind with the Apoſtle concerning works of regeneration. Our aduerſaries, granting there be ſuch works, aſcribe too much vnto them: for they will not haue them to be duties and teſtimonies onely of thankfulneſſe vnto God, but alſo that they be meritorious cauſes of that iuſtification, which they call the ſecond iuſtification.
               Again, we are to remember, that the aduerſaries iudgment concerning works of regeneration is, that they proceed not onely from infuſed grace, and firſt iuſtice (as they ſpeake) but alſo from nature and free-will, which works together with that iuſtice, in reſpect whereof alſo they account good works meritorious (as was before The popiſh opinion of good works.
                  
ſhewed) ſo aſcribing their good works in part to that their firſt grace, and in part to free-will. And thus farre of this compariſon: wherby it appeares, whether we or our aduerſaries haue the better, or the more ſound iudgment concerning both couenants, of the grounds of both, nature, grace, and Chriſt: as alſo of the effect of both, which we call mans iuſtification. And laſtly, for that this is the moſt fundamentall point of true religion, we may hereby diſcerne alſo whether we, or the aduerſaries, haue the religion and worſhip of God the more purely & ſoundly eſtabliſhed amongſt vs.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of the written Word, or of the written Couenant of God.
               
               
                  THe word in both couenants was for a long time in the world, euen from Adams time till Moſes, vnwritten; deliuered as from hand to hand, and continued by a liuelie voice: for I paſſe ouer ſuch matters as Ioſeph recordes to be ingrauen in columnes before the floud, as alſo the Apocryphals of Henoch.
               
               And whē as in continuance of time corruptions grew, by theſe traditions, and the puritie of the doctrine of the couenant could not thus be preſerued, and yt God would no longer follow the former courſe onely, he beganne in Moſes time to ordaine and to publiſh another forme, to wit this, to preſerue and to continue the puritie of the

celeſtiall doctrine in written books, approued and ſealed by diuine authoritie and teſtimonie; & the more to commend his written word vnto men, in all ſucceeding ages, God himſelf with his owne hand did firſt write in tables of ſtone the words of the Decalogue: Next after this, he gaue it in charge vnto Moſes, that he ſhould afterwards write and record all things which hee receiued at Gods owne mouth: and that the people of God might be aſſured that the bookes of Moſes came not by mans will, but were giuen by diuine inſpiration, the Lord ſealed 2. Tim. 3. 16, and teſtified theſe writings to be his heauenly oracles, by manie great wonders, before they were written, when they were written, and after they were written. And Moſes wrote the Word of both couenants; of both I ſay, Legall and Euangelicall: but whereas he gaue, but as it were, the firſt lineaments of the Euangelicall couenant, he ſet forth the Legall couenant clearely and in full meaſure. For the legall couenant in the bookes of Moſes is cleerely recommended and vrged, but the Euangelical more darkly ſet before vs. For which cauſe all the doctrine of Moſes is ſaid to be legall: The Law came by Moſes, Ioh. 1.
               After Moſes, God ſtirred vp his Prophets, whoſe writings alſo he confirmed with his great miracles, and gaue them great authoritie: yet were they not to ſet forth any thing diuers or contrary to the doctrine of Moſes and the Patriarches; nor to publiſh any thing, but what was grounded in the bookes of Moſes: but by diuine reuelation they did ad more cleere interpretations, as the morning ſtarre of the new teſtament did more neerely approch. Theſe holy men wrote the ſumme and chiefe heads of their doctrine, euen ſo much as God himſelfe thought meete to be reſerued for poſterity. And theſe records being written, were laid vp with the holie books of Moſes, which were kept in the ſide of the Arke, Ioſh. 24. 26.
               
                  
Finally, after the incarnation of Chriſt, the Euangelicall doctrine, or the Goſpell firſt beganne for certaine yeares to be deliuered by voice, and to be preached by Chriſt himſelfe; and then after by his Apoſtles: And laſtly, the ſame was written by the Apoſtles. The works of Gods law, and nature are commanded in the bookes of the new Teſtament: And the verie moral law is expounded by Chriſt himſelfe, & freed from the leauen and corruption of the Phariſees: but the works of the law and nature, are not recommended to the end, that by them men might be iuſtified and ſaued; but they be commended, either to prepare men to intertaine grace offered, or to quicken them to proceed and grow in grace receiued, as is before ſhewed. Againe, the works of regeneration be commanded, not for iuſtification, but as teſtimonies of that iuſtification which is by faith, and of thankfulnes vnto God: for which cauſe, ſo ſoone as the Apoſtle hath taught the doctrine of faith, he deſcends to the works of the lawe, teaching men that their life and conuerſation muſt be worthie that high calling, whereunto we are called in Chriſt Ieſu. See Ephe. 4. 1. 1. Theſſ. 2. 12. But faith in Chriſt is that, which is principally required in all the books of the new Teſtament. And thus farre generally of the written word of the couenant.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. The number of the controuerſies which are concerning the written Word: and of the firſt controuerſie, whether the Scripture be the word of God.
               
               
                  THere be two kinds of controuerſies concerning the holy Scripture. The firſt kind is of ſuch controuerſies as bee more eſſentiall, that is, which

concerne the very eſſence (if I may ſo ſpeake) or being of the Scripture. The ſecond kind is of thoſe controuerſies which bee more accidentall, and doe not ſo neerely concerne the eſſence of the Scripture. Of the firſt kind there are ten controuerſies or queſtions: the firſt is, Whether the Scripture Propheticall and Apoſtolicall bee the word of God? The ſecond is, How it may appeare that this Scripture is Gods word? The third is, Of the antiquitie of it. The fourth is, Of the perſpicuity or cleerenes of it. The fift is, Of the ſimplicitie or plainneſſe of it. The ſixt is, Of the viuacitie, quickening power, or life of it. The ſeuenth is, Of the ſimple & euident neceſſitie of it. The eight is, Of the perfection & ſufficiencie thereof, that it is ſufficient and perfect in it ſelfe, without all vnwritten verities, or traditions whatſoeuer. The ninth is, Whether the Scripture may bee the iudge to determine all controuerſies? The tenth is, Whether the Scriptures Propheticall and Apoſtolicall muſt haue the chiefe place of excellency, and be in authoritie aboue the Church.
               
               As for thoſe eight controuerſies which follow the two firſt, they are touching the properties of the holie Scripture; and theſe, when we ſhall haue proued that the Scripture is Gods word, will appeare euidently: for they are neceſſary conſequents of that Theoreme. For grant we this, that the Scripture is Gods word; then theſe things muſt follow neceſſarily; firſt, that it is moſt ancient; ſecondly, moſt cleere; thirdly, moſt ſimple or pure; fourthly, moſt powerfull; fiftly, moſt neceſſarie; ſixtly, moſt perfect; ſeuenthly, the greateſt & beſt iudge of all controuerſies without exception; eightly, moſt excellent. But for as much as the aduerſaries denie theſe eight properties, therefore (as is a foreſaid) there is of euerie one of them a ſpeciall controuerſie.
               We are then to handle theſe controuerſies in order: and firſt of that which by due right, & naturally is to haue the firſt place: Whether the Scripture be the word of God? The Aduerſaries graunt generally that the holy Scripture

is the word of God: but when they are brought from the generall to a ſpeciall, they break from vs. To ſpeake more plainely: the word of God at this day, is twofold in the Church of God, 1. immediate. 2. mediate. I call that the Gods written word. immediate word of God, which doth proceede immediately out of Gods owne mouth: and that I call mediate, which the Lord ſpeakes by his preacher or Miniſter. We hold then and auouch, that the holie Scripture is that immediate and primarie word of God, and to bee vnto vs in ſteed of that firſt, immediate, and liuely voice of God himſelfe: yea, that it ſerues vs in place not only of that liuely voice of God, but alſo of the ſecret and inſearchable mind of God, and of Gods vnſpeakeable myſteries. Our arguments are theſe: 1. For that this is the verie will of God. They haue Moſes (ſaith he) and the prophets, that is, the bookes of Moſes and the Prophets, Luk. 16. 29. 2. If we had nothing to ſupply the defect of the liuely voice of God, then doubtleſſe our ſtate were worſe then that of the old Church of the Iewes, which had the oracles of God: but it is againſt all light of reaſon ſo to Rom. 3 1. 2. affirme. 3. Our third reaſon is this: The firſt ground of our faith muſt be, either the liuely voice of God, or the verie mind and counſell of God, or ſomething to ſupply the want of Gods liuely voyce, and of the ſecret mind of God, which muſt alſo be vnto vs no leſſe certaine and firme, then if we heard God himſelfe ſpeake, or did behold and reade the verie mind of God; yea the very diuine oracles written in Gods owne breaſt: but now we haue not the liuely voice of God; now we ſee not the ſecret mind of God: therefore it muſt follow that we haue ſomething to ſupply the want of the liuely voice of God, euen meanes to reueale vnto vs the ſecret mind of God: and nothing can do this, but the ſacred Scripture: therefore Gods holy written word is, and muſt be vnto vs as the verie voice, and as the verie mind or wil of God himſelfe manifeſted vnto vs. The fourth reaſon. The Scripture

containes all thoſe things which God hath ſpoken in elder ages, and what God himſelfe hath decreed in his ſecret counſell (ſo farre as is meete for vs to know) concerning our life and ſaluation: Ergo, &c. Thus far of the immediate word of God. The mediate voice of God, we call the voice of the holy and true Church of God: for albeit men ſpeake, yet the word ſpoken, is the word of God himſelfe.
               Here the aduerſaries riſe vp, and contend, that the voice of the Church muſt haue the priority of excellencie, and that it ſupplieth the want of Gods liuely voice, and the manifeſtation of his mind, rather or better then the Scripture: for, ſay they, the voice of the Church is a Popiſh Obiection cōcerning the teſtimonie and the authority of the Church before the Scripture. Scripture written, not with the penne of any Scribe, but by Gods owne finger in the heart of the Church: therefore the voice or teſtimonie of the Church, ought to bee accounted the principall voice of God: For it is a liuely voice, proceedings from the liuing heart of the Church, wherein God hath ingrauen all truth with the finger of his owne Spirit: whereas the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apoſtles, albeit they were deliuered, and ſpoken by God himſelfe, yet they were not written by Gods owne hand, but by the Prophets and Apoſtles, which were the pen-men: Again, they were not written in ye liuing hearts of men, but in papers, and books, or tables. Hence therefore it followeth, that this ſcripture, which is found in the heart of the Church, is the principall Scripture of God, and that the voice of the holy Church, is that moſt excellent voice of God, & ought to be vnto vs, as the immediate voice of God, & in ſteed of the ſecret counſel of God.
               I anſwer: true it is, the teſtimonie of the Church is a liuely voice, proceeding from a liuing heart, ſanctified by the holy ghoſt (for we ſpeake of the true Church:) But firſt I ſay, that the only Scripture prophetical and apoſtolical, is to be accounted that Scripture which was written by Gods owne finger, and that immediate word of

God. Next, I ſay, that the heart of the Church is taught and ſanctified by the Spirit of the Scripture; and that the Scripture which is in the heart of the Church is nothing els, but a certain tranſcript (that ſo I may ſpeak) or a copy, which the holy Ghoſt hath written in our hearts, according to that ancient and authenticall copie, which is the holy Scripture. For the holy Ghoſt teacheth the Church nothing now, but that which is written; and doth by the ſcripture after a ſort, beget the Church: & the Scripture is the mother, the Church is the daughter; the Scripture is the miſtreſſe, the Church is the ſcholler. Thirdly, I adde that the knowledge of the truth, which is in the heart of the Church by means of the ſcripture, is not ſo perfect nor ſo abſolute, as is the holy Scripture. And laſtly, I ſay, that the Church being inlightened and renewed but in part, may erre from the truth, euen in the greateſt matter of waight, and that it doth erre ſo often as it forſakes the canon and rule of the ſacred Scripture.
               Their former aſſertion being thus caſt downe, it is euident that the voice of the Church (I vnderſtand here the true church only, not that whooriſh church of Rome) the voice of the Church (I ſay) is not that primarie and moſt excellent word of God, nor ought to be vnto vs in ſteed of the liuely and immediate voice of God; nor to be reputed for Gods minde and counſell; but this prerogatiue is due only to the ſacred Scripture. I ad further, that if thou doeſt firſt not ſo much reſpect the truth it ſelfe, which the Church ſpeaketh, as the inſtruments of the ſpeech vttered, which are men: next, if ye compare the voice of the Church ſpeaking with the ſacred Scripture it ſelfe, it doth not deſerue at all to be called by the name of Gods word, but may more properlie be called the worde and teſtimony of man. For Chriſt himſelfe calles that teſtimonie which Iohn the Baptiſt gaue of him, the teſtimony of man. I receiue not, (ſaith he) or deſire not the teſtimnoie of man, Ioh. 5. 34. Be it ſo, that the teſtimonie

of the Church be true, & agreeable to the holy ſcripture, notwithſtanding it is truly called an humane teſtimonie, whether yee reſpect the men which ſpeake, or compare their teſtimonie with that, which doth proceed from the mouth of God and Chriſt himſelfe.
               But it may be replyed, that the very Apoſtles and Prophets, which writte and ſpake all theſe things, which we haue in the Scriptures, were men in like manner: & therefore all the Scriptures are but an humane teſtimonie. I anſwere, that I denie not all is obiected, if we were to eſteeme the words or writings of an Apoſtle or Prophet, as they are inſtruments and Miniſters, or if this were to be compared with the very liuely voice of God and Chriſt himſelfe. For in reſpect of the inſtruments, (if we compare the words or writings of theſe men, with the words and writings of God himſelfe) theirs (I ſay) muſt come after and giue place vnto this, and muſt beare the name of an humane teſtimonie: for ſo the teſtimony of Iohn Baptiſt himſelfe, as being an inſtrument in compariſon of Chriſt the Lord of life, was called the record of man. Wherefore when we auouch that the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall Scripture is the immediate teſtimonie of God himſelfe, we make no compariſon with the liuelie voice of God himſelfe; neither doe we ſo much reſpect what Organs the Holy-Ghoſt vſed to ſet forth the Scriptures: but we conſider the matter it ſelfe, and the diuine oracles which be written, and we ponder in what eſtimation God himſelfe will haue vs to accept the ſacred Scripture; not as the writings and ſayings of men, but as the writings and words of God himſelfe. And we conſider this alſo, as in a compariſon made with the Church: For to vſe that compariſon againe, the voice of the Scripture is Gods owne voice; but the voice of the Church of Chriſt, is called an humane teſtimonie, as the word or writing of a Prophet or an Apoſtle compared with the liuely voice of God, is called the record of man, as Chriſt himſelfe teſtifieth, 10. 5. And thus farre of the 1. controuerſie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII. How it may appeare that the ſcripture is the worde of God.
               
               
                  THE ſecond controuerſie is, by what argument may it appeare, that the ſcripture is the word of God. Like as then the firſt queſtion was this: whether the Scripture bee Gods worde? So the queſtion in hand is this; how and by what euidēce this may appeare, that the Scripture is Gods word? To this I anſwer on this manner: That we haue no need ſimplie of any other light, or of any one ſpeciall euidence to demonſtrate this matter, but that very light which is in the Scripture. For the Scripture (being the firſt and immediat word of God) is of authoritie ſufficient in it ſelfe, 
                     Scriptura eſt 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and ſo likewiſe of it ſelfe m
                     •
                  ſt cleere and euident, and the onely cauſe of al that light which is in the Church, and in the harts of men. For like as the light of the ſun is not perceiued nor to be ſeene by meanes of any S. other light, for that it ſo far exceeds al other bodily & external Note. light: So that ſpirituall light of the Scripture, hath no need in it ſelfe of any other light to ſet forth the ſame, for that of all ſpiritual lights to inlighten the mind withal, it is the moſt bright and moſt beautifull in the world. But whereas euidences and demonſtrations be here demanded for the proofe of this matter, to confirme the Scripture to be Gods word, that is, to be the very light:

the cauſe of this doubtfulneſſe is in our ſelues, for that we be ſo bleere-eyed and ſo blind by nature. Wherefore the arguments which are brought for this purpoſe, ad no light to the light of the Scripture, (which is of it own nature ſo cleere, and can not be made to ſhine more bright by any additiō) but al ſerue to this end; to make that thing manifeſt vnto vs which is moſt euident in it ſelfe, and that our eies may be opened to ſee that moſt ful, and moſt glorious light of the ſacred Scripture: that is, to behold the diuine maieſtie of God ſhining bright, and ſpeaking S. vnto vs in the holy Scripture. Like as if a man were to proue to a blinde man that the Sunne did ſhine, hee would not produce arguments to commend the excellencie of the light of the Sunne, but rather prouide ſuch things, as whereby (if it were poſſible) he might open the eies of the blind, that with his own eies he might looke on the glorious light of the Sunne. Wherefore in a word, whatſoeuer arguments, men aske of vs to demonſtrate the light of the Scripture, they ought not to be demaunded, becauſe of any defect in the Scripture, but in reſpect of vs, becauſe we bee ſo blind, hauing neede of all arguments and helpes, euery way, to open our eies, that our ſight may be quickned to behold this glorious light.
               The arguments and helpes whereby our eies may be opened to behold the light of the Scripture, or God ſpeaking and ſhining in the Scripture, theſe arguments, I ſay, which the godly and learned vſe for this purpoſe, be not of one ſort, but many in number. But if the holy-Ghoſt ſpeaking in the Scripture, doe not firſt of all inſpire our Eph. 1. 16. 17. minds, & opē the eyes of our vnderſtanding (for he alone can do it) aſſuredly it is but loſt labor to ſpeak of any other argument, or help; if we be not taught of God, and by his Eſay. holy ſpirit, all other meanes ſhall profit vs nothing at all. Wherefore the firſt & moſt principal cauſe to effect this, yt we may behold the light of the Scripture (ſo bright in it ſelfe) muſt be the holy ghoſt, teaching vs inwardly in our

hearts, and opening our vnderſtanding, that we may behold that light of the Scripture, and may acknowledge the voice of God, and of Chriſt himſelfe ſpeaking in the Scripture. And the holy Ghoſt alſo himſelfe in this work giues no new light to the Scripture, which is cleere and glorious in it ſelfe, as is aforeſaid; but inlightens our minds, to this end, that we may ſee the great light of the ſacred Scripture. Againe, the holy ghoſt in this great work of our illumination, effecteth it by certaine meanes & inſtruments, whereby it pleaſeth him to work in our hearts and minds.
               The meanes which the H. G. vſeth for this worke, are of two kindes. The firſt is internall: the ſecond is externall. The inwarde meane, is in the very Scripture it ſelfe; the outward is without the Scripture. The internal meane is the principall organ, or inſtrument of Gods ſpirit in this work, and it is that verie light which ſhineth in the Scripture. The holy Ghoſt then doth firſt of al open How the holy Ghoſt firſt teacheth vs to know the Scriptures. the eies of our vnderſtanding, by the light of the Scripture, to diſcerne that light of the Scripture, ſo bright in itſelfe, and ſo vnknowen vnto vs. And hee cleereth our vnderſtāding to ſee the light of the Scripture, by the verie ſcripture it ſelfe; and by the light of the ſcripture, manie waies: For partlie hee effecteth this by producing 1 certaine teſtimonies of Scripture, which plainly teſtifie Inward meanes to ſee the light of the ſcriptures. of this great light of the Scripture, and of God ſpeaking in the Scripture, as that place, al Scripture is giuen by diuine inſpiration, 2. Tim. 3. 16: partly by ſuggeſting into vs, that we obſerue the ſpirituall matters which are 2 therein deſcribed: partly by admoniſhing that we note 3 the ſpirituall words, whereby the ſame ſpirituall matters are expreſſed and ſet before vs: partly by warning vs to 4 obſerue the truth of the diuine oracles by the complement of the prophecies: Againe, he ſets before vs the 5 beautifull harmonie of the Scripture in the old and new Teſtament, the one ſweetly teſtifying of the other: And 6
                  
heere he omitteth not the miracles which be recorded therein, whereby the celeſtiall doctrine had in the beginning a confirmation. Hee putteth vs alſo in minde of the Martyrs, which ſealed ye ſame truth with their blood, as we read in the ſame Scripture. By theſe meanes and ſuch like, the ſpirit teacheth vs out of the very Scripture, that the ſacred Scripture is Gods word, by cleere euidence manifeſting that great & excellent light which is in the Scripture. Ad alſo vnto the aforeſaide meanes, the worth and holineſſe of thoſe men which wrote the Scriptures, as the ſame is teſtified and recorded in the Scriptures. And this is the internall and principall meane and inſtrument of the holy Ghoſt, whereby he teaceth vs, & breedeth faith in our hearts, whereby we be certainly perſwaded that this Scripture is the very word of God.
               There are alſo other meanes without the Scripture, Externall meanes to proue the ſcripture to be God▪ word. whereby the Spirit proueth the ſame thing: as the conſtancie of the Martyrs, which daylie ſeale with their blood the truth of this heauenly doctrine; & the perſecution raiſed by the enemies of the Church againſt it; & the enmitie of Sathan againſt it; and the preſeruation of the diuine oracles of God vnto our times; and to be ſhort, the teſtimonie of the true Church of God for it. All theſe are without or beſide the Scripture, and giue vs a ſecundarie kinde of demonſtration, whereby the holy Ghoſt worketh alſo, as it pleaſeth him, and openeth the eies of our vnderſtanding, inlightening vs to ſee and heare God him-ſelfe ſpeaking and ſhining in the Scripture.
               But here we be to obſerue, that the holy ghoſt doth God rather by theſe meanes the teſtimonie of the Church and couerſation of the ſaints, prepareth vs to receiue the pretious faith. not beget faith in our harts, properlie and principallie, by this ſecond kinde of externall meanes (for the proper and principall inſtrument of God to breed faith, is the very word of God himſelfe: for it muſt be neceſſarilie, either the liuely voice of God, or the ſacred ſcripture which ſerueth vs in ſteede of the liuelie voice of God himſelfe) but either prepares our hearts only to receiue faith afterwards Io. 4. 1. Pet. 3. 2. 3.
                  
wards by the word of God; or to confirme the ſame in ſome ſort, beeing already ingendred in our hearts by Gods word. For this cauſe this ſecond kind of meanes ſometimes is ſent before the voice of God in the ſcripture, whereby the holy Ghoſt otherwhiles makes mens minds ready to intertaine faith and grace offred. This we reade of Auguſtine; for he ſpeaks it of himſelfe (I would not haue beleeued the goſpell, but that the authority of the Catholicke Church moued me thereunto) by which words he meaneth, that when he was a Manichee, he was prepared by the authority and teſtimonie of the Church, to beleeue the Goſpell. Afterwards notwithſtanding, the ſame holie ſpirit, which thus prepared him by the teſtimonie of the Church, I ſay, the ſame ſpirit did beget faith in Auguſtines heart, by the very ſcripture of the goſpell; whereby he did beleeue that the goſpell was the verie word of God. For this cauſe he ſpeaks elſe where of himſelfe: And let vs follow them (ſaith he) which doe inuite vs firſt to beleeue that which we cannot behold Auguſtines wordes. as yet, that being ſtrengthened by faith it ſelfe, we may be worthie to vnderſtand what we beleeue, not by the relation of men, but by the grace of God himſelfe inwardlie confirming and inlightening our mindes. So the woman of Samaria Io 4. as a member of the Church, did by her kinde of preaching prepare the Samaritanes to the faith of Chriſt, & they hauing heard Chriſt himſelfe, ſaid to the woman: We beleeue no longer becauſe of thy ſayings, for 
                  Io▪ 4. 42 1. Pet. 3. 2. 3. Win them with your conuerſation, which are without the word.
                   
                  we haue heard him our ſelues, and know that this is indeed the Chriſt the Sauiour of the world. By which wordes they plainely teſtified, that they were prepared only by the womans teſtimonie to embrace the faith, and that faith was ingendred in their hearts by the powerfull voice of Chriſt himſelfe. Wherefore it is cleere, that ſometimes this kind of meane and argument (as is aforeſaide) goes before faith is begotten in the heart to prepare vs, and ſometimes this followes faith, for confirmation: And

ſometimes alſo this kinde of argument goes before faith, and followes after it; it goes before, I ſay, for preparation; it followes after, for confirmation. For the ſpirit teacheth vs many waies, applying himſelfe to diuers men in diuers 
                     Note well Io. 3. manners, as it ſeemeth good vnto himſelfe, and as mens infirmities do require.
               And here we be to obſerue, that there is no abſolute neceſſitie of this ſecondarie kind of argument (which is externall and leſſe principall) to beget faith in vs. For it ought to ſuffice vs, if the ſpirit teach vs onely by Gods worde: but to helpe our weakenes the ſame ſpirit addeth the other ſecondarie kind of argument: as Chriſt plainly teacheth vs, Io. 5. where he ſayth, the teſtimonie of Iohn Baptiſt concerning him, was not ſimply neceſſarie, but that God ſo prouided to helpe their weakeneſſe and vnbeliefe, ver. 33. Iohn gaue teſtimony to the truth, but I deſire not the teſtimonie of man: Neuertheleſſe theſe things I ſpeake that ye may be ſaued. And that Iohns teſtimonie was but a ſecondarie argument only, and that Chriſts owne record of himſelfe was the firſt, he ſheweth plainly in the words following. ver. 36. But I haue a greater witnes then the witnes of Iohn: for the works which the Father hath giuen me to finiſh, the ſame works that I do, beare witnes of me, that the Father ſent me. And this is our iudgment concerning this argument; whereby we proue the Scripture to be the word of God, and our anſwere to the queſtion, wherefore it is ſo, as we auouch it.
               What the Papiſts thinke in this matter, it is eaſily ſeene How the Papiſts proue the ſcripture to bee Gods word. by their words and writings: Their iudgement briefly is this. The meane and principall argument, and in a manner the only way with them to demonſtrate the ſcripture to be Gods word, is the teſtimony of the church, not only the catholick (as they ſpeak) but alſo thoſe of their church which haue preſerued the faith (as they ſpeake) by contiall ſucceſſions from the Apoſtles vnto our times: and here they vnderſtand principally the Popes, who (as they

ſay) ſucceeded Peter and his chaire. Theſe men will haue the Church the iudge and interpreter of all Scriptures, from whoſe iudgement it may not be lawfull for any man to depart for an appeale to any other iudge: And they aſcribe this dignity & prerogatiue to the teſtimony of the Church, becauſe they will haue the Scripture which is written in the heart of the Church, to be the principall Scripture, and that we account and eſteeme of the voice of the Church, as the very liuely voice of God himſelfe; as if God now ſpake firſt principally in his Church, and by the voice of his Church. If they will haue it ſo, that the voice of the Church, bee the primarie voice of God, and the primarie Scripture of God; it is euident, that they deeme the greateſt light we haue, is to be found in the voice of the Church, and the ſame to be moſt cleere and demonſtratiue, not only to vs, but alſo in and by it ſelfe: and therefore that this light inlightens the ſacred Scripture, not in reſpect of vs only, but in reſpect of themſelues alſo. For which cauſe one of them hath ſaid, that the The blaſphemy of Papiſts. Scripture is of no more validity without the authority of the church, then AEſops fables. For the voice of the church being vnto them the primarie voice of God in all reſpects, for as much as it is liuely and vocall; and for this cauſe both by nature and to vs moſt manifeſt: it followeth, according to their iudgement, that it yeelds light vnto the Scripture, not only in reſpect of vs; but alſo in reſpect of the Scripture it ſelfe; & yet is it in verity but a certaine ſecondary Scripture, and a certaine ſecondary voice. For (as they auouch it) the voice of the Church is as Gods owne voice ſounding from heauen, ſeruing to confirme the voice of the Scripture (which now is but mans voice only) and to ratifie and make authenticall the very Scripture, as being written but by certaine Scribes, and publiſhed onely by the hands of men: This muſt bee the conſequent of their principles, or concluſion of their premiſſes, albeit other men be of another iudgment.
               
                  
As for our ſelues, like as we denie the concluſion which they inferre vpon the former principles, ſo we reiect alſo their very principles. For we denie & refuſe their firſt ground, to wit, that the voice of the Church is to be accounted the liuely voice of God himſelfe, and that the Scripture written in the heart of the Church, is to be accounted for that ſcripture which was written by the very finger of God: And we affirme that the only propheticall and apoſtolical ſcripture is to be eſteemed as the liuely voice of God; we auouch it, I ſay, that this Propheticall and Apoſtolicall ſcripture only ſerueth vs in ſteed of that ſcripture, which was written by Gods owne finger: We adde alſo that the ſacred Scripture is vnto vs a booke of reuelation of thoſe diuine myſteries which were hidden in Gods owne breaſt from eternitie: for this is the very will of God, that we attend on him ſpeaking in the ſcripture, as it were in his owne liuely voice. They haue (ſaith he) Moſes and the Prophets, Luk. 16. verſ. 29. that is, the bookes of Moſes and the prophets. And God will not haue this ſcripture in no leſſe account then that ſcripture, which hee wrote in times paſt with his owne finger in tables of ſtone. The voice of the Church (I meane the true Church, not the lying papiſticall ſynagogue) is but as the voice of the handmaide, or as the voice of a crier, which is to publiſh and to proclaime that voice of God, full of excellencie, ſpeaking in the ſcripture: But the ſcripture in the heart of the Church, that is, the Maximes of Gods truth written in the hearts of the faithfull, they be nothing els but a certaine ſecundarie ſcripture, taken out by the holy ghoſt, out of that primarie and moſt ſacred ſcripture, and ingrauen in the minds of men. For how much, think you, of that ful meaſure of the Propheticall & Apoſtolicall ſcripture is there taken forth and ingrauen in our minds? I ſay, that if all mens hearts were bound together, yet all they could not comprehend all thoſe things fully and perfectly, which

be recorded in the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall ſcriptures: For the catholicke Church, ſo long as it is conuerſant on the earth, is not capable of al that light which ſhineth in the ſacred ſcriptures of ye apoſtles & the prophets. Let their firſt principle be thus beaten downe, and their Corolatie, or ſecond concluſion (to wit, that the voice of the Church is moſt manifeſt, both in it ſelfe, and vnto vs) will fall to the ground of it owne accord: and ſo both principles being ſhaken, their concluſion which they inferre, is of no ſtrength to ſtand, but muſt fall away.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Of the firſt proprietie of the ſacred Scripture.
               
               
                  WE are now to proceed, and to make it manifeſt, that the holy ſcripture is of greateſt antiquitie: and this is the firſt proprietie 
                     The 1. propriety of the ſcripture, moſt ancient.
                   before aſcribed to the Scripture. Here firſt we be to find out the diuers acceptations of this word Scripture. This word Scripture may be taken, either for the matter onely, and Acceptation of the word ſcripture. the very ſubſtance which is contained in the words and letters; or not only for the matter and ſubſtance, but alſo for the verie writing it ſelfe, or the forme wherein that ſubſtance is expreſſed and ſet before vs. Now if by this word Scripture, ye vnderſtand the verie ſubſtance it ſelfe, it is without all controuerſie, that the Scripture is moſt ancient: becauſe it is the ſubſtance of thoſe diuine oracles,

which not only Patriarches and Prophets haue ſpoken, but alſo God himſelfe vttered; which things alſo were hidden in Gods mind from eternitie. But if yee vnderſtand by this word, not onely the ſubſtance, but the very writing, and in this reſpect alſo, the ſcripture may be ſaid to be moſt ancient. For as touching the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall ſcriptures, in reſpect alſo of the writing and manner of reuealing of them (as wee ſaid often before) it is Gods will that we ſo eſteeme them, not onely as the liuely voice of the Prophets and Apoſtles, nor onely as the liuely voice of God himſelfe, or as a booke written with his owne hand (as the Decalogue was ſet downe with his owne finger in tables of ſtone) but alſo that we ſo accept them as the very myſteries, and if I may ſo ſpeake, as the verie diuine notions, which were ingrauen in Gods owne mind from eternitie.
               To cleare this point a little; The veritie kept ſecret in Gods mind from eternitie, was in time manifeſted manie wayes, or in diuers formes; for it was reuealed partly by the liuely voice of God himſelf, partly by the voice of the Patriarches, Prophets, and Apoſtles (to paſſe by Angels in ſilence) and partly alſo by the ſcripture which was written by the Prophets and Apoſtles. The liuely and immediate voice of God did ceaſe long ſince; neither haue we that copie which God himſelfe wrote: the Patriarches How to eſteem of the written word of God. alſo, & the Prophets, and ye Apoſtles haue ceaſed to ſpeake: the writings only of the Prophets and Apoſtles remaine to this day. Wherefore this we hold as neceſſary vnto faith, that we accept theſe writings or books, firſt in ſteed of the liuely voice of the Prophets and Apoſtles: 1 Next, in place of the liuely voice of God himſelf: 2 Thirdly, of the Scripture written with Gods owne finger: 3 Fourthly and laſtly, as that holy veritie and diuine myſteries 4 which are recorded in Gods owne breaſt: which Oracles being ſimply without compariſon of greateſt antiquitie, it is very manifeſt that the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall

ſcripture is after a ſort moſt ancient. For what may be auouched of the liuely voice of God himſelfe, or of the Oracles of his mind, the ſame in ſome reſpect may be ſaid of the ſcripture, ſupplying vnto vs their defect. For Subſtance of the ſcripture, ſimply moſt ancient. if I may truly ſay in ſome ſort, the ſcripture is the liuely voice of God himſelfe, doe I not as truly ſpeake alſo in like manner, the ſcripture is moſt ancient, for as much as the voice of God is moſt ancient? But it ſhall ſuffice vs to commend the antiquitie of ſcripture, to conſider the ſubſtance onely of the ſcripture, which without all controuerſie is moſt ancient. But the verie ſcripture and writing it ſelfe hath his excellencie alſo, for that the ſcripture in reſpect of the very writing, is ſaid to be giuen vs alſo by diuine inſpiration. For there is not a iote or pricke in the 
                     Scriptura, eſt 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . very writing, which is not by the inſpiration of God.
               Here the Aduerſaries take exception, and as els where often, ſo here they prefer their Church before the ſcripture, and they affirme the Church is more ancient then the ſcripture: For they ſay there was a Church two thouſand A Popiſh obiection. full yeares before Moſes, the firſt writer of the ſcripture. And ſince Chriſts comming the Church for many yeares wanted the ſcriptures. But that which hath beene alreadie written, and is aforeſaid, can eaſily ſolue this obiection: For if we vnderſtand by this word Scripture, not only the characters and books, but alſo that ſubſtance and matter contained in them (for we haue the Prophets and Apoſtles ſpeaking in the ſcriptures, & we haue their liuely voice, we haue (I ſay) the liuely voice of God himſelfe, and the very expreſſe mind of God contained in them) if I ſay, we vnderſtand by this word that ſubſtance; it cannot thē be denied, but the ſcripture is more ancient then the Church, which was borne not of mortall ſeed, but of immortall, euen by the word of God, who liueth and endureth for euer, 1. Pet. 1. 23. I ſay (the premiſſes well conſidered) it ſhall appeare, the ſcripture is not onely more ancient then the Church, but to be of greateſt antiquitie, and

to haue beene with God from euerlaſting. But if by this word ye vnderſtand both the matter and writing; in this reſpect alſo, it ſhall be no diſparagement to auouch it to be of greater antiquitie then the Church; yea to be moſt ancient, as we haue at large before ſhewed. And thus far of the firſt propertie of the ſacred ſcripture, and of the third controuerſie.
            
            
               CHAP. X. Of the ſecond propertie of the ſacred Scripture, where begins the fourth controuerſie.
               
               
                  THe ſecond propertie of the ſacred ſcripture is opened ſufficiently in a manner alreadie, in the ſecond controuerſie before handled. This propertie is this; that the Scripture is moſt cleere in it ſelfe, and moſt eaſie to be vnderſtood: for it being the very word of God (which word euerie man muſt neceſſarily graunt, to be in it ſelfe moſt cleere, moſt manifeſt and moſt perſpicuous, whether you reſpect the words or the matter contained in the words, if men will not offer extreme iniurie to Gods holy Spirit:) aſſuredly it muſt follow (I ſay) that the holy ſcripture is in it ſelfe, and of it ſelfe, moſt cleere and euident in euery part, and in euerie reſpect. Of this great perſpicuitie of the ſcripture, the holy ghoſt teſtifieth often, Pſal. 119. The word of the Lord is a lanterne to my feete. Pſal. 19. The precept of the Lord, ſaith the Pſalmiſt, is cleere, and inlighteneth the eyes. Prou. 6. The

commandement is a lanterne, and the law is a light. The Lord by the Prophet Eſay, chap. 45. 19. ſaith, I haue not ſpoken in ſecret: and 2. Pet. 1. 19. he ſaith, We haue a moſt ſure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heede, as to a light that ſhineth in a darke place. Wherefore the whole ſcripture, & al places of the ſcripture, are by themſelues, and in themſelues moſt manifeſt, moſt cleere, and applied alſo to the capacity of the vulgar ſort, and of the moſt vnlettered among the people. For it is certaine, that the Lord in the ſcriptures doth as it were liſpe with vs, Io. 3. 12. If I haue ſpoken to you of earthly things, and you beleeue not, that is, I haue ſpoken vnto you, after an earthly and plaine manner, and I haue applied my ſelfe to your capacitie, &c.
               I haue auouched that the ſacred ſcripture is in it ſelfe cleere and eaſie: True it is, if ye reſpect men, as they are 
                     All the ſcripture cleere and eaſie to the weakeſt beleeuer. 1. Cor. 2. 14. men, that is, naturall and carnall, the holy ſcripture vnto ſuch is altogether obſcure and ſtrange: For the naturall man doth not conceiue the things which appertaine to the Spirit of God. But if ye conſider the ſpirituall man, and ſuch as be taught of God, I grant to ſuch it is partly obſcure, becauſe they be as yet in part carnall: And for this cauſe the godly put vp continually ſupplications vnto God (as feeling the reliques of their naturall blindnes and corruption) and making requeſts, that the eyes of their vnderſtanding might be opened, that they may behold the bright ſhining light of the ſcriptures, and of euerie place and portion of the ſcripture, being otherwiſe moſt euident in it ſelfe. All the religious and godly in their prayers are ſo farre from laying any imputation of hardneſſe and obſcurity on Gods word; that they do euer accuſe & condemne themſelues, and their owne blindneſſe and dulneſſe.
               And albeit this be true, that all the ſcripture, and all places of the ſcripture be ſimply and in themſelues moſt Note. cleare and eaſie, and onely darke and hard by reaſon of

our corruption and blindneſſe, yet this cannot be denied, but that ſome places of ſcripture be more cleere in themſelues, then others, more eaſie and more euident; as thoſe ſcriptures, concerning faith and manners, which bee ſo neceſſarie vnto ſaluation: they be (I ſay) ſo cleerely ſet downe, ſo often repeated, and in ſo manie places expounded, that we need not manie rules for interpretation, or to find out the knowledge of them. But theſe places alſo require the grace of Gods holy ſpirit: for without him, ſpirituall things which be moſt perſpicuous and euident, cannot be vnderſtood of anie man on earth. Wherfore he that is ignorant of the moſt cleere ſcriptures, which doe ſo much concerne his ſaluation, is altogether blind, and lieth as yet in the wofull ſtate of perdition, for ſo the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: If that the Goſpell be hid, it is hidden to them that are loſt, 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
               As for other ſcriptures which are more hard in appearance, for that they do not ſo much concerne the neceſſarie articles of faith, and rules of life and conuerſation, we may be ignorant of them without danger of faith and ſaluation: albeit the knowledge of ſuch places might bring ſome light for the better vnderſtanding of the How to interpret & expound hard ſcriptures. ſcriptures, which of neceſſity muſt be knowne concerning faith and manners. And we may attaine ſome tolerable interpretation of theſe ſcriptures, analogicall vnto faith, if we obſerue thoſe rules of knowlege and interpretation, which are commonly recommended by the learned, euer making Gods holy ſpirit our firſt and principal guide for our inward illumination and inſtruction. The rules which follow this, are but the meanes which the holy Rules. Ghoſt vſeth; and they are borowed partly out of the 1 holy ſcripture, as by conference of places of the ſcripture, 2 either the very ſame, or the like in ſenſe and phraſe: partly 3 from els where, as of the common places of diuinitie, 4 of the teſtimonie of the Church, of the Grammar it ſelfe, 5 ſpecially, the Hebrue and Greeke: and good rules and 6
                  
helpes are had from Rhetoricke and Logicke; which teacheth vs to conſider not onely of ſimple arguments ſet apart, 7 but alſo of the diſpoſition and connexion of arguments, bound and knit together in Axiomes or propoſitions, in ſyllogiſme and methode. For Logicke teacheth vs the coherence of Antecedents and conſequents, which ſerueth not a little for the vnfolding and opening of hard places. And to paſſe ouer other things, ſome little inſight in Ethickes and Phyſickes, &c. may giue ſome helpe hereunto. But aboue all things we muſt remember to put vp vnto God contiuall and feruent prayers, to open and to enlighten our minds by his holie Spirit. If men obſerue theſe meanes for the interpretation and vnderſtanding of the Scriptures, and hard places of the Scripture, we ſhal not lightly erre from the truth of God.
               Here fume the aduerſaries, and endeuour to proue by The drift of Papiſts in affirming the ſcriptures to be obſcure. manie arguments, that the Scriptures in themſelues and of themſelues are obſcure, euen in thoſe places which are neceſſarie, and appertaine to ſaluation: to this end and purpoſe, forſooth, to withdraw mens minds from reading the Scriptures, that they may attend and truſt to their dreames, and that they may obtrude their gloſſes on the Church, euen what pleaſe them, & what for the moſt part they preferre before the text it ſelfe; writhing as it were, and drawing rather the text of Scripture to be their gloſſe, then giuing any light of interpretation by or from the text it ſelfe. And heere they contend againſt vs with teſtimonie, firſt, of the Scriptures themſelues; next, of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church; & laſtly, with arguments of their owne: all which may eaſily be anſwered, if we obſerue well the grounds before ſet downe. It ſhall ſuffice vs now to heare onely one or two of their arguments refuted.
               They demaund, whether for theſe Scriptures now extant of the old and new Teſtament, we haue no need of commentaries, which are now in the world verie manie,

written by manie men? I anſwer, that the diuine Scriptures of themſelues haue no need of the comments and interpretations of men; for the Scriptures we account thē to be the liuely voice of God himſelfe: and what is there that can make this voice of God more cleere and euident in it ſelfe? Can either man or Angell ſpeake anie thing more cleerely, then God himſelfe? or doth God purpoſely affect obſcuritie? both which to auoch is verie blaſphemous. As for the Commentaries or expoſitions Commentaries, of the godly learned, which haue ſpent ſome good time in the Scriptures of God, we graunt they helpe the ignorant and the common ſort very much, and that they ſerue well to diſpell the clouds of our naturall corruption.
               But this may ſeeme a greater queſtion and more doubtful, touching the preaching of Gods word, and the expounding of the Scriptures, by Paſtors and preachers in the publike aſſemblies: whether preaching be not neceſſarie, I meane the liuely preaching of Paſtors and teachers? I anſwer, the Scriptures of God, which we account as the liuely voice of God, haue no need of this meanes in themſelues; I ſay, that God and his word in themſelues need neither this preaching nor interpretation of the ſcriptures: But the neceſſitie of the miniſtery and of preaching is only in reſpect of vs, and of our blindneſſe and ignorance, which be but as children, yea as infants in a manner, all the dayes we liue on earth Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 13. And when as we ſhall become men in the world to come, then ſhall we haue neede of no ſuch miniſterie: for we ſhal reſt contented (being filled with that The ſtate of the elect in heauen. onely light of God, and of Chriſt) without any further inſtruction of men or Angels. And thus farre of the ſecond propertie of the Scripture, and of the fourth controuerſie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI. Of the third propertie of the ſacred Scripture, whereof ariſeth the fift controuerſie.
               
               
                  THE third propertie of the ſacred Scripture is this, It is moſt Simpliciſſima plaine and pure, whether ye reſpect words or phraſe: neither hath it any ambiguitie or doubtfulneſſe in it. This property differs frō the former herein, for that whereas perſpicuitie extendes it ſelfe, and concernes words and matter; this ſimplicitie or plainneſſe (as I may ſo ſpeake) is of words only. This we auouch then, that the ſacred Scripture is of it ſelfe moſt ſingle and plaine, voide of all ambiguitie, and Circumlocution by ſpeech. Amphibologie, or that it contayneth nothing doubtfull in one place, which is not expreſſed in another, if there be any obſcuritie in it. For the word of the Lord and his ſpirit be euer ſingle and ſincere; neither doth God at any time ſpeake to catch men with ambiguous and doubtfull ſpeeches, as doe Diuels and Sophiſters; but to teach men his holy truth. For the ſpirit of truth leadeth vs into all truth, Io. 16. 13. And the Scripture is giuen of God by inſpiration, & is the very word of God, as is before ſhewed: Wherefore if we will not offer God extreame iniurie, we muſt neceſſarily graunt, that the Scripture in it ſelf is moſt plaine, and If the ſcriptures ſeeme doubtful, condemne thine owne ſinne and corruption. ſimple in ſenſe and ſignification. I ſay, the Scripture in it ſelfe is plaine, as touching the ſenſe: for if

there be any ambiguitie in any words of ſcripture, that diuerſitie or darkneſſe may not be imputed to the Scripture, but to the blindnes and ignorance of men, euen of ſuch alſo which do not of any euil purpoſe of hart peruert the Scripture. For there be many which impiouſly wreſt the ſame to the one ſide and the other; when as they know right well notwithſtanding, the ſenſe of the ſame Scripture is onely one, plaine and euident. To approue this plaineneſſe and ſimplicitie of the Scriptures, firſt the Son of God himſelfe, in his diſputations againſt Sathan and all his aduerſaries, borroweth hence his weapons, by his owne example recommending the ſacred ſcriptures to all men. Next after him the Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſors, and the Fathers themſelues haue drawen their arguments from the ſacred ſcriptures againſt Heretickes, both for confirmation of truth and confutation of error.
               The aduerſaries here contend againſt this property of the ſacred ſcripture, and they hold that that is doubtfull, ambiguous, and blaſphemouſly report, that it hath a noſe A lutae inſtar. of waxe, and may be turned here and there: For which cauſe they affirme it is the book of Heretiques, & that of it ſpring hereſies, and that al men ſeeke to maintaine their errors by it. But theſe blaſphemies are eaſily anſwered, by that which is before ſhewed. For this ambignitie, and flexibleneſſe is not to be imputed to the ſcripture, which is giuen of God by diuine inſpiration, and ſerueth vs in ſteede of Gods owne voice: but muſt be aſcribed either to the ignorance or malice, or malapertneſſe of men, who either cannot apprehend the ſimple & true ſenſe of ſcripture, or malitiouſlie peruert and turne the ſame into a ſtrange ſenſe.
               Here they obiect, that the ſcripture is full of tropes, allegories, Ob. parables, words of diuers ſignifications, amphibologicall ſentences, viſions; all which haue their ambiguity. I anſwer, that this matter may the better be cleered, we are to looke a little more ſoundly into it. The A.
                  
ambiguity which is contrarie vnto ſimplicity, being in the words and not in the matter: for the words are ambiguous, and not the matter: Let vs reduce all ambiguity 5. Principall heads.
                   which is in the words, vnto 5. principall heads. For firſt there bee ſimple or common words of diuers acceptations: ſecondlie, there bee tropicall or figuratiue words: thirdly, there be whole ſpeeches or ſentences, which carry a doubtfull ſignification: fourthly, there be allegorical ſpeeches conſiſting of the continuation of tropes: fiftly, there be alſo typicall words and ſentences concerning types and figures.
               Of all theſe, this I ſay generally; that in all ſuch places the holy Ghoſt hath but one only ſimple ſenſe and meaning. For as touching words of diuers ſignifications, if any ſuch words be found in ſcripture in the originals, Hebrue and Greeke (as that can not be otherwiſe, but there muſt be ſuch in the ſcriptures) firſt I ſay that ſuch words haue but one ſignification only in ſuch places, and that the holy Ghoſt purpoſeth and intendeth, but one thing by them. For the holy Ghoſt deſireth not to vſe any fallacion or ſophiſtication. Next I anſwer, that wee may deprehend that one ſignification, and that one plaine How to vnderſtand a doubtfull worde, Phraſe or ſentence in ſcripture. meaning of the word (we deſire to finde) either by the drift of the holy Ghoſt in that place or text, where any ſuch word is; or by conference of other places of Scripture, where the like worde is to be found; or by other Scriptures, expreſſing the ſame ſenſe and matter in other words; or by obſeruation of Grammaticall accidents, accents, points or pricks, and ſuch like. And where we find tropes and words borowed and drawn from their proper and natiue ſignification in any text of ſcripture, I ſay that there ſuch words are vſed by ye holy ghoſt, purpoſely to expreſſe in a more ſignificant and liuely manner, but one ſenſe and meaning. As where it is ſaide (this is my body) by the Metonymie, which is in the word body, the ſpirit ſpeaketh more ſignificantly, then if he had ſaid; This is a

ſigne of my body: For by that metonymicall phraſe, the holy Ghoſt plainly auoucheth the ſacramentall vnion, which is of the ſigne and of the thing ſignified. Next I ſay, if the trope ſeeme ſomewhat obſcure and ſtrange, that ye may finde the ſignification of the ſame trope by a word of proper ſignification, either in the ſame ſcripture, or in ſome other ſcripture, where the like trope may be found.
               If ye meet in ſcripture with a ſentence ſeeming ambiguous, A ſentence in ſcripture ſeeming ambiguous firſt be wel aſſured that Gods ſpirit doth not purpoſely ſpeake doubtfully, as ſophiſters do, but hath euer one ſingle and plaine meaning: but men doe both giue and receiue an euill conſtruction of the context, either ignorantly or malitiouſly. Next, I ſay, that other places of ſcripture do more cleerly ſet forth the ſelfe ſame matter: Finally; if you find allegories in ſcripture, of them this I affirme, that firſt they ſerue for illuſtratiō: next, that they haue but one ſignification or ſenſe: and the ſame is either manifeſt and needeth no further expoſition, or if it be obſcure, it is more cleerly expreſſed ſome where elſe in the ſcripture. And as for ſcriptures concerning types, I ſay of them alſo firſt, that they haue but one ſignification, and A typicall ſpeech in ſcripture. ſignify types only, and not alſo the matters ſignified by them: next, that one very ſenſe of the types is applyed to ſignify another thing, that is, the body it ſelf: for the types themſelues cary in them the ſignification of the things ſignified, and ſhadowed by the types, and not the words themſelues which are vſed to ſet forth the types: for in that hiſtorie recorded, Gal. 4. this name Sarah ſignifieth Abrahams wife, that is, the type only: next the type ſignifieth the couenant, that is, the thing ſhadowed, figured, and ſignified by the type. And thus farre of the third property and fift controuerſie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII. Of the Fourth propertie, and Sixt controuerſie.
               
               
                  THis we ſay alſo cōcerning the ſacred ſcripture, that it is moſt effectuall, moſt liuely, and moſt vocall, ſounding to euery man an anſwer of all things neceſſarie vnto ſaluation. The life which here I vnderſtād, is not any fleſhly or carnal life, as the life of man; but that ſpirituall life, as the life of God: and by a liuely voice I meane, a ſpirituall voice, ſpeaking not ſo much to the eare, as to the minde of man. For firſt if ye reſpect the ſubſtance of this diuine reuelation, this which I auouch, is without all controuerſie. For the ſcripture containes in it the word of God, which is liuely & powerfull, &c. Heb. 4. Next in reſpect of the forme of the reuelation thereof, that is, the very writing of God, this is euident in like manner; for it was giuen and written by diuine inſpiration: and whatſoeuer is of this kinde, muſt neceſſarily be in it ſelfe both liuely and ſpirituall. Againe, this Scripture is vnto vs, if not the liuely voice of God; yet certainly in ſtead thereof. For we haue none other liuely voice of God but this: for as for the voice of the Church, paſtors and teachers in the Church, the ſame may erre; neither may it properly be called the voice of God. The voice of God we muſt auouch of it, that it is a liuely voice:

                  ergo, &c. Thirdly, the very Scripture ſpeaks of it ſelfe, as hauing a liuely voice, as we may reade, Rom. 9. The Scripture ſaith &c. Againe, Eſaias Scripture is ſaid to crie concerning Iſrael, Rom. 9. 27. Fourthly, ſo many as propound queſtions of any matter neceſſarie to ſaluation, be ſent to it: Eſaie. S. Should not a people inquire at their God? from the liuing to the dead? Turne rather to the law & to the teſtimonie: If they ſpeake not according to this word, there is no morning light in them. Againe, the Sonne of God himſelfe, ſo often as any propounded queſtions vnto him of the law, of diuorcement, of the Sabboth, of the Meſſias, of regeneration and of the reſurrection, or how to attaine eternall life: he alwaies gaue them anſwer out of the ſacred Scripture, and euer he ſends ſuch as moue any ſuch doubts, vnto the Scripture. How readeſt thou? ſaith hee: and haue ye not read? Haue ye neuer read? How is it written?
               
               Againe, the Apoſtles of Chriſt for all their aſſertions, bring proofe and teſtimonies out of the old Teſtament. Apollos was a man mighty in Scriptures, He ſtrongly confuted publiquely the Iewes, with great vehemency ſhewing by the Scriptures, that Ieſus was that Chriſt, Act. 18. 24. 28. The men of Beraea receiued the word with all readineſſe, and ſearched the ſcriptures daily, whether thoſe things were ſo. Act. 17. 11. Thus the primitiue Church, and the fathers refuted hereſies by the Scriptures. To conclude this point, moſt memorable is that worthy fact of Conſtantinus the Great, who propounding the Bible to the Fathers aſſembled in the Nicene councell, ſpake on this manner: Here I ſet before you the writings Euangelicall, of the Apoſtles, and the ſanctions of the auncient Prophets, which can informe vs concerning the ſacred law of God. To beat back therefore the dint of the ſword of the aduerſarie, let vs learne how to anſwer all obiections of the aduerſarie, out of the words which are giuen vs of God by diuine inſpiration. Laſtly, this I haue ſaid, that the Scripture is in it ſelfe liuely and vocall: for as concerning

deafe and dead men, that is, the naturall neuer taught of God, vnto ſuch (I ſay) it is but as deade & mute.
               Here the aduerſaries blaſpheme and reply, ſaying, that ye ſacred ſcripture is but as a dead letter, mute, and not able togiue anſwere to any man, not able to decide queſtions and controuerſies in religion: And contrarily they glory that the voice of the Church, which proceeds from the Scripture (as they ſpeake) which is in grauen by Gods own Spirit in the hearts of men; they boaſt, I ſay, that this is vocall, and able to anſwer the demaunders of all queſtions appertaining to ſaluation, & that this cannot be wreſted nor peruerted, but euer abides the ſame in al reſpects. The anſwer to this calumniation and blaſphemy, is cleere of that which is before ſhewed: for we made it cleere and manifeſt, that the ſacred Scripture is moſt liuely and vocall in it ſelfe. And whereas controuerſies are not ſo ſoone decided by the Scriptures, the cauſe is not in Gods word, but in men, which be either ſo naturally blind and dull, that they cannot heare & vnderſtand the Scripture, ſpeaking, anſwering, yea crying in their eares: or they be ſo malitious and obſtinate, that they will not heare and vnderſtand; yea that they will full often, againſt their owne conſcience, wreſt the voice of the Scripture into another ſenſe, and that to their owne perdition. Wherefore we conclude this point, that the ſcripture is in it ſelfe, 2. Pet. 3. and by it ſelfe, moſt liuely and vocall.
               And further we be to remember, that to the end it may ſpeake as a liuely voice vnto vs, and to the end we may vnderſtand it concerning all controuerſies in religion, we muſt vſe the meanes before mentioned, & our very Grā
                  mar Meanes to be vſed for the vnderſtanding of the ſcripture. is one ſpeciall inſtrument for this purpoſe. For our eies & eares are opened by ſuch meanes to vnderſtand the Scripture, and to attend vnto Gods voice ſpeaking in the ſcripture, if it ſhall ſeeme good to the holy Ghoſt to worke effectually by them in our hearts and minds. If ſo be that the ſpirit worke effectually by the aforeſaide

meanes, then the Scripture ſhall anſwer to all controuerſies concerning faith and religion, with a more cleere, liuely, intelligible, and diſtinct voice, then all the men in the whole Church ſhall anſwer, who can auouch nothing ſound and certaine, vnleſſe firſt they haue receiued it from the mouth of the Scripture, and anſwer in the verie words of the ſcripture. For whereas theſe men ſay, the voice of the Church is liuely, and vocall, heard of all men, and cannot bee peruerted and wreſted: To this I anſwer firſt, that the voice of the Church, (as is aforeſaid) doth depend on the voice of the ſcripture: Next, that the voice of the Church is ſubiect to errours and change: ſo that they may this day anſwer one thing, and to morrow another: and this ſerues no better in a manner, then a Lesbian rule, to decide controuerſies concerning faith & religion. As for the church of Rome, they haue ſo long and ſo corruptly anſwered concerning faith and religion, that they haue caried the world from the truth to lies and errours, and infinite hereſies: that there is now no cauſe wherefore theſe men may ſo put forth to ſale, the voice and ſound of their Church, which is become ſo corrupt and adulterous.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII. Of the fift property of the Church, and of the ſeuenth controuerſie.
               
               
                  NOw it reſteth that we proue, that the ſacred Scripture is ſimply moſt neceſſarie. Here then I ſay, that if by Scripture yee vnderſtand the ſubſtance and the verie matter contained in the words written, it cannot be denied that the ſcripture is ſo neceſſarie, that without it there can be no Church in earth, for the church is borne and bred, not 
                  Fift propertie, Scripture is moſt neceſſarie. 
                  of mortall, but of immortall ſeede, which is the word of God, 1. Pet. 1. 23. But if ye vnderſtand by the ſcripture, the verie writing and forme of reuelation, I ſay, that in this reſpect alſo it is ſo neceſſarie, that without this there cannot be a Church. For the liuely voice of God is ſimply neceſſarie: The ſcripture after a ſort, is the liuely voice of God: therefore ſimply neceſſarie.
               I graunt it, that when as the liuely voice of God did ſound, and was heard in the Church; this writing, and this forme of reuelation was not then ſo neceſſarie: but when as God did ceaſe to ſpeake, and that the ſcripture came in place of Gods own voice; then the ſcripture was no leſſe neceſſary, then the liuely voice of God. For the voice of God muſt euer be in the Church, that the church may haue her being, and may continue on the earth; yea this voice muſt be heard by the Church, either by it ſelfe, or by that which may beſt ſupply the want of the

liuely voice of God. Before Moſes time, this voice it ſelfe was heard: after his time, this voice ſounded and ſpake in, and by the voice and writings of Moſes, and the Prophets: When Chriſt was come, his owne liuely voice was heard: After Chriſts aſcenſion, for a time the 2. Cor. 5. 19. 1. Pet. 2. 19. preaching of the Apoſtles, and the bookes of the old Teſtament were receiued for the liuely voice of God himſelfe, and of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt. Then followed the Apoſtolicall Scripture, which together with the holy ſcripture of the old Teſtament continue in the Church, to ſupply not only the liuely voice of the Apoſtles, but alſo of God, and of Chriſt himſelfe. By the premiſſes it is euident, yt it is ſimply neceſſary at all times, that the liuely voice of God ſound euer in the Church of God, either by it ſelfe, or by this ſupply, which wee now auouch to be only the ſacred Scriptures of the old and new Teſtament. Wherefore we plainly conclude, the Scripture is moſt neceſſarie.
               The Aduerſaries oppoſe themſelues againſt this aſſertion, as againſt the former, and they denie that the ſcripture is ſimply neceſſarie: it is neceſſary (ſay they) that is, it is profitable or commodious for the well being of a Church; but is not ſo neceſſarie for the being; nor no ſuch thing as without which the Church can haue no being. And for this cauſe do theſe men denie the neceſſitie of the Scripture, that they may open the doore to their authoritie and traditions, that is, to their owne dreames, which they ſay, be ſimply neceſſary, and preferre them before the ſcripture. They are eaſily anſwered by the rules before ſet downe. For if by ſcripture they vnderſtand the ſubſtance of the ſcripture, it cannot be denied that the ſcripture is ſimply neceſſarie: but if they vnderſtand not the ſubſtance onely, but alſo the verie writing; in this reſpect alſo, we haue ſhewed it by cleere demonſtratiō, that the ſcripture is ſimply neceſſarie; for that it is vnto vs in place of ye liuely voice of God himſelfe. Wherfore

their aſſertion is falſe, howſoeuer they take this word Scripture either in this ſenſe or the other.
               But they ſay, the Church wanted the ſcripture neere two thouſand yeares, all which time religion was preſerued by tradition only: Therefore the Scripture is not ſimply neceſſarie. I anſwer: If you vnderſtand by Scripture the verie ſubſtance of the couenant, then your argument followeth not: for the ſubſtance of the ſcripture was in thoſe verie traditions, whereby the Church was edified and kept. But if by this word ye vnderſtand the verie writing; then I grant the ſcripture was not extant ſo manie yeares: and I ſay, that it was not then neceſſarie, for that then the liuely voice of God it ſelfe was heard. If they conclude, that becauſe it was not then neceſſarie, therefore it is not now neceſſarie; or that it was not neceſſarie, after that God had commanded it, and after that it began to be extant: ſurely the conſequence is very euill: for as ages and times haue changed, ſo diuers formes of reuelation were neceſſarie.
               
                  Or we may more briefly ſet downe this controuerſie in this forme.
                  THe ſcripture is neceſſarie not onely for the well-being (as Popiſh Schoole-men ſpeake) but alſo for the being of the Church: Et hactenus eſt ſimplex neceſſitas.
                  
                  And this neceſſitie is in reſpect of time only: for there was not a neceſſitie of the ſcripture in all ages; I vnderſtand 
                        The word written not neceſſary in all ages. Heb. 1. 1. 2. by the word Scripture, not onely the ſubſtance of the written word, but alſo the manner or forme of reuelation: but this ſimple neceſſitie muſt bee auouched of the ſubſtance and forme of reuelation in diuers reſpects. For the ſcripture as touching the ſubſtance of it, was neceſſarie to the Church in all ages, but in reſpect of the manner of reuealing the ſame, it was neceſſarie for a certaine time only, to wit, vntill it ſeemed good vnto Almightie God

to teach his church by the ſcripture. ARG. 1. For the Lord God had not giuen his Church the Scripture, if he had not thought it neceſſarie euū for the being of his Church. ARG. 2. The liuely voice of God was neceſſarie in the time appointed for it: ergo, the Scripture alſo is neceſſary in the time the Lord hath decreed for it: for there is but one and the ſame reaſon of both. ARG. 3. It is neceſſarie that Gods will be reuealed and communicated to the Church at all times in one forme or other, either by Gods own liuely voice, or by writing, or by both: but now the liuely voice of God hath ceaſed: therefore now the word written is neceſſarie.
                  The aduerſaries deny this abſolute neceſſitie, moued hereunto with theſe arguments following. Firſt, from Adam to Moſes there was no Scripture: Ergo. I anſwer, the Lord God thought it not neceſſarie for all that time. But when as the Lord himſelfe began to write, and that the 2. Pet. 1. 18. 19. 21. holy men of God were acted and moued by the holie Ghoſt, firſt Prophets, then Apoſtles; then the Scripture began to be neceſſarie, & euen ſimply neceſſary. ARG. 2. From Moſes vnto Chriſt, Iob and his friends both beleeued and were ſaued without the Scripture. I anſwer, It is moſt like theſe alſo read the ſcriptures; as may appeare by the Eunuches ſtory, Act. 8. Next, I anſwer, that ſo manie as were called without the viſible Church, God dealt with them in an extraordinary manner. ARG. 3. They did more attend the traditions of the Fathers then the written word, euen in the ſecond age. I anſwer, this is falſe. ARG. 4. In the third age there was no ſcripture of the new Teſtament extant for a long ſeaſon. Ergo. I anſwer, the Apoſtolicall ſcripture beganne not long after Chriſt: Next, all that time, I grant it was not neceſſarie; but when the Apoſtles were dead, and when their liuelie voice ceaſed, then began it to be neceſſary.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII. Of the ſixt propertie of the Scripture, and the eight controuerſie.
               
               
                  THE Scripture is perfect, containing in it all things neceſſarie for faith and manners, not onely ſufficiently, but alſo abundantly: for this is the perfection which heere wee doe auouch. The ſenſe then of the Propoſition is this: This kind of reuelation containes all things, &c. The proofe is this. Argument 1. The liuely voice of God contained all articles or inſtructions concerning faith and manners: Ergo, ſo doth the Scripture. The reaſon of the argument is euident; for that nothing, in reſpect of ſubſtance, was ſpoken by that liuely voice, which is not recorded in the Scripture. ARG. 2. If the Scripture contained not all things neceſſarie perfectly, then euill were the condition of our Church, and of our time, which heareth not the liuely voice of anie man ſpeaking by diuine inſpiration, nor of any prophet or Apoſtle. ARG. 3. The religious and ſuch as be taught of God, haue an holy experience of the ſufficiencie of the Scriptures, and of the fulneſſe of it. Adde to theſe arguments theſe diuine teſtimonies. Deut. 4. Ye ſhall not ad to the word that I ſpeake, &c. Reuel. 22. If anie ſhall adde to theſe things, God ſhall 
                  
                     Verſ. 18. 
                  adde vnto him the plagues which are written in this booke. Albeit theſe ſayings are to bee vnderſtood properly of particular books, yet the ſame reaſon ſerues for all books of the canonicall ſcripture: and ſurely the reaſon binds

more ſtrongly: for if we may not ad to particular books, how much leſſe is it lawfull to adde to the whole Canon. Prou. 30. Thou ſhalt ad nothing to his words: This ſeemes to be vnderſtood of the whole Scripture. Matth. 28. Teaching to obſerue all things which I commanded you. Gal. 1. 8. If we or an Angell from heauen ſhall preach vnto you another Goſpel, or otherwiſe then that which we haue preached vnto you, let him be accurſed. Ioh. 20. Theſe things are written that ye may beleeue, &c.
               
               And as for the iudgment of the Aduerſaries in this matter, which affirme that the ſcripture is lame and maimed, chiefly note Bellarmine and his arguments for this purpoſe. They teach the ſcriptures to bee defectiue and weake, that we might giue place to their traditions and forgeries: wherefore let vs a little conſider this matter of Of Traditions. traditions. The word Tradition is generall, and ſignifieth any doctrine written or vnwritten: and ſo this word is vſed both in the ſacred ſcriptures, and in the ancient Writers: albeit the Papiſts affirme that the Fathers vſe this word onely to ſignifie a doctrine not written. Teſtimonies of ſcripture which cleere the generall acceptation of the word, are theſe. Act. 6. 14. And ſhall change the ordinances which Moſes 
                  
                     Quos nobis tradidit Moſes: 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  gaue vs, or which wee had from Moſes by tradition. 2. Theſſ. 2. 15. Keepe the tradition or doctrine 
                  
                     Traditam doctrinam. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  deliuered vnto you, which ye were taught, either by word, or by our Epiſtle.
               
               The word tradition in Scripture is giuen other whiles to things nceſſarie and continuing; and ſometimes to things not neceſſarie and temporarie. The teſtimonie which is 2. Theſſ. 2. verſ. 15. is of neceſſarie doctrine. The place which is cited out of the Acts, 16. 4. is of ceremonies: for heere the Spirit ſpeaketh of a decree of the Councell holden at Ieruſalem concerning bloud, and things offered to idols, and that which is ſtrangled: Of which Act. 15. 28. As touching traditions which concerne neceſſarie points of faith & manners, they were firſt deliuered by the

liuely voice of Chriſt & his Apoſtles: and then the ſhort ſumme of them recorded in bookes, as may appeare by that ſpeech of the Apoſtle concerning the Lords ſupper, 1. Cor. 11. 23. And againe 1. Theſſ. 4. 2. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . where he giueth rules of an honeſt conuerſation. And againe 2. Theſſ. 2. 15. And as touching traditions which be not neceſſarie, but ceremoniall, they were either recorded, as of Eccleſiaſticall rites, 1. Cor. 11. 14. or not recorded. 1. Cor. 11. 34. Other things will I ſet in order when I come. He promiſeth heere to ſet in order, but ceremonies, and namely ſuch as did concerne the Lords ſupper. Of ceremonies, onely this I wil ſay, they did no way exceed, neither were Of Ceremonies. Good rules. they vnprofitable, neither were they deliuered with anie 1 opinion of neceſſity to bind mens conſciences, neither 2 were they contrarie to thoſe things which were written: 3 yea, this I auouch, yt there was nothing deliuered by way 4 of tradition; or touching ceremonies by the Apoſtles, which had not good ground & warrant in Gods word, that is, in the bookes of the Prophets, and in the doctrine of Chriſt, which not long after was written by the Euangeliſts and Apoſtles. And as for Popiſh traditions Popiſh traditions and ceremonies. and ceremonies, there is no end of them; they are vnprofitable; they are like old wiues fables; all for the moſt part deliuered with an opinion of neceſſitie; and moſt of them moſt repugnant to the Apoſtolicall doctrine. And thus do we diſtinguiſh traditions.
               The aduerſaries vnderſtand by Tradition, their vnwritten veritie, not that which is no where found written, but that which is not written by the firſt author thereof, that is, by him which deliuered the ſame by his owne liuely voice. This then the Papiſts do here profeſſe, that they cannot find their traditions in the Scriptures, nor proue them by the Scriptures.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. Of the ſeuenth propertie, and ninth controuerſie.
               
               
                  THE ſacred ſcripture is the iudge of all controuerſies: I meane ſuch controuerſies, as are concerning religion. Now there bee two principall controuerſies concerning religion; the firſt is of the ſcripture it ſelfe, who ſhall be iudge here, or how it may be tryed, that the ſcripture is the word of God. The ſecond The iudge of the ſcripture. is of the ſenſe and interpretation of the ſcripture, who ſhal iudg of that, or how it may appeare that this, or that, is the very naturall ſenſe of the Scripture. I meane by iudgement here a definitiue ſentence pronounced and giuen with ſuch authority, as that all men muſt herein reſt. By the word ſcripture, I meane not only the ſubſtance thereof, but alſo the form of reuelation, which is alſo by diuine inſpiration. Againe, this manner of ſpeaking is improper, when we ſay of the ſcripture, that it is the iudge of controuerſies. For to ſpeake properly, the holy Ghoſt is the iudge; for the iudge muſt be a perſon, and the holy Ghoſt he is the third perſon in Trinity. The Scripture therefore is not properlie ſaid to be a iudge: but it is the voice and ſentence which the Iudg hath giuen the principall inſtrument or meane, wherby ye ſpirit ſets forth his iudgment, &

whereby he teacheth vs, and worketh faith in our hearts. And the ſpirit here iudgeth freely in and by whom he pleaſeth, being not tied to any one kind of men, as Paſtors & Doctors, but in and by whom it ſeemeth good to him. Here then three things muſt be conſidered of vs: Firſt, whether the holy ghoſt be a iudge. Secondly, whether the ſcripture be his principal voice wherby he giueth Firſt, whether the holy Ghoſt be a iudge. ſentence, or determineth any queſtion. Thirdly, whether he iudg in and by any man without difference or reſpect of perſons, or be bound to one certaine kinde or ſort of men. For the firſt queſtion, I anſwere; the holy Ghoſt is a Iudge, firſt, for that he was promiſed of Chriſt Io 14. Math 28. Mar. 16. vnto his church, at his laſt departure from the Apoſtles, & is giuen & as it were deputed Chriſts vicar on earth, both to teach and to iudge, &c. Secondly, for that among other offices of the holy Ghoſt, this is one, to iudge. But becauſe the aduerſaries do not much gainſay this aſſertion concerning Io. 16. Gods ſpirit, that by him all things are to be iudged and tried, and that by him the ſcriptures are to be interpreted, therefore we will be briefe in this point. Now for the ſecond point, that the holy ſcripture is the primarie Secondly, that the holy ſcripture is the principall voice of the iudg voice of this iudge, iudiciarie, and proper to him, whereby he begets faith in our harts; may appeare by theſe reaſons following. Firſt, the ſcripture is the word of God. Secondly, it is moſt auncient. Thirdly, it is moſt cleere or euident. To theſe I ad the teſtimonie of the ſcripture it ſelfe. Ioh. 14. 25. 26. He ſhall teach you all things, and bring all things to 
                  Suggeret. 
                  remembrance which I haue told you. And hereunto may alſo be added the common experience of the Saints. There are other meanes to prooue this, but leſſe principall, among which the teſtimony of the Church is one. The aduerſaries withſtand this concluſion, and infring it, with theſe arguments. Firſt the ſcripture is not written in mens hearts with the finger of God, neither is it the primary voice of God. Secondly, the ſcripture is of no antiquity. Thirdly, it is obſcure. Fourthly, ambiguous,

&c. Bellarmine ads more to theſe, of which ye may read in him. They conclude, that the voice of the Church is the principall and proper voice of the holy Ghoſt, as he is the Iudge of controuerſies. Their proofe is this: The ſcripture is written in the heart of the Church with Gods own finger, & this is the primary voice of God: And whatſoeuer excellency wee doe aſcribe to the ſcripture, that they attribute to their owne Church, which is nothing els but a den of theeues.
               And that the ſpirit being this great iudge, is not bound to one ſort of men, as thoſe of the Eccleſiaſticall function, the Pope and Councels (as they ſpeak) but doth performe this office without all reſpect of perſons, in whom and by whom ſoeuer it ſeemeth good vnto himſelfe; this is manifeſt, firſt: for if the holy Ghoſt be not the Iudge both of the very context of the ſcripture, whether it be Gods word, and of the interpretation of ſcripture; if he be not (I ſay) in man himſelfe, aſſuredly there can be no faith. For the ſpirit only begetteth faith in mans heart. Secondly, the holy Ghoſt executeth his other offices freely in & by any man; therefore ſo may he this function of iudging. What is meant by iudging in the holy Ghoſt▪
                   For I demand, what els is it to iudge, but to inlighten, & to teach that the ſcripture is giuen of God by inſpiration, and that this is the naturall ſenſe of this ſcripture. Thirdly, the ſame we be taught by our experience: for we find it true by experience, that he doth freely iudge in and by whom it pleaſeth him. Teſtimonies of ſcripture proue alſo this aſſertion. 1. Cor. 12. 11: And all theſe things worketh euen the ſelfe ſame ſpirit, diſtributing to euery man ſeuerallie as he will. And Eſay, 54. All thy children ſhall be taught of God. Ier. 31. I will write my lawes in their harts. The aduerſaries impugne this truth of God with ſome argumēts of their owne, of which ye may reade in Bellarmine. And theſe men binde the holy Ghoſt to the Pope, and to councels confirmed by him, which point our men impugne alſo & refute with many arguments, of which this

is one: that of their concluſion, this muſt be the conſequent, that the Pope and his councels muſt be aboue the ſcriptures: which thing is abſurd to be graunted. See more arguments of this ſubiect in their diſputations.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI. Of the eight propertie, and the tenth controuerſie.
               
               
                  LASTLY, we auouch that the ſacred ſcripture is of higheſt authority, excellency and 10. Propertie.
                   dignity on the earth. Here againe by this word ſcripture, we vnderſtand both the ſubſtance of it, and the writing. And here wee meane it hath ſuch excellency, as makes it moſt worthie of credit, and whereby alſo it gaines authority and eſtimation to the Church. For which cauſe the Church is called the Pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. And it hath many other titles, which are giuen to it often in the ſcriptures. This is prooued by the former demonſtrations, as theſe: The ſcripture is the word of God, it is moſt perſpicuous, it is moſt pure and ſimple, &c. Ergo.
               
               The aduerſaries vary in iudgment touching this authority of Scripture: For ſome of them detract from this ſoueraigne authority of it, affirming that of it ſelfe it is not authentical, but takes authoritie and eſtimation from the Church. Of this minde are theſe, Eckius in Enchiridio. Pighius in his booke de Hierarchia, and one Hermannus
                  
an impudent Papiſt, he with a black mouth auoucheth it, that the ſcripture is of no more validity without the teſtimony of the Church, then AEſops Fables, &c. Others, more late writers and more ſubtile, ſay, that the ſcripture hath authoritie in and by it ſelfe, and is authentical; but not to vs, before the church approue it, and aſcertain it to be ſo. Of this iudgmēt be theſe: Bellarmine, Coclaeus, Canus, Stapleton, Caniſius, &c. They which ſpeake thus, that the written word of God is not authenticall to vs, before the iudgment of the Church be manifeſted: theſe men (I ſay) haue this meaning, that we bee not bound to beleeue that the Scriptures bee authenticall, before the iudgment of the Church be paſt of it; and that we ſinne not at all, if wee beleeue them not before the definitiue ſentence of the Church. But we hold this to be falſe alſo, to ſay that the ſcripture is not to vs authenticall, without the authority of the Church: For it is the holy Ghoſt that teacheth euery man to know & beleeue that the ſcripture is authenticall, and hath ſoueraigne authority in it ſelfe. And this he teacheth, not by any externall meane How the holy Ghoſt teacheth vs what authority the ſcripture hath. firſt, but by the very ſacred ſcripture, by which alone he properly breeds faith in our hearts to beleeue and apprehend this truth of God. And ſo we reſting on this illumination of the holy ghoſt, teaching vs by the ſcripture, that this is the excellencie and authority of the ſcripture, doe beleeue this to be ſo, albeit the whole world did oppoſe it ſelfe againſt vs. And thus farre of the more eſſentiall queſtions concerning ſcripture.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII. Queſtions more accidentall concerning the holy Scripture: and firſt of the bookes wherein the ſame is contained.
               
               
                  THE firſt queſtion is concerning the books of holy ſcripture: Theſe bookes are commonly called (for the excellency of them) The Bible. The Bible, as it is commonly receiued and caried in hands, containes in it two ſorts of books: the firſt is of books Canonicall: and the ſecond is Apocryphal. Regular or Canonicall bookes are ſuch, as giue rule and direction touching faith and manners. The bookes of Moſes are the firſt Canon, or preſident ſent from God, Firſt Canon. which may not be iudged or tryed by any other externall Canon whatſoeuer: For there was no booke extant before the books of Moſes. The authoritie of the writer ſo holy, and the euidence of the ſpirit ſo powerfull, and the holineſſe of theſe books (to paſſe by other arguments) ſo great, hath gained theſe books this high eſtimation and authority in the Church. The books of the Prophets make vp the ſecond Canon: which bee adiudged canonicall Second Canon. by that externall Canon of the Moſaicall books, by which they were examined. Next, they were and are diſcerned (of ſuch as be taught of God inwardly by the holy Ghoſt) by the great euidence of Gods ſpirit which is manifeſted in them both in words and matter. The third Third Canon.
                  
Canon are the Apoſtolical books of the New Teſtament, which are adiudged and approoued as Canonicall, partly by the Canonicall books of Moſes, partly by the bookes of the Prophets, partly by the ſpiritual euidence they carry in themſelues, which the Sons of God inſtructed by his holy ſpirit, can eaſily diſcerne. The Canonicall bookes of the Bible are either of the Old, or of the New Teſtament. The Canonicall books of the Old Teſtament are theſe.
               
                  1. The 5. bookes of Moſes.
                  2. Ioſhua. 1. booke.
                  
                  3. The booke of iudges. 1.
                  4. Ruth. 1. booke.
                  
                  5. The bookes of Samuel. 2.
                  6. The bookes of Kings. 2.
                  7. The bookes of Chronicles. 2.
                  8. Ezra, 1. booke.
                  
                  9. Nehemias 1. booke.
                  
                  10. Heſter. 1. booke.
                  
                  11. Iob. 1. booke.
                  
                  12. Pſalmes.
                  
                  13. Prouerbs.
                  
                  14. Eccleſiaſtes.
                  
                  15. The book of Canticles.
                  
                  16. Eſaiah.
                  
                  17. Ieremiah.
                  
                  18. Ezechiel.
                  
                  19. Daniel.
                  
                  20. The twelue ſmall Prophets.
                  
               
               The Canonicall books of the New Teſtament are theſe, which are commonlie. receiued.
               
                  1. The Goſpel according to S. Matthew.
                  
                  2. The Goſpel according to S. Marke.
                  
                  3. The Goſpel according to S. Luke.
                  
                  4. The Goſpel according to S. Iohn.
                  
                  5. The Acts of the Apoſt.
                  
                  6. S. Pauls Epiſtle to the Romans.
                  
                  7. S. Pauls Epiſtles to the Cormthians. 2.
                  8. The Epiſtle to the Gal.
                  
                  9. The Epiſtle to the Epheſians.
                  
                  
                     10 The Epiſtle to the Philippians.
                  
                  11. The Epiſtle to the Coloſsians.
                  
                  12. The Epiſtles to the Theſſalonians. 2.
                  13. The Epiſtles to Timothie. 2.
                  14. The Epiſtle to Titus.
                  
                  15. The Epiſtle to Philemon.
                  
                  16. The Epiſtle to the Hebrues.
                  
                  17. The Epiſtle of Saint Iames.
                  
                  18. The Epiſtles of Saint Peter. 2.
                  19. The Epiſtles of Saint Iohn. 3.
                  20. The Epiſtle of Saint Iude.
                  
                  21. The booke of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn.
                  
               
               And whereas ſome haue doubted for a time of ſome of theſe bookes, as of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues, the Epiſtle of Saint Iames, the laſt of S. Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. Iohn, the Epiſtle of Iude, and the Apocalypſe: yet they were neuer vtterly reiected, but for a time onely doubted of, whether they might be accepted as Canonical. Theſe Canonical books of the Old and New Teſtament were written by holy men, as they were moued by the holy Ghoſt, 2. Pet. 1. 21. And of theſe, ſome are called the Prophets, which wrote the bookes of the Old Teſtament, ſo called, becauſe they were gouerned by the ſpirit of prophecy: Some be called Apoſtles, ſo called, becauſe of their function, & theſe wrote the books of the New Teſtament. The books of the old & new Teſtament ſome haue their writers names expreſſely ſet downe, or noted by ſpeciall characters or ſignes: ſome haue no names at all annexed, whereby the holy Ghoſt would ſignify vnto vs, that theſe men were but inſtruments onely, and not the very authors of ſuch books: wherefore we be not ſo much

to reſpect their names, nor ſo buſily to inquire after them, if they be not expreſſed. Thus farre of the Canonicall bookes.
               Now as concerning the Apocryphall bookes: they be ſo called, becauſe the Church would haue them kept hid, and not to be read or taught publickly in the Churches; the priuate reading of them was onely permitted. The Apocryphall bookes are ſuch as were found onely annexed to the old Teſtament, and they bee eleuen in number.
               
                  1 Iudith.
                  
                  2 Tobit.
                  
                  3 Eſdras third & fourth booke.
                  
                  4 The Wiſedome of 
                     falſly ſo called. 
                     Salomon.
                  
                  5 Eccleſiaſticus.
                  
                  6 Baruch.
                  
                  7 The Epiſtle of Ieremiah. 
                     Apocryphall bookes.
                  
                  8 Additions to Daniel.
                  
                  9 The Prayer of Manaſſes.
                  
                  10 The two bookes of Machabees.
                  
                  11 The ſupplement of Heſter, from the third ver. of the tenth chap.
                  
               
               Among theſe ſome there are, which the verie aduerſaries account to be Apocryphall. Firſt, the prayer of Manaſſes. Secondly, the third and fourth booke of Eſdras. Thirdly, the third and fourth booke of Machabees, wherof Athanaſius maketh mention in his Synopſis. But we are to proue, that all theſe before named, bee Apocryphall. The firſt Argument is from the Writers: All the Canonicall bookes of the old Teſtament were written by the Prophets: But theſe were not written by the Prophets: Therfore they be not Canonical, but Apocryphal. I proue the Propoſition, Luk. 16. They haue Moſes and the Prophets, that is, the bookes of Moſes and the Prophets. Luke 24. 27. of Chriſt it is written, that he began at Moſes
                  
and at all the prophets, and interpreted vnto them in all the Scriptures, the things which were written of him: Therefore Moſes and the Prophets were the writers of the old Teſtament. To the Rom. 16. He cals the ſcriptures of the old Teſtament, the Propheticall Scriptures. And 2. Pet. 1. 19. The moſt ſure word of the Prophets. And for the aſſumption: But theſe were not written by the Prophets, 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . I proue it: Malachie was the laſt of the prophets: and betweene Malachie and Iohn the Baptiſt there aroſe no prophet. But theſe bookes were written after Malachies time, and this cannot be denied of ſome, as of Eccleſiaſticus, & the books of ye 
                  Machabees: Ergo. 2. ARG. This is from the language wherin all the canonical Scriptures were written. They were written (I ſay) in the language of Canaan, in the Hebrue tongue, which was the ſpeech of the Prophets, wherein they wrote their prophecies: But theſe bookes be not written in the Hebrue tongue, but all for the moſt part in Greeke: therfore our propoſition or aſſertion is manifeſt. The Aſſumption is euident, that I ſhall not neede to cite either the teſtimonie of the Fathers, or the aduerſaries owne confeſſion. ARG. 3. is from the teſtimonie of the old Church of the Iewes. If theſe books were Canonicall, the old Hebrues had heard ſome thing of them: But they neuer heard of them: Therefore they be not Canonicall. The Propoſition is cleere: I proue the Aſſumption. In Ezraes time all the canonicall bookes were gathered into one volume; and the Iewes care was ſuch of them, that they nūbred all the letters which were found in the Prophets, & ſet down the ſum of thē: how much more would they haue had care of theſe whole bookes, if they had heard of them. The 4. ARG. is from the teſtimonie of the late Church of the Iewes, which was in Chriſts time. If theſe books were canonicall, then the latter Rabbins or Iewiſh Writers would haue accepted them: but they did not receiue them, but reiect them: Therefore they bee not canonicall.

I proue the Propoſition: For out of all queſtion, if they had not receiued the Canonicall bookes, Chriſt would haue taxed them for it, for that he ſo reprehends them for their ſiniſter and falſe interpretations of the Canonicall Scriptures. The Aduerſaries grant the Aſſumption. The 5. ARG. is from the teſtimonie of Chriſt and his Apoſtles. If theſe before named books were canonicall, then Chriſt and his Apoſtles would haue cited them ſomewhere for confirmation of their doctrines: but that can neuer bee found they did, no not in all the new Teſtament: therefore they be not Canonicall. The propoſition is manifeſt: The matter it ſelfe will make ſure the Aſſumption. The 6. ARG. Theſe Apocryphall bookes containe ſome things differing from the canonical ſcriptures, ſome things contrarie, ſome things falſe, ſome things fabulous, and ſome things impious: Therefore theſe bookes be not canonicall. I proue the Antecedent. Tobit. 3. 8. and 3. 25. 5. 15. and 11. 12. Iudith 8. 6. and 9. 2. and 9. 13. and 16. 8. Baruch 6. 2. the Additions of Daniel 13. 1. and 14. 32. the Additions to Heſter 15. 1. 2 Mach. 2. 1. 7. 8. 27. and 12. 43. and 14. 37. and 15. 39. The 7. ARG. Theſe bookes containe contrarieties, and points repugning one another. Conferre 1. Mach. 6. 8. with 2. Mach. 1. 16. and 2. Mach. 9. 5. Conferre 1. Mach. 9. 3. and 2. Machab. 10. 1. Conferre 1. Machab. 4. 36. and 2. Mach. 10. 1. Conferre 1. Mach. 6. 17. and 2. Mach. 10. 11. The 8. ARG. is taken from an humane teſtimonie, firſt, of Councels: ſecondly, of Fathers; the ancient firſt, next, the latter writers. The Councels which giue canons touching the canonicall bookes, and the Apocryphal, are theſe for the moſt part: The Laodicen Councel, which was held in the yeere after Chriſts incarnatiō 300. The 3. Councel of Carthage in the yeere 400. The Trullan in the yeere 600. The Florentine in the yeere 1150. The Tridentine in our age. Of theſe we may reaſon thus: The Laodicen Councell (the moſt ancient here

numbred) reiects theſe bookes as Apocryphall: See the 59. Canon of that Councell: Ergo. But the aduerſaries obiect heere: that at this time before the third Councell of Carthage, the canonicall bookes were not diſtinctly known. I anſwer, firſt, that this councell was not held till foure hundred yeeres after Chriſt: but it is abſurd to ſay, that there was no Canon knowne, or that the canonicall books were not diſcerned till this time. Ergo. Secondly, I anſwer, that Councell was not general, but prouinciall: But a prouinciall Councell may not preſcribe any canon for the Catholike Church: Ergo. But, they ſay, this Councell was confirmed by that of Trullan. I anſwer, that the Laodicen Councell alſo was approued by this: and that the Trullan Councel is reiected by the Papiſts themſelues in manie things.
               Thus far of Councels: now for the ancient Fathers: they alſo did reiect theſe bookes, as Apocryphall: Ergo. I proue this by an induction. 1. Athanaſius in his Synopſis. 2. Cyril of Ieruſalem. 3. Hilary Biſhop of Pictauia. 4. Melito biſhop of Sardinia. 5. Nazianzen in his poem. 6. Hierom in his prologo Galeato, which is prefixed before the books of Kings. 7. Gregorie the Great. 8. Ioſeph againſt Appian. 9. Ruffin in the expoſition of the Symbole Apoſtolicall. 10. Auguſtine. The aduerſaries here except, ſaying: But theſe men haue ſpoken of the canon of the old Teſtament of the Hebrues (ſay they) & not of Chriſtians? I anſwer firſt, as if the Hebrues had one canon & the Chriſtians another? Secondly, they did approue that very canon of the Hebrues. But it may be (ſay they) that then peraduēture there was no Canon known or determined of by the Church. I anſwer, and I demand then, when was this decreed? and in what Councell? was this done in the Councell of Trent? but this is too late, for this Councell was euen in our age. Was it decreed in the Florentine Councell? that is but little elder. Was this Canon agreed vpon in the third Councell of Carthage?

But that Councell, 1. was but prouinciall. 2. and this is reiected of the very Papiſts themſelues in ſome things, as in the canon of the high Prieſt, which in number is the 26. They will ſay, this Councell was confirmed by the Trullan Councell. I anſwer. 1. So was the Laodicen. 2. So the canon was concluded or eſtabliſhed later, to wit, in the yeare of Chriſt 400. 3. The Trullan Councell is reiected in many things of the verie Papiſts. 4. After the Trullan Councell there were Fathers which would not receiue the Apocryphall bookes. And ſo now let vs come to the ſecond claſſe of Fathers, that is, to the latter Writers.
               Heere then I reaſon thus: The late Writers doe not reckon theſe bookes among the Canonicall: Ergo. This I proue by an induction. Lib. de Officiis▪
                   
                  Iſidore, Iohn Damaſcen, Nicephorus, Leontius, Rabanus Maurus, Radulphus, Lyranus, Carthuſianus, Abulenſis, Antoninus, Hugo Cardinalis, Eraſmus in ſome of his writings, Cardinall Caietanus. All theſe were after the Trullan Councell; yea ſome of them were reputed for ſonnes by the Church of Rome after the Florentine Councell.
               By theſe teſtimonies firſt of Councels; next, of Fathers, it is euident, that none of theſe bookes was accepted for Canonicall in anie lawfull iudgment: for if there had beene anie ſuch matter, ſo manie ancient and late Writers would no doubt haue ſo acknowledged. Wherefore theſe bookes are Apocryphall, and ſo to be accounted.
               The aduerſaries for their defence alleage alſo humane teſtimonies, and this in a manner is all they can ſay: They cite the Councels before named, as the third of Carthage, the Trullan, Florentine, and the Councell of Trent. But we reiect the two latter as tyrannicall, and congregate purpoſely to oppreſſe the truth and light of God. And touching the Trullan, and the third Councel of Carthage, we haue ſet downe our iudgment. And as

for Fathers, they bring forth for this matter principally the Popes themſelues, as Pope Innocentius, and Gelaſius, and Auguſtine in ſome place. But I anſwer, that they cannot bring ſo many as we can, nor ſo ancient for themſelues. Secondly, when theſe Fathers, which they name, call theſe bookes canonicall, which we reiect as Apocryphall, they take the name of Canonicall bookes, more largely then we, to wit, for bookes which haue ſome ſuch ſanctity, as in prophane Writers cannot be found; and they call them ſo, not for that they meane that they are of like authoritie with the Canonicall bookes of Scripture. And we denie not, but that in many of theſe ſuch holineſſe may appeare, as cannot be found in the bookes of prophane authours. And thus farre of the Apocryphall bookes.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. Of the authenticall Edition of the Bible.
               
               
                  WHereas there be extant many Editions of the Bible in diuers languages, as the Hebrue, Greek, and Latine, & other proper tongues, it is a queſtion which of theſe muſt be reputed for authenticall? I anſwer, the Hebrue edition of the old, and the Greek of the new Teſtament, is authenticall; & ſo muſt be accounted: ſo that all things are to be determined by theſe, & all other editions muſt be approoued ſo far as they agree with theſe. Wee will therefore firſt ſpeake of the Hebrue edition of the old Teſtament: we auouch then, that the Hebrue edition of

the old teſtament is authenticall. This propoſition ſhall haue his confirmation, after we haue giuen a ſhort preface touching the Hebrue tongue, and the writing of the old teſtament in that language, and the preſeruation of theſe bookes of the old teſtament, written in the Hebrue tongue to this day.
               The Hebrue tongue was the firſt, and the 
                     The Hebrue tongue onely before the floud. Gen. 11. 1. only language on earth to the floud, and to the building of the tower of Babel, Gen. 11. 1. 9. The whole earth was of one lauguage, and of one ſpeech, or Et verba erant eadem. 
                  had the ſame words. At the building of Babel began the confuſion of languages, and from the Hebrue, as from the mother of all the reſt, all other tongues had their firſt beginning: for all other languages are nothing els in a manner, but as Dialects to the The Hebrue tongue mother of all the reſt. Hebrue tongue, of which ſome reſemble their mother more then other: ſome be more eſtranged from her. In that confuſion of tongues, the Hebrue was preſerued as the wombe or mother (as Hierome ſpeaketh) of all the reſt; this was preſerued (I ſay) in the family of Heber, who was the fourth from Noah, and liued that verie time Hebers family kept the Hebrue tongue. that the tower of Babel was built, and when the confuſiſion of languages began. The Hebrue tongue then was ſo called firſt of Heber, & from him it came to his poſteritie, not to all, but to them onely of whom came Abraham: and from him continued to the verie laſt of all the Prophets: for Haggai, Zacharias & Malachie wrote their prophecies in this very language. Thus farre of the Hebrue tongue.
               The olde teſtament was written firſt in this Hebrue and holy tongue. The firſt writer was Moſes: the prophets The old teſtamēt written in Hebrue. followed him: of whom ſome wrote before the captiuitie; ſome in the captiuitie; ſome after the captiuitie: and they writ all in Hebrue, except Daniel and Ezra, which wrote ſome things in the Chaldee tongue. And this letteth not but that we may ſay, that all the old teſtament was written in the Hebrue tongue, for that the

Chaldee and Hebrue haue no great diuerſitie.
               Now to ſpeake of the preſeruation of theſe bookes of the old Teſtament: the bookes of Moſes & the prophets, that is, the old Teſtament written in Hebrue, was kept by the admirable prouidence of almighty God vnto this day. They were preſerued (I ſay) in moſt perillous & hard times, as in the burning of the citie and of the temple of The admirable prouidence of God in the preſeruation of the Bible. Ieruſalem, in the captiuity, & in that moſt grieuous perſecution of Antiochus Epiphanes: for hee raged alſo againſt theſe very books; & in the great perſecutions which were after Chriſt, vnder the Roman Emperours.
               But here it is demanded, whether the ſame very books which were written by Moſes & the Prophets before the captiuity, be come into our hands? I anſwer, for this matter, diuers men haue thought diuerſly. For there were that thought, that thoſe bookes which Moſes & the prophets left, were loſt when the temple and the citie were deſtroyed with fire, and that theſe which we haue, were repaired and written ouer againe by Ezra the Scribe, inſpired by God, & called extraordinarily for this purpoſe. Of this iudgment are theſe, Epiſt. ad Chilonem. 
                  Baſil, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, 
                  Lib. de Offic. 
                  Iſidorus, Rabanus Maurus, Leontius. It may be they were thus minded, becauſe of that ſtorie or fable rather, which we may reade Eſdras 4. 14. But that booke is Apocryphall, and reiected not onely of our Church, but alſo of the Church of Rome. The point may be thus refuted. If Ezra had written ouer theſe bookes againe, then aſſuredly it is moſt like, that he would haue written them, not in the Hebrue, but in the Chaldee tongue, or in a mixt language of Hebrue and Chaldee together: for that Ezra did write two bookes in that mixt maner, euen thoſe two bookes of Eſdras. Secondly, Nehem. 8. Ezra is ſaid to haue brought forth, and to haue read, not his owne bookes, or bookes which he had written, but the bookes of the law of Moſes. Thirdly, it is not like, but ſome godly man, or Prophet, or ſome other was

left, which in that time of the fire, preſerued theſe ſacred books, or kept ſome copie of them: & the rather, for that thē, out of al doubt, Ezechiel & Daniel the prophets liued. 4. The very name which Daniel giues to the Chaldee monarchie (calling it the golden empire) doth argue that this did not ſo rage againſt the ſacred books of God: for if this monarchy had laide ſuch violent hands on Gods books, aſſuredly the holy Ghoſt would not haue giuen it a name of ſuch excellency. Therefore that aſſertion is falſe: and the contrary is true, to wit, that the books of Moſes & the old Prophets were preſerued from daunger, when the Temple and the City were conſumed with fire, as alſo in the captiuity, and ſo be reſerued by diuine prouidence, and ſo deliuered by Gods owne hand at laſt into our poſſeſſions. Neither yet do we gaine-ſay, what the godly haue recorded, that is, that Ezra after the captiuity, did reuiſe the books of Moſes and the Prophets, digeſted them into one volume, and ſet them downe in this certaine order. Thus farre of this queſtion.
               Now it reſteth, after the premiſſes, that we prooue the Hebrue edition of the old Teſtament to be only authenticall. That edition which was written in the firſt language that euer was, and firſt in the primarie language, and hath beene preſerued in that tongue, purely & fully, euen vnto our times; I ſay, that edition of the old Teſtament is authenticall: But ſuch is the Hebrue edition: Ergo.
               
               The aduerſaries cannot deny, but that it was written, in the firſt language and mother tongue, and alſo that it was firſt written in it; and they cannot deny, but that it was preſerued in ſome purity euen vnto this day: but they will not graunt, or allow it this excellency of ſincerity and purity which we auouch. Bellarmine hath obſerued out of all the old Teſtament, 5. places only, whereby hee would prooue that the Hebrue fountaine hath loſt ſome part of this puritie. The firſt place is Eſay, 9. 6. And he Vajikra Schemo Pele.
                     
ſhall call his name (to wit, the Lord) Wonderfull. But the vulgar Latine readeth, and he ſhal be called, which reading Caluin approoueth: And therefore by Caluins confeſſion, heere the Hebrue fountaine it ſelfe is not cleere. I anſwere firſt; the ſenſe is the ſame, whether ye reade ſhall call or ſhall be called. Secondly, the letters are the ſame in both words in the Hebrue, ſhall call, and ſhall be called, the Vajikra. points being diuers do not make the body of the word to be of diuers ſignifications. Thirdly, the Hebrue Doctors, as Uatablus, ſay often, that with the Hebrues a verbe perſonal of the third perſon, is taken for an imperſonall, as heere, ſhall call, for ſhalbe called. Fourthly, Tremelius and Iunius retaine the Hebrue reading, and ſay thus, and he doth cal his name, &c.
               The ſecond place is Ier. 23. 6. And this his name, wherewith he ſhal cal him, the Lord our righteouſnes: But the vulgar Vezeh Schemo aſher jikreo, Iehouah Tſidkenu. Latin edition ſaith, that they ſhall cal him, the Lord our righteouſneſſe: and this tranſlation alſo Caluin approoueth: Therefore by Caluins teſtimony, the very Hebrue text is here corrupted. I anſwer, the ſenſe ſhall not de greatly vnfitting, if ye read whereby he ſhal cal him, to wit, the Lord our righteouſneſſe: The name going before is the name of a people of ſecuritie, of a people that dwell ſafely, as Tremelius and Iunius vnderſtand and reade the place. Thirdly, Ieremy leaues it to our free choiſe▪ Fourthly, the Hebrue Doctors Vatable, Pagnine, Arias Montanus, read vocabit, he ſhal cal; and yet turne the word, vocabunt, they ſhal cal.
               
               The third place is in the 22. Pſalm. 17. ver. They pierced 
                  Caari Iaddai Veraglai. 
                  my hands and my feete. In the Latine edition it is, Foderunt, they digged or pierced, and ſo read all Chriſtians; but the Hebrue is, Sicut Leo, as a Lion: Wherefore in this place the Hebrue text is corrupted. I anſwer, ye Maſorites teſtify that they haue read in ſome Hebrue copies Caru, which ſignifieth to dig into or to pierce. They alſo which haue ye word Caari in their books, ſay it is not to be taken here in Caari.
                  
the proper and common ſignification. The Chaldee Paraphraſt doth knit both particles together: As a Lion ſmites with his teeth, ſo haue theſe pierced, &c. But theſe were before Ierom, I meane the Maſorites, and the Chaldee Paraphraſte: therefore it is falſe, that this place was corrupted by the Iewes after Ieroms time. Ierom in his Pſalter keeps this reading Caari, and yet he tranſlates the word, foderunt, they digged or pierced. Laſtly, a certaine Popiſh writer one Auguſtine Iuſtinianus, who ſet forth the book of Pſal. coliected of many languages, doth plainly auouch it, this place is not corrupted, but that there is a defect of a word which the Chaldee Paraphraſt hath ſupplyed.
               The fourth place is Pſal. 19. 5. Their line is gone forth 
                  Becol haarets iatſa kauuam. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  through al the earth. Here not only the vulgar, but the Septuagint alſo, whom the Apoſtle to the Rom. 10. followeth, doe reade, their ſound is gone &c. therefore this place is corrupted. Let Genebrard alone anſwer this in his obſeruations on the Pſalmes, who ſaith, the Septuagint and Paule, did rather expreſſe the ſenſe of the word, then the proper and naturall▪ ſignification thereof.
               The fift place is, Exo. 2. after the 22. ver. in ye vulgar Latine edition, all this place is read of a ſecond ſon of Moſes. And ſhe bare a ſecond, whoſe name he called Eliezer, ſaying, the God of my Father is my helper, and hath deliuer
                        •
                     d me from Pharaohs hand. But all this place is not to be found in the Hebrue text: Ergo. To this I anſwere: the very Louaine editions haue here their marginal note, to put vs in mind that this place hath crept into the text, and the better ſort of the Papiſts are of this iudgement, that this place is not the natural or very text of Gods worde, as Caietanus, who writes of this place in this manner: All this clauſe of a ſecond ſonne is ſuperfluous. Wherefore Bellarmine can not conclude by theſe places, that the Hebrue edition is corrupt, and therefore is not authenticall.
               I ſhall conclude contrarily with this one argument, that

the Hebrue edition is not corrupt: If the Iewes corrupted it, it was before Chriſt or after: But not before Chriſt; which point (to paſſe by all teſtimonies of auncients) 
                     The Iewes before Chriſt did not corrupt the Hebrue: Chriſt is witneſſe, and ſo the apoſtle, Rom. 3. 1. I make euident with this one reasō. If the Iewes had corrupted the Hebrue text, Chriſt would haue texed them for ſo horrible an offence: But we neuer find that Chriſt ſo chargeth them for any ſuch cauſe: but contrarily, we reade that hee ſends them to that very Hebrue edition, which they had in their hands: Search the ſcriptures, ſaith he, Io. 5. 39. The Scripture was not corrupted after Chriſts time: which aſſertion I proue (to paſſe by the authority of auncients) with this one argument. The Iewes could not corrupt al the Hebrue copies, albeit they were neuer ſo willing to effect it, for that they were now for the moſt part come to the hands of Chriſtians. Hence it followeth, that if the Hebrue text was not corrupted neither before Chriſts time, nor after his comming; then was it not corrupted at all. But happily they will ſay, that the Iewes corrupted it after Auguſtine and Ieromes 
                  The Iewes coulde not corrupt the Hebrue after Chriſts comming time? I anſwere, in what places? For as touching Bellarmines 5. places, we haue already ſhewed, that both in Ieroms time and before, theſe places were thus read, as we read them this day. Wherefore we conclude, the Hebrue edition is moſt pure, and conſequently in the old Teſtament, this edition only is authenticall.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIX. Of the Greeke edition of the New Teſtament.
               
               
                  WHereas there bee many editions of the new Teſtament, wee ſay the Greeke only is the authenticall: which firſt I demonſtrate on this manner. Firſt in Chriſts time and the Apoſtles, the Greeke tongue among the Gentiles was of greateſt excellency. Secondly, and as it was accounted of beſt note; ſo was it moſt famous and moſt common in the world: For albeit as then the Romane Empire was moſt large & great; yet the Latine tongue was not ſo common, as is teſtified by a good Cicero in oratione pro Archiae poëta. writer of that age. Thirdly, the Idolatrie and ſuperſtition of the Gentiles, and all the Philoſophy of the Greeks was written in the Greek tongue. The Lord hauing theſe and ſuch like reſpects, no doubt, at what time it pleaſed him to carry his Goſpell from the narrow bounds of Iewrie into the great and ſpacious field of all the world: It was the Lords will and pleaſure, I ſay, at that time that the Goſpel ſhould be written principally in the Greeke tongue.
               The writers they were, ſome of them, Apoſtles; ſome Euangeliſts; al which firſt wrote in Greek, except Mathew and the author to the Hebrues. For firſt concerning Mathew,

                     
                        In Synopſi. 
                     Athanaſius ſaith, he wrote firſt in Hebrue; the ſame ſaith 
                        Lib. 3. Irenaeus, & Incarmine. 
                  Naztanzen and Ierom, 
                  
                     In Praefat. in 4. Euang. ad Damaſ. et in Catalog. in Math.
                   who ſaith that Mathew firſt in Hebrue. in his time Mathews Hebrue copie was reſerued in the library of Ceſaria which Pamphilus the Martyr built. Athanaſius ſaith, that Saint Mathews Hebrue edition was tranſlated into Greeke by Iames the Apoſtle: others ſay, by Saint Iohn the Apoſtle: others by Mathew himſelfe. Thus write the Fathers, but their aſſertion hath no ſtrong grounds. For when Chriſt liued with his Apoſtles, all the Iewes ſpake Syriack, that is, a language mixt of Hebrue & Chaldaiack: Therefore if Mathew had purpoſed to write in any other language but the Greek, he would no doubt haue written ſpecially in the Syriack tongue, and ſome Papiſts of this age are of the very ſame iudgment. Wherefore it is vncertaine whether Mathew firſt wrote in Hebrew, Syriack, or Greeke: yet is it more probable that he did firſt write in Greeke, both for that this tongue was not vnknowne to the Iewes; and other Apoſtles firſt wrote in it, not onely to Iewes and Gentiles indifferently, but alſo particularly to the very Iewes 
                     As Saint Iames and Saint Peter 1. Epiſt. Mathew in Hebrue. In Catolog. in Paul.
                  . Well, howſoeuer it is, the Greeke edition which we haue in the Church at this day, is authenticall; for that it was both written and approoued, while the Apoſtles were yet liuing: For as touching the Hebrue edition (if there were any) I doubt now, it can no where be found. And as for this Hebrue copie which is in many hands, it is not the true copy.
               As concerning the Epiſtle to the Hebrues, Ierom ſayth, that firſt it was written in Hebrue: next, turned into Greek either by Barnabas, or Luke, or Clement: but it is vncertaine, and it is more like to be true that this Epiſtle alſo was firſt written in Greeke. Howſoeuer it be, this Greeke edition of this Epiſtle which we haue at this day, is authenticall.
               Now the New Teſtament written in Greek by the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, hath beene ſo preſerued by the

admirable prouidence of God, euen in the middeſt of perſecutions and hereſies, vnto this age, and in all former ages ſo freed and kept by godly and Orthodoxall writers from the corruption of Heretiques: the Lord God, I ſay, hath ſo prouided that it is come into our hands moſt pure and perfect. Thus then I reaſon. That edition of the New Teſtament which was written in the beſt language and firſt, and originally written in it, to wit, the Greeke, I ſay the ſame muſt be accepted, as authenticall of all men: But ſuch is the Greeke edition of the New Teſtament, Ergo.
               
               The aduerſaries except onely againſt the purity of this edition. For albeit ſome of them, the latter, and the better learned, as Bellarmine, doe not ſay that the Greeke edition of the New Teſtament is altogether corrupt, as ſome of them haue blaſphemed; yet they ſay it is not ſo pure, that they can graunt it to be authenticall, becauſe in ſome places it is corrupt. Bellarmine brings forth ſeuen places, whereby he indeuours to prooue this aſſertion, that the Greek edition is corupt; and therefore cannot be authenticall.
               The firſt place is 1. Cor. 15. 47. The firſt man is of the earth earthly; the ſecond man is the Lord from heauē. But in the vulgar 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Latine edition, it is, the ſecond is from heauen heauenly; & this reading is approued: therfore the Greek edition is corrupt and not authenticall. I anſwer, firſt, albeit we read as the Greeke is; yet the ſenſe is good and orthodoxall, and the ſame with that which is of the vulgar reading, differing in word only, and not in matter. Secondly, the Arabick and Syriack tranſlation ſo read the place. Thirdly, the Fathers, Chryſoſtome and Theophylact ſo reade. Fourthly, Epiphanius citing 
                     Haereſeon. 22. 2 all the places which Marcion corrupted, yet remembers not this place. But (ſaith he) Tertullian ſaith, that Marcion 
                  
                     Tert. lib. 5. contra Mar.
                   hath corrupted this place. I anſwer, that Tertullian in that booke and place, reads theſe words in the very ſame manner, as we do: The

Lord from heauen.
               
               The ſecond place is 1. Cor. 7. 33. He that is maried careth for the things of the world, how he may pleaſe his wife. The 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. wife and the Virgin are diſtinctly ſet downe. So reads the Greek. But the Vulgar thus: He that is ioined to a wife careth for the things of the world, how he may pleaſe his wife, and he is diuided: but the woman that is vnmaried, and the Virgin bethinketh of the things which pleaſe the Lord both in body and ſpirit: Wherefore the Greek edition is here corrupted, and ſo can not be authenticall. I anſwere. Firſt, that the ſenſe which is by the Greek, is not only ſound, but alſo more fitting in this place, then that which is by the Vulgar tranſlation. Secondly, the Syriack tranſlation ſo reads theſe words. Thirdly, Theophylact, the Greek Scholies, and Baſil ſo read the words. But he ſayth that Ierom 
                  
                     Lib. 1. contra Iouinan.
                   auoucheth it, that this Greek reading is not Apoſtolicall: I anſwer, the ſame Ierom in another place Contra Heluidium & Euſtochium. reads theſe words as we doe: wherefore ſeeing he changeth his mind, he is not fit to iudge for this ſcripture.
               The third place is Ro. 12. 11. ſeruing the time: But the old Latin is, ſeruing the Lord: Ergo. I anſwer. Firſt, albeit 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ye read ſo the place, yet the ſenſe is good and ſounde. Secondly, the reading varies in manie Greeke copies, as witneſſeth Origens Interpreter, who reads the Lord, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and hee noteth it, that in many bookes he founde, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  the time: the ſame ſaith Ambroſe, who reades 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſeruing the time, yet ſaith he in ſome bookes wee find, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Lord. Thirdly, the Syriack, Chryſoſtome, Theophylact and Baſil read 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Lord: which reading wee beſt like: For which cauſe our Beza tranſlates the word, Domino, the Lord.
               The fourth place is Ioh. 8. where in the beginning of that Chap. many Greek copies want the ſtorie of the adulterous woman, which the cōmon tranſlation in Latin hath, & the Church approues it as canonicall. I anſwere: Firſt, that our Greeke books which we haue and hold for

authenticall, haue this hiſtorie alſo, and our Church receiues it. Secondly, yet we denie not, that this hath beene gainſaid by ſome, and the Syriacke tranſlation hath it not.
               The fift place is Mark. 16. where, in many Greeke copies, that whole chapter is wanting, which notwithſtanding the Latine edition retaineth. Ergo. I anſwer, firſt, that all our Greeke bookes, which we account authenticall, haue alſo this chapter, and our churches receiue the ſame as canonicall. Secondly, Ierome ſome-where moues ſome doubttouching it, but to no purpoſe.
               The ſixt place is 1. Ioh. 5. 7. where the ſeuenth verſe (which containes a worthie teſtimonie of the Trinitie) in manie Greeke copies is miſſing, but in the vulgar it is retained: Ergo. I anſwer, firſt, our Greeke bookes, which we hold for authenticall, haue this verſe, and our Church receiues it. Secondly, we denie not but ſome haue gaineſaid it.
               The ſeuenth place is, Matth. 13. For thine is the kingdome, 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. 
                  power and glorie, Amen. But this place is not in the vulgar tranſlation: Ergo. L. Valla anſwereth, this place is not added to the Greeke, but detracted from the Latine: and I pray you, what hereticall or vnſound matter hath this place?
               Thus we ſee then the▪ aduerſaries cannot proue by theſe places, that the Greeke edition of the new Teſtament is corrupted, and ſo not authenticall. Wherefore it reſteth, that the Hebrue edition of the old Teſtament, and the Greek of the new Teſtament, is only authentical.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX. Of the Tranſlations of the old Teſtament.
               
               
                  NOw it reſteth that we ſpeake of the Tranſlations of the old and new Teſtament. And firſt, of the tranſlations of the old Teſtament. The old Teſtament was firſt written in Hebrue, and afterwards tranſlated into diuers languages, ſpecially the Chaldee, and Greeke: Firſt concerning the Chaldiacke tranſlation; next, of the Greeke: and for the Chaldiack, we be to conſider firſt, what manner of tranſlation it is: Secondly, by whom this was done: Thirdly, what authoritie this hath. For the firſt, the Chaldiacke tranſlation is rather a Paraphraſe, then a tranſlation word for word. The Rabbins call this Authors of the Chaldee paraphraſe. paraphraſe the Targum. For the ſecond point, by whom this Paraphraſe was ſet forth: Rabbi Aquila tranſlated the Fiue bookes of Moſes. 
                  Pentateuch, and this they call Onkelos: the reſt of the bookes of the old teſtament were tranſlated, partly by Rabbi Ionathan, partly by Rabbi Ioſeph 
                  blind. 
                  Caecus: they liued not long before Chriſt, or about Chriſts time. For the third point: The Chaldee paraphraſe with the Ancients was euer of great note and authoritie, ſpecially that part of the Pentateuch: for as for the reſt of this Paraphraſe, one Praefat. in Biblia complu. tenſia. 
                  Ximenius a Cardinall auoucheth it to be full of Iewiſh fables, and of the vaine conceits of the Thalmudiſts. And thus farre briefly of the Chaldee paraphraſe.
               Now touching the Greeke tranſlation of the old teſtament:

there were diuers tranſlations of it into the Greeke tongue. Some number nine tranſlations. Of theſe the firſt and principall is that of the Septuagint, which thoſe 72. Ancients did at the appointment of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: for whereas Lib. ſtromat. 
                  Clemens Alexandrinus writeth, that the Scripture was tranſlated long before into Greeke, and that Plato had read the ſame, it is not like to be true: for neither Plato, nor anie of Pythagoras ſect euer ſaw the ſacred Scriptures. To ſpeake then of the interpretation of the ſeuentie interpreters, and to bind our ſelues to certaine queſtions, ſixe in number: the firſt may be this, whether there was euer any Greeke tranſlation ſet forth by the 72. interpreters. Secondly, if there were anie, when it was done. Thirdly, of what bookes. Fourthly, how this was done. Fiftly, what authoritie this tranſlation is of. Sixtly, whether this be the true tranſlation of the 72. Interpreters which we haue at this day?
               For the firſt queſtion, the anſwer is eaſie: for there is no doubt but that there was a Greeke tranſlation by the 72. interpreters, for that all antiquitie accords to this. This is teſtified by Lib. de menſuris & ponderib. 
                  Epiphanius, 
                  De praeparat. euangel. 
                  Euſebius, 
                  In dialog. cum Tryphone. 
                  Iuſtin Martyr, with many others. And as for the ſecond queſtion, the anſwer alſo to it is eaſie,: for all men doe agree that this tranſlation was done in the raigne, and at the appointment of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: this write and auouch theſe men, Ioſeph, Philo, 
                  
                     In Synopſi. 
                  Athanaſius, Epiphanius, Tertullian, 
                  In hiſtoria ſua de hacipſare. 
                  Ariſtaeus, and manie others. And for the third queſtion, what bookes were tranſlated by them, the anſwer is not ſo eaſie: for ſome thinke they tranſlated but the fiue bookes of Moſes only. Of this mind is In pro
                        ••
                     io antiq. 
                  Ioſeph, and Ierome ſeemes to incline this way. Others ſay, they tranſlated all the Scripture: and this is likeſt to be true: For firſt it is not like that king Ptolomie could haue contented himſelfe with the Pentateuch only. Secondly, the Apoſtles of Chriſt vſed the Greeke tranſlation in citing teſtimonies out of the prophets: but in the Apoſtles time

there was none other tranſlation, but that of the Septuagints. Thirdly, there had beene no matter of admiration, in that this worke was done with ſuch expedition (if the Pentateuch onely had beene tranſlated) and finiſhed in the ſpace of 72. dayes: for they ſay his tranſlation was miraculous. Fourthly, Chryſoſtome and Theodoret, among the Fathers, are of this iudgement: Wherefore it is beſt we hold this as moſt probable, that all the old Teſtament was tranſlated by them.
               And as for the fift queſtion, what authoritie this tranſlation had? Hereunto men anſwer diuerſly. For ſome aſcribe too much to it, as In lib. de menſuris & ponderib. 
                  Epiphanius, who ſaith, they were not interpreters only, but in a manner Prophets. Auguſtine is too much in the commendation of it, he ſaith; It was done by a ſpeciall diſpenſation of God, and thinks it to be ſet forth by diuine inſpiration. Others aſcribe not ſo much to it: In praefat. in Pentateuchon. 
                  Ierome ſaith againſt Epiphanius, they were no prophets. And often in his Commentaries, he taxeth it not onely as corrupted, but as verie faultie in it ſelfe, which thing he would neuer haue don, if he had thought this worke had beene done by diuine inſpiration. What authoritie ſoeuer this tranſlation is of, aſſuredly it can haue no more, then what may, by good right, be giuen to an interpretation: for we may not auouch it to be giuē by the inſpiration of God, nor make it of equall authoritie with the Scripture.
               As touching the ſixt queſtion, ſome thinke that the old tranſlation of the Septuagint is as yet extant; but to 
                     Old tranſlation of the 70. be ſo corrupt, that it is no wiſdome to correct either the Hebrue or Latine copies by it. Bellarmine is of this mind. Others affirme, that the ancient tranſlation of the 72. interpreters is loſt, and that this which wee haue is mixt, and verie corrupt. This alſo they proue by an induction of certaine places corrupted. Firſt, the Greeke Bible numbers from the creation of the world vnto the floud, 2242. yeares, as we may ſee, which Auguſtine, Euſebius,
                  
and Nicephorus in his chronologie: but the Hebrue veritie ſaith, the number of yeares be 1656. therefore the Greeke number exceedes the Hebrue in yeares 586. Secondly, from the floud to Ahraham, the 72. interpreters reckon of yeares 1082. but according to the Hebrue text of Gods word, there be no more yeares but 292. ſo the Greeke exceedes the Hebrue veritie 790. yeares. Thirdly, in the Greeke copie, Adam is ſaid to haue liued 230. yeares, and in ſome bookes 330. when he begat Sheth: but the Hebrue Bible ſaith, Adam begat Sheth when he was 130. yeares old. Fourthly, according to the Greeke copie Methuſalem liued fourteene yeares after the floud, which is verie ridiculous: for where liued he? or how was he kept from the waters? In the arke? That cannot be, for but eight ſoules onely entred into the Arke, among whom Methuſalem is not reckoned. The Hebrew bible ſpeakes farre otherwiſe of Methuſalems 
                  Methuſalems life and death. yeares and age: for by it we gather that he died that verie yeare, the deluge came on the whole earth, to wit, the yeare of the world 1656. Fiftly, in Ionas, the Greek copy denounceth deſtructiō to the Niniuits after the third day, As yet three dayes, & Niniuie ſhall be deſtroyed: but in the Hebrue text we reade, Yet fortie dayes, and 
                  
                     Chap. 3. 4. 
                  Niniuie ſhall be deſtroyed. By theſe places wee ſee there is great difference betweene the Greekes and the Hebrues in their numbring: but all agree that they Hebrue numbers are true. 
                     De ciuitate Dei lib. 18. 
                  Auguſtine fames, I know not what myſterie in this diuerſitie of numbers, to defend the authoritie of the 72. Interpreters, which notwithſtanding hee could not maintaine in the place concerning Methuſalem. Ierome deales more plainely and faithfully, ſaying, that the Septuagint haue erred in their numbers. By theſe before cited places, and many ſuch like corrupted, wee conclude, that this Greeke tranſlation which is nowe extant, is not that which the 72. ancient Iewes wrote; or if it be the ſame, that it is ſo corrupted, as we may reckon

it to be of very ſmall authoritie.
               Thus farre of the Greeke edition of the 72. interpreters: now we are to conſider of other Greeke tranſlations, which were written after that the Goſpell was publiſhed farre and neere among the Gentiles. And there be eight ſeuerall tranſlations numbred. The firſt was Aquilas written in Adrian the Emperours time, as teſtifieth Epiphanius. This Aquila was firſt a Pagan, and after turned Chriſtian, and was baptized: after this being admoniſhed, Aquila Synopenſis, and his apoſtaſie. for his ſtudies in iudiciall aſtrologie; and at laſt caſt out of the Church for his obſtinacie; he fell away to the Iewiſh religion: and conuerſing with the Iewes, hee learned the Hebrue tongue, and then and there tranſlated the old Teſtament out of the Hebrue into Greeke, but with a peruerſe and froward mind (as ſaith Theodoret) purpoſely intending to obſcure the doctrine of Chriſt, and to colour his apoſtaſie.
               After this tranſlation of Aquila, followed Theodotions, in the raigne of Commodus the Emperour, as Epiphanius alſo writeth. This man was of Pontus, and of the ſect of Marcion the heretike, after a time renouncing his ſect, and abiuring all Chriſtian religion, he fell to Iudaiſme; and hauing learned the Hebrue tongue, he tranſlated in like manner the old Teſtament into Greeke, but with a malicious heart, and vnfaithfully (as Theodoret ſpeaketh) intending the confutation of his owne ſect.
               After this tranſlation of Theodotion, followed that of Symmachus, in the raigne of Seuerus Auguſtus. This man Symmachus trā
                     ſlation. was a Samaritane by birth and countrie, and for that hee could not attaine ſome ſuperioritie hee deſired in his owne countrie, he fell in like manner into Iudaiſme, and was circumciſed the ſecond time: & how this was done, Epiphanius noteth it out of 1. Cor. 7. 18. to wit, by gathering his vncircumciſion, after his firſt circumciſion; that ſo there might be matter for a ſecond circumciſion. This man tranſlated the old Teſtament out of Hebrue into

Greeke; but vnfaithfully (as Theodoret ſaith) intending moſt the confutation of the Samaritans, of whom he had his firſt beginning.
               After this tranſlation of Symmachus, there were two others, whoſe names bee not knowne. The one was found in Iericho, laid vp in great veſſels for the preſeruation of it, in the raigne of Caracalla the Emperour. The other was found at the North-Nicopolis, in the time of Alexander the Emperour, the ſonne of Mammaeas. This Apud Nicopolia Aquilonarem, becauſe there were three of that name. is teſtified by Epiphanius, Theodoret, and others.
               After all theſe followed Origen, who liued in the yeare of Chriſt 261. in the daies of Valerian & Galienus the Emperours. Origen laboured exceedingly in the conference of ſuch tranſlations as he found extant before his time: for he gathered into one volume foure tranſlations, to wit, firſt, Aquilas: ſecondly, Symmachus: thirdly, the Septuagint: fourthly, Theodotions: and ſet them down in foure diſtinct columnes, and this was Origens Tetrapla. This doue, hee added to theſe foure columnes, 
                     Origens 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   two more of the Hebrue text; the one ſet downe in Hebrue; the other in Greeke characters: and this was Origens Hexapla. Laſtly, to the ſix former columnes, he annexed 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the two editions before noted to bee of vnknowne Authors: and this was called Origens Octapla, a worke of 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . great labour and excellencie, the loſſe whereof hath beene, no doubt, no ſmal domage to the Church of God. Origen in theſe his works had his marginal ſtarres, to obſerue what he liked: his long ſtrokes, to put out what he diſliked: his little labels for addition, and his ſecond labels for a ſecond addition, according to the varietie and diuerſitie of his copies. A certaine godly man complaining for the loſſe of theſe works, ſaid, Well we may deplore the loſſe of theſe works, but reſtore the ſame we cannot.
               After Origen there was one Lucianus tranſlation about Lucianus. 
                  Diocletians time. This man was a miniſter of the

Church of Antioch, and a martyr. A copie of this edition (as I haue read) was found written with this martyrs owne hand, and kept in a marble cheſt at Nicomedia. Hierome alſo writeth, that in his time there were Greeke copies, which were called by Lucians name.
               Finally, after Lucians tranſlation, followed another edition, ſet forth by one Heſychius, which corrected the interpretation of the Septuagints, and gaue it to the Heſychius. Churches of Egypt. And thus farre of the eight Greeke tranſlations which were after Chriſt, all which be loſt: howbeit the Papiſts ſell for good Canonicall Scripture, certaine remnants (as they ſay) of Theodotions tranſlation, Dan. 13. and 14. chap. a fragment which that foule heretik & Apoſtata left in their ſafe keeping. For as concerning this Greeke edition of the old Teſtament which is now extant, howſoeuer it comes to vs, we haue none pure, but mixt and corrupted, as we haue before obſerued. And thus farre of the tranſlations of the old Teſtament: firſt the Chaldee Paraphraſe; next the ſundrie Greeke copies of all ages.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI. Of the Syriacke tranſlation of the new Teſtament.
               
               
                  NOw let vs come vnto the tranſlatiō of the new Teſtament. The new Teſtament being firſt written in Greeke, was tranſlated into the Syriacke tongue, which in the dayes of Chriſt and his Apoſtles was the proper and naturall

language of the Iewes, by reaſon of their long captiuity in Babylon, and for that the Aſſyrians were ſo tranſported to the poſſeſſion of Iurie. It is vncertaine who was the Author of this tranſlation, as alſo at what time it was done: Tremelius thinks it moſt like to be true, that this was done: in the primitiue Church, in the very beginning; & that by the Apoſtles themſelues or their Diſciples. He prooues alſo the reuerend antiquity thereof, Firſt by the elegancy of the tongue. Secondly, by the defects & loſſe of certaine books and places of the N. Teſtament, which Syriack tranſlation anncient. are to be found in the Syriack tranſlation: as the 2. Epiſt. of S. Peter. The 2. and 3. of S. Iohn. The Epiſt. of Iames and of Iude, the Apocalypſe, and the ſtorie of the woman taken in adulterie, which is found in the beginning of the 8. Chap. of the Goſpell according to S. Iohn. By this defect he gathereth, that ſeeing the Syriack tranſlation was extant before the Church accepted theſe books as canonicall, the Syriack tranſlation muſt be very auncient. Againe, he ſaith he found a ſingular faithfulneſſe in the Syriack tranſlation, by conferring it with the Greeke and originall: which experience any ſhall finde, if they ſhall pleaſe to conferre both languages together. Of the premiſſes the concluſion is this, that the Syriack tranſlation both was in elder ages, and is now at this day of great authority in the Church. Thus farre of the Chaldiack and diuers Greeke tranſlations of the old Teſtament, and of the Syriack tranſlation of the New.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXII. Of the Latin tranſlations of both Teſtaments.
               
               
                  WE be now to ſpeake of the Latin tranſlations of the New Teſtament, and of the Old. The Latine tranſlations of the Bible were very many. This ſay 
                     De doctrina Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 11. 
                  Auguſtine and In prooemio in lib. Ioſuae. 
                  Ierom, who complaineth much of the varietie and diuerſity of Latin tranſlations. Of all the Latin tranſlatiōs, the firſt was an Italian: 
                     De doctr. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 15. 
                  Auguſtine preferres this before all the reſt, as keeping moſt ſtrictly to the wordes of the originall, and beeing more perſpicuous then others in ſentences. This was not that tranſlation of Ierom: for it is euident, this was far more ancient then that tranſlation of Ierom. And who ſhould bee the Author of this, it is vncertaine.
               After this Italian tranſlatiō, Ieroms followed next: who is ſaid to haue left a double tranſlation in Latin of the old Teſtament. In the firſt, he followed the 72. interpreters: in the latter, the Hebrue originall text. For as touching the New Teſtament, Ierom is ſaid not to haue tranſlated it into Latin, but to haue corrected the old Latin tranſlation: as himſelfe affirmeth it in many places. This edition of Ierom, when it came forth firſt, it began forthwith to be 
                     Aug. Epiſt. 10. ad Hicron.
                   accepted, and read publiquely in the Churches; but with no contempt of that old Italian copy.

For as Gregorie ſaith, theſe two tranſlations, that elder Italian, and the latter of Ierom, were of greateſt note in the Latine Churches, and moſt vſed. At length all thoſe old Latine tranſlations together with that Italian, were not reſpected; and Ieroms tranſlation only remained, if we may truly auouch this to be Ieroms tranſlation, which at this day is vſed, and is caried about in his name: for the learned greatly doubt of this matter. Here therefore we bee to conſider of this point: And two queſtions principally are to be anſwered: Firſt, who was the Author of this: The ſecond, what authority it may haue in the Church.
               As touching the Author of this Latin tranſlation, diuers men ſpeake diuerſly. Some thinke it was Ieroms, and that it is pure without any mixture: So think al Papiſts for the moſt part, ſpeciallie the Ieſuits. Others thinke it not to be Hieroms, as Sanctes 
                  
                     In praef. in Interp. Bibl. ad Clement. 7. Pontif.
                   
                  Pagninus, and Foroſemprouianus. 
                  Paulus a Biſhop; to paſſe by Eraſmus, Munſter, and other popiſh writers. Others deeme it to be Hieroms, but not to want corruption: of this iudgmēt are theſe men, Ioannes Driedo, Sixtus Senenſis; and Bellarmene ſeemes to incline this way, as may eaſily be gathered by his propoſitions and reaſons touching this matter. We ſay, it is neither Hieroms, nor yet Not his in whole, nor yet in parte. pure, nor mixt: and this we proue on this manner. Hierom tranſlated the old Teſtament out of the Hebrue into Latine accurately, or exactly: But this vulgar edition is not exact: therefore it is not Hieroms. The propoſition is euident: for Hierom himſelfe teſtifieth in many places of his works, that he had labored and done this tranſlation very exactly: as in his preface before the 5. books of Moſes; in his Preface before the books of the Kings; in his Preface on the Pſalter: in all which places he ſaith, he changed nothing, but followed faithfully the Hebrue text, and he appealeth to the Iewes to teſtify of the faithfulnes of his tranſlation. And 
                     De ciuitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 43. 
                  Auguſtine affirmeth it, that the very Iewes did confeſſe his tranſlation was ſound

and true. 
                     Hiſpalenſis▪ lib. 6. Etymolog. cap. 5. 
                  Iſidore preferres Hieroms tranſlation before all mens, for keeping himſelfe more ſtrictly to the words of the Hebrue text, and for his perſpicuity of phraſe: wherefore if we may beleeue theſe men, Hieroms tranſlation was exactly done. So farre the propoſition, the aſſumption followeth: But the vulgar Latine edition is not accurate; neither doth it agree with the originall the Hebrue text, yea it ſo far diſſenteth from it, that neceſſarily one of theſe two aſſertions muſt be true, either that this Latin edition is moſt corrupt, or that the Hebrue fountaine is moſt troubled and diſordred: And this laſt point Bellarmine himſelfe dare not auouch, but taxeth ſuch as do ſo affirme, and that worthily.
               It reſteth therefore that we proue this great diſagreement, betweene the Latine edition and the Hebrue text. And this can no otherwiſe be done, but by conference of the one with the other. Let the compariſon begin at the book of Geneſis; & compare not al places which diſſent (for that were infinit) but ſome ſpeciall places, whereby ye may ſoone conceiue of the reſt, and iudge what they be. And by this conference of places, you ſhall diſcerne that the defaults are not of one kinde, but of diuers, as for changing of words and ſentences, for defect and ſuperfluitie. For ſo many waies the vulgar Latine edition is faulty. In my iudgement this compariſon cannot better be found by any man, or meanes, then by that vulgar Latine which was corrected by Iohn Benedict a diuine of Paris, whom (that I may paſſe ouer this point briefly) I recommend vnto thee gentle reader. By this cōference that ſhall appeare, both that this is not Hieroms tranſlation, & that this vulgar Latine edition is not authenticall; ſo as we ſhal not need to ſpend▪ any time in handling the other queſtion.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIII. Of the tranſlation of the Bible into the mother tongue.
               
               
                  IT remaineth now that we ſpeake of ſuch editions and tranſlations as be in the vſuall mother tongue. I vnderſtand that tranſlation to be in the mother tongue, which is done in that language, which is vulgar & common among the people of that countrey, whoſe language it is; as the Dutch, Italian, French, Engliſh, Scottiſh, and Spaniſh tranſlations, &c. We may moue three queſtions of theſe tranſlations. Firſt, whether it be lawfull to tranſlate the ſacred Scripture into euery mother tongue. Secondlie, whether the leiturgie or common prayers of the Church ought to be in the mother tongue. Thirdly, whether it ſhal be lawfull for the common people to read the ſcriptures tranſlated into their owne language or mother tongue.
               To the firſt queſtion we anſwer, that it is lawfull, yea alſo that it is expedient it ſhould be ſo: and this we proue by ſome few arguments. Firſt, the ſacred ſcriptures muſt be read publiquely before all the people: therefore muſt they be tranſlated into their owne known language: for otherwiſe it were in vain to read them. The antecedent is proued Deut. 31. ver. 11. 12. The Lord commandeth that the books of Moſes be read to all indifferently, when

they were aſſembled, Men, Women, and Children with the ſtrangers. Ier. 36. chargeth Baruch the ſcribe, that hee ſhould read before all the people the book which he had Tranſlating of the ſcripture into the vulgar tongues. Firſt argument. written from his mouth. But ſome will heere obiect, that this precept was to indure but for a time. I anſwer, the end ſhewes it muſt be perpetuall, Deut. 31. The end being this, that this people may heare, learne, and feare the Lord. This end is perpetuall, therefore ſo is the law in like manner, ſpecially ſeeing that the reading of the Scripture is the ordinarie and neceſſarie meanes whereby we be to come to this appointed end. So the antecedēt being thus cleered, it followeth neceſſarily that the ſcripture muſt be tranſlated into our knowne mother tongue.
               Arg. 2. The people are permitted to read ye Scriptures: Second argu. therfore they are to be tranſlated into the vulgar tongue: for otherwiſe the common people could neuer reade them. The antecedent I proue thus. The Sacred Scriptures do furniſh vs with weapons againſt the Deuil, as we be taught by Chriſts example, Matth. 4. who gaue Sathan the repulſe, vſing none other weapons againſt him but teſtimonies of Scripture. Ioh. 5. chap. Chriſt commaunded the multitude to ſearch the ſcriptures. Acts chap. 17. the Chriſtians of Beroea are commended for ſearching the ſcriptures, whether the points were ſound and good, & agreeable to the ſriptures, which were taught by the Apoſtles. But ſee more of this antecedent in the handling of the 3. queſtion.
               Arg. 3. The very Papiſts graunt, the ſcriptures may be read before the people; but they ſay it muſt be done in an Third argu. vnknowen tongue: wherefore, I reaſon thus. If the ſcriptures muſt be read before the multitude in an vnknowen tongue, that ſhall be fruitleſſe, and without all edification: therefore they muſt be tranſlated into their knowen language. The Antecedent is prooued by, 1. Corin. 14. 6. If I ſhal come vnto you ſpeaking in tongues, what ſhal I profit you. q. d. nothing. And after in the ſame Chap. ver. 19.

                  I had rather ſpeake fiue words with my vnderſtanding, that I might alſo inſtruct others, then ten thouſandwords in a ſtrange tongue. But of this point more hereafter.
               The fourth argument: God requires in his people wiſdome, knowledge, and inſtruction: Therefore the ſcriptures Fourth argu. muſt be read, and therefore tranſlated into the vulgar tongues. The antecedent I prooue thus. Deut. 4. God wil haue his people to be wiſe & of vnderſtanding, that the nations round about hearing of this, might bee ſmitten with an admiration, and ſay, ver. 4. Only this people is wiſe, and of vnderſtanding, and a great nation. The Apoſtle, Col. 3. 16. will haue Gods worde to dwell in them richly, or plenteouſly. Paul in his Epiſtles euery where requires the Churches to whom he writes, to be filled with all knowledge. The aduerſaries contend and diſpute much againſt this knowledge which God requires in the common people.
               The fift argument. Chriſt while he liued among the Iewes, ſpake and preached vnto them in their owne mother Fift argu. tongue: The Apoſtles of Chriſt in like manner did preach the Goſpell in their vulgar tongue, as in the day of Pentecoſt, and after; and for this very cauſe, that they might ſpeake to euery nation in their owne knowen language, that gift of tongues was giuen them. Thus then I reaſon; If to preach the Goſpell in the vulgar known languages, was no profanatiō of the Goſpell; then ſo in like maner, to write the Goſpel in the vulgar known languages, is no profanation of the ſame: for there is like reaſon of both.
               The ſixt argument is from the perpetuall vſe and practiſe Sixt argu. of all the auncient Church. For in the Primitiue Church, the ſacred Scripture was tranſlated, neere hand into all languages, as the Chaldiac, the Syriac, the Arabian, the Armenian, the Egyptian, the Ethiopian, the Indian, the Perſian, the Scythian, the Sarmatian tongue. There are not a few do auouch this; 
                     Homil. 1. in Io.
                   
                  Chryſoſtome, 
                  
                     De corrigend. Graecorum Affectib lib. 5. 
                  Theodoret,

                     De doctr. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 15. Auguſtine, with others. And at this day there be extant the Chaldiac, the Syriack, the Arabick, the Egyptian, and the Ethiopian tranſlations; all which the learned ſay, were done in the Apoſtles times. Chryſoſtome turned the ſacred Scripture into the Armenian tongue, as Sixtus Senēſis reporteth. Ierom trāſlated the ſcripture into the Lingua Dalmatica. Dalmatick tongue, as theſe men do teſtify; Alphonſus a Caſtro, Eckius, Hoſius, Eraſmus. Methodius tranſlated it into the Sclauonian tongue, as ſaith Auentine in his Chronicle. Socrates tripartita hiſtoria. 
                  Vlphilas Biſhop of the Gothes, tranſlated the ſame into the Gothes language. 
                     De ciuitate Dei lib. 15. 
                  Auguſtine writeth that the old Teſtament was tranſlated into Syriack. Harding againſt Iuel, and Eckius write that the Muſcouites, and the people of Ruſſia had the ſcripture in their owne mother tongue. The hiſtorie of England written by Beda affirmeth, that the ſcriptures were tranſlated into the Engliſh tongue before his time. Beda ſaith, he tranſlated part of the new Teſtament himſelfe. Thus far the practiſe of the old church, whereby as by the reſt of the arguments afore going, it followeth, that the ſacred Scripture is to be tranſlated into euery countrey vulgar language.
               Now it reſteth to ſee what the Papiſts anſwer to this queſtion we haue in hand. Some few yeares paſt they vtterly denied that the ſacred Scripture might bee tranſlated into any mother tongue. De choris canonicis. 
                  Petrus Aſoto, Cenſura Colonienſis, and Harding before named, theſe write that ſome are of this iudgment: The Scriptures are not to be tranſlated into the vulgar languages. And for this cauſe ſuch as tranſlated Scriptures, they were baniſhed and condemned by the Pope: and their bookes were prohibited and burnt. And when they ſaw this to be odious to all men, theſe graue Fathers changed their minds, and now forſooth they auouch the Scriptures may be tranſlated into the vulgar languages, yet by the Popes permiſſion. And this, albeit it ſeeme to be ſomething diuers from the former aſſertion, yet in effect it is the verie ſame. For the

Pope will permit no man to doe this, but to ſuch a one as ſhall turne all the corruptions which are to be found in the old Latine edition into the vulgar tongue, and ſo recommend the ſame to poſterity. This is Bellarmines iudgment, and the Rhemiſts. But we auouch the contrarie, to wit, that euery godly, learned man, skilful in the tongues, may tranſlate the Scripture without the Popes permiſſion: yea, albeit he prohibit the ſame. And that it ſhall bee lawfull for the Church of Chriſt, to accept of the ſame tranſlation after examination, albeit the Pope giue none authoritie nor approbation hereunto. For in the ancient Church, when the authoritie or tyrannicall iuriſdiction of the Pope was vnknowne, the tranſlations before ſpecified, were both done and receiued of the Churches without the Pope. And thus farre of the firſt queſtion.
               It followeth in the ſecond place, whether the Leiturgie or common prayers of the Church, are to be celebrate in a knowne tongue? I meane the publike ſeruice or worſhip of God in eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies: as the publike prayers, the reading of the Scriptures, the adminiſtration of Sacraments, ſinging of pſalmes, &c. Theſe be called by the name of 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . diuine ſeruice. To the queſtion we anſwer affirmatiuely, that this publike ſeruice of God is to be done in the vulgar tongue. Our firſt argument, we take from the 1. Cor 14. where, from the 6. ver. to the 21. the Apoſtle teacheth, that nothing is to bee done in the Church in an vnknown & ſtrange language. But Bellarmine excepteth ſaying, that in that chapter the Apoſtle vnderſtandeth principally, a collation & exhortation, which in the old Church followed after the publike prayers: and to this end he ſheweth out of 
                     Apolog. 2. Note the order of the old Church on the Lords day.
                   
                  Iuſtin Martyr, the cuſtome of the old Church. The Chriſtians aſſembled on the Lords daies, and firſt, the Scriptures were read: then after this, the chiefe miniſter of the place preached: after this the Sacramēts were adminiſtred: laſtly,

they did vſe conference of diuine arguments, or of godly queſtions. I anſwer, the Apoſtle here intreateth generally of all eccleſiaſticall duties, and that in this order; firſt, ye haue a general doctrine from the ſixth verſe to the fourteenth. Next, there followeth a ſpecial inſtruction how prayers muſt bee conceiued, how to ſing pſalmes, not in an vnknowne tongue, but in a knowne or common language, to the ninteenth verſe. After this, he returnes to his generall doctrine againe.
               
                  Bellarmine excepteth againe, that Paul here ſpeaketh of ſongs, which in that meeting they ſung, which were endued with ſome extraordinarie gift of the holy Ghoſt. I anſwer, the Apoſtle diſtinctly nameth prayers & ſongs: againe, he ſpeaketh of thoſe prayers and thankſgiuings, whereunto the people did anſwer, Amen: now the people did not anſwer Amen, but to the publike prayers: wherfore he meaneth here publike prayers conceiued in the diuine adminiſtrations, in the publike aſſemblies.
               
                  Bellarmine againe obiecteth: The publike prayers at Corinth were in the Greeke tongue, a ſpeech wel known to the people, and that the Apoſtle knew: and therefore If in Greeke, not in Latine. there was no need to preſcribe any ſuch rules for their diuine ſeruice. I anſwer, albeit it be graunted that the common prayers, &c. at Corinth were done in the knowne mother tongue; yet it followeth not but that the Apoſtles doctrine is generall, of all Eccleſiaſticall offices to be done in the publike aſſemblies. Next, it is moſt like, that there were at Corinth ſome which had the gift of tongues, which abuſed it to vaine oſtentation, euen in the publike adminiſtration, and that is it which the Apoſtle taxeth in that Chapter. And thus farre of the firſt Argument.
               The ſecond is of the ſame Apoſtle, in the ſame chap. v. 6. If I ſhall come vnto you ſpeaking with tongues, that is, vnknowne 
                     Argument. 2. tongues, what ſhall I profit you? Hence I conclude, the publike worſhip of God muſt be not in an vnknown,

but a knowne language. Bellarmine anſwereth, that hee which adminiſtreth the publike prayers in an vnknowne tongue, ſhall profit others: for it is ſufficient that God vnderſtand him: And this he goeth about to cleare by a ſimilitude: Like as (ſaith he) if a man ſpeake for a ruſtick or rude man, ignorant in the Latine tongue, in Latine to the king, this ſhall ſuffice if the king vnderſtand him, to conferre any benefit by the king vpon the ſame ignorant perſon. I anſwer, what is this els but to ſay, that the publike adminiſtration doth profit the people by vertue or merit of the worke done, albeit in the meane time the Opus operatum. people be without faith & knowledge of the true God: but of this in place appertaining.
               The third Argument is of the ſame Apoſtle in the ſame chap. verſ. 11. He that ſpeaketh vnto mee in a ſtrange 
                  3. Arg.
                   
                  tongue, ſhall be as a Barbarian: therefore the publike adminiſtration of the word and Sacraments, and of all Gods worſhip and ſeruice muſt be in the vulgar and knowne tongue. Bellarmine anſwereth, that hee which ſpeaketh Hebrue, Greeke, or Latine, albeit he bee not vnderſtood; yet is he not to be reputed as a Barbarian, becauſe theſe tongues be not barbarous: but if he ſpeake in anie other language, he is to bee accounted barbarous. I anſwer. If the ſpeaker (who ſpeaketh in theſe tongues) be not vnderſtood, he ſhall be to him that vnderſtandeth him not, as barbarous. For ſo the verie Poet auoucheth it of himſelfe, When, ſaith he, he was in exile in Pontus, he complaineth, that albeit he ſpake Latine, yet hee was accounted of thoſe ſtrangers as barbarous:
               
                  Barbarus hîc ego ſum, quia non intelligor vlli.
               
               And when it was obiected to Anacharſis the Philoſopher at Athens, that he was barbarous: he anſwered, The Athenians are Barbarous vnto me.
               The fourth Argument is of the ſame Apoſtle in the 4. Arg.
                   ſame chap. ver. 16. When thou bleſſeſt with the ſpirit, to wit, ſpeaking in an vnknowne tongue, how ſhall he that occupieth

the roome of the vnlearned ſay Amen, at thy thankeſgiuing; ſeeing he knoweth not what thou ſayeſt? Whence it followeth neceſſarily, that all publike prayers and ſeruice of God, muſt be done in the knowne vulgar tongue. Bellarmine anſwereth, that it ſufficeth, if ſome of the people vnderſtand and anſwer Amen: yea, it ſufficeth, if he whō they call the Clarke, ſay Amen for the people. I anſwer, this was not the cuſtome of that old ancient Church, which neuer knew what a Clearke meant.
               My fift Argument is of the ſame Apoſtle in the ſame 5. Arg.
                   chapter, verſ. 40. Let all things in the Church be done decently, and in order: But if ye Miniſter ſhal pray in an vnknowne tongue, and the people ſhall conceiue other prayers differing from the Miniſters: then ſhall the Miniſter in the publike congregation haue his prayers, and euery one of the people his owne prayers alſo, and not the ſame with the Miniſter. What good decencie can be in this, when the people are ſo diuided in prayer, which in the publike aſſemblie ſhould offer vp with one mind, and with one mouth, one and the ſame prayer vnto God?
               The ſixt Argument is from a point which Bellarmine himſelfe yeeldeth. He granteth that the publike adminiſtration 6. Arg.
                   of prayers, &c. at Corinth, were done in the known Greek tongue: wherfore then may not all other Churches in the like manner haue their Leiturgie in the vulgar knowne language? What can he anſwer heere, but this happily, that the publike adminiſtration at Corinth was done in the mother tongue, not for that it was the vulgar tongue, but becauſe it was Greeke: for Papiſts giue the Greeke tongue (when they pleaſe) ſome prerogatiue.
               The ſeuenth Argument is from another point which 7. Arg.
                   
                  Bellarmine graunteth. The Collations (as himſelfe ſpeaketh) and the exhortations ought to be done in the mother tongue: wherefore in like manner may not the publike adminiſtration of Gods worſhip be done in the

mother tongue beſt known to ye people? He anſwereth, that the reaſon is not the ſame of the collation & ſeruice; For (ſaith he) the collations tend to the inſtruction and conſolation of the people: but the publike ſeruice principally concernes Gods worſhip. I anſwer, Doth not all the people worſhip God in the publike adminiſtration or ſeruice of God, and therefore ought they not to worſhip God in a knowne language, if they wil worſhip their God in faith?
               The 8. Argument is from the practiſe of the old and beſt Church. In elder ages, ſo manie tranſlations were done principally to this end, to celebrate the publike ſeruice of God, and that herein the Scriptures might bee read to euery man in his owne knowne mother tongue. Lib. de origine Bohemorum. 
                  AEneas Syluius writeth, that to Cyril & Methodius it was permitted, that the people of Morauia ſhould haue their common prayers in the mother tongue. And at this day the people of Armenia, AEthiopia, Egypt, and the Muſcouites haue their common prayers in their known tongue. Here Bellarmine anſwereth, all theſe are heretiques. I ſay they be no more heretiques then Papiſts. Aſſuredly as touching publike prayers, I had rather be in this hereſie with them, then with the Papiſts, as they thinke, to meane well. And thus for our iudgement in this matter.
               The Aduerſaries ſay, that the publike prayers may not be in a knowne tongue, but in Hebrue or Greeke, as in the Eaſt and Greeke Churches; or in the Latine tongue, as in the Latine and Weſt Churches. The arguments they produce for this purpoſe, be firſt from the prerogatiue of tongues: the firſt is this, Chriſt in the title of his Croſſe, gaue honour to theſe three languages, therefore publike prayers ought to be done in theſe. I anſwer, albeit wee graunt the antecedent, the conſequent will not follow: yea rather we may infer the contrarie. The Lord would haue the cauſe of Chriſts death to be manifeſted to all people in thoſe languages, which then were beſt known:

which cannot be denied of the Greeke and Latine: therfore publike prayers ought to bee done in the vulgar tongues, and knowne to the people.
               The 2. Arg. Theſe three tongues Hebrue, Greek and Latine are of greateſt excellencie, antiquitie & authority▪ therfore the common prayers and ſeruice of God ought to be done onely in theſe tongues. I anſwer. Grant the Antecedent be true, yet the fequele is not good: for that verie gift of tongues, which was giuen the Apoſtles in the feaſt of Pentecoſt, plainly proueth, that euery toong, be it neuer ſo baſe, is ſanctified of God for holy vſes, and Note. for the execution of publique and eccleſiaſticall offices and ſeruice vnto God.
               The 3. Arg. The Scriptures was originally written in theſe three tongues: therefore the publique prayers ought to be done in theſe only. I anſwer, firſt, the Antecedent is falſe: for neither the whole Scripture, nor anie part thereof was written firſt in the Latine tongue. For whereas they ſay, Saint Marks Goſpell was firſt written The Papiſts ſay Saint Marks Goſpe
                        •
                      was firſt written in Latin. in Latine, it is falſe: but of this point elſe where. Next, I anſwer, that it will not followe of that Antecedent, that publike prayers ſhould be ſayd in vnknowne tongues; but rather the contrarie followeth: for that whereas the Scripture was firſt written in theſe two tongues, Hebrue and Greeke, for this very cauſe, for that euen then, and in thoſe times, theſe two languages were moſt common, and beſt knowne to the people: hence it followes rather, I ſay, that the publique prayers ought to bee in the moſt common and beſt knowne tongues.
               Thus farre we haue heard of arguments drawne from the prerogatiue of tongues: now follow arguments from the practiſe and vſe of the Church. The firſt here is this: From Ezra vntill Chriſt the Scripture was woont to bee read in the Church of the Iewes in the Hebrue tongue, that is, an vnknowe tongue: Ergo publike prayers may be ſaid in an vnknowne tongue. I anſwer. I grant the

Scriptures were read in the Hebrue tongue: but I denie that this was an vnknowne tongue. For Nehem. 8. it is very cleare, that the ſacred Scripture which Ezra read in Hebrue, was vnderſtood by the people which were preſent and heard it. Whereupon the contrarie conſequent muſt follow: The Scripture was read in the Church of the Iewes in elder ages in a known tongue: therfore it muſt be read at this day in popular and knowne tongues.
               The ſecond Argument is from the practiſe of the Iewiſh Synagogue of theſe times. To this day (ſaith hee) the Scripture is read in the ſynagogue of the Iewes in the Hebrue tongue: therefore publique prayers muſt be celebrate in an vnknowne tongue. I anſwer. The Argument followes not from the euill example of the ſynagogue of the Iewes; for that this reading of the old Teſtament in an vnknowne tongue, is the cauſe wherefore ſo manie of them hold backe, and will not be conuerted to the faith of Chriſt.
               The third argument is from the practiſe of the primitiue Church. In the primitiue Church the publike prayers were ſaid in one of theſe 3. tongues: therfore the concluſion followeth. I anſwer, the Antecedent is falſe, for that, as hath beene before ſhewed, in the time of the old Church, yea in the verie dayes of the Apoſtles, the Scriptures were tranſlated in a manner into all languages.
               The fourth Argument is from the continuall practiſe of the catholike Church: for in it the publique prayers were euer either in the Greeke or Latine tongue. I anſwer, if by catholike Church, they meane the Church of Rome, then I weigh not the example and practiſe thereof: but if by this word they meane the true catholike Church, then it is cleare alreadie by that which is before deliuered, that the Antecedent is falſe. And thus farre of theſe Arguments taken from the practiſe and vſe of the Church.
               To the former Arguments, they adde more from a

finall cauſe: The publike adminiſtration of Gods ſeruice and worſhip being performed of all or moſt Churches in one tongue, to wit the Latine, this might ſerue well for the preſeruation of the vnitie of faith. To this I anſwer, this ſerues notably for the continuance and increaſe of vnbeleefe and ignorance. Againe, our verie experience teacheth (by Gods good bleſſing in theſe times) that notwithſtanding the great variety of tongues in the reformed Churches, yet they agree well (to God be praiſe) in the vnitie of faith.
               Next, they reaſon from the little good which hence enſueth, as they imagine: It profits the people nothing at all that the Scriptures be read in the vulgar tongues: for they vnderſtand not any ſentence of Scripture, albeit they know the words? To this I anſwer: Euerie one of the vnlearned, if they come to heare the Scriptures with Gods feare and reuerence, they ſhall reape and receiue ſome profit by it.
               Againe, from another danger which may happen, they reaſon thus: The reading of the Scriptures in a knowne tongue may more hurt then profit the people: for deuotion hath rather decreaſed then increaſed, ſince publike prayers or ſeruice of God hath beene celebrated in popular tongues. I anſwer, the conſequent is not good: The ſacred Scripture read in the mother tongue hurts manie; therfore it is not ſo to be read at all: becauſe accidentally, and through the default and corruption of the people, it hurts, and profits not. So the preaching of the Goſpell is the ſauour of death vnto death vnto manie; therefore the Goſpell is not to bee preached. Furthermore, be it knowne that this is no religion, nor true pietie, which is ſo coupled with ignorance, but a damnable ſuperſtition, when as the ſacred Scriptures are read, and prayers adminiſtred in a ſtrange and vnknowne tongue. Thus far theſe three Arguments from the finall cauſes and effects.
               
                  
Againe, they reaſon from an inconuenience, firſt, on this wiſe. If the ſcriptures muſt bee read in the vulgar tongue, then tranſlations muſt bee renewed in euery age: for auncient words weare out of vſe: and this is inconuenient. I anſwere, what loſſe is it, if tranſlations be reuiſed and renewed in euery age? for the whole tranſlation needes no renuing, but ſome words which happily are become obſolete and out of vſe.
               Againe, an other euill which might follow this concluſion is this. The Pope vnderſtandeth not all vulgar tongues: But the publique prayers muſt be celebrate in a language which the Pope knoweth: Ergo. I anſwere, it is not neceſſarie that prayers be in that tongue which the Pope knoweth. This they proue Vne conceſſo errore mille conſequuntur. becauſe he is the vniuerſall Biſhop: And this I deny alſo. Wherefore there is no domage ſhal follow, if publique prayers be contained in a language which the Pope knoweth not. And thus far the 2. queſtion.
               The 3. queſtion followeth: whether it is lawfull for the lay people, as they call them, or the vulgar ſort, to read the holy ſcriptures? We auouch that it is lawfull for euery one, euen of the baſeſt of the people to read the holy Scriptures. For this point ſee Deut. 6. Chap. & 11. c. and 17. c. Ioſh. 1. c. and 10. c. 5. Search the Scriptures, ſaith the Lord Chriſt. Acts. 17. the men of Berea ſearched the Scriptures, and for this cauſe are commended by the holy Ghoſt. Matth. 4. The example of Chriſt (who reſiſted the Deuill with no other weapons, but of the ſcripture) teacheth vs that the ſcripture miniſtreth vnto vs ſuch a furniture, as euery man muſt be prouided of to withſtand Sathan in his aſſaults againſt vs. Laſtly, this is prooued by the practiſe of the Church: For wherefore were the ſcriptures in the old church tranſlated into ſo many popular languages, but that they might be read & vnderſtood of the people? And this is our iudgement in few words. What ſay the aduerſaries? Some yeares paſt they taught

it was not lawfull at all for any of the common and lay people (as they vſuallie tearme them) to reade the holy Scriptures. Afterwards when they ſaw how odious Vide Cenſuram Colonienſem. this was, they changed their minde: and now forſooth they ſay, it is lawful to read the ſcriptures, but with conditiō 
                  if it be permitted: permitted, I ſay: of whom? They anſwer, by the Pope, his Biſhops, or inquiſitors. I demaund: what, of theſe only? They anſwer, not of theſe only, but of them with the aduertiſemēt of the pariſh Prieſt or confeſſor. Well, I vnderſtand who be to permit the reading of the holy ſcripture: now I aske, to whom is this permitted? They anſwer, not to all indifferently, but only to ſuch as the pariſh Prieſt, whom they call the Curate, ſhall well diſcerne, both by their confeſſion, and by their whole cariage of their life, to be a true Catholick, that is, a ſtubborne or ſtiffe-necked Papiſt. I ſee then to whom they yeeld thus far the reading of the ſcriptures. I demand in the next place, what tranſlations be allowed them? They anſwer, they will not haue them to read all tranſlations indifferently, but ſuch only as ſome Catholicks haue publiſhed, ſuch as at this day, the Engliſh Rhemiſh tranſlation of the New Teſtament is.
               Thus far briefly of that permiſſion, which hath ſo decreed the condition of this libertie of reading the ſcriptures. And this is their meaning according to the decree of Pius Quartus the Pope, which decree is confirmed alſo by the councel of Trent, & commended by the Rhemiſts, in the preface of their Engliſh tranſlation. And this is Bellarmines iudgment; who differeth in words only a little from the former popiſh aſſertion, but in matter and purpoſe is the ſame in effect: for what difference is there, if there be no permiſſion at all, & to be thus permitted with ſuch a condition, as is aforeſhewed?
               And thus of the 3. queſtion, and as touching the controuerſies which are moued at this day, concerning holy ſcripture, I remember not any that we haue left vntouched.

We haue therefore ſpoken of the word of God, which is the word of both couenants: as alſo of the ſacred ſcripture, which is a certaine meane, wherby it pleaſed God to manifeſt his word and wil vnto men. It reſteth now that weſpeake of ſinne, and of mans miſerie.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII. Of ſinne in generall.
               
               
                  THE common place of ſin, as alſo the former before handled, is ſubalterne to the place or generall head of our calling. For calling is the tranſferring of a man out of the ſtate of ſin What our calling is. and miſerie, into the ſtate of righteouſneſſe and happineſſe. Therefore we ſhall ſpeake of ſinne firſt in generall; after we ſhall come vnto his kindes or partes. The name of ſin ſignifies a certaine thing compounded of his owne matter and forme. The matter of ſinne, to ſpeake thereof in the firſt place, is a certaine being, or thing that is: and that being is not a ſubſtance, but an accident; and What ſin is. that is either a qualitie or action: and this quality or action belongs not to euery creature, but only to the reaſonable creature, Angell or Man: for God gaue his law vnto theſe only. Of this being, which we ſay is the matter of ſinne, God himſelfe is the author and principall efficient: for it is he alone that calleth thoſe things which are not, as if they were; and that createth all things, both ſubſtances and accidents: But the creature neither is, nor is called the principall efficient of any being. Therefore that being, which is the matter of ſinne, ſeeing God is the principall

efficient thereof, neceſſarily in, and by it ſelfe, is good: for that whatſoeuer God createth or maketh, hath an ingrafted forme of goodneſſe in it. Gen. 1. 31. When God (ſaith he) ſaw whatſoeuer he had made, behold it was very good. This forme of goodneſſe is ſo naturall and eſſentiall to Being, whether quality or action, which God made, that there from it can neuer be ſeparated. But now I graunt that this ſame Being hath put on another forme, to wit, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The cauſe of ſin.
                   
                  Lawleſneſſe, the cauſe whereof is an euill inſtrument, as we ſhall ſhew hereafter: for this Lawleſnes is from another cauſe; neither doth it deſtroy that eſſentiall forme of the goodneſſe of being it ſelfe, which proceedeth from God the creator and maker thereof. For as for the being which God maketh, nothing can be put to it, or taken from it, that in it ſelfe it may be better or worſer. So much concerning the matter of ſin.
               Now as touching the forme: The forme of ſinne is called Lawleſnes, that is, the want of conformitie with the will and law of God. 1. Ioh. 3. Sinne by his forme is thus The forme of ſin. defined. Sinne is the tranſgreſſion of the law. This Lawleſneſſe or tranſgreſſion, which wee call the forme and 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . manner of ſinne, is not a beeing, or a thing poſitiue, but a thing meerely priuatiue, to wit, a priuation, and want of conformitie with the law of God. This trangreſſion happeneth through the cauſe and fault of an euil inſtrument, which God vſeth in that being, or in doing his owne worke: and this inſtrument is either the Deuill, or an euill man and vnbeleeuer. For when the Diuell or an euill man concurreth with God, to bring forth his work, he is not the principall efficient of the being it ſelfe, or of the worke done, but only an inſtrumentall or miniſteriall cauſe; but the Deuill or man is the principall efficient cauſe of the tranſgreſſion, or of the deformity or ſin of that action.
               And this tranſgreſſion, the efficient whereof is an euill inſtrument, is euill either for that the action it ſelfe, or Cauſes of ſinne.
                  
worke is contrarie to the law of God: as when a man committeth murther; the action of murther is expreſly Cauſes of ſinne. condemned by the lawe; Thou ſhalt not murther: or for that the fountaine and beginning of the action or worke is againſt the law of God, although the action in it ſelfe be conformable to the law: for as the law of God commandeth the action or worke it ſelfe, ſo hath it regard of the fountaine and beginning of the action; commanding that the whole worke which is commanded by the law, proceed from a pure, holy, and beleeuing heart of that inſtrument, which God vſeth in doing his worke. An example of this kind of tranſgreſſion may be this: When any man giueth almes, which worke indeed is commanded of God, and yet not done of charitie, it is reiected: ſee 1. Cor. 13. Or laſtly, it falleth out to be a ſinne, for that the end, which the euill inſtrument in doing or working together with God propoſeth to it ſelfe, is againſt the lawe of God. For as the law of God commandeth the worke it ſelf, and the fountaine and beginning of the worke; euen ſo it commandeth the end, as the chiefe and principall, to wit, the glorie of God himſelfe: Whether yee eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer ye do, do all to the glorie of God, 1. Cor. 10. And in this reſpect a man ſinneth, when he doth ought, not for God, nor for his glory; but for himſelfe, his owne profit, and only for his owne glorie.
               Here it is to be noted, that whoſoeuer ſinneth, as touching the fountaine and originall of the action, the ſame man alwaies ſinneth touching the end; and ſo contrarily. Wherefore theſe two laſt wayes of tranſgreſſion are alwayes ioyned together. Againe, it is to be noted, that he who ſinneth touching the original and the end, doth not alwayes ſin in the action it ſelf: For the action or work of any inſtrument, how euil ſoeuer in it ſelf, may be good & The perſon muſt pleaſe God, otherwiſe the worke ſhall diſpleaſe. conformable to the law. Wherfore the firſt way of tranſgreſſion, & the two laſt are not alwaies conioined. Now then this tranſgreſſion (which we cal the maner & forme

of ſinne, comming, or put to that Being, the author wherof is God, and which in it ſelfe is good, whether it be a qualitie or an action) maketh vp that which we call ſinne, and which is ſo called of the forme thereof, and not of the matter, ſeeing all things haue their denominations from their formes.
               Theſe things thus declared, it ſhall bee eaſie to gather ſome definition of ſinne: That ſinne is a quality or action of a reaſonable creature, lawleſſe, or contrarie to the law of God. The generall proprietie of ſinne, or the conſequent thereof, is guiltineſſe; and guiltineſſe is that which meriteth or deſerueth puniſhment: as therefore guiltineſſe followeth after ſin, ſo after guilt followeth puniſhment, both temporall and eternall.
               Let this ſuffice concerning ſinne in generall; which being knowne, it is eaſie to anſwer thoſe queſtions, which are wont to be made touching ſin; and namely to this Three queſtions concerning the cauſes of ſin. which they aske, If Sinne be of God? or if God be the author of ſin? Anſw. In ſin there are two things; a Being and a tranſgreſſion. God is the Author and principall efficient of that Being; but of that tranſgreſſion God is not the author; but the euill inſtrument is. Againe, it is aſked, whether this tranſgreſſion be any way from God? Anſw. It is from God, not effecting, but permitting it: for he ſuffers it to be done by an euill imſtrument. Thirdly, it is demanded, if God permit ſin, in as much as it is tranſgreſſion of his law? Anſw. Not ſo, which euen by this one reaſon may be ſhewed: He permitteth it vnto his glory: and all the meanes of Gods glory, ſo farre as they haue ſuch reſpect, are good; and darknes it ſelfe, as it is permitted of God vnto the glory of his name, becōmeth light.
               Againe, if here it be asked: If therfore the tranſgreſſion of Gods lawe, in ſo farre as a tranſgreſſion, bee not permitted of God, doth it not of neceſſity follow, that ſin in reſpect, or as it is a tranſgreſſion, is done againſt Deo inuito, whether he will or no. Gods will? Anſ. It followeth not: for that which is done againſt

Gods will, is ſaid properly to be done againſt Gods decree, and not againſt his reuealed wil, or expreſſe law: but ſinne, as it is a tranſgreſſion of the law, is not done againſt any decree: therefore ſinne, as it is a tranſgreſſion of the lawe, is not done againſt Gods will. The Aſſumption is ſhewed, becauſe God decreed not from euerlaſting, that ſinne as it is a tranſgreſſion of his law, ſhould not be done of an euill inſtrument. Therefore thou ſaiſt, hee decreed that it ſhould be done? Anſwer. It followeth not. 1 For both theſe are true concerning God: God hath neither decreed that tranſgreſſion, as it is tranſgreſſion, 2 ſhould not be done; neither hath he decreed that tranſgreſſion, in ſo farre as it is tranſgreſſion, ſhould be done. For there is no decree of God extant, either in this or that reſpect touching ſinne, as it is a tranſgreſſion, or breach of the law of God.
               But thou maiſt aske, is not ſinne effected as it is tranſgreſſion, ſome way by the permiſſion of God? Anſw. A thing is ſaid to be done two wayes by Gods permiſſion; either by it ſelfe, or by accident. That, which by Gods permiſſion commeth to paſſe by it ſelfe, muſt of neceſſitie reſpect, and put on the nature of good; ſeeing God propoſeth and directeth the ſame vnto a good end: but that, which by an accident is done, God permitting it, or forſaking the creature, nothing hindreth, but that, as it is ſuch, it is euill: for God leauing the creature, and euill inſtrument to it ſelfe, the creature doth that which is euil, as it is euil: neither can it otherwiſe do, being left of him, who is the Author of al good. But now, in reſpect of God permitting and leauing, that euill, as it is euill, is done by accident, not by it ſelfe, becauſe God in forſaking, purpoſed not euill, as it is euill; but on the contrarie, ſo farre forth as it reſpecteth good, and is a meane of his glorie, of that eſpecially which is the conſequent of his mercie: for all meanes, whether wrought by God himſelfe, or ſuffered to be done of euill inſtruments, in

the firſt place are both ordained of God himſelfe, and directed to the glorie of his mercie, ariſing from the ſaluation of the creature: God hath ſhut vp all vnder ſinne, that he might haue mercie on all. And in the ſecond place, for the hardneſſe of man, and becauſe of the heart that cannot repent, ſinnes and euils which are done by an euill inſtrument, ſerue to that glory, which God getteth vnto himſelfe, by his iuſtice and iuſt puniſhments.
               If on the contrarie thou obiect: God ſuffereth ſinne, that he may puniſh the ſame: but he puniſheth ſinne, in Or, I would anſwer the maior, That God ſuffereth not ſin to puniſh it (for that he reſpecteth not) but for that be hath a purpoſe to manifeſt his owne glorie in the puniſhment of ſinne. that it is ſinne, or tranſgreſſion: therefore he permitteth ſinne, as it is ſinne. I anſwer vnto the Aſſumption: Sinne, as puniſhment followes thereupon (which in it ſelfe is good, and turnes to the glorie of God) in this, ſin (I ſay) hath not reſpect vnto euill, but vnto good, producing a good effect; for an euill cauſe, as it is euill, cannot bring forth a good effect: But if that cauſe, which in it ſelfe is euill, be alſo conſidered as the cauſe of a good effect, it muſt needes in ſome ſort, take vnto it the nature of good. I confeſſe indeed, that ſinne, as it is ſinne, is the cauſe of puniſhment: and the puniſhment, as it is the effect of an euill cauſe, muſt needs it ſelfe be euill. And indeed puniſh ment, Puniſhment in it ſelfe is euill. which is inflicted, is conſidered two wayes: firſt, as a thing in it ſelfe euill: for there is ſome tranſgreſſion How puniſhmēt is euill. in euerie puniſhment, and euery puniſhment after a ſort, is alſo a ſinne. Againe, it is conſidered as a thing that is good, to wit, as a meane of Gods glorie. This I ſay in a word: that all meanes (which in, and by themſelues are euill) in reſpect of God propounding, and of the end, which is the glorie of God, in ſome ſort are good. And that whole chaine of meanes (which is betweene God propounding, as the head and beginning, and the glorie of God as the end) is the order of things, which either by themſelues are good, or at the leaſt in ſome ſort, may be ſo accounted. For thoſe two extremes chaunge all darkneſſe after a ſort into light.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXV. Of Originall Sinne.
               
               
                  THVS farre of ſinne in generall: the firſt diuiſion of ſinne is into originall and actuall. To ſpeake of originall ſinne firſt, we be firſt to obſerue the reaſon why it is ſo named. It is called Originall ſinne why ſo called. original, becauſe it is in vs & with vs from our firſt being, conception, and natiuity: for it comes by propagation, and is deriued from parents to children, as an hereditary diſeaſe, as a leprie, the ſtone, or any ſuch like malady of the body.
               And that there is ſuch a kind of ſinne, it is moſt manifeſt: for there is none ſo fottiſh, and ſo voide of all ſenſe, that he feeleth not this hereditarie ſicknes in himſelfe, as the infection and corruption of his nature. But the holy Ghoſt, who beſt knoweth what is in man, doth cleerely auouch this in many ſcriptures. Gen. 5. 3. When as Adam (ſaith he) begat a ſonne, according to his owne image. Note heere the propagation of that corrupt image, which was in Adam, into his ſonne Sheth. Iob. 14. 5. Who can bring forth a cleane thing of an vncleane? not one. Behold here the propagation of vncleannes. Pſalm. 51. 7. Behold I was formed in iniquitie, and in ſinne did my mother cheriſh Tremel. fouit: kept me warme in hir bed.
                      mee.  Behold the ſin which we haue from our mothers wombe. Ioh. 3. 6. What is borne of the fleſh, is fleſh: Behold the propagation

of fleſh, that is, of our corrupt nature. Rom. 5. 12. Like as by one man ſinne entred into the world, and by ſin death. &c. Obſerue here the propagation of ſinne. Eph. 2. 3. We were by nature the children of wrath: Note here our corrupt nature, and therefore how ſubiect it is to the wrath of God. And thus far we ſee that there is a ſin which we call originall.
               Now let vs conſider what the ſubiect thereof is. The ſubiect of originall ſinne is the whole man, body and ſoule: which thing is taught vs cleerely by that one name Soule infected with Orig. ſin. which is giuen it, Ro. 6. 6. as els where, that old man: whereby nothing els is ſignified, but the whole man corrupted: or the corruption of the whole man. That the minde is infected with this ſin, firſt we be taught it by very ſenſe it ſelfe; next, by many teſtimonies of ſcriptures. Geneſ. 6. 5. When the Lord ſaw all the imaginations, that is, all the thoughts of his heart, were only euill continually. Gen. 8. 21. Albeit the imagination of mans heart be euill from his youth. Epheſ. 2. 3. Fulfill the will of the fleſh and of the minde.
               
               And that the body is infected with this poiſon, ſee Rom. 6. 12. Let not ſinne raigne in your mortall body. And that euery The body and all the members poiſoned with originall ſinne. one of the members is infected and poiſoned with the ſame ſin, is ſhewed v. 13. Neither giue your members as inſtruments of vnrighteouſnes vnto ſin.
               
               Againe the very names of this ſinne, ſhew the ſubiect thereof, or where it reſteth: As when it is called fleſh, concupiſcence, the law of the members, the body of ſin, the body of death. And thus farre of the ſubiect of originall ſinne.
               Now wee bee to come to the parts of it: and becauſe it is as a compound thing, we are to conſider, firſt, The materiall cauſe of originall ſinne, threefold. what the matter thereof is: next, what the forme. The matter of originall ſin is threefold: The firſt part of the matter thereof, is that apoſtaſie wherein we fell all away from God in the loines of Adam: This we receiue from

our mothers womb; for we are al born Apoſtates & backſliders frō God. For that the firſt apoſtaſie was not Adams only, but did appertaine to vs al; firſt, reaſō it ſelfe may ſufciently conuince it: for we were all as then in his loynes, and as parcelles of the ſubſtance and nature of the firſt man; and ſo we all fell in him and with him from the liuing God. For this very cauſe Heb. 7. Leui is ſaid before he was borne, to pay tithes to Melchiſedeck becauſe he was then in the loynes of Abraham. Abrahams fact was therefore Leui his fact alſo, and of all his poſterity, which then were in his loynes. Next, this is teſtified by ſcripture, as by name in that place which is Rom. 5. 12. In whom (to wit Adam) all men haue ſinned.
               
               That firſt Apoſtaſie, I grant, is paſt and vaniſhed away, as euery action paſſeth away: yet after a ſort it is ſaide to continue ſtill, for albeit the fact be paſt, yet the How the Apoſtaſie of Adam continueth ſtill. guilt thereof remaineth ſtill: for euery man is borne guilty by nature of that firſt Apoſtaſie. The ſame is to bee ſaid of euery other ſinne; Murther, Adultery, Theft, &c. For whatſoeuer it is, it may be truly ſayd to remaine ſtill, ſo long as the guilt remaineth, which is conſequent thereunto. Wherefore euery man is guilty of that firſt defection and falling from God, vntill this guilt be taken away by the bloud of a mediator. And that we be ſuch Apoſtates by nature, the ſcripture teſtifieth. Rom. 5. 15. By the offence of one, many be dead. Wherefore many muſt be guilty that one offence. Ro. 5. 16. The fault came of one offence vnto condemnation. And thus farre of the firſt part of originall ſinne, that is, of the firſt backſliding and our falling away, which we bring forth with vs from our mothers wombe into the world.
               The ſecond part followeth of originall ſinne: which is a certaine defect, or a certaine want of originall iuſtice, Second part of Originall ſinne. that is, of that righteouſnes, or integrity wherein man was created, according to the image and example of the righteouſneſſe which is in God the creator. For he created

man after his owne image, wiſe, iuſt, holy. For the Apoſtle to the Eph. 5. and Col. ſaith, that in theſe reſpects man was like to God himſelfe in his creation. This want, I ſpeake of originall iuſtice, is the firſt effect of that apoſtaſie before ſhewed. For that apoſtaſie, whereof we are al by nature guilty, depriueth vs in our firſt birth, euē in our very conception, of that originall iuſtice and image of God. This part of the matter of originall ſinne very ſenſe ſheweth, and many ſcriptures teſtifie of it: I meane ſuch as ſpeake of ſinne negatiuelie or priuatiuelie. For 
                     Proofe of our want of original iuſtice by 1. ſenſe. 2. by ſcripture.
                   all ſuch places ſhew plainelie what defect is in vs, and what want of originall iuſtice. Rom. 3. 23. All haue ſinned and are depriued of the glory of God. Ro. 7; 18. I know that in me, that is, in my fleſh, dwelleth no good thing. And a little after. I find no meanes to performe that which is good. Rom. 8. 7. The wiſdome of the fleſh is not ſubiect to the law of God, neither indeed can be. 1. Cor. 14. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the ſpirit of God, neither can he know the. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are ſufficient of our ſelues to think any thing as of our ſelues. Eph. 4. 18. Hauing their cogitation darkened, and being ſtrangers from the life of God. And thus far of the 2. part of the matter of original ſin, to wit, the want of originall iuſtice.
               The third part followeth: and this we ſay is an inclination 
                     The 3. part of the matter of originall ſinne.
                   or quality contrary to that originall iuſtice and integritie before mentioned, ſucceeding euen in place thereof. This is, that which they call our naturall corruption, and it is the ſecond effect of the apoſtaſie of Adam, in Paradice. For that rebellion of our firſt parents, firſt depriueth vs of originall iuſtice and of the image of God: next, in place there of by Gods iuſt iudgement, it infecteth vs with a quality cleane contrary to that righteouſneſſe, whereby we are made prone and apt to al euil. This contratie qualitie or inclination vnto ſin to be in vs, very ſenſe procues it, with many teſtimonies of the holy Scripture: all which ſpeake of ſinne affirmatiuely; or, that I may ſo

ſpeak, poſitiuely. Ro. 7. 7. I had not known concupiſcence, but that the law ſayth, thou ſhalt not couet. Rom. 7. 23. I ſee another law in my members, rebelling againſt the law of my mind. Eph. 2. 3. Fulfilling the luſts of the fleſh and of the minde. Ad to theſe the places before cited, Gen. 6. and 8. And thus farre of the third part of the matter of originall ſin.
               And here as touching the want of iuſtice, and inclination vnto ſinne, which were two parts of the matter of originall ſinne, ye muſt be aduertiſed: that there is no facultie A ſpeciall note. of the ſoule of man, which is not infected with both theſe euils together. We reckon as principall powers of the ſoule, the minde or vnderſtanding, the will and the affections. Theſe two laſt the ſcripture often vnderſtandeth them, in the worde, hart: becauſe the will and affections be ſeated in the hart. The firſt defect then is in the mind, and this is the want of light and knowledge: here is alſo the want of holineſſe, that is, of a quality, wherewith our very knowledge and light muſt be affected, and aſſuredly was affected with, in the firſt creation.
               The light of the minde or knowledge is twofold; naturall 
                     A two fold light of the mind. 1. VVant of naturall light.
                   and ſpirituall: In the mind there is a defect of light or of naturall knowledge, not in whole, but in part: for there do remaine euen in the vnregenerate, certaine generall notions of good and euill things, which are commanded and condenmed in the law: but they be ſuch as ſerue only to make men inexcuſable, for that they are but lame and corrupt. Rom. 1. 19. The mind alſo wants ſpirituall 2. VVant of ſpirituall light.
                   light, not in part but in whole, for it is vtterly void of this light: for as concerning thoſe things which appertaine to the kingdom of heauen, the vnderſtandings is ſo darkened, that it doth not only not perceiue them, but alſo hath no power to conceiue them. 1. Cor. 2. 14. To be ſhort, the minde wants holineſſe; for the things it vnderſtandeth, 3. VVant of holin
                           •
                        ſſe in the mind.
                   it neither conceiueth them rightly and holily, but impiouſly and prophanely all things, euen the things which in and by themſelues are good: For the facultie of

vnderſtanding albeit it be not vtterly loſt, yet that holynes of this facultie, wherein it was created after the image of God, was vtterly loſt in the fall of man. This want of this naturall light, the Apoſtle ſheweth Rom. 1. 21. Becauſe when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. Theſe latter wordes plainly ſhew that the naturall light of the minde is but a dim light, and ſoone vaniſheth away. The want of the ſpiritual light, the Apoſtle ſheweth 1. Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the ſpirit of God. The want of ſanctitiy in ye vnderſtanding, the Apoſtle ſheweth Rom. 8. 7. The wiſdom of the fleſh is enmity againſt God, euen then when it vnderſtādeth thoſe things, which otherwiſe be in themſelues true & good. 2. Cor. 3. 8. Not that we are ſufficient of ourſelues to thinke any thing, to wit, well and holily. Eph. 4. 18. Hauing their cogitation darkened, & being eſtranged from the life of God. And there ver. 23. And be ye renewed in the ſpirit of your minde. And thus farre of the want or defect which is in the mind.
               There is alſo a quality in the minde, which hath ſucceeded or ſtept in place of that light and holineſſe, which was loſt in the fall of man: For darknes hath taken poſſeſſion in the very ſeate of light. Epheſi. 5. 8. Yee were in times paſt darknes, but now ye are light in the Lord. In place of ſanctitie & integrity haue crept in impuritie and a certaine malitiouſneſſe of nature, which euidently appeareth, when it is ſaid Rom. 8. 5. For they that are after the fleſh, ſauour the things of the fleſh: This wiſdome is of ſome euill quality. 1. Cor. 1. 18. The preaching of the croſſe is to them that periſh, fooliſhneſſe. And 1. Cor. 2. 14. For they are fooliſhnes vnto him. This word fooliſhnes argueth the peruerſe iudgment of the minde.
               Thus far of the want of the mind, & the contrary quality crept thereinto. Both theſe in like manner are to be ſeene in the will and in euery affection. The want of integrity The will corrupted. and vprightnes in the will, the Apoſtle teſtifieth ſaying, I find no meanes to performe that which is good, Rom.

7. 18. and Phil. 2. 13. It is he which worketh in you both the will and the deed. The corruption and frowardnes of the will, and of the motions thereof, is teſtified by many ſcriptures. As Gen. 6. 5. 6. The conceit of a mans heart is only euill. Eph. 2. 3. Doing the will of the fleſh and of the minde.
               
               Finallie, this I ſay, that mans will is more poiſoned by this originall corruption, then the minde is: for which Video meliora proboque, deteriora ſequor. cauſe the very heathen could ſay: I ſee & approue (by the light of reaſon) the better things, but (through the corruption of my will) I incline to the worſer. And this the Apoſtle ſaith, Eph. 4. 18. Affirming that the ignorance 
                  The will worſe then the mind. 
                  which is in men, is by reaſon of the hardneſſe of their hearts. & Rom. 1. 28. They regarded not to know God, therefore God deliuered thē vnto a reprobate mind. Note, how the obſtinate will reſiſteth the light of the mind, and cauſeth the mind to be ouerclouded.
               And thus far of the threefold matter of originall ſinne. Theſe parts of the materiall cauſe of originall ſin, becauſe they are ſo many Beings Entia., and are of God, euery one of them muſt retaine in them ſome goodnes (as we ſay) in reſpect of their being: for that very apoſtaſie and falling away was good in it ſelfe: as ſo the want of originall iuſtice, becauſe it is athing in nature, and a conſequent of that Apoſtaſie, this want (I ſay) as it is of God, is good in it ſelfe: and to conclude, that poſitiue qualitie, which ſucceedeth in place of that holineſſe and image of God, for the being thereof, is of God as principall efficient, and is good in itſelfe.
               The forme of originall ſinne followeth. And this is a The forme of originall ſinne. very ſpeciall repugnance againſt the law of God, cauſing a very ſpeciall kind of ſinne. And like as the matteriall cauſe of originall ſinne is threefold; ſo there is in it a threefold 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . repugnance againſt God and his law: For euery part of the materiall cauſe hath a repugnance againſt the law in it, and ſo a forme which is from another, in reſpect whereof it is ſinne: The firſt Apoſtaſie hath in

it a repugnance againſt God; and ſo the want of originall iuſtice; and the poſitiue quality alſo, which ſucceeded in place thereof. This threefold iniquitie Or breach of Gods law., is not of God as efficient, but from the euill inſtruments, the deuill firſt, next Adam, and laſtly, the very man, which is of Adams progenie: For we alſo which are ſick of this hereditarie euill, are the very cauſes of our ſicknes. And thus far of the forme of originall ſin.
               Now we be to define originall ſinne of the matter and forme thereof, on this wiſe: Originall ſinne is an apoſtaſie from God, a want of Originall iuſtice, and a certaine poſitiue qualitie, repugning againſt the law of God. The threefold Originall ſin defined. materiall cauſe ſtands for the genus of it; and for the forme the threefold breach of Gods law. And like as guilt in general, is the conſequent of ſin in general; ſo a ſpeciall guilt Guilt following originall ſin. is conſequent to originall ſin: and this is threefold alſo, as the matter and forme of this ſinne is threefolde: For the apoſtaſie hath his ſpeciall guiltineſſe following it; ſo alſo the want of originall iuſtice; and that poſitiue quality. And euery guiltineſſe merits death, and eternall damnation.
               It reſteth now, that ſeeing we ſee this ſinne originall is deriued by propagation from the parents to the children, that we ſearch out the manner thereof: and this may bee expreſſed on this wiſe. The propagation of ſin muſt be, by one of theſe 3. waies: for it is deriued either by the ſoule, or by the body of the parents, or through their default. It cannot bee ſaid that the propagation of this ſin is by the ſoule, for the ſoule of the Father or Mother is not deriued by propagation to the children, in whole or in part, as is very euident: wherfore this ſin coms not by the ſoule of the parents.
               But it may not vnfitly be ſaid, that there is ſome deriuation How ſin is deriued from parents to their children. of this ſin by the body of the parents, to the body and ſoule of the child begotten by them. This propagation of ſinne by the body of him which begetteth, into the

bodie of him which is begotten, is eaſily diſcerned: for the ſeede of the parents, being in the child, is corrupted & infected with ſin: whence it followeth neceſſarily, that the bodie which is begotten of ſuch corrupt & vncleane ſeede, muſt alſo be corrupt and vncleane in like manner.
               The propagation of ſinne by the body of him which begetteth, into the ſoule of him which is begotten, is more hardly expreſſed: yet I deliuer what ſeemes moſt How ſin infefecteth the verie ſoule. probable vnto me, on this manner. After that by the bodie of him which begetteth, ſinne is deriued into the bodie of him which is begotten; now the body begotten being corrupt, & infected with ſin, this bodie, I ſay, infecteth and poiſoneth the ſoule, created euen then of God, before, and infuſed into it that very moment of time, wherein it was created. Here you demaund, whether the ſoule were pure and cleane the time it was created, and ſo Queſt. infuſed into the bodie: and then afterwards ſo defiled by the contagion of the bodie? I anſwer, it is not like to bee ſo: for that the ſoule is created, infuſed, and corrupted, in Anſ. the very ſelfe ſame moment of time. This corruption of the ſoule is, partly by reaſon of the deſertiō of God, partly by reaſon of the contagion of the body whereinto it is infuſed: for God the very ſame moment of time wherein he createth & infuſeth the ſoule, in his iuſt iudgment forſakes it, and giues it ouer to the body to bee ſo defiled with ſinne: wherefore this I auouch, that the ſoule is created, infuſed, forſaken of God, and defiled by the bodie the very ſame moment of time.
               The manner of the propagation of this ſinne, which is ſaid to be through the default of the parents, followeth; and this I expreſſe on this wiſe. Adam by that his firſt offence, did deriue, as by a certaine conduit, whatſoeuer corruption was in him to his poſteritie: for this cauſe the Apoſtle, Rom. 5. 12. ſaith, By one man (to wit, ſinning) ſin entred into the world.
               
               Here it may be demaunded, whence proceedes this

efficacie or power of that firſt ſin, to ingender, as it were, and to deriue ſinne into all and euerie one of Adams progenie. I anſwer, this efficacie of that ſinne, is by reaſon of that word and couenant which God made with Adam in his creation, as it were in theſe words: If man wil ſtand and perſiſt in that his innocencie, which he had by creation, he ſhall ſtand for his owne good, and for his progenie: but if he do not ſtand, but fall away, his fall ſhall turn The Couenant of God in the creation. as to his owne dammage, ſo to the hurt of his poſteritie: and whatſoeuer euill ſhall be tide him, the ſame ſhall enſue to all his off-ſpring after him. And this laſt way of the propagation of originall ſinne pleaſeth me beſt, and ought to content all ſober wits, for that this is grounded on the authority and words of the Apoſtle. And thus far our iudgement concerning originall ſinne.
               Now let vs briefly ſee what the old hereticks, and late aduerſaries of Gods truth ſay concerning this ſinne. Firſt The opinion of the heretikes cō
                     cerning originall ſinne. heere wee be to meete with the hereſie of Pelagius the Monke, and Caeleſtius his Diſciple, which ſaid, there was no originall ſinne: that Adam by his fall did hurt himſelfe only, and not his poſteritie, excepting onely by his example. They ſaid his poſteritie ſinned, not by propagation of his ſinne, but by imitation of their father Adams preuarication.
               When it was obiected againſt them, that young infants died; which could not be, but that they are infected with originall ſinne: They anſwered, that Adam himſelfe alſo had died by the law of nature, albeit he had not ſinned. And this was the Pelagians principall argument againſt The Pelagians argument againſt originall ſinne. originall ſinne. If ſinne be by propagation, then it muſt needs be deriued to the poſteritie by the ſoule, or by the body: but not by the ſoule, for that it is not by traduction: and it is not by the bodie, becauſe it is void of reaſon; neither can ſinne be ſaid to bee firſt and properly ſeated in it: and not by both vnited, becauſe it is not by the parts: therefore there is no originall ſinne at all.

The anſwere is eaſie of that which hath beene before ſet downe in this chap▪ touching the forme or manner of the propagation of this ſinne. Firſt, their propoſition Anſwer. doth not number all the formes & meanes of the propation of this ſinne: for there is beſides thoſe meanes a deriuation of ſinne, which is through the default of the parents. Next the Aſſumption is falſe, for albeit there be no propagation of ſinne by the ſoule, yet it may well bee by the bodie, as is afore ſhewed. And thus farre of Pelagius and Caeleſtius hereſie.
               Next, the Schoole-men had diuers opinions of originall Schoolemens opinion of original ſinne. ſinne: for ſome ſaid, that originall ſinne conſiſted only in the guilt of Adams apoſtaſy: others ſaid, it was but the want of original iuſtice. But Peter Lombard reiecting theſe opinions, auoucheth it to be alſo a poſitiue euill qualitie, contrarie to that firſt originall iuſtice. Albertus Pigghius, & Ambroſius Catharinus ſaid, that it was nothing els but that firſt tranſgreſſion of Adam. And out of this concluſion, they drew forth three other opinions: the firſt was this: Originall ſinne is one and the ſelfe ſame onely Three groſſe opinions of papiſts concerning originall ſin. in all men: 2. This ſin in Adam was reall and actually his; but it is ours only by imputation: the third, that infants in verity, haue nothing in them that hath any appearance of ſinne: for they ſaid, that guiltineſſe, want of iuſtice, and the ſpots of nature, and ſuch like things, ſeeme rather to be puniſhments then faults, if ye ſpeake not happily improperly, as when ye apply the name of the cauſe to the effect.
               
                  Bellarmine following all theſe, firſt blames Lombards concluſion concerning his poſitiue qualitie; and next, Bellarm. obiect▪ againſt Lumbard Anſwer. condemnes Pigghius aſſertion as hereticall. One of his principall arguments againſt Lombard is this. God is either the cauſe of that poſitiue quality, or not the cauſe: if the cauſe, then is he the cauſe of ſin: if he be not the cauſe of it, then is he not the authour of all things. Therefore there is no ſuch poſitiue qualitie at all. We anſwer to the

Aſſumption: in that euill poſitiue quality two things muſt be reſpected. Firſt, the qualitie it ſelfe, or the being of it; next, the euilneſſe, or irregularity, or deformity therof: God is the the authour and principall efficient of the firſt: but the diuell and the euil inſtrument is the authour and cauſe of the ſecond.
               This done, at laſt the Ieſuit ſets downe his owne iudgemēt, auouching that original ſin conſiſteth in two things: Bellarm iudgment of originall ſinne. firſt, in the firſt tranſgreſſion of Adam, not as hee was a certaine priuate perſon, but as being then the perſon of all mankind: next, he ſaith, it is alſo a want of that gift of originall iuſtice. And thus farre he ſpeakes wel, affirming that there are two parts of original ſin: but herein he erreth, for that he omitteth that euil poſitiue quality before mentioned. And thus farre of the iudgement of the Aduerſaries concerning originall ſinne.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI. Of Concupiſcence.
               
               
                  BVt becauſe there is ſome controuerſie touching concupiſcence, which is the third part of originall ſinne; therefore we be to ſpeake ſomething of it apart. The word Concupiſcence, doth firſt and properly ſignifie that coueting, or luſting, which is ſaid to be in the baſer facultie of the ſoule, to wit, in the ſenſible and the naturall power thereof: and tropically it ſignifieth our naturall corruption, and that euill poſitiue quality, which reſteth not

onely in the concupiſcible faculty of the ſoule, but in all the powers therof alſo, euē in reaſon it ſelf. For the word Concupiſcence in Scripture is as generall as the old man, or the fleſh: for Paule vſeth theſe words indifferently for one and the ſame matter, the old man, the fleſh, concupiſcence, and the law of the members, to wit, for the third part of originall ſinne, which is that euill poſitiue quality. And that concupiſcence is properly and truly a ſinne, appeares plainly out of the Epiſtle to the Romans, ch. 7. 7. I had not knowne luſt, except the law had ſaid, thou ſhalt not luſt. And this briefly is our iudgment touching Concupiſcence.
               
                  Pelagius reckoneth Concupiſcence in the number of the good things, or benefits of nature: for hee denies originall ſinne. Our aduerſaries the Papiſts, by Concupiſcence vnderſtand nothing els, but that concupiſcible faculty of the ſoule, which is in it ſelf good, or atleaſt indifferent, but euill accidentally, and in ſome reſpect: to wit, for that now the bridle or originall iuſtice is let looſe, whereby Concupiſcence ought to haue been curbed: ſo then this curbe being loſt, it inclines (ſay they) to ſinne. This is the iudgment of the Councell of Trent, The iudgment of the papiſts concerning concupiſcence. concerning Concupiſcence, that it may not be ſaide truly and properly that it is a ſin, but that it is ſo called, becauſe it proceedes from ſin, and inclines to ſinne. But that Concupiſcence is ſinne, is more manifeſt by Paules doctrine, then that it needes any proofe at all: and that it is a ſinne not onely in the vnregenerate, but alſo in the regenerate. And thus farre of Concupiſcence, and of originall ſinne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVII. Of Actuall ſinne.
               
               
                  ACtuall ſinne is the fruit, and effect, and the puniſhment alſo of originall ſin. The firſt and principall diuiſion of actuall ſin, is into Actuall ſinne. internall and externall. The internall I call the ſinnes of ſoule, and of the faculties thereof. Internall ſinne is partly of omiſſion, partly of commiſſion. A ſinne of omiſſion, in the mind, is the want of a holy and good motion: and the roote of this is the want of originall iuſtice. And like as that defect of original iuſtice is in all the powers of the ſoule; ſo this internall Sinne of omiſſion what. ſinne of omiſſion, is of all the powers of the ſoule. Of the ſinne of omiſſion the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, 1. Cor. 2. 14. when he ſaith, that the naturall man cannot conceiue the things of the Spirit of God. Lo here the want of a holy motion in mans nature: the fundamentall cauſe whereof he addeth in the next words, ſaying, neither can he perciue them: In which words yee haue the want of that power and faculty, whence a holy motion doth ſpring.
               The internall ſinne of commiſſion followeth: and this is a peruerſe and euill motion of the mind. And this proceedes from the third part of originall ſinne, to wit, that A ſinne of commiſſion. euill poſitiue qualitie, or naturall corruption. And like as yt poſitiue quality is of al the faculties of the mind, ſo that internall ſinne of commiſſion is of all the powers of the ſoule in like manner. Of this ſinne the Scripture ſpeakes

euery where. Rom. 7. 5. When we were in the fleſh, the 
                  or affections. 
                  motions of ſinnes which were by the law, had force in our members, to bring forth fruite vnto death. Where three things are to 
                     Three things, Rom. 7. 5. be obſerued: firſt, the fleſh, which is original ſin: Secondly, Affections or motions, whereby vnderſtand the internall ſinne of commiſſion: Thirdly, the fruit of thoſe motions 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . or affections: whereby he meanes euery externall actuall ſinne. Againe, ye haue the ſame three things knit together, Ephe. 2. 3. Fulfilling the will of the fleſh, and of the mind. 1. the fleſh, that is, originall ſin. 2. Next, the thought or luſt of the fleſh, which is the internall commiſſion of ſinne. 3. To fulfill the ſame, and this is externall ſinne. The ſame things ye haue Iam. 1. 15. When concupiſcence hath conceiued, it bringeth forth ſinne. Concupiſcence is originall ſinne: conception is actuall internall ſinne: the birth thereof is an externall ſinne. And thus farre of actual internall ſinne.
               The externall actuall ſinne followeth, which is a ſinne of the bodie, and of the members thereof: and this ſinne Externall actual ſinne. alſo is partly of omiſſion, partly of commiſſion. The externall ſinne of omiſſion is, when things to bee done are omitted: and this proceedes from the internall ſinne of omiſſion: And here alſo, like as the internall ſinne of omiſſion is of all faculties of the mind, ſo the externall ſin of omiſſion is of all the members of the body. Of this ſin the Apoſtle ſpeaketh Roman. 7. 9. I do not the good which I would do. The externall ſinne of commiſſion followeth. This is when that is done, which ought not to be done: Externall ſin of commiſſion. and it proceedes from the internall ſinne of commiſſion: This is alſo of all the parts of the body, like as the internall ſinne of commiſſion is of all the powers of the ſoule. The teſtimonies of Scriptures before cited, proue this, Rom. 7. 19. The euill which I would not, that do I.
               
               The externall ſinne of commiſſion is twofold, partly of errour and ignorance, partly of knowledge. It is of ignorance, when a man ignorantly committeth any thing:

This was Paules ſinne, 1. Tim. 1. 13. For I did it ignorantly through vnbeleefe. This ignorance is either of the law, or of the fact. The ignorance of the law, is to be ignorant of Gods will: Of this Sin ſpeaketh Chriſt Luke 12. 48. He that hath not known his maſters wil, & hath done things worthy of ſtripes, ſhall be beaten with few ſtripes. This was alſo Paules ignorance, when hee blaſphemed and perſecuted the Church of Chriſt, 1. Tim. 1. The ignorance of the fact, is when a man knowes not what he doth: And a man may be ſaid not to know what he doth, or to erre in the Sin of ignorance. fact, either when he doth a thing negligently, or when a thing is done by him (as we ſay) by fortune or chance, or rather by the ineuitable prouidence of God. An example of ſinne of negligence may be this, as when a ſhip is loſt by the negligence of the Gouernour or maiſter thereof, An example of a ſinne by fortune, or Gods prouidence, may be, as when one caſting a ſtone, killeth a man paſſing by, of whom he neuer thought: for this ſinne in the old Church, the cities of refuge were appointed, Numb. 35. 23. Thus farre of the external ſinne of commiſſion, which proceedes of errour or ignorance.
               The externall ſinne of commiſſion followeth, which is committed in knowledge, or as we ſay, wittingly: and this is when a man knoweth that hee doth euill: hereof ſpeakes Chriſt, Luk. 12. 47. That ſeruant who knoweth his maſters will, and doth it not, ſhall be beaten with many ſtripes.
               
               This ſin is either of infirmitie, or of contumacie. An example Actual external ſinne committed willingly. of a ſinne of infirmitie is in Peter, who three times denied his Lord and maiſter for feare of death and perſecution. An example of a ſin of contumacie we haue in Iudas the traitor. Againe, a ſin of contumacie is either done in hypocriſie, as when a man is not openly rebellious, but hides his ſinne vnder the cloake of hypocriſie: this the Apoſtle taxeth Rom. 2. 5. Thou (ſaith he) after thy hardneſſe, and heart that cannot repent, doeſt treaſure vp wrath againſt the day of wrath. Againe, it is an open rebellion or

pride; when a man ioynes to his contumacy, pride againſt God himſelfe: for which cauſe he is ſaid to ſinne with an high hand, Numb. 15. 30. This manifeſt rebellion and Hereſie. pride, is either againſt the ſecond Table of the law, as open murther, knowne adulterie; and this is the leſſer contumacie: but if it be a proud rebellion againſt the firſt Table, the ſinne is intolerable: And of this latter kind is Open rebellion. hereſie firſt, when as a man in a proud obſtinacy, wil defend anie opinion againſt the manifeſt truth of Gods word.
               Of all the ſinnes before ſpecified, this is one property, that a man may repent of them, or for them all: whereupon followes another property, that they are all pardonable. But if ye adde to knowledge, pride, frowardneſſe, a malicious heart, ſtriuing againſt the holy Ghoſt inlightening a man, & teaching inwardly: then the great ſinne ariſeth, which they call the ſinne againſt the holy Sinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. Ghoſt: the propertie whereof is this, that hee which ſo ſinneth, cannot repent him of his ſinne: whereupon it followeth that this ſinne is impardonable. And this ſin is called irremiſſible, not for that the greatneſſe of it exceeds the greatnes of Gods mercy & grace in Chriſt; but VVherefore impardonable. becauſe finall impenitence is the reward and puniſhment, which by Gods iuſt iudgment is inflicted vpon this ſinne. Read of this point Matt. 12. 21. Heb. 6. 4. 5. and chap. 10. 26. 1. Ioh. 5. 16. And thus farre of actuall ſinne.
               Now it remaineth to ſee what the aduerſaries ſay of actuall ſinne. Here the greateſt controuerſie is of the diuiſion of actuall ſinne into mortall and veniall. We auouch that euery ſin by nature is mortall, that is, that the guilt Sinne mortall & veniall, a popiſh doctrine. of eternall death followes it: And that if any ſinne be veniall, that is, may find pardon of God, this commeth to paſſe, not for that it is ſo by nature, but of Gods meere mercie in Ieſus Chriſt. Many ſcriptures approue our aſſertion. Ro. 6. 23. The wages of ſin is death. He ſpeakes here of ſin in generall, and of eternall death. Matth. 5. 19. Who ſoeuer

ſhall breake one of the leaſt of theſe commandements, and ſhall teach men ſo, heſhall be called the leaſt in the kingdome of God, that is, he ſhal haue be of reckoning in heauen. Obſerue then here, how for the leaſt ſin a man deſerues to be ſhut forth out of heauen. Deut. 27. 26. Curſed be he that abideth not in all things which are written in the booke of the law: Therefore there is no ſinne which deſerueth not the curſe or malediction of God. For in that the law denounceth an execration againſt euery ſin, there is no exception we ſee of anie, euen the leaſt ſinne. I am. 2. 10. Whoſoeuer ſhall keepe the whole law, and yet fayleth in one point, hee is guiltie of all. Therefore if ye reſt in any one ſinne againſt the law, ye ſinne againſt the whole law, and ſtand guiltie of all ſinnes, which are committed any way againſt the law: So there is no cauſe why wee ſhould meaſure our guilt by anie one ſinne, euen the verie leaſt. For euen the verie leaſt ſinne we liue and lie in (without faith & repentance) The leaſt ſinne merits hell. caries with it the guilt euen of the greateſt ſinnes, as may clearely appeare by that place of Iames. Matth. 5. 26. Thou ſhalt not depart thence till thou haſt paid the vtmoſt farthing: Therefore God in his accounts reſpecteth euen the leaſt parts of ſinne, and the ſmalleſt ſinnes that are. The tenth law condemnes euen the leaſt motions of concupiſcence. Matth. 22. 37. Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy mind: Therefore the law requires an exact or perfect obedience. Wherefore he that offendeth euen in the leaſt point, is a tranſgreſſor of the law: and that euerlaſting curſe followeth the breach of the law, if redemption be not purchaſed by Ieſus Chriſt. Matt. 5. 18. Till heauen and earth periſh, one iote, or one tittle of the law ſhall not ſcape, till all things be fulfilled. Note here, there ſhal not paſſe away one iote, or one tittle, that is, the leaſt branch of the breach of the law, which ſhall eſcape without ſatisfaction either by our ſelues, or a mediator. And thus far touching our iudgment of this matter.
               
                  
The aduerſaries for actuall ſinne, reſpecting it either according to the greatneſſe thereof, or for the puniſhment it deſerueth, they diuide it into mortall and veniall. They cal that mortall ſinne which doth extinguiſh charity, Mortal ſin defined of Papiſts. or iuſtice, making vs enimies vnto God, and therefore guilty of eternall death. They call that veniall ſinne, which doth not quench charitie and iuſtice, nor doth not cauſe an enmitie betwixt vs and God: but dooth a little ſtaine iuſtice, which they place in charitie, and they ſay it A popiſh veniall ſinne. ſpots it a little: wherefore this ſinne (ſay they) is ſoone pardoned, and expiate with a light puniſhment: as in this life, with the repetition of the Lords prayer, the ſmiting of the breaſt, ſatisfactiō or penance impoſed by the prieſt or which men do of thēſelues voluntarily vndergo. After this life all venial ſinnes be expiat in purgatory, if they be not pardoned in this life, by the meanes before expreſſed.
               They ſay, veniall ſinne is twofold: the firſt veniall ſin is ſo called, becauſe it is ſo by nature, and for the ſubſtance 
                     Venial ſin 2. of it, as an idle word, or immoderate laughter. The next veniall ſinne, they ſay, is that, which is not ſo by nature, but for ſome imperfection, for that ſin by nature is mortall: but becauſe it is imperfect for the meaſure or quantity of the euill, therefore it is veniall. This imperfection, ſay they, is twofold: for this imperfection is either by reaſon of the will, as when there is not a full conſent of the will vnto a ſecret motion of concupiſcenſe: In this kind of venial ſinne they reckon all euil ſecret motions, which ſtirre in the affection, before the mind can think of them, and which get not any full conſent of the will, as the motions of luſt, of anger, of enuie, &c. Oragaine, there is an imperfection in reſpect of the matter of the ſinne, to wit, when the matter is ſo ſmall and light, that it makes the ſin veniall, as for example; if a man ſteale a half-peny, or ſome ſuch trifle, wherby the neighbour is little or nothing touched, and charity is not violate.
               And they go about to proue their opinion concerning

veniall ſinne by diuers kindes of arguments. Firſt by teſtimonies of the ſcripture, and of the Church: next by reaſons of their owne: in refutation of which arguments my Popiſh arguments for veniall ſinne. meaning is not to inſiſt. For veniall ſinne they cite Mat. 12. 32. Whoſoeuer ſhall ſpeake againſt the holy Ghoſt▪ it ſhall not be forgiuen him, neither in this world nor in the world to come: Therefore ſay they, there is a kinde of ſinne which ſhalbe pardoned after this life: and the ſame is venial ſin, which is purged with the fire of purgatory. But let Mark. chap. 3 29. bee the interpreter of this phraſe which Mathew hath in this place. Whoſoeuer (ſaith he) ſhall blaſpheme againſt the holy Ghoſt, ſhal neuer haue forgiuenes, but is culpable or guilty of eternall damnation. Therefore where Mathew ſaith, neither is this life nor in the life to come, it is the ſame, as if he ſaid: It ſhall neuer be forgiuen him.
               
               They bring alſo the place which is. Mat. 5. 22. Whoſoeuer is angry with his brother vnaduiſedly, ſhalbe culpable of iudgment; and whoſoeuer ſaith vnto his brother Raca, ſhalbe worthy to be puniſhed by the Councel: and whoſoeuer ſhal ſay foole, ſhalbe worthy to be puniſhed with hell fire. There are here 3. kinds of ſins, ſay they, of which he adiudgeth one kinde only worthy of hell fire: wherefore the two former are to be expiat with ſome light puniſhment, and therfore be veniall ſinnes. I anſwere, this place teacheth vs that there is an inequality, firſt of ſinnes, next of puniſhments; and thoſe alſo ſpirituall and infernall, which Chriſt expreſſeth here by an alluſion to ciuill and politique penalties which were vnequall.
               They reaſon alſo on this wiſe: No man (ſay they) will denie that one ſin is leſſer then another by nature: Therefore Popiſh reaſons for veniall ſin. is not the leſſer ſinne veniall by nature? I anſwer, it followeth not, for that the leaſt ſinne by nature meriteth eternall death, and eternall puniſhment, albeit not the greateſt puniſhment. For we deuie not the inequalitie of the paines of the damned.
               
                  
Next ſay they, is not one ſin leſſe then another in quantity? And therefore is it not veniall in reſpect of the imperfection thereof? I anſwer; it followeth not, for euery ſin howſoeuer imperfect, meriteth eternal death: or if it be venial, it is not for the imperfectiō of it; but for Chriſts ſake, and his ſatisfaction for it.
               Thirdly, they ſay, is not that ſin veniall which doth not deſtroy or ouerthrow iuſtice, charity, or inherent grace? But there are ſome ſinnes which doe not ouerthrow or extinguiſh iuſtice: Ergo, there be ſome venial ſinnes. The aſſumption is proued. The iuſt man fals 7. times in the day and riſeth againe: Behold here one ſinneth, and yet ceaſeth not to be iuſt. I anſwer: The propoſition is falſe: for that very ſinne which doth not extinguiſh the grace of Chriſt, and inherent holines, that very ſinne by it owne nature is mortall: And in that it is pardonable, and doth not aboliſh holines, that is not to be imputed to the ſin it ſelf, but to the free mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVIII. The controuerſie concerning the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt.
               
               
                  THE aduerſaries ſay, there be 6. kindes of this ſinne: The firſt ſinne is preſumption, when a The Papiſts ſay, there be ſix kinds of the ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. man preſumeth ouermuch of the grace of God and of faith, in the meane while denying his faith by his works: This is the man whom Iames
                  
taxeth in his Epiſtle, Chap. 2. verſ. 14. and after. Theſecond is deſperation, contrary to preſumption: this was Cain and Iudas ſin. The third is to impugne the knowne truth: hereto belongs the blaſphemie againſt the holy 3 Ghoſt; this was the ſinne of the Pharaſies, Matth. 12. The fourth is to enuy or to repine at the graces of God in our 4 brethren: this was the ſin of the Iewes, which did repine and grieue at the grace of God giuen the Gentiles. The fift is obſtinacy, when as a man ſhal perſiſt in a known ſin with an obſtinate mind. This was Pharaohs ſinne, and 6 the obſtinate Iewes. The ſixt is finall impenitency, when as any ſhall die in contempt of the ſacrament of penance, and of any ſatisfaction impoſed vpon him by Eccleſiaſticall order. Of this they vnderſtand that place, 1. Ioh. 5. 16. There is a ſin vnto death, I do not ſay, that ye ſhould pray for him. They ſay, a man ſins againſt the holy Ghoſt al theſe waies, and that all theſe ſins be inexpiable: and that theſe ſins are called irremiſſible, becauſe they bee ſeldome and hardly forgiuen; as men ſeldome and hardly repent them of theſe ſins. But the laſt which is finall impenitency, they thinke that onely is properly ſayde to be impardonable, becauſe it is neither forgiuen in this life, nor after this life. And this is their iudgment of the ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt.
               But we auouch that the ſcripture doth teach vs, there is but one ſinne only againſt the holy Ghoſt, Matth, 12. 32. Mark. 3. 29. Luke. 12. 10. called the blaſphemy againſt the holy Ghoſt. Ye haue a deſcription of this ſinne, Heb. 6. 4. and 10. 26. 27. the Apoſtle calling it an apoſtaſy or backſlyding from God. It is ſo alſo deſcribed, 2. Pet. 2. 20. And 1. Io 5. 16. It is called a ſinne vnto death. As for the other kinds of this ſin before ſpecified, ſome of them are conſequently of this ſin, which we call a blaſphemie, and appertaine vnto it: for deſperation and final impenitency are the puniſhments of this ſinne: Obſtinacie is in the very nature of this ſinne, for it caries with it an obſtinate

maliciouſneſſe. And as for the other kinds I cannot ſee how they may be called ſins againſt the holy Ghoſt: for as for preſumption, what is it els but hypocriſie? To Preſumption. repine at the graces of God in our brethren, is a ſinne againſt our neighbour, and againſt the ſecond table of the law. Therefore let this reſt, that there is but one ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt, ſo called, to wit, the blaſphemy againſt the holy Ghoſt, or an apoſtaſy from the grace of the ſpirit once receiued: for theſe are one and the ſame, to blaſpheme againſt the holy Ghoſt, and to fall from grace receiued. Notwithſtanding I deny not, but that this ſin, which is but one in ſubſtance may haue his increaſe or growth: for then it is come to a height, when as it fighteth againſt all the known truth which is according to godlineſſe. Next we ſay, that this one ſinne is impardonable, not for that it is ſeldome and hardly pardoned; but for that it is neuer pardoned, becauſe ſuch a one can neuer repent him of his ſinne, that he hath committed. For this mans heart groweth to ſuch a hardneſſe (and that by Gods iuſt iudgment) as can neuer after be mollified.
               And that this ſin is ſimply impardonable, is manifeſt by ye very words of the lord in ye goſpel, before cited: for where it is ſayd in Matth. it ſhall not be forgiuen him neither in this world, nor in the world to come: and in Mark▪ This ſinne is neuer forgiuen, but is culpable of eternall damnation: Do not theſe words cut off all hope of pardon? So as I cannot but wonder at the Rhemiſts, ſo impudently to extenuate 
                     Rhemiſts impudency. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the force of the words of the lord. To the Heb. 6. he ſaith, it is impoſſible that he which ſo ſinneth ſhould be renued by repentance: then he addeth a waighty cauſe and moſt neceſſarie, for (ſayth he) This man crucifieth againe to himſelfe the Sonne of God, that is, as much as in him lyeth.
               Which point, the better to conceiue it, we muſt know there is a difference betweene all other ſinnes, and this ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt, as touching the remiſſion and expiation

of them. For to expiat all other ſinnes, the ſacrifice of Chriſt once offered, is ſufficient for them all, and the vertue thereof extendeth it ſelfe to purge all ſinnes for euer. But when a man hath once ſinned againſt the holy Ghoſt, and profaned that pretious bloud, the vertue thereof will neuer after be effectual for the expiation of his ſin. Wherefore he ſtands in neede of ſome new ſacrifice to purge his ſinne; which thing ſhal neuer be granted him: For if this were graunted, then muſt Chriſt be crucified againe, or ſome other ſacrifice muſt be offered: but neither can Chriſt be crucifyed againe, neither can any other ſacrifice bee offered for him, as it is written Heb. 10. 26. For there remaineth no more ſacrifice for ſinnes. Therefore this ſin can neuer be expiat, becauſe a new ſacrifice can neuer be giuen for it: And this is the cauſe of the impoſſibility of the pardon of this ſinne.
               The aduerſaries, namely, the Rhemiſts in their obſeruations on this place, do thus interpret this impoſſibilitie: they ſay, there is a double repentance, or renuing, or purging of ſinne: They ſay, the firſt is eaſie and light, in and by Baptiſme: where (ſay they) all the ſinnes before Baptiſme, are purged by that light waſhing of baptiſme. The ſecond they call penance, or the purging of ſinnes, Popiſh ſacrament of penanc. as they ſay, by the ſacrament of Penance: and in this Sacrament (as they ſpeake) ſuch ſinnes are purged which are committed after baptiſme; and this is hard and painfull, as conſiſting of faſtings, prayers, ſatisfactions, and other corporall afflictions. If you graunt them this diſtinction, then they ſay, this impoſſibilitie of being renewed, is in reſpect of that repentance, renewing, and purging of ſinne which is in baptiſme: For (they ſay) it is impoſſible that a ſinne committed after Baptiſme, ſome baptiſme being iterated, ſhould be purged: for we may not be rebaptized. As for the latter, penance and renewing, they ſay, there is a poſſibility in it: For the greateſt ſinne after baptiſme may be expiat by it. Therefore they affirme, the Apoſtle

ſpeakes couertly to ſuch as ſinne after baptiſme, ſending them to the Sacrament of Penance, that by vertue of that Sacrament their ſinne may be expiat, and that they may be renewed: But by this their interpretation 2. Pet. 3. 16 they peruert the holy Scripture to their owne deſtruction. For this is certaine, that the Apoſtle here takes away all poſſibilitie of being renewed, as the reaſon annexed manifeſtly proueth.
               Finally, it is euident by that place of Iohn before cited, that this ſinne is impardonable, and that this is proper to that ſin, that it can by no meanes be pardoned. For Iohn ſaith, we may not pray for that ſinne: If we may not pray for it, there is no hope of repentance, or pardon for it. I know what the Rhemiſts heere would ſay, to wit, that by this ſinne vnto death we muſt vnderſtand finall impenitencie: finall impenitencie is not remitted, becauſe here wants repentance, and therfore we may not pray for ſuch a one after his death: for he died in impenitency, contemning the Sacrament of Penance. But they affirme it to be lawfull to pray for other ſinnes after death.
               This againe is to peruert Scripture, for the Apoſtle ſpeaketh not of prayer to be or not to be after his death which hath ſo ſinned, but that prayer muſt not bee conceiued for him whileſt he liueth, after that it hath manifeſtly appeared vnto the church by infallible arguments, that ſuch a one hath ſinned vnto death. As for Iulian the Apoſtata, for whom the Church prayed not while he liued, yea it prayed againſt him, in his life time, after it was clearely diſcerned, that hee had ſinned vnto death, that is, had blaſphemed againſt the holy Ghoſt. I paſſe ouer that place of Peter before cited, where the Apoſtle ſpeakes of no difficultie, but of a meere impoſſibilitie of being renewed, of repentance, and of remiſſion of ſinnes, where it is ſaid, Their latter ſtate is worſe then the firſt: and as it followeth, but it hath happened vnto him (as it is in the true prouerbe) the dog hath returned to his owne vomit, and

the ſow to her wallowing in the mire. And thus farre of this ſecond controuerſie, and ſo much ſhal ſuffice concerning ſinne.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIX. Of iuſtifying Faith.
               
               
                  OVr effectual calling is effected, firſt by ye Law, then by the Goſpell. The whole doctrine of the Law may be reduced to this or forme of reaſon. ſyllogiſme: Curſed is he that continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of this law, to do them: But I haue not continued in them: Therefore I am accurſed. The propoſition of this reaſon is the voice of the Law: and that commination which is added to the couenant of works: which is thus conceiued, Do this, and thou ſhalt liue: but if thou do it not, thou ſhalt die. THe aſſumption of this reaſon, is the act of euerie ones conſcience that applieth to it ſelfe the tranſgreſſion of the law. The concluſion likewiſe is the act of each ones conſcience, applying to it ſelfe the iuſt puniſhment and curſe of God for ſinne. This forme of reaſoning belongs not ſo much to the calling it ſelfe, as to our preparation to that Our preparation to our effectuall calling. effectuall calling, which is properly effected by the doctrine of the Goſpell. For by the doctrine of the Law, which is comprehended in this argument, wee are amazed, and affected with the feeling of our miſerie, which feeling is the firſt degree vnto ſaluation,
               Now the doctrine of the Goſpell may be comprehended in this forme: Whoſoeuer beleeueth, ſhall be iuſtified and liue: But I beleeue: therefore I ſhall be iuſtified; An Euangelicall ſyllogiſme. and liue. The propoſition is the voice of the Goſpell,

or of God himſelfe calling. For therein is contained the firſt part of an effectuall calling, which is nothing els but a proclaiming of the free couenant, the forme whereof is contained in this propoſition. The Aſſumption is not indeed the act of the naturall conſcience, but of euerie ones ſupernaturall ſaith applying to himſelfe Chriſt Ieſus the Mediator of the couenant, and him firſt crucified, and next glorified. The Concluſion alſo is the act of faith, applying to euerie one the benefits of Chriſt, his righteouſneſſe and ſaluation by him. This reaſon doth properly belong to Calling: and the Propoſition of it is the firſt part of calling: and the Aſſumption and concluſion is the ſecond part. And ſeeing the aſſumption and concluſion are the acts of our faith, whereby we doe as it were make anſwer vnto God that calleth; ſurely we ſhall not without cauſe ſay, that the ſecond part of effectuall calling is nothing els but faith: Wherefore the common place of Faith muſt be compriſed vnder this of our effectuall calling.
               It followeth therefore that we ſpeake of Faith, yea of that faith which is properly & ſimply ſo called; that is, of faith which they call iuſtifying faith. For as touching the other kinds of faith, which are commonly numbred, as a Iuſtifying faith. dead faith, &c. they are ſo termed, not ſimply, but in ſome reſpect, and with an addition, dead faith, temporary faith, &c.
               Now in the declaration of faith, the firſt thing that offereth it ſelfe to be conſidered, is the obiect thereof. The The obiect of faith. obiect is generally whatſoeuer is contained in the word of God, that is, the whole truth of God. But ſpecially and properly, the obiect of it, is Ieſus Chriſt with all his benefits.
               There is a twofold conſideration of Chriſt and his benefits: for firſt Chriſt with his benefits is conſidered as he is offered in the word and Sacraments: that is, as he is offered vnto vs, as in a looking glaſſe; and yet not ſo much

Chriſt himſelfe, as a certaine image or picture of him. Of this looking glaſſe of the word and Sacraments ye reade, 1. Cor. 13. 12. We ſee now as it were in a glaſſe, and by a darke ſpeaking. And 2. Cor. 3. 18. But we with open face beholding the glorie of the Lord as in a glaſſe, are transformed into the ſame image from glorie to glorie. Now Chriſt ſo conſidered, The glaſſe wherein we may finde and ſee the face of Chriſt. is nothing els but Chriſt preached in the word, and repreſented in the Sacraments. We (ſaith he) preach Chriſt crucified, 1. Cor. 1. 23. For the Goſpell preached doth ſet Chriſt in a manner before our eyes. Gal. 3. 1. To whom Ieſus Chriſt was before pictured before your eyes, and among you crucified.
               
               Next, we be to conſider Chriſt without this glaſſe of the word and Sacraments, as he is in himſelfe. Of Chriſt ſo conſidered the Apoſtle ſpeaketh 1. Cor. 13. 12. But then we ſhall ſee him face to face. And 1. Ioh. 3. 2. But we know that it ſhall come to paſſe, that when he ſhall appeare, we ſhall be like him, becauſe we ſhall ſee him as he is. As there is a twofold conſideratiō of Chriſt, ſo the knowledge and apprehenſion of him is twofold. The firſt is called Faith, the A twofold know ledge or apprehenſion of faith. latter Sight. Of both theſe ye reade 2. Cor. 5. 7. For wee walke by faith, not by ſight. Theſe two wayes of knowing & apprehending, do agree one with another in nature and eſſence: for both of them are the knowledge and apprehenſion of Chriſt: but they differ in quantity, and as they vſe to ſpeake, more or leſſe: for the knowledge of faith is the leſſer, as alſo is the apprehenſion: whereupon 1. Cor. 13. 9. it is ſaid, that we know in part. But the knowledge & apprehenſion by Sight is the greater; & ſo perfect knowledge and apprehenſion: and this ſhall haue place in the next world. Of this perfect knowledge is ſpoken in the ſame chap. verſ. 10. But after that which is perfect is come. And verſ. 12. Then ſhall I know euen as I ſhall be taught.
               
               Theſe things thus laid downe and knowne, it is eaſily perceiued, what the ſpeciall and firſt obiect of faith is: namely, Ieſus Chriſt with all his benefits, and euen ſo, as

he offereth himſelfe in the word and Sacraments. Or the obiect of faith is the word it ſelfe, or the promiſes which are made of Chriſt, which is all one. Hence it followeth, The neceſſitie of the word preached. that whenſoeuer the preaching of the word, and admiſtration of the Sacraments ſhalceaſe, this faith alſo wherby we now walke, muſt alſo ceaſe. See 1. Cor. 13. Then ſhall that which is in part be done away.
               
               To conclude, it is to bee noted of this obiect of faith, that it is ſpeciall, that is, offered to me, to thee, and to euerie man ſpecially and diſtinctly. For albeit the words bee generally conceiued; yet they are ſpecially to be taken, as ſpoken to me, to thee: or of me, and of thee. Thus much touching the obiect of faith.
               Now we are to ſpeake of the ſubiect thereof; namely, wherein it is, and from which it proceedeth. The ſubiect of faith is the ſoule of man; and in the ſoule of man the The ſubiect of faith. reaſonable and principall faculties: thoſe I terme, firſt the mind; then the wil. For as touching the other inferior faculties and affections of the ſoule, faith is not ſo much ſaid to be reſident in them, as to ſanctifie them, and to ſtir them vp vnto good, and as a Ladie, to gouerne them. Whereupon it is ſaid, After that by faith he had purified their harts. Now that faith belongs to the mind, it is apparant by thoſe titles which are giuē to faith euery where in the Scripture, as whē it is called knowledge, vnderſtanding, ſight: as whē it is ſaid, We ſee now in a glaſſe. And that it is in the will, it is euident by that which is ſaid Ro. 10. 10. For with the heart man beleeueth vnto righteouſneſſe. And Eph. 3. 17. that Chriſt may dwell in your hearts by faith: for the ſeate of the will is attributed to the heart. Furthermore, the names whereby faith is termed in the Scripture, doe ſufficiently conuince, that the ſeat of it is not only in the mind, but alſo in the will and heart: as when it is called an apprehenſion, and when it is termed a certaine embracing, and ſuch like names, which ſignifie the office of the heart and will. Thus farre of the ſubiect of faith.
               
                  
Now let vs come neerer to the nature thereof, and to the parts of the nature of it. The firſt part of faith, is the knowledge or vnderſtanding of the mind, whereby the mind doth plainly vnderſtand ſome ſentence or propoſition of the Goſpell, and by name that propoſition which is in the ſyllogiſme of the Goſpell, which we alleaged before: for the propoſition of that ſyllogiſme is as it were an abridgment of the whole Goſpell. From this part, as the principall, namely knowledge, faith is named euerie where in the Scriptures.
               The ſecond part of faith, is the iudgment, or as it is commonly called, the aſſent of the ſame mind. Of this iudgement the ſcripture ſpeaketh euery where, as 1. Cor. Parts of faith. 2. 15. The ſpirituall man iudgeth all things. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Trie the ſpirits whether they be of God. This iudgement is twofold, the firſt, of truth; the ſecond, of goodnes. The iudgment Iudgment twofold. of truth, is when the mind aſſenteth to the propoſition of the Goſpell, that it is true: of this iudgement ſee Ioh. 3. 33. He that receiueth his teſtimonie, hath ſealed that God is true. 1. Tim. 1. 15. This is a faithfull ſaying, and worthie by all meanes to be receiued, &c. To conclude, this iudgment of truth is gathered out of all places of Scripture, wherein there is mention made of the truth of Gods word. The iudgement of goodneſſe is, when the mind aſſenteth to that thing, which is in the propoſition of the Goſpell, that it is good; and therefore to be followed. For it muſt be knowne, that all the propoſitions of the Goſpell The ſayings of the Goſpel be practicall. be practical, as they ſay; in the naked ſpeculation and contemplation of which none muſt ſet vp his reſt; but they are to be drawne out into the manners and life euerie day. Of this iudgement of goodneſſe, ye haue that Rom. 7. 16. I conſent to the law that it is good. 1. Cor. 1. 18. The preaching of the croſſe is to vs which are ſaued the power of God. And in the ſame chap. verſ. 24. We preach Chriſt, to them which are called, the power and wiſedome of God. And thus much concerning the twofold iudgment, which (as

we haue ſaid) muſt be of the generall propoſition of that Euangelicall Syllogiſme: of both which, this laſt of all is to be held, that it is not only general, but alſo ſpeciall; whereby I do iudge that thoſe things which are ſpoken in the Goſpell, are true of me, and good to me. For, as we ſaid before, thoſe things which are publiſhed in the goſpell, are to be vnderſtood to be ſpoken ſpecially of mee, and of thee. And this ſpecial iudgement is properly that which is called 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  full aſſurance. After this followes 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  confidence,  which belongs to the heart and will: whereof we will ſpeake in the next place.
               There followeth therefore in the third place, the choice or hold-taking of the will, which is, when any one doth with his will or heart peculiarly apply to himſelfe that The third point of faith. which he hath iudged, firſt true; then good, not onely in generall, but alſo in ſpeciall. This apprehenſion or application, is in the Aſſumption or concluſion of that ſyllogiſme of the Goſpell, alleaged before by vs. For after that the mind hath ſeene and iudged the propoſition of that ſyllogiſme, then the will of euery one doth particularly apply vnto himſelfe in the aſſumption and concluſion, thoſe good things which that generall Propoſition did concerne. Of this apprehenſion ye haue 1. Tim. 6. 12. Lay 
                  The apprehenſion of faith. 
                  hold on eternall life. Phil. 3. 12. I follow, if I alſo may apprehend it. 1. Tim. 1. 15. This is faithfull ſaying, and worthie by all meanes to be embraced by vs. To conclude, this third part of faith is to be vnderſtood in all thoſe titles, wherby the choiſe of the will is ſignified in the Scripture. From this part faith is termed a ſpeciall confidence or truſt: for the nature of faith is chiefly ſeene in it.
               Theſe things thus declared, it will be eaſie to gather a definition of faith. For Faith in Chriſt with all his benefits, 
                  Faith defined. 
                  as he is offered in the word and Sacraments, is firſt aknowledge of the mind; then an apprehenſion of the will or heart. In this definition we haue firſt the obiect of faith; then the ſubiect of it; thirdly, the parts. Vnder the knowledge of the

mind I vnderſtand alſo the iudgement or aſſent of the mind, and that twofold, whereof we haue ſpoken afore. It is to be knowne that faith thus defined by vs, is improperly taken for the function and worke of faith, ſeeing faith is properly an infuſed habit (as they call it) or an holy qualitie, firſt of the mind; then of the will or heart.
               Now this quality in the mind, what is it els but that light, of which the Scripture ſpeakes euery where? Ye were once darknes, but now ye are light in the Lord, Epheſ. 5. 8. The eyes of your minde being opened, that ye may know what 
                  Faith a light. 
                  is that hope of his calling, Epheſ. 1. 18. God which commanded that the light ſhould ſhine out of darknes, is he which hath ſhined in your hearts, to giue the light of the knowledge of the glorie of God in the face of Ieſus Chriſt, 2. Cor. 4. 6. But God hath renealed thoſe things vnto vs by his Spirit: for the Spirit ſearcheth all things, euen the deepe things of God. 1. Cor. 2. 10.
               And this light ofye mind, which is the firſt part of faith, ſeemeth to be not onely a reſtoring of that natural light, which was impaired in Adams fall: but alſo a certaine ſupernatural light put into the mind by the Spirit of Chriſt, to this end, that the mind might behold and ſee thoſe things which excell all naturall knowledge. Whereupon Ephe. 3. 18. 19. it is thus ſaid, That ye being rooted & grounded in loue, may be able to attaine with all Saints, what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and height, and to know that loue of Chriſt, which paſſeth all knowledge. I doe not thinke that this knowledge was in Adam, in his firſt creation, before his fall. For all the knowledge in Adams mind, Adams knowledge before his fall. before the fall, as it was holy; ſo it ſeemeth it was natural: it ſeemeth it was a naturall knowledge of God himſelfe; it ſeemeth it was a naturall knowledge of the things created. Neither did he before his fall ſee God in the mediator Chriſt, nor was it needefull he ſhould ſee him ſo. Beſides, this light which I ſpeake of, is kindled in our minde by looking on the face of Chriſt the Mediator, as

it were in the glaſſe of the Goſpell. 2. Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding as in a glaſſe the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the ſame image from gloxy to glory. Alſo 4. chap. ver. 6. To giue the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Ieſus Chriſt. But Adam before his fall, as he heard nothing concerning the Goſpell of Chriſt, ſo he ſaw not his face in the glaſſe of the Goſpel. Beſides 1. Co. 15. 45. of Adam it is ſaid, the 1. Adam was made a liuing ſoule: but of Chriſt, the laſt Adam was made a quickening spirit. Out of which words the difference betwixt Adam and Chriſt is ſeene, that Adam was made only naturall, yet holy: but Chriſt was made ſpirituall and ſupernaturall: for ſpirituall things are ſupernaturall. Againe, out of this difference wee gather that that ſpirituall and ſupernaturall light, which we haue only by the benefit of Chriſt, that is, the ſecond Adam, was not in Adam before the fall. For in the ſame place verſ. 48. 49. Our heauenly or ſpiritual condition is aſcribed vnto Chriſt. But of this thus farre, and but ſparingly.
               Alſo in the will or heart faith is a ſupernaturall abilitie; put into it by the Spirit of Chriſt, of which 
                     Or the ſaith of the operation of God. Ephe. 3. 20 According to the power that worketh in vs.
                   Col. 2. 12. By the faith of God that worketh mightilie in vs. This power alſo, as I thinke, was not put into Adams heart before the fall, being induced by the ſame reaſons which wee alleaged before. And ſeeing that light of the mind, and efficacie of the heart are ſupernaturall, it followeth alſo that the functions of that light & efficacie, namely, the knowledge of the mind, and the apprehenſion of the heart, are likewiſe ſupernaturall. Wherefore vnto that definition of ſaith before ſet downe, we adde this branch (ſupernatural) as the laſt: ſo that iuſtifying faith in Chriſt, with al his nofits offered vnto vs in the word and Sacraments, is not onelie 
                  Iuſtifying faith defined. 
                  an holie, but alſo a ſupernaturall knowledge of the mind, and apprehenſion of the wil. Thus thē we define faith, as we admoniſhed before, as the name of faith is taken for the function and worke of faith: For ſo the Diuines do commonly

define it: ſo alſo in the Scriptures is the name of faith wont to be taken, namely, for the function or worke of faith, as it is tearmed 2. Theſſ. 1. 3. But if the deſcription of faith properly, and as it is taken for an infuſed qualitie, do like any man better; thus alſo he may haue it deſcribed: that Faith is a light of the mind, and an 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . effectuall action in the hart ſupernaturally, put into them both, for the knowing and apprehending of Chriſt with all his benefits, offered in the word and Sacraments.
               
               Now it remaineth that we ſpeak ſomething touching the effects of faith. That knowledge and apprehenſion of Chriſt which we ſpeake of, ſith the ſeat of it is in the principall and reaſonable faculties of the ſoule, namely the mind and the will, it cannot be idle, neither doth it Effects of faith in the mind and heart. &c. containe it ſelfe within the bounds of thoſe higher faculties of the ſoule, the mind & the wil; but is effectuall alſo in the lower heart, that is, in all the affections: and there is not anie of al the affections, but is affected ſome way or other by this knowledge & apprehenſion, being not only ſanctified by it, but alſo rapt vp aboue it ſelf & the nature therof. For as we ſaid of faith, yt it is a ſupernatural knowledge and apprehenſion, the ſame is true alſo of the functions of all the affections: for they are al not onely made holy, but alſo ſupernatural, by a certaine ſupernatural facultie put into them by the Spirit of Chriſt.
               But to ſpeake diſtinctly of the effects of Faith: Chriſt with all his benefits being once knowne and apprehended, an hope of good to come, & a feare of euill to come, Note the ſpecivll effects which follow faith. the loue of Chriſt, and the deſire of him, and ioy & gladneſſe, are in a wonderfull manner kindled in the ſoule, as 1. Pet. 1. 8. Beleeuing in him ye reioice with ioy vnſpeakeable and glorious. Griefe alſo which is according to God, is kindled, with grones which cannot be expreſſed, Ro. 8. 26. To conclude, the whole heart burnes to Godward. By faith alſo our affectiōs toward our neighbour are ſtirred vp, and that for God & Chriſt: as loue of our neighbour,

and delight in the Saints, Pſal. 16. 3. And theſe are the firſt effects of faith, and thoſe are inward in the lower heart or affections.
               There be alſo outward effects of faith, hauing their being in the body, and in all the members of the bodie; and thoſe are outward actions of the body, into which the inward motions of the affections breake forth. And thoſe are, firſt, ſuch as reſpect God: then, ſuch as reſpect our neighbour for Gods cauſe. And thus much of the effects of faith, both inward and outward, as alſo of faith, which is properly ſo called, which they commonly tearm iuſtifying faith.
            
            
               CHAP. XXX. Of the improper ſignifications of Faith.
               
               
                  IT followeth that we ſpeake of the improper ſignifications of faith. For this word, faith, is Diuerſe acceptions of faith. ambiguous, and ſignifieth many things. Properly 1 it ſignifieth this faith which they call iuſtifying: for that is properly and ſimply termed by this name. Secondly, it ſignifieth that faith which 2 they call hiſtoricall, or dead; which is nothing els, but as it were the carcaſe of iuſtifying faith: for it lacks the ſoule, that is, the full aſſurance of the mind, and the confidence of the heart in the ſpeciall aſſent of the minde, and in the truſt and apprehenſion of the heart.
               Thirdly, it ſignifieth faith which they call temporary, 3 which is as a certaine Ape of iuſtifying faith, Fourthly, & 4
                  
laſt of al, that faith, which they terme miraculous.
               Theſe three laſt ſignifications of faith are improper, and the name of faith is but by an Homonymie or improperly put vpon them, to ſignifie theſe things. For not any of theſe may be called by the name of faith, vnleſſe you ſay in ſome reſpect, in part, and after a ſort, and with an addition: for example; the knowledge of hiſtory is termed faith, but with this addition, hiſtoricall or dead; and ſo of the reſt. Now a generall notion of this word faith is that which is Heb. 11. 1. And that is a knowledge in general, with aſſent and agreement to all thoſe things which are comprehended in the word of God, and that whether generall or particular. I meane by a particular worde, when any thing is reuealed to any one peculiarly out of order, by which kinde of reuelation it came to paſſe that miracles were done by ſome. We muſt ſpeake therefore in the firſt place concerning hiſtoricall or dead faith: and firſt for the teſtimonies of ſcripture touching it. Iam. 2. 15 Faith if it haue no works, is dead of it ſelfe. 1. Cor. 12. 9. Unto other, faith by the ſame spirit. The coherence of the text Hiſtoricall or dead ſaith. and compariſon made with other gifts of the holy Ghoſt, which in that place are numbred, doe ſhew ſufficiently that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of hiſtorical faith. Hitherto belongeth that place which is 1. Cor. 13. 2. If I had all faith, ſo that I could remoue mountaines. Here he doth not only meane the faith of miracles, but alſo the hiſtoricall: for he ſayth all faith; and after he ſets downe one kinde, as if he had ſaide by name, miraculous faith to remoue moūtaines. The reaſon of the name is this: It is termed hiſtoricall, becauſe it is only a bare knowledge of the holy hiſtory, concerning God, Chriſt, the will of God, and his works, and not an holy apprehenſion of the things knowne. And why it is called dead, Iames rendreth a reaſon in the place before cited, namely, becauſe it hath no Dead faith. works: the reaſon is from the conſequent or ſigne. For want of works or actions, argueth and ſheweth that faith

is as it were dead, and without life, and if I may ſo ſpeake the carcaſe of faith: euen as if there be no motions nor actions in a man neither inward nor outward, thereby it is declared, that the man is dead, and the bodie without life, or but the dead carcaſe of a man.
               Our aduerſaries, that I may ſpeake of this by the way, when they heare out of Iam. 2. 16. that ſaith is therefore The papiſts touching faith. called dead, becauſe it hath no works, by & by conclude, that charitie, and the works of charitie, is the ſoule of faith: but this followeth not, that charitie, and the works of charity are the ſoule of faith: but this followeth, that charitie, and the works of charitie are the ſignes and tokens of the ſoule, that is by name, of that apprehenſion of Chriſt which is in the heart: for this is indeede the ſoule and forme of faith. I will declare this thing by a like example. A man, if he haue no workes, no actions, neither inward nor outward, that indeed argueth, that there is not a ſoule or forme in him, out of which actions doe proceed: but it doth not argue that works or actions are the ſoule and forme of man.
               But they thinke that the words of Iames, chap. 2. 26. do make for their opinion. For out of that that Iames ſaith, As the bodie without the Spirit or breath is dead, ſo alſo faith which is without works is dead: thus they infer: Therfore as the Spirit is the forme of the bodie, ſo are workes the forme of faith. But this conſequent is not of force. For the compariſon and ſimilitude is not in that, but in this, that euen as the bodie without the ſoule or breath is dead, ſo faith without works is dead: The bodie without the ſpirit, as her ſoule and forme, is dead: faith without workes, as the ſignes and tokens of the ſoule, is dead. Euen as therefore the want of the Spirit or the ſoule, doth argue the death of the bodie: ſo the want of the ſigne & token of the ſoule of faith doth argue the death of faith: It is therfore a compariſon of the ſpirit and works in the like effect, and not in the like nature: For both haue the

like effect, which is death; but both the things are not of the ſame nature. Hitherto of the reaſon of the name. The obiect of hiſtoricall faith, is all the holy ſtorie, that is, the whole truth which is according to godlineſſe, and the word of both couenants: wherein this faith differs from iuſtifying faith, which hath the word of the Goſpel, or of the couenant of grace for the obiect thereof.
               The ſubiect of this faith is the mind, which knoweth and iudgeth: but the iudgment of the mind, doth onely Subiect of an hiſtoricall faith. reach to the truth of the hiſtorie, as I thinke, and not to the goodnes of the things themſelues, which are contained in the ſtorie. For although an hypocrit do profeſſe that al thoſe things, of which the Goſpel ſpeaks, are true; yet he doth not aſſent to thē in his mind, as good things: Note well. which is the firſt ſtep of practiſe or action. For after the iudgement of the goodnes of a thing, followeth the apprehenſion thereof, which belongs to the will; out of which after proeede the motions of the affections, and out of them laſt of all do iſſue the outward actions of the bodie. Therefore this dead faith, doth not ſincerely at the leaſt aſſent to thoſe things which are in the word as good things, but rather doth indeed reiect them, and count them as euill. So the diuell, who hath this faith, is ſaid to tremble, Iam. 2. 19. Out of which it is manifeſt, that the diuell doth reiect Chriſt and all his good things. For this horrour ariſeth out of reiecting and hating of the thing. Therefore in one word, this hiſtoricall faith pertaines only to the mind, and hath that for the ſubiect of it.
               It followeth, that we ſpeake of the nature thereof. By theſe things which haue beene ſpoken of the ſubiect, it The nature of an hiſtoricall faith. may eaſily be learned what is the nature of it. For it is wholy compriſed but onely in the generall knowledge of the mind, and iudgment of truth: it hath therefore one or two degrees of iuſtifying faith. Out of all theſe things which we haue ſpoken of an hiſtoricall faith, it is eaſie to

gather the definition thereof. For hiſtoricall faith is a knowledge in the mind of the whole truth both of the Hiſtoricall faith defined. law, and of the Goſpell, and the iudgement of the mind made thereupon, as farre as concernes the truth thereof. And thus farre concerning hiſtoricall or dead faith.
               Next followeth a temporarie. Of this faith yee haue theſe texts. Matth. 13. 20. 21. But he that receiued the ſeede 
                  3. Faith a temporary faith.
                   
                  in ſtonie ground, is he who heareth the word, and by and by receiues it with ioy, yet hath no roote in himſelfe, but is for a time, and when perſecution and trouble ariſeth becauſe of the word, is offended preſentlie. To the ſame purpoſe reade I. uk. 8. 13. Of this faith ſee alſo Heb. 6. 4. 5. For it cannot be, that they which haue beene once inlightened, and taſted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall awaie, &c. To conclude, of this faith ye haue Ioh. 5. 35. He (namely Iohn) was a burning and a ſhining candle: and ye would for a time haue reioiced in his light. The reaſon of the name is this: it is called Temporarie, becauſe it endures but for a time: and it endureth but for a time, becauſe it hath no roote.
               It hath the ſame obiect with iuſtifying faith, & which is properly ſo called, namely, Ieſus Chriſt with his benefits, offered in the word of the Goſpell and in the Sacraments; wherein it differs from hiſtoricall faith, which hath for the obiect thereof the vniuerſall truth. It hath The ſubiect of a temporary faith. the ſame ſubiect with iuſtifying faith: for it hath it ſcat both in the mind, and alſo in the will and heart.
               Laſt of all, it hath as many parts of nature as the iuſtifying faith hath. For it is a knowledge of the vnderſtanding, conioyned with both the iudgements of the mind, & it is the apprehenſion of the wil or heart: whereout follweth alſo the ſtirring of the affections, as of ioy, delight, &c.
               But that I may ſpeake a little more largely of this apprehenſion, which is in Temporarie faith, and of this ioy. Firſt, it is certaine by the ſcripture, that theſe things are in

the Temporarie faith. For Chriſt ſaith in Matth. That hee which is but for a time, doth receiue the word, and that with ioy. And in Ioh. The Iewes are ſaid to haue reioiced for a time in the light of Iohn Baptiſt: And to the Hebr. How the hiſtoricall and temporary ſaith differ one fro another, and both from the iuſtifying. there is attributed to this faith, not onely the enlightening of the mind, but alſo the taſte of the heart, and that performed not onely by the word, but alſo by the Spirit: for he ſaith; They which haue beene made partakers of the holy Ghoſt. Therefore in Temporarie faith there is indeede a kind of apprehenſion, there is indeede a certaine ioy, wherein Temperarie faith differeth from hiſtoricall faith. For in hiſtoricall faith theſe things are not indeed, but he that hath it, doth faine, and diſſemble and lie, in his outward profeſſion that he hath theſe things: wherfore he is a ſhameleſſe hypocrite. But hee that hath temporarie faith, hath theſe things indeede, apprehenſion (I ſay) and ioy, after a certaine manner: neither doth he ſo faine or ſie, as he that hath an hiſtorical faith: yet he is an hypocrit, becauſe this apprehenſion and this ioy, are not ſincere, albeit after a certaine manner they be true.
               I ſay, they are not ſincere, becauſe they are not for that cauſe for which they ſhould be, that is, they are not for Chriſt himſelfe, offered in the preaching of the Goſpell; they are not for Gods ſake, they are not for his glory, nor for thoſe heauenly benefits of Chriſt, his righteouſnes and eternall life: but they are for other cauſes, as for the newneſſe of the Gospell, which is to bee vnderſtood in that place, Ioh. 5. 35. He was a burning & a ſhining candle, and ye would haue reioiced for a time in his light, namely, for the newneſſe of the matter: Secondly, they be, becauſe of a licentiouſneſſe to ſinne, which men by and by ſnatch to themſelues, vpon the hearing of free iuſtification by Chriſt, and Chriſtian liberty: To conclude, they are for riches, honours and other commodities of this life. Now ſeeing the Temporizing profeſſor hath theſe cauſes propounded to himſelfe in hearing and receiuing the word,

and in reioycing, it muſt needes be that theſe are not ſincere in him. For nothing is done ſincerely, vnleſſe it bee Synceritie. done in reſpect of the glorie of God. And herein differs Temporarie Faith, from iuſtifying: For the iuſtifying Faith doth all things for Chriſt himſelfe, for God himſelfe, for the heauenly and ſpirituall benefits of Chriſt, as much as it can for mans infirmity.
               Out of this therfore it followes, that the Temporizer is alſo an hypocrit, ſeeing he is not ſincere, and that the Temporizer is an hypocrit. temporary faith is hypocriticall, ſeeing it is not ſincere. Out of that againe, that it is not ſincere, another thing followeth, namely, that it is not ſound & firme: for nothing that is not ſincere, can be ſound. For thoſe cauſes vpon which it depends, are not ſound: as for example, thoſe worldly things, as riches, honours of the world, &c. In which thing temporary Faith differeth from iuſtifying Faith: for iuſtifying Faith, as it is ſincere, ſo it is ſound. For of that it is ſaid Col. 2. 5. And the ſtedfaſtneſſe of your 
                  The difference betwene a temporary faith, and true iuſtifying faith. 
                  faith in Chriſt. For iuſtifying Faith is, as it were, a ſolide body, conſiſting of three dimenſions, length, bredth, depth: for it poſſeſſeth the depth, and loweſt of the heart: but temporary Faith is not a body with three dimenſions, but only a ſurface, ſticking in the vpper part of the heart: for it is not either a ſound light, enlightening all the heart, or a ſound apprehenſion, ariſing from the bottome of the heart; or to conclude, a ſound ioy poſſeſſing the whole body: but all theſe things are only ſuperficiall in the temporary Faith. Whereupon Heb. 6. that apprehenſion of heauenly things which is therein, is compared to taſting, or ſleight touching, ſeeing that the heart doth but as it were with the tip of the tongue lightly taſt thoſe heauenly things, and not quite drinke them vp, and receiue them into it ſelfe.
               Againe, out of this, that temporarie Faith is not ſound, another thing alſo followeth, namely, that it doth not endure for euer, but onely for a time. For that which is

not ſound, is not durable and perpetuall; but only temporary. Wherein alſo it differeth from iuſtifying faith, which as it is ſound, ſo it is perpetuall and conſtant. From this property this faith tooke her name, and was called temporary: now this property doth preſuppoſe the two other going before; namely, firſt that it is not ſounde: ſecondly, that it is not ſincere, albeit it bee in ſome ſort true.
               While I conſider ſomewhat more diligently of the cauſe of theſe three properties, I found that it is not to be imputed ſo much to thoſe outward things for which this faith doth apprehend Chriſt in the word, and reioiceth in him, as to the inward euill affection of the heart. For the heart of man, as Chriſt ſayth, is ſtony ground, that is, it is neither good nor honeſt of it owne nature. Now we meaſure this goodneſſe and honeſty, chiefly by ſimplicity and ſincerity, which is oppoſed to hypocriſie and diſſembling. Therefore a deepe hypocriſie, which is contrary to ſincerity poſſeſſeth the heart of this man. Now the heart ſo affected, doth beleeue, apprehend and reioice, not ſincerely for a true cauſe, for which it ought to do theſe things, but for other worldly cauſes. It followeth therefore, that the cauſe of theſe euils doth lurke in the heart. Wherefore, if any man will not be a temporizer, A good admonition for a temporizer. let him aboue all things looke to his heart, and ſift and examine it diligently night and day, ſo long till hee feele that the faith of Chriſt takes roote in the bottome of his heart, and doth throughout poſſeſſe the whole heart, as much as may be.
               Out of theſe things which we haue ſpoken, touching the properties of this faith and of the cauſe of them, a marke may be taken, whereby any one may diſcerne true & iuſtifying faith from temporary. And that is, in a word, ſincerity in doing, in beleeuing, in apprehēding, in reioicing, Synceritie. & in doing all things throughout the whole courſe of the life. Now ſincerity is knowne by this, if all things

be done and performed by vs for God and for Chriſt, whether thoſe things be of ſmall or great moment. Whether ye eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer ye doe; doe all to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10. 31. By theſe things which haue beene ſpoken, it is eaſie to gather a definition of this faith. For 
                     Tempor. F. defined.
                   temporary faith is a knowledge in the minde, and an apprehenſion in the will, of Chriſt with all his benefits; but yet tēporary, or enduring but for a time. And thus much of temporary faith.
               The miraculous faith followeth, which is the third vnproper ſignification of the word of faith. Touching this faith theſe are teſtimonies. Matth. 17. Yf ye haue faith as a graine of muſtard ſeed. 1. Cor. 13. If I had all faith, ſo that I could remoue mountaines. The reaſon of the name is this: 4. Miraculous faith.
                   It is termed miraculous from the effect of it, becauſe it is powerfull to doe miracles.
               The obiect thereof is not the bare generall word of God, but rather a ſpecial promiſe or reuelation made to ſome one, touching the doing of ſome certaine miracle. Now that the bare generall word ſufficeth not, it appeareth hereby, for becauſe many holy men haue had faith in the generall word, yea they haue iuſtifying faith in the promiſe of grace; and yet could doe no miracles. Simon Magus beleeued by an hiſtoricall faith in the generall word, and yet he could do no miracles: therefore hee would haue bought this facultie with money for a price. Act. 8. 31. Vnleſſe therefore vnto the generall word, there be added a ſpeciall promiſe or reuelation, it is no miraculous faith; which is a certaine ſpeciall and extraordinarie gift of the Spirit. Wherein the Aduerſaries do erre verie much, who thinke that the generall word ſufficeth for this, to make a miraculous faith. The ſubiect of it The ſubiect of a miraculous faith is the mind, firſt vnderſtanding, and withall iudging the ſpeciall promiſe: and then the will or the heart apprehending that which is promiſed.
               The parts of the nature thereof are; a knowledge with

a iudgement of the mind, and an apprehenſion with the will and heart. Out of theſe things now ſpoken, I gather this definition of this Faith: that Miraculous faith is a 
                  Miraculous faith defined. 
                  knowledge in the mind, and an apprehenſion with the will of a speciall promiſe or reuelation, for the doing of a miracle. Thus farre of miraculous Faith; and in ſumme, of the true doctrine of faith.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXI. The opinion of the Aduerſaries concerning Faith.
               
               
                  IT followeth now that we ſee briefly, what the aduerſaries doe hold touching Faith. Firſt, they do not acknowledge the diuers ſignifications of Faith: they entreat onely of one faith, and that they terme iuſtifying, that is, as they expound the word, that The Popiſh opinion of Faith. which diſpoſeth vs to iuſtice, being to be infuſed after in the time thereof. Thus thinks Bellarmine in his Treatiſe touching faith.
               In this doctrine of faith, which they terme iuſtifying they differ from vs, firſt about the obiect of it. Indeede they doe not denie, that the obiect of faith, is the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt, offered in the Goſpell, that is, that it is the Goſpell, and the promiſes of grace concerning Chriſt, and Gods mercie in him. But they will haue the obiect to be not onely the word of the Goſpell, but

equally the vniuerſall word of God.
               To confirme this opinion of theirs, they alleage that definition of faith which is ſet downe Heb. chap. 11. 1. Faith (ſaith the Apoſtle) is the ground of things that are hoped for, and the euidence of things which are not ſeene. This (ſay they) is the definition of iuſtifying faith: But this definition ſtretcheth it ſelfe, not onely to Chriſt, to the promiſes of God, and to the Goſpell concerning him; but alſo to the whole word of God, & to all things that are contained in the word of God. For example: it ſtretcheth it ſelfe to the word of God, which is concerning the creation of the world, as is euident by verſ. 3. which followeth in the ſame chap. By faith we vnderſtand that the world was ordained by the word of God: Hence they conclude, that iuſtifying faith hath the whole word for the obiect of it. But to this we anſwer, that not onely iuſtifying Faith is defined by the Apoſtle in that place, but that that definition of Faith is common to all the ſignifications of faith, as is plaine enough by that induction of examples which followeth in that place and chapter.
               Neither is that their argument, which they gather out of the coherence of the text, of anie force. They ſay that that faith is defined, of which the Apoſtle ſpake in the laſt verſes of the chapter going afore: Now the iuſt ſhall liue by faith, &c. But there the Apoſtle ſpake of iuſtifying Faith: therefore heere in the 11. chap. iuſtifying faith is defined. I anſwer, this definition, I confeſſe, doth belong to iuſtifying faith, but not to that alone, but it is commō to it with other ſignifications of Faith, as with hiſtoricall 
                     Heb. 11. 1. A generall definition of faith common to all kinds of faith.
                   faith, and miraculous, &c. as is euident by the induction that followeth. Seeing therefore that this definition doth not onely belong to iuſtifying faith, it followeth that out of this definition they get not that they would haue, namely, that the obiect of iuſtifying Faith is equally the vniuerſall word of God: Therefore let the obiect thereof

properly be that which it apprehendeth: and that is the Goſpel, and the promiſe concerning Chriſt.
               Secondly, they diſſent from vs about this ſame ſpeciall obiect, namely, the mercy of God in Chriſt. For we ſay and affirme, that the obiect of iuſtifying faith is, not onely a generall mercy, nor only a generall promiſe touching Chriſt, but much rather a ſpeciall mercy, and a ſpeciall promiſe: that is, mercy offered in the Goſpel, not in common to all, but peculiarly to me, or to thee. For albeit the promiſes and ſentences of the Goſpell be conceiued generally; yet it is certaine, that they are to be receiued particularly by euery one, as if they were ſpoken to euery one in ſeuerall: as for example, Ioh. 3. the promiſe of the couenant of grace is conceiued generally in theſe words, Whoſoeuer beleeueth in the Sonne ſhall not periſh, but haue life euerlaſting. This promiſe is indeed generally conceiued, but it is to bee vnderſtood particularly and ſingularly by euery one, as if it had beene ſpoken to me, or to thee: If thou beleeueſt in the Sonne, thou ſhalt not periſh, but haue euerlaſting life. The Apoſtle 1. Tim. 1. doth vnderſtand this generall ſentence, namely, that Chriſt Ieſus came into the world to ſaue ſinners, no otherwiſe then if it had beene pronounced onely concerning himſelfe: whereupon he doth apply it particularly vnto himſelfe, aſſuming by name, that he is the ſinner, and concluding, How the beleeuer is to make a ſyllogiſme in forme. at the leaſt ſecretly, that Chriſt came into ye world to ſaue him by name. We may make trial of this thing by thoſe promiſes that are made ſpecially in the Goſpell to ſaue certaine men: as to the man ſicke of the palſie, Matt. 9. to the woman that was a ſinner, Luk. 7. to the Adultreſſe, Ioh. 8. to Zacheus, Luk. 19. to the thiefe, Luk. 23. For the Spirit of Chriſt, when any generall promiſe or ſentence touching Chriſt and his mercie is alleaged, doth no leſſe particularly now apply the ſame to euerie man, by ſpeaking inwardly to the heart of euery one, then at that time Chriſt did by his liuely voice apply thoſe

particular promiſes to ſome certaine perſons. Roman. 3. Whē the righteouſnes of God is ſaid to belong to al beleeuers, and that without diſtinction, it is plainly ſignified that that righteouſneſſe is offered to men of euerie ſort and condition, and alſo propounded to euery ſeuerall perſon. 1. Tim 2. after he hath admoniſhed that wee are to pray for all men, he addeth, that God will haue all men to be ſaued, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Out of which it followeth, that in the publiſhing of the Goſpell, God hath reſpect, not onely of all men in common, but alſo diſtinctly of euery ſeuerall perſon: which regard alſo he will haue vs to haue in our prayers. What neede many words? For if there were nothing els that did The mercie of God in Chriſt offered generally to all the world, particularly applied to euery one by the Spirit, is the obiect of iuſtifying faith. teach this, the adminiſtration of the Sacraments alone hath force enough in it to proue, that the mercy of God in Chriſt is offered ſpecially to euerie one. For in both the ſacraments, the ſeales of that mercy are giuen and offered to euery one ſeuerally. And let this ſuffice, to ſhew that ſpeciall mercy (as it is called) is the obiect properly of iuſtifying Faith, againſt which our aduerſaries hold.
               The obiect of iuſtifying Faith being made to bee a generall mercy, it followeth that faith, in the opinion of our aduerſaries, is generall, and not a ſpeciall aſſent. For ſeeing there is only a generall mercy propounded generally to the Church, and not offered particularly to the ſeuerall members therof, how can any particular man challenge that particularly to himſelfe, which is not ſpoken and offered particularly? But we affirme, that iuſtifying faith is that whereby euery beleeuer doth particularly, not onely aſſent to the promiſe that it is true in it ſelfe, but alſo apprehends with the heart the promiſed thing, and applies it properly to himſelfe. For this being made plaine, that the mercie of God was particularly offered to euery one, it followeth, that faith muſt be particular. But for the proofe hereof there are almoſt infinite teſtimonies

of the Scriptures: we will be content but with a few. Gal. 2. 20. And the life that I now liue in the fleſh, I liue by faith in the Sonne of God, who loued me, and gaue himſelfe for me. Marke here, he doth by faith peculiarly apply to himſelfe the Sonne of God, and his life, his loue and his death. Neither is there any cauſe why any one ſhould ſay, that this might be lawfull for the Apoſtle, who had ſome extraordinary reuelation of that thing, but that it is not lawfull to the common ſort of Chriſtians: in as much as the Apoſtle doth in this place beare the perſon of euery Chriſtian and beleeuing man. Rom. 8. For I am perſwaded that neither death nor life, &c. Marke here that ſpeciall truſt and particular application is pointed at by the verbe of the ſingular number. Beſide, that which is cited out of Habakuck by the Apoſtle, The iuſt ſhall liue by faith, doth ſufficiently inſinuate a ſpeciall faith: for thereby is ſignified that euery iuſt perſon doth liue by his faith, that is, by a ſpeciall aſſent to, and application of the righteouſneſſe of God in Chriſt. Matth. chap. 9. a particular faith is commended to the man ſicke of the palſie: to whom it was ſaide, Sonne be of good comfort, thy ſinnes be forgiuen thee. Ioh. 3. when it is ſaid, He that beleeueth in the Sonne hath eternall life; that verie ſame ſpeciall faith is ſignified, which is when euerie one doth aſſent particularly to, and apply to himſelfe euerlaſting life offered to himſelfe. What neede manie words? The ſame thing doth that verbe (I beleeue) which is found in the Apoſtles Creede, teach: For to beleeue, is there ſpecially and particularly to beleeue.
               Out of the generall mercy, and generall faith of the aduerſaries, followeth the vncertaintie of particular faith, and of Gods peculiar grace, which they defend. For it is eaſily diſcerned, that vncertaintie doth follow neceſſarily out of that generality, firſt a doubtfulneſſe of mercy; then of faith. For when as mercy is propounded

and offered, not ſpecially, but generally; and when there is onely a generall aſſent of faith, how can I be certaine of that mercy, which pertaines not certainly by name to me?
               But that there is a certainty of faith, againſt which they hold: firſt it eaſily appeareth by thoſe things which haue The certainty of faith. beene ſpoken of Gods ſpeciall mercy, and ſpeciall faith. For ſeeing mercy is offered particularly to thee and to me &c. and I againe aſſent particularly to it; now am I certaine of that mercy that it is mine, ſpecially, ſeeing I doe already by faith and ſpeciall application poſſeſſe it. For Chriſt dwelleth in our harts by faith, that is, we now poſſeſſe Chriſt, and doe enioy him as preſent. Of this ſpeciall certainty, ſee Rom. 4. 16. The inheritance is of faith, that it may be by grace, to the end the promiſe may be firme to the ſeed. And in the ſame Chapter, ver. 18. Which Abraham againſt hope beleeued vnder hope. But hereof there is a notable place, Heb. 6. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it is not poſſible that God ſhould lie, we might haue ſtrong conſolation, which haue our refuge to holdfaſt the hope that is ſet before vs. Where you ſee, firſt that God hath promiſed it: ſecondly, that he hath bound himſelfe by an oath, that is, that hee hath declared the vnchangeableneſſe of his councell for ſauing of vs by two immutable things, to this end that we might haue ſtrong conſolation. Now the comfort is not ſtrong, vnleſſe it riſe out of our firme and certaine aſſent, whereby we conſent to the truth of Gods promiſe. For if our aſſent wauer and be vncertaine, certainly there Note. can no ſtrong conſolation ariſe out of our aſſent: Secondly, that it may be a ſtrong conſolation, ſome generall certainty of our aſſent is not ſufficient, but it muſt needes be a ſpeciall and particular certainty of aſſent, whereby, to wit, I am certain, that that which is promiſed, is true of mee. For what conſolation at al, much leſſe a ſtrong conſolation can that be, when as I am certaine that the promiſe concerning Chriſt doth belong only in generall to

the Church, and not to my ſelfe alſo in particular? Nay rather, in that very thing is the griefe increaſed, when one ſees that the benifites of Chriſt pertaines to other, but not to himſelfe at all.
               But to the end that this which we ſpeake of, touching certainty and vncertainty, may be the more manifeſt, we muſt ſearch into this point a little more deepelie. In generall therefore certainty, is either of the thing, or of the perſon. Concerning the certainty of the thing, & the firm truth thereof, there is no queſtion. The certainty of the The certainty of faith. perſon apprehending the obiect is nothing els, but the firmeneſſe of the iudgement, or the aſſent of the minde, conſenting to the truth of ſome thing or ſentence. Wherfore certainty is nothing els, but a certaine property of the iudgment, or of the aſſent of our mind. And ſeeing the aſſent of the mind is twofold, either generall, when I generally aſſent to the truth of ſome ſentence that it is true, as for example; concerning the vniuerſall Church: or it is ſpeciall, when as I aſſent to the truth of any ſentence, that it is true, euen of me and of each particular: ſeeing, I ſay, there is a twofold aſſent of the mind, it followeth that there is a twofold certainty, one generall, namely, the property of a generall aſſent: the other ſpeciall, namely the property of a ſpeciall aſſent.
               Now that we may come to the ſtate of the controuerſie, What the controuerſy is concerning a particular faith. the queſtion is not concerning generall certainty, but all the controuerſie is of the ſpecial certainty of a ſpeciall aſſent, which they call the certainty of grace, or of ſpeciall mercy. For we do affirme and defend the certainty of ſpecial grace: but they oppugne this ſame certainty of ſpeciall grace; but I pray with what arguments? Firſt they ſay, that in the Goſpel no mercy is any where offered & promiſed to any particular or any one man: Therefore, there can be no certainty of ſpecial grace. I anſwer, and doe inuert the argument. In the Goſpell grace is promiſed and offered, not only in generall to all, but in ſpeciall to euery

one, as we haue taught before: wherfore the certainty of a ſpeciall grace is required in euery one. Now to thoſe things which we ſaid touching ſpeciall mercy offered to ſeuerall perſons, I adde theſe few things, to the end that the whole matter may more cleerely appeare, and to the end that we may learne by ſenſe and experience it ſelfe, that grace is offered to euery one by God. The ſpirit of Chriſt only is Chriſts vicar on earth, who teacheth and inſtructeth vs in thoſe things which Chriſt ſpake, and The ſpirit of Chriſt is his only vicar on the earth which are written in the Goſpel. Now this ſpirit teacheth, not only generally, that the promiſes and ſentences in the Goſpell touching Chriſt and his benefits, are true of the whole Church; but much more that they are true of that ſpeciall and particular man whom he inwardly teacheth. And ſith the ſpirit of adoption dooth teſtifie with our spirit that we are the ſons of God, Ro. 8. this teſtimony of the holy Ghoſt is not generall concerning the whole Church, that they which are in the Church be the ſonnes of God: but it is a ſpeciall teſtimonie of mee, and of thee, that I am the ſonne of God, and that thou art the Sonne of God. Beſides 1. Corin. chap. 1. it is ſaide of the Spirit, that he ſearcheth euen the deepe things of God, that is, the ſpirit which is giuen to euery one and which dwelleth in euery one, doth ſearch that grace and mercy in Chriſt Ieſus which lieth hid in the deepe, and makes it to bee knowne to euery one. For the ſpirit of God dwelling in me, reueales to me that, which is hid in the very hart of God. Now I demand whether he reueale to me ſome generall mercy only, belonging in generall only to the Church; or whether he reueale to me that ſpeciall mercy hid in God, which belongs to me peculiarly? Certainly there is no man, to whom this ſpirit dwelling in him hath at any time reuealed any grace that lyeth hid in God, but he will conſtantly affirme, that by the holy ſpirit there is reuealed to euery one, not a generall mercy I know not what rough draught of mercy: but a ſpeciall

mercy belonging particularly to himſelfe. Wherfore theſe ſame defenders of generall grace and mercy only, Defenders of generall grace are but meere naturall men. ſeeme to mee to be only naturall men and not ſpirituall; of whom that of the Apoſtle may be truly ſpoken: The naturall man perceiueth not the things which are of the ſpirit of God.
               
               Secondly (they ſay) that it is not expedient that euery one ſhould be certaine of his owne grace, righteouſneſſe and ſaluation: for certainty breedeth pride, but vncertainty humility. I anſwere, certainty is a gift of the ſpirit regenerating, which is beſtowed only vpon the elect. I ſpeake of true and ſound ſpeciall certainty, which is the property of true iuſtifying faith. Can it therefore be ſpoken without blaſphemy, that the holy ſpirit and iuſtifying faith, is the cauſe of the greateſt of al euils that are, & that the worſt of al, that is, of pride? Nay rather the vncertainty of a man is vtterly the property of one that exaltes him ſelfe againſt God, euen, when he promiſeth and offereth ſpeciall mercy, and binds it with an oath.
               Thirdly, they ſay, certainty of ſpeciall mercy, is a ſpeciall prerogatiue of ſome certaine men, to whom God was pleaſed to reueale extraordinarily, ſome ſpeciall mercie proper vnto them. Is therefore a ſpeciall prerogatiue which belongs but to ſome, and but to a few men, to be reckoned among Gods common or generall graces? I anſwer: It is falſe that the certaintie of ſpeciall grace, is a ſpeciall prerogatiue of ſome certaine men. For if iuſtifying faith be reckoned among the common good things and gifts of all Chriſtians, and this ſpeciall certaintie be the propertie of iuſtifying faith, with what face dare any deny this gift of ſpeciall certainty to the common ſort of Chriſtians? Is it becauſe it was reuealed but to ſome certaine and few of them, that their ſins are forgiuen, as to that man ſicke of the palſie, to that ſinner, to Zacheus, to the thiefe, is therefore this gift of certainty no other but ſpecial and extraordinary? Nay wee haue alreadie ſaid,

that the ſpeciall mercie of God is no leſſe now promiſed, and offered to euery ſeuerall and particular perſon, as to me, and to thee, then it was offered in times paſt to thoſe men by Chriſts expreſſe words.
               Fourthly, the holieſt men (ſay they) haue bewrayed with a lamentable voice at the very point of death, & do bewray dayly the vncertaintie of their ſaluation: Therefore there is not that certaintie of mercy and life, which wee ſay there is. I anſwer: there is much difference betweene that which is, and that which ought to be: This argument doth only conclude that which is, that is, that there is an vncertaintie, but it concludes not that there ought to be an vncertaintie; nay, it concludes againſt it, that it ought not to be. For they that weepe and lament for the vncertaintie of their owne ſaluation, doe therby declare, that there ought not to be an vncertainty: but our aduerſaries doereckon the vncertaintie of our owne ſaluation among the chiefe Chriſtian vertues. Secondly I anſwer, that out of that complaint of holy men, being ready to giue vp the Ghoſt, the certainty of ſpeciall mercie M. Rollock argueth of the conflicts of the godly in their death, that they haue a good faith. doth neuer a whit the leſſe follow, then the vncertaintie. For that ſpeech riſeth out of that warre that is betweene the Spirit and the fleſh, betweene faith and vnbeleefe, betweene certaintie and vncertaintie. Wherefore it is no leſſe an argument of certainty, then of vncertaintie: nay, it argueth that in that warre certaintie hath the vpper hand.
               Fiftly, they ſay, the beſt may fall from grace and faith; therefore what certaintie can there be of ſpeciall mercie and ſaluation? I anſwer. They which are indued onely with temporarie grace and faith, both may indeed fall, and doe fall away: but they which are indued with true iuſtifying faith, and with regenerating grace, can neither Of falling from grace. fall away totally nor finally. Now that comes to paſſe, not in regard of the men themſelues, for of their owne nature they are prone to finall and totall defection (ſuch

is their infirmity and weakneſſe) but it comes to paſſe, by the nature (as I may ſpeak) of that grace and gift of God, which is giuen in Chriſt Ieſus: For the gifts and calling of God are ſuch, as that hee cannot repent himſelfe of them. Rom. 11.
               Sixtly, they obiect teſtimonies of Scripture, theſe chiefly which commēd vnto vs care, thought & endeuor for the keeping and preſeruing of grace. As, He that ſtandeth, let him take heed leaſt he fall, 1. Cor. 10. 12. Alſo 2. Cor. 6. 1. Paul exhorts the Corinthians, that they receiue 
                  
                     The Papiſts cite it thus euer, but falſly: for the text is, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. & ſo it is againſt them. Phil. 2. 
                  not grace in vaine. To conclude, Chriſt admoniſheth that we ſhould watch and pray: To ſay nothing of thoſe places wherein feare is commended to vs, as Rom. 11. Thou ſtandeſt by faith, be not high minded, but feare. And in another place, Worke out your ſaluation with feare and trembling.
               
               Out of theſe and the like places, they ſay, followeth doubting of a mans owne grace and ſaluation: for why ſhould there be ſuch commandements giuen, vnleſſe it might be ſo, that one might fall from grace, and faith; and therefore that he ought to doubt of his owne grace and ſaluation. I anſwer, that out of theſe and the like places Chriſtian care & feare how good. it followeth, that there is no perſeuerance in grace, vnleſſe there bee ioyned a care, thought and labour to keepe grace. For care and thought, is ſet (God ſo ordaining it) to bee as it were the keeper and watchman to grace; forbidding that a man fall not into carnall ſecuritie, which is the enemie of grace: and this thought and care is giuen with grace, yea and it ſelfe is a kind of ſpeciall grace, and a companion of grace, which neuer departeth from her ſide: for where grace is, there is alwayes ſurely ſome thought and care to retaine that grace, which is neuer all quite loſt, euen as grace it ſelfe is neuer wholy loſt: for it is euer in proportion to the grace. For when there is great grace, there is great care: & when there is but a ſmall grace, the care is but little. And becauſe God

knoweth how neceſſary this care is, which is ye companiō and preſeruer of grace, therefore doth he ſo often in the Scriptures ſtir vs vp vnto care, & commendeth it vnto vs. And all theſe exhortations are nothing els but ſo many outcries, as it were, wherby this care, which we ſaid is the watchman and keeper of grace, is ſtirred vp & prouoked to do her dutie, that is, to keepe grace, and to driue away carnall ſecuritie, which is an enemie to grace, and which would, except care ſtood vpon▪ her watch, vtterly aboliſh grace it ſelfe, as faith, regeneration, righteouſneſſe, and life. Therefore out of theſe and the like places, care and not doubting, vertue and not vice doe follow. For doubting hath beene euer reckoned in the Scriptures among the worſt euils, & of moſt enmitie to God & man.
               Now let vs ſpeak of the ſubiect of iuſtifying faith, what that is, according to the mind of our aduerſaries. They Subiect of iuſtifying faith with Papiſts. make the mind only to be the ſubiect; and in the mind onely one facultie properly, which is that that iudgeth and aſsenteth to the truth of any ſentence: But of the will and heart they ſpeake nothing, when yet iuſtifying faith doth chiefly belong to the heart, as wee haue ſaid before.
               For the parts of the nature of iuſtifying faith, they make not ſo manie as we. For as touching knowledge, which is the firſt part of iuſtifying faith, either they ſay, yt 
                  Parts of the nature of iuſtifying faith with Papiſts. it is not neceſſary, or els that ſome obſcure knowledge will ſuffice: which thing they labour to proue by this reaſon. There is (ſay they) a double aſſent of the mind, wherby we conſent to the truth of any ſentence. The firſt aſſent is, when we conſent vnto it for ſome reaſon or cauſe: and this is termed knowledge: this aſſent doth neceſſarily require knowledge to goe before it, to the truth whereof we aſſent. The latter aſſent is, when we aſſent to the truth of a ſentence, not for ſome reaſon, but for the authoritie of him that ſpeaketh: this aſſent is is called Faith; but it doth not require that the knowledge of that thing, wherto

aſſent is giuē ſhould go before it, being content only with the bare authoritie of the ſpeaker. Out of this diſtinction & difference of aſſent (ſay they) it followeth, that in faith there is no need of knowledge, ſeeing faith is an aſſent, whereby we do agree to the truth of ſome ſentence, being induced not by any reaſon or cauſe, but by the authority of the ſpeaker.
               To this reaſon we anſwer, & firſt we do grant this difference of aſſents: but we denie, that that aſſent which is yeelded becauſe of the authoritie of the ſpeaker, hath no need of knowledge to go before it. For that it may be iuſtifying Faith to vs, it is required that that which is ſpoken by God himſelfe be ſome manner of way vnderſtood by vs. For God doth not require that of vs, that we ſhould aſſent to his word and voice, becauſe of the bare authority of him that teſtifieth, when as we vnderſtand them not at all.
               Secondly, they reaſon out of that definition of faith, Heb. 11. Faith is the ground of things that are hoped for, and the euidence of thoſe things that are not ſeene. Here, ſay they, we ſee faith of things vnknowne, namely of ſuch things as are to be hoped for, & as are not ſeen. But (ſay I) theſe two words 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  ground, and euidence do argue ſufficiently, that thoſe very things which are hoped for and not ſeene, are in the meane time in ſome ſort preſent, and ſeene of vs. Whereupon Paul 2. Corinth. chap. 4. ſaith: Why, we looke not on thoſe things which are ſeene, but on thoſe things which are not ſeene. Heere you ſee, that The popiſh implicite faith. euen thoſe things which are not ſeen, nor obiect to theſe eyes of our bodies, are yet ſeene and beheld with the ſpirituall eyes of our faith. And this is their opinion touching the knowledge of faith, which tendeth to this purpoſe, to eſtabliſh that faith which they terme implicit or infolded faith.
               Concerning that aſſent which we ſaid is the 2. part of iuſtifying faith, they do place the nature of faith only in

that aſſent, which is yeelded in regarde of the truth of a thing: for they ſpeake nothing of the aſſent or iudgment of goodnes: and they make that ſame iudgment of truth which they hold, to be only general: namely, wherby one doth iudge that ſome ſentence is true, not of himſelfe, but in generall of the whole Church: when as notwithſtanding that iudgement, aſwell of truth as of goodneſſe, which is the propertie of faith, is rather particular; yea a very peculiar grace, which in the Scripture is called that ful aſſurance, as we haue ſaid before. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               Touching the third part of faith, which we tearmed the confidence of the heart, they doe not acknowledge it. For they ſay that confidence is nothing els but hope ſtrengthened, and a certaine effect of faith, whereas notwithſtāding confidence which the Greeks tearme 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is a certain motiō of the wil or hart not expecting, but in preſent apprehending ſome good, and depending therupon, and reioicing therein as preſent. Furthermore, Confidence and faith of the ſame roote in Greeke. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, faith and affiance are of the ſame roote: For both of them come from the verbe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which ſignifyeth to perſwade. Beſides the verbe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is taken euery where by the Apoſtle for, to be perſwaded, to beleeue and not to hope. Rom. 8. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, I am perſwaded, that neither life, nor death, nor things preſent nor things to come, &c. Phil. 1. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , I am perſwaded that he that hath begun in you a good worke, &c. 2. Cor. 5. Knowing therfore the terror of the Lord, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , we perſwade, or draw men to the faith. I graunt that the name 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is ſome times taken for confidence which is a conſequent of faith, and a certaine property of it: for it comes to paſſe that he which beleeueth or truſteth, dooth depende on him in whom he placeth his truſt. Of this ſignification of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , read Eph. 3. 12. In whom we haue freedome and acceſſe with confidence, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , by faith in him.
               
               Out of theſe things which we haue ſpoken, it is eaſie to gather a definition of faith, according to their opinion:

who take iuſtifying faith to bee nothing els, then that whereby euery one doth in generall aſſent to the truth of the word of God, & that for the authority of the ſpeaker: A popiſh definition of faith. which definition what els is it I pray you, then a generall notion of faith, and ſuch as is common to all the ſignifications of faith, which we ſet downe before. From this definition of iuſtifying faith they gather, & that truly, that iuſtifying faith may be in euery wicked and moſt hainous A popiſh definition of faith. ſinner: For in him this generall aſſent may be, which cannot be denyed to the very deuils, as Iames witneſſeth. The Deuils, ſaith he, beleeue and tremble: and yet they call this, iuſtifying and true faith, though not liuing. For they diſtinguiſh betwene true and liuing faith. True faith (they ſay) is euen that which worketh not by loue, yea though it be dead: but a liuing fatih they terme that which worketh by loue, as by hir forme, and not as an inſtrument: whereupon they terme this by another name formed faith.
               
               But we do vtterly deny this diſtinction of true and liuing faith: for we take true faith and liuing faith for one and the ſame; euen as one and the ſame man is true and liuing: and as true or liuing man is ſo termed from his ſoule or form: ſo alſo true or liuing faith is ſo tearmed frō hir ſoule or form, which conſiſts in ful aſſurance & truſt, as we haue ſaid, without which, faith is nothing els but a carcaſe, euen as a man without a ſoule is not ſo much a man, as a carcaſe and dead body.
               But they indeuour to proue out of Iames. 2. laſt verſe, that euen dead faith and not liuing, is neuertheleſſe true faith. As the body is to the ſoule, ſo is faith vnto works: but the body without the ſoule is a true body, albeit not liuing: therefore faith without works is a true faith, although not liuing. I anſwere, that this is a ſophiſticall argument: for the compariſon of the body and faith, which Iames maketh, is not in the truth, but in the death of thē: and Iames aſſumes and concludes out of that propoſition:

                  But the body without the ſpirit is dead: wherefore alſo faith without workes is dead. For betweene faith and the body this is the difference: one and the ſame body may be both dead and true: but faith is not both true and dead, euen as a man is not both true and dead: for as a man is a compound thing of his body and his ſoule; ſo faith is a certaine compound thing, as it were of her body and of her ſoule, the tokens or ſignes whereof are the actions. Wherefore in Iames the compariſon is made betweene a ſimple and a compound: the ſimple thing, which is the body voide of the ſoule: the compound which is faith. And the compariſon is of force in that wherein it is made, namely, in the death of both & not in other things. And ſo much of iuſtifying faith according to the opinion of our aduerſaries, as alſo of the whole doctrine of faith.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXII. Of Hope.
               
               
                  HOPE followeth faith: for that apprehenſion of Ieſus Chriſt with his benefits offered Hope. in the worde and ſacraments, which is the property of faith, dooth giue hope vnto vs that wee ſhall one day inioy Chriſt preſent. The Apoſtle, Rom. 5. ſaith, that experience breedes hope. Now by faith we get experience, and as Peter ſayth, wee taſte how good the Lorde is: wherefore it muſt needs bee

that faith begets hope.
               That we may therefore ſpeake of hope: it muſt firſt of all be ſeene, what is the obiect thereof. The obiect of faith and hope is the ſame in ſubſtance, namely, Ieſus Chriſt with his benefits. Heb. 11. It is ſaid that faith is the 
                  Obiect of hope the ſame in ſubſtance with the obiect of faith, and how they differ. 
                  ground of things that are hoped for. It may be againe ſaid, that hope is of thoſe things which are beleued or which haue after a ſort a being by faith. By theſe things it is euident, that the obiect of faith and hope is the ſame thing in ſubſtance or effect.
               Yet the obiect of hope differeth in reaſon from the obiect of faith. The chiefe difference is this, that the obiect of faith is Chriſt in the word & ſacraments, or the word concerning Chriſt and the ſacrament, which ſhadoweth him: Wherefore the obiect of faith is a certaine image of Chriſt, which is propounded to vs to be looked vpon in the glaſſe of the worde and Sacraments. Whereupon 2. Cor. 3. we are ſaide with open face to behold as in a glaſſe, and to be transformed into that image, which we behold in that glaſſe.
               But the obiect of hope, is Chriſt with his benefits, not indeed appearing to vs in the word & ſacraments, but appearing as he is, and as I may ſay, in his owne perſon. For hope is not ſetled vpon that image of Chriſt which we behold in a glaſſe by faith, but vpon the face of Chriſt himſelfe which we hope we ſhal ſee at the laſt. Phil. 3. 20. from whence alſo we looke for the Sauiour our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Tit. 2. Looking for that bleſſed hope and the glorious comming of the great God our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Becauſe we ſhall ſee him as he is: and whoſoeuer hath this hope in him, that is, he that hopes that he ſhall ſee him as he is. By theſe things it appeareth, that hope hath for it obiect the very face of Ieſus Chriſt. There be three things which are conuerſant about one Chriſt, Faith, Hope, and Sight, 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Sight.
                   but each in a diuers reſpect. For faith is properly of

his image; hope is of his face, but to come and appeare hereafter: and ſight is likewiſe of his face, but preſent.
               The ſecond difference betweene the obiect of faith and hope, is a conſequent out of yt firſt, and this is it, that faith is of preſent of things, namely, of Chriſt and his benefits, or rather of the image of theſe things, which we behold preſent in the glaſſe of the word and ſacraments: whereupon Heb. 11. it is called A ground and an euidence, which words ſignify the preſence of thoſe things which are beleeued. But hope is of things to come hereafter: for hope if it be ſeene, is no hope, that is, if it bee of things preſent, it is no hope. For why ſhould a man hope for that which he ſees? Ro. 8. 24. Beſide, hope is of his face, which is not yet ſeen. The third differēce followes alſo out of the firſt: for faith is of the thing only in part, ſeeing that it is of the image and as it were of the ſhadow, and as I may ſay, of the earneſt, which is but part of the ſumme. See 1. Cor. 13. We know in part. But hope is of the whole thing, it is of the face, of the complemēt; to conclude, it is of the whole ſumme, the hope whereof that earneſt which we apprehend by faith, giueth vnto vs. And thus far of the obiect of hope.
               The ſubiect followeth, which is not the mind, or ſome faculty of the mind, whether of vnderſtanding or iudgeing; Subiect of hope. nor is it the wil, for faith hath made her ſeate in theſe. But hope being content with the inferior ſeate, hath it a biding in the heart. For it is an affection of the heart, euen as feare is which is oppoſed to it. If we ſpeake of the nature of it, it is not iudgment or aſſent; it is not an apprehenſion or truſt: for all theſe belong to faith, but it is an expectation which followeth faith, and is begotten by faith.
               The property of hope, is not that certainty properly which is of faith, or of that aſſent which is in faith. For faith is properly ſaid to be certaine: but hope is not properly How hope is certaine. called certaine; but it is tearmed certaine becauſe

of the certainty of faith. In ſcripture I finde that patience is attributed to faith, as a certaine property thereof. Rom. 8. 25. But if we hope for that which we ſee not, we doe with patience 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Patience of hope.
                   
                  abide for it Heb. 6. it is ſaid of Abraham, that when he had patiently taried, he obtained the promiſe. 1. Theſ. 1. 3. there is mention made of the patience of hope, or of patient hope. And this patience is it, whereby hope doth ſuſtaine all the croſſes and afflictions of this life, and doth as it were goe vnder them: For all the promiſes of heauenly things are made with an exception of temporall afflictions. Wherefore, whoſoeuer hopeth that he ſhall obtaine thoſe heauenly promiſes, he muſt needes make himſelfe ready to beare and ſuſtaine all the calamities which are incident to this life. Wherefore patience is ſo neceſſarilie ioined with hope, as that hope cannot bee without it.
               Out of theſe things which we haue ſpoken, the definition of hope may be gathered: that hope is a patient abiding 
                  Hope defined. 
                  of the heart for the face of Chriſt or fulfilling of the promiſe. It is to be noted that this is the definition of hope, as the name is taken for the worke, and office of hope, which properly ſignifies an affection of the heart, and that a ſanctified one; and not onely ſo, but an affection caryed vp aboue nature. For when we are regenerated by the ſpirit of Chriſt, we doe not only recouer that holines of nature loſt in Adam, but alſo in regeneration there is not a faculty of the minde or an affection of the heart, but ſome ſupernaturall power or quality is put into it, for the exerciſing of ſupernaturall functions. For our regeneration is not ſo much effected according to that image which was entire and holy in Adam before his fall, as according to the image of Chriſt. 1. Cor 15. 49. We ſhal beare the Image of the heauenly man: Whereupon the motions of VVhat affectiōs a man regenerate hath in him. our heart are termed vnutterable, and ſuch as cannot be declared. Rom. 8. they are called grones which cannot bee expreſſed. 1. Pet. 1. Ioy is called vnſpeakable and glorious:

and the faculties of the mind & the affections of the heart regenerated are caried to thoſe things which are incomprehenſible, and which I think, could not be comprehended by Adams holy nature; ſuch as theſe are: The vnſearchable riches of Chriſt, Eph. 3. 8. the loue of Chriſt which paſſeth all knowledge, in the ſame Chap. verſ. 19. As thoſe things which the eie hath not ſeene, nor eare heard, nor euer entred into mans heart, 1. Cor. 2. 9. But we haue ſpoken of theſe things already in the doctrine of faith.
               This laſt of all is to be obſerued concerning hope, that there be many degrees of it: For there is a certaine more 
                     Degrees of hope 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . earneſt or vehement hope, which is called by the Apoſtle Rom. 8. 19. the feruent deſire of the creature. Phil. 1. 20. Paul doth profeſſe this kind of hope and earneſt looking for. And thus much of hope according to the iudgment of our Churches.
               Now bee aduertiſed in few words, what our aduerſaries Popiſh opinion of hope. thinke of it. They make the obiect of hope to be thoſe things which belong to him that hopeth; for this difference they make betweene hope and faith, that faith is of generall mercy, and not of proper: but that hope is of proper mercy. But this difference is falſe: For as wel faith, as hope, is of proper grace and mercy. They ſay with vs, that the ſubiect of hope is the heart: For they teach that hope is a vertue put into the heart.
               They make the nature of it to conſiſt not in knowing nor in iudging, but in expecting. Bellarmine makes a difference betweene hoping and expecting. We hope (ſaith he) for thoſe things which we doe not know certainly that we ſhall obtaine. Whereupon the bleſſed ſoules in heauen are ſaid to expect the reſurrection of their bodies, becauſe they know certainly that it ſhall come to paſſe. But Paul. Rom. 8. ſeemeth to take the words of hoping and expecting for one and the ſame thing: If we hope for that which we ſee not, then do we with patience expect it. You 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ſee that with Paul, to hope and to expect, are one and the

ſame.
               They make the property of hope to be certainty: For they ſay that hope is certaine: but they teach, that this certainty belongs to the vnderſtanding. For it is the vnderſtanding that dooth know certainly that ſaluation will come to paſſe; and becauſe of the certainty of the vnderſtanding, hope is ſaid to be certaine, and the heart hopeth certainly that ſaluation will come. Therefore this certainty is not properly in hope, but hope preſuppoſeth it. They ſay that this certainty is not ſimple and abſolute. For they ſay that no man is ſimply and abſolutely certaine of his ſaluation, or dooth certainly know that hee ſhall obtaine ſaluation: Nay contrarywiſe they teach that there is ſimply and abſolutely an vncertainty of hope, and hee that hopeth (ſay they) is ſimply and abſolutely vncertain of his ſaluation. But he that hopes (ſay they) is certaine of his ſaluation not ſimply and abſolutely, but after a certaine manner and in ſome reſpect. Firſt in regard of the foundation of hope, that is, the promiſe of God which cannot deceiue, and for which, if there were not other cauſes of certainty, one might be ſaide to be ſimply and abſolutely certaine of his ſaluation. But ſeeing there be other cauſes of certainty, beſide the promiſe of God, a man cannot be ſaide to be ſimply and abſolutely certaine of his owne ſaluation for the promiſe of God only, and the infallible truth thereof. Secondly, a man is ſaid to bee certaine of his ſaluation in reſpect of charity, which they ſay, is the forme of faith. For he that hath charity, is in this part, and in this reſpect certaine of his ſaluation: For charity is a ſure cauſe of ſaluation, and if it could bee that a man might neuer fall from charity, euen for that cauſe alone he might be ſimply & abſolutely certaine of his ſaluation. But ſeeing any man may fal from charity and leeſe it, therefore there is no abſolute certainty of hope in reſpect of charity neither.
               This is then their opinion, that hope is likewiſe vncertaine,

but yet that it is certaine in ſome reſpects. Firſt, in reſpect of the promiſe; then in reſpect of charitie: and therefore that the certaintie of hope is alwayes mixt with vncertaintie. For what time it is certaine becauſe of of the promiſe of God, at the ſame time it is vncertaine for other cauſes which are in our ſelues: as in regard of our repentance▪ in reſpect of our works and merits, which are alſo required to make hope certaine. Againe, what time it is certaine becauſe of charity, at the ſame time it is vncertain, becauſe of the changeableneſſe of charity. This is their opinion. But we hold thus, that hope is called certaine, becauſe of faith going afore it, & for the full aſſurance Certainty of hope of that faith. For certaintie doth properly belong to faith; and it is faith whereby euery one of vs doth certainly know, that ſaluation belongeth vnto vs: Hence commeth the ſureneſſe of hope, and the certainty thereof. Secondly, we ſay, that this certainty of hope, which is for Faiths ſake, is ſimple and abſolute: and wee deny that hope is in one reſpect certaine, and in another reſpect vncertaine, which thing they affirme: but we affirme that it is certaine in all reſpects, at leaſt that it ſo ought to be, in reſpect of Gods promiſe, in reſpect of charity, and of our whole regeneration, in reſpect of our perſeuerance: and ſo of the reſt. For all theſe things are certaine and ſound, vpon which hope dependeth, and for which it is ſaid to be certain: & theſe things do depend vpon Gods vnchangeableneſſe, whether they be out of vs, as the promiſe of God; or within vs, as charity and all regeneration: for grace once giuen in Chriſt Ieſus, can neuer be totally and finally loſt.
               Our aduerſaries doe place ſome cauſe of certainty in our ſelues, and in our ſtrength, and in our workes and merits. And therefore it is no maruell, though they ſay that hope is not ſimply and abſolutely certaine: for there is nothing more vncertaine then theſe things, in which they place ſome, or rather the chiefe cauſe of

the certainty of hope.
               Concerning the abſolute certainty of hope, theſe bee ſome teſtimonies of Scripture. Pſal. 31. In thee, O Lord, haue I hoped, let me not be confounded for euer. He that truſteth in the Lord ſhall be as mount Sion, which ſhall not be moued for euer, Pſal. 125. Rom. 5. We reioyce vnder the hope of the glorie of God. And after. Hope maketh not aſhamed. Rom. 8. We are ſaued by hope. Phil 1. 20. According to my earneſt expectation and hope, that I ſhall not be aſhamed. Rom. 9. Whoſoeuer beleeueth in him ſhall not be confounded. And thus much of hope.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIII. Of Charitie or Loue.
               
               
                  AMong the principall effects of Faith, charitie is reckoned in the next place after hope: and Paul knits them together, as the three ſpecial graces of the holy ghoſt, Faith, hope, charitie, 1. Cor. 13. There are three (ſaith he) faith hope, and charitie, and the greateſt of theſe is charitie. The Apoſtle knits theſe together, and we do not ſeuer them, ſpecially for that Gods loue is a certaine bond vniting vs to God, together with the bond of faith, which is the primary and principal. For this cauſe Peter ſaith, that our communion with Chriſt now abſent from vs, doth conſiſt loue & faith. And this moueth vs in the third place after faith, to intreat of Charitie, in this treatiſe of our effectuall calling. And charitie or loue proceedeth from

that ſweet apprehenſion and taſte of the Lord: for that taſte ſtirs vp in the heart an exceeding loue of the Lord, VVhence loue proceedeth. and of our neighbour for the Lords ſake. And when as Charitie hath receiued this life by Faith, it becomes the inſtrument of Faith, whereby it worketh other effects of the Spirit; as the gifts of knowledge, of propheſying, of tongues, and of miracles. Theſe alſo are the inſtruments & meanes, wherby iuſtifying faith worketh; but the principal is loue: for which cauſe it is ſaid, Gal. 5. that faith worketh by loue, and loue with the works or fruits thereof, among all ſignes and teſtimonies, giues the ſureſt euidence Loue the beſt euidence of faith. vnto faith.
               If this be compared with other graces of Gods Spirit, it muſt be preferred before them all: for it hath the third place after Faith. Therefore if ye ſet aſide Faith and hope, loue hath the firſt place of all the graces of ye holy Choſt, and is, as it were, the ſoule of all gifts which followe after it. For this cauſe the Apoſtle 1. Cor. 12. 13. hauing numbred diuers gifts of the holy Ghoſt, ſaith, That if theſe graces wanted loue, they were either as dead, or as nothing, or ſhould profit nothing. Whereby he giues vs to vnderſtand, that all other vertues haue no ſoundneſſe in them, if ye ſeuer them from loue, but to be onely certaine dead ſhadowes of vertues. We may therefore iuſtly call charity the life of all gifts and graces which follow it.
               If the aduerſaries had contented themſelues with this prerogatiue of Charity, they had not erred: but for that Popiſh charitie. they auouch it to be alſo the life and forme of faith, herein they ſin greatly, that faith rather contrarily is the life of charity, for that without Faith, there is no man hath but the dead ſhadowe of Loue. Wherefore the faith of Chriſt is the principall life or ſoule both of charity, and of all other vertues for without it they are all but vaine and counterfeit, and very ſinnes before God: for whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne.
               
               The primarie obiect of loue is the ſame with the obiect

of faith and hope: For what wee firſt apprehend by faith, and next expect in hope, the ſame we embrace in Obiect of loue. loue. The ſecondary obiect of loue is our neighbor, whō we loue in and for the Lord. The ſubiect of loue is the heart: for we loue with the heart: as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, Loue out of a pure heart. 
                  1. Theſſ. 1. 5.
               
               The nature thereof is not in knowledge, nor in hoping, but in louing. In loue two things are principally to Nature of loue. be reſpected: firſt, a diligent endeuour for the preſcruation of that we loue: next, an earneſt affection to be vnited and conioyned with it: both which we ſee are to bee reſpected in the loue of God and of our neighbour.
               The properties of loue are many, 1. Cor. 13. 4. &c. For whereas loue is, there is a heape of vertues: for Charitie is neuer alone in any man, but hath euer many other vertues as companions & handmaids attending on it. Of the premiſſes ye may gather ſome definition of faith; as namely, that Loue is an holy endeuour for the preſeruation of that which is beloued, whether God, or man, with an earneſt deſire 
                  Loue defined. 
                  to be vnited vnto it: For loue is that bond (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) whereby the members of the body are knit together. And it ſerues alſo in ſome ſort and place to vnite vs vnto God and Chriſt; notwithſtanding that the communiō of Chriſt the head of his body the church, be principally to be aſcribed vnto faith. And in this reſpect loue goes before iuſtification, and is a branch, in our effectual calling, euer going together with faith, hope, & repentance. For which cauſe principally, I thought good to ſpeak of it briefly in this Treatiſe, after faith and hope: for that faith, wherein we ſay conſiſteth the ſecond part of our effectuall calling, hath theſe for inſeparable companions, faith, hope & repentance: after which followes our iuſtification by order, not of time, but of nature. But in another reſpect loue followes iuſtification, and appertaineth to the grace of regeneration: but of this we ſhal ſpeake in fit place.
               
                  
Now to returne to our purpoſe: the definition giuen before, is not ſo much of loue it ſelfe, as of the worke and function thereof. For Loue is properly an affection, holy A larger definition of loue. or ſanctified: and not ſo onely, but alſo ſupernaturall, caried vp to loue thoſe things which are aboue nature, and exceed all naturall affection: for like as faith is of thoſe things which excell all naturall knowledge and apprehenſion; and hope is of thoſe things which excell all naturall expectation: ſo Loue alſo is of thoſe things which be aboue the reach of all naturall affection. For as wee haue often before admoniſhed, this our new-birth in Chriſt Ieſus, is not ſo much a reſtoring of vs to that image of Adam, which he had before his fall, as vnto the image of Chriſt, who is a ſpirituall and an heauenly man, in whom, and by whom we haue not onely (ſo to ſpeake) a naturall ſanctitie or holineſſe: but alſo doe receiue from him a certaine heauenly and ſupernaturall vertue and efficacie infuſed into all affections and powers of the ſoule. But this our ſupernaturall condition as yet appeareth not vnto men, neither doe we ſufficiently feele it and find it our ſelues, but it ſhall be ſeene in another life, when as we ſhall put on, & beare the image of that heauenly man, 1. Cor. 15. 49. Now we are called the ſonnes of God, but as yet it appeareth not what we ſhall be: but we know it ſhall come to paſſe, that we ſhal be like vnto him, when he ſhall appeare. 1. Io. 3. 2.
               The Aduerſaries ſpend all their labour in ſetting forth the commendations of loue, and they be too long in extolling charitie: For they adorne it with the ſpoiles of iuſtifying faith, ſo gracing it with ſtolen colours, and not with it owne proper beautie, aſcribing the iuſtification and ſaluation of man (which they take away from faith) vnto charitie: as ſhall be ſeene when we come to ſpeake of the doctrine of free iuſtification. And thus farre ſhall ſuffice of charity or loue.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Repentance.
               
               
                  REpentance followeth faith, as the effect followeth his cauſe: For that godly ſorrow which is according to God, and worketh repentance, is the daughter of Faith, as we ſhall ſee afterward. Of this benefit there are diuers names in diuers languages. The Hebrues do cal it TESCHUBHAH, the Grecians, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is of a verbe which ſignifieth to bee wiſe after a thing is done, to retract his ſentence, to change his mind, & to returne to a right mind. Whereupon Repentance is nothing els but an after wit, a reuerſing of iudgment, and chaunge of determinations. The word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is of the verbe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ſignifieth to be carefull and anxious after a thing is done: Wherupon 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is nothing els but a trouble and diſquietneſſe of heart, after a thing is acted. Therefore theſe two Greeke words differ, for that the firſt concerneth properly the mind or vnderſtanding: the ſecond, the heart and affection. They differ alſo in another reſpect, in that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   comprehendeth the whole worke and benefit of Repentance (for the change of the mind, which is implied in this word, doth neceſſarily preſuppoſe the ſorrow of the heart: and that ſame 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (which is a contrition & an axnietie after the fact committed:) whereas 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
is rather reſtrained to ſignifie only a part of this benefit, namely, the firſt, which conſiſteth in ſorow, in contrition, and the diſquiet of the heart after a thing is done: for it followeth not, that whereſoeuer this ſame cōpunction of of heart be, there ſhould preſently follow that ſound Repentance; as it is neceſſarie that whereſoeuer ſound Repentance be found, there alſo muſt be that compunction of heart. Some there are which make a third difference betweene theſe two, affirming that this ſound Repentance properly belongs to the godly, and to the Elect, and onely to them; for the elect onely, properly, and in very truth become wiſe after their fals, and they doe onely change their minds, and their purpoſes, & returne to a ſound mind; whereas ſome compunction, and diſquietneſſe of heart doth not onely belong to the godly and the elect, but alſo to the wicked, and to the Reprobates, in whom there is found after a ſin committed, ſome griefe, and diſquietneſſe of heart, not ſo much for the ſinne committed, as for the puniſhment of the ſinne. But we are to vnderſtand that whereſoeuer this ſame ſorrow is attributed to the wicked, there is not vnderſtood hereby that godly care and ſorrow which is according to God; but a worldly ſorrow, and a ſorrow which is vnto death. In which ſenſe it is attributed to Iudas, Mat. 27. 3. Iudas repented himſelfe: but contrariwiſe, when it 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . is attributed to the Godly, thereby is ſignified not ſo much a ſorrow for the puniſhment of ſinne it ſelfe, as for the offence and diſpleaſure of God. Thus farre of the Greeke names of Repentance.
               The Latines do call it a Conuerſion, an after-wit, to returne to heart and vnderſtanding, and repentance. Conuerſion Conuerſio. Reſipiſcentia. doth fitly anſwer with the Hebrue word: and it is a word which the Prophets haue vſed in the old Teſtament, Teſchubbah. 
                  Conuert me, O Lord, and I ſhall be conuerted, Ier. 31. Euen as Chriſt and his Apoſtles themſelues vſe the foreſaid Greeke words in the newe Teſtament, of Repentance
                  
and Compunction of heart. A change of the mind is properly ſignified in the Greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for to 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . change the mind is to begin to be wiſe after the deede done. Penance is ſignified in the Greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : for it is deriued of the verbe Poenitere, which ſignifieth a puniſhment: for in this kind of repentance, that ſorrow and anxietie of the heart is a puniſhment. For as the Greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   doth differ from the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſo doth poenitentia, penance, from the word Reſipiſcentia, 
                  Reſipiſcentia. Repentance. For to paſſe by other differences, the word Penance ſignifieth properly one part onely of this benefit, to wit, ſorrow, diſquietneſſe, and anxietie after the deed done. But the word Reſipiſcentia, which is a change of the mind, doth comprehend this whole benefit: for the change of the mind, and to become wiſe after our fals, doth neceſſarily preſuppoſe the ſorrow of the heart, as the efficient cauſe. The old Latine tranſlation doth tranſlate both the Greeke words euery where Poenitentia, Penance. The aduerſaries doe earneſtly contend, that the word Penance is euerie where to be retained, to wit, that they may defend the Sacrament of Penance (as they call it) euen by the very name it ſelf, to conſiſt in externall and corporall affliction. The word Reſipiſcentia, which ſignifieth a change of the mind, is more vſed by our Diuines when they ſpeake of this grace. And thus much concerning the names of this benefit.
               The parts thereof are generally theſe, firſt ſorrow, then after ſorrow a chang of the mind & purpoſe, which Parts of Repentance. is properly (as is afore ſaid) ſignfied by the Greeke word, vſed for repentance. Wee are therefore firſt to ſpeake of ſorrow, which is the firſt part of repentance, and this ſorrow is of two kinds. Firſt for the puniſhment of ſin, which 2. Co. 7. is called The ſorrow of the world, and alſo a ſorrow 
                  Sorrow twofold. 
                  which is to death: Secondly, it is a ſorrow for the ſinne it ſelfe, and becauſe of the offence which is committed againſt God, which in like manner is called of the Apoſtle

                  A ſorrow according to God. Of both theſe we will ſpeake ſeuerally. The principall efficient of the firſt ſorrow which is conceiued in heart, for the puniſhment of ſin, is the holy Ghoſt, which Rom. 8. verſe 15. 16. is called the ſpirit of bondage to feare, that is to ſay, which teſtifieth vnto vs of our ſeruile and miſerable condition without Chriſt, and therefore doth beget feare and horror within vs.
               The inſtrument wherby the ſpirit doth worke this ſorrow in our hearts, is the preaching of the law. The ſum whereof is in that ſyllogiſme, concerning the which we haue ſpoken in the doctrine of faith: the propoſition of which ſyllogiſme is this. Curſed is euery one that continueth not in all things, which are written in the book of this law to do thē. The aſſumption is by euery mans conſcience thus annexed. But I haue not continued in them: & the concluſion therefore is this: I am accurſed. From hence dooth that ſorrow, or rather that horror of the heart ariſe or ſpring, not ſomuch for ſin which is in the aſſumption, as for the puniſhment, and feare of the curſe, which is in the concluſion. And this is that which is called the pricke of conſcience, which by meanes of the concluſion before ſhewed, doth not only prick a wounded mind, but alſo pierce euen through the heart. And this legall ſorrow, if the grace of the Goſpell did not put an helping hand betweene it and vs, would driue a man into vtter deſperation. And thus much concerning that firſt ſorrow.
               The very ſame ſpirit of God is likewiſe a principal efficient cauſe of the latter ſorrow, but not proceeding as before: for now he becommeth the ſpirit of adoption, Wherby we crie Abba, Father. Rom. 8. that is, teſtifying of our adoption in Chriſt, and therefore doth inlarge both our heart and mouth to call vpon God familiarly, as vpon our Father.
               The inſtrument whereby the holy ſpirit doth worke this faith in our hearts, it is the preaching of the Goſpell: the ſumme whereof is contained in that ſyllogiſme concerning

which we haue ſpoken in the doctrine of faith. The propoſition of this ſyllogiſme is, He that beleeueth ſhal be iuſtified, and ſhall liue; whereupon faith doth aſſume, ſaying: But I do beleeue; and concludeth ſaying: Therefore righteouſneſſe and life pertaineth vnto me. In this concluſion there is I confeſſe, matter of ioy, & of vnſpeakable gladneſſe: but it is as true that there is in it matter of ſorrow alſo; which is conceiued after we haue known the mercy of God in Chriſt to be ſo great, and doth ariſe in this reſpect, becauſe we haue offended ſo merciful and ſo louing a Father. It is then a ioy mixt with ſorrow, & with the vnſpeakable and glorious ioy of faith hauing ioined with it ſighes that cannot be expreſſed. And thus much alſo of the later ſorrow.
               Now let vs ſee how both theſe kinds of ſorrow belong vnto ſound repentance: That firſt ſorrow which is of the law, and is conceiued by reaſon of the puniſhment which followeth ſinne: I confeſſe it is no part of this holy change and conuerſion vnto God: for of it own nature it doth rather eſtrange vs from God, then conuert vs to The terror of the law a preparatiue for the Goſpell. God; and in very deede it dooth altogether alienate the wicked from God as from a terrible iudge. Notwithſtanding in repentance it hath his vſe for it prepareth the elect by giuing them ſenſe of their miſery, to that grace and mercy which is propounded in the Goſpell. The latter ſorrow which is according to God, and is effected by the Goſpel, is properly a part of repentance and dooth effect that change of the mind, and reaſon before ſpecified. And therefore the Apoſtle ſaith, 2. Cor. 7. that the ſorrow which is according to God, cauſeth repentance. And thus far of the firſt part of this benefit which is found to be in ſorrow. The other followeth which is called properly by the Apoſtle 2. Cor. verſ. 7. a Chaunge of the minde. For there followeth after that godly ſorrow a certaine wonderfull change of the minde, of the will, and of the heart. As touching knowledge, and that illumination Second part of repentance.
                  
of the mind, this goes before the ſorrow we haue ſpoken of, & is an acknowledgment wrought in vs firſt of ſinne and of our miſery, by the law: next of mercy, by the Goſpell. Therefore the chaunge of the mind which followeth this ſorrow: it pertaines to the faculty or iudgment of reaſon, which alſo is called the counſell and purpoſe of the mind Act. 11. 23.
               He exhorteth them that with one purpoſe of heart they would cleaue vnto the Lord. And the iudgment or counſell of the mind is chaunged in this ſort: The mind diſalloweth the euill which is committed, and alloweth the good hereafter to be practiſed. There are therefore two parts of the change of ye iudgement or counſell, the firſt is the diſallowing of the euill committed: the ſecond is the The change of the mind hath two branches. approuing of the good to be done. After the change of the iudgement, or counſell of the mind, there followeth a change of the wil in this manner: The will reiecteth that euill which is committed, or it declineth from it, and alloweth the good to be done hereafter, or inclineth thereunto. There are there two parts of this change, firſt a declination from the euil committed: ſecondly, an inclination to the good which is, or ought to be done. After the 2. Change of the will.
                   change of the wil followeth the change of the hart, which is on this manner: The heart hateth and deteſteth that euill which it hath heretofore done, and it loues, and affects the good, which hereafter it ought to doe. There are therefore two parts of this change, the firſt is the deteſtation 3. Change of the heart.
                   of euill done and committed: the ſecond is the loue of that good which ought to be done.
               In general therfore there are two parts of that chang of the mind, which is an effect of ſorow, the firſt is a change from euill, and from ſinne committed: the ſecond is a change to good hereafter to be practiſed and followed. Commonly theſe parts are called mortification, and viuification, but I know not how rightly & iuſtly: for mortification and viuification are properly parts of regeneration,

which doth differ from repentance, as ſhalbe ſeene Regeneration and repentance differ. hereafter.
               By that which hath bin already ſaid, we vnderſtand what be the eſpecial points of repentance, from whence it proceeds, and wherunto it ſerueth. The point from whence it proceedes, is the euill, or ſinne committed; the point to which it tendeth, is the good heereafter to bee done. Repentance therefore ſtandeth betweene two actions, paſt, and future; and it doth differ from regeneration: for the points thereof are not deeds and actions, but qualities, to wit, the corruption of nature, or the old man; and ſanctitie, or the new man: but of this we ſhall entreate afterward, when wee come to ſpeake of the difference of repentance, and of regeneration.
               Ye ſee thē, after that great ſorow, how there is a change in the whole mind of man. Next, ye ſee by that hath been ſaide of this benefit of repentance, that repentance doth begin from the heart and doth proceede by the reaſonable faculties of the mind and will; and laſt of all, it dooth end and reſt in the heart: To conclude, it may eaſily be gathered by that which hath bin ſayd in the the treaty of the parts of it, what the definition of repentance is, that it 
                  Repentance deſined. 
                  is an after-wit, after the deede, and euill committed, and a ſorrow, becauſe God is offended, and from that ſorrow a certaine change of the whole minde from euill vnto good. The effect of repentance is in the outward life, to wit, an amendment of life bringing forth fruit worthy of repentance, Matth. 3. verſ. 8.
               There is queſtion concerning repētance, whether it be the ſame with regeneration or new birth; for the common oipnion of Dimnes is, that the benefits of regeneration, and new birth differ not in matter it ſelfe; notwithſtanding it appeares vnto vs that there is a differēce between theſe two, and it ſhall appeare to them alſo who diligently Repentance and regeneration differ. conſider the ends of both; for repentance is to be referred to our effectuall calling, and it is an effect of faith

which is another part of our effectuall calling: for as many as beleeue, they repent, they change their counſell and returne to a better mind. But regeneration is the beginning of our glorification, and the beginning of a new creature. Repentance goeth before iuſtification, euen as faith and hope; for of the Baptiſt it is ſaid, That he preached the baptiſme of repentance for the remiſſion of ſins, Marke 3. 4. Luk. 3. 3. But regeneration followeth iuſtification, for being iuſtified we receiue the ſpirit of ſanctification whereby we are renewed, and as it were find a new creation begun euen in this life: Repētance is the cauſe, regeneration is the effect: for therefore God doth renews vs in How reneneration and repentance differ. Chriſt, and make vs new men, becauſe we repent vs of our old life, and begin to be wiſe after ſin cōmitted. Notwithſtanding in the middle place betwixt repentance & regeneration, comes in iuſtification; when as God doth of his meere mercy & grace accompt, and repute vs as iuſt. The name of repentance employeth ſorrow, but the name of regeneration gladnes. To conclude, the points of repentance, as whence it proceeds & whereunto it tends, they are deedes, the euil or ſin committed; and the good which ought to be practiſed: but the bounds of regeneration are qualities, inherent corruption, and ſanctity or holineſſe, which is wrought in vs: the old man, and new man renewed in Chriſt.
               But you will ſay, in repentance there is a change from euil to good; a change I ſay of the mind & hart: I anſwer, in our effectuall calling there begins a change of ye mind of man. Notwithſtanding al Diuines diſtinguiſh calling, & faith from regeneration, why then ſhould they not in like manner diſtinguiſh betweene repentance, (which followeth faith and our effectual calling) & regeneration? for euery change of the mind is not to be deemed forthwith How repentance followeth regeneration. regeneration, but there are certain changes of mans mind which goe before regeneration, and which prepare the mind, and ſo the whole man vnto regeneration, and to

that new creation: in which kinde repentance is an eſpecial grace. Theſe things are to be diſtinguiſhed not in time but in nature: for at that very ſame inſtant, we beleeue and be effectually called, and do repent, and be iuſtified, and be regenerate.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXV. How farre a wicked man may proceed in repentance.
               
               
                  HAuing thus far ſpoken of repētance, which is proper to the elect & godly, we are next to conſider how far the reprobate, and vngodly man may proceed in repentance. All wicked & vngodly men do not make like progreſſe: for they profit ſome leſſe, ſome more in the work of repē
                  tance. We wil firſt ſpeak of them which be leaſt proficient Theſe firſt haue a ſorrow, or horror in their minds, which Degrees of repentance in the impious. commeth from the law, and that not for ſinnes or any offences committed againſt God, properly and truly: but becauſe of the puniſhment of ſinne properly, and for ſin accidentally, becauſe puniſhment followeth ſin. Next after this ſorrow there followeth in them ſome diſlike in mind of the ſinne committed, but becauſe of the puniſhment: Note this diſtinction. but as touching affection to the good which ought to be don, ſo far they come not. Further, yet there followeth in the wil a declining from euil committed but becauſe

of the puniſhment; for in the meane while their will is not bent, or inclined to the good which ought to be done. After this little change of the wil, there followeth in the heart a deteſtation of euill committed, but in regard of the puniſhment; for all this while the heart dooth not proceede to loue iuſtice, or the good which ought to be done. And as touching the outward, life there is no good change or holy amendment in it.
               In this kind was Iudas the traitor, of whoſe repentance read Mat. 27. where firſt it is ſaid, that Iudas did repent him of that he had done. Note here in this word his ſorrow, Iudas example. & anxiety of hart. Next, he is ſayd to haue brought againe ye 30. pieces of ſiluer to the high prieſt: whēce may neceſſarily be gathered a change of the wil, of the mind and of the heart: which thing alſo by his owne confeſſion may appeare, becauſe he ſaid afterward, I haue ſinned, betraying the innocent bloud: for this word doth argue a diſlike of ſin in ſome ſort, and a renouncing, and deteſtation of ſin, albeit not ſincere, but principally in reſpect of the puniſhment; accidentally in reſpect of the ſin, becauſe ſin and the puniſhment thereof goe together: finally, whereas he caſt the ſiluer peeces into the temple, it appeares there was in him an inward diſlike, and deteſtation of euill, and yet that no amendment of life followed this change of mind, it appeares in this, becauſe preſently going aſide he hanged himſelfe.
               There are other impious men, who proceed a little further in repentance then theſe, hauing in their minds ſome change vnto good, their mindes allowing that which is good, and their will chooſing the ſame, and their heart affecting it: yet theſe things be not ſincere in them, but proceede from feare of puniſhment. And as concerning the amendmēt of their outward life, they begin that alſo: but as the Prophet ſaith: Their goodneſſe vaniſheth as a morning cloude, and as the morningdew. Amos. 6.
               Of this number was Saul. Sam. 15. & Achab. 1. Kin. 21. Saul.
                  
And of this kind alſo, it ſeemes was Eſau, Gen. 27. His ſorrow appeareth by his teares ſhed: the change alſo of his mind in ſome ſort vnto good appeares by that it is ſaid, he would haue obtained the bleſſing, he ſought the bleſſing: but there was nothing ſincere in him. For forthwith after he returned to his old haunt, or wonted courſe againe. The wicked which yeeld beſt ſignes of repentance, are thoſe, who haue attained the temporary faith, whoſe ſorrow alſo doth ariſe from the Goſpel, and the acknowledgment of the mercy of God in Chriſt; and the change of the mind vnto good, is in ſome ſort for the good it ſelfe: for they taſt after a ſort the ſweetnes of God in Chriſt, and are delighted in it. And as concerning the amendment of outward life, that alſo is in them a little longer then in thoſe before deſcribed They do alſo returne and relinquiſh many ſins.
               Of this kind it ſeemes Herod was, of whom it is written Mar. 6. 20. Herod feared Iohn, knowing that he was a iuſt and an holy man, and he receaued him, & when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly: And thus far of theſe 3. ſteps of impious men in repentance, & here alſo I end the doctrine of ſound repentance.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXVI. What the iudgement of Papiſts is of Repentance.
               
               
                  IT followeth now that we conſider what the Papiſts do thinke of their Penance: for they reiect the very name of Repentance T: heir errours are manie which they hold, we will take view of ſome few of them, & briefly confute them: firſt, they ſay, that Repentance is a Sacrament. But A Sacrament. I aske, if it be a Sacrament, what ſenſible ſigne hath it? They anſwer, that the ſigne is partly the act of ye penitent perſon; & partly the words of the Prieſt, whereby the penitent is abſolued. But I anſwer, in a ſacrament there muſt be not only an audible ſigne, but alſo a viſible: there muſt be alſo a certaine element, and not a ceremonie onely: as in Baptiſme, and the Supper of the Lord. Beſides the ceremonies and rites, there are elements, water, bread, and wine. Concerning this errour this ſhall ſuffice.
               Secondly, they affirme that the vſe of Repentance is this, to aboliſh mortall ſinne committed after Baptiſme, 2. Errour.
                   and to make him, who of a friend, through ſinne, was become Gods enemie, the friend of God againe, that is, a iuſt man. To this I anſwer. To the reſtoring and repairing of man, who hath ſinned after Baptiſme, we haue no need of any other Sacrament then Baptiſme, the force and vertue whereof is perpetuall, and effectuall throughout the whole life of man, for the waſhing away of ſinne to regenerate men: for it is falſe that in Baptiſme theſe ſinnes

onely are waſhed away, which were committed before Baptiſme; ſeeing Baptiſme reacheth to the whole life of Baptiſme effectuall to the regenerate all his life. man, and the remembrance thereof is effectuall for the remiſſion of ſinnes, and our regeneration, euen then, when a man giues vp the Ghoſt, and departs this life.
               Thirdly, they ſay that the Repentance which was in the old Teſtament, and before the reſurrection of Chriſt, 3. Errour.
                   is not the ſame with the repentance which followed the reſurrection of Chriſt; for that was no Sacrament, but this is: I anſwer, that the doctrine of Repentance, and of our conuerſion to God, is one and the ſelfe ſame; which all the Prophets, Iohn Baptiſt, Chriſt before and after his incarnation, and the holy Apoſtles haue preached.
               Fourthly, they ſay that the principall efficient cauſe of Repentance is free-will, and the ſtrength of nature ſtirred 4. Errour.
                   vp by a preuenting grace, and that grace is but onely our helper, working together with nature or free-will.
               I anſwer, that it is cleane contrarie: for the Spirit, or grace of God is the principall efficient cauſe of Repentance, but the inſtrument are the faculties and powers of the mind, not ſuch as they are by nature, but as they are ſanctified by the Spirit: which may appeare euen by this teſtimonie, Ier. 31. Conuert me, O Lord, & I ſhall be conuerted: where the principall efficiencie, & cauſe of the work is giuen to the Lord himſelfe, and to his grace. But of vs, it may well be ſaid, that we become actiue in repentance, being acted and moued by the holy Ghoſt.
               Fiftly, they diuide Penance eſſentially into the act of the Penitent, as the matter; and abſolution of the Prieſt, 5. Errour.
                   as the formall cauſe: I anſwer, that there is no neceſſitie why repentance ſhould be ſo parted betweene the penitent or confeſſing ſinner, and the Prieſt abſoluing. For the ſinner who doth repent him of his ſinne, may priuately confeſſe vnto God, and of him alſo bee abſolued, without any conceiued or ſet forme of abſolution by the Prieſt. We repent daily, and yet there is no need that the

matter ſhould be dayly ſo perfourmed by the ſinner repenting, and the Prieſt or miniſter abſoluing. Wherefore repentance is not to be reſtrained to this forme and dialogue, or communication, which muſt paſſe (as they ſay) betweene the ſinner repenting, and the Prieſt abſoluing.
               Sixtly, they diuide Penance materially into Contrition, 6. Errour.
                   Confeſſion, and Satisfaction: for theſe three parts doe (as it were) appertaine to the acts of their Penitents, which be the matter of their Sacrament of Penance. I anſwer, concerning Contrition, which is nothing els but a ſorrow of heart, we verily admit of it, but without anie opinion of merit, which they attribute thereunto.
               And as touching Confeſſion, firſt we ſay, that it is not Signes of Repentance. properly any part of Repentance, but an outward ſigne of Repentance, which is wrought inwardly in the mind: for amongſt the ſignes theſe are numbred; confeſſion of the mouth, teares, humbling of the bodie, and other actions of like kind. Againe, we ſay that their auricular Confeſſion, wherein all, euen the priuate ſinnes of a man muſt be numbred, as neere as they can remember, and whiſpered into the eare of the Prieſt; we affirme, I ſay, that ſuch a Confeſſion is the inuention of mans braine, wherof there is no commandement or example extant in the whole Scripture: Yea verily the will of God is, that manie priuate ſins, vnto which we alone are priuy, ſhould bee concealed, & not vttered, euen as God doth couer the multitude of our priuate ſinnes of his free will and mercie, wherewith he embraceth vs in Chriſt Ieſus. Notwithſtanding this, he requireth of vs that we priuately repent of them, ſo oft as we ſhall remember them.
               To conclude, concerning Satisfaction, we vtterly condemne and renounce it: for by it (as they teach) we ſatiſfie of ourſelues the wrath and iuſtice of God, and that by temporall puniſhments, which we willingly ſuffer for our ſinnes. This we do vtterly condemne, as an opinion

which doth derogate from the merit and ſatisfaction of Chriſt, whereby alone the wrath and iuſtice of God is ſatisfied for our ſinnes. And as for theſe temporall afflictions of the godly, they are not truly ſatisfactions for their ſinnes, but by them God doth mortifie the remnants of ſinnes, and by that meanes prouoke vs to earneſt repentance; hereby curbing, and keeping vs from falling into ſinne againe. Finally, as all things worke for the beſt to them that loue God, ſo theſe things which are not ſo much puniſhments, as croſſes do worke together for the beſt for the godly. Neither is that diſtinction of temporall and eternall puniſhments to be allowed: for it is certaine that whoſoeuer are puniſhed temporally for their ſinnes, and in that reſpect, and for that cauſe, ſuch alſo (without repentance) ſhall be puniſhed for their ſinnes eternally: for temporall puniſhments of the vngodly in this life, are the very beginnings of eternall puniſhments to be ſuffered in another life. And thus farre of repentance.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVII. Of mans Free-will.
               
               
                  AFter the doctrine of Faith, Hope, and Repentance, the doctrine of Free-will is to follow, becauſe the Aduerſaries do attribute Faith, hope, repentance, or as they call it, Penance, to the liberty of our will, as to the principall agent or cauſe: but they aſſigne to grace the ſecond place

in the worke of Faith, hope, and repentance: for they ſay after that Free-will is ſtirred vp by a preuenting grace, man by the benefit of his free-will, doth of his owne ſtrength beleeue, hope, and repent him of his ſinnes. And as for grace, that is only a fellow-worker, ſay they, and a helper of mans Free-well, which principally worketh in faith, hope, and repentance. But to this we haue anſwered before in the doctrine of repentance, & we ſhal hereafter anſwer it a little more plainely. Now hauing thus far ſhewed the occaſion, why after the doctrin of Faith, hope and repentance, we ſpeake of Free-wil: let vs come to the point it ſelfe, and diſcourſe of it. The will of man is a facultie The wil deſcribed. of the reaſonable ſoule, following next after the facultie of reaſon: for the mind firſt vnderſtandeth, and thē iudgeth. The function and vſe thereof is in willing, in nilling, in chooſing, in refuſing, and in doubting of thoſe things which were before concealed, and conſidered of in the vnderſtanding. The obiects therof are things ſimply good, and euill, and things indifferent. I call thoſe things ſimply good, which are commanded by ſome expreſſe Things ſimply good. law of God. I call thoſe things ſimply euill, which are forbidden by the ſome expreſſe lawe of God. And thoſe things I count indifferent, which are neither expreſly commanded, nor expreſly forbidden in the law of God. And if they be commanded or forbidden by anie law of God, that is by accident, to wit, ſo farre forth as they further or hinder the edification of our neigbour. Theſe obiects of the will I ſubdiuide again into their final cauſes or ends, and into thoſe meanes which tend and leade vs to the ends.
               And thus I apply the functions of the wil to the ends, and to the meanes: We be ſaid as well to will, and nill, the meanes as the ends vnto which they ſerue: for to will and nill are things generall; but we are ſaid onely to accept, and to reiect, and to doubt of the meanes: for theſe things are ſpeciall. And thus farre of the will, according

to our preſent purpoſe.
               There is aſcribed vnto the will a certaine propertie, which the Latines call Libertie: the Greekes a Power, as 
                     Libertas. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Rom. 9. 20. where the Apoſtle ſpeakes of the power the Potter hath ouer the clay. And 1. Cor. 7. 37. He that hath power ouer his owne will: As if he ſhould haue ſaid, hee that hath libertie or power of his will: in our vulgar tongue it is called Soueraingtie. This libertie of the will is as it were a royall power, and the Greeke word is vſed to ſet forth the power of a king, or ſome ſupreme Magiſtrate. Rom. 13. 27. Let euery ſoule be ſubiect to the higher power. For this cauſe the will in the ſoule of man is receiued as a Queene, and in that reſpect is ſaid to haue as it were the iuriſdiction in her owne hand.
               But to come to ſome deſcription of Free-will: This freedome of will, is a libertie, whenas a thing being offered to the wil, as to a certain Queene, whether it be good or euill, or indifferent, the will euen then can by it own A deſcripttion of free-will. proper right and power, either will it or nill it; reiect or receiue it; or hold a man in ſuſpence. For which cauſe commonly in ſchooles it is defined to be a power or facultie, to like or diſlike things that are directly oppoſite, that is, to incline to either part of the contradiction, to receiue, or reiect the one or the other: and thus commonly they deſcribe it. Yet I like beſt this deſcriptiō, to wit, that libertie of will ſhould bee in reſpect of good and euill things (for concerning them the controuerſie is) it is, I ſay, a power of the will, or a certaine right it hath, whereby of it ſelfe, and of it owne inward and naturall motion, without conſtraint, it wils onely that is good, it chooſeth the good, it wils not that is euill, it reiecteth that is euill: In one word, libertie of will is a power vnto good, not to euill.
               I am induced to like beſt this definition of libertie, by the example of the libertie of God himſelfe, who by the confeſſion and grant of all men, moſt freely wils, and Gods free-will
                  
doth all things: notwithſtanding, the libertie of God is not ſo defined, that it ſhould be a certaine power, whereby he doth ſo will good, as though he might nill it, or doth not ſo will euill, as though he might will it; but the liberty of God is this: of his owne right, & without conſtraint, onely to will that which is good, and nill that is euill. Againe, the ſame is plaine by the example of the bleſſed Angels, who haue liberty to that is good onely, and not vnto good, and euill: that is, they do not ſo will good, as if they might nill it: for they are ſo gouerned & Freedome of Angels. ſtrengthened of God, that their will onely is inclined to good, & doth abhor from euill. To conclude, the ſame is ſhewed in the example of Adam, & of his ſtate before his fal; for then truly the liberty of his will was to will good Adams freedom in his innocencie. only, & not both good and euil, that is, he did not ſo will good, as if he might nil it, except you vnderſtād a remote power: wheras we by this word Liberty (to ſpeake properly) do vnderſtand a more neere faculty of the ſoule.
               I call that a remote facultie, which is incident to the matter, as is the power or propertie of laughter in the bodie of a man, before it hath either forme or life. I call that Remota potentia: a neere facultie which is incident to the forme, as laughter Propinqua potentia. in a man that hath life. So in the will of man there is a remote power, as appertaining to the matter; and there is a neere power, as pertaining or conſequent to the forme: but we (as a little before we ſpake) by liberty vnderſtand not that remote power, which is incident to the matter, but that neere power which is conſequent to the forme: and by the forme we vnderſtand that ſanctitie which is according to the image of God, which is the ſoule as it were of our ſoule, and without which our ſoule is as it The image of God. were dead. For which cauſe the Apoſtle ſaith Ephe. 2. 1. That without this holineſſe, wee are truly ſaid to be dead in ſinnes and treſpaſſes. Whence I conclude, that the libertie of will is properly a power or facultie, which is a conſequent of ſanctity, as of the formall cauſe, and as

it were, the very ſoule of the will. Wherby it commeth to paſſe, that the will in this ſtate without conſtraint, doth incline onely to good, and doth decline from euill: for this libertie of a mans will, is according to the ſimilitude & image of the libertie of God himſelf. Vnto this liberty, conſtraint is oppoſite, proceeding from ſome outward agent, & is contrarie to the nature of the will: for it is not a wil, if it be conſtrained, neither is it ſaid, that the will is conſtrained, albeit man himſelfe, in whom the will is, may be ſaid to be conſtrained. I ſay that conſtraint is oppoſite to libertie, and not neceſſity: for thoſe things which wee will or nill freely, we will or nill thoſe things of neceſſity: firſt, becauſe of the neceſſity of Gods decree: ſecondly, becauſe of the incident forme of the will it ſelfe, as of holineſſe, of corruption, of both. As when man was holy in his creation; ſo long, as that holineſſe continued, of neceſſitie he did will that which was good, and nill the euill. So the bleſſed Angels of a certaine neceſſitie will that is good, and nill the euill, and at length when man is glorified he ſhall incline to good, and decline from euill: So The will of the vnregenerate. man being wholy corrupt, before his regeneration of a certaine neceſſitie, he wils the euill, and nils that is good, and notwithſtanding after his manner, he doth will freely, albeit this be not a true libertie, as we ſhall hereafter ſee. To conclude, a man regenerate partly of neceſſitie doth will good, in reſpect of his new birth; partly of neceſſity hee doth will euill, for that he is as yet partly corrupt; yet in both reſpects hee willeth freely: for we muſt diſtinguiſh betwixt neceſſity, and conſtraint; for neceſſitie is more generall and large then conſtraint is: for that which is conſtrained, is neceſſarie, but on the contrarie that which is neceſſarie is not cōſtrained. And thus much concerning the libertie of the will in generall.
               There is then a foure fould hate of man to diuers conditions 1. State.
                   or ſtates of man to be conſidered. The firſt ſtate of his innocency before his fall: ſecondly, the ſtate of his

corruption after his fall: thirdly, the ſtate of regeneration: fourthly, the ſtate of glorification. Firſt then concerning the firſt ſtate, it is a queſtion whether man in his innocency had liberty of will? I anſwere, if you follow the former definition of liberry, which is a faculty, or power reſpecting inclining to either, ſide, I graunt that in things▪ indifferent it had a liberty, but in things ſimply good and euil, man had not in that ſtate of innocency, that liberty of wil, whereby when he did will good he might nill it, and when he did nill euill, he might will it: except you vnderſtand a remote power: for in reſpect of his neer power, he was inclined to good, only becauſe of the form of ſanctity and goodnes in the will which was in him, according Propinqua potentia. to the image of God; but if you follow the latter definition of liberty, which is, when the wil of it ſelf of an inward motion without coaction, or conſtraint of any externall agent, is carried to that which is good only: if I ſay you follow this definition, I anſwere, that man in the ſtate of innocency had a liberty of will.
               Concerning the ſecond ſtate of man, the queſtion is, whether man in the ſtate of corruption now hath liberty 2. State.
                   of will. I anſwer, if you follow the former definition of liberty, I doe not deny that in things indifferent he hath his liberty: But in things ſimply good and euill, he hath not liberty. For man which is wholy corrupt, doth not ſo will euill as that he may or can nill it: neither dooth he ſo reiect that is good as that he may or can will it; except yee vnderſtand a power remote: for in man vnregenerate that neere power of the will is only inclined to euill, becauſe of the form of corruption & of impurity which doth wholy poſſeſſe his will. But if you follow the latter definition of liberty; then verily we cannot aſcribe that liberty of the wil which is according to the image of the liberty of God himſelfe, and is a neere power or faculty, and wherby without conſtraint he is caried to that only which is good, we cannot, I ſay, truly attribute this vnto the vnregenerate

and his will. For a faculty to euil cannot truly be ſaid a liberty; but rather a certaine ſeruitude: And in verity the vnregenerate mans will is not free but bound: yet becauſe the vnregenerate dooth not will euill by conſtraint, but of his owne accord and meere motion, in ſome ſort it may be ſaid that his will is free.
               Here our aduerſaries diſſent from vs, aſcribing liberty of wil to the man vnregenerate, whereby alſo of his owne meere power he may will good; where as this liberty or Papiſts of free will. ſelfe power, before preuenting grace lyeth indeede a ſleepe: yet notwithſtanding (ſay they) it is in him like as a man though he be a ſleepe, yet he is both a man and liuing. From whence it followeth neceſſarily (as they would haue it) that there is ſome holines and integritiy in the will of a man vnregenerate. For there is no ſelfe power of the will to good, vnleſſe there be in it the form of ſanctity and integrity, which is as it were the life of the will, and quicknes of this ſelfe power in the will vnto good.
               The Papiſts therfore erhere two manner of waies: firſt, becauſe they will haue ſome ſanctity and integrity to remaine in the wil of man vnregenerat now after the fal: & ſecondly, becauſe they wil haue this ſelf power of the wil (which neceſſarily is a conſqeuent of the formall cauſe thereof, which is holines, as is aforeſaid) they will haue this ſelfe power (I ſay) vnto good to be in the will. For as touching holines and righteouſnes, it is certaine that all the image of God was loſt in the fall of man, and what portiō ſoeuer hereof we ſhal haue in this life, it is repaired & as it were created a new by Ieſus Chriſt: for which cauſe it is called a new creature. And if this in any reſpect bee old, wherefore is it called new? And if any ſanctity (which is the ſoule of our ſoule, remaine in man after the fall) why is man ſaid after the fall, before regeneration, to be dead, and not halfe dead? We forbeare to vſe teſtimonies of ſcripture in this matter, which are infinite. And as concerning

the liberty or ſelfe power which they aſcribe to the will of man, how many euidences of ſcripture might be produced to refell ye ſame? Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come 
                  Propiqua materia. 
                  to me, except the father which ſent me draw him. Rom. 8. 5. The wiſdome of the fleſh, it is not ſubiect to the law of God, neither indeede can be. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man perceiueth not the things which are of God: for they are fooliſhneſſe to him, neither can he diſcerne them. Theſe places of ſcripture and other ſuch like, are to be vnderſtood of that neere power of the wil vnto good, which therfore the ſcripture denieth to man in his corruption, becauſe there is in him no holineſſe left ſince the fall of Adam. For as touching the remote power of the will vnto good, which is a conſequent of the matter, not of the forme, we do not deny, that it is in the wil of a man vnregenerat. And that this alſo becomes of a remtoe power a neere power, ſo ſoone as any holyneſſe is wrought in the will of man by the ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt. Seeing then we leaue this remote power to the will of the vnregenerate man, that is, a certaine power of the cauſe materiall: there is no cauſe why our aduerſaries ſhould ſay, that we make men very ſtocks and blocks, becauſe we denie free will vnto them. For this power of the materiall cauſe vnto good, which we aſcribe vnto the will of man vnregenerat, may not truly be aſcribed to any dead ſtock, or trunke.
               We muſt vnderſtand in this place, that wheras we deny this neere power to the vnregenerate, that is, a liberty to good; we meane hereby that which is good, as it is truly good: For euen the vnregenerate perſon may wil that which is good, in it ſelfe; as the conſeruation of his countrey, iuſtice, equity, &c. But that which in it ſelfe is good, becomes euill in ſome ſort, in regard of the man vnregenerat; who dooth not will well, that which is good in it ſelfe, that is to ſay, neither in that manner, nor to that end doth he will it as he ought to will it, becauſe himſelfe is not good, and cleane; and to the vncleane, all things are vncleare,

as to the cleane all things are cleane. Tit. 2. 15.
               Againe, be aduertiſed that in this matter of free will, I hold that there is one, & the ſame reaſon of good things of what kind ſoeuer they be, naturall, or ciuil; and humane or ſpirituall: for the vnregenerat man hath not this liberty, or neere power to any good thing, as it is good and acceptable to God, and agreeable to his law: albeit by nature his will is moſt farre eſtranged from ſpirituall things, which the naturall man perceiueth not, & which (as the poſtle ſaith, He cannot know, yea they are fooliſhnes vnto him. By ſpirituall good things I meane faith, hope, repentance, iuſtification, eternall life it ſelfe. There is no cauſe therefore why our aduerſaries ſhould aſcribe faith, hope, repentance to the liberty of our will, that is to ſay, to the ſtrength of nature, as to the principal efficient cauſe of the ſame: as if we by nature, & the ſtrength thereof could beleeue, could hope and truly conuert our ſelues vnto God.
               But to the intent this thing may yet be more manifeſt, we muſt vnderſtand that there bee two kinds of good things, the one is of humane good things: the other is of kinds of good things. diuine and ſpirituall good things. Humane good things are either morall, and pertaine to euery priuate man, or Oeconomicall, and pertaine to a mans family: or they are Politicall, and pertaine to the whole common-wealth, or to the whole City. Spirituall good things are faith, hope, repentanceiu, ſtification, ſanctification, life eternall. To both theſe kinds of good things mans will is not like affected, for vnto humane things, or vnto humane good things, it is ſomewhat more inclined: as for example, nature doth incline vnto temperancy, fortitude, liberality, iuſtice, albeit it doth neither will nor chooſe theſe things, which in themſelues are good, in that manner or to that end it ought. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that thoſe things which in themſelues are good, yet (in reſpect of him, who is vnregenerate) become euill and very ſinnes before God. And concerning things ſpirituall, the nature

of man is more eſtranged from them: and when they offer themſelues to the will, nature it ſelfe doth wholy abhorre from them.
               This thing may be yet more plain by example, & experience. There are two certaine good things, to wit, iuſtice by works, and iuſtice by faith, which is called the iuſtice Righteouſnes by works naturall. or rightcouſnes of God: we all haue experience that our will naturally is inclined to that righteouſneſſe which is by works, and which is a certain humane good thing. Hence it comes that euen to this day, all the world following nature ſeekes to be iuſtified by good works. But the ſame will doth wholy abhorre, and vtterly diſlike that righteouſneſſe whichis by faith: the reaſon is, becauſe it is a certaine ſpirituall & vnknown good thing. Hence it comes to paſſe that ſo few ſeeke to be iuſtified by faith, and by the alone mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt.
               By this and other ſuch like examples it appeares, that mans will is more inclined by nature to humane good things; and wholy to abhorre ſpirituall good things. Albeit in truth, to ſpeake exactly, it is inclined to no good at all, as it is truly good. It is not inclined at all, no not to thoſe humane things, as they be truly good and acceptable vnto God: for it wils them neither in that maner, neither to that end it ought. So far forth then, as it willeth them, euen thoſe things that are good in themſelues are ſins, and vnpleaſing to God. Notwithſtanding they differ from thoſe euils and ſinnes, which euen in themſelues, & in their own nature are ſinnes, as manſlaughter, adultery, theft, and in which I graunt there be more degrees of ſin; for in theſe things men ſinne both in the ſubſtance of the things themſelues, and in the manner of doing, and in the end. And the will of man vnregenerate is more inclinable vnto theſe things by it owne nature, then vnto thoſe things, which are good in themſelues. For firſt, it is caried of it owne accord to thoſe which are euill in themſelues. Secondly, it hath but ſome inclination to things humane,

which in their owne kind are good. Laſtly, it doth wholy abhorre ſpirituall good things before regeneration. Againe, I conclude, that humane good things, ſo farre forth as mā vnregenerate doth wil them, become in ſom ſort euill; and the man vnregenerate doth ſin in the very deſire of them: which thing alſo is true in things indifferent, which are neither good nor euill in themſelues. For ſo far forth as man vnregenerate doth will them, ſo far forth they become euill; and the vnregenerate man doth ſin, when he doth wil & deſire euen that, which of it own nature is indifferent, becauſe he doth wil it, neither in that manner, nor to that end he ought.
               Now concerning the eſtate of regeneration, the queſtion is, whether the regenerate man hath his free-will: I anſwer, if you define free-will to be a liberty or power to chooſe, or wil (they ſay) any of both ſides: Firſt, in things indifferent, we ſay that he hath this liberty. Secondly, wee do not denie vnto him this liberty alſo in things good & euil: for ſeeing there is double act & a double form in the wil of the regnerat man, to wit, the forme of holines, and the form of corruption; & becauſe he hath the firſt fruits of the new man, and the remnant of the old, it cannot be, but that the neere power of his will be double alſo, one inclining vnto good, the other declining vnto euill: So that this receiued definition of free-will ſeemes vnto mee to agree beſt with the will of the regenerate perſon. But if you define liberty to conſiſt of a power not conſtrained, tending to good only, and not to euill; then verily the man regenerate is not ſo free; but proceedes only to this liberty, which ſhall at length be perfected in another life.
               Finally, concerning the eſtate of glorification, the queſtion is whether man whē he ſhall be glorified, ſhall haue this liberty of will? I anſwer, if you define free-will a power to make choiſe of either part, euen in good things, and in euill; then I ſay, man in this ſtate of glorification

ſhall not haue it. For hee ſhall haue that neere power to good only, becauſe of that forme of holineſſe, or glorie rather, wherewith then, his will ſhall be indued withall. I deny not that there ſhall be in him alſo a remote power to euill in reſpect of the neceſſarie mutability of the creature; but this remote power ſhall neuer be a neere power, becauſe God ſhall for euer ſtrengthen him, and ſuſtaine him in yt ſtate of glorie. But if you follow that latter definition of free-will, the glorified perſon ſhal at length be ſet free: for he ſhal wil that only which is good and acceptable to God, and that without conſtraint, and for euer. Man had free wil in the ſtate of innocency, according to the image of that diuine liberty; but in the eſtate of glorification, wherein he ſhall come more neere vnto the image of his God, and ſhall beare the image of that heauenly man Ieſus Chriſt, his wil ſhall be much more free, and far more ready to that which is good only. And thus haue we ſpoken hitherto of the liberty of will, that is, of that propriety, or naturall quality of the wil.
               Now we be to ſpeake of *free-will. But there be which referre the word Arbitrium to the mind: for that they deeme it is nothing els but the iudgement of the mind, which goeth before the free action of the will: but the word free, they ſay, doth pertain to the wil: notwithſtanding I think the word Arbitrium doth ſignify the decree of the wil it ſelf, that is, that by this word, we vnderſtand the fūction of the will, whatſoeuer it be, whether it wil, or nill, whether it chooſe or reiect. We aſcribe liberty to this purpoſe or endeuour of the will, and it is ſaid to bee free, euen as the will it ſelf is called Free-will, for that euer the propriety of the cauſe doth predicate (as the Logitians ſpeake) both of the effect, and of the action of the ſame cauſe. Free-wil then is nothing els in my iudgment, but the decree or endeuour of the wil, which is without conſtraint, and which proceedeth from ſome inward motion of the will, and not from any externall conſtraining

power. A queſtion may be demaunded whether the will when it doth freely execute his function & office in willing freely, or nilling any thing, whether I ſay, the mind and vnderſtanding haue not ſome working herein? I anſwer, that obiect, whatſoeuer it be which the wil, & ye free functiō therof doth reſpect, is firſt diſcerned by the mind.
               The iudgment aiſo of the mind is two fold: firſt, ſimple Iudgment of the mind twofold. and intelligible; as when without any diſcourſe and reaſoning, it iudgeth that this is good, & that is euil; this is to be followed, and that to be auoyded. This iudgment of the mind is of the end, or of ſome meanes ſeruing to the end, which is but only one. Next, the iudgement of the mind is, when as by diſcourſe, and arguing, it iudgeth any thing to be good or euill; to bee auoyded, or to be followed. This iudgment is where diuers meanes fall out, of which, after diſcourſe had in the mind, one is choſen, and the other is reiected. Now the obiect which by the mind and vnderſtanding is in ſome ſort ſhewed and diſcerned, the will doth freely will, or nill; chooſe, or refuſe: howbeit ſince the fal of man, ſuch is the confuſion of theſe faculties, or powers of the mind of man, that what the vnderſtanding iudgeth to be euill, and diſalloweth, the very ſame doth the wil chuſe, and proſecute: The diſorder and confuſion. which is by nature in the ſoule of man. and on the contrary, that which the mind approueth for good, and alloweth, that very ſame the wil reiecteth. Of the mind it may be demaunded, whether it can diſcerne betweene good and euil; approue the one, improue the other. This queſtion muſt be anſwered by the conſideration of that fourefold ſtate of man. But becauſe the queſtion chiefly is of the vnderſtanding of man in the ſtate of corruptiō, whether that can approue or accept the good, and reiect the euill: our anſwer ſhal be accordingly: We ſay therefore, that if you vnderſtand that neere power, which is a conſequent of that corrupt eſſential forme, the mind of man, in this ſtate can but only allow that which is euil: It may alſo allow that which is good in it ſelfe, but

not as it is truly good, becauſe it cannot allow it, neither in the manner, nor to the end it ought, as is aforeſaide of will. But to approue that good, which we call humane good, the mind of man in the ſtate of corruption is more inclinable: but far is from intertaining any ſpirituall good at all, for as the Apoſtle Saint Paul ſaith, 1. Cori. 1. 2. 4. It iudgeth euery ſpirituall grace to be folly; for the things which are of the Spirit of God are fooliſhneſſe vnto him. And thus farre haue we ſpoken concerning the freedome of mans wil, or of free-will. It followeth now that we ſpeak next of the grace of God, which is contrary to free will, or to nature, and which is not onely the principall efficient cauſe of Faith, Hope, & repentance, but alſo the ſole efficient cauſe of them: It followeth then that we treate next of the free grace of God.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVIII. Concerning the free grace of God.
               
               
                  THe grace of God is the vndeſerued fauour of God, or it is that whereby God fauoureth his creature without any deſert of his. Th'Apoſtle Grace deſcribed. dooth intimate thus much Epheſ. 1. 9. in that he putteth no difference betweene theſe words Grace, and a good pleaſure: for whereas he ſaith in that verſe, that God 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  had elected vs according to his free grace, it ſeemes to bee ſpoken in the ſame ſenſe and meaning with that which

he ſaid before in the ſame chapter, ver. 7. In him we haue redemption according to the riches of his grace: for the grace & loue of God are taken in differently one for another, Ro. 9. 13. I haue loued Iacob. This is that loue or that free grace wherewith from all eternity he loued Iacob. Eph. 3. 19. That (ſaith he) You being rooted and grounded in loue. &c. And this is that grace whereby he loued vs from all eternity Tit. 3. verſ. 4. The grace of God as it reſpecteth mankindis called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  or loue towardds Man.
               
               Againe, this word Grace is taken more generally, then this word Mercy, for whereas mercy doth properly reſpect ſuch as are in miſery & ſinners: grace reacheth vnto al creatures of what kind or condition ſoeuer they be, aſwell to the bleſſed Angels as to ſinful mē, as may appeare by the ſalutation which Paul vſeth to Timot. in the firſt, & ſecond epiſtle, where he wiſheth firſt grace to Tymothy, as being a more generall thing: then in the ſecond place mercy, as a more particular thing, reſtraining it to the Grace more generall then mercy. perſon ſaluted. For although in thoſe ſalutations Grace and Mercy are taken metoymically for the bleſſings and benefits which are conferred, and conueyed to men of Gods free grace and mercy: yet hereby may appeare that the mercy of God, which is the cauſe & fountaine of theſe benefits hath not ſo generall an acception as grace. For the meaning of the words is thus much, as if the Apoſtle had ſayd, the benefits which God doth giue vs, are freely beſtowed vpon vs, without any deſert of ours, and not only without deſert, but to vs which deſerue to be puniſhed with all the miſeries and calamities that can be.
               That it may further appeare that all the bleſſings and benefits of God, are deriued and conueyed vnto vs by meanes of his grace, and ſame fauour of God, wee will ſearch into and conſider more deepely of the doctrine of grace. God from and before all eternity, purpoſed to be glorified ſpecially in his grace, Ro. 11. 32. God hath ſhut vp all in vnbeleefe, that he might haue mercy vpon all. In which

place we may ſee the iuſtice of God, to attend on his mercy and grace. So in like manner all the other eſſentiall properties of God, as his power and wiſdome, &c. all which be ſubordained to ſerue his grace and mercy. Hence it is that firſt of all, God before all eternity paſt his decrees of grace to the praiſe and glory of his grace. Ephe 1. 6. 12. 
                     The 1. decree of Gods free grace.
                   The firſt decree of Gods free grace, was cōcerning the incarnation of his Sonne, and the glorifying of him, at the appointed time, vnto the praiſe of his grace. Concerning the decree of his Son Chriſt, read Act. 2. 23. & 4. 28. oncerning the loue of the father to Chriſt, Coloſ. 1. 29. Becauſe the Father was well pleaſed in him: where you may ſee that the loue of the Father is the cauſe why the fulneſſe of the deity doth dwell corporally in Chriſt: for it was of his admirable grace that God would haue fleſh, yt is, ſo baſe and vile a creature to be vnited vnto God, the glorious and incomparable creator. The ſecond decree proceeding 2. Decree of Gods free grace.
                   from grace, was concerning the firſt creation of man after his owne image: then after the fall, concerning his reſtoring by his Sonne Ieſus, I truſt, vnto the image of his Sonne: that is to ſay, by calling, iuſtifying, and glorifying of man to the glory of Chriſt, and to the praiſe of his own grace in his appointed time. For the reſtoring and repayring of manking after the fall, is ſummarily ſet downe in theſe three chiefe points: read Eph. 1. 4. 5. Ro. 9. 11. Ro. 11. 5. 6.
               Hence followeth the execution of theſe decrees by ſame grace of God, and the firſt execution was of the decree of God concerning man; which by order of Execution of Gods free grace. nature had the ſecond place, for that which was firſt in decree and ordination, became the ſecond in execution; and contrarily, that which was the ſecond in decree and ordination, became the firſt in execution. Therefore the execution of the decree of God concerning man hath the firſt place, and the ſame was of the free grace of God, vnto the glory & praiſe of the ſame grace. Therfore the execution

of the decree of God concerning man to ſpeak ſome thing thereof, was firſt the creation of man, of Gods free grace after the image of his creatour, and to the praiſe of that his grace. Then after the fall of man followed the reſtitution of man, of Gods free grace in and by his Sonne Chriſt, to the glory of Chriſt his Sonne, and to the praiſe of the grace of God the Father. This repairing, which is one of the parts of the execution of the decree of God concerning man conſiſteth of many parts all which proceede from the meere grace of God, and firſt tend to the glory of Chriſt the head, and our mediator between God & man: next, to the praiſe of ye grace of God the father. 1. Co. 3. 22. 23. Al things are yours, & you are Chriſts, & Chriſt is Gods. And concerning this reſtoring of mankind, before we come to the parts therof ye muſt be aduertiſed, that in time it partly went before the execution of that decree, concerning Chriſt the Sonne of God; and partly did follow after it: For before the fulnes of time came, wherein Chriſt was manifeſted in the fleſh, God begā to reſtore mankind, euen from the very fall of the firſt man, that is, men were called, iuſtified, and glorified: and that partly by vertue of that decree concerning Chriſt, which was from euerlaſting; & partly becauſe of the manifeſtation of the ſame Chriſt which was to come. But when that fulnes of time came, & when Chriſt was now manifeſted in the fleſh, had ſuffered and was glorified, this redemption of man was more fully and richly accompliſhed. For Chriſt being now come works our reſtitution more effectually by his Goſpel, I meane his power is more effectually ſeene and knowne in our vocation, iuſtification, and glorification, then it was before his incarnation. Therefore the execution of the decree concerning Chriſt the Son of God, which was firſt, falleth now as it were into ye midſt of the repairing of mankind, or of the execution of the decree concerning mans redemption. Wherefore we ſhal alſo ſpeak thereof in the middle place, that ſo from it

we may proceede to ſpeake of the parts of the redemption of mankind.
               The execution then of that decree touching the Son of The execution of the decree concerning Chriſt. God Ieſus Chriſt conſiſteth in his incarnation, paſſion, and glorification, and that of the free grace of God which reſpected partly the humanity of Chriſt, & partly reſpected vs, who be repaired and redeemed by that ſame very fleſh of Chriſt hypoſtatically vnited vnto the Son of God. Therfore the execution of the decree concerning the Son of God Ieſus Chriſt, did proceed from a double grace, & was to the praiſe of that grace of God.
               Now I come to ſpeake of the recouery or redemption The execution of the decree concerning. mans redemptiō. of mankind, or of the execution of the decree concerning the reſtitution of man: the parts hereof briefely be theſe: vocation, iuſtification, glorificatiō. Our calling, to ſpeak thereof in the firſt place, is by Gods free grace, and that in a double: reſpect, for firſt in our effectuall calling the publiſhing of the couenāt, & the preaching of the goſpel, is of the only free grace of God. Ephe. 1. 9. Hauing opened 
                  Our calling is by grace. 
                  vnto vs (ſaith he) the myſtery of his will according to his good pleaſure. Next faith, whereby we receiue the promiſe of the couenant, which is offered vnto vs in Chriſt, is of the Faith. meere grace of God. Philip. 1. 29. For vnto you it is giuen for Chriſt, not only to beleeue, but alſo to ſuffer for him. Hence it followeth that faith is the free gift of God. That former grace may be called the grace of our vocation, this grace is common to all that are called elect and reprobate. But the latter grace in our effectuall calling, may bee called the grace of faith, appertaining only to the elect: for it is giuē only to thoſe that are predeſtinated, to life euerlaſting, to beleeue. Vnder the grace of faith I likewiſe comprehend the grace of hope, and of repentance, as being ſubalterne graces, & comprehended vnder this argument of our effectuall calling.
               The grace of iuſtification followeth this double grace in our effectuall calling: For that very imputation which follweth faith, and that apprehenſion of faith in our effectuall

calling proceed alſo of a certaine new grace of God: For it cannot be but of grace that the iuſtice, and ſatisfaction of another ſhould be imputed or accounted vnto vs as ours, Ro. 3. 14. We are iuſtified freely, that is, by grace; as els where often. This grace the Apoſtle doth alwaies oppoſe to works, and to merits, making it the companion of faith Merits. in Chriſt: for the free grace of God doth well agree, and ſtand with the merits of Chriſt apprehended by faith; not only becauſe that merit is not ours but Chriſts, that is, the merit of God himſelf, but much more rather, becauſe the ſatisfaction and merit of Chriſt is of Gods free grace and meere mercy: For God ſpared not his Son, but gaue him to dy for vs. Ro. 8. 32. Hence it is, that the grace of God dooth more appeare in this ſatisfaction and merit of his, then if he had iuſtified vs without any merit at all, either of our own or of any other.
               Therefore the free grace of God dooth very well ſtand with that merit, which God gaue vs of his owne. And if that merit and price of our redemption had not bin paid by God himſelfe, then ſurely the grace of God had not ſo manifeſtly appeared in our redemption. And as for mans merit, we ſay that the grace of God cannot in any wiſe ſtand with it.
               The grace of glorification, or regeneration, followeth the grace of iuſtification; for as pronunciation, & giuing of ſentence is of grace; ſo the execution thereof is likewiſe of grace: for regeneration or glorification is a certaine execution of the ſentence of iuſtification aforegoing. Of Regeneration or glorification is as it were an execution of the ſentence of iuſtification. this grace ſee. 1. Pe. 2. 3. Who of his great mercy hath begotten vs vnto a liuely hope. Tit 3. 5. According to his mercy he ſaued vs by the fountaine of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghoſt. Eph. 2. 5. 8. They are ſaued by grace.
               
               Here ye muſt obſerue that in this worke of the reſtitution of mankind, and that in all the parts thereof, there is but one only grace of God, which is the beginning and firſt cauſe of all theſe proceedings: but we according to

the varietie of the effects thereof doe thus diſtinguiſh it, and conſider of it diuerſly: like as the ſpirit of God which is one 1. Cor. 12. 4. in reſpect of the diuerſitie of the gifts and effects thereof, is after a ſort diſtinguiſhed, for that in ſome reſpect (but not indeede and verity) he ſeemes not to be one and the ſame (as it were) Rom. 8. 15. For you haue not receiued the ſpirit of bondage to feare any more, but you haue receiued the ſpirit of adoption.
               
               By this that hath been ſpoken, vnderſtand that there are as it were 4. graces of God in the reſtoring of mankind, and in the parts thereof. For whereas there is a double mercy of God in our effectuall vocation, to wit: Firſt, an offering of Chriſt with all his benefits, in the couenant of grace, or the Goſpell: ſecondly, faith to receiue Chriſt being offered (vnder faith I comprehend hope and repentance, which follow faith) Therefore in our effctuall Parts of our effectual calling. calling two graces muſt bee vnderſtood the grace of our vocation, or of offering Chriſt vnto vs, and the grace of faith, or of receiuing Chriſt by vs. In iuſtification we haue a third grace, which we may cal the grace of iuſtification; & in glorification there is a fourth grace; which we may not vnfittly call the grace; of glorification.
               Hence we may ſee, that the firſt grace (which they call preuenting grace,) is that grace whereby God firſt calleth vs to himſelfe by his Goſpel; and the laſt grace which is Preuenting grace the complement of grace, to be that grace whereby God doth glorify vs together with his Sonne in his kingdome: for he beginneth the laſt grace in this life by regeneratiō, but reſerueth the full conſūmation therof to another life by glorification. Thus much of the parts of the reſtitutiō of mankind, all which proceed from the meere grace of God, and are directed vnto the glory of his grace.
               We muſt obſerue this in general, that al the bleſſings of God as wel thoſe that were from al eternity, as thoſe that are in time, be founded vpon the only and meere grace of God. And that in reſpect of grace there is no difference

betweene thoſe benefits of God, that were before all worlds, as his preſcience, and predeſtination, and theſe which are in time, as our vocatiō, iuſtificatiō, glorificatiō.
               This is the truth of God, & it will ſtand in deſpite of all the aduerſaries & enemies of the grace & croſſe of Chriſt, which notwithſtāding hold I know not what freedom of will, & that our meritorious works do cōcurre in our votion, iuſtification & glorification, with the grace of God. For as touching our calling, although they confeſſe this to be true, that preuenting grace (as they ſpeak) doth ſo preuent or preoccupy vs, euen then, when we thinke nothing of the grace of God, or of preparing our ſelues to receiue grace, but being (as it were) a ſleep in ſin: yet they do aſcribe to free-wil, that affiance which we giue vnto faith, wherby we aſſent vnto preuenting grace, & admit ye ſame: as though we had any actual free-wil, or ſelf power, (as they ſpeak) to receiue the grace of God. We do grant ſome power or freedome of wil, wherby it inclines after a ſort vnto that which is is good: I vnderſtand a power of the matter: but wee do vtterly deny that men by nature haue any actual free-will, or that we haue a ſelfe power to do that which is good, as it is good. That ſelfe or neere power of will, or liberty of will to good, I define to be that liberty in the will, which is by the eſſentiall forme of Potentia propinqua. holineſſe, or by the image of God which is imprinted in the will, as may appeare in the Chap. of free-will before handled. Therefore wee hold, and teach that in receiuing the firſt grace, our will ſtands before God meere paſſiuely and not actiuely, that is when the free grace of God preuenteth it, we ſay it hath a power vnto good, but the ſame to be of the matter only (as ſchoolemen ſpeak) & paſſiue, which they call a remote power. Againe, we auouch that the ſame power is made actual, by meanes of diuine grace preuenting vs, yt is, by the working of the holy ſpirit, who taketh poſſeſſion as it were of vs by the preaching of the Goſpell, whereby the holy Ghoſt doth renue our hearts,

inſpiring that life of God into vs, frō which we were before altogether ſtrangers: as it is writtē Eph. 4. 17. 18. 19. creating in vs againe that image of God which was loſt, that image (I ſay) of holineſſe, & true righteouſneſſe.
               As touching our iuſtification where our aduerſaries do affirme that it is two fold, terming ye 1. habituall & the 2. Popiſh iuſtification. actuall: they ſay, that we are prepared by our free-will, to the 1. iuſtification, as by a principal agent, & by the grace working together with the ſame. But as for the 2. iuſtification, that they place in works proceeding from free wil & from our▪firſt iuſtificatiō, which they cal infuſed grace. And here they aſcribe life euerlaſting to the merit of this 2. iuſtification, which dooth conſiſt in the workes of our free-will and of infuſed grace (as they call it.)
               Hence we may ſee, that they do not attribute to the only grace of God, any of the former benefits, neither iuſtificatiō, nor vocatiō, nor glorificatiō, nor any of thoſe ſpiritual graces, which God in time giues to his children: But they do part them betweene Gods grace, free-will, and mans merit. Finally, if any compariſon be made between God, & vs concerning the conferring of theſe benefits, we ſhall Note. find them to aſcribe more to vs, and our free-will, & our works, then to the grace of God. But we haue written ſomewhat of this before in the chapters of our effectuall calling of repentance, & of free-wil. Therefore I refer the reader to theſe places, and here I end this matter.
               Thus far then haue we ſpoken of this common place of our effectuall calling, which becauſe it comprehendeth vnder it many other points of diuinity, it may be wel reckoned amongſt the moſt generall heads of Theologie.
            
            
               
               OF THE MEANES WHEREby God from the beginning hath reuealed both his couenants vnto Mankind.
               Queſtion.
               
                  
                     HOW many waies are there, whereby God from the beginning hath reuealed all his will, that is, 
                  Kinds or forms of reuelation. 
                  the doctrine of both couenants, of works & grace, vnto mankind?
               
               A. They are two.
               Q. Which be they.
               
               A. The firſt is a liuely voice: the ſecond is the Scripture.
               Q. What calleſt thou a liuely voice.
               
               A. The firſt meanes of reuelation, whereby God partly by his owne mouth, and partly by men, hath manifeſted VVhat is meant by a liuely voice. the whole doctrine of both couenants to his church, from time to time.
               Q. What were the inſtruments of that liuely voice from the beginning?
               
               A. Firſt, God himſelfe ſpake ſometimes by his Sonne in VVhoſe it was. the forme or likenes of man, appearing to the Fathers; ſometimes by his ſpirit inwardly in the heart. Secondly, the liuely voice of Angels was heard: Thirdly, the liuely voice of men, firſt of the Fathers, then of Moſes, and the Prophets; after that, of Iohn the Baptiſt vntil Chriſt. Then

lowed Chriſt himſelfe manifeſted in the fleſh. Laſt of all, the liuely voice of the Apoſtles of Chriſt.
               Q. This kind of reuelation which was by a liuely voice of al 
                  The quality of it. 
                  theſe whom you haue named, was it by inspiration and altogether free from error?
               
               A. Concerning the liuely voice of God himſelfe, of Chriſt and of the Angels, there is no queſtion: and as concerning men, whoſe liuely voice God hath vſed from the beginning of the world hitherto, in reuealing his wil to his Church, they truly albeit they were ſinfull men, and in part onely regenerate; notwithſtanding in the deliuery of the doctrine of the truth of both couenants, they were ſo extraordinarily gouerned and inſpired with the Holy Spirit of God, that they could by no meanes erre.
               Q. Doeſt thou meane then, that all men, as manie as haue beene from the beginning of the world hitherto (by whoſe mouth God hath-ſpoken to his Church) were men extraordinary, endued with extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghoſt, & confirmed by miracles.
               
               A. I meane euen ſo: for prophecy in times paſt came not by the will of man, but holy men ſpake as they were moued by the ſpirit of God. 2. Pet. 1. 2.
               Q. At what time began this liuely voice in the Church? 
                  VVhen it began.
               
               A. It began euen in the firſt creation of man.
               Q. How long hath the liuely voice of God and men, who could not erre in deliuering the doctrine of the truth continued 
                  Continuance of it. 
                  in the Church of God?
               
               A. It hath been from the beginning of the world, euen to the death of the Apoſtles: all which time, there was almoſt no age, wherein at leaſt ſome one holy man of God, was not extraordinarily ſtirred vp; who could not erre in deliuering the doctrine of the truth.
               Q. Why doe you ſay almoſt: was there anie intermiſſion at all?
               
               A. Truly there was: but I will name onely ſome more notable intermiſſions, which may be gathered out of the

holy ſcriptures. Firſt in the age of the Patriarches it is obſerued, that there was an intermiſſion in Terachs time who was the Father of Abraham: for albeit he retained ſome grounds of truth receiued from his Fathers, notwithſtanding he became an Apoſtata and an Idolater, as is manifeſt by the hiſtorie. Next, there was an intermiſſion alſo, when the people liued in Egypt: for from the death of the Sonnes of Iacob, euen to the departure out of Egypt, Ezechiel teſtifieth Chapter 20. that al the people were fallen frō God to the Idols of the Egyptians. Laſtly, there was an intermiſſion from Malachy the laſt of the Prophets vntil Iohn Baptiſt, in all which time no Prophet was raiſed vp; notwithſtanding the word of God was cōtinued, amongſt the people of ye Iewes by high Prieſts and the ordinary miniſtery, but not without corruptions: ſo that at the comming of Chriſt for the more part, the doctrine of truth was now corrupted.
               Q. Ought not the liuely voice of God, which is not ſubiect to errour, bee continued in the Church vntil the comming of 
                  VVhether a liuely voice not ſubiect to error continues til Chriſt. 
                  Chriſt; becauſe you ſaid that this liuely voice did continue in the Church till the comming of the Apoſtles only?
               
               A. The liuely voice of Chriſt continues in the Church, I confeſſe, but not the liuely voice either of God or of extraordinary men, ſuch as were the Fathers, Prophets, and Apoſtles: but only the liuely voice of ordinary men, of paſtours and doctors, who both may erre, & do erre whenſoeuer they depart neuer ſo little, from the preſcript word of the Prophets and Apoſtles.
               Q. But God hath giuen a greater meaſure of his holie ſpirit, to his Church which now is vnder Chriſt, then euer he gaue to the old Church. Therefore if in the old Church there was a liuelie voice which could not erre, how much more ſhall there be now in the Church of Chriſt a liuelie voice which cannot erre.
               
               A. It is true indeed, that together with this full reuelation, which is cōtained in the writings of the Apoſtles, a more full ſpirit was giuen to the Church of Chriſt,

which now is, then was giuen to the the old Church: But hence it followeth not, that either the Church, or the Paſtors and doctors in the Church, are ſo gouerned with that Spirit, that they cannot at all erre in deliuering the truth: For this was the extraordinarie gift of the holy Ghoſt, which was giuen but for a time; but the gift of the Spirit which was giuen to the Church of Chriſt ſince the times of the Apoſtles, is ordinarie and perpetuall, to wit, the gift of ſanctification, illumination, and regeneration.
               Q. The Church then which now is, ſeemes to be in a worſe caſe, then the old Church was, which had the liuely voice of God, & of men which could not erre?
               
               A. That doth not follow: for this Scripture of the Prophets and Apoſtles, which nowe the Church hath, doth not erre in doctrine, and containes alſo a moſt full and moſt cleare reuelation of the truth.
               Q. Albeit I ſhould graunt the condition of our Church to better then of that old Church which was before Moſes, and which had the tradition and vſe onely of the liuely voice, and that verie imperfect and obſcure: notwithſtanding I ſee not how the Church was not in better caſe, which was after Moſes, euen to the comming of Chriſt, as hauing not onely the vſe of tradition, and of a liuelie voice, but alſo of the Propheticall Scripture, as a light ſhining in a dark place?
               
               A. Truly that Church had both, that is, both the ſound of a liuely voice, and of the Scripture and written word of God; but neither perfect, and abſolute. But this Scripture which our Church alone hath, containes a moſt full and plaine reuelation: for euen one forme or maner and kind of reuelation, which is perfect and full muſt be more excellent, then two which are both imperfect, or which containe an imperfect reuelation of the truth.
               Q. But there is no man who would not ſay, it were better with this our Church, if it had ſome liuelie voice which in ſpeaking and anſwering to all controuerſies, might not erre?
               
               
                  
A. They haue Moſes, the Ptophets and Apoſtles, that is, the writings of Moſes, of the Prophets, and of the Apoſtles, and thoſe truely not onely ſufficient, but moſt perfect: whēce only if they cānot learne the truth by thē, and decide and end all controuerſies, they will not be inſtructed with the liuely voyce of anie extraordinary man: howbeit, as I haue ſaid before, the liuely voice was to continue onely ſo long in the Church, as ſome thing was wanting to the full declaration of the myſtery of Chriſt. So that if now there ſhould be any need of the liuely voice either of God, or of ſome extraordinarie man in the Church of Chriſt; that truly ſhould plainely argue, that the reuelation of the truth and myſterie of Chriſt, is not perfect as yet, nor accompliſhed.
               Q. You conclude then, that ſince the Apoſtles time there hath beene no liuelie voice heard in the Church, which could not erre.
               
               A. Yea truely.
               Q. Whie did a liuelie voice not ſubiect to errour, continue in the Church all that time, which was from Adam to the Apoſtles?
               
               A. To ſpeake nothing of the will of God, with the which alone we ought to reſt contented; firſt, the condition of the Church did require this continuance: & then the meaſure of the reuelation that then was.
               Q. Whie the condition of the Church?
               
               A. Becauſe the viſible Church in all that time, which was from Adam to the Apoſtles, was both in place more ſtreight, as being ſhut vp in one family, or in one nation, & was by reaſon of age weaker, or not ſo wel growne. For the Church before Chriſt (if I may ſo ſpeake) was either as a child, or as a young man.
               Q. What then?
               
               A. The liuely voice doth more eaſily reach, or extend it ſelfe to a Church, which is in place more ſtreight, and to the Saints fewer in number: & the church being as yet

vnexpert by reaſon of the age of it, and leſſe growne, had neede of the liuely voice of a teacher, none otherwiſe then children haue neede of the liuely voice of a maiſter, who as it were ſtammereth with them: but after the comming of Chriſt, when the Church was ſufficiently inſtructed by the liuely voice of Chriſt, and of his Apoſtles, and now come to mans eſtate, there was no more heard anie liuely voice either of God, or of men extraordinarie.
               Q. Whie did the meaſure of Reuelation require this?
               
               A. Becauſe all that time, which was from Adam to the Apoſtles, there remained as yet ſome thing more clearely and more manifeſtly to be reuealed; and the reuelation of the doctrine was in ſeuerall ages, made more manifeſt ſtill as pertaining to the ſubſtance of it: and ſo long, as ſome thing remained to be more clearely reuealed, ſo long a liuely voice was to continue; for euerie new reuelation ought firſt to begin with a liuely voice.
               Q. Seeing that the laſt and moſt full reuelation was by the liuelie voice of Chriſt and his Apoſtles: hath there euer ſince beene heard anie liuely voice, either of God or of anie extraordinarie man?
               
               A. None at all.
               Q. Do you gather by theſe things which you haue ſpoken, concerning the cauſes of the continuance of a liuelie voice in the Church, what was the vſe of it heretofore in the Church?
               
               A. Yea truly: for the vſe of it was firſt in reſpect of the Church it ſelfe, to giue it inſtruction while it was yet ſo ſmall for place, and ſo young in knowledge: next, in reſpect of reuelation, to deliuer it from time to time more cleerly and euidently vnto the people.
               Q. By this vſe of a liuelie voice, which you haue here mentioned, it ſeems that this kind of ruelatiō, which was by a liuely voice, was the more ſimple and the more familiar, and the more imperfect, and therefore the more fit for perſons and things that were of like imperfection?
               
               
                  
A. It is euen ſo as you haue ſaid.
               Q. Hitherto I haue heard you ſpeake concerning a liuelie voice: now I would heare ſomething of you concerning the ſubiect of it, what ſay you then was taught all that time by a liuely voice?
               
               A. In al that time, and in euery age the ſelfe ſame, and the whole truth of God was deliuered by a liuely voice. The subiector master of the liuely voice.
               
               Q. Wherefore then, ſaid you, that the perfect manifeſtation of that myſterie of godlineſſe was not accompliſhed till the Apoſtles time?
               
               A. By that fulneſſe & perfection I vnderſtood not the ſubſtance of the doctrine it ſelfe, but the quality, that is, the cleareneſſe of one and the ſame doctrine. For the myſterie of Chriſt was in the Church, and was manifeſted in ſome meaſure from Adam vnto Chriſt, and the Apoſtles: but if the compariſon be made of times, it may be ſaid to be ſhut & hidden in all ages before the comming of Chriſt.
               Q. Was the paritie of the heauenlie doctrine ſufficientlie conſerued and kept, by a liuely voice?
               
               A. The hiſtorie ſhewes plainely that the doctrine deliuered by liuely voice, was often corrupted and adulterated.
               Q. How then was it reſtored?
               
               It ſeemed good to God, afterward by new reuelations to reſtore the puritie of his word decayed, to conſerue and keepe it, and to giue a more full declaration of it.
               Q. Was the puritie of doctrine ſufficientlie preſerued and kept ſo?
               
               A. Not ſo verily: and therefore it ſeemed good to God, at length to adde hereunto the written word.
               Q. Are there no other cauſes of writing the holie Scriptures?
               
               A. There are: for firſt the condition of the Church required, that the Scripture ſhould be added vnto the liuely voice: and next, the meaſure alſo of reuelation.
               
                  Q. Why the condition of the Church?
               
               A. Becauſe at length, in Moſes time, the Church began to be both in place more large, as being ſpred throughout a whole nation, and to grow greater and riper in yeares: for the time from Moſes vnto Chriſt, was as it were, the time of the midde age, or young yeares of the Church.
               Q. What then?
               
               A. The written word therefore was firſt in reſpect both of place, and ripeneſſe of age: for both a whole nation is more eaſily taught by writing then by voice: and the age which is more ripe, is more capable of that doctrine which is deliuered by writing, that is, by that kind of reuelation which is not ſo familiar and ſimple: and by writing doth more eaſily conceiue any mans meaning.
               Q. Why doth the meaſure of reuelation require the written word?
               
               A. Becauſe whereas before Moſes, the reuelation of the myſterie of godlineſſe was ſmall and very obſcure, it ſeemed not good to the Lord to cauſe it ſtraight waies to be written, to the intent it might be kept for poſteritie. But when in Moſes time the Reuelation began to bee much more cleare then before, then it ſeemed good vnto God to commit it to writing, to the intent it might be reſerued, and remain for thoſe which ſhould come after. For that which is more perfect and full, that wee are to write, to this end, that it may remaine both for vs and our poſterity; but that which is more imperfect, that we doe not eſteeme worthy the writing, or to be reſerued vnto poſterity.
               Q. Before you go anie further, I would haue you declaare vnto me the ages of the Church, where of you haue ſo oft made mention?
               
               A. I will ſo do.
               Q. How manie ages then, ſay you, are there of the Church?
               
               A. Three: the firſt was from Adam vnto Moſes, which

was the infancy and childhood of the Church: the ſecond from Moſes vnto Chriſt, which was the youth or middle age of the Church: the third, from Chriſt and his Apoſtles, euen vnto the end, which may be called the ripe age of the Church, if it be compared with the ages paſt: for otherwiſe we are not men growne vntill we bee gathered together with Chriſt our head in heauen.
               Q. Do you meane then, that God had reſpect alwaies of theſe three ages, in his proceedings with his Church?
               
               A. I meane ſo indeed: for (that I may ſo ſpeake) hee hath tempered theſe three things proportionally to theſe three ages of the Church: to wit, firſt the meaſure of reuelation: ſecondly, his holy Spirit: thirdly, the manner of reuelation.
               Q. Declare I pray you more particularlie what you haue ſaid?
               
               A. To the infancie and childhood of the Church, he gaue the leaſt meaſure of reuelation to wit, firſt, the firſt principles of religion onely. Secondly, the leaſt meaſure of the holy Spirit, to wit, that which was proportionable to the reuelation. Thirdly, one onely kind of reuelation, which was by liuely voice, as being the moſt fit for the inſtruction of infants, and of ſuch as were weake in the faith.
               Q. I vnderſtand what you ſaie concerning the firſt age of the Church: now I would haue you ſpeake concerning the middle age, which you call the youth of it, and to applie theſe three things mentioned to it in like manner?
               
               To the middle age of the Church he gaue firſt a greater meaſure of reuelation. Secondly (ſo to ſpeake) a greater portion of the holy Spirit. Thirdly, a double kind of reuelation, the liuely voice, and the Scripture. The liuely voice I ſay, becauſe as yet it was but weake: and the written word; becauſe it was in age better growne, and ſo more capable in ſome ſort of the word written: for God hath tempered theſe two kinds of reuelations together, and of both hath made a middle kind of reuelation, according

to the time and age which wee call the middle, and as it were the temperate age.
               Q. You haue ſpoken of the firſt & ſecond age of the Church, now I pray you ſpeake of the third.
               
               A. To the third age of the Church (which I call the manly or ripe age) he gaue firſt a full meaſure of reuelation. Secondly, a moſt plentifull effuſion of the holy Ghoſt. Thirdly, both thoſe kinds of reuelation, and that now truly containing a full and perfect reuelation; hee taught it by liuely voice for a certaine time: & after this, he added the writings of the Apoſtles. And when as the myſtery of our ſaluation was fully reuealed by that liuely voice firſt, and then that full reuelation was written, euer ſince there hath beene no more vſe of the liuely voice of any extraordinarie Prophet or Apoſtle. But the Scriptures written firſt by the Prophets, and after by the Apoſtles, remained only without any liuely voice, which could not erre.
               Q. Where muſt wee begin to count the third age of the Church?
               A. Not ſo much from the comming of Chriſt, and the ſending of his Apoſtles to all nations, as from that time when the Apoſtles ceaſed to ſpeake with liuely voice aſwel to the Iewes as to the Gentiles: for euen then the Church catholick came to mans eſtate & full growth, and then the Church began to vnderſtand and to learne the wil of God by the written word, as being a more accurate and perfect manner of reuelation. The time then which was frō the cōming of Chriſt vntil the death of the Apoſtles, was as it were a paſſage from the middle age of the church, vnto the ful growth & ripenes of the ſame.
               Q. I vnderſtand what you ſay cōcerning the cauſes of additiō of the written word to the liuely voice, & of the ſeuerall ages of the Church: now I would haue you speake ſome thing concerning the ſcripture, or of the writing of Gods word.
               
               A. I will do ſo.
               
                  Q. What then call you writing or Scripture?
               A. I call ſcripture or writing the ſecond kind of reuelation, whereby God either by himſelfe, or by the meanes of men extraordinarily reuealed thoſe things, which already had beene deliuered by liuely voice before, to wit, in that firſt kind of reuelation.
               Q. Who then were they, who euer ſince the beginning haue written?
               A. Firſt, God himſelfe, next, men Moſes, the Prophets, and the Apoſtles.
               Q. This kind of reuelation which was by writing, was it not ſubiect to error, like as that kind which was by a liuely voice?
               A. No truly: for concerning that which God himſelfe did write, there is no queſtion: and touching men, they were ſo extraordinarily inſpired and gouerned by the ſpirit of God, that in writing they could not erre at all.
               Q. When began it then to be written?
               A. In Moſes time.
               Q. How long did the word written continue in the Church?
               A. The ſcripture or the act of writing continued from Moſes, euen to the Apoſtles: all which time there was almoſt no age wherein extraordinarily ſome one was not ſtirred vp, who in deliuering the doctrine of truth by writing, could not erre.
               Q. You thinke otherwiſe of the ſcripture it ſelfe, then of the act of writing?
               A. I do ſo: for the ſcripture it ſelf or that which is now written by Moſes, the Prophets, and Apoſtles yet continues in the Church, and ſhall continue vnto the ſecond comming of Chriſt.
               Q. Was there any intermiſſion of writing the word from Moſes vnto the Apoſtles?
               A. There was: for it appeareth in all that time, which was frō Malachy to Iohn the Baptiſt none was ſtirred vp, either Prophet, or writer inſpired by God: for the books of the Machabees be not giuen by inſpiration, as we ſhal ſhew hereafter.
               
                  Q. You ſaid that writing continued in the Church vntil the time of the Apoſtles, ought it not then to continue euen vnto the end?
               A. Like as ſince the Apoſtles time there is no liuely voice heard in the Church, which can be ſaid to be ſo goned by the holy Ghoſt, that it can not erre at all: So ſince the Apoſtles, nothing is written in the church, which may worthily be called or ſaid to be giuen by inſpiration.
               Q. What then do you think of ſo many writings of godly and learned men, which haue been publiſhed ſince the times of the Apoſtles from time to time, to the great good and profit of the Church?
               A. Verely I thinke of the writings of Paſtors and Doctors in the Church, as I think of their preaching, to wit, that both be ſubiect to errour, and neither is ſo gouerned by the holy Ghoſt, but that in deliuering the truth of God they may erre.
               Q. It ſeemeth then that the condition of the Church, which is ſince the time of the Apoſtles, is not ſo good as hauing neither the liuely voice (as is afore ſaid) nor the writings, as now you ſpeak, of thoſe very mē who in deliuering the truth cannot erre?
               A. It hath the ſcriptures of the prophets and Apoſtles, which as pertaining to the ſubſtance of reuelation is full; and as touching the kind & forme of reuelation, it is giuē by inſpiration & not ſubiect to error: out of the which ſcripture, whoſoeuer do not learne all things which are neceſſary to faith and ſaluation, aſſuredly ſuch would not receiue from the mouth of God himſelf, openly ſpeaking in an audible and intelligible voice, the doctrine and inſtructon of faith and ſaluation.
               
                  Q. Wherefore did the Lord ſo continue to record his will by 
                  The cauſe of the continuance of▪ writing Gods word. 
                  writing in the Church all that time, which was from Moſes to the Apoſtles?
               
               A. There are the ſame cauſes of the continuance thereof, as are of the addition of the liuely voice vnto writing: For both the condition of the church and

the meaſure of reuelation required the ſame.
               Q. Why the condition of the Church?
               
               A. Becauſe the church continually increaſed and grew, as in number ſo in knowledge.
               Q. What then?
               
               A. The greater number and riper knowledge do require this, that the word be written.
               Q. Why the meaſure of reuelation?
               
               A. Becauſe the reuelation of the doctrine of ſaluation, was from time to time made more cleare and manifeſt, euen vnto the times of Chriſt & of his Apoſtles; at which time it was in the end compleate and perfected. For it was meete that euery reuelation manifeſted more cleerely & fully, ſhould be recorded in writing, to this end, that it might be ſurely kept and deliuered to poſterities.
               Q. Can ye gather by theſe things the vſe of the continuance 
                  The vſe of writing. 
                  of ſcripture in the Church of God.
               
               A. Yea truly.
               Q. What is then the vſe of it?
               
               A. To paſſe by the conſeruation of the purity of doctrine, the firſt vſe was in reſpect of the Church, for the inſtructiō thereof, as being now in place more ample & large, & in knowledge more perfect. Secondly, it was in reſpect of the reuelation of the doctrine it ſelfe, that it might cō
                  prehend and keepe it more fully and cleerely.
               Q. By this vſe of ſcripture or writing which you giue, it ſeemes that this kind of reuelation which is by writing, is ſomewhat more perfect & high, as that which is beſt agreeing & fitting to perſons and things that are more perfect?
               
               A. It is euen ſo.
               Q. Thus far then forwriting or ſcripture: now I would haue you declare ſomething vnto me concerning the ſubiect of this writing, & of the matter it ſelfe which is written?
               
               A. As touching the ſubſtance the very ſame is written which was before deliuered by the liuely voice.
               Q. I pray you ſpeak in order vnto me of the ſubiect or argument

in ſcripture, written first by God himſelf: ſecondly, by mē, by Moſes, the Prophets and Apoſtles?
               
               A. I will do ſo.
               Q. What then hath God written?
               
               A. The ſum of the doctrine of the couenant of works, & of the law, euen the very ſame which he had deliuered firſt by a liuely voice to the Fathers, and to Moſes.
               
               Q. What hath Moſes written?
               
               A. All the celeſtiall doctrine, which he had receiued partly of the fathers by tradition, partly of God himſelfe, Moſes books who ſpake mouth to mouth with him; for ſo the ſcripture ſpeaketh: partly he had learned of the holy Ghoſt by an inward inſpiration; & to ſpeake in a word, whatſoeuer had happened to him, and to all the people in his life time, for the ſpace of 100. and 20. yeares, all theſe things he committed to writing and gaue to the people.
               Q. Did Moſes then write what ſoeuer true doctrine was deliuered from the beginning of the world to that time?
               
               A. Moſes omitted no point of true doctrine, which at any time had bene deliuered concerning either faith or manners: for from the beginning vntil that very time one and the ſame doctrine of truth, as touching the ſubſtance, was taught full and whole, in all ages. The difference only was in the meaſure of the reuelation of it, that it is accidentall & Moſes deliuered this doctrine fully and wholy by liuely voice more cleerely and manifeſtly then euer before: then after this, it was recorded in writing.
               Q. What did the Prophets write, who followed Moſes euerie one in their time, and order?
               
               A. The ſame and all, as touching the ſubſtance, which Moſes had written before; the difference only was herein: that euery one by reuelation did adde a more cleare & manifeſt interpretation, as the bright morning ſtarre did approch more neere.
               Q. What haue the Apoſtles written after the Prophets.
               
               A. All and the ſame, which from the beginning of the

world in al ages before them was both by liuely & audible voice deliuered and written; they firſt alſo by a liuely voice deliuered the ſame, and after committed it to writing.
               Q. Doe you then make no difference betwixt the writings of the Prophets and of the Apoſtles?
               
               A. In the matter and ſubſtance none; in the clearenes and perſpicuity thereof, very great: for the ſcripture of the Apoſtles conteineth the ſame reuelation of the myſtery which was declared from the beginning of the world, but moſt fully and moſt clearely.
               Q. I haue heard you ſpeake concerning both kinds of reuelation, conſidered without compariſon: now I would haue you to compare together the liuely voice & writing, that by compariſon it may appeare whether is of greater dignity & authority.
               
               A. I will compare them together, the liuely voice and ſcripture are compared either in reſpect of ſubſtance and matter is ſelfe, which is reuealed by theſe meanes, or in reſpect of the kinds of ye reuelatiō of it. If cōpariſon be made in regard of the matter or ſubſtance, they muſt needes be both equall & alike, ſeeing that the matter in either is one and the ſame: but if you compare the kinds of reuclation together, it cānot truly be denied but that the firſt & better place is due to the liuely voice, ſeeing that the liuely voice is both in reſpect of time more auncient, & was before the organs or inſtruments thereof (for the mouth is an inſtrument more worthy & to be preferred before the hand) and is a kind of teaching more familiar & more fit for the capacity of ſuch, as are more rude & ignorant. Albeit alſo in ſome reſpects writing is to be preferred before the liuely voice: For it is a more perfect & accurate kind of reuelation, fit to inſtruct thoſe that are more perfect, & to keepe the truth more firmely. In the meane while it cā
                  not be denied, but yt in other reſpects they are both alike, for they haue both ſpoken, & written the ſame thing, & in the ſame manner, to wit, as being guided & moued by the

holy Ghoſt & inſpired of God, 2. Pet. 1. 21. 2. Tim. 3. 16. To conclude, ſeeing that now the liuely voice, by the wil of God hath ceaſed, and in the place of it the ſcripture hath ſucceeded; ſo that whole dignity of the liuely voice before mentioned, is and ought worthily to be aſcribed and referred vnto the ſcripture, or written word of God.
               Q Doe you meane then that the Prophetical & Apoſtolical ſcripture ought to be now in as great account with vs, as the liuelie voice of God himſelfe, and of extraordinarie men was in times paſt?
               
               A. I meane ſo, and in his kinde of reuelation alone I willingly reſt, as in that which came by inſpiratiō from God, ſo long, vntill I ſhall heare at his glorious comming that liuely and moſt ſweete voice of Chriſt my Sauiour; when he ſhall ſay to them, who ſhall be at his right hand, Come ye bleſſed of my Father, inherit the kingdome, prepared for you from the beginning of the world. To whom be all praiſe for euer Amen.
               To God only wiſe be praiſe through Jeſus Christ for euer, Amen.
            
         
      
   