
      
         
            
            
            Romes Monarchie,
ENTITVLED
THE GLOBE OF RENOWMED
GLORIE.
            Briefly comprehending the firſt foundation
and building of Rome by Romulus: The principall
warres and conqueſts of the Romanes after the
time of their firſt chooſing Conſuls, till
Iulius Caeſar attaining ſoly to
the Empire, and from him
more briefly to
Nero.
            VVhere in ſmall compaſſe is deſcribed, manie most
noble, and vertuous acts, atchieued in their ſaid warres,
and conqueſts; ſtrange Tragedies, ſecret practiſes and policies,
Ambition, hate, and reuenge: and how inſurrections, rebellion,
ſtrife, ciuill diſcord and diſcention preuailing,
was the onely plague, ruine, and vtter destruction
of many great Monarchies,
Kingdomes, Cities, and
Countries.
            Tranſlated out of the French and Italian hiſtories by E. L.
            
            
               Il premio é meritato.
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by the Widdow Orwin, for Matthew
Lawe. 1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE,
MOST WORTHIE
for vertues, Maſter Alderman Slany, Lord
Maior of the citie of London: the right Worſhipfull Maſter Thomas
Low, and Maſter Leonard Halliday, Aldermen and Sheriffes
of the ſame citie: and to the right Worſhipfull the reſt
of the Aldermen their brethren, and other the Magiſtrates
in authoritie there: long life, health, and
all good happes in this life, and after
eternall felicitie.
            
               RIght Honorable, and right Worſhipfull:
Next vnto the ſacred Scriptures of
almightie God, wherein is contained
the only ground of our faith, beleefe, &
ſaluation in Chriſt Ieſu, the knowledge
of other Hiſtories, are not of ſmall importance
to be weighed, and in ſome meaſure digeſted of
all men, for diuers cauſes if they be duely conſidered and
examined: but moſt of all and eſpecially with more regard
and iudgement of ſuch as your Honour and Worſhips
are, who for many conſiderate cauſes and other vertues,
are called to the adminiſtring of iuſtice in the publike
weale: I except vaine fabulous inuentions, & meane
thoſe philoſophicall workes, which either are morall, or
hiſtoricall, tending to vertue, or ſuppreſsing vice. Among
all which worthie volumes, as the numbers be many, and

ſubiects ſundrie, the hiſtories of the ancient Romanes gouernment
is not of leaſt eſteeme to be preferred with the
chiefeſt: conſidering how from their meane originall &
baſe beginning, they acquiſed and got the ſoueraigntie
of the whole world. This briefe tranſlation (right Honorable
and right Worſhipfull) written in French, deſcribeth
the principall warres and Conqueſts of the Romanes,
whoſe acts and geſts, (concerning the gouernmēt
of their Common-wealth, with other matters in the large
volumes conteined) are not (I know) vnknowne to your
Honour and Worſhips, and a great number moe (by
knowledge of which, is reaped no ſmall profit:) but the
multitude, or vulgar ſort of our nation, not hauing thoſe
large volumes, neither can attaine vnto for value of price,
or want of knowledge of the languages wherein ſome
of them are written, may in this briefe behold how thoſe
great Monarches in their ſayd warres, ſtirred vp by Ambition
of rule and Emperie, ſubdued the Nations of the
world, onely firſt, by flinging into the principalities of
peaceable Princes, the fire of ciuil diſcord, ſtrife, and diſcenſion:
by meanes whereof when they had gotten that
footing, then ſhortly after followed the ruine, decay, and
vtter ouerthrowe of thoſe Countries, and Kingdomes,
their cities and people: and how when their Empire was
at higheſt, through thoſe furies kindled with hate and
reuenge among themſelues, their great gouernment fel to
ruine and decay, (a thing moſt wonderfull in the iudgement
of God) ſo that at this day of their great Conqueſts,
there is no more mention left thereof, ſaue only the bare
name of Caeſar: whoſe declining eſtate (God ſparing me
life) I meane to bring into as ſmall a roome and compaſſe,

as this, which ſheweth their increaſing fame of
worldly glorie.
            My humble deſire is, that this my poore vnpoliſhed labour
may finde that fauour of your Honour and Worſhips
to be accepted, and taken in good part, vnder your
worthie protections, the rather in that they who are here
mentioned, were Citizens and gouernours of a moſt renowmed
Citie like this, wherein you are Magiſtrates, &
gouernment thereof, for your virtues, cōmitted vnto you,
whoſe minds whileſt they liued, the world could not cō
               taine,
do before your Honor & Worſhips in a few paper
leaues muſter themſelues and their greatnes, to the ende
that their great Conqueſts vnder your patronages, may
firſt paſſe through this noble Citie, and after through the
cities, townes and villages of her Maieſties dominions, to
all her other faithful & true harted ſubiects, by reading of
which they may conſider in theſe thundring dayes, the
great threatnings of our mightie & mortal foe, the inſatiable
Monarch, whom the worlds Empire wil not ſuffice,
Caeſar like with his adherents, ſeeking daily by many craftie
conueiances, treaſons, treacheries, & other inhumane
and vnchriſtianlike meanes, to kindle the fire of ſtrife &
ciuill diſcention among vs, the eaſier to preuaile, to the
vtter ruine, and ouerthrowe, both of Prince, people and
countrie, which God of his good grace, hath moſt mightilie
and miraculouſly defended a long time: let all true
Engliſh hearts pray, that it will pleaſe him ſo to continue
his gracious fauour euermore towards vs.
            What vnitie, loue, concord, and peace is, (Gods name
bee bleſſed) wee may all ſay wee haue felt, doe feele and
know, and whileſt the bands of them true and firmely laſteth,

we ſhall be inuincible: but if once they begin to diſſolue,
by peruſing of this brief hiſtorie, may be ſeene how
many miſeries follow.
            God preſerue your Honour and Worſhips, and that it
will pleaſe him to direct your hearts in all your actions,
to increaſe in you vertue, which liueth when all worldly
vanitie els dieth, and ſend you long liues, to be moſt worthie
members, for the aduancement of this moſt noble
flouriſhing Common-wealth and Monarchie, which
God of his gracious goodnes grant long to continue, vnder
the gouernment of the thrice happie and proſperous
raigne of the admirable Empreſſe of the world, our
moſt gracious Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth,
ouer whom be the power of
his mightie hand euermore
extended. Amen.
            
               Your Honor, and Worſhips moſt
humble to commaund:
E. L.
            
         
         
            
            To the louing, curteous, and
friendlie Readers.
            
               AS in a little nooke or corner of a Cabinet, a rich Iewell
or pretious ſtone vnpoliſhed, may be couched: ſo in the
compaſſe of theſe few paper leaues is briefly comprehended
the fame and memorie of the moſt renowmed conquerours
of the world: the remembrance of whoſe great
actes, ne can or will, euer bee forgotten. Like an Apprentice or vnskilfull
Artiſt, haue I aduentured the diſrobing of their noble conqueſtes
out from the French copie, in Engliſh proſe, and deuiding the ſame into
chapters, in ſome places augmented from the italian, enterfraught
with ſome few meane poeticall fictions, not altogether vnfitting to the
ſubiect where they are placed. Faultes are ſooner found then amended,
and therefore (Qui non fa, non falla: qui falla ſ'amenda) (if any
haue eſcaped, as who liueth not committing any) and that exceptions
be taken as there may bee, by ſome prying Paſciphil
                  •
               s, howſoeuer the
finenes of their Caprichios, may mistake the ſence, the good, vertuous
and well dispoſed ſpirits will conſtrue the beſt, the other will ſhew their
kinde: what faults ſoeuer there be espied, my intent is to ſurpriſe vertue,
and ſubingate vice: Praying the almightie to ſend loue, peace,
vnitie and concord among all faithfull Christian Princes, and their
ſubiects in Chriſt Ieſu, that as all, that beare that name from him in
outward ſhew, ſo all may both inwardly and outwardly follow
him, ſimply in manner of life and doctrine, for the
benefite of themſelues in the
life to come.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Romes Monarchie.
            
               CAP. 1.
               The building of Carthage, and Rome,
the expelling of Romes Kinges, and firſt
chooſing of Couſuls there, the ouerthrow of
300. Romaines being all of one name, and
familie, called Fabians.
               
                  OF Priams pompe, his pallace or his towne,
                  Srong Troy, the wals, or how thoſe warres began
                  Which ten yeres held, by Grecians laſt beat down:
                  Or whether ſide the praiſe or glorie wanne
                  Is not here ment at all, vpon to ſcanne:
                  Yet will my muſe (in meane ſtyle) pen I imploy
                  Of warres to write long after that from Troy,
               
               
                  
                     Aeneas came into Italia ſoyle:
                  But, leauing him and farther on to paſſe:
                  Excepting too, what euer iarre or broyle,
                  Did after chance till Rome yfounded was
                  By Romulus, whoſe birth is counted baſe:
                  Thus much is ſayd, becauſe Aeneas line,
                  Is brought by writ, in Caeſars ſeate to ſhine:
               
               
                  
                  For,Who commanded the whole world. when Auguſtus, ſurnam'de Caeſar, ſate
                  Sole with the Scepter in th'imperiall throne,
                  
                     Virgil, to praiſe his high diſcent, and ſtate,
                  In his Aeneidos,
                     Virg. Aene. lib. 6. makes it to him knowne,
                  How Troian race the world then rul'de alone,
                  Old Priams ſtocke (of Troy that famous king)
                  In him * moſt freſh,Oct Auguſt. ore all the earth did ſpring.
               
               
                  But memorie, and fame of nations olde,
                  Swift time makes ende, as was as of beginning.
                  Romes baſe commence in writing is enrolde,
                  To be at firſt, a webbe of ſlender ſpinning;
                  And yet at laſt had all the world winning,
                  As floudes at firſt come ſlylie creeping in,
                  So at full ſea, to ebbe do ſtraight begin.
               
               
                  So worketh time of euery thing the change:The ſpread eagle, the armes of the Emperour.
                  
                  O Rome whoſe wings ſometime the earth oreſpread,
                  Thy glories gone, thy fame ſtill laſting, ſtrange,
                  Thy captaines that did raiſe thy ſtate are dead,
                  Both Pompee, and Caeſars aſpiring head,
                  With many moe, their monarchies and all:
                  Whom Time hath raiſ'de, and likewiſe made to fall.
               
               
                  But,Whatſoeuer is decreed by diuine power, worldly policie cannot withſtand. what ſo fates and deſtinie allottes,
                  Fortune will not gainſay, or backe withholde
                  What ſubiect is vnto her ſtaines and ſpottes,
                  Nought can auaile, no mines, or mounts of golde.
                  And what againe in fauour ſhe doth holde,
                  Shall mount, and weare both diademe, and crowne,
                  And vnlook'te for, as faſt come tumbling downe.
               
               
                  
                  Proofe of thſe things by Carthage firſt of twaine,
                  Whoſe plotted ſeate queeneDido the new maried wife of Sicheus, whō the king of Tyrus ſlue, from whoſe cruel tyrannie Dido fled into Afrique. 50. yeares before Troyes deſtruction. 
                     Dido did beginne,
                  By graunt obtain'de, and ſo much ground did gaine
                  To build vpon, in reach of a bulles ſkinne,
                  Which ſhe cut ſmall in pieces long and thinne:
                  In lengthes ſtretcht out, it farre oreſpead the field
                  In circuite, there the walles ſhe gan to build
               
               
                  With houſes braue, high towers, temples fayre▪
                  
                  The ſtately Forte, which Birſa had to name:
                  Whoſe toppes high mounted, ſeem'de to touch the ayre:
                  For ſtrength and wealth the world it had for fame.
                  Yet for all that, the Romaines it orecame,
                  The citie ſackt, and raz'de the walles to ground:
                  Whoſe match ech way, on earth was thē ſcarſe found.
               
               
                  Of Rome, the walles and buildings firſt of all,
                  Olde writtes record, that Romulus began
                  ToBetweene 350. or 400. yeares after Troyes deſtruction, or Eeneas comming into Italie. found the ſame, whoſe meane eſtate, ſome call
                  Him ſhepheard borne, or elſe a bare heardſman
                  Nurſt by a wolfe; but he ſuch glory wan,
                  As fates decree the chance of euery thing,
                  His power grew ſo, as laſtly made him king.
               
               
                  And after him, if hiſtories ſay true,
                  Two hundreth yeares, adde fortie foure withall,
                  Sixe kings more raign'de,1. Kinges. ech one in order due,
                  The laſt of which, his pride did cauſe to fall:
                  And name of king did euer after thrall,
                  To rule, or rainge, that famous citie in,
                  Who called was that time, the proud Tarquin.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Their Kings expel'd,2. Conſuls. two Conſuls next bare ſway,
                  Whoſe office was t'endure for a yeare,
                  
                     Iunius Brutus to the ſtate a ſtay,
                  Chiefe cauſe the Tarquins Romes kings chaſed were;
                  His owne two ſonnes, no whit he did forbeare
                  For to be head, with others, ſeeking meane,
                  Their Tarquins kings for to reſtore againe.
               
               
                  A noble deed of iuſtice,Iuſtice. right, and zeale:
                  O happie place where rulers vpright ſtand.Iuſtice duly and rightly executed, cauſeth a common wealth to floriſh.
                  
                  A worthy member of a publique weale:
                  A preſident for euery ſtate and land,
                  Vice to correct with rod of iuſtice hand.
                  Thus Conſuls two, in place of kings did guide
                  The ſtate of Rome, which after ſtretched wide.
               
               
                  During which time, diſcordes did often riſe
                  At home, and forth,A prouince in Italie neere vnto Rome, an il neighbour to their ſtate. 
                     Toſcane the countrie hight
                  That then made warre, but Rome did them deſpiſe,
                  Three hundreth Romaines went with them to fight:
                  All of one name cal'd Fabians, put to flight
                  Their armie, and they all ſlaine, left no more
                  Of that name but a child, who did reſtore
               
               
                  Their houſe againe: which chaunce to Rome did fall
                  Thirtie three yeares, after their kings decay,
                  And after that three hundreth yeares in all
                  Of Romes building, things at vncertaine ſtay,
                  By reaſon brawles did often them affray:
                  From them Ambaſſage to the Grecians went,
                  Who lawes to Rome in braſsie tables ſent.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 2.
               The third and fourth alteration of officers in
Rome, where, after many changes the Conſuls
were of continuance vntill
Iulius Caeſar.
               
                  IN meane eſtate was Rome at that ſame time,
                  Wanting both wittes, and men of wiſedomes lore
                  To make them lawes: but things that be in prime
                  Come to be ripe, though it be long before:
                  In Greece that time were wiſemen plenteous ſtore,
                  That in all kind of Artes profound did floriſh,
                  Romes weake eſtate with wiſedome they did noriſh.
               
               
                  Thoſe lawes brought home the publike ſtate, & weale,
                  Rechanged was from Conſuls two as then
                  To Decemuirs ſupremely that did deale
                  With euery cauſe, aſmuch to ſay Tenne men:
                  But this new change, was altered ſoone agen:
                  
                     Appius Claude, one of that number tho
                  Committing rape, that gouernment did orethrow.
               
               
                  A magiſtrate, to doe an act ſo vile:
                  The people would no longer them permit,
                  Conſuls againe were choſe, who but a while
                  Did laſt, but yet againe began to flit
                  Their officers, for ſo it was thought fit:
                  Two Tribunes then were choſe, whoſe power and might
                  Was Conſul like, the peoples wrong to right.
               
               
                  
                  This time alſo 
                        〈◊…〉
                      three hundreth yeare,L. Quintius Cincinnatus.
                  
                  And fifteene ſince 
                        〈◊…〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     rſt was founded,
                  An office was which onely one did beare,
                  Which ſeemes to be, on great authoritie grounded:
                  Dictator calde,Dictator, which office had endured now alreadie about 70. yeares. who cauſ'de to death be wounded
                  
                     Spurius Melius, who ſought to be Romes roye,
                  His houſe and name, for euer to deſtroye.
               
               
                  Two yeares next after gouernment againe,
                  To warlike Tribunes, came ſeruing in warre
                  Abroade, at home, as fortune liſt to raigne,
                  To ſtint all ſtriues of mutinie and iarre:
                  And to keepe off, the enemie a farre:
                  Which did endure about ſome ſeuentie,
                  In all which time, men worthie many were.
               
               
                  Amongſt them all one Furius Camille,
                  
                  For vertue paſt all thoſe, ſupplied that place,
                  For ſeruice good, he was requited ill:
                  He is exile, was foreſt to take his race,
                  Although ſometime he Conſull were in grace.
                  Ingratitude ſo raignes in peoples mindes,Ingratitude
                  
                  For doing good, with ill requitall findes.
               
               
                  Cauſeleſſe exilde, the Senate him recalde,
                  Whoſe vertue ſau'de all Rome from ſpoyle and ſacke
                  By French menBurguinions. Malice not of any continuance, but vanquiſhed by virtue. wrought, and therefore was reſtalde
                  In dignitie, for putting them to wracke.
                  Thus fortune plaies with men, now forth, then backe:
                  Dictator he was after in two yeares,
                  Vertue ſuppreſt, at length more great appeares.
               
               
                  
                  A worthy wight eke Manlius ycalde,
                  Soone after that, the Capitall did guard,
                  Againſt the French:The vertuous oftentimes are diffamed by enuie, & foyled. who welnie hap it thralde,
                  In doing which, he had an hard reward:
                  Suſpicion foule, his fame and glory bard:
                  (Sans proofe) ſuppoſ'd he would Romes ſtate diſtaine:
                  For which he was caſt from rocke Tarpeiane.
               
               
                  Decreed it was, not any of his race
                  Or noble houſe, thenceforth ſhould beare the name
                  Of Marc, which ſeem'de as then a great diſgrace:
                  But to rehearſe againebefore mentioned. 
                     Camillus fame,
                  Who ſeuen times of Tribune had the name:
                  To leade the Romaines vnto battell bolde,
                  Had good ſucceſſe, and died very olde.
               
            
            
               CAP. 3.
               Of Romes ſeueritie in iuſtice, of their conſtancie
for the common wealthes cauſe, the time of
Alexander the great his being, and of the Romaines
warres againſt Pirrhus,
King of Epirotes.About this time the care and charge of the commō wealth came from the Tribunes to Conſuls againe.
               
               
                  ROmes age was now three hundreth foureſcore,
                  Alſo nine yeares, when Captains there was found
                  Moſt valiant, wiſe, the like was nere before:
                  Who in aſſaults, their enemies brought to ground:
                  Themſelues not dreading death, or deadly wound.
                  Too long it were their names all to recite,
                  Who in defence of Romes eſtate did fight.
               
               
                  
                  And in the ſame vſ'de iuſtice for ſmall crime,
                  Amongſt all which, one of them doe I finde
                  
                     Torquatus nam'de, chiefe Conſull at that time:
                  His onely ſonne (a thing farre out of kinde)
                  He cauſ'd to die, for fightingout of the place he was charged to ſtand in. (vnaſsin'de)
                  Againſt his foe, which he orecame in fight,
                  Though well he did, law could not him acquight.
               
               
                  What lawes were made, were duely executed,
                  Such men they were, Heroicall of minde:
                  For daſtards they diſdain'd to be reputed,
                  For countries weale, dutie and loue did binde
                  Their deaths to ſeeke, rather then liues to finde:
                  For to aduance the Romaines ſtate and name,
                  Willing died many, to gaine perpetuall fame.
               
               
                  One Decius Mus, did vow to loſe his life
                  In fight againſt the Latines, Romaines foes,
                  For countries cauſe, which he perform'd, in ſtrife
                  With them that time, which made the Latines loſe
                  The field that day, receiuing bloodie blowes.
                  One of ſelfe name after44. yeares after in a battell againſt the french Senonois. his ſonne alſo
                  In ſuch like cauſe, his life did eke forgoe.
               
               
                  Although that he were Conſull at that time:
                  About which time as written I doe finde,
                  The Monarch great was then in chiefeſt prime:
                  
                     Macedo king,Alexander the great. ſtout Alexanders minde,
                  Whoſe conqueſts great, were but a puffe of winde:
                  For when he had maiſtred the world all,
                  At Babylon by poyſon had his fall.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the ſtate of Rome he did intend
                  To haue made warre, if Aſia once ſubdued,
                  Then next through all Europa to haue wend,In this time liued Homoer and Socrates.
                  
                  His hands yet more in blood to haue imbrued:
                  But fates by death his purpoſe did ſeclude,
                  At 12. yeares raigne, and 33. yeares age,
                  His part being playd he left vaine worlds ſtage.
               
               
                  His force againſt, (but death you heare forbad)
                  
                     Papirius was for Romaines chieftaine choſe,
                  Whoſe valiantneſſe great fame attayned had,
                  In giuing foyle to Samnites cruell foes
                  To Romaines, tho in danger like to loſe
                  Their army all, vnder theirT. Vetu
                           •
                        ius Caluin, and Spurius Poſt-humus albin. Cōſuls, who diſhonourably had taken truce with the enemie, greatly to the Romaines diſgrace. Conſuls twaine,
                  
                     Papirius force did victorie obtaine.
               
               
                  
                     Dictator he that office after bare,
                  And earneſt was in martiall diſcipline,
                  Expert, and quicke, in warlike feares his care
                  Was euermore, that ſouldiers ſhould encline,
                  Not nice to be, to lodge, or dyet fine,
                  But valiant, ſtout, and to endure all toyle,
                  Which made them oft to giue their foes the foyle.
               
               
                  In this time loe of Romes encreaſing fame,
                  In Saragoſſe theDioniſius the tyrant of Syracuſa. Tyrant then did raigne,
                  Whom to aduiſe with precepts good there came:
                  Diuine Plato who hardly ſcapt vnſlaine,
                  This tyrants acts was had in ſuch diſdaine:
                  In hiſtories who liſt to reade ſhall ſee,
                  His hatefull life vpheld by tyrannie.
               
               
                  
                  Strange were his acts, too many to be tolde
                  Here in this place: but for to make the reſt
                  To be ſuppoſde, from one I cannot hold:
                  Of Barbar would he nere be trim'd or dreſt,There are many wold truſt the barbar to trim their beards if they had any.
                  
                  For feare the razor ſhould his life areſt:
                  His daughters aye with nutſhels burning bright,
                  Should ſindge his beard, and ſo his head to dight.
               
               
                  But now returne to noble Rome againe.
                  After the death of Alexander great
                  Fortie two yeares, one Pirrhus that did raigne
                  
                     Epirotes King, the Romanes ſtate did threate:
                  His armie did their forces oft defeate,
                  Yet, ere two yeares were gone and ouerpaſt,
                  He ſought their peace and friendſhip at the laſt.
               
               
                  To which requeſt the Senate would haue graunted:
                  But Appius Claude full ſeauen times elected
                  Conſull, then old and blind, their purpoſe daunted,
                  Of cowardiſe the Senate he detected,
                  In publique ſpeech he Pirrhus peace reiected.
                  
                     Fabritius eke gainſt Pirrhus ſtout did ſtand,
                  Friendſhip with him to hold, would at no hand.
               
               
                  Though Pirrhus did to him great preſents ſend,
                  With offers mo, for to reuolt and turne
                  Vpon his ſide,Conſtancie to the commonweale in a Magiſ
                           ••
                        ate. 
                     Fabritius would not bend
                  For preſents, ne for promiſes, once ſpurne
                  Againſt Romes ſtate, ſuch loue in him did burne
                  To countries weale, (O patterne pretious ſtone
                  For this our age to looke, nay gaze vpon.)
               
               
                  
                  Yet more, what did this noble heathen knight?
                  (But Machiauels, from whom all miſchiefs ſprings,
                  Worke contrary) he voyd of hate or ſpight,The heathē ſcorned thē Machiauels deuiſes, now a daies too much raigning.
                  
                  No ſtabbing blades, or murdring dags in brings,
                  No banketting, nor phiſicke poyſonings:
                  Nor no ſuch parts, vile practiſes moſt euill,
                  Bred firſt in hell, inuented by the diuell.
               
               
                  But he ſends to (Romes enemie) Pirrhus king
                  A runnagate, a rogue, a periur'd ſlaue,
                  A ſouldier of his owne,Among Chriſtians now a daies treaſons are rewarded, and traitors ſuccoured. who promiſing
                  By poyſon, or ſome other meanes, in graue
                  The Romanes ſhould, Pirrhus, dead, ſee, or haue:
                  
                     Fabritius n'wold to this foule deede conſent,
                  But him faſt bound, to Pirrhus priſoner ſent.
               
               
                  When Pirrhus ſaw the Romanes friendſhip, hee
                  Could not obtaine by treaties, or reward,
                  Determined by warre the end to ſee:
                  With martiall men he ſtood vpon his guard,The firſt vſe in Italy of Ele
                           •
                        hants in warre.
                  
                  And Elephants to combat ſtrong prepar'd:
                  He was the firſt, to Italy that brought
                  Thoſe beaſts, who bare mē on their backs that fought.
               
               
                  But to encounter Pirrhus haughtie pride
                  And mightie force, a noble Romane knight,
                  
                     Dentatus cal'd, with Romanes him beſide,
                  For Romes eſtate, who did not flye, but fight.
                  They Pirrhus, and his power diſcomfit quight:
                  
                     Dentatus for his worthie valour ſhowne,
                  Had triumph braue, which through all Rome was knowne.
               
               
                  
                  Vntill this warre which Pirrhus laſtly made,
                  Fiue hundreth yeres the romaines had welnie
                  Broyles ſtill at home, and often ouerlayd
                  With neighbours nere,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         wars 
                           〈…〉
                        the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of 
                           〈◊〉
                        . yeares ere they made any conqueſtes abroad. people of Italie:
                  Doubtfull their chaunce, and fortunes they did trie:
                  The Latines oft, the Samnites, Toſcanes, other,
                  One gaining now, then looſing, ſtraight the tother.
               
               
                  But in the ende, their home warres brought to ceaſe,
                  Some vanquiſht, ſome by truce, and friendſhip bound;
                  Romes fame did now begin for to increaſe,
                  Againſt Carthage to make warre,Libia a prouince in Afrique, where Dido built Carthage. meanes they found:
                  A ſtately towne, ſeated on Libia ground:
                  More auncient t'was then Rome, by many yeares,
                  As by record of writers it appeares,
               
            
            
               CAP. 4.
               The firſt beginning of the warres with Carthage,
Attilius Regulus chiefe Captaine taken priſoner,
ſent to Rome to treate for peace, but perſwaded
warre, returning to Carthage
was put to death.
               
                  GReat was the fame throughout the world ſpread
                  Of mightie Carthage,Things at the higheſt, decaying higheſt. rich, exceeding fayre,
                  Whoſe wealth, and pompe, was cauſe her ruine bred,
                  At ſuch time when at higheſt in the ayre,
                  Her glorie grew, then fell it to appayre.
                  By which is ſhowne, all earthly honours ſtate,
                  Fall of it ſelfe, or elſe brought downe by fate.
               
               
                  
                  Chiefe leader firſt of Romaines to this warre,
                  
                     Attilius Regulus had the onely charge;
                  His army preſt, no miſhap could him barre,
                  On ſhipboard came, with many a boate, and barge,
                  And hoyſing ſayles, ſea roome, and winde at large,
                  Neede was there none, once for to ſhip an oare
                  Vntill ſuch time, they came to Afrique ſhore.
               
               
                  Where taking land, ſuch fauour fortune lent,
                  As in ſhort ſpace,Hauing firſt gotten a partie in the countrie. they many citties tooke:
                  With Carthage oft, all good haps backward went,
                  Their force decreaſd, and countrie them forſooke,
                  Their chieftaines ſlaine, their ſouldiers durſt not looke
                  Out at their gates, ſo hard they were beſet,
                  And to triumph, naught did the Romaines let.
               
               
                  From Carthage then Ambaſſadors did wend
                  (For one, that could an armie rule and guide)
                  To Lacedemon, who, did vnto them ſend
                  A captaine ſtout, in warlike feates well tryed
                  
                     Xantippo namde, who neuer once denyed
                  To fight for them, with all the skill he may,
                  And Romaines force, to giue repulſe or ſlay.
               
               
                  But here (behold) of warre, the lot, and chaunce,
                  The Romaines had the ouerthrow in deede;The chance of battaile vncertaine.
                  
                  They, who but late in triumphes did aduance,
                  Doe flye, lye ſlaine, and wounded, ſome doe bleede:
                  Who winneth oft, hath ſometimes euill ſpeede,
                  
                     Attilius tane, and many him beſide,
                  In priſon pent like fortune to abide.
               
               
                  
                  And Xantippo of Carthage for his deede,
                  Rewarded was, (wo worth wretches ingrate)
                  To giue him giftes,Ingratitude moſt vile. and honour, they agreede,
                  With louing ſpeech, as ſeemed his eſtate:
                  But little knew he, of their inward hate:
                  Towards his ſhip, they brought him with glad cheare,
                  And after, dealt with him as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  On ſhipboord come, they laude him to the skies,
                  And taking leaue,They murdered him, becauſe at his returne, the Lacedemonians ſhould not glorie in the victory gotten by their Captaine. doe leaue great giftes behinde:
                  The Maſter, they did charge in any wiſe,
                  All ſecretly t'agree vnto their minde;
                  This thing therefore vnto him they aſsignde,
                  That in the night, Xantippo the ſhould ſlea,
                  And after, drowne his carcaſſe in the ſea.
               
               
                  But (now) returne to Attilius againe,
                  Whom Carthage kept in priſon fure and faſt,
                  They did with him accord for to obtaine,
                  The Romaines loue, and peace now at the laſt:
                  And to forget all warre and diſcord paſt,
                  Ambaſſadors to Rome they ſtraight did ſend,
                  
                     Attilius with them muſt likewiſe wend.
               
               
                  But firſt they tooke an oath and made him ſweare,If the heathen held their worde in matters of life and death, how much more ought chriſtians in ſmaller moments.
                  
                  For to returne their priſoner backe againe:
                  (If loue and peace to them denyed were)
                  And at their pleaſure, ſo ſtill to remaine.
                  
                     Attilius here, all promiſe breakers ſtaine,
                  Whoſe vowes & words, are not performde in deedes;
                  Fayre flowers in ſhew, proue but ilſauouring weedes.
               
               
                  
                  Ah Regulus, thy fame ſhall aye endure,
                  Who free at home out of thine enmies hands,
                  Wouldſt not to liue in Rome, their peace procure,
                  But rather chuſe to lie in cruel bandes,
                  For Countries cauſe to leaue lyfe, goodes, and landes:
                  Thy conſtancie in word, and valiant minde,
                  A patterne is for men of noble kinde.
               
               
                  And where the Carthaginians, thought that he
                  Would treate for peace,And the exchange of priſoners on both ſides. perſwaded otherwiſe
                  The Senate, not to peace with them t'agree:
                  Warre noble Romaines, Carthage peace diſpiſe,
                  By league with them, no profite will ariſe
                  Romes ſtate vnto, they yeeld, and he againe
                  To Carthage went, and payd the price with paine:
               
               
                  Where being returned, he raunſome payd by death,
                  For countries cauſe, which he did not refraine:
                  Moſt cruelly they cauſd to ſtop his breath,
                  By rolling of a barrell downe a mayne
                  An hill moſt high, vnto his grieuous payne,
                  Sped thicke with nayles, where he was cloſde within,
                  Moſt cruelly piercing his tender skin.
               
               
                  During this warre, good hap the Romaines had
                  By Sea, at firſt, vnder their Conſull ſtout
                  
                     Duillius, made Carthaginians glad
                  To flie, andHanno, Carthage Captaine. 
                     Hanno put into a doubt:
                  Though truce of times was taken them throughout:
                  Both ſecretly committing vnder hand,
                  Vile partes at Sea, when peace was on the land.
               
               
                  
                  Yet in th'end, full peace tweene them tooke place:
                  But long it did not laſt, for vnquencht hate
                  Not cleane extinct, will ſecret worke diſgrace:
                  And,Daily practiſes of Machauellians ſo fares ſtill the courſe of worldly ſtate:
                  Enuie, friendlike, with fayre ſmoth ſpeech can mate
                  His mortall foe, and deadly foes, we ſee,
                  How ere in heart, outward ſeeme to agree.
               
               
                  Such entercourſe, tweene Rome, and Carthage was,
                  Each other to conuince by pollicie:
                  For twentie yeares, and vpwards, there did paſſe
                  Strange ſtratagems, with many ſecrets ſlye:
                  Ambition cauſde them many mayſtries trie,
                  That, in th'end the peace was broken quight,
                  And taking armes, the fall againe to fight.
               
            
            
               CAP. 5
               The ſecond warre of Carthage, by Publius Scipio,
Hannibal the Carthaginian Captaine in
Italie, his returne to Carthage, is
ouercome and flieth.
               
                  ABout this time Cornelius Scipio,
                  
                  Sardignia Iſles, and Corſica, he tooke
                  With other holdes the Carthaginians fro:
                  This ſecond war, moſt nere their welfare ſhooke,
                  That forſt they were about them for to looke:
                  But Hannibal, who now their chiefetaine was,
                  Brought them great hope, and much relieu'd their caſe.
               
               
                  
                  The cittie Sagunt, he beſiegde moſt ſtrong:
                  Came into Spayne, and after into Fraunce,
                  And with his armie, marched all among
                  The AlpieMountaines parting France and Italie, of a wonderfull height. hilles and laſtly did aduaunce
                  His enſignes, ſpread (ſo fortune leades the daunce)
                  In Italy, the Romaines to purſue,
                  Vext with homeBy the countries about Rome. warres, which done, began a new
               
               
                  Stout Hannibal his warre; of which to reade
                  His battailes three, againſt the Romaines won,
                  Shall ſee, and heare of many a worthy deede,
                  At large of him,Three times he gaue the Romaines the repulſe▪ and in the fourth, had a moſt mightie victorie. by Rome, and Carthage done,
                  But Hannibal, did cauſe his enmies ſhun
                  Three times the field, the names, of places three:
                  Tecyn, Traſimene, the third, floud Trebie.
               
               
                  
                     Quinbus Fabius, Dictator was create,
                  The Carthaginians force to ſtop or ſtaye,
                  His valour did withſtand their running ſtate,
                  And Hannibal a while did keepe at baye:
                  But after that againe, held on their way
                  To Cannas field, where Romaines him withſtoode,
                  And, where the earth, was glutted with their blood.
               
               
                  Such ſlaughter there, the Romaines did ſuſtaine,
                  As put all Rome, into a wondrous fray,
                  Deuoyd of hope,Publius Scipio, the ſonne of Cornelius Scipio, before rehearſt. for euer to regaine,
                  So great a loſſe, in minde to flie away,
                  And leaue the citie at vncertaine ſtay:
                  But Scipio young, of courage wiſe, and ſtout,
                  Both comfort gaue, and draue away all doubt.
               
               
                  
                  Now Hannibal whom fortune fauour'd ſo,
                  Had at command the countrie allHannibal had al Italy at commā
                        dement. The countrie being fertile they ſurfeted with the fruites, ſo that many dyed. about;
                  The ſummer paſt, to winter he did go
                  To Capua, with Carthaginian rout,
                  Where idlenes infected valour ſtout:
                  Abundance bred their bane, cloyd with delight:
                  His armie all was welny orethrowne quight.
               
               
                  But whil'ſt he lay within Italia ſoyle,
                  He Romanes force had welny vanquiſht quight:
                  Yet Aſdrubal receiu'd a mightie foyleNeere to the floud Metaurus by M. Liuius and C. C. Nero.
                  
                  By Romanes Conſuls, that with him did fight,
                  Bringing new ſuccours for to reuenge the ſpight
                  To Carthage done, whil'ſt Hannibal with chance,
                  By fortune might againſt Romes walles aduance.
               
               
                  ButPublius. 
                     Scipio this while ſtout, bold and wiſe,
                  Whoſe valour great, is ſpoken of before,
                  Had good ſucceſſe inWhich place was aſſignde to him for the warre. About this time his father and vncle were ſlaine in lberia in the Carthagiman wars. Spayne, whoſe fame did riſe
                  Throughout all Rome: and to augment it more,
                  In getting Spayne, which place his father bore,
                  And vncle both, to Rome did come at laſt,
                  Where for deſert, in Conſulſhip was plaſt.
               
               
                  His noble mind, bent to his cities good,
                  Required Afrique might be him aſsignde,
                  For publique weale to looſe his life and bloud:
                  But his deſire impediments did finde:
                  Old Fabius ſharply did reſiſt his mind,One who had bin oft Conſull.
                  
                  Who gaue aduiſe rather at home to ſtay,
                  Gainſt Hannibal with force to take the way.
               
               
                  
                  But Scipio then contrarying Fabius will,
                  Declar'd his mind in open audience
                  The Senate too, to grant him their good will:
                  For it will proue by good experience,Deſire to reuenge his vncle & fathers death.
                  
                  In Afrique if we fight for Romes defence,
                  Neede will driue Carthage call home Hannibal:
                  
                  Who it denies, I know ſuch hap will fall.
               
               
                  For he who is their chiefeſt hope and ſtay,
                  And he on whom their ſaftie doth depend,
                  Long time they will, ne can, miſſe him away:
                  So ſhall our warres in Italy haue end:
                  To his aduiſe the Senate did attend,
                  Debating much, ſome loth,Of the Senate. yet was aſsignde
                  For Carthage warre, which greatly pleaſde his minde.
               
               
                  But firſt toThe common paſſage into Afrique & nereſt from Italy, where he was but ſlenderly furniſhed at firſt for ſuch a war. 
                     Scicil Iſle muſt take his courſe,
                  And there prepare to furniſh full his neede,
                  To rig vp ſhips, t'abide the waters ſourſe:
                  Preſt in each poynt, away go'th he with ſpeede,
                  Though all the Senate ſcarſe thereto agreede:
                  Yet loe this warre grew to ſo glorious fame,
                  As none ſo much encreaſt the Romanes name.
               
               
                  So much preuail'd Scipio his vertue there,
                  As Carthaginians gaine to loſſe did fall:
                  By meanes whereof ſo hard beſet they were,
                  As Carthage towne was welny brought in thrall,
                  Enforced to reuoke home Hannibal.
                  
                  The Senat now found Scipios ſaying true,
                  Away he went that meant Rome to ſubdue.
               
               
                  
                  Who then had for the ſpace of ſixteene yeares,
                  Infeſted all Italia about:
                  Put Rome and Romaines oft in deadly feares:When he was ſent for he had his armie before Rome walles.
                  
                  And brought their ſtate to many a dreadfull doubt,
                  Deliuered now from troubles which did ſprout
                  And ſpring each day, by meanes of ſuch a foe,
                  
                     Hannibal gone ioy did expell all woe.
               
               
                  But ere that he from Italie did paſſe,
                  Carthage to Rome Ambaſſadors did ſend
                  For to haue peace,Subtil practiſes vſed generally now a daies which thing concluded was:
                  Yet ſecretly their warres they did intend,
                  Each kinde of way they did repayre and mend,
                  Their armies that did armes and victuals want,
                  Which warres among them had made very ſcant.
               
               
                  But Hannibal no ſooner was arriu'd,
                  At Carthage tho,Hannibal, a 
                           •
                        worne enemie to the Rom. by a vow at nine yeres of age, in the time of Amilcar his father. but did diſlike the peace:
                  Of hope he ſhould be ſure to be depriu'd,
                  And purpoſe too, if that the warres ſhould ceaſe:
                  Diſpleaſde he ſeemde, but did his force encreaſe.
                  Braue Scipio to meete vpon the field,
                  Whoſe noble minde did neuer meane to yeeld.
               
               
                  Their Armies tweene, light skirmiſh oft did chaunce:
                  
                     Hannibal was for victuals hard beſet,
                  He who but late to warre would needes aduaunce:
                  Secret ſeekes peace, prouiſions for to get,
                  Obtaind, performde, conditions did not let
                  On Carthage ſide, but people all cride out
                  We are betrayde among theſe champions ſtout.
               
               
                  
                  And iarring thus themſelues full oft among,Diſcord the ſigne of deſtruction, the plagues of common weales, and priuate meſnages.
                  
                  Now taking truce, and then doe breake againe:
                  They crie a freſh, theſe Captaines doe vs wrong,
                  Whoſe outrage rulers ſeeke for to reſtraine:
                  Things running thus, the magiſtrates are fayne
                  The peace to breake, commaunding Hannibal
                  
                  To trie by fight, what fortune will them fall.
               
               
                  Both armies lay each in th'others ſight:
                  KingMaſsiniſſa, a King in the countrey, betrothed to the daughter of Aſdrubal, giuē by the Carthagi. firſt to him, and after to Syſax, another King in the countrey there, to him maried, and after, Maſsiniſſa maried her againe, whē for feare to be taken of the Romaines, poyſoned her ſelfe. 
                     Maſsiniſsa was on Romaines ſide:
                  Who league with Scipio made before in ſpight
                  Of Carthage, who denyed him his bride:
                  (A noble mayde in prime of beauties pride)
                  Firſt his from them, but after did her mary
                  Another to, the cauſe that made him vary.
               
               
                  This ciuill ſtrife with many others moe,
                  The citie in, and countrie all about,
                  Was cauſe at laſt of Carthage ouerthrow:
                  In ſteede of reaſon, will, did rule the rout:
                  Tweene magiſtrates alſo foule hate did ſprout,
                  Rage, inſolence, and often death moſt vile:
                  Thus foule reuenge did high, and low beguile.
               
               
                  But Hannibal hearing of Romaines ſtrength,
                  Of Scipioes bountie, clemencie, and fame,
                  His noble minde, with more, ſought meanes at length
                  To ſpeake with him ere they to battaile came,
                  It chaunſt, and loe, furie ſeemde to enflame
                  
                     Hannibal, who, in wordes was ſomewhat tart:
                  Threatning each other, a ſunder they doe part.
               
               
                  
                  The time being come when both their armies met,
                  Great was the ſlaughter made on either ſide:
                  But Romaines did the victorie there get,
                  Making their foes to dye with woundes full wide.
                  
                     Hannibal fled, he durſt not longer bide:
                  The loſſe ſo great, that Carthaginians craue
                  Peace once againe, with Romaines for to haue.
               
               
                  
                     Scipio agreed, Romes Senate did conſent:
                  Whileſt peace endured, many things did chaunce,
                  Here to recyte, too long were verament;
                  But Romaines did their honors ſtill aduaunce,
                  And Carthage welfare, backwardly did glaunce.
                  
                     Scipio to Rome returnde, did triumph gayne,
                  And for ſurname, was called Africane:
                  
               
               
                  For that thoſe warres attayned had ſuch fame,
                  And profite great brought vnto Romaines ſtate,
                  The countrey whole had Africa to name
                  By him ſubdued, ordeynde thereto by fate:
                  Thus time we ſee,The nature of time. brings all things to their date,
                  Deſtroying oft, and raiſing vp againe,
                  Yeelding ſome ſtore, others doth pinch with paine.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 6.
               The warres of the Romaines with the Macedonians,
the conqueſt of Aſia, the death of Scipio
African, Romes Ambaſſador putteth the great King
of Aſſiria in feare with his ſpeech, the conquering
of Macedonia and
Dalmatia.
               
                  PEace on this wiſe, again to Carthage granted:
                  Rome had home-broyles, warres greater outward grew.
                  The Macedonian King gainſt Romaines vanted,
                  Whoſe proude attempt, with Grecians to ſubdue,
                  
                     Quintus Flaminius, led forth the warlike crue
                  Of Romaines, tho ſubduing that ſame King,
                  And Grecians, all ſubiects to Rome did bring.
               
               
                  He charge gaue to this King of Macedo,
                  
                     Phillip by name, neuer once warre to moue
                  Gainſt Romaine ſtate,Nor to paſſe the limites of his countrey. which he agreed vnto,
                  Performing it with dutie and with loue:
                  To Romaines he a friend did after proue,
                  For ayde he gaue with all his power and might,
                  When Romaines would at any neede to fight,
               
               
                  
                     Antiochus the great Aſsiria king,
                  Came with greatInto Greece. power, the Romaines to withſtand:
                  This Phillip then, moſt willingly did bring
                  His force, and ioyn'de with thoſe of Romaines band:
                  
                     Glabrio for Rome obtain'd the vpper hand.
                  
                     Antiochus fled to Egypt ward with ſpeede,
                  Rayſing more force, to doe ſome other deede.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Phillip, and he (t'is ſaid) deſcended were
                  From thoſe, who, when great Alexander dead,
                  In kingdomes did diuide his whole Empiere,Ciuill diſcord, the ouerthrow of the Macedonian Monarchie.
                  
                  Partage of which, great warres, and diſcord bred,
                  Betweene all thoſe to that ſucceſsion led:
                  With cruell fightes, each other long did thrall,
                  As laſt, the Romaines came t'enioy them all.
               
               
                  Thus Romes triumphing glorie high did growe,
                  Her power was great by ſea, and eke by land:
                  With ſack, and ſpoyles, of cities they did flowe:
                  Nations not any, might Romaines force withſtand,
                  Kings, and countries, fat off did at their hand
                  Deſire ayde, amongſt all which did come
                  Ambaſſadors from Egypt vnto Rome.
               
               
                  Praying to guarde young Ptolomé their King,
                  Now vext with warres, and like to haue the chafe,
                  With power which Antiochus did bring,
                  From Kingly ſeate, and crowne him to diſplace:
                  The Senate gaue conſent to right his caſe,
                  Sending vnto Antiochus, to ceaſe
                  His warre, and ſuffer Ptolomé liue in peace:
               
               
                  Which he obeyde, but yet to haue a fleece
                  Of Romaines ſpoyle, and to reuenge late ſpight,
                  Did leade along his armie into Greece,
                  Procurde by meanes of Hannibal, in flight
                  From Carthage force, by Scipio put to flight
                  (As is rehearſt before) from whence he fled,
                  
                     Antiochus too, with ſuccour to be ſped.
               
               
                  
                  But into Greece, the Romanes Armie brought,
                  Encountred him,Antiochus. with whom `was Hannibal:
                  
                  Orethrew thē both, & brought their powers to naught:
                  Here Carthage captaine had a ſecond fall,
                  
                     Antiochus eke receiued a farther thrall:
                  By ſea alſo, Rome got the vpper hand,
                  Expeld him thence into Aſsiria land.
               
               
                  
                     Lucius Scipio, was chiefe this warre that led,
                  Brother vnto Scipio calde African:
                  
                  And for becauſe ſo happilie he ſped,
                  The ſurname of Aſiatique he wan:
                  But ſpeake againe of Scipio African,
                  
                  Lieutenant to his brother in this war,
                  At his returne to Rome, there fell a iar.
               
               
                  The Tribunes of the people,Enuie the enemie to all vertue. did moleſt
                  Through enuie (ſure) the glorie he had won:
                  By meanes whereof, in quiet for to reſt,
                  From Rome he went, (their mallice for to ſhun)
                  ToA houſe or manor of his in the countrey. Lyterne, till their heate of rage was done:
                  But there as ſome doe ſay (ſuch was his chaunce)
                  This worthy man, death wounded with his launce.
               
               
                  Whoſe loſſe full many did lament, (no doubt)
                  So braue a man to dye at ſuch an age,
                  For fiftie yeares he was not all full out:
                  Thus doe we ſee, the valiant bold and ſage,
                  When time brings death, cannot withſtand his rage,
                  Rome happie thou, to breede ſo braue a wight,
                  Vnhappie folke, his virtue ſo to quight.
               
               
                  
                  Hereby is ſeene the fruites of enuie ſtill,
                  Who ne're workes good, but euill euermore:
                  Virtue ſhe ſeekes for to deſtroy and kill,
                  Things that are whole, ſhe hurtes, and maketh ſore,
                  Thoſe that are good, the enuious doe abhore:
                  Which thing hath been, and euer more will be,
                  Bright virtue blamde, by foule iniquitie.
               
               
                  Where ſtate and welth increaſeth day by day,
                  By valour of the vertuous, and the ſtout,
                  Enuie there rootes, and takes ſuch hold and ſtay,
                  In ſecret wiſe, brauing among the rout:
                  And with pretence each cauſe is good, (no doubt)
                  Infecting ſore ſuch places that ſo floriſh,
                  Vnder the cloake of virtue, vice doth nouriſh.
               
               
                  With pollicie, and practiſe ſlie, they frame
                  Their braſen face, and adders tongues to bite:
                  They gloſe, and faine, and flatter without ſhame,
                  With forged lies, they faith, and truth doe ſpite,
                  And where as once their venym vile doth light,
                  They doe not ceaſe, to puffe with poyſoned breath,
                  Like Cockatrice, to bring them to their death.
               
               
                  (Alas the while) ſo Rome did Scipio loſe:
                  During which time, Aetolia people were
                  Taken, to be the Romanes vtter foes:
                  ButMarcus Fuluius. 
                     Fuluius, whoſe nobleneſſe was cleare,
                  Subdued and brought them vnder Romanes feare:
                  Thus ſtill their fame, did euery day increaſe,
                  Held warres abroad, at home the liu'd in peace.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Antiochus, (who late rehearſt before)
                  To whom for ayde, ſtout Hannibal did flie:
                  Enforſt to keepe his countrey, and no more
                  His fortune, with the Romanes force to trie:
                  His kingly life, away from him did hye,
                  Vnto the King (then) of Bythynia
                  
                     Hannibal went, for ayde on him to ſtay:
               
               
                  Which thing when as the Romanes vnderſtoode,
                  To Pruſias ſent, (Bythinia King ſo hight)
                  To render him, it ſhould be for his good,
                  If not, t'were meanes to worke him great diſpight,
                  The Romanes would redreſſe the wrong with might:
                  Thus Hannibal, was nere his ending dayes,
                  Whoſe noble acts won euerlaſting praiſe,
               
               
                  And fame beſide, for euer during ſtill:
                  But foule diſpayre, (did much appayre the ſame)
                  In ougly ſhape who now came him vntill:
                  Monſter moſt vile, whoſe actes aye end with ſhame,
                  With in his minde ſuch deepe conceites did frame,
                  As they aloneDiſpayre in diſtreſſed mindes, ſolitarie are not alone. together, muſing ſate
                  Of glorie paſt, and now his wretched ſtate.
               
               
                  Hope baniſht was, diſpayre did bring in feare,
                  And he fear'd moſt to fall in Romanes hands:
                  When him before,Infernall plagues to earthly mindes diſtreſt. moſt ougly ſhapes appeare:
                  Hell ſeemed looſe, and round about him ſtands,
                  Griefe, ſorrow, care, thought, miſerie with bandes,
                  Ruine, decaye, woe, wrack, and endles ſtrife,
                  Slaunder, diſfame, and ſhame to rid his life.
               
               
                  
                  Enuie, reuenge, hate, diſcord, and diſdayne,
                  Mallice, and ſcorne, pride would not be behinde:
                  The pride of Rome ſo pincht his heart with paine,
                  Becauſe reuenge did not fall to his minde:
                  And now diſpayre againe his eyes did blinde,
                  (When as theſe furies, had his ſpirites poſſeſt,
                  More greater yet, t'augment his great vnreſt.)
               
               
                  Shewed him his armies, and his victories,
                  His glorious pompes,The remē
                        brance of pleaſures paſt, pincheth when penurie is victor. his triumphes, wealth and all
                  Carthage great loſſe, how Rome did him diſpiſe:
                  The wracke eke of his brother Aſdrubal,
                  
                  After all this, his owne miſhaps, and fall
                  From ſo great height, and laſtly, now to light
                  Into their hands, whom he did alwaies ſpight.
               
               
                  Midnight was come, and euery thing at reſt:
                  When ſightes yet ſtrange, more monſtrous did appeare,
                  (As t'is with all by foule diſpayre poſſeſt:
                  Toſt, and turmoyld, with horror, dread, and feare,)
                  And long before the day gan for to cleare,
                  In viſion ſaw great battailes, thouſands ſlaine,
                  Huge heapes of dead, whoſe blood the earth did ſtaine
               
               
                  Before him ſeem'd t'appeare great flames of fire,
                  Where in diſpayre bad him goe end his life,
                  Murder faſt by (inflamde with rage and ire,)
                  To kill him, readie with a bloodie knife:
                  Waters to drowne himſelfe and rid all ſtrife:
                  The Romaines hands t'eſcape, there is no hope;
                  Hang thy ſelfe (quoth diſpayre) here is a rope.
               
               
                  
                  Beholde this chamber wherein thou doeſt lye:Actes of diſtreſſed ſoules, poſſeſt by deſpayre, running through their ſences.
                  
                  A thouſand wayes there is to end thy woe,
                  See there a tower ſtately, ſtanding hye,
                  Thy ſelfe from top thereof thou ſoone mayſt throw,
                  Here, ſtab thy ſelfe thy valour greate to ſhow:
                  Or cut thy throate, or braynes do knocke from head,
                  No ioyes in lyfe, in beſt caſe when th'art dead.
               
               
                  Diſpayre at length the victory did gayne,
                  And Hanniball did geeue conſent to dye:
                  Diſtreſſed he paſt hope, did thinke life vaine,
                  With ſhame to liue, that late in honours hye
                  Did ſit, and now to dwell in miſerie,
                  With them who were his cruell deadly foes:
                  He prayed diſpayre ſome way elſe to diſpoſe.
               
               
                  His wretched life, thoſe former meanes rehearſt
                  He liked not, (when ſighing breath'd for ayre:
                  Both head and heart, of Hannibal quick pearſt)
                  Then what ſaieſt thou vnto a potion fayre?
                  A bolle of wine,Hannibal poyſoned himſelfe. carrouſe, drinke to deſpayre,
                  Sorrowes are drie; this draught will quench all ſtrife:
                  Thus poyſoned, he did leaue his loathed life.
               
               
                  Ah wretched ſtate, vaine worldes vading ioyes,
                  High for to be, auailes nothing at all,
                  Thy pompes and glorie, are but trifeling toyes,
                  For record take we, worthy Hannibal,
                  
                  And many moe whom fortune hath made fall:
                  She lifteth high, and ſmileth, when a frowne,
                  Makes Ceſar hop beſides his ſeate and crowne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Antiochus dead,The ambition of antiochus, King of Aſſiria, who alſo would gouerne the King of Egipt, being but yet a childe, minding thereby to obtaine the Kingdome to himſelfe. 
                     Antiochus againe
                  Succeeded him, who likewiſe vndertooke
                  In Egypt, chiefe next to the King to raigne,
                  Yet vnder age, his ſtate to ouer looke:
                  But th'Egiptians, would not this thing brooke,
                  They ſeeing his ſleights, and where about he went,
                  To Rome in haſt, once more for ſuccour ſent.
               
               
                  
                     Popilius Lenas charge the Senate fro,
                  Ambaſſage went, with that great King to ſpeake,
                  By Romanes power, he coniur'd him to goe,
                  And his great ſiege from Alexandria breake;
                  
                     Antiochus fear'd himſelfe to be too weake,
                  Deſired time, to be aduiſ'd thereon
                  To anſwer him, to ſtay, or elſe be gone.
               
               
                  
                     Popilius then a rod held in his hand,
                  With haughtie looke beheld the King in face,
                  And round about, in place where he did ſtand,
                  A circle on the ground therewith did trace:
                  
                     Antiochus (quoth he) ſay on a pace,
                  Ere I out of this circle ſet one foote;
                  Straight anſwer me, delayes ſhall nothing boote.
               
               
                  This Scarbrough warning put the King in feare,
                  Which made him to Popilius ſtraight agree,Romes Ambaſſador, feareth the great King of Aſſiria with a word.
                  
                  His ſiege forthwith in all the haſt to reare,
                  And Egypt all, to leaue in vnitie.
                  By writers loe theſe things recorded be,
                  To ſhew what might, and rule, the Romanes bare
                  By deſtinie, or through their vertues rare.
               
               
                  
                  For at this time, their rule did ſtretch ſo farre,
                  Inuading ſtill the world euery where,
                  Who did not yeeld themſelues, the rod of warre
                  Should draw out blood, and bring them vnder feare:
                  The world, they ſeemde in ſunder for to teare,
                  Raigning alone, as ſoueraignes, and chiefe,
                  As after here, it ſhall be ſhewed in briefe.
               
               
                  
                     Phillip King of Macedo (who but late
                  Rehearſed is) ambitiouſlie now bent,
                  To liue as King within his owne eſtate,
                  Did thinke himſelfe too ſtraight ſhut vp and pent,
                  Of promiſe made before time did relent:
                  League with the Romanes brake, and purpoſde warre
                  If he had liu'd, but death his courſe did barre.
               
               
                  But (loe) his ſonne,His breach of promiſe puniſhed after in his ſonne, called Perſeus, ſolicited by his nobles, after his fathers death, to take in hand this warre. that next him did ſucceede,
                  Incited oft to take that cauſe in hand,
                  As heyre vnto the warre, at laſt agreed,
                  Of Macedons he raiſde a mightie band:
                  
                     Emilius Paulus, did his power withſtand,
                  Orethrew his hoaſt, and priſoner tooke him tho
                  With wife, and children, greatly to their woe.
               
               
                  Return'd to Rome, triumphing with his praye,
                  Where, for ſurname, Macedonique was cal'd
                  Still after that, and from that ſelfe ſame daye,
                  Macedo ſtate to Rome was full inſtal'd,
                  Dalmatia after, alſo was enthral'd
                  By Naſica, Cornelius, ſo namde,
                  Whoſe force was ſuch, as he thoſe people tamde.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 7.
               The third and laſt warre of Carthage, when
the City was quight ſubuerted and razed
to the ground.
               
                  WHen time by fates, vnto his period reacheth,
                  To top of wealth, or bottome of all woe,
                  A rule moſt firme vnto the world teacheth,
                  Nature, ne arte, can alter or forgoe,
                  Vnleſſe that he moſt high diuine ſay no:
                  Who ruleth fates, who guideth time and all,
                  Who builded firſt, and laſt ſhall make to fall.
               
               
                  Sixe hundreth yeares and fower (now) it was,
                  Since building firſt of noble Rome began.
                  Carthage once more deuiſde to bring to paſſe,
                  To regaine that, which late the Romaines wan:
                  Force they prepare, with all the ſpeede they can,
                  Their neighbours vexe, withWho at this inſtant gaue vnto thē a great ouerthrow, which weakened them ſore to withſtand this laſt warre. 
                     Maſsiniſſa King,
                  The Romaines friend, and thus themſelues they bring
               
               
                  To vtter ruine: for now it was debated
                  In Senate houſe, to ſaue, or to deſtroy
                  Carthage, when at the laſt it was dilated
                  For Romaines weale, to make cleare all annoy,
                  After that time chiefe, magiſtrate, or roy,
                  Should gouerne more, or dwelling there be found,
                  Commiſsion was, to raze it quite to th'ground.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Bellonaes, face now fround with tyrannie,
                  Behold th'ambitions, rightly in their kinde,
                  That to aſpire, regardes no miſerie,
                  Or woes, or wracke of others, ſo their minde
                  
                     Ambition is neuer ſufficed till death. Suffiſed be, which with a blaſt of winde
                  Is ouerturnde, and vaniſheth away,
                  Not knowing how ſoone may come their own decay.
               
               
                  But ſuch the nature and condition, is
                  Of earthly mindes, t'enioy what they delight,
                  Forward to run,The wiſe foreſeeth deſtinie but fooles fall in their folly. not thinking ought amiſſe,
                  Should them betide, or once their purpoſe ſpight,
                  And certes we ſee, oft times doth run out right
                  Without a ſtop, or any ſtay at all.
                  Thoſe things decreed, by deſtenie to fall.
               
               
                  As here the Romaines, purpoſing this war.
                  All doubtes debated, into Afrique ſent
                  To Libia coaſt, when Carthage ſaw a far
                  Romes force, and knowing the Senates full intent,
                  Amazde they were, now this, then that way bent:
                  One part reſolu'd their cittie to defend,
                  With fame, their liues, and miſeries to end.
               
               
                  The league of peace ſome ſeeke to hold, their ire
                  Some ſue t'aſſwage, and to that ende doe make
                  Long ſuites and plaintes:A great nū
                        ber of their Children according to the laſt trues. (and laſt with teares deſire)
                  Bringing pledges, in fauour them to take,
                  But all in vaine, denied, with griefe they quake
                  Diſtreſſed thus, prouiſions all were ſcant,
                  Of friends abroad, they had as great a want.
               
               
                  
                  Onely a few, but diſcord cauſ'd their wrack,
                  When warres firſt gan, then brake they vnitie:
                  One ſide, forwards did draw, the other back,
                  Which thing now laſt, wrought all their miſerie:
                  Famine, with plagues, murder, and trecherie,
                  Which to recure, was now (alas) too late,
                  When firſt their folly, laſt brought their finall fate.
               
               
                  Cenſorino, Martio, and Mamilio were
                  
                  Chiefe in this warre, who carthage firſt beſet:
                  Whoſe fortunes, for the ſpace of foure yere
                  Was loſſe moſt part, ſmall honour did they get:
                  Though toyle they tooke, in colde, in drie, and wet,
                  Till Scipio young, who was th'adopted ſonne
                  Of Scipio, that before had Afrique wonne.
               
               
                  Seem'd for to tread, and trace, the ſteps aright
                  Of his great Vnckle, or elſe his Graundſire:
                  For in theſe Carthage laſt warres, did acquight
                  Himſelfe ſo well, the army did admire
                  His ſeruice there, a Trybune then no higher,
                  Whoſe virtue did mongſt them ſuch glorie gaine,
                  As ſole Empire, by Romes voyce did obtaine
               
               
                  Ore all th'army at fiege of Carthage tho:The people deſired him for hope onely of the former, Scipio who conquered Aſtique before.
                  
                  But thereto would the Senat not aſſent,
                  The people by treaties deſired ſo,
                  Or elſe perforce, would cauſe them to conſent:
                  Clayming olde cuſtome, laſtly were content,
                  Applauding much, their captaine newly choſe,
                  For Rome to fight gainſt their long mortall foes.
               
               
                  
                  When Scipio (thus) had of this warre full charge,The true patterne of a moſt noble Captaine.
                  
                  Within the campe, he framed orders new:
                  In friendly ſort, he made vnto them large
                  A ſpeech, commending of their valor true,
                  Eke what requir'd, in ſouldiers to be due:
                  Purging from them the vicious, idle all,
                  Who through corruption, might th'armie thrall.
               
               
                  Which done preparde by ſea, and eke by land,
                  For the aſſault, which to defend, with might
                  The Carthaginians, loſt time on no hand,
                  But fought, and wrought t'offend by day and night▪
                  
                  To Romanes they did many waies worke ſpight:
                  But all in vaine, ſince fates would haue it ſo,
                  That Romanes force, the citie ſhould o'rethro.
               
               
                  But like as time of euery thing makes end,
                  So now of Carthage, faſt came on the fine,
                  Beſiegde with out, with in themſelues they bend
                  To iarre (alas) of vtter ruine a ſigne:Where Magiſtrates are not obeyed with a confuſion commeth finall deſtruction.
                  
                  Strength fayld, and with diſpayre, they gan to pine:
                  Yet long, and oft, they did the Romanes grieue,
                  Whom Scipio by his valor did relieue.
               
               
                  Succour by land and ſea, from them he tooke,
                  Brake downe the walles;The end of diſobedience to the Magiſtrates in a common welth, is many miſeries. entred the citie in:
                  When terror (loe) the Carthaginians ſhooke,
                  Like people mad, to runne the doe begin,
                  In deſperate caſe, to looſe all, or all win,
                  Killing, and kild, at length the Romanes gaine,
                  The maiſtrie, and the citie to obtaine.
               
               
                  
                  Which to beholde, what heart but would lament,
                  To ſee how Carthage ſtoode in wofull caſe,
                  Her ſtately fort cal'd Birſa, torne, and rent,
                  And houſes ſackt before the owners face:
                  Huge flames of fire, riſing in many a place,
                  A woefull thing for to beholde with eye,
                  Smoake dim the ayre, and flames to reach the skie.
               
               
                  Great was the ſlaughter,The nature of fury once conqueror. made by Romaines all,
                  In euery ſtreete, ran murder, blood, and fire,
                  The ſillie babes, from mothers breaſtes doe fall,
                  Husbands, and wiues a ſunder doe retyre,
                  Brothers, and friendes, and ſiſters, pay the hyre
                  Of death, (alas) a griefe it was to ſee,
                  The cities ruine, and their great miſerie.
               
               
                  Some with the ſword, ſome midſt the flame to burne:
                  A ſpectacle moſt horrible to rue,
                  Both magiſtrates,The miſerie of diſordered people, euen their owne enemies, do often lament to beholde. and people, dying, mourne,
                  Of former welfare, their ilfare laſt to view:
                  
                     Scipio himſelfe ſhed teares, with griefe that grew,
                  To ſee the ruine of that citie olde,
                  Late rich and fayre, welnie laid flat on molde.
               
               
                  Continued had ſeuen hundreth yeares and more,
                  Flouriſht moſt braue, with plentie of each thing,
                  And had commaund,On earth, nothing permanent. ore kingdomes, cities ſtore,
                  Rul'de eke by ſea, as chiefe imperiall King,
                  With ſtore of ſhips, that riches home did bring,
                  All in ſhort ſpace conſumde, and ruinde quight,
                  Subiect vnto blinde fortunes cruell ſpight.
               
               
                  
                  Which well may ſhew, the ſtate of kingdomes all,
                  Though nere ſo rich, ſo populous and ſtout:
                  But fortune can, and hath made them to fall,
                  And welnie razde, both names and places out,
                  Recount we will, ſome chiefe among the rout;
                  What is become, of Troyes pompe and pride,
                  Of Priam King, and all his power beſide.
               
               
                  Aſsiria that Monarchie ſo great,
                  The Perſian, Mede, and Macedonian King
                  In battaile that Darius ſtout did beate,
                  And all the world, did ſubiect to him bring,
                  Carthage may here draw with them in one ſtring:
                  Thus worketh time, change, and chance, of each thing,
                  Baſe, high to raiſe, more faſter downe to bring.
               
               
                  Thus Carthag (loe) came to her finall ende,
                  Razde to the ground; to Rome rich ſpoyles were brought
                  That were of choyſeThe image of Apollo, of fine gold pillars of golde, of the waight of 1000. talents, with innumerable other ſpoyles, beſides thoſe taken by the ſouldiers. and Scipio eke did ſend
                  Scicilians too, braue ſtatutes finely wrought,
                  And ornaments, the Carthaginians, cought
                  Long ſince from them, which antique were and olde,
                  Which they by force, from them alſo did holde.
               
               
                  In Rome was ioy for this great victorie,
                  With high and low, Scipio did triumph gayne,
                  His prayſes were extended to the skie,
                  With peoples voyce, and ſound of trumpes amayne,
                  For ſurname (alſo) was giuen him Africane:
                  
                  Becauſe an end he made of ſo great warre,
                  Whereby Romes gloriy ſtretcht exceeding farre.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 7.
               The conqueſt of Achaia, the razing of the city
Corinth, warres in Portugall, Spayne, and with
the ſlaues in Scicilia, the razing
of Numanitia in
Spaine.
               
                  WHen all theſe warres of Carthage ended were,
                  Th'acayan people gathered head amaine,
                  In Greece, and there an armie they did reare
                  Againſt Romes ſtate, whoſe brauing to reſtraine,
                  
                     Lucius Mummius Conſull, leaue did gaine
                  To fight with them, of Romes force was he chiefe,
                  Who them o'rethrew vnto their paine and griefe.
               
               
                  Their countrey ſubiect vnto Rome they yeelded,
                  Corinth chiefe citie principall of Greece:
                  Hundreth of yeares full many, had been builded,
                  With ſack and ſpoyle,Lucius Mummius, had for ſurname Achaique. his ſouldiers did it fleece,
                  Burning the ſame, left ſtanding not one peece:
                  And after razde the ſame quight with the ground,
                  No dwelling left, in it for to be found.
               
               
                  About which time, in Portugall there was,
                  A perſon ſtout, Viriatus cal'd by name,
                  But meane of birth, yet ſo it came to paſſe,
                  That from a ſhepheard,Portugall ſubiect to Rome. grew to ſo great fame,
                  And with his force, the Romanes oft did tame,
                  But he by treaſon ſlaine, and not by fight,
                  Which cauſ'd that countrey, fall to Romanes right.
               
               
                  
                  Not far from thence, in Spayne a towne did ſtand,
                  Numanitia cal'd, which long time warres did hold
                  With Romanes force, fighting with equall hand:
                  Both one, and other, gaynde as fortune would:
                  The Romanes tooke diſdaine, a poore towne ſhould
                  Braue them ſo long, and not to haue it tane:
                  Thither was ſent ſtout Scipio
                     14. Yeares after Carthage deſtroyed, and in the 622. of Romes foundation▪
                      
                     African,
                  
               
               
                  At whoſe aproach, diſorder great was found
                  The army in, that at the ſiege did lie,
                  Which he reformde, and then by trumpets ſound,
                  With ſharpe aſſault Numantiaes force did trie:
                  Did take the ſame, the people mercie crie,
                  His ſouldiers ſpoyl'd, and ſacked euery place,
                  And afterward did clearely it deface.
               
               
                  About this time within Scicilia iſle,When the foote will riſe againſt the head, cut it off on the ground, any more to tread.
                  
                  Bondmen, and ſlaues, did make a great vprore,
                  Them to appeaſe was vſed many a while,
                  Their number did increaſe, ſtill more and more:
                  But yet an armie, was raiſ'd vp before,
                  For to ſubdue their power and their ſtrength,
                  Whom Conſul Fuluius pacified at length.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 9.
               The ſecond warres in Aſia; the death of Scipio
African: warres with Iugurth King of Numidia,
and warres in Germanie, France,
and other places.
               
                  SOone after this, in Aſia warre was mou'd,
                  On the behalfe of Attalus the King,
                  Who by his will had giuen to be prou'de,
                  His kingdome, crowne, and euery royall thing,
                  The Romanes too; but one a plea did bring
                  Againſt the caſe namde Ariſtonicus:
                  
                  But Rome replyed, and brought an action thus:
               
               
                  With armed men to trie the matter out:
                  
                     Ariſtonious orecome, and brought to yeld;
                  
                     Perpenna Conſul with his Romane rout
                  Captiued him, in battaile on the field;
                  Which yeare following,In the yeare of Rome, 625. to death (too ſoone) did yeeld
                  
                     Scipio, as he within his houſe tooke reſt,
                  Strangled t'was thought, by ſome whom he lou'd beſt.
               
               
                  Not much aboue fiftie ſixe yeares of age,
                  (Loe valiant wightes, foule fortunes cruell ſpight)
                  Rome was perplext with dolor,Both the other, Scipio and this, dyed in the flower of their age. griefe, and rage:
                  And as ſome write, in skies appear'd a ſight,
                  It's ſaid the ſonne kept not his courſe aright,
                  How ere it was, the loſſe was great to Rome,
                  So time brings too, all earthly things their doome.
               
               
                  
                  In France enſuing, after this alſo,
                  The Conſull Fabius gain'd a battell great:
                  And Gracchus, Tribune of the people, tho
                  A man moſt rare, on matters graue to treate,
                  By Enuies rage, ſome did him cruell threate:
                  For ſlaine he was, about diuiding lands:
                  The wiſe we ſee, cannot ſhun malice hands.
               
               
                  And now began the warres of Iugurth ſtout,Iugurth K. of Numidia, a countrey in Afrique, appertaining ſometime to the Carthaginians.
                  
                  Which Saluſt doth at large moſt plainly ſhow,
                  Where may be ſeene great matters brought about,
                  And of the reſt before paſt on a row
                  In other workes, who will them reade may know:
                  Why this ſmall worke was writ, one cauſe was chief,
                  Romes riſing high to be declar'd in brief.
               
               
                  But Iugurths warre, (which next did fall in chaſe)
                  
                     Calphurnius firſt did take the ſame in hand,Calphurnius.
                  
                  Who Conſull was, and after him had place
                  
                     Cecilius Metellus, ſtrongly mand:
                  But laſtly Marius, with his warlike band
                  Orethrew his hoſt, with many a deadly wound,
                  Ending the warre, had Iugurth priſoner bound.
               
               
                  During which warre with this Numidian king,
                  The Germanes high, and low, gan to moleſt
                  Italia ſoyle,Slaughter and ouerthrowes of the Romaines, by the Germanes. and mightie troopes did bring,
                  In France alſo, that countrie to infeſt:
                  The Romanes had by them vnquiet reſt,
                  Great ſlaughter oft, amongſt them they did make,
                  Chief Captaines many, were forſt their liues forſake.
               
               
                  
                  But Marius, Conſull foure times now choſe,
                  Gaue them repulſe, and laſt their power orethrew:
                  The Almanes hie, were ſlaine and ſoone did loſe,
                  At Aix in Prouence, where their ſtrength they drew:
                  In Lombardie, at Lyſieres, did rue
                  The other ſort, which done, afreſh did grow
                  New warres, that ouer all Italie did flow.
               
               
                  Thoſe people that vpon the ſoyle did dwell,
                  In ſundrie partes, which often heretofore
                  Be nam'de,The Latines Samnites, To ſcanes, Veientes, Eques, Faliſques, and others, now ſuch countries as areabout Rome, Florence, Genua, Mantua, Ferrara Sienna, and others. began againe for to rebell:
                  With much adoe appeaſde was their vprore,
                  And being reduc'de to quiet, as before:
                  Swift time that doth begin, and end all thing,
                  A dangerous warre, againſt Romes ſtate did bring.
               
            
            
               CAP. 10.
               The warres with Mithridate King of Pontus,
vpon which grew the ciuill warres in Rome, betweene Sylla and
Marius: of warres in Portugall, and the vtter
ouerthrow of Mythridate the great,
King of Pontus.
               
                  IN Kingdomes rule, moſt ſtrange is fortunes chance,
                  Fleeting, vnſure, not to be thought with hart:
                  Euents each day, both to, and fro, do glance:
                  Sores thought well ſalu'd, elſwhere vnknowen do ſmart
                  Truſt treaſon proues, and plaies a tragique part
                  With ſecret ſleights: Ambition worketh wiles,
                  Faith proueth fraudes, and friendſhips are but guiles.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Mythridate King of Pontus, valiant, ſtout,
                  With armie ſtrong, did giue two Kings the foile,
                  Gaue them the chaſe, their ſeate and kingdome out:
                  One ofTwo countries in Aſia. Bythinia, the other of the ſoyle
                  Of * Cappadoce, their countries both did ſpoile:
                  Which warre, ſo ſore the ſtate of Rome did trouble▪
                  
                  Firſt ſtrife, next hate, and after murders double.
               
               
                  Theſe wretched Kings diſtreſſed thus with woe,
                  In league and friendſhip, were with Romanes knit
                  Vnto their aide, perforce did driue themThe Romanes. to:
                  But here marke fortune when ſhe liſt to flit,
                  Who frowning ſeemde, on Romanes ſide to ſit,
                  For warres abroade, to hurt them did begin,
                  And 
                        •
                     arres more ill, at home themſelues within.
               
               
                  Strife did ariſe two captaines ſtout,
                  Which after grew to warre,Ciuill diſcord, the onely miſchiefe of all commonwealths, & which bringeth therein, deſtructions, ſooner then any other plague. and deadly wound:
                  Note here the fruites ſedition bringeth out,
                  And where likewiſe ambition taketh ground:
                  The bodies ſicke, whereas the heades vnſound.
                  Rome had good cauſe to looke both pale and wan,
                  Neuer ſo plagude, ſince firſt their ſtate began.
               
               
                  Stout Mythridate with kings chaſe not content,
                  But farther runnes, into the Romanes land;
                  Long t'was before the Senate could conſent,
                  Who for this warre, as leader chiefe ſhould ſtand:
                  On partes they were, on this ſide, and that hand,Contentiō cauſe of hate and reuenge.
                  
                  
                     Sylla ſome choſe, becauſe of noble race,
                  Some Marius, rather to ſupply the place.
               
               
                  
                  Betweene theſe two, began Romes wofull ſtate:
                  (Here may be ſeene what ciuill diſcords breede)
                  
                     Sylla had preſt his armie at Romes gate,
                  
                     Marius conſtrain'd to flye away with ſpeede,
                  Perforce was ſuch, and ſo hard grew his meede,
                  In a ſmall boate, as faſt as he could hye,
                  To Afrique coaſt, away from Rome did flye.
               
               
                  So Sylla had of Pontus warre the charge,
                  And thither marcht with Mithridate to fight,
                  Abſent from Rome:One poiſon driuen out by another, and yet the griefe not cured. 
                     Cynna, whoſe power was large
                  That time Conſull, began the ſtate to ſpight,
                  Stirring vp ſtrife, but was ſoone put to flight
                  By Octauian, who in office with him was,
                  Out of the citie to Cynna gaue the chaſe.
               
               
                  
                     Marius on this returned from exile,
                  His power with Octauian did vnite,
                  In Rome committing many parts moſt vile:
                  Wrong bare the ſway,The fruites of ciuill diſcord. and did orepreſſe the right,
                  Murder, and theft, was done in open ſight:
                  They Conſuls choſe, and did what ere they luſt,
                  Their will was law, that euery thing diſcuſt.
               
               
                  
                     Sylla this while in warre gainſt Mithridate,
                  
                  The Romanes loſſe, in part did get againe:
                  Hearing of Romes foule broyles and troubled ſtate,
                  Faſt homeward hied, to eaſe that grieuous paine:
                  And when he had,A quiet ſtate the meane while. for moſt orecome and ſlaine
                  His enemies, that gainſt him did reſiſt,
                  Bare ſway alone, and then did what he liſt.
               
               
                  
                  Thus one gap ſtopt, a worſer breach is made,
                  One tempeſt paſt, a fouler ſtorme doth riſe:
                  One drowning ſcapte, a gulfe more ill to wade:
                  One ill foreſeene,True is an olde ſaying, ſeldome comes the better. a vilder blinds the eyes:
                  One foe found out, a crueller lurking lyes:
                  One canker heal'd, out breakes more peſtlent ſore:
                  
                     Marius was ill, Sylla could be no more.
               
               
                  For when the winde tempeſtuouſly doth blow,
                  Oreturning towers, houſes trees and all:
                  Thoſe harmes paſt ore, incontinent doth flow
                  A mightie floud, by raine continuing fall,
                  Drencheth vp beaſts on fields, and in the ſtall,
                  Drowning both corne, and fertile medow ground,
                  One common loſſe doth make a grieuous wound.
               
               
                  
                     Marius windlike at firſt did blow and rage,
                  Which tempeſt little calm'd, ſcarſe ouerpaſt:
                  
                     Sylla not bent, that ſo it ſhould aſſwage:
                  But after blaſts, brings flouds of raine as faſt,
                  The woolfe full pancht, the beare take his repaſt:
                  Who hunger bides? but weaker beaſts among
                  The rauening ſort, oppreſt by open wrong.
               
               
                  
                     Sylla his en'mies ſharply did purſue,
                  Some baniſht were, and on their goods ſet price,
                  Their children eke that after ſhould enſue,
                  He quite deſpoyl'd for euer to ariſe
                  Office,Reuenge ioyned with ire. or rule to beare in any wiſe:
                  No man what ere might ſafe enioy his ſtate,
                  Or life, if once againſt him he bare hate.
               
               
                  
                  So farre forth was his heart enflam'd with ire,
                  
                     Marius being dead, part of his carkaſſe tho,
                  (Such furie did his raging mind inſpire)
                  He cauſde into a riuer to be throw:
                  Behold reuenge to mortall men a foe,
                  Neere ſatisfied, vntill ſhe haue her will,
                  Of will reſtrainde, with griefe her ſelfe doth kill.
               
               
                  Thus Sylla got the victorie at length,
                  Dictator made, and had the chiefeſt place
                  For to command, and now againe in ſtrength:
                  Rome gan to grow, and mutinies to race,
                  But yet farre of, an Exile in diſgrace
                  With Sylla, nam'dePreſcribed by Sylla. 
                     Sertorius ſtout and fierce,
                  With warre did ſeeke the Romanes ſtate to pierce.
               
               
                  In Portugall an armie he did wage,
                  Got many townes, in warres hauing great skill:
                  For to appeaſe this vnlookt for outrage,
                  
                     Pompee had charge, to worke therein his will:
                  Betweene theſe two, each part much bloud did ſpill,
                  After great fights, Sertorius was ſlaine
                  In treaſon foule, with craft caught in a traine.
               
               
                  A few yeares after, Pompee this had wrought,
                  All Spayne he got, and in that time alſo
                  Bythinia king, to earth by death was brought,
                  Heire to his crowne, he made the Romanes tho:
                  ButGiuing many ouerthrowes to the Romans, during the ciuill warres. 
                     Mithridate king of Pontus ſayd no:
                  Who occupied Bythinia all the while,
                  That Marius, and Sylla, made the broyle.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt whoſe pride, Lucullus Conſull went
                  And foyld him oft, ſpeeding ſo at the laſt,
                  His armie all in piecemeale cut and rent,
                  And from Bythinia made him hye in haſt,
                  In Pontus bounds, ſhutting him vp full faſt,
                  From whence alſo, in fight was driuen away,
                  Flying for ayde to the king of Armenia.
               
               
                  
                     Lucullus ſtill did after him purſue,
                  And oftentimes with both the powers did fight
                  Of thoſe two kings, who thought for to ſubdue
                  
                     Lucullus force: when each in others ſight
                  Were come, the Romanes orepreſt them by might,
                  The Kings enforſed to forſake the field,
                  Their people moſt were ſlaine, and fled, ſome yeeld.
               
               
                  But here by meanes of mutinie and iarre
                  In Romanes campe, which did Lucullus let,
                  With Pontus king to make an end of warre,
                  Whereby he might the gaine of glorie get,
                  The Senate did a meſſage ſend to ſet
                  
                     Lucullus
                     Liued often moſt ſumptuouſlie, &c. Not medling any more in matters of the commonwealth home, and in his roome did place
                  
                     Pompee, thoſe warres of Mithridate to chaſe.
               
               
                  Who late before,Pompee great fame and credite gainde,
                  In vanquiſhing by ſea the nauie ſtrong
                  Of Pirats ſtout, who had with power attainde
                  The ſoueraigntie of all the coaſts along
                  From Spayne, toNere vnto Conſtantinople, or beyond, which com paſſeth the one ſide of all Europe. Helleſpont, there all among
                  Thoſe Iſles: yet further did their force extend
                  By land alſo, which Pompee brought to end.
               
               
                  
                  The ouerthrow of whom did much preuaile,
                  For Romes welfare, and for the common ſtate:
                  So hard beſet till then, they could not ſaile
                  Out from their ſhores: but brought now to this rate,
                  
                     Pompee prepar'd himſelfe for Mithridate,
                  
                  To Aſia ſped, making his power there ſtrong,
                  Thoſe warres to end, which Rome had vexed long.
               
               
                  Which entred too, he proſecuted ſo,
                  As in ſhort ſpace, Mithridate was bereft
                  Of hope, for ere to riſe his ſtate vnto,
                  When once his forces were aſunder cleft,
                  Small was the ſuccour tho vnto him left:
                  For after being beſieged by his ſonne
                  
                     Pharnaces cal'd, his life he yeelded done,
               
               
                  Killing himſelfe.Vnconſtā
                        cie of mind in miſeries, engendreth diſpayre. O fury foule deſpayre
                  That doeſt inſpire, thy ſelfe in ſoules diſtreſt:
                  But, what is life, ſay ſuch? a blaſt of ayre:
                  Foule honors ſeate, chiefe cauſe of great vnreſt.
                  The meane eſtate is ten times happier bleſt.
                  O pride of Rome,Romes ambition ſtill continueth. Ambitions patterne left,
                  Which neuer will from following race be reſt.
               
               
                  But yet a while, behold this mightie king
                  Stout Mithridate, how fortunes frowning ſpight,
                  Did at the laſt, his warres and conqueſts bring
                  To wretched ſtate, that fortie yeares with might,
                  Moſt valiantly did with the Romanes fight,
                  And victor oft, their Captaines many led
                  With him each where captiu'd, ſo well he ſped.
               
               
                  
                  Treaſons he ſcapte, and murmurings many a one:
                  Of body ſtrong, to walke on foote, or ride;
                  No wound did euer make him ſhrinke, or grone,
                  To ſhun the warres, at any time or tide:
                  Gaynſt poyſoning, he poyſon did prouide,
                  Wherewith when as he would his life haue ended,
                  No power at all, by poyſon was extended.
               
               
                  His ſonne (as is rehearſt) Pharnaces nam'de,
                  Vſurping now his crowne and dignitie,
                  
                     Mythridate ſaw his wracke in ſuch ſort fram'de,
                  Fearing to fall, in farther miſerie,
                  Into the Romaines hands by trecherie,
                  Drew forth the venim, which he euer bare
                  About his ſword, began it to prepare.
               
               
                  Two of his daughters being faſt him by,
                  Did pray the King that they might firſt of all
                  Take taſte thereof, the potion for to trie,
                  (Loathing their liues to ſee their fathers fall)
                  He would not yeeld, but they would needes enthral
                  Themſelues to death, and dranke and preſent dyed,
                  The ſelfe ſame thing, by Mythridate was tryed
               
               
                  But would not worke, his body long before
                  He ſo prepar'de,By this King, was inuented the triacle now vſed, called by his name. againſt all poiſon ſtrong,
                  For to withſtand all treaſon, enuie bore
                  Againſt his ſtate, who ſought all meanes by wrong
                  T'abridge his dayes, but fortune made him long
                  Happie to liue, vnhappie for to die,
                  From Empire ſo to fall in miſerie.
               
               
                  
                  Vanquiſht with griefe, which long before his hart,
                  Ne bodie could, the Romanes legions great
                  Orecome, by practiſe, policie, or art,
                  And now (quoth he) loe what doth me moſt freate:Friends, and his ſouldiers forſooke him, by meanes of his ſon who vſurped the crowne.
                  
                  Faithles ſouldiers, children vnkind entreate
                  Me too, my friends vnfaithfull to me are:
                  Theſe foes I flye, rather then life to ſpare.
               
               
                  Vnto a Duke that ſtood vnto him neere,
                  (Quoth he) to me thou euer haſt been iuſt,
                  From huing any longer rid me cleere,
                  Leſt Romanes tread my glorie in the duſt,
                  Ore me a king to triumph as they luſt:
                  Since poyſon will not end my wretched life,
                  Helpe me by bloudie ſtroke to ceaſe all ſtrife.
               
               
                  The Duke bewayled Mithridate with teares,
                  Yeelding his helpe, to rid him of his woe:
                  To his right breaſt, with trembling hand he beares
                  The bloudie blade, that did his life vndoe:
                  
                     Mithridate with a ſtroke, draue it into
                  His breaſt, when as the liuely ſprite outbraſt:
                  Thus this great king, fortune with ſpight downe caſt.
               
               
                  What therefore bootes long life with troubled ſtate,
                  Though riches, wealth, and honor men poſſeſſe?
                  What doth auaile long life,The longer life, the greater ſtrife without debate,
                  In pleaſure, ioy, neuer to feele diſtreſſe?
                  In weale, or woe, let life be more or leſſe,
                  Death is all one, at firſt, as tarie long,
                  Since dye we muſt, mid woes ſmall ioyes among.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 11.
               The diſturbance of Romes eſtate by the conſpiracie
of Catiline, Ieruſa'ems tribute to Rome, warres by Iulius
Caeſar in Germany, France and England, by Pompé the King of
Egypt was restored to his kingdome.
               
                  LIke as the day (when freſh Aurora ſpreds
                  Her curtaines large) expelling darke nights ſhade:
                  Bright Phoebe doth riſe from chamber and vnbeds
                  Himſelfe abroad, with blaſing rayes, doth glade
                  Aſlant the earth: where length of ſhadowes made:
                  By miſtie cloudes, all vaniſh quite away
                  Rough winds ariſe, it proues a ſtormy day.
               
               
                  Through heate perhaps, a thunderclap may ſound:
                  Or els rough Aeol raiſe a mightie wind,
                  With flouds of raine faſt powring on the ground:
                  That heards of cattell ſcarſe can finde
                  Shilter to ſaue their bare backs (thinly linde)
                  When as thoſe beaſts that feeding lye in ſtall,The weakeſt alwaies goes to the wall.
                  
                  Recks not the ſtorme, how great ſo ere it fall.
               
               
                  So fareth fates: faire weather now foule proue,
                  Stormes paſt, there comes a quiet calme againe,
                  Seaſons and times ſuch earthly chances moue:
                  So Romes high ſtate now whole, then ſicke with paine.
                  In worldly life, cares be our daily gaine:
                  Lawes,Ciuill ſtrife a deſtroyer. for the good of common weales firme ſeated,
                  Through ciuill ſtrife their right vſe are defeated.
               
               
                  
                  As Pompee had thoſe broyles and iarres late ended,
                  Seditious fire began to light againe;
                  Now Catiline byGathereth a crew, diſcontented through idlenes and voluptuouſneſſe. coniuration bended
                  A number moe (their countries peace to ſtaine)
                  The ſtate of Rome to ſpoyle, ambitious braine:
                  But Cicero who Conſull was that time,
                  Detected them of that moſt heynous crime.
               
               
                  But Catiline to Toſcane came by flight,
                  Gathering freſh crewes of wretches all forlorne:
                  Gainſt whom Anthonius,
                     The reward of rebeliious perſons diſturbing the quiet eſtate of the common wealth. (Conſull) went to fight,
                  By whoſe great valour in pieces cut, and torne
                  The rebels were, (vnhappie wretches borne)
                  But fates to men, doe aye alot ſuch chance,
                  That by wrong meanes, themſelues thinke to aduance.
               
               
                  And in this yeare fine Cicero Conſull was
                  Ieruſalem, and all Iudea land,
                  (Great Pompees power atchieu'de and brought to paſſe)
                  Did tribute pay vnto the Romaines hand:
                  
                     Octauian eke as you ſhall vnderſtand,
                  (Who Emperour was in proceſſe following here)
                  Receiu'de his birth, at Rome in this ſame yere.
               
               
                  Fiue yeares after Gabinius, and Piſo
                  
                  Conſuls were choſe, when as theA people in Germanie. Swyſers bold,
                  Did caſt their courſe, byA Countrey in France very fruitefull. Prouence for to go
                  Farder in France, whereas they ment to hold
                  Their biding place (ſay nay who ſo would)
                  By reaſon of the fertile ſoile and ground,
                  Great foyſon there of fruites, in ſeaſon found.
               
               
                  
                  Whom to forbid t'abide or there to reſt,
                  
                     Iulius Caeſar raiſde an armie ſtrong,
                  Commaunded by the Senate,Iulius Caeſar, his firſt charge in warrein Germanie. ſoone was preſt:
                  And in ſhort ſpace the Swyſers came among,
                  Their power moſt dead, on earth he laid along,
                  And after that to Ariouiſt alſo,
                  And Almane King he gaue like ouerthrow.
               
               
                  Beſides theſe two, he other battailes fought,
                  In parties moe of Germanie, and France,
                  Neere riuer Rhyn,Caeſar fortunate in al his warres. his enemies he brought
                  Subiect, which farre his glory did aduance:
                  From thence with power, ore Ocean ſeas did glance,
                  And did arriue among the Brytanes then,
                  With whom to fight,Caeſar in England. he found them matchleſſe men:
               
               
                  But yet in fine, he did ſubiect that Iſle
                  Ere he return'd, and letters thence did write
                  To Rome, (which were conueyed in ſhort while)
                  The firſt day of September to recite,Letters written to Rome from England.
                  
                  To Cicero, which he receiu'de in ſight
                  Vpon the nine and twentith of the ſame:
                  From England, in a month thoſe letters came.
               
               
                  
                     Caeſar from thence return'd againe to France,
                  Had good ſucceſſe, the countrie quiet brought
                  Ere it was long, thus fortune can aduance,
                  Thoſe whom ſhe meanes at length to bring to nought:
                  About this time, th'egiptians Rome beſought
                  To aide their king, expeld his countrie fro
                  By Archelaus, worker of his woe.
               
               
                  
                  Vnto the Senate Pompee ſute did make,
                  The king diſtreſt, for to reſtore againe:
                  
                     Gabinius charge thereofCommanded by the Senate or councell. muſt vndertake,
                  He Archelaus, perforce did conſtreine
                  For to depart, vpon a grieuous paine:
                  SoThe noble mind of Pompee to diſtreſſed Princes. 
                     Ptolome receiu'd againe his crowne,
                  And royall ſeate, by Pompees high renowne.
               
            
            
               CAP. 12.
               The Ciuill warre betweene Caeſar and Pompee
Caeſars quieting, the ſtate of Egypt, his quicke
expedition through diuers other countries
his attaining to the
Empire.
               
                  LIke as two Lions long without their pray,
                  And comming where they hunger may ſuſtaine,
                  Both being fierce, they will agree no way
                  In friendly ſort, to part the ſpoile in twaine,
                  High ſtomackt both, both thinke the whole to gaine,
                  Doe fall at ſtrife, one for the others part,
                  Where one, or both, doe rue their rage with ſmart.
               
               
                  This ciuill warre which now began to riſe
                  Tweene Caeſar ſtout, and Pompee cal'd the great:
                  Sheweth lion like, the grudge that ſmothring lies
                  Within the heart,Where reuenge taketh roote, nothing but death can ſupplant it. which canker like doth eate:
                  Vntill ſuch time reuenge, breakes out in heate,
                  And ſets on fire, from ſmoake vnto a flame,
                  Neuer extinct without ſome foule disfame.
               
               
                  
                  This ground whereon this grudge began to grow,Hate will build on a ſmall ground to be reuenged
                  
                  The cauſe thus fell, ſtout Caeſar was reiected
                  Conſull to be, vntill he did beſtow
                  His armie, and his office laſt elected:
                  But hate hath meanes, that ſpight ſhall be detected,
                  Although ſmall cauſe important thereto long,
                  Right ſet aſide, hate workes by open wrong.
               
               
                  But this conceipt Caeſar held in his mind:
                  To yeeld his ſtrengthes, then naked ſhould he bee,
                  Where now before, might hap then come behind:
                  Yet neuertheleſſe, ye yeelded to agree,
                  If Pompee would, releaſe as well as he,
                  His power alſo, which Pompee would not yeeld.
                  
                     Caeſa
                           •…
                        . Haſted to France againe, and from the field
               
               
                  Brought on his armie, came in Italie:
                  Tooke many townes by loue, and compoſition:
                  
                     Pompee this hearing, with Conſuls both did flie,
                  
                     Caeſar purſued, (there was no prohibition)
                  But ere he came, to make with them condition,
                  Embarqute they were, on ſea boord, vnder ſayle
                  And out of ſight, might bid to them alhayle.
               
               
                  For want of ſhips to ſerue his warlike turne,
                  He thought not good there long while for to ſtay:
                  But backe againe to Rome made his returne
                  From Durazo, (from whence they fled away)
                  At Rome held court long after, day by day,
                  Framing complaints, gainſt thoſe that did him wrong,
                  And offring peace the Romance ſtate among.
               
               
                  
                  He perceiuing the Senate made ſmall count
                  Of what he ſpake, from Rome in haſt he ſped:
                  And ere t'were long atOr Marcellis, a towne in in France, lying betweene Spayne and Italy, on the ſea coaſt. Marcels did diſmount,
                  Whereas the towne gainſt him did make head:
                  But he by ſea an armie cauſ'de be led,
                  Left it beſiegde by water, and by land,
                  And into Spaine did iourney out of hand:
               
               
                  Where Pompees captaines did vnto him render,
                  With all their forces, at his commaund to bee,
                  And with them haſted, whereas hope was ſlender,
                  At Marſeiles towne, ere he came ſought t'agree
                  And yeeld to him, which done, away goeth hee
                  To Rome againe, and in his abſence was
                  Dictator made, (through fates ſo brought to paſſe.)
               
               
                  The people (eke) the more to raiſe his fame,Partly through feare of further trouble.
                  
                  Elect him Conſull, with Seruilius marched:
                  And when he had ſet euery thing in frame,
                  For publike weale, toAnd Pharſalie where they fought. Theſſalie diſpatched,
                  And there a time to fight, with Pompee watched,
                  Did him orecome, ſlew all his power welnie,
                  
                     Pompee enforſt to Egypt for to flie:
               
               
                  Where raigned then, Ptolome his ſonne that late,
                  (Before rehearſt) by Pompees meane who was,
                  Reſtorde againe into his royall ſtate,
                  In haſt by flight Pompee to him did paſſe,
                  In hope he would with curteſie (alas)
                  Requite with aide, and ſuccour, at his neede
                  Him now diſtreſt, for that his former deede:
               
               
                  
                  But he to whom, Pompee this pleaſure did,
                  Was dead, and now this King was but a childe,
                  Who ſcarcely would to Pompee welcome bid:
                  Of hope and ſuccour being thus beguilde,
                  Ingratitude, (who is a monſter vilde)
                  Within the harts of the Egyptians grew,
                  Doubting miſhap, in treaſon they him ſlew.
               
               
                  Vile wretches that durſt on him ſo lay hand,
                  Whoſe noble hart relieu'd your wretched ſtate:
                  Did you not feare, the breach of league and band
                  With Romanes made, but could ye him ſo hate
                  That was your friend, though deſtinie and fate
                  Did on him frowne, ſo in his bloud t'embrue
                  Your cruell handes: but you his death ſhall rue.
               
               
                  
                     Caeſar ſhall not let vnreuenged goe,
                  Your barbarous part, though he his enemie bee:
                  The day ſhall come wherein you ſhall crie woe,
                  Ruying your ſtate with wracke, and miſerie,
                  For doing of ſo foule a villanie,
                  In killing him, the worlds flower chiefe,
                  Whom Caeſar (loe) bewailes with teares, and griefe.
               
               
                  Preſenting of his head, thinke you to finde
                  Pardon, and peace? no, no▪ Egyptians baſe
                  Sprong from the ſtocke of ſome vile raſcall minde:
                  No maruaile though like rogues the world ye trace,
                  Let not the earth affoord you byding place;
                  But wander ye, as wretches all forlorne,
                  Your ofſpring curſt, and thoſe before you borne.
               
               
                  
                  No doubt thoſe plagues ſhall light vpon you all:
                  The Romanes who your kings oft ſuccour gaue,
                  Shall raze their ſeate, and euer after thrall
                  Their name, and make both king, and queene a ſlaue,
                  And farther yet, this curſe eke ſhall you haue,
                  Craft, and deceipt, and theft ſhall be your trade,
                  Vntill the gallowes, end of all haue made.
               
               
                  Ah worthy wight, Pompee the Phoenix rare,
                  Starre of the world, before, and euer ſince:
                  Both memorie, and fame, ſhall aye declare
                  Thy noble artes whoſe proweſſe did conuince,Pompe but young, yet a great conqueror.
                  
                  Full many a realme, and prouince, king, and prince,
                  At twentie fiue yeares age being no more:
                  What one did euer match thee ſince, or before.
               
               
                  For noble mind, for valour, bountie loue,
                  Whoſe good ſucceſſe did raiſe the Romanes ſtate:
                  For conſtancie which miſhaps could not moue,
                  For honour ſhew'de to wretched Mythridate,
                  
                  Himſelfe his race, to many in like ſtate;
                  Thy vertues blazde thy noble diſpoſition,
                  But cruell mindes, made thereof prohibition.
               
               
                  The ſtately triumpn Rome did make to thee,
                  Declare thy fame, when thou didſt backe returne
                  With captiu'de kings conquer'd, thy victorie
                  As bright as ſunne, or blazing lampe did burne:
                  Which ſight to ſee, made them with griefe to mourne,
                  When in a chariot ſhining bright, all gold,
                  Set rich with ſtones, their eis might thee behold.
               
               
                  
                  To ſit,There was counted to be in ſiluer 2200. talents, after our account in money, an infinite ſome. and when their ſcepters, and their crownes,
                  Their royall roabes, with ornaments, and all
                  Their ſtately wealth, their iewels, ſpoyle of townes,
                  Siluer, and gold, with ſtatues high and tall
                  Of beaten gold, yet more to ſhew their thrall:
                  Their armours, and their weapons, broad in ſight,
                  They priſoners all, orecome by thee in fight.
               
               
                  Triumphing thus,Beſides priſoners there were 314. pledges, children of Kinges, and great Princes of countries by him ouer come, ſhewed in the triumph, with the images & pictures of thoſe ſlaine in battaile, to repreſent his victories. with much more in like ſort,
                  Romes youth went firſt, next them the youthfull crew
                  Neere mans eſtate, then followed with great port,
                  Graue citizens, next Senate did enſue
                  Clad in their roabes, of colour bloody hue:
                  Many ſortes moe of people in their place,
                  Before and after, in triumph then did trace
               
               
                  In order due: Thoſe of his armie ſtrong,
                  Some chiefe, on horſebacke, ſome on foote did goe,
                  Neuer the like triumph there was among
                  Romes conquerours, for any ouerthrow,
                  That giuen ws to countrie, or to foe,
                  Yet (loe) (alas) ſuch was his deſtenie,
                  Hated by friends, and ſlaine by trecherie.
               
               
                  What mindes haue men in honours ſeate that ſit,
                  High ſtill to clime, not knowing how ſoone they may
                  When dread is leaſt in daungers greateſt flit,
                  And being once fallen, ſoone wither and decay,
                  On mightie trees growes ſundrie ſortes of ſpray,
                  Whoſe rootes turn'd vp, the danger is not ſmall,
                  Whē tumbling down comes bark, boughs, twigs, & al.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Pompee euen ſo oreturn'd by cruell fate
                  By ſuch as ſhould haue him their ſuccour lent,
                  His friends who loue did beare vnto his ſtate,
                  Branches, and boughes, firme fixt to him and bent,
                  Were afterward cut off, ſcattred, and rent,
                  As here enſuing ſhall be ſhewed in place,
                  If well you note, this high imperiall chace.
               
               
                  
                     Caeſar purſued, and into Egypt came
                  With power great, the king that time in armes,
                  A quarrell had his ſiſters pride to tame
                  
                     Cleopatra, (for ſhunning future harmes)
                  On either part there was ofttimes alarmes,
                  Which to appeaſe, Caeſar did them incite
                  For him t'appeare, as Iudge the cauſe to right.
               
               
                  In that he was Conſull of Romane ſtate:
                  And for before the former king that dyde
                  Did league contract, (aſſenting to a rate)
                  The Senate with, in friendſhip to abide:
                  But th'Egyptians, with diſdaine did ſlide
                  From this offer, tooke it in great diſgrace,
                  Their king to pleade, before a Conſuls face.
               
               
                  Whereon in armes they drew them out of hand,
                  Sought meanes Caeſar, like Pompee to orethrow:
                  But he withſtood them with his warlike band,
                  In dangers great: yet laſt did make them know
                  He Caeſar was, for victorie did blow
                  Vpon his ſide, the king dead, he diuided
                  Egypt in two, and thus it was contriued.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Cleopatra, ioynde with her younger brother,
                  Should both enioy the ſtate and dignitie,
                  The one to be as mightie as the other,
                  Subiects to Rome, euer after to bee:
                  This done, Caeſar departs, and after hee
                  Tranſportes his force, and armie out of hand,
                  With ſpeed moſt ſwift into Aſſyria land.
               
               
                  To Pontus next, and there the king orethrew,
                  
                     Pharnaces nam'de,The greatnes of mans minde, atchieueth many enterpriſes, thought vnpoſsible, which proueth true, that a man is but his minde. the ſonne of Mythridate,
                  
                  (Rehearſt before) and afterwards he drew
                  Armenia too, and quieted that ſtate:
                  With Gallogreece, aſsigning them a rate.
                  Cappadoce, Pont, Bythinia alſo,
                  Romes league on paine of death not once forgoe.
               
               
                  This done, to Rome faſt making his returne
                  The ſeaſon cold, in winters ſhorteſt dayes:
                  Deſire of rule ſo made his heart to burne,
                  Setting a part all manner of delayes,
                  From Rome, to Scicill Iſle, and there not ſtayes,
                  But taketh ſhip and ſayles to Afrique coaſt,Cato ſlew himſelfe at Vtica, a city in Afrique, for that hee would not fall into Caeſars hands.
                  
                  With great deſire t'encounter his en'mies hoaſt.
               
               
                  
                     Pompees allies: amongſt whom, Cato graue
                  With other moe, had raiſde an armie great
                  To take their parts, kingIuba, a King in Afrique, his league with Rome. 
                     Iuba they doe craue,
                  Who did conſent with them his foote to wet,
                  In doing of which he was ſet by his ſeate:
                  For Caeſar had ore them the victorie,
                  The great'ſt part ſlaine, the reſt away did flie.
               
               
                  
                  When Caeſar had ended this chaſe of warres,In his owne perſon, ere he attayned the ſoueraigntie of Emperor, hee had made war in three parts of the world, viz Aſia, Africa & Europe, and from them all, returned victor.
                  
                  Returning backe, triumphing with great ſpoyle,
                  In euery place made peace, and ceaſt all iarres,
                  And to his enemies giuen vtter foyle:
                  To Rome he came, and reſting now from toyle,
                  He triumph had, and did command each where
                  The world throughout, all nations did him feare.
               
               
                  Now here behold Romes Empire ſoueraigne,
                  Whoſe fame doth yet continue to this day:
                  The name of Caeſar ſtill it doth retaine,
                  And euer ſhall vntill the worlds decay:
                  The Scriptures by the Prophets ſo doe ſay,
                  Interpreted by learned clerkes diuine:No ſooner full ſea, but ebbe beginneth.
                  
                  But now at height, note how it did decline.
               
            
            
               CAP. 13.
               The wounding to death of Iulius
Caeſar in the Senate
houſe.
               
                  WHen bloud,Ambition, cauſe of many miſeries. when fire, whē ſlaughter, ſpoyle & ſack,
                  Throughout the world had run to raiſe Rome hye,
                  (Alas) what woe, what miſerie, and wrack,
                  (Vile wretchednes, and torments cruelly
                  Her Empire cauſde, cauſles many to dye)
                  Through treaſons vſde, with ſubtiltie and craft,
                  And ſlye deceits ſince in the world laft.
               
               
                  
                  But richly clad in throne Imperiall,
                  (As Phoebe in skies with maieſtie doth ſhine)
                  
                     Caeſar did ſit, and in his hand the ball,
                  Or globe did hold, for token or a ſigne,
                  (As ſay he might the world all is mine)
                  Sole to command, no match or mate had he:
                  Such was his minde, gaining ſole ſoueraigntie.
               
               
                  But here began hate, enuie, and diſdaine,
                  The Monarch new,Honers ſeat full of dangers. his greatnes to deſpiſe,
                  His equals late, now vaſſals, he to raigne
                  Alone, and they, as baſe before his eyes:
                  High minds, ſecret, the furies made to riſe▪
                  
                  Not priuatly pretending of his harmes,
                  Nor publikely banding with men in armes.
               
               
                  But as he in th'imperiall ſeate did ſit
                  In parliament,Whē dread is leaſt, then is danger greateſt. not dreading ought at all,
                  Pricks forth reuenge, his enemies all fit:
                  The tree high growne with fatall axe to fall,
                  Leaſt that his boughs, ſpred large with ſhade might thrall
                  Small vnder trees, and wood that grew him neere,
                  Purpoſe purſued, they would no longer beare.
               
               
                  Vnto him came in number eight or nine,
                  Each one a dagger, bodkins ſome doe ſay:
                  What ere, but there, the thred they gan t'vntwine
                  Of that greatA relation to the fourth ſtaffe in the firſt Chapter of this booke. webbe, begun ſo many a day
                  Before, and now iwoue, begins away
                  To weare and fret, by piecemeale rag'd and torne,
                  As at this day baſe BaſhragsThe Turkes doe it ſcorne.
               
               
                  
                  Thus ſunke the ſhip that floted with full ſaile,
                  Through ſtormes ſtird vp by furies plagues of hell:
                  Thus worthy Caeſar worlds rule bids alhaile,
                  Leauing the trumpe of fame, his praiſe to tell:
                  His vertue flyes, his name, mongſt vs to dwell:
                  Vpon this globe what glorie more can be,
                  Vertue, acts, name, left to eternitie.
               
            
            
               CAP. 14.
               The fortunate and proſperous raigne of
Octauius Augustus Caeſar, in whoſe
time our Sauiour Christ
was borne.
               
                  WHen Summers heat,Summer the ripener of al fruites. with parching flames had burnd
                  The earths freſh coate, deckt ſweet by Flora queene,
                  Whoſe colours gaye, to ruſſet browne was turnd,
                  Through drought, fire hot, each pleaſant field was ſeene
                  Bare backt, deep ſcortcht with chawnes, in ſteede of green
                  
                     Ceres vncrownde, her garland withered ripe,
                  
                     Pan, harueſt home to Swaines, had playd with pipe.
               
               
                  Fruites falling faſt Autum the ſame did hye,Autum, the gatherer & 
                           •…
                        orier.
                  
                  Cleare dayes began to be o'recaſt with cloudes,
                  Turning to miſts, and raine deſcends the skye:
                  Birds couerts ſeeke, and beaſts together crowdes
                  Cloſe from the cold, in houſe by fire ſhrowdes
                  The ruſtique ſort, and greater ſwaynes beſide,
                  Content perforce the winters wrath to bide.
               
               
                  
                  Whilſt chilling colde with many a bitter blaſt,
                  Diſroabes the trees, and bating quight the ground,
                  When Saturne with his cruell lookes doth caſt
                  A mantle thicke,Winter the deſtroyer & ſpender. the colour ſeene and found
                  White euery where, (but skies blacke) low all round
                  This globe vpon, and when's depending ſeene
                  Trees leau'd with yce, in liew of Sommers greene.
               
               
                  When whiſtling windes do ſheere the tender skinne,
                  And razor like, piercing, doth make a raze
                  On ſeelie creatures, barely clad, and thinne,
                  Nye ſtaru'de, with cold, looking with rueful grace,
                  Doe wiſh the ſpring to haſten on a pace,
                  Which doth enſue: when Phoebe warme beames doth ſhow
                  His force from high, to dying things below.
               
               
                  Then from his hole the ſeelie flye doth creepe,Spring the quickner againe of all.
                  
                  For ioy to feele the warmth approaching nye,
                  Each creature elſe, whom winters wrath made weepe,
                  Reioyce cloudes paſt,But this ſpring, the comfort of all Chriſtians, the harueſt hath been long, God graunt many good laborers there in, that whē Autum commeth, winter following be not ſharpe. beholding cleere the skye:
                  Beaſtes caues, fruites earth, fowles naked buſhes flie,
                  Mounting towards ayre, and all doe ſeeme to ſing,
                  The ſweeteſt time (of all) is in the ſpring.
               
               
                  Which ſeaſon chaunſt when Caeſars burning ſunne
                  And harueſt toyle, began to end, and drew
                  Both Autumne, and his winter courſe in one,
                  Diſpoyling him of all his prime gaynd hue,
                  
                     Octauius ſpring began the world anew:
                  So freſh a ſpring as neuer was before
                  Vpon the earth, nor euer ſhall be more.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Caeſar thus ſlaine, his glory laied downe low,
                  His force that late did through the world flie,
                  Ambitious mindes doth point,Planting with care and yet not knowing who ſhall enioy that they haue toyled for. and as t'were ſhow,
                  Their vading ioy, when they haue toucht the skie:
                  Great is their fall, that ſeeke to climbe on hie,
                  Reſtleſſe their mindes, beſides their bodies toyle,
                  Conſuming time, themſelues with cares do ſpoyle.
               
               
                  
                     Octauius, who was Caeſars ſiſters ſonne,
                  (The birth of whom recounted is before)
                  Such loue belike had of the ſouldiers wonne,
                  Of Legions he did gather a great ſtore,
                  Reuengement of hisIu. Caeſar. vncles death he bore
                  Secret in mind, but ſeemde, as though that he
                  Tooke armes to fight, againſt Mare Antonie.
                  
               
               
                  In fauour of the publique ſtate and weale:
                  But ere t'was long,Inconſtancie the change of many ſtrange chances. th'empire did diuide
                  With him, and Lepidus, they three to deale
                  In cauſes all, before them to be tried:
                  
                     Triumuirates ſo cald, for to decide
                  Matters of warre, of peace, contention, ſtrife,
                  What euer els, concerned goods, or life.
               
               
                  
                     Marc Antonie at this time bare ſuch ſway,
                  As by his power he gaue commandement,
                  
                     Marcus Tullius Cicero, for to ſlay,
                  Who late in warres with power againſt him went:
                  (This ſame was he that was ſo eloquent)
                  But now behold how enuy ſowed ſeede,
                  Quarrels betweene the Triumuirates to breede:
               
               
                  
                  For Lepidus, depoſde his office fro,
                  Vpon ſuſpition of ſome trecherie,Diſcention cauſe of diſtruction.
                  
                  Eſteem'd Octauius for his mortall foe:
                  Reuengde to be, drew to him Antonie,
                  
                  To Egypt-ward they both in haſt did flie,
                  Where Antonie tooke after vnto wife
                  
                     Cleopatra, which bred foule hate and ſtrife.
               
               
                  
                     Cupid (blind god) the Romanes heart did wound,Liking and luſt cauſe of diſhonor
                  
                  At ſight of this Egyptian (ſtately dame)
                  Agreeing both, conuenient time was found,
                  To quench deſires heate, and burning flame:
                  Strange may it ſeeme to ſome, the noble fame
                  Theſe two liu'd in, with honour, wealth at will,
                  All pleaſures ſought, their minds for to fulfill.
               
               
                  Fine ſumptuous feaſtes, delights, with triumpes braue:
                  What daintie thing was thought on, was not had:
                  Gold, pearle, ſtone, attyre, that hart could craue,
                  Nothing did want, that might their minds make glad,
                  Sportes were deuiſde, t'expell all cauſes ſad,
                  This life they led: but Antonie to blame
                  For one part plaid, which wrought his end with ſhame.
               
               
                  
                     Octauius ſiſter he had eſpouſde before:
                  Caſting her off, th'egyptian tooke to wife,
                  Which now at laſt grew to a canker ſore,
                  A cauſe that moued Caeſar vnto ſtrife:
                  When Antonie, amidſt this pleaſant life▪
                  
                  With his rich queene of Egypt wearing crowne:
                  Dread ſet apart, fortune began to frowneSweet meat will haue ſower ſauce
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Caeſar his armie into Egypt lead:
                  Egyptians force the Romanes made to flie,
                  Haſt and away, who faſt did runne beſt ſped,
                  
                     Cleopatra, and her braue Antonie,
                  
                  Their high eſtate brought downe by deſtinie:
                  Force,Delightes with careleſnes, bringes wracke and wretchednes. and hope, faylde, their welfare to regaine,
                  Exceſſe was turn'd, to penurie and paine.
               
               
                  Recalling both their former liues to count,
                  Now feeling want, reliefe to them was ſtrange:
                  No hope againe, vnto their ſtate to mount,
                  Deſpaire throughout their ſences all did range,
                  Working vile meanes, their wretched liues to change,
                  With griefe of which, ſo nipped both their hartes,
                  As loathing life, the ſame to death impartes.
               
               
                  The Empire ſole Octauius then did ſway;
                  
                     Antonie dead, peace through the world was:
                  Fortie foure yeares,Chriſtes birth, the ſpring of our ioyes. he raigned day by day,
                  And in the twentith nine, it came to paſſe
                  That Ieſu Chriſt, our onely Meſsias
                  Was borne, (for vs) of a pure virgine,
                  Our ſoules from hell, for to redeeme and winne.
               
               
                  The Monarch now long reſting without warre,
                  Nation not any durſt once ſtriue gainſt Romes ſtate,
                  By ſea, or land, neere hand, or yet a farre.
                  The firſt that did, were Germanes full of hate,
                  People that time, louing ſtrife and debate:
                  But ſubiects Caeſar brought them vnder yoke,
                  So fortunate he was, and bare ſuch ſtroke.
               
               
                  
                  Some ſay that oft reuoluing in his minde,
                  The burden great of gouernment he bare,
                  Determind once, the ſame to haue aſsignde
                  To others, to diſcharge him of that care:
                  But priuate being, knew not how t'would fare,
                  To leade that life might be vnto him ſtrange,
                  Doubting beſides of Romes eſtate the change,
               
               
                  Of noble minde,The praiſe of Auguſtus. with vertues fully fraught
                  Peace to obſerue, both liberall, bountie, free
                  To learned men,Conſtancie in virtue, maketh old age long happie. who vertue, ſought, and taught:
                  For in his time, moſt higeſt in degree
                  And perfect fine, (it's written for to bee)
                  The Latin tongue, but now corrupt, vnpure
                  To that was then, which we haue now in vre.
               
               
                  When as the terme of fortie foure yeares
                  Expired was, Caeſar at vtmoſt date
                  Of life, did leaue (as by record appeares)
                  In quiet peace his high Imperiall ſtate,
                  A thing (no doubt) ordainde before by fate
                  So for to be, for good of all mankinde,
                  As learned clarkes in holy writ doe finde.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. 15.
               The raigne of Tyberius next
Emperour.
               
                  
                     OCtauius dead, (whoſe name Auguſtus was)
                  Next did ſucceed Tyberius to the ſtate,
                  His ſonne adopt, and kinſman in like caſe:
                  It's ſayd the Senate humbly did him treate,
                  (Vnwilling for to rule, his braines to beate,)
                  To take the ſtate on him, at laſt agreede:
                  During whoſe raigne, there chaunſt not worthy deede.
               
               
                  Which was for profit of the publique wealth:
                  But left vnto the Senate all the care,
                  Seeing himſelfe in rich eſtate, and health,
                  Bent whole his minde to quiet life and fare,
                  Occaſion great th'empire did appaire:
                  For now both Parthia, Denmarke, Poland, France,
                  With other moe, againſt Rome did aduance.
               
               
                  Thus may we ſee when as the floud is full,
                  It falles againe: ſo fares all worldly haps,
                  Fruites firſt be ripe, before men doe them pull:
                  In ſeaſons faire, ſudden comes thunderclaps:
                  In midſt of ioyes, griefe all our mirth vpwraps;
                  And now behold of Rome the morning ſhine,
                  Paſt midday marke, begins for to decline.
               
               
                  
                  Diuines doe hold,Chriſts death, our comfortable harueſt, God grant vs grace to gather therby fruites, that in winter we dye not, but liue that in the fifteenth yeere
                  
                     Tyberius raignd, our Sauiour Ieſu Chriſt
                  Did ſuffer death, (to make vs ſinners cleere,
                  To dwell with him that ſits in throne moſt higheſt,
                  Who helpes vs aye, when dangers we be nigheſt)
                  Whoſe Empire ſtands, and euer ſhal endure,
                  When worlds pompe ſtill fleeteth, neuer ſure.
               
            
            
               CAP. 16.
               The raigne of Caligula.
               
                  Caligula.
                  
                     TYberius ſonne, Caligula ſo calde
                  Succeeded next, a moſt pernicious childe,
                  Vnto all vice he was a bondſlaue thralde,
                  Moſt fit to dwell with ſauage men and wilde,
                  A life he led, that wicked was and vilde:
                  Great heapes of gold, Tyberius in his raigne
                  Had got, he ſpent in one yeare, lewd and vaine.
               
               
                  Claudius.
                  
                     CLaudius next him ſuppoſde his vncle,The Brytaines reuolt from Romes gouernement. he
                  Came to England, reduc'd againe that land
                  That did reuolt, from Romanes ſoueraigntie,
                  The Britaines did reſiſt him with ſtrong hand:
                  But he orecame them with his Romane band,Glouceſter, ſo Claudius Cae
                           •
                        ar.
                  
                  And ere from thence did part, (vnto his fame)
                  A citie built, and calde it by his name.
               
               
                  
                  Nero.
                  NExt him enſued Nero, when once againe
                  The Britons bold began to warre anew;Virtue buildeth, vice plucketh downe.
                  
                  The Romanes they did pill, and put to paine:
                  In France the Frenchmen alſo them orethrew:
                  A mightie wind in many countries blew,
                  In Syria, and alſo Armen
                        •…
                     ,
                  Their forces moſt, were beat and ſhronk away.
               
               
                  Laſt out of Spayne old Galba did retire,
                  Drawne on byWho was gouernor of a prouince in France, for the Romanes wrote letters into Spayne. The onely decaye of the Empire was ciuill diſcord. 
                     Iulius Vindex, who from France
                  Perſwaded him to Caeſars ſeate aſpire,
                  (See how Ambition mortall minds doe launce)
                  He was content, though old, (to follow chaunce)
                  Did march to Rome, vpon whoſe comming fled
                  
                     Nero, who was moſt wretchedly found dead.
               
               
                  Whoſe ſtorie full at large may well be ſeene,
                  In Tacitus in Engliſh fine tranſlate,
                  A worthie preſent for a King, or Queene,
                  For noble Peeres, or others of high ſtate:
                  His praiſe deſeru'd,Virtues praiſe neuer dyeth. ſhall neuer come too late,
                  Who did ſo well, in Engliſh it reduce
                  For high degree, to ſerue for publique vſe.
               
               
                  Where is deſcrib'd Nero his monſtrous life:
                  A common-wealth, and ſtate, in pieces torne:
                  Where may be ſeene,Whoſe increaſe is mightie now a dayes. what fruites doe come of ſtrife,
                  How broods of vice, each quiet ſtate doth ſcorne,
                  And ſeeke to ruine: but ſubiects truly borne
                  Flye ciuill diſcord, bringing woes and ſpoyles:
                  Moſt foule are fowles their owne neſts that befiles.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   