
      
         
            
            
            ODES.
IN IMITATION
OF THE SEAVEN PENITENTIAL
PSALMES,
VVith
Sundry other Poemes and ditties tending
to deuotion and pietie.
            
               
                  HS
               
               
IMPRINTED,
ANNO DOMINI.
M.D.CI.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE VERTVOVS
LADIES AND GENTLE VVOMEN
READERS OF THESE
DITTIES.
            
               WHen for my owne priuate recreation
I had penned ſome of theſe poemes
yet not entēding to make them publyke,
for that I feared their ſoone receauing
the deſerued cenſure of the
ſlenderneſſe of their woorth. Yet
hauing by chaunce communicated
them with a freind, I was not a litle vrged, to affoord
them the libertie of open view, but alſo perſwaded to
their further augmentation. And now hauing yeilded
vnto the one, & aduentured the other, I knew no better
way then to make dedication of them vnto your ſelues,
whoſe ſweete voyces or virginalles may voutſafe ſo to
grace them, as that thereby they may be much bettered,
and the rather yf it ſhal pleaſe you to obtaine of
ſome ſkilful Muſitian, ſuch requiſite tunes, as may vnto
them be beſt fitting. And therein crauing your helpful
furtherance, and for my preſumption your fauourable
pardon, I humbly take my leaue, excuſing my ſelf
with my owne good meaning:
            Vttred as enſueth. Vid.
            
            
               
               The vaine conceits of loues delight
               I leaue to Ouids arte,
               Of warres and bloody broyles to wryte
               Is fit for Virgils parte.
            
            
               Of tragedies in doleful tales
               Let Sophocles entreat:
               And how vnſtable fortune failes
               Al Poets do repeat.
            
            
               But vnto our eternal king
               My verſe and voyce I frame
               And of his ſaintes I meane to ſing
               In them to praiſe his name.
            
            
               Yours in his beſt endeuours R. V.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ODES.
IN IMITATION OF
THE SEAVEN PENItential
Pſalmes:
            To ſo-many ſeueral tunes of Muſick.
            
               In imitation of the firſt penitential Pſalme.
Beginning.
               Domine ne in furore. Pſalm. 6.
               
                  WHen my miſdeedes o God
                  May thee to anger mooue,
                  Amiddes the rigour of thy rage
                  Voutſafe mee not reprooue.
               
               
                  Nor when for my offence
                  Thy chaſtiſment muſt bee,
                  In thy diſpleaſure o deere Lord
                  Let it not light on mee.
               
               
                  Thy mercies Lord I craue
                  Of ſtrength I am bereft,
                  O ſalue the ſoreneſſe that my ſin
                  Vpon my bones hath left.
               
               
                  My much agrieued ſoule▪
                  
                  In ſorrowes doth abound,
                  
                     
How long o Lord ſhal they endure
                  Or comfort be vnfound.
               
               
                  O turne thy ſelf to mee
                  And rid my ſoule of paine,
                  Eu'n for thy mercies which exceed
                  And euer do remaine.
               
               
                  O haſten thee o Lord
                  To ſaue and ſet me free,
                  Amongſt the dead (to their auaile)
                  Ther's none can thinck on thee.
               
               
                  And in the depth of hel
                  VVhere there is no redreſſe,
                  VVho is it that wil giue the praiſe
                  Or vnto thee confeſſe?
               
               
                  My ſighinges for my ſinnes
                  Haue paſt in painful wiſe,
                  And I each night wil waſh my bed
                  VVith teares of wailing eyes.
               
               
                  My ſight is vext with feare
                  Of fury in thy rage,
                  Oh that my ſinnes muſt be my foes
                  To weare mee out in age.
               
               
                  A way a way from mee
                  All yee that are vniuſt,
                  Let him my mournful ſound receaue
                  In whome I put my truſt.
               
               
                  That I with ioy may ſay
                  How to my ſutes accord,
                  Voutſafed hath to condeſcend
                  My deere and louing Lord.
               
               
                  
                  Let ſhame my foes befall
                  And vexed let them bee,
                  Their owne conuerſion or their ſhame
                  Lord let them quickly ſee.
               
               
                  Glory o God to thee
                  And vnto Chryſte thy ſonne,
                  As alſo to the holy ghoſte
                  Let endleſly be donne.
               
               AMEN.
            
            
               In imitation of the ſecond penitential Pſal.
Beginning.
               
                  Beati quorum remiſſe ſunt. Pſalm. 31.
                  
               
               
                  O How much bleſt may they remaine
                  That pardon for their guylt obtaine,
                  And whoſe great il and each offence
                  Lies hid in contryte penitence.
               
               
                  VVhat happy ſtate may hee be in
                  To whome our Lord imputes no ſin,
                  VVhoſe conſcience doth no guyle retaine
                  That can himſelf beguyle againe.
               
               
                  I did my ſinnes in ſylence hold,
                  In grief whereof my bones grew old,
                  M
                        •
                     ane whyle my dayes in plaintes of paine
                  VVithout redreſſe I ſpent in vaine.
               
               
                  
                  But when o Lord thy heauy hand
                  No day or night I could withſtand,
                  But that in anguiſh ouerworne
                  My conſcience prickt as with a thorne.
               
               
                  Lo then o Lord I did begin
                  To vtter all my ſecret ſin,
                  No longer liſt I ought conceale
                  But each iniuſtice to reueale.
               
               
                  Againſt my ſelf I ſaid wil I
                  My wronges confeſſe and faultes defy,
                  To thee o Lord, o Lord to thee
                  That haeſt from all abſolued mee.
               
               
                  And ſince I thus thy mercies fynde
                  Let each of good and godly mynde,
                  Aproche to thee in happy tyme
                  To pray for pardon of his cryme.
               
               
                  For ſuch as ſo do ſinck in ſin
                  That ſtil they plunged lie therein,
                  Vnable are of thee to gaine
                  VVhat contryte ſinners can obtaine.
               
               
                  O Lord my refuge reſtes in thee
                  VVhen troubles do enuyron mee,
                  O free me then my freedomes ioy
                  From ſuch as ſeeke mee to annoy.
               
               
                  Great comfortes Lord I do conceaue
                  Thow mee thy ſeruant wilt not leaue,
                  But wilt inſtruct and guyd me right
                  And kepe me euer in thy ſight.
               
               
                  O yee that careleſſe are of grace
                  Behold and ſee your brutiſh caſe,
                  
                     
And be not as the horſe and mule
                  That liue deuoyd of reaſons rule.
               
               
                  And thow o Lord in mercies ryf
                  Voutſafe reſtraine their ſtraying lyf,
                  VVith bit and brydle make them ſtay
                  That vnto thee wil not obey.
               
               
                  Since that for thoſe of ſinful trade
                  Ful many ſcourges there be made,
                  VVel him, that doth in God repoſe
                  VVhoſe mercies may his ſoule encloſe.
               
               
                  Be therefore ioyful in our Lord
                  All that to righteouſneſſe accord,
                  Let each with gladneſſe beare his parte
                  That hath a pure and perfect harte.
               
               
                  All glory bee O Lord to thee
                  And to thy Sonne in lyke degree
                  As alſo to the holy Ghoſte
                  Perpetual and enduring moſte.
               
               AMEN.
            
            
               In imitation of the third penitential Pſal.
Beginning.
               
                  Domine ne in furore. Pſalm. 37.
                  
               
               
                  AMiddes thy fury my deere lord
                  Rebuke not mee,
                  Nor let thy chaſticement befall
                  VVhen wrathful thow ſhalt bee.
               
               
                  
                  Thy arrowes in my ſelf I feele
                  Alredy ſtand,
                  I ſee o Lord thow fixed haeſt
                  At me thy ayming hand.
               
               
                  VVithin my ſelf (o wo is mee)
                  No health I fynde,
                  Through feare and terror of thy face
                  That ſemes to wrath enclynde.
               
               
                  My very bones diſturbed bee,
                  Gon is their peace,
                  My owne beholding of my ſinnes
                  Doth woork my woes encreaſe.
               
               
                  And as my ſinnes ſurmounting are,
                  I muſt confeſſe,
                  So are they mounted on my head
                  And heauy me opreſſe.
               
               
                  My crymes forepaſt and pardoned
                  Lyke ſcarres remaine,
                  That putry fyde break out a new
                  Becauſe I ſin againe.
               
               
                  A woful wretche am I become
                  Crooked I grow,
                  Each day I waile and whyle I liue.
                  I will continew ſo.
               
               
                  My members by illuſions led
                  Mee ſo reſtraine,
                  My healthleſſe body is vnapt
                  True vertue to retaine.
               
               
                  By great affliction I am brought
                  Exceeding low,
                  
                     
Be moued Lord through my lowd groanes
                  Thy mercies to beſtow.
               
               
                  My ſutes o Lord tend all to thee
                  Thow knoweſt my caſe,
                  My plaintes and penance Lord accept
                  That ſo I may haue grace.
               
               
                  VVithin my ſelf my ſilly hart
                  Is vexed ſtil,
                  My force is loſt, my ſight I lack,
                  To ſee and ſhun my il.
               
               
                  In my diſpleaſing thee o Lord
                  Right wel I ſee,
                  My freindes are foes, my ſoule is ſought
                  And force is wrought on mee.
               
               
                  They wiſh my il, and ſpeake my ſcorns,
                  And when they ſmyle,
                  Their hate admittes no tyme of ſtay
                  To ſtudy fraud and guyle.
               
               
                  But I alas with patience preſt
                  Muſt all for-beare,
                  Lyke to the dumb and ſeeming deaf
                  I neither ſpeak nor heare,
               
               
                  And for becauſe o gratious God
                  I truſt in thee,
                  Thow wilt I know my louing Lord
                  Giue eare and ayd to mee.
               
               
                  Let not o Lord my foes preuaile
                  Leaſt they reioyce,
                  Sith ſcars my feet I may remoue
                  But they aduance their voice.
               
               
                  
                  Of my miſdeedes I am prepard
                  To beare the ſmart,
                  Stil is my ſin before my ſight
                  And ſorrow in my hart.
               
               
                  I wil reuolue my faultes fore-paſt
                  Amiddes my mynde,
                  And thoſe I truly wil confeſſe
                  That I may mercy fynde.
               
               
                  Hate hath confirmd on me my foes
                  In wrongful wyſe
                  And ſtil they liue and do encreaſe
                  VVhoſe enuy neuer dies.
               
               
                  They yeild me il that gaue them good
                  And me defy,
                  Becauſe I goodneſſe would enſue
                  From which they ſeeke to fly.
               
               
                  Forſake me not o Lord my God
                  In ſtate deſtreſt,
                  Be redy Lord to my relief
                  My lyf in thee doth reſt.
               
               
                  To Father Sonne and holy Ghoſt
                  All glory bee,
                  From former endleſſe date to dure
                  To all eternitie.
               
               AMEN.
            
            
               
               In imitation of the fourth penitential Pſal.
Beginning.
               
                  Miſerere mei Deus. Pſal. 50.
                  
               
               
                  HAue mercy o good God on mee
                  In greatneſſe of thy grace,
                  O Let thy mercies manifold
                  My many faultes deface.
               
               
                  Foule filthy loath-ſome vgly ſin
                  Hath ſo defyled me,
                  VVith ſtreames of pittie waſh me cleane
                  Els cleane I cannot bee.
               
               
                  To wel my foule vnclenſed crymes
                  Remembrance do renew,
                  To plaine in anguiſh of my hart
                  They ſtand before my view.
               
               
                  To thee alone o Lord to thee
                  Theaſe euilles I haue donne,
                  And in thy preſence, wo is mee,
                  That ere they were begun.
               
               
                  But ſince thow pardon promiſeſt
                  VVhere hartes-true-ruthe is ſhowne,
                  Shew now thy mercies vnto mee
                  To make thy iuſtneſſe knowne.
               
               
                  That ſuch as do infringe thy grace
                  Be made aſham'd and ſhent,
                  
                     
As ryfe thy mercies to behold
                  As ſinners to repent.
               
               
                  VVith fauour view my foule deffects
                  In crymes I did begin,
                  My nature bad, my mother fraile,
                  Conceau'd I was in ſin.
               
               
                  But ſince thy ſelf affecteſt truthe
                  And truthe it ſelf is thee,
                  I truly hope to haue thy grace
                  From ſin to ſet me free.
               
               
                  Since to thy faithful thow before
                  The ſecret ſcyence gaue,
                  VVhereby to know what thow would'ſt ſpend
                  The ſinful world to ſaue.
               
               
                  VVhoſe heav'nly hyſope ſacred droppes
                  Shal me beſprinckle ſo,
                  That it my ſin-defyled ſoule
                  Shal waſh more whyte then ſnow.
               
               
                  O when myne eares receaue the ſound
                  Of ſuch my ſoules releaſe,
                  How do ſin-laden lymmes reioyce
                  At hattes true ioyes encreaſe?
               
               
                  From my miſdeedes retyre thy ſight
                  View not ſo foule a ſtaine,
                  Firſt wype a way, my ſpots impure
                  Then turne thy face againe.
               
               
                  A cleane and vndefyled hart
                  O God creat in mee,
                  Let in me Lord, of righteouſneſſe
                  A ſpirit infuſed bee.
               
               
                  
                  From that moſt glorious face of thyne
                  O caſt me not away,
                  Thy holy Ghoſte voutſafe o God
                  VVith mee that it may ſtay.
               
               
                  The ioy of thy ſaluation Lord
                  Reſtore to me againe
                  And with thy ſpryte of graces chief
                  Confirme it to remaine.
               
               
                  That when at thy moſt gracious hand
                  My ſutes receaued bee,
                  The impious I may inſtruckt
                  How they may turne to thee.
               
               
                  For when o Lord I am releaſt
                  From vengeance and from blood,
                  How ioyful ſhal I ſpeak of thee
                  So gratious and ſo good.
               
               
                  Thow Lord wilt giue me leaue to ſpeak,
                  And I thy praiſe wil ſhew,
                  For ſo the graces do requyre,
                  Thow doeſt on me beſtow.
               
               
                  If thow ſin-offringes had'ſt deſyr'd,
                  As wonted weere to bee,
                  How gladly thoſe for all my illes,
                  I would haue yeilded thee.
               
               
                  But thow accepts in ſacrifiſe,
                  A ſorowing ſoule for ſin,
                  Deſpyſing not the hart contryte,
                  And humbled mynde within.
               
               
                  Deale gratiouſly o louing Lord,
                  In thy free bounties wil,
                  
                     
VVith Syon, thy dere ſpouſe in earth,
                  And fortify it ſtil.
               
               
                  That ſo thow maieſt thence receaue,
                  That ſoueraigne ſacryfiſe,
                  From alter of all faithful hartes,
                  Deuoutly where it lies.
               
               
                  To thee o Father glory bee
                  And glory to the Sonne,
                  And glory to the holy Ghoſt
                  Eternally be donne.
               
               AMEN.
            
            
               In imitation of the fyft penitential Pſal.
Beginning.
               
                  Domine exaudi orationem meam. Pſal. 101.
                  
               
               
                  O Let o Lord thyne eares enclyned bee
                  To heare the prayers that I make to thee:
                  And my hartes grief that breaketh forth in cryes
                  O let it haue the power to pearce the ſkyes.
               
               
                  Turne not from me thy fauourable face,
                  VVhat day or howre I am in heauy caſe:
                  But when I call to thee in my deſtreſſe
                  O heare me Lord and ſend me ſoone redreſſe.
               
               
                  My dayes and yeares alas with litle gaine
                  Lyke vnto ſmoke how are they paſt in vaine:
                  My forces Lord how are they partch'd and dry,
                  Deuotions lack yeilds moiſture no ſupply.
               
               
                  
                  The blaſted graſſe my image now can ſhew,
                  My withered hart confirmes that it is ſo:
                  And I forgotten haue vnto my grief,
                  To eat the bread of my ſoules beſt relief.
               
               
                  And my too much regard of earthly care
                  Before my ſelf for grace I could prepare,
                  Made reaſon to abandon reaſon quyte,
                  And to affection faſt it ſelf vnyte.
               
               
                  Bur now o Lord, ſince that I do begin
                  To ſee my ſelf, and know the ſhame of ſin,
                  From earthly traine I wil retyre my mynde,
                  Thee wil I ſeeke, my ſauing helth to fynde.
               
               
                  In deſert lyke as liues the Pelicane,
                  Or as the crow that doth day light refraine
                  Or chirping ſparow ſitting all alone.
                  I ſhrowd, I watche, retyr'd, I make my mone.
               
               
                  But whyle O Lord I do endure this lyf
                  Expecting peace by fleeing wordly ſtryf
                  Old freindes I fynde become new noyſome foes
                  O loue me Lord, for loſſe of loue of thoſe.
               
               
                  My penance not reſtraind through ſcorne of theirs,
                  My food I take with aſhes & with teares:
                  Thee more I feare, leaſt thow on me ſhould'ſt frowne,
                  That can'ſt mee raiſe, and raiſing caſt me downe.
               
               
                  My dayes declyne as doth a ſhadow paſſe,
                  And I as hay that whylome was as graſſe:
                  But thow from age to age ſhalt euer bee,
                  Then euermore o Lord forget not mee.
               
               
                  Voutſafe o Lord in puiſſance to aryſe,
                  To raiſe thy Sion that depreſſed lies:
                  
                     
Now is the tyme, the tyme doth now expyre,
                  It mercy wantes, and mercy doth deſyre.
               
               
                  This glorious woork was firſt begun by thee,
                  Thy ſeruants earſt were glad the ſtones to ſee:
                  And they wil grieue with hartes-afflicted care,
                  If ſo the ruynes thow do'ſt not repare.
               
               
                  But when o Lord thy woorks ſhal ſhew thy fame
                  The faithleſſe people then ſhal feare thy name:
                  And eartly kinges ſhal bend their glory downe,
                  At thy celeſtial glorie and renowne.
               
               
                  Becauſe thy Churche thy Syon thow did'ſt buyld,
                  VVhere thow would'ſt euer haue thy honor hild:
                  And haeſt not vnregarded hard the plaint,
                  Of faithful folk, thrall'd in vntruths reſtraint.
               
               
                  And that no tyme remembrance may impare,
                  Of thy maintayned woork, and mercy rare,
                  Let people now, for people to enſew,
                  Thy prayſe record, thy praiſes to renew,
               
               
                  For from high heauen to this low earthly place,
                  From blis to bale our Lord enclynes his face:
                  The groanes to hear, the greiued to releaſſe,
                  To free from thrall, to make affliction ceaſſe.
               
               
                  The more may Sion now ſound foorth his fame,
                  Ieruſalem his praiſes may proclame:
                  VVhere in his Churche his people do accord,
                  And whereas kings are ſubiects to their Lord.
               
               
                  VVho may o Lord thy dateleſſe dayes relate,
                  That of all ages ouerpaſſe the date:
                  It's thow to vs haeſt put apointed ſpace,
                  O ſtop not me ere half I run my, race.
               
               
                  
                  The world and welkin firſt by thee were made,
                  Thow heauens ſphere, thow earths foundation laid,
                  Thow ſhalt endure, they ſhal conſumed bee,
                  Thow madeſt tyme, tyme hath no force on thee.
               
               
                  Theaſe elements by alteration ſtrange,
                  Shal changed bee, and ſo remaine in change:
                  But thow o Lord that woorkes all at thy wil,
                  VVa'ſt earſt the ſame, the ſame remayning ſtil.
               
               
                  Vouſafe o Lord there ofſpring to preſerue,
                  That thee in feare and faith and loue do ſerue:
                  And in thy wayes directed to remaine,
                  A laſting lyf in laſting bliſſe to gaine.
               
               
                  Vnto the Father, Sonne and holy Ghoſte,
                  All praiſe and glory be aſcrybed moſte,
                  As herefore before the world begun
                  And as it now, and euer ſhalbe donne.
               
               AMEN.
            
            
               In imitation of the ſixt penitential Pſal.
Beginning.
               
                  De profundis clamaui ad te Domine. Pſal. 129.
                  
               
               
                  EV'n from the depth of woes
                  VVherein my ſoule remaines,
                  To thee in ſupreame blis
                  O Lord that higheſt raignes,
                  I do both call and cry:
                  
                     
T'is deep hart-ſorrowes force
                  That moues me thus to waile,
                  T'is pittie Lord in thee
                  Muſt make it to auaile,
                  Thyne eares therfore aply.
               
               
                  If ſtricktly thow o Lord
                  Obſerued haeſt my ſinne,
                  Alas what ſhal I do?
                  VVhat caſe then am I in?
                  If rigour thow extend:
                  But wel o Lord I know
                  Sweet mercy dwelles with thee,
                  And with thy iuſtice then
                  It muſt expected bee,
                  And I therefore attend.
               
               
                  My ſoule doth wait on thee,
                  Thy grace confirmes my truſt,
                  My warrant is thy woord:
                  Thow keepeſt promis iuſt,
                  Keep me o Lord ſecure:
                  Let thy afflicted flock
                  Comfort in thee retaine,
                  From dauning day to night,
                  From night to day againe,
                  Let ſtil their hope endure.
               
               
                  There is with our good God
                  Much mercie ſtil in ſtore,
                  Redemption doth remaine
                  VVith him for euer more,
                  Aboundant is his grace:
                  
                     
His people he affects
                  He wil not leaue deſtreſt,
                  The thralled he wil free,
                  VVith eaſe of their vnreſt,
                  And all their faultes deface.
               
               
                  All glory be therefore
                  O Father vnto thee,
                  And ſo vnto the Sonne,
                  The lyke great glory bee,
                  And to the holy Ghoſte:
                  Such as it wonted was,
                  Before the world began,
                  Such as now yet it is,
                  And euer ſhal remaine,
                  Aboue all glorie moſte.
               
               AMEN.
            
            
               In imitatiō of the ſeauenth penitētial Pſal.
Beginning.
               
                  Domine exaudi orationem meam. Pſalm. 142.
                  
               
               
                  VOutſafe admit thy gratious eares,
                  VVith myld regard for to attend,
                  The prayers that a playning hart,
                  VVith ſorowing ſighes to thee doth ſend:
                  And let thereto o louing Lord
                  Thy iuſtice and thy truthe accord.
               
               
                  
                  In rigour of thy righteous doome
                  O do not ſkan thy ſeruants cauſe,
                  For there is none on earth alyue
                  Through faultleſſe lyf free'd from thy lawes:
                  Then how may I in ſinful plight
                  Seeme iuſt in thy all-ſeeing ſight?
               
               
                  The freind of ſin, the foe of ſoules,
                  Down to the earth my ſoule hath brought,
                  VVhich to the heauen ſhould aſpyre,
                  Since from the heauen it was wrought:
                  O raiſe it vp againe to blis
                  From earth and all that earthly is.
               
               
                  Amids the darck miſ-led am I,
                  VVhere lack of light ſinnes view denies,
                  I hue a lyf more lyke to death,
                  VVhyle dead from grace my body lies:
                  And whereas care through ſecret ſmart
                  Sends anguyſh to afflict my hart.
               
               
                  But I o Lord recall to mynde
                  VVhat thow haſt donne in tyme before,
                  And how thy iuſtice hath bene great,
                  But how thy mercy hath bene more:
                  Thus hope of help ſtil comfort giues,
                  VVhile mercy ſtil with iuſtice liues.
               
               
                  My ſtretched hands to thee diſplay
                  The enſignes of my yeilding hart,
                  My ſoule as earth that water wants
                  Of vertues frute can beare no parte:
                  I faint, ſend ſoone relief of raine,
                  Leaſt els vnfruteful I remaine.
               
               
                  
                  Thy face of pittie not of wrath
                  Turne not o louing Lord from mee,
                  And let not Lord my owne miſdeedes
                  Haue laſting force to anger thee:
                  For ſo might I compare my caſe
                  To theirs that furtheſt fal from grace.
               
               
                  But ſince my hope is firme in thee
                  Let me betymes thy mercy haue,
                  The way of helth make knowne to mee,
                  My feete from erring paths to ſaue:
                  Only to thee my ſoule retyres,
                  Only thy mercy it deſyres.
               
               
                  O free mee from my ſinful foes,
                  To thee I fly to be ſecure,
                  Teach me the leſſon of thy wil,
                  And let me put it wel in vre,
                  Thow art my God and God of all
                  That for thy ayd and comfort call.
               
               
                  Thow wilt voutſafe to mee o Lord
                  Thy holy ſpryt to bee my goyd,
                  My faith and hope in thee is ſutch,
                  And ſutch it euer ſhal abyde:
                  Reuyue thow wilt mee for thy name,
                  Goodnes in thee requyres theſame.
               
               
                  So that at laſt by thee o God
                  My ſoule from bale to blis bee brought,
                  And that in mercy thow ſub
                        •…
                     ert
                  All thoſe my ſoules deſtruction ſought:
                  And force of foes deſtroy'd may bee,
                  And I made ſafe for ſeruing thee.
               
               
                  
                  All glory bee to thee o God,
                  The Father of eternal might:
                  And to the Sonne, and holy Ghoſte,
                  Three in an vndeuyded plight:
                  As now it is, and was of yore,
                  And ſhal endure for euermore.
               
               AMEN.
            
         
         
            
            EXTRACTS
OF THE SIBYLLAES
PROPHESIES
OF CHRISTE.
            
               Sibylla Perſica.
               THow ſerpent fraught with craft and crueltie
               Shalt by a mightier ſtrength bee troden low,
               And on baſe earth, the high God borne ſhalbee,
               And from a maid the branch of blis ſhal grow:
               And that true woord, vnſeene before of all,
               Shal now be ſeene, and ſhalbe felt withall.
            
            
               Sibylla Libyca.
               IN obſcure darcknes light ſhal gliſtring ſhyne,
               The Synagogs ſtraight bands vnbound ſhalbee:
               The king of lyf be ſeene of mortal eyen,
               And in a maidens lap ſhal nowriſht bee,
               And high aboue the gentils hee ſhal raigne,
               And ſhal in mercie his eſtate maintaine.
            
            
               
               Sibylla Delphica.
               ATtend (o earth) thy ſoueraigne Lord to ſee,
               And know thy God, which is Gods only ſonne:
               Chyld of the higheſt, and moſte high is hee,
               VVhoſe beeing by no earthly wight begun:
               Hee ſhal the great expexted prophet bee,
               Of woorthy greatneſſe, and great dignitie.
            
            
               Sibylla Cumea.
               AMaid excelling all in ſainctitie
               And whoſe cleere beauty ſhal the ſtarres exceed
               Of Chyld (in future tyme) conceau'd ſhalbe,
               And of the rareſt ſacred blood and ſeed:
               And from the heauens the ſweet dew downe ſhal fal
               Into her breſts to nowriſh him withal.
            
            
               Sibylla Erithrea.
               IN later age, high God wil him abaſe,
               And vnto low eſtate himſelf inclyne,
               Mixing his nature with our humaine race,
               His Godheid to our manheid to combyne:
               And lo the litle lamb in ſtrawy bed,
               Shal of a maid be nowriſhed and fed.
            
            
               
               Sibylla Samia.
               O Fond Iudea, why do'ſt thow neglect,
               The certaine knowlege of thy very God,
               Thy happy dayes why do'ſt thow ſo reiect?
               O why do'ſt thow prepare for him a rod?
               VVith thorny crowne his head why do'ſt thow preſſe?
               And for his taſte a bitter potion dreſſe.
            
            
               Sibylla Cumana.
               WHat tyme the third dayes ſleep hath taken end
               The tyme preſcry bed alſo end ſhal take,
               Of death, whoſe rule to that ſpace did extend,
               And then as from his ſleep ſhal wax awake,
               Hee whoſe now bringing liues reuyned ioy,
               Shal ſhew how men from death may lyf enioy.
            
            
               Sibylla Heliſpontiaca.
               EVen from the heau'ns moſte high & ſtately throne
               The eyes of God the earth ſhal oueruiew,
               And of all creatures take regard of one,
               Of modeſt meekneſſe, and moſte gratious hew:
               And as a man God ſhal bee borne on earth,
               And of an hebrew virgin haue his birth.
            
            
               
               Sibylla Phrigia.
               THe earth ſhal rent at feareful trumpet ſound,
               And kinges as vaſſals at Gods ſeat appeere,
               In iuſtice all his iudgments ſhal abound,
               Yeilding to men as men deſerued heere:
               vnto the good, ſtil during heauenly ioy,
               And to the il, long-laſting helles annoy.
            
            
               Sibylla Tiburtina.
               THow Bethlem arte the birth-place of thy Lord,
               That doth from Nazareth aſſume his name,
               O bleſſed moother, blis doth thee affoord,
               His loue, that leaues himſelf pledge of theſame▪
               
               O bleſſed bee that ſweet milk-yeilding breſt,
               To no wriſh God, right happely adreſt.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            THE
FIFTEEN MYSTERIES
OF THE ROSARIE,
OF
OVR BLESSED LADY.

                  VVHEREOF

                        The firſt fyue. are ioyful.
                        The ſecond ſorowful.
                        And the third glorious.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The firſt ioyful myſterie.
               Conteyning the Anuntiation of our bleſſed Lady.
               WHen heau'ns rare loue reſolued mannes releaſe▪
               
               From thrall to him that firſt produced ſin,
               It was decreed that this redeeming peace,
               Muſt by a God and by a man begin,
               Then on Ambaſſage was an Angel ſent,
               vnto the beſt of all the beſt on earth,
               VVith grace-ful greeting to declare th'intent,
               Of Gods deſigne in ſuch a ſacred berth.
               And euen as ſhee aſſented to theſame,
               Eft-ſoones in her conception did begin,
               And bleſſednes gaue tytle to her name,
               And ioy at her glad hart did enter in.
            
            
               
               The ſecond ioyful myſterie.
               Conteyning our ladies viſitation of S. Elizabeth.
               HEr change exchang'd not humbleneſſe for pryde,
               That bore Gods Sonne and yet would go to ſee,
               Her in whoſe wombe Gods ſeruant did reſyde,
               vaine pointes could not with her pure vertue bee.
               And as her cooſins eares receau'd her voyce,
               One chyld by Simpathy the other moued,
               VVhich outwardly both moothers made reioyce,
               VVhoſe ioy each chyld by inward ioy approoued,
               From virgins mouth the dittie then begun,
               How much her ſoule did magnify her lord,
               VVhich ſince inur'd help-ſeekers from her ſonne
               Therein her praiſe, in his praiſe to record.
            
            
               
               The third ioyful myſterie.
               Conteyning the birth of Chriſte.
               AT Ceaſars heſt to Bethlem ſhee repaires,
               As duty wild, where duty had no claime,
               No harbenger her loging there prepares,
               Her poore eſtate fyndes harbor lyke theſame.
               But when as God in chyldheid would appere,
               Odors and Angels brightnes it adorne,
               And with deere loue, her louing babe ſo deere,
               Shee doth adore aſſoone as it is borne.
               High priuilege exempted her from wo,
               VVhich but Gods mother none could els obtaine,
               And heauenly bounty did on her beſtow,
               That ſhee a mayden euer ſhould remaine.
            
            
               
               The fourth ioyful myſterie.
               Conteyning the preſentation of Christe in the temple.
               AT tyme prefixt by ryte of auncient lore,
               That now the moother muſt her babe preſent,
               Though not impure, but purer then before,
               And pureneſſe bringing with her where ſhee went.
               As warned then, through hyre of hope and faith,
               Good Simeon comes, to ſee his wiſhed ſight,
               VVhere as the Swan he ſinges before his death,
               And in one ioy doth end all worlds delight.
               And all they yeares old Anne deuoutly ſpent,
               That with her age encreaſt her godly zeale,
               Did now bring ioy vnto her hartes content,
               And ioy to all where ioy ſhee did reueale.
            
            
               
               The fift ioyful myſterie.
               Conteyning our Ladies fynding of Chriſte in the temple.
               SEqueſtred loue doth foſter grief and ioy,
               Twixt feare of loſſe and hope of happy gaine,
               Such was her caſe that loſt her litle Boy,
               VVhoſe ioy reuyn'd in fynding him againe.
               In Temple once buylt by the wyſeſt king,
               VVhere not til now the wiſe king took his place,
               VVho yet no kingly porte did thether bring,
               But wiſdome vttred with a chyldiſh face.
               VVith lyke in yeares ſhee haply might him ſeek,
               But did him fynde with doctors in diſpute,
               He left repoſe to fraudleſſe myndes and meek,
               And took in hand wiſe folly to confute.
            
            
               
               The firſt ſorowful myſterie.
               Conteyning the apprehenſion of Chriſte.
               WO woorth that ſorow ſhould ſucceed to ioy,
               Or for the il the good ſuſtaine the ſmart,
               But ſince the ſonne would ſuffer wronges annoy,
               The mother beares her vndeſerued parte.
               For when as hee deſtreſt in garden prayd,
               And bloody ſweat ran downe his face amayne,
               And Iudas falſe him Iudaſly betrayd,
               Loſt ioy her left, betrayed vnto payne.
               And when with rage the Iewes led him away.
               Then anguiſh her ſurpryſ'd and led in thrall,
               And all that out wardly on him they lay.
               Doth in wardly vnto her hart befall.
            
            
               
               The ſecond ſorowful myſterie.
               Conteyning the ſcourging of Chriſte.
               T'Apeaſe the rage of cauſeleſſe raging Iewes,
               falſe Pylate wild true Chriſte ſhould ſcourged bee,
               Cryme knew he none, and yet he did refuſe,
               vnpuniſhed to ſet the guiltleſſe free.
               Then was ſweet Ieſus to a piller tyde,
               And helhoundes laſht at his faire tender ſkin,
               Embrude with blood al round on euery ſyde,
               Thinck then how ſtood th'aquyter of our ſin.
               And in what ſorrow his poore moother ſtood,
               For his great good, their ſo great il to view,
               Her hart bled inward, and diſtild the blood,
               Foorth at her eyes, though altred in the hew.
            
            
               
               The third ſorowful myſterie.
               Conteyning the crowning of Chriſt with a
crowne of thorne.
               FOr change of torture not for eaſe of grief,
               The Iewes do from the piller Chriſte vnloſe,
               VVhyle his ſad mothers hopes of his relief,
               Encreaſe her ſorow in his lengthned woes.
               For they his dolour to deryde and ſcorne,
               The king of kinges in mockage king do call,
               And on his head they fix a crowne of thorne,
               And in his hand a reed to rule withall.
               Yeilding pure loue impure diſpight and hare,
               Accurſed rebels to a king of grace.
               That purchaſe now the due diſgraceful ſtate,
               Of their ſtil kingleſſe and contemptuous race.
            
            
               
               The fourth ſorowful myſterie.
               Conteyning Chriſte his bearing of his Croſſe.
               WHen Pylat preſſed by the Iewiſh rage,
               VVith wreſted conſcyence gaue the doome of death,
               The Iewes made ha'ſt their fury to aſwage,
               In the extinguiſhing lyf-giuers breath.
               And his deaths engyne, burthen of his wo,
               They make him beare, that him to beare they made.
               Him in the way to death to tortur ſo,
               Til they his fainting force, giue forced ayd.
               VVel may his mother mourne this to obſerue,
               That from his burthen lodes her mynd with woes,
               And he wel aſke what withered ſtocks deſerue?
               VVhen fruteful trees are ſerued ſo of thoſe.
            
            
               
               The fyft ſorowful myſterie.
               Conteyning the crucifying of Chriſte.
               OH wo is mee at this great end of grief,
               Chriſte is arryued at his dying place,
               Lamblyke he ſtandes, bereft of all relief,
               Subiect of ſorow, vaſſal of diſgrace.
               For on his croſſe all naked they him nail,
               And reare it vp, and wound him in the 
                     •
                  yde,
               VVhich all the bleſt of heauen do be wayl,
               VVhyle of the earth th'accurſedſt it deryde.
               The ſwoord of ſorow peirſeth now the hart,
               Of his lamenting mother in her dolour moſte,
               VVhoſe deere Sonnes ſorrow, and ſurmounting ſmart,
               Now takes an end, in yeilding of his ghoſte.
            
            
               
               The firſt glorious myſterie.
               Conteyning the reſurrection of Chriſte.
               SVbdued ſorrow glory now enſues,
               For from the croſſe the ſoule of Chriſt deſcending▪
               
               Bringes to expecting ſoules the cheereful newes,
               Of heauens entrance, their de
                     •
                  ynments ending.
               And to his corps his ghoſte return'd againe,
               Triumphant raiſeth it from cloſed toombe,
               Terror vnto the actors of his paine,
               VVhoſe hate, and death, and hel, is ouercome.
               And glory that his ſorowes now had chaſed,
               Extinguiſht wo in his kynde mothers hart,
               And glory there and in all others placed,
               That of his anguiſh had ſuſtayned parte.
            
            
               
               The ſecond glorious myſterie.
               Conteyning the aſcention of Chriſte into heauen.
               WHen forty dayes the day had ouerpaſt,
               Of that now lyf that Chriſte from death had taken,
               He did reſolue his heauens returne at laſt,
               To leaue the world that had him firſt forſaken.
               And hauing to his mother now appeered,
               And alſo vnto his apoſtles true.
               Confirmd in faith, and in his glory cheered,
               On Oliue mount he biddes them all adieu.
               And there liftes vp himſelf to ſacred blis,
               Th'unworthy world no more him ſo retaynes,
               And all the glory that in heauen is,
               To him is yeilded and to him remaynes.
            
            
               
               The third glorious myſterie.
               Conteyning the coming downe of the holy Ghoſt.
               PLac'd in his throne and glorious chaire of ſtate,
               Our louing Lord regardful of o
                     ••
                   weal,
               VVould let no more then ten dayes run their date,
               Ere he his keeping promis would reueal.
               VVhat tyme his mother and diſciples bent,
               In ſecret wyſe to inuocate his name,
               Down vnto them his holy Ghoſt he ſent,
               VVith glorious fyre their hartes for to enflame,
               And to conioyne to his Churche now begonne,
               That ſpirit of truthe that euer muſt it guyde,
               In only truthe, whyle ſhyneth any Sun,
               Maugre the woorſt, of daunted helliſh pryde.
            
            
               
               The fourth glorious myſterie.
               Conteyning the aſſumption of our bleſsed Lady.
               WHen hence to parte the virgin did obtayne,
               The Hierarchies their due attendance gaue,
               To bring her ſin-leſſe ſoule to endleſſe raigne,
               VVhyle ſaintes on earth brought her pure corps to graue.
               VVhich therein laid, and found thence 
                     •
                  o be tane,
               Makes pietie to faith to recomend,
               That ſoone her ſoule to earth return'd againe,
               And tooke her corps and did therewith aſcend.
               A due prerogatiue, and due alone,
               Vnto that body that had borne a chyld,
               As neuer did, nor neuer ſhal do none,
               That neuer was with thought of ſin defyld.
            
            
               
               The fyft glorious myſterie.
               Conteyning the coronation of our bleſſed Lady.
               ASſumpted ſo with ſoule and corps combyned,
               As glorious as at laſt the bleſt ſhal-bee,
               And placed in her princely ſeat aſygned,
               Lyke 
                     〈◊〉
                   woorthy ſelf appeered ſhee.
               And that eternal euer three in one,
               There crowned her the higheſt heauens Queene,
               VVhere angels yeilded honor to her throne,
               As ſeemly might to her eſtate bee ſeene.
               And ſhee that earſt repleniſht was with grace,
               Now plac'd where grace flowes out in plenties ſtore,
               VVhere as ſhee ſees her ſonnes moſt gratious face,
               And ſues for ſuch as ſue to her therefore.
            
         
         
            
            AVE MARIA.
            
               HAil Marie, filled ful of grace,
               Our Lord remaines with thee,
               And thow among'ſt thy ſexes race,
               Remaineſt bleſt to bee.
            
            
               And as thow bleſſed did'ſt become,
               So did'ſt thow bleſſed bring,
               The bleſſed frute that from thy wombe,
               So bleſſedly did ſpring.
            
            
               Both now and when wee yeild our ghoſte,
               To him prefer our caſe,
               Becauſe his mercy laſteth moſte,
               And thow art ful of grace.
            
         
         
            
            EPITHETES
OF
OVR BLESSED LADY.
            
               Templum Dei.
               WHen God would from the heauēs to earth his progres take,
               No pallace there he found, that might him entertaine,
               Saue one rare edifice, which earth-quake could not ſhake,
               The woorthieſt woork of praiſe, that might on earth remaine.
               Faire court of ſanctitie, made holier for his ſake,
               That thee the Temple made, his preſence to conteyne:
               O Temple where as God, voutſafed for to bee,
               Stil may wee him adore, adoring ſtil in thee.
            
            
               Porta Caeli.
               WHen grace came frō aboue, then wa'ſt thou made the gate,
               By which it entred heer, & brought the hope of blis,
               Which hope in hartes of men, remaineth ſtil in ſtate,
               And ſtil through faith and loue, aliue preſerued is:
               Then ſince thow wa'ſt the dore, for grace this to relate,
               So art thow heauens gate, and wel accordeth this,
               That as God vnto men, did thee his entrance make,
               Men entrance vnto God, againe by thee may take.
            
            
               
               Scale Caeli.
               HOw may our heauy load, enclyning to deſcend,
               Aſcend vp in the ayre, beyond the egles flight,
               Except by ſuch a guyde, as wil aſſiſtance lend,
               And can from ſtep to ſtep, direct the paſſage right:
               Or rather her owne ſelf, vs better to defend,
               The ladder wil become, that ſcaleth heauens height,
               By whoſe degrees of grace, to blis we may attaine,
               And in our mounting vp, not to fall downe againe.
            
            
               Electa vt Sol.
               BRaue ornament of heau'n, and comforter of kynde,
               Of whome the ſhyning Sun, doth but the ſhadow ſeeme,
               Which as it is elect, and hath his place aſſygn'd,
               Aboue the planets all in earthly eyes eſteeme,
               Aboue all ſainctes to thee, is woorthely reſygn'd,
               The ſeat in ſupreame blis, that beſt doth thee beſeeme,
               Where thy faire beauteous face, no foggy cloudes can hyde,
               But choſen there by grace, in beauty do'ſt abyde.
            
            
               Pulchra vt Luna.
               WHen Ph
                        •
                     bus fyrie ſteedes, in compaſſing the ground,
               Leaue night behynde their backs, til they againe returne,
               Then that there ſhould ſome light, in darcknes yet be found,
               Faire Phobe ſtaies behynde, ſupplying Ph
                        •
                     bus turne:
               Where ſhee through borrowed light, in beauty doth abound,
               And cheers therewith the earth, that might in darcknes mourne,
               So thy faire influence, faire Cynthia vs extend,
               Which thy moſt bounteous ſonne, doth thee moſt freely lend.
            
            
               
               Stella Maris.
               BRight ſhyning ſtar by ſea, in lands abandon'd fight▪
               
               At once apparent ſeene, on either ſyde the ſpherre,
               The goodly guyd of all, and guyding all aright,
               That in this raging ſea, enſue thy brightnes cleer:
               And bending not there cours to ſuch illuding light,
               As may miſlead to wrack, ear danger do apeer,
               For thy direction leades, vnto the porte of reſt,
               Thoſe guyded by thy ſelf, whoſe guydance is the beſt.
            
            
               Ciuitas Dei.
               FAire Citie ſtately buylt, by ſingular deuyce,
               Of that great Architeckt who is of greateſt arte,
               With all thoſe goodly ſtones that are eſteem'd of pryce,
               Which to this faireſt woork, their fairneſſe do conuert:
               And through far aquaducts, from ſpringes of paradiſe,
               The waters thether led, which do refreſh the hart,
               And to octroy this towne, with all-ſurpaſſing fame,
               The buylder here himſelf, a Citizen became.
            
            
               Turris Dauid.
               HIgh Tower of ſtately porte, and far to be deſcry'd,
               And far from thence againe, the world about to view,
               It ſelf the centinel, that therein doth abyde,
               To giue aduyce of foes, or danger to enſue:
               Wel furniſht for defence, for e'ury tyme and tyde,
               For there a thowſand ſheilds are hanging on a rew,
               Not weapons of offence, but for defence to bee,
               Of all ſuch innocents, as from oppreſſion flee.
            
            
               
               Nauis Institoris.
               IF certitude of gaine, may ſtit the ſearching mynde,
               To venter in the ſhip, from whence misfortunes flee,
               That gouerneth the 
                     •
                  yde, and doth comaund the wynde,
               And ſpeedely returnes, with goodes that pretious bee,
               The barck of blis is ſhee, and fortunate by kynde,
               With grace ſhee fraighted is, and is of cuſtome free,
               Taking but for her hyre, and her inritching trade,
               Loue of deuoted myndes, that rich by her are made.
            
            
               Puteus Aquarum.
               CLeere wel that ouerflowes, with water freſh and fyne,
               More pure then vnicorne, could water euer make,
               Made by the hand of him, that water turn'd to wyne,
               Who giuing it the force, dry ſorrow to aſlake,
               Made that it neuer ſhould, to any drought enclyne,
               But that at all aſſaies, men might refreſhing take,
               And oure their healthes decay, in deadly agonies,
               Since from the flud of lyf, the iſſue doth atiſe.
            
            
               Quaſi plantatio Roſae in Iericho.
               EV'n as the fragrant Roſe, on prickling ſtalk doth grow,
               In fairneſſe and ſweet ſmel, and vertue to bee ſeene,
               And woorthyeſt to be worne, and wel beſeeming ſo,
               In place of diademe, in garland of a Queene,
               So thow which heau'n did once, on bryry earth beſtow,
               In fairnes, ſmel, and force, and burgeo
                     •
                  s euer greene,
               Shew'ſt that this goodly flower, may thy reſemblance bee,
               Saue in his vading kynde, which cannot bee in thee.
            
            
               
               Lilium Conualium.
               THe litle lilly flower, that groweth in the dale,
               Leaues not in low degree, ſweet fairnes for to ſhew,
               Which Salomon himſelf, could neuer counteruaile,
               With all his gorgeous coſt, he lyked to beſtow;
               So thow ſweet ſmelling flower, whome ſorrowes did aſſaile
               And worldes eſteeme debaſe, to fortune that was low,
               Did'ſt not therefore reſtraine, the ſplendure of thy face,
               Nor now from heauen to earth, the greatnes of thy grace.
            
            
               Flos Campi.
               THe faire flower of the feild, the dayes-eye doth apere,
               When thence al flowers beſyde, retyre and vade away,
               For to this only ſlower, doth each month of the yeare,
               For comely beauties cauſe, become the month of may,
               Bnt that dayes-eye in deed, which doth all ſeaſons cheere,
               And keepes her beauty ſtil, which no tyme can decay,
               The dayes-eye is of day, where night may neuer bee,
               And thow celeſtial flower thy ſelf art only ſhee.
            
            
               Lilium inter Spinas.
               AMiddes a gard of thorne, this goodly lilly grew,
               Defended from the foe, that would it faine deface,
               Who neere it to aproche, the entrance neuer knew,
               With poiſon to infect, where filth had neuer place,
               Yet ſuch might bee the hate, that heeron did enſue,
               That hee reſeru'd reuenge, vnto ſucceeding ſpace,
               What tyme a crowne of thorne, the ſonnes head did ſuſtaine,
               To make the mothers hart, be pricked with the payne.
            
            
               
               Quaſi Cedrus.
               LYke as the Cedar doth, her nurs Libantis hil,
               Pay with begotten fame, of her deere nowriſhing,
               In that ſo talle a tree, as all trees doth excel,
               Moſte ſtately there doth ſtand, in verdure flouriſhing:
               And doth through ſauor ſweet, ſerpents away expel,
               So that high tree of blis, that from the earth did ſpring,
               Vnto the earth againe, her ſweetneſſe doth extend,
               Il thinges to driue a way, that may the good offend.
            
            
               Quaſi Palma.
               THrough burden of thy grief, long did'ſt thow liue depreſt,
               Part-bearer of the wo, thy deere ſonne did ſuſtaine,
               But as it was a grief, to ſee him ſo deſtreſt,
               Loue made it ſeeme ſome ioy to help to beare his payne:
               Yet grief had neuer force, ſo far thee to moleſt,
               That thow did'ſt vertue want, thy courage to maintaine,
               No more then is the palme, depreſt by heauy waight,
               Who doth thereby the more, endeuour to bee ſtraight.
            
            
               Quaſi Cypreſſus.
               LYke to the Cypres tree, on holy Sion hil,
               That faire and vncorrupt, in vigour doth endure,
               And with ſweet ſmelling breath, her neere aprocher fil,
               And doth for Temples yeild, her timber euer pure,
               So on that ſacred mount, thow arte remaining ſtil,
               And in that Temple wrought, whence grace men muſt procure,
               And where aproching ſoules, do thy ſweet ſent rec
                     •
                  aue,
               And where no ſu
                     •
                  er thow, do'ſt vnrelieued leaue.
            
            
               
               Quaſi Oliua.
               WHen earths foule face of ſin, might not the heauen ſee,
               The waters all did hyde, that vnto earth pertayn'd,
               Except the Arck wherein, few were reſerued free,
               There to expect the tyme, that mercie might be gayn'd,
               From whence the hopeful Noe, a pigeon did let flee,
               Who by an Oliue branch, brought newes that hope remayn'd,
               So thow the Oliue tree, whereout our ioy did ſpring,
               Becam'ſt the ſigne of ioy, and ioy it ſelf did'ſt bring.
            
            
               Quaſi Platanus.
               LYke as the goodly plane, doth beautify the feild,
               And far her root extend, more ſtedfaſt for to ſtay,
               To make her farſpred boughes refreſhful ſhadow yeild,
               For trauelers repoſe, in hoteſt tyme of day,
               So thow exalted art, of heauen to be beheld,
               Where in aſſured ſtate, thy boughes thow do'ſ
                     •
                   deſplay,
               To the refreſhful ſhade, of trauelers deſyre,
               That pas in dangers dread, of ſoule afflicting fyre.
            
            
               Hortus Concluſus.
               MOſte pleaſant garden plot, true Paradiſe of praiſe,
               Erected in the roome, of Paradiſe of iore,
               But yet that garden far, exceeding ſundry wayes,
               As perfect ſecond woorkes, exceed things wrought before:
               All cloſely wall'd about, inmolate it ſtayes,
               No ſerpent can get in, nor ſhal for euermore,
               All goodly flowers and fru
                     ••
                  s, here in perfection grow,
               Vertue on ſtockes of grace, hath them engraffed ſo.
            
            
               
               Fons ſignatus.
               PVre 
                     •
                  ountaine ſurely ſeald, from each infectious thing.
               Whoſe water doth exceed, the taſte of Nectar ſweet,
               And in two milk-whyte ſtreames, did iſſue out and ſpring,
               And for one only taſte, allowed to bee meet,
               Who by diuineful power, did to it vertue bring,
               That turn'd it to a red, whoſe colour could not fleet,
               And taken from thy breſt, did yeild it from his ſyde,
               To ſalue the ſinnes of men, when on the croſſe hee dy'd.
            
            
               Speculum ſine Macula.
               CLeere chriſtal earſt conſeald, in rock of heauens height,
               Was fram'd into a glas, to mirrour vertues face,
               Whence lookers on receaue, conſeruatiue of ſight,
               And can no ſpot eſpy, to make it beare diſgrace:
               But ſerueth as a booke, and moueth much delight,
               By pureneſſe therein ſeen, impureneſſe to deface,
               And ſacred was the ſkil, that pulliſht it ſo cleere,
               That through it vnto men, ſaluation did appeere.
            
            
               L'enuoy.
               LEt not offence miſtake diſpraiſing this my praiſe,
               As to diſpraiſe the ſame, in deeming it too much,
               Whoſe woorth demaundeth more, of duty many wayes▪
               
               And doth deſerue diſpraiſe, in that it is not ſutch,
               But ſince deuotion hath, afforded theſe aſſayes,
               Let not vncauſ'd offence, all cauſeleſſe ſeeme to grutch,
               For heau'n did by beheſt, moſt bleſſed her ordayne,
               And ſhee ordayn'd her praiſe, ſucceſſyue to remaine.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            OVR BLESSED LADIES
LVLLABY.
            
               Vpon my lap my ſoueraigne ſit
                     •
                  ,
               And ſucks vpon my breſt,
               Meane whyle his loue ſuſtaines my lyf,
               And giues my body reſt.
               Sing lullaby my litle boy,
               Sing lullaby my liues ioy.
            
            
               VVhen thow ha'ſt taken thy repaſt,
               Repoſe (my Babe) on mee,
               So may thy moother and thy nurs
               Thy cradle alſo bee.
               Sing lullaby my litle boy,
               Sing lullaby my liues ioy.
            
            
               I grieue that duty doth not woork
               All what my wiſhing would,
               Becauſe I would not bee to thee
               But in the beſt I ſhould,
               Sing lullaby my litle boy,
               Sing lullaby my liues ioy.
            
            
               Yet as I am and as I may
               I m
                     •
                  ſt and 
                     ••
                  lbe thyne,
               Though all to 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ot thy ſelf,
               Vout
                     •
                  af
                     ••
                  g to be myne▪
               
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               
               My vits my woords, my deeds, my thoughts,
               And els what is in mee,
               I rather wil not wiſh to vſe,
               If not in ſeruing thee.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               My babe, my blis, my chyld, my choyce,
               My frute my flower, and bud,
               My Ieſus, and my only ioy,
               The ſomme of all my good.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               My ſweetneſſe and the ſweeteſt moſte,
               That heauen could earth deliuer,
               Soule of my loue, ſpirit of my lyf,
               Abyde with mee for euer.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               Liue ſtil with mee, and bee my loue,
               And death wil mee refraine.
               Vnleſſe thow let mee dy with thee,
               To liue with the againe.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               Leaue now to waile thow luckleſſe wight,
               That wrough'ſt thy races woe,
               Redreſſe is found, and foiled is,
               Thy frute-aluring foe.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               
               Thy frute of death from Paradiſe
               Made thee exyled mourne,
               My frute of lyf to Paradiſe
               Makes ioyful thy returne.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               Grow vp good frute, bee nowriſht by
               Theſe fountaines two of mee,
               That only flow with maidens milk,
               The only meat for thee.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               The earth is now a heau'n become,
               And this baſe bower of myne
               A princely pallas vnto mee,
               My Sonne doth make to ſhyne,
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               His ſight giues cleereneſſe to my ſight,
               VVhen waking I him ſee,
               And ſleeping his myld countenance
               Giues 
                     •
                  auour vnto mee.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               VVhen I him in myne armes embrace
               I feel my harte imbraced,
               Eu'n by the inward grace of his,
               VVhich hee in mee hath placed.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               
               And when I kis his louing lips
               Then his ſweet ſmelling breath
               Doth yeild a ſauor to my ſoule,
               That feedes loue hope and faith.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               The ſhepheards left their keeping ſheep,
               For ioy to ſee my lambe,
               How may I more reioyce to ſee,
               My ſelf to bee the dam.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               Three Kinges their treaſures hether brought,
               Of incenſe myrh and gold,
               The heauens treaſure and the King
               That here they might behold,
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               One ſorte an Angel did direct,
               A ſtar did guyde the other,
               And all the faireſt ſonne to ſee
               That euer had a mother.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               This ſight I ſee, this chyld I haue,
               This infant I embrace,
               O endleſſe comfort of the earth,
               And heau'ns eternal grace.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               
               Thee ſanctitie her ſelf doth ſerue,
               Thee goodneſſe doth attend,
               Thee bleſſedneſſe doth wait vpon,
               And vertues all comend,
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               Great Kinges and Prophets wiſhed haue,
               To ſee that I poſſeſſe,
               Yet wiſh I neuer thee to ſee,
               If not in thankfulneſſe.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               Let heauen, and earth, & ſaintes, & men,
               Aſſiſtance giue to mee,
               That all their moſte occurring ayd
               Augment my thankes to thee.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               And let th'enſuing bleſſed race
               Thow wilt ſucceeding raiſe,
               Ioyne all their praiſes vnto myne.
               To multiply thy praiſe.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
            
               And take my ſeruice wel in woorth,
               And Ioſephs heere with mee,
               VVho of my huſband beares the name,
               Thy ſeruant for to bee.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
               Sing lullaby, &c.
            
         
         
            
            A REPREHENSION
OF THE REPREHENDING
of our ladies praiſe.
            
               FY foule contempt of ſelf-defyling breath.
               That dar'ſt diſgorge, gainſt ſo great puritie.
               The poiſſon iſſued from defect of faith,
               To ſerue to witnes thy impietie.
            
            
               VVhence can it come but from infernal hat
                     •
                  
               
               That earth-bred wretches are become to brag,
               As Gods owne mothers glorie to abate,
               To call and compt her but a ſaffron bag.
            
            
               Or that a 
                     •
                  il the ſubiect vnto ſin
               Dare equalize her ſelf as good as ſhee,
               In whome no thought impure hath euer bin,
               Or leaſt of pureneſſe-want might euer bee.
            
            
               No Saint or Angel euer taught them this,
               For heauen did her entytle ful of grace,
               And her conception of the king of blis
               Her high regard comends to eu'ry race.
            
            
               Her ſelf of her owne praiſe was propheteſſe,
               And of the races that ſhould it conſerue,
               Needes muſt they then her euer-praiſe profeſſe
               That loue and law enuyteth to obſerue.
            
            
               
               The honor to a mother ſuch as ſhee
               To ſuch a ſonne muſt argue greater loue,
               VVhich may not vnto him offenſiue bee,
               In whome kynde loue can it no leſſe approoue.
            
            
               But hatred of her laud may neuer grow
               Of zeale that loue vnto her ſonne may raiſe,
               Nor can the chyld his loue on ſuch beſtow,
               As kindle hatred at the mothers praiſe.
            
            
               He which is mighty her hath magnifyde,
               Let faithful then her euer magnify,
               VVhyle the vnfaithful in conceit abyde,
               Of doing wel her praiſes to deny.
            
            
               And let performance of her woorthy praiſe,
               Of her praiſe-yeilding race remaine the ſigne,
               That ſo the blame that for it others raiſe,
               Become the marck of their diſſenting lyne.
            
            
               And let contempt of her with ſuch abyde,
               As pay in hel the tribute of their pryde.
            
         
         
            
            THE TRIVMPHE OF
feminyne Saintes.
            
               THe trump of fame ſoundes foorth the factes,
               Of wel-deſeruing wights:
               And kinges with honor do reward,
               The ſeruice of their knights.
               Of ſuch therefore I ceas to ſing,
               My ſong of ſuch to frame:
               VVhoſe meed reſtes in no princes power,
               Nor praiſe in earthly fame.
            
            
               And of the ſexe of woman kynde,
               Though not of thoſe of yore:
               VVith ſeared breſts againſt their foes,
               That warlyke armour wore.
               But ſuch as armed were with faith,
               Againſt ſoul-killing euil:
               And did in combat ouercome,
               The fleſh, the world, and deuil.
            
            
               And for thy loue o Ieſu Chriſte,
               And glorie of thy name:
               That found no woes to bee endur'd,
               But did endure theſame.
               Their faith did bring them to endure,
               Endurance blis did bring:
               In blis they now do ſing to thee,
               Now here of them I ſing.
            
            
               
               Vnheard it was in earth before,
               Vnſounded foorth by 
                     •
                  ame:
               Vnknowne that ere in ſilly ſexe
               Such reſolution came.
               Til wil and vertue did conioyne,
               In choiſe of chiefeſt good:
               And grace gaue ayd, & faith gain'd force,
               And nothing it withſtood.
            
            
               As Teela firſt example giues,
               VVhome fyre could not annoy:
               And beares and lions left vnhurt,
               Each other to deſtroy.
               Fierce rigour woorking rigours ruth,
               No hurt the hurtleſſe fynde:
               Yet ſhee a martres is eſtem'd,
               That martred was in mynde.
            
            
               
                  Euphemia throwne to ſauage beaſtes,
               By men of beaſtly mood:
               Found beaſtes deuoyd of ſauageneſſe,
               And men more thirſting blood.
               And all the torments that ſhee had,
               To her not ſeemed payne:
               But when a ſwoord tranſpearſt her corps,
               True glory was her gayne.
            
            
               The noble Anaſtatia,
               
               Poore chriſtians did relieue:
               VVhoſe heath niſh huſband her therefore,
               Vnkyndely did agrieue.
               But when the ſwoord and cruel death,
               Did her from thralle releaſe:
               The heau'ns her freedome did reſtore,
               VVith endleſſe ioy and peace.
            
            
               
               Beſydes this Anaſtatia,
               
               A martres and a wyf:
               Two virgins of lyke name and faith,
               Loſt each lyke wiſe their lyf.
               The elder that moſt paynes endur'd,
               Moſt is her glory ſpred:
               That loſing firſt, paps, handes and feet,
               Did laſtly loſe her head.
            
            
               Mylde Dorothey endured much,
               And dy'd by dint of ſwoord:
               VVhoſe ſuffrance did her loue approue,
               To her deere louing Lord.
               Shee dead, to himTh
                        ••
                     -phil
                        ••
                     . ſweet roſes ſent,
               That dying did her ſcorne:
               VVhich moued him her to enſue,
               That els had bene forlorne.
            
            
               
                  Eraſma in her faiths defence,
               Did wade through many a wo:
               Vntil the hedſman ended all,
               In his death-bringing blow.
               And with this virgin, virgins three,
               Did gladly yeild to die:
               So ſelling lyf at rate of death,
               Vndying lyf to buy.
            
            
               
                  Seraphia her ſetled loue,
               To Chriſte was ſo entyre:
               That ſtrokes with cudgels ſhee ſuſtaind,
               And burning flames of fyre.
               And laſt of all, her lyf and all,
               For his deere loue ſhee left:
               And gaynd an euer-lyuing lyf,
               In ſteed of that was reft.
            
            
               
               
                  Sabi
                        •
                     a nobly did enſue,
               
                  Seraphia noble dame:
               Yet nobler either in their actes,
               Then only in there name.
               Refuſing of vngodly gods,
               The ſeruice to fulfil:
               Shee rather yeilded to the ſwoord,
               Then to the pagans wil.
            
            
               As Authia the woes beheld,
               VVhich were by tyrants donne:
               Vnto the conſtant BiſhopEleuth
                        •
                     
                     rius.,
               Her ſo wel-beloued ſonne.
               Shee ioy'd to haue ſo good a chyld,
               For Chriſte to ſuffer ſmart:
               But when with him ſhee ſtrangled was,
               Then ioyed moſte her hart.
            
            
               
                  Affra in turning vnto Chriſte,
               Turn'd from a lyf impure:
               And for his loue the fyres fierce flame,
               VVas willing to endure.
               And to a ſtake when ſhee was ty'd,
               Eu'n as the fyre was made:
               I giue the thankes o God for this,
               This glorious martres ſaid.
            
            
               Sincere was Simphoroſas faith,
               As did by deedes appeere:
               In gayning vnto her belief,
               Her ſpouſe and children deere.
               And with her huſband to accord,
               And ſonnes in number ſeauen:
               To liue in Chriſte to dy for Chriſte,
               To loue and liue in heauen.
            
            
               
               
                  Fides and Spes and Charitas,
               
               Borne of S
                        •
                     p
                        •••
                     
                   ſage.
               Rype in their faith and forti
                     ••
                  d
                     •
                  ,
               Though greene in yeares of age.
               VVere whipped, thruſt in boyling pitche,
               And hedded afterward:
               VVhoſe woorth the world of right admyres,
               And heauen doth reward.
            
            
               VVhen bleſt Blandina had the rack,
               And ſundry tortures paſt:
               Vnto a bul wrapt in a net,
               Shee was with fury caſte.
               And when of this ſo feirce a beaſt,
               No harme ſhee could receaue:
               Then with the ſwoord, men woors then beaſtes.
               Did her of lyf bereaue.
            
            
               
                  Potamina a noble Dame,
               VVas with her motherMarcella. brent:
               VVhen fearing-threates nor 
                     •
                  uries 
                     •
                  orce,
               Might moue her to relent.
               Shee beeing dead to himBaſilides. app
                     ••
                  rd,
               That her did ayd in death:
               VVhereby he turning vnto Chriſte,
               VVas martred for h
                     •
                  s faith.
            
            
               Thryce happy was Felicitas,
               
               Tha
                     •
                   happely did ſee:
               Her ſonnes her ſayinges to enſue,
               And of her faith to bee.
               And for the ſame by diuers deathes,
               A deathles lyf renew:
               VVhich by the ſwoord ſhee laſtly gaynd,
               And ſo did them 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
               The mayd Martina beeing led
               
                  Appollo 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   adore:
               The Idol of it ſelf fel downe,
               As ſhee it came before.
               A Lion vnto her they put,
               Her body they did wound:
               And by the ſwoord her lyf ſhee loſt,
               And lyf thereby ſhee found.
            
            
               To offer to the Idol Gods,
               
                  Cecilia did refuſe:
               And contumelies, paynes, and death,
               Contented was to chuſe.
               And in a ſkalding caldron caſt,
               And thryce ſtrook with the ſwoord:
               Attayning ſo vnto the ioyes,
               The heauens do affoord.
            
            
               Faire Agatha in beautie rare,
               And welth did both abound:
               But vertue which is more of woorth,
               Might more in her be found.
               Vnhurt on Irons hot ſhee ſtood,
               Cut of were both her paps:
               Her lyf ſhee left, and gayned blis,
               So ending al miſhaps.
            
            
               The loyal Appollonia.
               
               VVithſtood the pagan lawes:
               For which with violence her teeth,
               VVere torne from out her iawes.
               And when for her a burning fyre,
               The helhoundes did prouyde,
               Into the ſame ſhee went her ſelf,
               And conſtantly ſhee dy'd.
            
            
               
               
                  Ruſſi
                        ••
                     
                   and Sec
                        •
                     n
                        ••
                     
                   both,
               Siſters and virgins were:
               Both liuing in the loue of God,
               And dying in his feare.
               From ſundry ſorrowes which they 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               The ſwoord did them releaſe:
               And lyf and ioy foorth with began,
               As wo and death did ceaſe.
            
            
               
                  Baſilia hauing fixt her loue,
               VVhere loue is beſt beloued:
               Tooke no regard of carnal loue,
               By fond affection moued.
               To Chriſte ſhee vowed chaſtitie,
               And beeing forc'd to chuſe
               A heathens loue, or loſſe of lyf,
               To liue ſhee did refuſe.
            
            
               
                  Eugenia woorthy wel her name,
               Not of Dianaes traine:
               To offer therefore did refuſe,
               Vnto her Idol vaine.
               Shee drowned not ty'd to a ſtone,
               And in the Tiber caſt:
               But on a Chriſtmas day to Chriſt,
               By dint of ſwoord ſhee paſt.
            
            
               
                  Concordia with the heauens in peace,
               And with the earth at ſtryf:
               VVith blowes was beaten vnto death,
               And ended ſo her lyf.
               Vnited faſt in faith and hope,
               And Charities accord:
               Shee died here in perfect p
                     •
                  ace,
               And ſo liues with her lord.
            
            
               
               Pure Margares a priſed pearle,
               For Chriſte himſelf to buy:
               In tender yeares imbrac'd his loue,
               A
                     ••
                   for his law did die.
               The diueliſh dragon burſt in twain
                     •
                  ,
               That ment her to deſtroy:
               Her death and ſorrowes here but ſhort,
               Brought lyf and laſting ioy.
            
            
               
                  Columbae ſixteene yeares of age,
               Reſolu'd a chaſte intent:
               VVhoſe vow to Chriſte a looſe yongman,
               To violate was ſent.
               But him a ſauage beare had ſlaine,
               Had ſhee not ſtayd the force:
               A virgin martres ſo ſhee dyde,
               And hee obtayn'd remorce.
            
            
               
                  Theodoſia martirs did ſalute,
               As at the bar they ſtood:
               And prayd them pray for her to him,
               For whome they ſhed there blood.
               For which the ireful iudge ordaynd,
               To teare her breſts a way:
               And to rent open both her ſydes,
               And caſt her in the ſea.
            
            
               Sweet Catharin belou'd of Chriſte,
               To Chriſte was conſtant ſeene:
               In leauing for his only loue,
               To bee a crowned Queene.
               Yet crownd ſhee was with martyrdome,
               VVhen torments from her fled:
               And Angels bore her ghoſte to blis.
               VVhen ſhee had loſt her hed.
            
            
               
               The true belieuing Barbara,
               
               Fals Gods would not adore:
               And loſt her fathers woorthleſſe loue,
               For Chriſt his loue and lore:
               Strange torments hee on her impoſ'd,
               And in ſtraight priſon hild:
               And laſtly her his only chyld,
               VVith his owne handes he kild.
            
            
               Yong Agnes aged thirteen yeares
               In Chriſte repoſ'd her truſt:
               A
                     •
                  d not for fauour nor for force,
               VVould yeild to ought vniuſt.
               No harme ſhee had, when in the fyre,
               Shee throwne was by her foes:
               And with a ſwoord thruſt through her neck,
               VVere ended all her woes.
            
            
               
                  Chriſtina faire and noble mayd,
               Did vnto Chriſte obey:
               For which ſhee 
                     •
                  y'd vnto a ſtone,
               VVas caſte into the ſea.
               But Angels ayded her to land,
               VVhere ſhee more woes did taſte:
               And as an arrow ſtrake her hart,
               Her ſoule to heauen paſte.
            
            
               VVhen Fauſta in her faithful mynde,
               Reſolued did remaine:
               The Idol prieſt wild with a ſaw,
               To cut her corps in twain.
               But when he ſaw it hurt her not,
               Hee in her faith affied:
               And comfort from the heauens receau'd,
               VVith her when as he dyed.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     udelia many did conuert,
               Vnto her lordes belief:
               VVhich in the Perſian pagans did
               Enkindle irefull grief.
               Vnto the Sun ſhee would not pray,
               Nor yet the fyre adore:
               And had the ſkin flead from her face,
               And laſtly dy'd therefore.
            
            
               Sout Iuli
                        •
                     na did endure.
               The torments of the euil:
               And did in combat ouercome,
               Th'accurſed cruel deuil.
               And after all her conqueſts gaynd,
               Then gayned ſhee renowne:
               For by the ſwoord vnto her due,
               Remaynd a martirs crowne.
            
            
               
                  Victoria wel might called bee,
               That woorthy mynded mayd:
               That in her ſelf ſubdued ſin,
               VVith courage vndiſmayd.
               And gayned virgins vnto Chriſt,
               And actes of woonder wrought:
               And did by martirdome attain,
               The garland that ſhee ſought.
            
            
               Becauſe the Idoles to adore,
               
                  Lucia did refuſe:
               Shee threatned was ſhee ſhould bee thruſt,
               Into the comon ſtewes.
               No no quoth ſhee; the mynd beeing pure,
               The body is vnſtaynd:
               Then with the ſwoord ſhee martrid was,
               And glorie ſo ſhee gaynd.
            
            
               
               To Fortunata for her faith,
               Much euil did betyd:
               VVho fyrie flames & fierce beaſtes claw
                     ••
                  ,
               VVas willing to abyde.
               And tortures and lim-ſtre
                     •
                  ching 
                     •
                  ack,
               From whence her ſauiour pleaſed:
               To cal her bleſſed ſoule to blis,
               VVhere with her woes were eaſed.
            
            
               
                  Febronia with reſolued force,
               For chaſtitie and faith:
               Endur'd with patience to the end,
               The woorſt of tyrants wrath.
               The rack, the fyre, and rods, ſhee felt,
               Teeths loſſe, and either breſt,
               And with the ſwoord all loſſe of wo,
               And gaine of laſting reſt.
            
            
               
                  Macra a mayd of heauenly mynde,
               No earthly thinges did moue:
               For priſon, fyre, nor loſſe of breſts,
               Might not her faith remoue.
               All naked o're hot-ſheards of pots,
               Her body rolled was:
               VVhyle ſhee in praying vnto God,
               To paradiſe did pas.
            
            
               
                  Z
                        •
                     a a glorious martyrsNicoſtr
                        •
                     tus. wyf
               Before the aulter prayd:
               VVhere-vnder bleſt ſaint P
                     ••
                  ters bones,
               The faithful had conuayd.
               And for this fact ſurpriſed then,
               VVas hanged on a tree:
               Both by her he
                     •••
                  , and by her neck,
               And ſo her crowne had ſhee.
            
            
               
               
                  Charitina with fyre annoyd,
               And caſt into the ſeas:
               Came foorth and had no hurt at all▪
               
               Nor feeling▪ of vneaſe.
               Then were her handes and feet cut of,
               But he whome ſhee did loue:
               Eu'n as ſhee prayd, receau'd her ghoſte,
               Into his ioyes aboue.
            
            
               
                  Eulalia ardent in her zeal,
               Vnto her louing lord:
               To ſuffre torments many wayes,
               Moſt midly did accord.
               And laſtly in the burning fyre,
               Lauding his holy name:
               To him her ſoule ſhee ſacryfyſ'd,
               And died in the 
                     •
                  lame.
            
            
               The lyke in loue the lyke in zeal,
               In ſome ſucceeding ſpace:
               A ſecond good Eulali
                        •
                     
                   was,
               A lyke endu'd with grace.
               The rack ſhe felt, and ſundry grieues,
               The laſt; of lyf the loſſe:
               VVhen foes of Chriſte, for faith of Chriſte,
               Did naile her on a croſſe.
            
            
               VVhyle Emer
                        •••
                     i
                        •
                     na. yet
               was taught in Chriſtian lore,
               Her foſter-ſiſter 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   tombe,
               Shee prayd, and kneeld, before.
               And taken at this martres tombe,
               A martres ſhee was made:
               And vnto happy heauen
                     •
                   ioyes,
               Her ghoſte ſtraight was conueyd.
            
            
               
               Chaſte Theodora to the ſtewes,
               To be deflowred led:
               Gat thence in habyt of a youth,
               That ſtayd there in her ſted.
               But for this fact, & for his faith,
               VVhen hee was led to death:
               Shee came and yeilded vp her ſelf,
               And with him yeilded breath.
            
            
               
                  Criſpina of renowmed race,
               Did by her vertues mynde,
               More honour in her ſelf atchiue,
               Then came to her by kynde.
               Shee would vnto the Idol Gods,
               No ſacrifiſe affoord:
               But yeided for her Lord and God,
               Her neck vnto the ſwoord.
            
            
               
                  Suſanna of a woorthy ſtock,
               VVas of as woorthy fame,
               As ſhee that falſe defamed was,
               And firſt did beare her name.
               Shee Chriſte his ſeruants did relieue,
               And liued in his lore:
               And for the ſame ſhee loſt her head,
               And gayned heauen therefore.
            
            
               Impriſned Leocadia long.
               Did for her faith remayne:
               VVhoſe faithful mynde remained free,
               In moſte afflicting payne.
               Til God at length for her releaſe,
               Her ghoſte tooke thence away:
               Her ſuffrance by a martirs crowne,
               In glory to repay.
            
            
               
               The virgin Bibiana was,
               Eſtabliſht in belief:
               VVhich faithleſſe foes could not ſubuert,
               By guerdon nor by grief.
               So long her body laſhed was.
               VVith knotted whips with lead:
               That her ſweete ſoule to heauen paſt,
               And left it lying dead.
            
            
               
                  Euphraſia with more maidens chaſte,
               In place vnchaſte was placed:
               But hee their puritie preſeru'd,
               That purely him embraced.
               Then by their death-contryuing-crue,
               Stones to their nectes were bound,
               And ſo into the water caſt,
               The innocentes were drown'd.
            
            
               
                  Antonia had her tender limmes
               Beyond all meaſure payned,
               And three dayes hanged by one arme,
               Moſte conſtant ſtil remayned.
               And two yeares hauing priſned bene,
               Receau'd at laſt her hyre,
               VVhat tyme her ſoule her body left
               Conſuming in the fyre.
            
            
               
                  Lucretia, not that Lucres once
               VVhich did her ſelf deſtroy,
               Did for true faith and faithful loue,
               Beare wrongful griefes annoy.
               The one in earth her glory left,
               The other in heauen and earth:
               Becauſe more woorthy was the cauſe,
               VVhy ſhee endured death.
            
            
               
               VVith tearing hookes and iron combes,
               VVas Tatiana torne:
               
                  Cointha trayld along the ſtreetes,
               Her fleſh from bones was worne.
               
                  Paula that gathred martyrs blood,
               Her owne for Chriſt did ſhed:
               
                  Creſcentia for her faith to Chriſt,
               VVas thruſt in boyling lead.
            
            
               
                  Corona torne betwene two trees,
               Her crowne in blis did fynde:
               As did Cirilla when ſhee left,
               Her bleeding corps behynde.
               
                  Balbina daughter to a ſaintS. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  ,
               Her fathers ſteps did trace:
               And Aquilina by her death,
               Did deathleſſe lyf embrace.
            
            
               
                  Helconis that great grief endur'd,
               Did laſtly loſe her h
                     •
                  d:
               
                  Calliopa her ſcortched corps,
               Left with tormentors dead.
               
                  Felicula by tortur kild,
               And Paula ſton'd to death:
               And with the ſwoord Conſtantia,
               
               Conſtantly
                     •
                  yeilded breath.
            
            
               
                  Regina many paynes endur'd,
               Heau'ns diademe to gayne:
               
                  Muſtiola did ſuffer wo,
               For gayning ioyes againe.
               
                  Irene that good bookes did hyde,
               Her lyf for Chriſte beſtowed:
               
                  Dominica that Idoles brake,
               By death her feruour ſhewed.
            
            
               
               
                  Dafroſa that to martirdo
                     •
                  e,
               Her huſbandFabi
                        •••
                     . hath enſued:
               And Marciona with whoſe blood,
               The wyld beaſtes were imbrued.
               
                  Mannea that with her three ſonnes,
               And with her huſband dy'd:
               
                  Valeria ſaint Vitals wyf,
               Gainſt death her courage tryd.
            
            
               
                  Pelagia in a brazen Ox
               Red hot, aliue was thruſt:
               
                  Anthuſia throwne into a wel,
               To pleaſe the tirants luſt.
               
                  Maxima vnto cruel death,
               VVith cudgels beaten was:
               
                  Agathoclia loſt her toung,
               Ere ſhee to blis did pas.
            
            
               
                  Blanda with her deer huſband dyd▪
               
               VVhoſe heddes on ſtakes on hic:
               Through pagan pollicy were ſet,
               Chriſtians to terrify.
               VVith Leonis and Libia,
               
               The faithful ſiſters twaine,
               
                  Eutropia twelue yeares old 
                     •
                  ndur'd,
               Death and moſte deadly payne.
            
            
               The vertuous virgin Sophia.
               
               
                  Cornelia loyal euer:
               
                  Albina and Aſteria,
               
               Did vnto death perſeuer.
               
                  Priſca and L
                        •
                     oc
                        •
                     itia,
               
               
                  Martha and Anto
                        •
                     ina:
               
               VVith Leonilla▪
                   of that lore,
               And ſetled Secund
                        ••
                     a.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Sebaſtiana whome ſaint Paule,
               Did bring to Chriſte his loue:
               And Reparata (dead) whoſe ghoſte,
               Aſcended lyke a doue.
               Faire Flora and Maria both,
               
                  And Fla
                     •
                  ia Do
                     •
                  itilla:
               Good Dula and Demetria,
               
               Gaudentia and Lucilla.
            
            
               VVith Alexandra ſix beſyde,
               For Chriſte their blood haue ſpent:
               And Ciriaca and fy
                     •
                  e more,
               VVith bodies rac'd and rent.
               VVith other martyreſſes twelue,
               
                  Theodoſia went to heauen:
               Eu'n as at S
                        ••
                     irna for that cauſe,
               Dy'd holy virgins ſeauen.
            
            
               Six that were called Cand
                        •
                     da,
               
               Gaue beauty to that name.
               More fairer far then 
                     •
                  t ſelf 
                     •
                  ound,
               Doth ſignify the ſame.
               Some maried were and ſome were maydes,
               Their ſuffrance ſundry wayes:
               There cauſe all one, their only king,
               Did all to glorie raiſe.
            
            
               Seauen of the name of Iulia,
               
               Did one of them enſue:
               VVhereby eight martirs glorious crownes,
               To this one name is due.
               And of the name Iuſtina fyue,
               As of Pelagia were?
               Of Martiana there were three,
               VVhoſe count Valer
                        ••
                     
                   beare.
            
            
               
               Of this moſt glorious troop and ranck,
               Of martrid woomen-kynde:
               I ſhal not nede to recon mor
                     •
                  ,
               Thoughe many more I fynd,
               For euen as theſe, rehearſed here,
               There croſſe with Chriſt ſuſtayn'd:
               So did the reſt, and all with Chriſt,
               Al glory haue obtayn'd.
            
            
               In ſundry regions of the earth,
               Ful many more beſyde,
               For faith, for vow, for zeal to Chriſt
                     •
                  ,
               Ful gloriouſly haue dyde.
               Chaſte VV
                        ••
                     n
                        •
                     frid did feele of death,
               The bloody ſtroke and ſting.
               As Dymp
                        •
                     a of her father did,
               A pagan Iriſh King.
            
            
               VVith ſoule and body vndefyld,
               In endleſſe lyf to raigne:
               Good Vrſula, and all her troop,
               Endured to be ſlaine,
               And C
                        •
                     rdula that hid her ſelf,
               Her lyf thereby to ſaue▪
               
               Came foorth and yeilded vnto death,
               Her lyf thereby to haue.
            
            
               To bring the number in accomp
                     •
                  ,
               Vnable is my ſkil:
               Of all ſuch glorious martirs names,
               And their endured il.
               But in the Lambe his booke of lyf,
               No one omitted is:
               Nor no one wo that they ſuſtaynd▪
               
               Vnrecompenſt in bli
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
               No more then their formenter
                     •
                   miſſe,
               Their iuſt reward in hel:
               For each inflicted grief and ſmart,
               VVherewith they them did quel.
               Exyl'd thoſe wretches are from heaue
                     •
                  ,
               And odious dead in earth:
               Yet in helles horror neuer dy,
               Though euer feeling death.
            
            
               Meane whyle, the choſen ſaintes of God,
               In heauen euer liue:
               And euer glorie vnto him,
               In all reioyſing giue.
               Al clad in whyte for puritie,
               Each with a golden crowne:
               And bearing palmes of victory,
               As enſeignes of renowne.
            
            
               No eye hath ſeene, no eare hath heard,
               No hart of man conceaued:
               No ſight, no ſound, no thought of ioy,
               As now they haue receaued.
               All griefes are now extinguiſhed,
               All ſorrowes haue 
                     •
                  n end:
               No teares can fall from weeping eyes,
               Nor ſighes from hart aſcend.
            
            
               O g
                     •
                  orio
                     ••
                   troop, whoſe praiſe the heau'ns,
               VVith melodie refou
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Accept that wee as c
                     •
                  coes here,
               Yeild noiſe vnto the ſound.
               And when for your true followed faith,
               VVee any wo ſuſtaine:
               Our conſtant ſuffrance of the ſame,
               Voutſafe of God obtayne.
            
            Deo gratiae.
         
         
            
            A RESEMBLANCE
OF MARTYRS.
            
               BEfore the craggy flint
               Meetes with the hardned ſteel,
            
            
               It ſeemes not to conteyne,
               The vertue it conteynes,
            
            
               But when it doth the ſtroke
               Of ſwift encountring feel,
            
            
               Eu'n then the force appeers,
               That hid in it remaines,
            
            
               Right ſo reſolued myndes,
               Through wicked fortunes wheel,
            
            
               Encountring with miſ
                     •
                  ap,
               And feeling bitter paynes.
            
            
               Make fyre of ſacred Ioue,
               From ardent zeal proceed:
            
            
               VVhich mounting vp to heau'n,
               Doth all the Starres exceed.
            
         
         
            
            TE DEVM LAVDAMVS,
OR
The ſong of S. Ambroſe, &
S. Auguſtyne.
            
               TO thee O God wee praiſes giue,
               VVee thee our Lord confeſſe
               Eternal father, all the earth,
               Adores thy woorthyneſſe.
            
            
               The Angels, heau'ns, & heau'nly powers,
               Yeild praiſes all to thee:
               The Cherubinnes, and Scraphinnes,
               Sound out inceſſantly.
            
            
               O holy, holy, holy, Lord.
               O God of Sabaoth,
               Thy glorious maieſty repleates,
               The earth and heauen both.
            
            
               To thee the quyre ſo glorious,
               Of thy Apoſtles all,
               To thee the number woorthy-praiſe,
               Of prophets cry and cal.
            
            
               The army of thy martirs bright,
               Thy praiſes do expreſſe:
               Thy holy Church through-out the earth,
               Doth thee o Lord confeſſe.
            
            
               
               Father of endleſſe Maieſtie,
               Thy only Sonne withal,
               Together with the Holy Ghoſt,
               Comforter of vs all.
            
            
               Thow King of glorie arte O Chriſte,
               And ere the earth begonne,
               Thow of thy father did'ſt remaine,
               His euer beeing Sonne.
            
            
               Thy willingneſſe man to releas,
               Made thee in earth to come:
               And for that cauſe not to abhor,
               Thy maiden-mothers woombe.
            
            
               And when the ſting of cruel death,
               By the was vanuiſht quyght,
               Thow opned'ſt then thee realme of blis,
               To each belieuing wight.
            
            
               In glorie of the father thow,
               Do'ſt ſit at Gods right hand:
               VVee hold thee for the iudge by whome,
               Our cauſes muſt bee ſkand.
            
            
               VVee humbly therefore thee deſyre,
               Voutſafe thy ſeruants ayd:
               Of whome with thy moſte pretious blood,
               The ranſomes thow ha'ſt paid.
            
            
               O make that wee rewarded bee,
               VVith thy deer ſaintes in blis:
               Eu'n with thy glory and thy grace,
               VVhich euer during is.
            
            
               
               Thy people and thyne heritage,
               O Lord ſaue and defend:
               And gouerne them, and ſtil their praiſe,
               In altitude extend.
            
            
               And from offending thee by ſin,
               This day do thow vs ſaue:
               And mercy haue on vs O Lord,
               Lord on vs mercy haue.
            
            
               And as our truſt in thee hath bene,
               Such let thy mercy bee:
               Confounded let mee not become,
               That hoped haue in thee.
            
         
         
            
            HOVV GOD IN ALL AGES
hath bin ſerued with Sacrifiſe.
            
               Sacrificium ſub lege Naturae.
               WHen God created man, and rule vnto him gaue,
               Of creatures all on earth, and eu'ry earthly thing,
               And knowlege of his God, did in his hart engraue,
               Subiection ſo to know, vnto his ſoueraigne King:
               Then for to know and yeild, what homage hee would haue,
               Nature by her inſtinckt, vnto his mynde did bring,
               And Sacrifiſe it was, and well accepted than,
               Thus mannes adoring God, with ſacrifiſe began.
            
            
               Sacrificium ſub lege Moyſes.
               VVHen frō the hows of thralle, through ayd of heau'uly might
               Gods people were led foorth, by Moyſis then their guyd,
               For this new freedome found, it reſted that of right,
               God with augmented thankes, muſt now bee gratifyde:
               And him to honor more, in more then wonted plight,
               Old Sacrifiſe was now, with new rytes beautifyde,
               So for more good receau'd, more gratitude did riſe,
               Which ſtill to God was don, in doing ſacrifiſe.
            
            
               Sacrificium ſub lege Euangelica.
               VVHen Gods dere Sonne from heau'n, did vnto earth deſced,
               Loſt loue of God againe, for mannes releaſe to win,
               Himſelf in ſacrifiſe, blood-ſacrifiſe did end,
               When his high priſed blood, did ſatisfy for ſin:
               But ſince Gods ſeruice muſt on ſacrifiſe depend,
               He chang'd, not took away, what faith did firſt begin,
               And did ordaine himſelf, in Sacramental wiſe
               To bee to God for man, a ſoueraigne ſacrifiſe,
            
         
         
            
            SAINT PEETERS
COMFORT.
            
               EV'n there where ſin, my ſilly ſoule defyld,
               Shame bad mee hy, and ſeeke to hyde my face,
               Foule face of myne, that that faire face behild,
               And could my ſo wel knowing it out face,
               And make himſelf eu'n whome I did deny,
               True witnes, vnto my fals periury.
            
            
               I ſcarſly was gon foorth out of the halle,
               VVhen ſorrow ſtraight my ſoule did apprehend,
               Poore ſoule of myne, deſeruer of thy thralle,
               VVhoſe fault no manner ſkuſes can defend,
               Only vnfayned teares, told my deſtreſſe
               And with my grief declar'd my guiltineſſe.
            
            
               In ſorrowes iayle, thus captiue did I ly,
               And there lament, and there my caſe complaine,
               And there did pittie ouer-heare my cry,
               And did in my behalf acceſſe obtaine,
               To ſue to him whome I deny'd to know,
               To let him know my grief for doing ſo.
            
            
               VVho daigning then vpon my hart to look,
               vpon my hart, the ſpectacle of wo,
               Hee there-vpon ſo great compaſsion took,
               That hee on it ſweet mercy did beſtow,
               Sweet mercy, that it ſelf ſo far extends,
               As to accept contrition for amends.
            
            
               
               And that the world heer of might witnes bee,
               His mercy renouated al his loue,
               Th'effects whereof all men in mee might ſee,
               But none more then my ſelf did euer prooue,
               The good I had before, that ſtil I hild,
               Only my guylt hee only hath annild.
            
            
               For where my ſoule for mercy only ſought,
               It mercy found, eu'n in the moſte degree,
               And mercy loue with it vnited brought,
               Deer loue, my dying ſoules reſtauratie,
               Lyf of my lyf, which did me now reſtore,
               To lyuely ſtrength, which I did lack before.
            
            
               The wound is heal'd, yet muſt the ſkar remaine,
               The ſkar my ſtil remembrance of the ſore,
               For which, kynde grief ſtil wil I entertaine,
               That neuer may ſufficiently deplore,
               Kynd-grief it is, cloſe in my hart it lies,
               To vrge the euer-dutie of myne eyes.
            
            
               For though my hart all comfort haue receaued,
               That heauens comfort did on it beſtow,
               Yet can it not of that grief be bereaued,
               That doth eu'n out of that ſelf comfort grow,
               For in admyring ſo great grace extended,
               I grieue that I ſo ſweet a Chriſte offended.
            
            
               My deereſt Lord, oh might I dy for thee,
               That brag'd to dy with thee, and the deny'd,
               By thy ſtrong ayd I muſt aſſiſted bee,
               For neuer thought ſhal in my breſt abyde,
               To ſay I wil, and not aſſiſtance craue,
               Becauſe my wil, muſt thy wil alſo haue.
            
            
               
               That ſhepe was I which did his way miſtake,
               And he the ſhepheard that recalled mee,
               Of mee his mercies-miracle to make,
               By abling mee his deputy to bee,
               For hee my ſelf a ſhepheard did ordain,
               That not deſeru'd to bee a ſhepheards ſwain.
            
            
               Thus not my cry me and puniſhment therefore,
               His pardon only ſtretched to deface,
               But he me raiſ'd to what I was before,
               And did renew and ampliphy his grace,
               And I that fel the loweſt of eleauen,
               Stil hold my charge to keepe the keyes of heauen.
            
            
               The Rock of ſtone hee hath confirmed mee,
               VVhereon the buylding ſtandes that cannot fail,
               Gainſt which helles puiſſance and ſuperbitie,
               May offer force, but neuer ſhal preuail,
               Thus I that late through feeble fainthes fel,
               Support the force, that breakes the force of hel.
            
            
               Do'ſt thow mee loue, thryce did he aſk of mee,
               In three demaundes of fayned doubtfulnes,
               For what my loue to him was bound to bee,
               And what it was, I needed not expreſſe,
               VVel hee it wiſt, and would but let mee ſee,
               By ſuch demaundes, how wel he loued mee.
            
            
               And more then theſe; do'ſt thow mee loue quoth hee,
               God wot more cauſe had I my Lord to loue,
               Yet ſuch hee did allow my loue to bee,
               As that it did a more reward behooue:
               Giuing to mee the office for my meed,
               At parting hence; his lambes and ſheep to feed.
            
            
               
               Loue is my debt, for loue and mercy due,
               And gratitude the intreſt thereon riſing.
               The obligation ſtandes in heauens view.
               And was ſet downe by equities deuiſing.
               The date it beares is endleſſe to auail,
               My ſoule the pawne to forfait yf I fail.
            
            
               Performance of thy promis Lord I ſee,
               Strengthned am I, my brethren ſtrength to giue,
               My faith ſhal neuer fail thow warrant'ſt mee,
               Then in my mouth truthe muſt for euer liue,
               And though I dy; ſucceſsion wil ſupply,
               Vndying truthe, vnto poſteritie.
            
            
               And all the graces thow ha'ſt giu'n to mee,
               To bynd and loſe the free and bond of ſin,
               Muſt not in my liues-ending ended bee,
               Though by thy gift they do in mee begin,
               But in ſucceſsiue power remaine for euer.
               To yeild the laſting graces of the giuer.
            
            
               O endleſſe comfort ending thus my care,
               Vn-ending thankes muſt therefore bee my parte,
               VVhich for thy due, I duly wil prepare,
               To offer on the Alter of my hart,
               VVhereas the ſyre of loue for euer lies,
               To ſerue for my eternal ſacrifiſe.
            
         
         
            
            SACRVM CONVIVIVM.
            
               WHen tyme approched that the lamb of lyf
               Muſt yeild himſelf among the wolues to dy,
               VVho did repay his peace with mortal ſtryf,
               And his meek patience with moſt crueltie,
               Then in the ſpace that yet to him remaynd,
               For his few freindes his fare-wel hee ordaynd.
            
            
               It was the night before the diſmol day,
               He cauſ'd prepare his laſt and fare-wel feaſt,
               Deſyr'd before, deferred by delay,
               Delayed wel, to tyme befitting beſt,
               For woordes and deedes, at parting donne or ſaid
               In memories conſeruance beſt are laid.
            
            
               And as his wil, and cuſtome had decreed,
               That at this feaſt a lamb muſt bee the meat,
               So hee that was th'unſpotted lamb indeed,
               Gaue them therein, his Image for to eat:
               Retayning yet for their more greater good,
               Far better meat then his ſelf-ſeeming food.
            
            
               For that no ſooner was the Paſchal donn
                     •
                  
               
               And cuſtome and their bodies ſatisfy'd
               But that eft ſoones another feaſt begonne
               And of a lamb, and that before he dy'd
               Himſelf was hee, and hee himſelf did giue
               Eaten to bee, the whyle himſelf did liue.
            
            
               
               VVhich to ordayne, he bread and wyne did take,
               And with his ſacred breath did bleſſe theſame,
               And did thereof his blood and body make.
               Through that ſelf might that all of nought did frame,
               And could not now bee deſtitute of arte,
               One thing into an other to conuert.
            
            
               And as the lamb their bodies had ſuffyſ'd,
               The true Lambes body turned into bread,
               VVas now the ſupper for their ſoules deuyſ'd,
               True bread of lyf alyue and ſeeming dead,
               Fleſh of his fleſh, bread his true body made,
               VVhen as eternal truth the woord had ſaid.
            
            
               Take eat this is my body, were the woordes,
               
               VVhich vnrepugnant hartes did ſo receaue,
               For humble faith gainſaying not affoordes,
               And wel they wiſt hee would them not deceaue,
               And in his wiſdome he right wel foreknew.
               VVhat faith their would, & ſhould heeron enſue.
            
            
               For from that inſtant, in ſucceeding ſpace,
               In en'ury region that is far or ny
               VVhere Chriſtian lore did paganiſme diſplace,
               As all fore-going tymes do teſtify,
               Thus was the faith, this is the faith of old,
               Held by the whole, now by the parte controld.
            
            
               Chriſt ſaid not, eat this in my memorie,
               But that his body take and eat they ſhould,
               Nor ſaid hee that it did him ſignify,
               But was himſelf that for them giue hee would,
               His truth and iuſtice could not beare the ſtaine,
               One thing to ſay, and it vnſay againe.
            
            
               
               And for he would that thoſe whoſe ſoules hee fed,
               By his example ſo ſhould others feed,
               Leaſt but themſelues none might bee nowriſhed,
               His plenteous goodneſſe hereupon decreed,
               That they in memorie of him lyke-wiſe,
               Should with lyke food, lyke faithful ſoules ſuffyſe
            
            
               Hence is deſcended that ſucceſſyue power,
               Of celebrating this ſoule-feeding feaſt,
               Aud that remaining reuerence to this howre,
               As elder tymes deuotion hath expreſt,
               And hence it comes, that to our laſting ioy,
               This heauenly meat our ſoules on earth enioy.
            
            
               And as by kynde, loues-grief encreaſeth loue,
               So loue that cauſ'd, that God with men did liue,
               Cauſ'd that for loue hee did great ſorrow prooue,
               VVhoſe ſorrow to his loue more force did giue.
               And ſo leſſe wonder his great loue did moue,
               To leaue himſelf the caution of his loue.
            
            
               Thus comes it that the ſeeming bread wee ſee,
               Is that ſame corps our ſauiour Chriſt had heere,
               Yet not in that ſelf manner is it hee,
               But as in couert veil ſo doth apeere;
               His body true, in Sacramental wiſe,
               Beheld by faith more then by earthly eyes.
            
            
               And as hee had his body at his wil,
               VVhen dores and walles gainſt it could not reſiſt,
               But did it vſe, and yet no place did fil.
               And wrought therewith ſuch woonders as him liſt,
               So ſtil remaines, his wil, his woord, and might,
               In heau'n and earth, in his all power-ful plight.
            
            
               
               His body doth his ſoule import withall,
               A body by effect of ſacred ſawes,
               A ſoule by ſequele which is natural,
               Conioynd in one, by his efficient cauſe,
               Touch-ſtone of fath whereby God would vs teach
               His heau'nly woorkes exceed our earthly reatch.
            
            
               And when our ſoules preſume vnto this feaſt,
               In cleane atyre they muſt themſelues preſent,
               (Leaſt els they fare as th
                     •
                   vnwelcome geſt,
               That il atyred to the wedding went)
               That ſo this bread of lyf ſuch vertue giue,
               That eating it, with it wee euer liue.
            
            
               And that eſteeme and condigne reuerence,
               That graue Antiquitie of duty gaue,
               Vnto a thing of ſo great excellence,
               Let in all enſuyng ſeaſons haue,
               And liue that faith, whereof Chriſt gaue the groūd,
               As long as faith may on the earth bee found.
            
         
         
            
            A COMPLAINT OF S. MArie
Magdalen. At her not fynding
Chriſt in his ſepulchre.
            
               A Las my Lord is gon,
               How muſt I now deplore,
               VVhere may hee bee that is each where,
               And I him ſee no more.
            
            
               Hope led mee here to ſeeke
               Recure of my deſtreſſe,
               But ſorrow here hath ſought mee out,
               And found mee comfortleſſe.
            
            
               Here lyf late ſeemed dead,
               Head dead I ſeeme aliue,
               It is my death him thus to miſſe,
               That may my lyf reuyue.
            
            
               Yee windowes on my face,
               That ſerue mee not to ſee,
               Serue now of water ſtild of wo,
               The conducts for to bee.
            
            
               In ſtede him to annoint,
               VVhome here I cannot haue,
               Make that the plenty of my teares,
               May ouerflow his graue.
            
            
               
               Perhaps it may him moue,
               His preſence to imparte,
               To ſee how moiſtning theſe dry ſtones,
               I therewith dry my harte.
            
            
               Good Gardner that arte here,
               To kepe this garden place,
               Lo how I water al thy plants,
               VVith raine falne from my face.
            
            
               Be grateful for this good,
               And tel mee I thee pray,
               VVhere is hee laid yf ſo thy ſelf,
               Haſte caried him away.
            
            
               If it haue troobled thee.
               Here to affoord him roome,
               O let me know but where hee is,
               My harte ſhalbe his toombe.
            
            
               And thow thereon maiſt wryte,
               This epitaph in verſe,
               Heer lyf that lately lay for dead.
               Liues and reuyues his hearſe.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE INVENTION, OR
fynding of the Croſſe of Chriſt.
            
               IN Britaine ſoile faire Helena was bred,
               The woorthy Empreſſe of the world of yore,
               The cauſe that Yorck. Romes glory more did ſpred,
               Then Rome it ſelf could euer ſpred before,
               There was ſhee borne, and there ſhee brought him foorth,
               That brought Roomes diade me to greateſt woorth.
            
            
               To greateſt woorth for that hee it adorned,
               Eu'n with the Croſſe in midle top of all,
               Raiſing to honor that which pagans ſcorned,
               And honouring therein him ſelf withall,
               VVhoſe tytle now, Great Conſtantyne became,
               Firſt Romaine Emperor of Chriſtian name.
            
            
               Good Siluiſter that ſat in Peeters chaire,
               Succeeding thoſe that all had ſuffred death,
               Now to ſaluation did the ſoule prepare,
               Of Conſtantyne by teaching him the faith,
               VVhereby himſelf an endleſſe lyf might haue,
               VVhoſe now conuerſion many lyues did ſaue.
            
            
               For when his mercy, mercy him had gayned,
               And hee in ſacred font had bathed bin,
               His ſoule and bodies weal hee both obtayned,
               In beeing cur'd of leproſy and ſin,
               Then that the more hee might Chriſtes glory reare
               He on his creaſt his cogniſance did weare,
            
            
               
               It was the ſigne that heau'n to him did ſhew,
               For patron of the enſigne he ſhould beare,
               VVhen gainſt Maxentius hee in armes did go,
               And vnto his encouragement did heare,
               An Angels voice, that in the ayre did cry,
               Thow in this ſigne ſhalt haue the victory.
            
            
               All which did ſo this noble moother moue
               To due eſteeme of ſuch a ſacred ſigne,
               As this of him, that ſo much merits loue.
               To whome her hearts deere loue ſhee did reſigne,
               That ardent zeale, did animate her mynde,
               To ſeeke where ſhee his hiddē croſſe might fynde.
            
            
               Led by deſyre that kindled was of loue,
               She tooke her voyage to the holy land,
               Faith was her guyde, hope did her wil approue,
               Speed did aſſiſt, to what ſhee tooke in hand.
               Deſyre, and loue, and faith, and hope, & ſpeed,
               Did all concur, to her deſeruing meede.
            
            
               And as her feet did trauaile on the ground,
               Her inward mynde did vp to heauen ſtie,
               VVhere the right holy land was to be found,
               Of him whoſe preſence this did ſanctify.
               So what in earth her bodyes trauaile ſought,
               In heauen her mynde in more perfection wrought.
            
            
               And there high God beholding her intent,
               And knowing wel whereto deuotion tends,
               And that it all vnto himſelf is ment,
               That vnto ought approching him intends,
               Did eu'n accept her ardent feruour futch,
               As earſt her faith that did his veſture tutch.
            
            
               
               And ſo concurr'd to what ſhee went about,
               That his hid croſſe ſo hidden might not bee,
               But ſhee at laſt it happely found out,
               Though doubtful which the right one was of three,
               Vntil a corps laid on it; dyd renyue,
               Shewing withal; her faith to bee alyue.
            
            
               It was the third day of the month of May.
               The worldes faire may-pole thus was found againe,
               And now rear'd vp that long obſcured lay,
               As yf reſeru'd for her owne honors gayne,
               whome faith, and loue, & hope, & zeale, did raiſe,
               To raiſe therein her glorious fame and praiſe.
            
            
               L'ENVOY.
               SOmtyme the Croſſe as ſundry recordes tel,
               Deryuing vertue from our Sauiours death,
               Hath had the force, the diuel to expel,
               And by the ſame confirmed Chriſtian faith,
               But now it ſeemes, faith hath ſuſtayned loſſe,
               Becauſe the diuel hath chaſte away the croſſe.
            
         
         
            
            COMPLAINT OF CHVRCH
CONTROVERSY.
            
               THe golden world long ſince is worne away,
               As now the golden yeare hath taken end,
               The Iron world doth ſtil remaine and ſtay,
               And in his ruſt doth to his ruyne tend,
               And in the ſhew of vertue and of truthe,
               Seeme-good ſeeme-goſpel turneth all to ruthe.
            
            
               At Babel tower where tounges confuſion came,
               It ſtayd the woork that fond aduice begun,
               But fond aduice now ſeeketh to disframe,
               A tabernacle ſeated in the Sun,
               And tounges confuſion Church-war hath procured
               Lately begun and yet to long endured.
            
            
               True yet it is that ſtryfe hath euer been,
               Twixt good and il in deadly feud depending,
               But neuer ſuch confuſion hath bin ſeen,
               Nor diffrent numbers in ſo great contending,
               As in our dayes when each one truth doth claime,
               And of vntruth each doth each other blame.
            
            
               VVhyle Truth herſelf the heau'ns begotten chyld
               And glorious imp of high Antiquitie,
               Lies ouertrod and vnder foot defyld,
               By each and all that woork her inury,
               All diſagreeing in their owne truth claming,
               Yet all agreeing in truthes falſe defaming.
            
            
               
               God 
                     〈◊〉
                   good corne did caſt into the ground,
               But ſoon the diuel threw in cockle there,
               God firſt his Church on earth did firmly found,
               VVhere ſtraight the diuel did his chappel reare,
               God vnto Truth the formoſte place aſſygnd,
               And fall hood with the diuel came behynd.
            
            
               VVhen God in Adam had his Temple buylt,
               The ſerpents ſynagog began in Eue.
               
               Good Abels blood his wicked brother ſpilt,
               At his Gods-woorſhip diuel-taught to grieue,
               So ſoon began illes enuy vnto good,
               Two only borne; one ſheddes the others blood.
            
            
               Through Moyſes God did giue his Churche a law,
               And Chores crew againſt it did rebel,
               Hating to liue in order and in aw,
               VVith their miſleader went aliue to hel,
               They claymed truth, reiecting right of his,
               And ſeru'd the diu'l in ſeruing God amiſſe.
            
            
               Saint Peeter did enſue his maſters lore,
               VVhich Simon Magus, ſtoutly did withſtand,
               And that great paſtor greatly hate therefore,
               But firſt-borne truth obtayn'd the vpper hand,
               And that fals Prophet mounting vp in pryde,
               Fel downe out of the ayre to earth and dyde.
            
            
               In auncient pathes trod by our elders feet,
               The way is found which is to reſt aſſygnd,
               But ſelf-ſought by wayes for ſelf-chooſers meet,
               They euer ſeek that ſeeking neuer fynd,
               Blynde guydes they bee, guyders of blynde they ſeeme,
               And with them fal ere they of danger deeme.
            
            
               
               To mend amiſſe was euer woork wel donne,
               In faultes and manners of Church-mennes abuſion,
               But by no prophet euer was begonne,
               Reforming of abuſes by confuſion,
               Nor for ſome faultes growne through Church-mē
                  nes defect.
               No good man euer did new Church erect.
            
            
               Il thrift may to that builder wel befall,
               That wil a faire-built edifice deface,
               And with the rubbiſh of the broken wall,
               Erect ſome cottage in an obſcure place,
               And to adorne it with vſurped fame,
               Giues it the tytle of the others name.
            
            
               Muſt now an vpſtart Martin or a Iohn,
               
               In queſtion call the firme fidelitie,
               Of her whoſe pallas on a rock of ſtone,
               Preſents the picture of her chaſtitie?
               VVho was of heau'n, and earth long heild in grace,
               Ere ought was heard of this new-riſen race.
            
            
               VVhy hath not els each man lyke priuelege,
               To chop to change, to found what faith hee liſt,
               And wreſted ſcripture for his proofs aleage,
               And gainſt a world in ſelf conceit perſiſt,
               And ſay all ſay amiſſe, except as hee,
               And all his woordes Gods woord & Ghoſpel bee.
            
            
               If free it bee for one its free for all,
               For all can claime the lyke inſtinct of ſpirit,
               But ſhrewd ſuſpition doth apeere withall,
               That of fals prophets all the name do merit,
               Their frute is il, themſelues were neuer ſent,
               They come to late, to ſoone to ſuch intent.
            
            
               
               Suſanna lyke, they Chriſt his Spouſe accuſe,
               And wil both iudges and accuſers bee.
               But lyke as Daniel falſhood did confuſe,
               By vntruth found in contrarietie,
               So contradictions in theſe fals accuſers,
               Shewes them to bee, the world and her abuſers.
            
            
               And as the ſpryte of God did Daniel moue,
               The innocent accuſed to defend,
               The ſpirit of God his deere ſpowſe ſo doth loue,
               That to her fals accuſers in thee end,
               In ſteed of caſten ſtones their blood to ſpil,
               They gainſt the rock themſelues ſhal caſt and kil.
            
            
               AN EPIGRAM.
               A Puritaine did plaine himſelf of late,
               Of late growne controuerſies into great debate,
               And prayed him to whome hee did complaine
               That hee his cenſure would affoord him plaine,
               VVel then quoth hee yf neither I ſhal flatter
               But ſpeake my conſcience freely of the matter,
               You are in fault, to make ſomuch contending,
               How can ſo new a faith, ſo ſoone lack mending.
            
         
         
            
            AN EXPOSITION OF
the Aue bel.
            
               THe Chaſer of my ſence-detayning ſlumber,
               vndid the windowes of my cloſed eyes,
               And freed my thoughtes from ſleepes confuſed cumber,
               That humours turned vnto fantaſies,
               And faire Aurora redy at the tyde,
               VVithdrew the ayes darck curtin all aſyde.
            
            
               In waking ſylence as a whyle I lay,
               Ere my freſh muſe new exerciſe had found,
               I heard the bel that ſoundeth thryce a day,
               And tooke the ſence leauing myne eare the ſound,
               For ſoundes and ſights are meſſengers aſſygn'd,
               To bring loſt memory vnto the mynde.
            
            
               And that ſame meſſage which the Angel brought,
               To her chaſte eares that could no noyſe receaue,
               That might ſuggeſt conceit of any thought,
               Her mynde of any puritie to reaue,
               VVas by this noyſe vnto my mynde renewed,
               VVhereby light idle fancies were eſchued.
            
            
               Eſt ſoones thereon to my remembrance came,
               Breach of the Law, the firſt law-maker made,
               Firſt acte of ſin, firſt cauſe of knowing ſhame,
               Firſt op'ned gap, for death man to inuade,
               Loſſe of heau'ns loue, purchaſe of earths il wil,
               Fynding of ſorrow, hid in ſeeking ſkil.
            
            
               
               Alas O wretched man that made th'offence,
               Iuſtice of thee demaunded the amendes,
               And for thy want of yeilding recompence,
               Thy vnacquyted gilt ſtil downe deſcendes,
               As doth ſome inward rooted malady,
               By heritage vnto a family.
            
            
               Thus ſtood from age to age and race to race,
               The ſcore of ſin vnpayd vnraced out,
               The world had not the woorth to purchaſe grace,
               Hope ſighing ſat betwene diſpaire and doubt,
               And thraldome was the woful miſery,
               Of helpleſſe mannes ſucceſſyue malady.
            
            
               So long til heau'ns great care conceaued grief,
               At mannes vnableneſſe himſelf to free,
               And loue no longer could with-hold relief,
               And ſweet relief that may thryce happy bee,
               Came eu'n at laſt when els loſt had beene all,
               And all did ſaue, and all vp-hold from fall.
            
            
               Loue firſt bred grief and grief did pittie moue,
               And pittie ſought the way to woork redreſſe,
               And kynde redreſſe the true effect of loue,
               Did ſalue the ſ
                     •
                  re that ſeem'd remedileſſe,
               Iuſtice for right, mercie for grace did craue,
               Iuſtice had right, mercie her fauour gaue.
            
            
               VVhich to accompliſh that eternal woord,
               VVhich was with God and was himſelf a God,
               His heauenly preſence would the earth affoord,
               And in a virgins cloſure make abode,
               VVhereof an Angels voyce the meſſage brought,
               As metalls noyſe renew'd it to my thought.
            
            
               
               To her it came whome heauens wyde view did ſee,
               For pureneſſe all the worlds moſt woorthy creature,
               A choſen manſion for the dietie,
               Adornd with vertues fitting to her feature,
               VVhome nature made, to ſhew the heauēs her ſkil
               And heauē through her the earth with grace did fil.
            
            
               And where a ſerpent with his poyſned ſting,
               In paradiſe infected Adams wyf
               A pure whyte doue from paradiſe doth bring,
               To Ioſephes ſpouſe reſtauratiue of lyf,
               And in a virgins bed the ſeed doth ſow,
               VVhereof the tree and frute of lyf doth grow.
            
            
               Her eares conceaued firſt the Angels voyce,
               Her heart conceau'd the heauens high decree,
               Her ſoule iuſt cauſe conceaued to reioyce,
               And her pure wombe as pure as pure might bee,
               Conceau'd withal; and that ſtrong infant bred,
               VVho with his foot did break the ſerpents hed.
            
            
               Againſt the tyme, his birth-tyme to adorne,
               Came downe on earth to conſecrate the ground,
               (VVith Al
                        •
                     ion reſt) Peace that in heauen was borne,
               Becauſe there might no noyſe of war be found,
               VVhen to the world the Prince ſhould ſhew his face.
               That came to all the world to offer grace.
            
            
               VVhoſe entrance when it pleaſed him to take,
               Into that country whereof death is King,
               His owne ſelf vertue mydwyf hee did make,
               And to annex more wonder to the thing,
               From his pure mothers cloſure hee did pas,
               Euen as the Sun makes entrance through the glas.
            
            
               
               O ſacred force enforcing ſuch a berth,
               The wonder of the wonders moſte of woorth,
               The breath of heauen clad in core of earth,
               Through an vnopened paſſage paſsing foorth,
               A humaine body ſpryte-lyke doth diſpoſe,
               His pow'rful ſelf that may no puiſſance loſe.
            
            
               And that ſweet Infant of eternitie,
               Is borne the infant of a virgins woombe,
               And God is man and ſo affinitie,
               Doth twixt the earth and twixt the heauen come,
               VVhereby th'Almighty maker thus wee ſee,
               Kinſman to men, to make himſelf to bee.
            
            
               Making withal the virgins glorious fame,
               In faithful hartes engrauen for to ſtand,
               (VVhere of Gods mother ſhee muſt beare the name)
               In faire carracters of a ſacred hand,
               And ſuch a mother, mayd and wyf to bee,
               As all her ſexe excelles in all thee three.
            
            
               Cleere chaſtitie deſcending from her throne,
               To do her homage here vpon the ground,
               A garland brought, made by her ſelf alone,
               Of Flowers that only were in Eden found,
               And with obeyſance ſet it on her hed,
               VVith tytle of eternal may denhed.
            
            
               The Angels trumps did ſound the heavens peace,
               An eaſterne ſtar ſtream'd out the fyre of ioy,
               God on his foot-ſtool did his ſtate decreaſe,
               New amitie extinguiſht old annoy,
               Hate had no place on all the earth to dwel,
               But did remoue vnto her hows in hel.
            
            
               
               O Infant ofſpring of vnending lyne,
               That in this world to ſpring would ſo begin,
               And with old Adams race thy ſelf combyne,
               And bee the man to ſatisfy for ſin,
               True God, true man, except with ſin defyld,
               VVho for to bee a man became a chyld.
            
            
               Thus God in chyld-heid did appeere on earth,
               Admitting tyme his manly growth to ſhew,
               VVhoſe dayes yet croſſed were by croſſe of death,
               Ere tyme on him could mannes ful tyme beſtow,
               But ſince for man hee would loſt lyf obtayne,
               Hee death to kil would firſt of death bee ſlaine.
            
         
         
            A SECONDARY
expoſition.
            
               THe contemplation of the miſtery,
               Of the ſubiected ſtate of heauens king,
               And the reuyual of the memory,
               That three tymes thryce a day the bel doth ring,
               Leades downe my muſe from height I earſt began,
               Vnto the lowneſſe of the lyf of man.
            
            
               Firſt how in darcknes of ſelf-knowing ſtate,
               And as yf all foregoing tyme were night,
               VVee enter in at this worldes cumbrous gate,
               As doth the day new dawning with his light,
               And that firſt treaſure Tyme on vs beſtowes,
               In chyldiſh thinges vnwittingly wee loſe.
            
            
               
               Thence grow wee vp as do the howres of day,
               Our dayes and yeares outrunning youthful rage,
               From all repoſe Tyme carrying vs away,
               Doth vnaware draw on our midle age,
               And through his haſte wil vs no leaſure lend,
               Once back to tutne, youths errors to amend.
            
            
               At noontyde of our dayes wee do arryue,
               As doth the Sun at midday in his height,
               VVhat tyme the bel a ſecond ſound doth giue,
               To moue remembrance of the heauy waight,
               Of ſinnes huge burthen when high heauens grace,
               In humaine fleſh releaſed humaine race.
            
            
               The midday tyme, hath but the name of tyme,
               For tyme himſelf no moment hath of ſtay,
               Nor wee repoſe before or after pryme,
               But as the Sun declyneth with the day,
               So we declyne euen at our higheſt rate,
               Changing with tyme the change of our eſtate▪
               
            
            
               E
                     •
                  t ſoones drawes on the euentyde of our yeares,
               As doth the Sun draw down ward to the weſt,
               VVhat tyme the bel reneweth to our eares,
               The ſound of ioy now twyce before expreſt,
               To ſhew how in the worldes declyning 
                     •
                  aſe,
               Attendant hope obtayn'd expected grace.
            
            
               Now of our lyf is come the better parte,
               And of our labors frute to reap the gaine,
               Yf youthes endeuours wrought our wel deſart,
               Or yf in lyf ſo long wee do remaine,
               For from the tree where wee behold the bud,
               Much frute falles downe ere it bee rype and good.
            
            
               
               Laſtly as day, our dayes thei
                     •
                   ending take,
               And as before from darck night wee aroſe,
               Our day our nightes returne againe doth make,
               And wee yeild vp vnto our laſt repoſe,
               Our claime to earth, and all that nature gaue,
               And lay vs downe where death ſhal dig our graue.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE STATE OF SOLItary
lyf dedicated to the ſeruice of God.
            
               OVVel are you that haue ſubdude,
               The force of worlds deſyre,
               And in the forte of ſolitude,
               For ſafety do retyre.
            
            
               Retyr'd from freedome ſo ſupoſ'd,
               In ſtraightnes freedome fynde,
               Becauſe true freedome is encloſ'd
               In circuite of the mynde.
            
            
               The world and fortune you depryue,
               From doing you deſpight,
               Dead vnto men, to God alyue,
               That giues liues true delight.
            
            
               That ſoule ſaith God which I affect,
               I wil with-draw aparte
               And tel vnto it in effect,
               The ſecrets of my harte.
            
            
               Think th
                     •
                  n you that retyred liue,
               For Gods deere loue and dread,
               His loue your ſoules deſyre did giue,
               Retyred liues to lead.
            
            
               VVhere as with him you might confer
               VVhen ſole your ſelues you deeme,
               And ſo alone leſſe neuer ar,
               Then when alone you ſeeme.
            
            
               
               Faith of yourfort is gouernor,
               Loue is liftenant there,
               Hope is ordained officer,
               The enſigne for to b
                     •
                  are,
            
            
               Contempt of welth is treaſurer,
               VVho woorkes no guyle for gaynes,
               VVhithin whoſe coffers neuer there,
               Corrupting droſſe remaines.
            
            
               Pure Chaſtitie the charge doth take,
               The cloiſter cleane to keep,
               And of her thoughtes the broome doth make,
               VVherewith ſhee doth it ſweep.
            
            
               Obedience which doth ſacrifiſe,
               In valued woorth exceed,
               Is redy for each exercyſe,
               As duty deemeth need.
            
            
               Perſeuerance is Centinel,
               The watch-woord watch and pray.
               VVhoſe due obſeruance doing wel,
               The heauens do repay.
            
         
         
            
            THE SVBSTANCE OF
humaine fleſh.
            
               AS once I did behold,
               The potters actiue ſkil,
               In ordring of his earthen pots,
               According to his wil.
            
            
               And ſome for woorthy vſe.
               And ſome for ſeruile trade,
               As hee them from one clod of clay,
               In ſundry faſhons made.
            
            
               And when they al were wrought,
               And each was put a parte,
               No cauſe they had (If they had could)
               To blame their makers arte.
            
            
               To each it might ſuffiſe,
               To ſerue his vſe aſygn'd,
               Since each to ſerue ſome proper vſe,
               VVas vtile in his kynde.
            
            
               Then as thereat I muſ'd,
               It came vnto my thought,
               How God euen from one maſſe of clay,
               All humaine kynd had wrought,
            
            
               Aſwel the ſilly wretch,
               That liues in low degree,
               As any mighty Emperor,
               How puiſant ſo hee bee.
            
            
               
               And how at his eſtate,
               None rightly may repyne,
               Since that the woork man of his woork,
               Hath freedome to 
                     •
                  eſigne.
            
            
               And each in each degree,
               Sufficient hath in charge,
               And hee the more whoſe mighty rule,
               Extendeth moſte at large.
            
            
               For how more great the charge.
               Cares burden greater weyes,
               And greatneſſe beares the greateſt brunt,
               And breedes the leſſer eaſe.
            
            
               And vertue can aſwel
               In cottages remaine,
               As honor may in high eſtate,
               In courtes of Princes raigne.
            
            
               Let each him then diſpoſe,
               VVel in his charge to ſerue,
               To haue the hyre that at the laſt,
               VVel-doing doth deſerue.
            
            
               For when a whyle on earth,
               Each hath ſeru'd in his turne,
               Earths fragile woork earſt made of earth,
               Muſt vnto earth returne.
            
         
         
            
            VISIONS OF THE
vvorlds inſtabillitie.
            
               I.
               WHen muſing on this worlds v
                     •
                  ſted faſtnes,
               Ere ſleep attain'd my ſences to ſurpriſe,
               Agreeued at the woful wretchednes,
               That ſad examples ſet before myne eyes:
               It chanced mee in this perturbed plight,
               By Morpheus arreſted for to bee,
               In whoſe cloſe priſon lying in the night,
               Srange viſions then there did apeer to mee:
               A ſpatious Th
                        ••…
                     re firſt mee thought I ſaw,
               All hang'd with black to act ſome tragedie.
               VVhich did mee vnto much attention draw,
               To ſee the ſequel of the miſterie:
               About the which; my braine oft haue I broken,
               To ſkan what ſuch phantaſmataes betoken.
            
            
               II.
               I ſaw a Holly ſprig brought from a hyrſt,
               And in, a princely garden ſet in was,
               VVhere of all trees it ſtroue to bee the firſt,
               In ſtately height whereto it grew a pace:
               Talle Cedar trees it ouertopped far▪
               
               And all with coral berries ouerſpred.
               
                  
It ſeem'd the roſes beauty for to ma
                     •
                  ,
               And to deface it with a ſkarlet red:
               VVhere at the Gardner when hee it ſuſpected,
               Or might perhaps miſweene this trees intent,
               For all firſt fauour now grew il affected,
               And all the Toughes a way did race and rent:
               Thus ſtood diſgrac'd the ſtock ſo braue before,
               VVhich now of grief grew dead and ſprong no more.
            
            
               III.
               Two ſtately pillers then to mee appered,
               Of Ruby thone of Saphir thother wa
                     •
                  ,
               That on their baſes ſtrongly ſtood vp reared,
               VVhoſe vnder-ground
                     •
                  woork was a rocky place:
               And through tranſparent luſture ſhyning bright,
               They not alone their beauty did extend,
               But they did ſerue as lanternes in the night,
               The trauailors from ſtraying to defend:
               Yet it befel; hee that the ſoyle did owe,
               Gan to d
                     •
                  uyſe theſe pillars downe to take,
               On his new buyding them for to beſtow,
               And woorkmen brought, & theretro ginnes did make:
               But out alas, in langor I complaine,
               In forceing them; they fel, and burſt in twayne.
            
            
               IIII.
               I ſaw a bird, of Egles race I deeme,
               For that ſhee hatched was in Egles neſt.
               VVhich of a Lord was held in high eſteeme,
               And to his lure ſhee only her adreſt:
               But it ſo fel that hee a Hauke eſpyde,
               And tooke ſuch pleaſure in her ſpeckled plume,
               That hee for her his faire foule thruſt a ſyde,
               In vndeſerued ſorrow to conſume:
               
                  
But lo this Ha
                     •
                  ke he now bore on his fiſt,
               Oblyg'd and taught to come when as hee lured,
               VVould not by him bee lured as hee liſt,
               But was by ſtelth to others lures enured:
               VVhich when hee ſaw, in wrath and in deſpyte,
               He wrang her neck of from her body quyte.
            
            
               V.
               A pleaſant crop of trees then did I ſee,
               On which ſweet nightingales did ſit and ſing,
               Til one that ſem'd to hate their melody,
               Sought how hee might them to deſtruction bring:
               He ſat vp ſnares and grinnes and lymy twigs,
               And all deuyſes that might them betray,
               And brake their neſtes that were among the ſprigs,
               And many kild and many chaſte away:
               And that they ſhould no more come there againe,
               The very trees vnto the ground hee threw,
               That ſcarſly any one he let remaine,
               But ſee how iuſt reuenge did ſoone enſue;
               His foot ſ
                     •
                  ipt in a pitfal hee had caſt,
               And downe hee fel and ſo his neck he braſt.
            
            
               VI.
               A Giant then mee thought there came in place,
               VVho dreaded was for greatneſſe of his ſtature,
               And many trembled to beh
                     •
                  ld his face,
               And muſed at the ſtrangeneſſe of his nature:
               for hee a ſwoord did hold in either fiſt,
               And freindes and foes he cared not to kil,
               For few could in his fauour long perſiſt,
               Becauſe to keep his loue was ſuch a ſkil:
               At laſt a monſter all compact of bones,
               Came traytor-lyke and with a darte him 
                     •
                  ent,
               
                  
That downe hee fel and ſo was dead at once,
               And as it ſeem'd, few did his loſſe lament:
               And where alyue he monuments defaced,
               Now dead, no monument on him was placed.
            
            
               VII.
               VVhen all theſe thinges were vaniſht from my view,
               At ſuch vnwonted ſights I greatly muſed,
               And though I not the certaine meaning knew,
               Yet did it ſeeme, although it ſeem'd confuſed:
               That thinges which are the cauſe of others wrong,
               Themſelues do often alſo ſuffer wrack,
               VVhereby is ſeene that ſway endures not long,
               And that reuenge not alwayes cometh ſlack:
               And that theirs none on earth hath leaue to tarry,
               And that when bearing-rule hath taken end,
               Fame doth ſuruyue, and takes an inuentarie,
               Of rulers actions and whereto they tend:
               And vnto after ages ſhee it ſhewes,
               To learne them what of good or il enſues.
            
         
         
            
            VERSES OF THE
worldes vanitie, ſuppoſed to bee
made by S. Bernard.
            And tranſlated into Engliſh to bee ſung to the tune
they beare in Latin.
            
               WHy doth this world contend,
               For glorious vanitie,
               VVhoſe welth ſo ſubiect is,
               To mutabilitie.
            
            
               As earthen veſſels faile,
               Through their fragillitie,
               So ſtandeth wordly force,
               Vnſure and ſlipperie.
            
            
               Caracters ra'ſt in yce,
               Think rather permanent,
               Then earthly vanities,
               Vading incontinent.
            
            
               Shadowed with vertue pure,
               But fals in recompence,
               At no tyme yeilding vs,
               True truſt or confidence.
            
            
               To men more credit gi
                     ••
                  ,
               That want fidelitie,
               Then truſt in worldly welth,
               VVhich is but 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
               Falſhood in fond-delight,
               Pleaſures in 
                     •
                  ranticknes,
               Deſyred vanities,
               Of fleeting ficklenes.
            
            
               VVhere now is Salomon,
               Somtyme in royaltie,
               Or Sampſon with his great,
               Inuincibillitie.
            
            
               Or gentle Ionathas,
               Praiſed for freindlyneſſe,
               Or faireſt Abſalon.
               So rare in comlyneſſe.
            
            
               VVheare now is Ceaſer go
                     •
                  ,
               High in authoritie,
               Or Diues with his fare,
               And ſumptuofitie.
            
            
               Tel now where Tullie is,
               Cleereſt in eloquence,
               Or Ariſtotle fled,
               VVith his intelligence.
            
            
               O ſil
                     •
                  y vermens food,
               O maſſe of duſtyneſſe,
               O dew, o vanitie,
               VVhence is thy loftineſſe.
            
            
               To morrow for to liue,
               Thow haſte no certainty,
               Do good to all therefore,
               VVhyle thow haſte liberty.
            
            
               
               This wordly glorie great,
               How ſhort a feaſt it i
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               And lyke a ſhadow here,
               Lo how it vani
                     •
                   hes.
            
            
               VVhich takes rewardes away,
               Of long continuance,
               And leades vs in the wayes,
               Of erring ignorance.
            
            
               This earthly glory moſte,
               VVhich here is magnifyde,
               In Scripture termed is,
               As graſſe thats withered.
            
            
               And as the lighteſt leaf,
               The wynde a way doth blow,
               So light is lyf of man,
               For death to ouerthrow.
            
            
               Think that which thow maiſt loſe,
               Is not thyne certainly,
               This world wil take againe,
               Theſe gifts of vanitie.
            
            
               Think then on thinges aboue,
               On them thy harte adreſſe,
               Contemne all worldly welth,
               For endleſſe bleſſednes.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   