
      
         
            
            
            Roome,
FOR A MESSE
of Knaues.
OR,
A Selection, or a Detection,
OR,
A Demonſtration, or a Manifeſtation.
of foure Slaues. OR,
A Conuiction, or a Comiction,
OR,
A Combination, or a Copulation
of foure Varlets.
OR,
A Reperition, or a Repetition.
OR,
A Replication, or a Recapitulation.
of foure Harlets. With a Narration or a Declaration, a Relation
or an Explication, of a ſtrange (but
true) battell, fought in the little Iſle
(or Worlde) of Man.
            Ridentem dicere verum quid vetat.
            London printed for N. F. and are to be ſold
at the ſigne of the Talbot at the Weſt end of
Paules. 1610.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader
            
               HAuing written this courſe diſcourſe
or rather diſcouery, I bethought
my ſelfe that it would
not be amiſſe, according to the
lawdable cuſtome of pamphletters,
to Dedicate the ſame (how vnpoliſhed
ſoeuer) vnto ſome good patron or other, for
ſhelter: when ſtraict it came to my minde that
this faſhoning of dedicating bookes, and ſo to
place the name of ſome Grand Signeor, in the
forefront of an Epiſtle, was for all the world,
like a Vintner: who at the firſt ſetting vp of his
Trade, yea and all his life after, hangs vp the
glorious ſpangled Iuey-buſh to draw good fellowes
to the taſting of his Outlandiſh Liquors
which made me to diſlike this faſhion of To
the Right Honorable, or ſo, & determined To
leaue it to the Printer without ane badge at all;
When ſodainly it came againe to my remembrance
how difficult a matter it was now
in theſe duble dealing daies to ſeeme ſinguler or
ſelfe conceipted in any courſe, the whold miſliking
ſuch fellowes no leſſe then your Monopolyters,
being men almoſt of the ſame kinde
and condition: and therefore I muſt needs

               inſanire cum alijs, and dedicated it muſt be, But
to whome? marry (quoth I to my ſelfe) to ſome
great man at leaſt, (for its in vſe now to haue
great Godfathers▪
                though we be neuer ſo meane)
&c.
            I but (quoth my ſelfe) it may be he will hould
it too baſe S
                  •
               biac for his Honor to patronize,
and vnhappily one or other of his followers
neare to him may finde himſelfe agreeued &c.
            Then (quoth I Ile to ſome Doctor? ſurely no
(quoth my ſelfe) for he in his great wiſdome
& great learning, may ouer ſhoote the marke,
or thinking it not fitting his grauely or ſo: may
            
               Why then may it not be, then to ſome Knight?
oh by no meanes (quoth I for he peraduenture
would take the matter in dudgion to haue a
diſcouery of Knaues offered vnto him, were it
but for the Affinity of the names, & peraduenture
(if he were one of thoſe trauailing Ks.
that knows more Languages then one) ſtanding
vpon the Etimology of the word, being deriued
from the DutchKnact in Duch is a Knaue. Knact would conceiue Iay
med at the Knight alſo, (whereunto before
God and the Country I plead not guilty) and in
a fume (eſpecially if he were at his Tabac
                     •
                  o)
would bid me be packing and take my knaues
with me, or elſe (and then ſweares heele) &c.
Put caſe I offer it to ſome great Lawyer (quoth
I) in no caſe (quoth my ſelfe) for if he ſhould
alter the caſe by miſpriſion, and with a writ of

the Caſe, caſe or cage you vp in the Counter
then you were in a wiſe Caſe, were you not?
How lik'ſt a Phiſition then? (quoth I) mary I
pray God I may neuer haue neede of them
(quoth my ſelfe) Now by Mars ile to ſome
Mounſer Capetaino.
            Then by V
                     •
                  nus thou art madd (quoth my ſelfe)
for the peace being now concluded in the
Lowe Countries, he in a malcontent humor
(miſtaking thy meaning) may peanter plaine
ſtabbe thee, or ſo.
            Why then (quoth I) what woodſt haue me
doe? for ſooth gud ſir quoth my ſelfe get you to
ſome rich Cittezen that hath broke off his
Trade and ſo.
            Now I ſee th'art ſhallow (quoth I) for thinkeſt
thou that he which breakes with h
                  •
               s company
and creditors, and ſo will not breake with
thee?
            No, I know a bette way then that: Ile alter
the caſe and Gender too, and take a Lady, or
ſome great Gentlewoman that hath a heart as
bigg as a Ladyes: Nay that's as worſe (quoth
my ſelfe) for ten to one ſhe would rather entertaine
one or all thy Knaues, then thy booke of
their diſcouery, and ſo reward thee with one
of their caſt liueryes and ſo.
            Now would I were a Saint, if I know to
whome then: I am in doubt (quoth my ſelfe)
that ſome one of theſe 4. Knaues thou writſt of,

came behinde thee in thy dreaming ſleepe and
hath clapt thee on the coxcombe and cract thy
brainpan: but now I thinke ont, Ile helpe thee
to 4 C. for thy 4 K. to whome thou maiſt commend
them: viz the Court, the Campe, the Cittie,
and the Country: You ſhot well at Rouers
quoth I, but I know an other C worth all your
C. Ile ſtand too't, ſuch a C. ſhe is, that ſhe may
be wife to the greateſt Earle in Europe: a C, of
all C. a treſnoble, command
                  •
               ng conquering C
a couragious kinde C. And where ſhe affecteth
not, a full fell furious and fiery foe is ſhee.
God ſend me from her frowne then quoth my
ſelfe: what Angell deuill? what Ianus I pray thee
mought ſhe be? mary quoth I the Epitome of hir
great name is Signiora Madonna Cogitatione Reina del
Microſmo: O quoth my ſelfe my aude metris,
A ken hur ſo weele ſir, A ſhus a blithe Laſse a gudfeth
Sir if ſhe be plezd, And a o fell feend a ſhe
froune: a foule eele au hur wezan ſhas oft gard me
to grit Sir.
            
            Well (quoth I) if I finde her no worſe then I
left her I care not: I pray thee Sira where lefſt
her (quoth my ſelfe) forſooth I left her where
they ſhall finde her that reads on my Booke,
except in her Huſbands abſence ſhe be gon to
viſit her Neece Venus or ſtepdame Luna: which
I know his Honor will not be well pleaſd with
when he coms home, but be it as it may, if ſhe
be gon abroad I wil ſtay til her returne, or leaue
it intruſt with ſome frtend neere about her.
         
         
            
            To the Right VVorſhipfull, &
my eſpeciall good friend, Sir Iohn
Lebon, Knight.
            
               
                  SIr: hauing long requeſted▪
               
after a Gentlwoman of good
note, one Miſtris Cogitations, I
was aduiſd by an extrauagant
fellow (that Pretended to know much) to
goe to the ſigne of the parret in lither lane,
for there he ſaide ſhe had a Chamber: thither
I went, and found one of that name indeed,
to whome I tendred this little remembrance
of my good will and ſeruice:
She, (whoſe accouterment, countenance,
and conditions, was fitly reſembled by her
Signe,) had ſcarſe read my Title, but ſhe
began to tattle, and after a ſcornfull and
malcontent manner, threw my booke at
me, and bade me be packing and take the
Knaues with me.
            Being thus miſtaken, (and ſtudying what
courſe was beſt to be taken) I was ouertaken
by a good fellow of my acquaintance

(well knowne to your Worſhip) hard by
the Roſe and Crowne to whome I imparted
my minde, and how I ſped with miſtris
Parrat: he laught and ſaid haſt thou
forgot our two ould acquaintance, goodwill,
and Il-vill? why man (quoth he)
thou ſhouldſt haue asked for miſtris good
Cogitations: ſhe keeps houſe in Loue-lane:
alſo ſhe hath a lodging in ſuch a mans
houſe, (meaning your worſhips) by whom
thou maiſt haue acceſſe to her: Thus
thanking my remembrance for his kindnes,
I am bould (Preſuming on your worſhips
good acceptance) to render this
ſmall remembrance of my good will,
to your good Cogitations:
And reſt.
         
      
      
         
            
            The 4. quarters of the day naturall,
Gouernd by foure knaues artificiall:
viz.
            A Melancholy knaue, & a Chollericke:
            A Sanguine knaue, & a Flegmaticke.
            
               THeſe foure are brothers
by the fathers fide,
begotten by Sultan Sathan,
on foure Succubuſes: the
firſt was borne in Heluetia:
the ſecond in Tartaria: the
third in Slauonia: and the
fourth in Barbaria.
            
            THe firſt (which is the knaue of Spades) he
was borne when Saturne was in coniunction
with the moone: therefore he will
proue a melancholy miſchieuous knaue, of the
nature of the earth, which he claimes for his
birth-right (though he haue no right thereunto:)

this knaue is couetous, enuious, mallicious,
and trecherous: of haire thinne, blacke,
ſooty. Balductus Rimarius (a late writer) reports
him to be the ſonne of a Sexton, preferd to the
ends of Court by helpe of the laſt great ſickneſſe,An ill winde that blowes no man to profit.
and ſo made a Lawyer: this carries ſome
probabillity: but I am not of his opinion, for he
is called the knaue of Spades, becauſe he is alwaies
digging, plotting, vndermyning, and forging
(with that clubfooted Cuckolds Iourney-men,
Brontes, S
                     •
                  cropes, and Pyracmon) of ſome
damned Engines of villany. Take heede of this
knaue for hee's a dogged knaue, and will bite
before he barke: he hath vnder him 6. ſubordinate
knaues, Lying, Forſwearing, Backbiting, Insinuating,
and Detracting.
            
            His deuiſe is, a Waterman, looking one way
and rowing another: his Motto is,
            
               Mel in Ore fel in Corde.
               Read what is written in the painted cloth,
               Beware the Mouſe, the Magot, & the Moth
               And euer haue an eye vnto the dore:
               Truſt not a knaue, a drunkard, nor a whore
            
            
               
AT twelue a clocke enters the knaue of
Harts, he was borne when Mars was in
Coniunctiō quadrature with the Moone,
Iupiter being retrograde. This portends that
he will proue a villanous hearty knaue, or a
knaue at the heart: he is of cōplexion ſanguin,
bloody, hot as fire, as may appeare by his red
head: you know Mack bogg foole, an Iriſh Hiſtoriographer,
repors tthat he was St, Patricks Lac
key, but (although he be accounted like an Iriſh
Lackey, yet I am not of his opinion: for St. Patricke
himſelfe (as more authenticke authors
report) went alwaies afoot, I and bare foot to,
for the ſinnes of his countrymen: he is giuen
by Conſtellation to be proud, Iealous, lunatick,
and ſometimes horne-mad: his time is (though
he ſeldome or neuer keepe time, order, or honeſt
courſes) to ſet about 6. a clocke in the afternoone,
and giues place to as very a knaue as
himſelfe: his 6. vicegerents are: Vaine-glory,
High-mindednes, Arrogancy, ſelf-loue, Maſterfulnes,
New-fanglenes.
            
            His Deuiſe, Acteon turned into a Hart, and
torne in peeces by his Hounds. his Word is,
            
               Qualis vita, finis ita.
               A ſilken Ciuet ſaucy knaue,
               That's dight in many cullours braue:
               
                  
Who whoods and mews his wife for flying
               A horne-plague hold him to his dying.
            
            THis third knaue is a Clubbiſh, black haird,
broad backt, cole-rake knaue: yet one that
will carry no coales neither: at this knaues
natiuity Mars was in coniunction with Venus,
in the houſe of Saturne, when Iupiter was retrograde:
therfore I finde by my Aſtronomical
Inſpection, that he will proue a mutinous
martiall knaue, one that ſpeakes nothing but
powder and ſhot: this Caualeero Snaphance,
though he breake vp at midninght, yet if you
moue him (and hee's quickely moued I can tell
you) then he will be Lord of the Aſcendant,
though he be not in his owne houſe: therefore
whereſoeuer you meete him let him paſſe, for
he is hot and dry in the third degree, and will
paſſe though it be to his own deſtruction. This
Don Colbrand is well knowne to the Watchmen
of London: when he hath finiſhed his quarter,
he retires himſelfe moſt commonly (but ſore
againſt his will) to the Counter, or Newgate,
and thete he ſtudies Brookes Caſes: til he be called
to plead at the Barre,Not Brooke the great. Lawyer, but Brooke the Taylor. and then to his laſt
ſupper prepared by 12. bones et Legales homines.
&c. His ſix petty Captaines are Oppreſſion,

Contempt, Swearing, Frowardnes, Impatience, Deſperation.
            
            His deuiſe, a Brewers Horſe got looſe, ſaltant
with a broken halter vpon his head pendant.
his word,
            
               Diſſolute & reſolute.
               A Maſtiffe-dog, will neuer make a Spaniel,
               An Horſemans ſaddel is no market Pannel
               The Deuil is a knaue and euer will be,
               This knaue like him ſhal walk alone for me
            
            THe laſt but not the leaſt, is your Diamond
Knaue: this is your onely Knaue
(or a Knaue alone) that loues to be alone
in moſt of his buſineſſes. This Knaue was borne
when Mercurie was in a Trine aſpect with Venus
in the houſe of Luna: a flegmaticke falſe
knaue he is that loues to be conuerſant in watery
places: his variable minde you may knowe
by his variable couloured haire of head and
beard, more variable in his apparell and countenance,
moſt variable in his luſt. This fellow
(for he hath many fellowes in theſe daies) predominats

from midnight to morning, a night
walker he is, and (as he ſaith) is neare of kin to
Oberon the king of Fayries, and it ſhould ſeem
                  •
               
ſo, for all his exerciſe is the workes of darkneſſe:
he is a knaue in print, and takes his
place with the firſt that euer ſtudies in the Academy
of the ſeauen liberall ſinnes, To be ſhort, he is
ſuch a cunning baudy knaue, that I can not
with all my skill diſcouer him ſufficiently vnto
you, and therefore I will leaue him amongſt
you, to comment further of him: His ſix vndertakers
are Intemperance, Shameleſneſſe, Idlenes,
Diſſembling, fawning, Lying.
            
            His deuiſe, An old Ram-goat, ſtalking vp and
downe in a Barne: his Motto,
            
               Si non caſte, tamen caute.
               Rightly the moone predominats in thee,
               For thou art all as changeable as ſhee:
               Lets ſay tis ſo, this eccho ſaies tis ſo.
               And will ſay after you if you ſay no.
            
         
         
            
            Knaues and Queanes draw
all in one line
            
               Vices goe by couples, Newgate faſhion.
               1. Little and loud,
               2. Long and lazy:
               3. Fat and lickriſh,
               4. Blacke and gaſie
               5 Sad and ſuttle,
               6. Red and rauing:
               7. Pale and peeuiſh.
               8. Old and hauing.
            
            
               A prying eye a lifting eare,
               a light finger, and a prating tongue
               Do conſort together,
               as foure parts in a Song.
            
            
               
THere be alſo foure Queanes of neere alliance
to the aforeſaid 4. Knaues, which
I thought to ſerue in, inſtead of Quayles,
(Rayles I might ſay) to your ſecond courſe (for
they are corſe I'le be ſworne to you) but I forbeare
them, for if I ſhould put them together
there would be foule rule, and I ſtand doubtfull
how you would taxe me, or ſo: therefore I
will firſt ſee how youle digeſt their comrades.
            Their names are.
            A Bridewell Queane commonly called a
Puncke.
            
            A Newgate Queane, commoly called a
Doxe.
            
            A Cuckſtoole Queane, commonly called a
Scowlde.
            
            A Cage Queane commonly called a
Bawde.
            
            
               1. From a Queane of her tongue,
               2. And a Queane that's laſie:
               3. From a lickoriſh Queane,
               4. And a Queane that's gaſie, Parce nos Domine. From a filching Queane,
               
                  6. And a Queane or her taile,
               7. From a miſchieuous Queane,
               8. And a Queane of ſale. Libera nos Domine.
               
            
         
         
            Aſtronomical il
                  •
               ections briefely
deſcribed for admini
                  ••
               ration of
Phiſicke and Phlebotomy.
            AS in all other parts of Phiſicke, ſo in Phlebotomy,
you are circumſpectly to conſi
der,
and certainely to knowe the cauſe, as
when the Impatient is infected with ſome
naughty, ſuperfluous, and vnnaturall humors,
Internally and Externally: and ſo the miniſtration
of Phiſicke is to be vſed: accordingly.

                  
                     
                        A. Coniunction.
                        B. Oppoſition.
                        C. a Trine.
                        D. a Quartill.
                        E. a Sextill.
                        F. a Degree.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
The miſchieuous melancholick, you muſt let blood or purge in Aries and Taurus.
            The cruell chollericke in Taurus and Leo, but if the diſeaſes be not too violent in Piſces.
            The filthy flegmaticke in Gemini and Libra.
            The inſulting ſanguin, in Capricornus, Aquarius
and Piſces.
            NOw as theſe foure knaues (by vſurpation)
haue got the gouerment of the day:
ſo by my Extronomicall calculation, I
finde alſo the whole yeare by a Colaterall reſignation
to fall vnto them. For the Prince of
darkenes, Sultan Lucifer, hauing got the Cards
into his owne hands (like a cunning Iugler) and
diſcarded the foure Kings, viz: Truth, Mercy, Iuſtice
and Temperance, hath foiſted in their ſtead,
theſe foure knaues: who for that they will neuer
be idle (as they wil neuer be well occupied)
haue deuided the twelue Months amongſt thē:
and ſo interchangeably ſubdeuided them into
weekes, dayes, houres, and minutes, that for my
life I cannot tell where to haue them by my figuratiue
conſpection, but onely by their villanous
effects. Somtimes I finde ſome of them
together in a trine aſpect, the ſigne being in Aries
and Taurus: ſome in a Quartile aſpect, in
Libra and Cancer: then all in a moſt ominous
coniunction (Inter aquam & ignem) the Moone

being entred the Dragons taile, certaine degrees
in Virgo, Libra, and Scorpio, they coclude
in an opoſition (with ſuch a terrible combuſt)
as though an other deluge with domes-day
would reduce the world to her olde
Chaos
            Then hurling by my Ephemerides,Terrible tanqu
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     on tru.
                in all
haſte I betooke me to my Proſpectiue-glaſſe,
wherein I foreſaw, that (Iupiter being euen then
Lord of the Aſcendant, & Saturne retrograde)
they are brought Coram nobis, in Capricornus &
Aquaries, (with cap & knee) with Humilianus,
& ſo conclude by the heeles in Piſces, till the
celeſtiall Dominator Sol appearing in his glory,Dominus Iudex.
brings to light their deedes of darknes: and ſo
(with a writ of Co
                     •
                  pus cum cauſa) ſends ſome to
needy Newgate; ſome to biting Bridewell,
ſome to the coſtly Counter, and ſome to the
colde Cage.
            But (alack the while here they ſtay not long,
for one claymes kindred of this great perſonage:
another that he and his predeceſſors doe
and haue ſerued long that great man.
            The third ſweares he hath ſpent his blood in
his maieſties ſeruice, and (if he can neither will
nor chooſe) will ſpend it againe.
            And the fourth being of a more Aprill deſpoſition,
proteſts like a Pewterane, it's not the
firſt, nor ſhall be the laſt, if they wil pardon this
fault. Then altogether with a thouſand ſorts of

lyings, and cryings, for ſwearings & tearings,
wringings and flingings, vowing neuer to doe
ſo againe, that is (like equiuocating Knaues as
they are) ſubintellegitur (with a mentall reſeruation)
ſo heed
                  •
               eſly.
            By theſe and ſuch meanes, with the helpe of
their honors letters, v
                  •
               z. a nonobſtant, the knaues
creepe out at the back-dore, and finding themſelues
in ſtatu quo prius,
               Plus valet ſauor in Iudice: qua
                     •
                   lex in C
                     •
                  
                  di
                     •
                  t. they fall to their olde
trade againe; but with more caution: for they
will ſo ſhuffle themſelues amongſt other honeſt
Cards, that you ſhall very hardly perceiue
them, but on the white ſide: ſo that you ſhall
neuer knowe them till it be vpon the winning
of the ſet, and then will they ſhew themſelues in
their kinde, knaues at a dead lift.
            NOw hauing diſcouered theſe 4. knaues in
part, I wil produce (like iugling Feats, the diuels
Iournyman) the whole packe before you,
that is to ſay, 52 Cards: that at the firſt ſight you
would thinke them to be good, honeſt, plaine
Cards, without any Legerdemaine; yet tis but
dec
                     •
                  ptio viſus for all that; but I will fetch them
off with a hey paſſe and repaſſe, and then you
ſhall ſee they are all knaues indeed, and all their
knauery too, as far as by my Aſtronomicall ſpeculation
and skill, I can diſplay them vnto you.
            But firſt, before you can well vnderſtand this
myſtery of iniquity, you muſt obſerue 4. points

moſt exactly: viz.
            1. The Spades be all long, to cut long-waies.
            2. The Clubs fall ſhort, to cut broad waies.
            3. The Hearts are equall, to cutt both wayes.
            4. And the Diamonds haue a principall marke
on the left corner, the better to be knowne, yet
ſo as that you ſhall not eaſily perceiue them,
but by obſeruation and dexterity in cutting
them.
            Well (if all may be well) being thus ſuted,
they are Cards for the deuills owne playe on
holidayes, and for his dam a
                  •
               l the weeke after.
            
               You ſhall finde them ſomtimes
               In the Court, like Controlers:
               In the Campe, like Commaunders:
               In the Cittie, like Cormorants.
               In the Country, like Conſtables.
               In the Terme time, like Pettifoggers.
               In the Vacation, like Promoters.
               In the Viſitation, like Sumners.
               In time of peace, like Iuſtices of Peace.
               In Warre, like Captaines or Muſtermaſters
               In ſicknes, like Phiſitions or Surgeons.
               In health, like orethwart Neighboures.
               In proſperity, as falſe freinds.
               
                  
In Aduerſitie, as Fell Foes.
               In profeſſion, are Phareſies.
               In life, Saducies.
               In the light Angells.
               In the Night diuells.
            
            On Sundayes pray with the people, and all
the weeke after pray on them.
            Yea theſe two are ſuch Nigromancers, that
they can with a trice Metamorfoze themſelues
into a thouſand ſhapes, and like Ignes Fatu
                     •
                  ,
with their falſe light, lead you in the night, out
of the way, and in the day (like Cheating companions)
deceiue you in the way.
            To conclude, their conditions like their coat
of many cullours, fitting (like a cheuerel gloue)
euery mans fingers.
            Theſe 4 principall knaues (as you haue heard
before) haue vnder each of their Iudaſ dictions,
6. ſubordinat knaues, and thoſe 24. haue each
of them one deputy, which makes the whole
packe 52. with their Cheiftaines: cum multis alijs
Raſcalibus, 
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nunc perſcribere longum eſt.
            
            
               The names of the other 24. are Inprimis, Ambition,
Preſumption, Stubbornes, Churliſhnes, Bitternes,
Maliciouſnes, Commotion, Traitery, Striuing,
Fighting, Oppreſſion, Vexing, Curſing, ſwearing,
ſcoffing, Pratling, Vnſeemely-ieſting, Theeuery, Baudry,
Beggery, Atheiſme, Hipocriſie, Curioſioty, Vnaduiſednes,

ſelfelone.
            A Legion of theſe Packets hath Don Lucifer
ſealed vp with his priuy ſeale, and deliuered
them to his three Groom porters, Minos, Eccus,
               Three great Iudges.
and Rh
                     •
                  damanth, to be foyſted in with other
plaine Cards, with twenty thouſand bales of
falſe dice; as high-men and low-men, viz. Gypſeys
and Iuglers, baudy Conſtables, and theeuiſh
boyes, &c.Fex populy.
            
            Therefore take heede, you that be ga
                  •
               eſters
at theſe Comi-tragicall ſports, leaſt you be
cheated of your goods and goodnes, and with
the Prodigall be ſent to keepe Swine, neuer to
returne home (the premiſes conſidered) but by
weeping croſſe, or Beggers buſh.
            Now hauing euacuated my head of theſe
groſſe infectious humors, wherof it may ſeeme
to haue bin fully charged: and falling into a
browne ſtudie what might become of theſe
Locuſts, that like the Graſhoppers of Egipt did
couer the whole earth: Commaunding Morpheus
(like a theefe in the night) came ſtealing
behind me before I was aware, and clapt his
ſoft hand vpon my eyes, and I dreamt: And
me thought I was (like Abacuck in the painted
cloath) carried (not downe to a denn) but (vp
to a high hill) inuironed with a deepe riuer:Microcoſmo
                     •
                  
               
& beyond the riuer a great champion feeld, in
the midſt whereof there was a faire Caſtle in
the forme of an Heart.
            
               
This Caſtle was beleagard by two huge
Armies: the one on the South-Eaſt ſide, and
the other on the No
                  •
               th-weſt.
            Forthwith I heard two Trumpets ſummoning
a parley: where unto an anſwer being replyed,
                  
                     •
                  ogetations.
I did behold (or thought I did behould)
a goodly young Damſell vpon the toppe of the
Caſtle, couered with a white vaile, that I could
not ſee her face: who demaunding the cauſe of
their ſ
                  •
               mmons, a dubble reply was made by
two Herralds, with my Lord, and my Lord: but
the North weſt Herrald (whoſe boyſtrous
bouldnes like blubd-cheekt Boreas bewrayed his
meger manners) cryed in the Slauonian tongue,
my Lord Vycioſo, baſe ſonne and heire aparant
to Sultan Pluto (ſole Emperor of the North,
from Babilon to Egipt and ſo to the further part
of Mare Rubrum to Mare Mortuum,
               Domine factotum. euen from
the Sunne ſet to the Sunne riſing) doth require
entrance and friendly entertainment for him
and his followers: Who ſweares and vowes
vnto you (by his Horror and vpon the word of
a Souldier) all loue and ſeruice: And to that
end (if you pleaſe) will ſend his commiſſioners
with authority, to treat with you of a perpetual
league, as alſo of a mariage: and to conclude
on Articles and conditions therunto belonging,
&c.
            All which ſhe hauing heard at large, (not
anſwering one word) turned her about to the

right ſide, to heare what th'other would ſay:
who to the ſame purpoſe (though after an other
manner) proteſted his Lords intire loue
and affection: And further putting hir in rememberance
of a former alliance and neighbourly
cōmerce held and continued between
his Lord Virtuoſo, and her deceaſſed Father,
who vpon his death-bed mocioned a contract
of mariage betweene them; which if ſhe would
ſtand vnto, then a large dowry ſhould be ratified
vnder his hand and ſeale to her, and the
h
                  •
               ires of their two bodies for euer. &c.
            His Embaſſie ended, ſhe breefly thus replied:
Sir you that ſpake laſt I anſwer, firſt thus:
            I finde not my ſelf inioyned by my deceaſſed
fathers Will, to any ſuch contract vpon a penalty,
therefore I hould myſelfe free to mine
owne will.
            But ſithens both your Lords profeſſe loue
(as you ſay) vnto me, and each offereth very
largely, I thanke them both, And that I might
know which loueth me beſt, I will that he that
can approue himſelfe moſt Puiſſant by the others
Conqueſt ſhall be Lord of me and mine.
            This anſwer returned (as faſt as Imagination
could carry them) away they went to their
Lords: who vnderſtanding her reſolution,
though they were both doubtfull of their ſucceſſe
(for the victory lay partly in her affecting)
yeat reſolued notwithſtanding on both ſides to
trye the euent.
            
               
Then Lord Virtuoſo ſpeedily deſpacht three
Commiſſioners, Reaſon, Deſcretion and good
Remembrance to ſolicit her the ſecond time:
And ſo did Pharo Neco Vitioſo: viz. Temptation,
Folly and Senſuallity to vſe their beſt deuoir to
draw her to their parts.
            But Madam Cogitations ſtoodfully reſolued to
behold the fight firſt, and then as ſhe ſaw occation
ſo ſhe would conclude.
            Being out of al hope on either ſide to obtaine
her fauourable aſpect, (which would be very
furtherſom to the party affected) they prepare
to the Battaile: but the night before Don Vitioſo
like a craftie knaua knauorum ſent his ſworne
ſeruant Sinior Senſuallity ſecretly (like a ſpie) to
ſow his ſlippery ſeede all ouer the Field, that
Lord Virtuoſo his ſouldiers ſhould not be able
to ſtand, their ground ſhould be ſo ſlippery.
            Now this right worthy Lord Virtuoſo very
early the next morning preparing to Battaile:
Thus marched forward with his whole army:
himſelfe ſitting in an Iuory Chatiot richly garniſhed
with Gould, Pearles, & precious ſtones:
there attending on the Chariot foure worthy
Knights: viz. Righteouſneſse, Prudence, Strength &
Temperance: Next to the Chariot Road ſeuen
Captaines.
            The firſt was Humility riding on a Lambe: on
his helme a Faulcon gentill ſtood.
            Next him followed Charity riding on a Tiger,
               
who carried a Pellican on his helme.
            The third was Patience on a Camell, he had
on his Creſt a Phenix.
            
            The fourth was Liberality on a Dromedary,
and on his Creſt an Oſpray.
            
            The fift was Abſtinence riding on a Hart, on his
healme a Popini
                     •
                  y.
            
            The ſixt was Chaſtity, who beſtred an Vnicorn,
on his creſt a Turtledoue was placed.
            Good exerciſe was the ſeuenth who was
mounted on a Panther: and a Crane he had on
his Creaſt.
            
               Many pettie Captaines there were beſides, as
Pitty, Meeknes, Goodnes, Concord, Vnitye, Patience,
Honeſtie,, true Friendſhip, Simplicity, Stedfaſtnes,
Quietnes, Peaceablnes, Helpfullnes, Diſcreetnes,
Seruiceablenes, Meſerablenes, Orderlines, Iuſtnes,
Contentednes, Sufferance, Foreſightfulnes, Cōtemplation,
Reuerence, Curteſie, Indifferencie, Lowlynes,
Affection, &c,
            All theſe were dubd Knights of the holy
croſſe by their Generall Don Virtuoſo:
            
            
               Don Vicioſo alſo dub'd other 24 Knights, of the
Poſt-haſte to animate them two to the conqueſt
of the gilt ſpurres.Iuanis Ho
                     •••
                  .
            
            
               Cunning, alſo brought to the ayd of Don virtuoſo
certain companies whoſe Captains were
Nigromancie, Geomancie, Magick,, Adriomancie,
Phiſsiognomy, Palmeſtry, Ornomancie & Pi
                     •
                  omancy:
but Treſnoble Virtue (ſcarſe thanking him for his

offer) tould him that he neuer vſed (nor would)
any ſuch companions in the warres.
            Whereupon Cunning, with his conſorts being
thus caſherd, went to Don Vicioſo, who (with
all reſpect) gladly receiuing him and his comrages,
and placed them in his rearward.
            To be breefe, in hearing on both ſides rainged
their maine Battalyons: Vicioſo Abbadono
moſt couragiouſly gaue the firſt onſet, diſcharging
his great Ordinance (which was baſtſterd
Cannons in all his Army) which the Lord
Grace (who commanded the Vangaurd of the
Prince Virtuoſos Army) auoided, by help of a
riſing hill on the Southeaſt ſide, and intrenched
on the North eaſt ſide, well manned and maintained
by right puiſant Patience and heauenly
Humilytie: ſo that all the ſhot paſt ouer their
heades without any detriment.
            Then they drew nere their enimy ſcirmiging
with th
                  •
               ir ſmall ſhot, which the Lord Virtuoſo
his party manly bore off, with their Targets of
proofe not yeelding one foot: Ioyning Battails,
they fell to it pell mell, with ſuch fury, that
many were ſlaine, many wounded, and many
taken Priſoners on both ſides: But the wicked
weed that Senſuallity had ſowed, made the
ground ſo ſlippery, that Lord Virtuoſo his company
could not ſtand: which Infidellety (ſtandingon
the left ſide of Madam Cogitacions) perceiuing,
inticed her to leane to Vicioſo Apollyon
                     •
                  
               
               
his party: But true Faith on the right ſide
counſelled her to the contrary: but al in vaine,
for ſhe not onely fauoured Mounſer Gogmagogo
Vicioſo, but tooke part with him alſo.
            All which, Lord Virtuoſo perceiuing, in great
diſcontent left the Feild for that time: and Signior
Gracioſo commaunded a retreat to be ſounded:
that hearing Doggodomado Vicioſiſſimo, his
Army made a great ſhowte, and cryed follow,
follow, for we ſhall all be Conquerers. But
the Lord Grace hauing recouered the intrenched
Hill, with Faith and Hope; maintained the
fight till Sunne-ſet.
            Early in the morning by the breake of day,
worthy Signior Gracioſo (with a heauenly Oration)
perſwaded his followers to a ſecond incounter:
which Faith & Hope no ſooner heard,
but with a freſh courage they led foorth their
Vangard, aduancing their Banners in the name
of Ieſus, and made a ſecond and a ſuddaine aſſault
(the enemy being in their Tents) At the
charge whereof, came thrice puiſant Perſeuerance
to their aide, with a mighty Hoaſt from
the Lord Virtuoſo: which Signior Gracioſo, with
Faith & Hope perceiuing, redoubled their courage,
and cryed Vertue and Victory.
            
            The Enemy this hearing, in all poaſt haſte
truſſed vp their trinkets, and in a diſorderly order,
aſwell as they could (vpon ſuch curtoll
warning) defended thēſelues: but moſt worthy

               Perſeuerance perceiuing that, tooke the aduantage,
and ſo wel behaued himſelfe that day, that
he made his foes to flie before his face: commaunding
Conſtancy with his couragious company,Plectrumaninims.
following cloſe after, that it reioyſt my
heart to ſee it.
            Now Madam Cogitations ſeeing this, (vſherd
by her olde ſeruant Goodwill) ſecretly ſtole to hir
Caſtle:Acuſation compeling her and meeting Lady Conſcience at the
Gate (in great ſorrow) craued hir counſel how
ſhe might recouer Lord Virtuoſo his fauour.
Marry (quoth Conſcience) you muſt goe to Humillity
and Repentance:
               Magn
                     •
                   cum 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  rore. So diſguiſing hirſelf, that
ſhe might paſſe the better vnknowne, ſhe met
with Contrition, who, with Repentance, brought
her the next way to Humilities Tent, which was
plac't at the foot of the Hil faſt by the intrenchment:
whome Humillity ſeeing a farre off, made
haſte to meete, and very louingly imbraced and
kiſſed them: Cogitations diſcouering all her intent,
intreated her beſt aid in her ſute to Lord
Virtuoſo, which he moſt willingly condiſcended
vnto, and went with her to the Generals Pauilion,
and there with Repentance and Contrition,
(falling downe flat before his Excellency) confeſſed
her amiſſe, and moſt earneſtly and heartely
craued pardon, which he moſt louingly
graunting,Remorſe. lifted her vp, ſet her on her feet before
him, and moſt friendly communed with
her.
            
               
In the meane while Perſeuerance with Conſtancy
ſo behaued themſelues, that Don Vitioſo with
al his whole rout, was vndone, and cleane ouerthrowne
horſe and foote: when (as the Diuell
wood) in ruſheth a mad rogue, one Caualero
Deſperatio with a Chariot (for his Lord was ſo
ſore wounded that he could not ride) and ſpeedily
conuayed him by a ſecret way out of the
feild.
            In this ouerthrow was taken Priſoners, ſeauen
Captaines of note or notorious Captaines, viz.
Enuy, Wrath, Couetouſnes, Pride, Gluttony, Letchery,
Sloth: with a number of the Raſcaldry: among
the reſt were my foure compictious knaues you
wot of: who in hope they would change their
coppies, and in time mend their manners, were
baniſhed the Iſland: Spadado Mellancollico, with
Caine to the land ofſignifieth barking. 
               Nodd bordering on ſad Acheron:
there to picke a Sallet of Rue, Wormewood,
Sorrell, and Colloquintida: Sanguinato cordato, to
Mount Etna, bordering on burning Flegiton:
there to offer fleſh and fuell, to that neuer-ending
fire.
            
               Fuſtifurato Colerato to the Torrida Zona, deuided
frō the Mount by infectious Stix: there to carbonado
his Collops with the Canibals.
            And that Flegmatico Diademono, to the land of
waſte, neere mourning Cocitus, neuer to returne
but vpon perpetual paine of the Poxe the Ghonorrhae:
with the grand conſumption of the

lungs and marrow: And all this to ſtand firme &
irreuocable, according to the law of the Medes
and Percians. Some were ranſommed for others
that were taken priſoners by the Enemy: others
committed to perpetuall impriſonment: and
ſome (like Hammon) were hanged for examples
to others.
            There were alſo ordained ſeauen ſpecial Officers
for the good gouerment of this noble Iſle
of Man,Microcoſmus. for preuention of future inuaſions: viz.
            
               1. Prudence, Lord Channcelor.
               2. Temperance Lord Treaſurer.
               3. Iuſtice, Earle Marſhall.
               4. Perſeuerance, Leiftenant Generall.
               5. Grace Lord Warden of the cinque
ports.
               6. Reaſon cheefe Secretary.
               7. Memory, M. of Requeſts and Recorder.
            
            As they were in conſultation about the future
good of this litle cōmon weale, & election
of inferior Officers, I heard one knocke hard
and haſtely at the Councell-chamberdore. And
with that I wak't.
            
               
Now concerning Signioriſſimo Virtuoſo his parly
with Madonna Cogitatio: the articles of agreement,
the marriage, her relapſe, and ſecond reconcilement,
with the ſecret and ſubtile return
of your foure irreligious Sadduces, to foure
hypocriticall Phareſies, will require an other
diſcourſe, and you ſhall heare more when our
old Poſt-maiſter Morpheus returnes, and that I
ſee your ſtrong ſtomacks do well digeſt theſe
my homely, but I hope wholeſome cates:
crauing pardon for what is amiſſe: and if I may
vnderſtand what is my error in this, I will mend
it in the next: for the plain truth is, I am but one
of Dame Reaſons ſculs, as may appeare
by my cookery and cloathing. But
yet I haue ſeene good worke in
my daies I cantel you.
         
         
            
            To the high & mighty Mounſier
Morpheus, brother to Oberon
King of Fayries: Coſin ierman
to Mercury, Squire of the body to Madam
Cogitations: Leiftenant Generall
of the cinque ports: & Domine Fac totum
of all nocturnall negotiations in
the Iſle of Man.
            
               
                  THy deuoted ſuppliant
& Micro-coſmographer
T. Goodwill: who doth
not onely, but alſo admire
thy mightineſſe: adore
thy virtue, and implore
thine Excellence (O thou Metamorphoſer
of mindes thou that art a releaſer of
Captiues, and a Captiuer of the releaſed: a

comforter of the comfortles, & a tormenter
of tormenters: a Meſſenger to the good of
gladnes, to the bad of ſadnes: a iuſt Iudge
twixt high and low, the poore mans wealth
and the rich mans woe: a Prophet of the
night, to the bad a falſe, to the good a right:
the balme of greefe and the bane of ſpite)
Thine Excellence I implore, that thou wilt
vouchſafe thy poore Goodwill a deepe carowſe
of thy Nectar, which may infuſe a
dreaming reuelation into my Piamater,
that ſo I may by way of propheſie foreſhew
what will follow of theſe aforeſaid foure
knaues, exiled for the teſtimony of a bad
conſcience: I cannot thinke that they
are dead, for they are ingendred of immortal
ſeed but (they are Metamorphoſed
into ſome other ſhapes, the better to deceiue)
and my ſpirits are kindled with a driuine
fire, & thou muſt not deny me as thou
tendreſt the fauour of my good Lady
Cogitations, in whoſe name I charge thee,
nay more, I coniure thee (marke what I ſay)
with Bell, Booke and Candle, that thou
ſatiſfie this my requeſt, leaſt in my furye I

turne Renegado, & write a moſt lewd Ballad
againſt thee, and that to ſome filthy
tune, to thy no ſmall diſhonor: but if thine
Excellence vouchſafe to anſwere mine expectation,
I vowe (by the life of Pharo) to
offer vpon thine Alter; (viz, a Feather-bed
and a Downe-pillowe) a Heccatomb of verſes
to be hung vp in thy Temple (viz. A
ſweete Chamber without fleas, in memoriall
of thy perpetuall prayſes: and when I awake,
I'le waſh my braines in Madera,
and ſing Madrigals in praiſe of thy
perſon and power.
            
               
HAuing fraught this my little Fleeboat,
with ſuch marchandiſe as I could meete
with in the Iſle, I found a proſperous
wind in the Eaſt-ſouth-Eaſt, which made meſet
ſail, directing my conrſe to the cape Bona Speranza, whichafter a few daies I had (a far off) diſcouered,
but before I could recouer the point, I
was chekt with a northerly winde, which perforce
draue me vpon the coaſt of the Canaries,
               Ile of Dogs.
where comming to an anchor, I was boarded
by a couple of copeſmates (called Zoilus and
Momus) that haue Authority there to ſearch
ſtrangers: who dealt ſtrangely with me indeed:
but it was my pride to be pryed into by them,
being forewarnd by many worthy men (whoſe
card and compas I am not worthy to catty after
them) of their paltry dealing.
            A ſecond ſort that aſſaulted me, was a cock-boat
laden with Coxecombes, that being not
able to apprehend, would reprehend: whome
after I had (with a volly of ſmall ſhot, well pelted,
I pardoned: for alas they did they knew
not what.
            The third ſort were a rapſedy of Raskals, that
would frowne or fauor as they ſawe others
affected: theſe detracting knaues would come
off with their buts, ifs and ands, but and if I
liue (I will threaten nobody) but I know what
I will doe.
            The laſt were a company of the laſt edition,

that tooke occaſion to poue a confiſcation of
my Ship and goods, producing againſt me
ſuch a chapter, ſuch a verſe, againſt my commodities
of prophane ieſting: &c.Aſſyrians. &c. Theſe Martiniſts
like Salomons fooles, Pro: 26. c, & Eſay. 5.
they would faine be ſinguler, and ſingle they
are, and ſo I left them.
            
               For Contempt and ſcorne are wits infirmitie.
               Wherewith diſdaine and ſcoffes keepes
company.
            
            Non mare tranſiſſet, pauidus ſi nauta fuiſſet.
            FJNIS.
            
         
      
   