
      
         
            
            
            LECTƲRES, VPON THE HISTORY OF THE PASSION, RESVRRECTION, AND ASCENSION OF OVR LORD IESVS CHRIST. Beginning at the eighteenth Chapter of the Goſpell, according to S. IOHN, and from the 16. verſe of the 19. Chapter thereof, containing a perfect Harmonie of all the foure Euangeliſts, for the better vnderſtanding of all the Circumſtances of the LORDS death, and Reſurrection.
            PREACHED BY THAT reuerend and faithfull ſeruant of God, Mr. ROBERT ROLLOCKE, ſometime Miniſter of the Euangell of IESVS CHRIST, and Rector of the Colledge of EDINBVRGH.
            EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HART. ANNO 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THEIR MOST LOVING FREIND IN THE LORD, MASTER WILLIAM SCOT, OF ELI, Grace in this life, and Euerlasting Glorie in the life to come.
            
               RIght worſhipfull, albeit that the true knowledge of Christ crucified, of all other, be the moſt worthie and excellent: & albeit that in him be the only and full matter of mans gloriation: yet few there be who ſtriue to know him as they ſhould, and to make him the matter of their reioycing. For to ſpeake nothing of the Gentiles, who count the preaching of Christ crucified to be fooliſhneſſe, or of the Iewes who count it a ſtumbling blocke, 1. Cor. 1, 23. or of the Turkes, who will not acknowledge him to be their Redeemer: euen they who haue bene baptized in Christ, & profeſſe outwardly his word, & true doctrine, if they remaine in nature, & be not preuēted by the ſpirit of adoption, whereby they may ſee their owne miſerie, their ſinnes, & the terrours of the wrath of God for ſinne, in the meane time that they profeſſe Christ, they in heart ſcorne the Croſſe of Christ, his woundes, and his blood, they account the knowledge

thereof of litle value: yea, they will preferre to it the knowledge of any thing here beneath, and they will ſeeke the matter of their gloriatiō not in it, but either in themſelues, or els into the creatures of God, which in themſelues are but tranſitorious ſhadowes. The naturall man will neuer thinke, that he can finde greater things in Christ crucified, than he will finde, if he obtaine the obiect which most he deſires, likes and longs for. The ambitious man will not thinke that he can get greater honour, than to be called the ſonne of a King or Emperour: he will not refuſe with Moſes, to be called the ſonne of Pharaoes daughter, that he may be called the ſonne of God, Heb. 11.24. The ſenſuall man cannot thinke that he can find any greater pleaſure, than in his ſinfull luſt, & he will neuer chuſe, rather to ſuffer aduerſitie with the people of God, than to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne. The couetous man can neuer thinke, that any greater happines can be, than here on earth to haue gold, ſiluer and treaſures: he will neuer with Moſes esteeme the rebuke of Christ greater riches, than the treaſures of Egypt. Only that man whom God preuents by his Spirit, and calles effectually frō the kingdome of darknes to the kingdome of light, wil account duely of the Croſſe of Christ, & will ſay with the Apostle, God forbid that I ſhould reioyce, but in the croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, Gal. 6.14. and, I decreed not to know any thing, ſaue Ieſus Chriſt, & him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2: that man will call it the ſupereminent knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt, Philip. 3.8: & he only will make Christ crucified to be the matter of his gloriation: for he will ſee, that God in him, as in a ſtore-houſe hath placed all treaſures, & that in him dwells the fulneſſe of the Godhead bodely, Col. 2.9: he will thirst to be woompled in the wounds of Ieſus, and waſhed in the blood of Ieſus: yea, that man will ſee, that God hath manifested in Christ our Sauiour, and in his death and reſurrection his glorious properties more clearly, than in the worke of our creation, or any other of his workes whatſouer: (for he is called, the brightneſſe of the glorie, & the engraued forme of the perſon of the Father, & the Image of the inuiſible God, Heb. 1.3.) and that man will ſee, that there is nothing, which the ſoule of man inlakes, ſtands in

neede of, or can deſire, but he will finde it in Christ. Wouldſt thou ſee the glorious properties of God? conſider firſt, his power: albeit in the worke of creation his power appeared to be incomprehenſible & omnipotent, when by his word he formed all things of nothing, & called theſe things that are not, and made them to be yet in the worke of the Redemptiō he manifested greater power: for notwithſtanding Sathan, the power of darkneſſe, the ſinnes of the Elect, which Ieſus bare, death and the graue were againſt him, yet powerfully he raiſed Ieſus from death, Eph. 1.19: there is a great power: and whereas in the Creation he formed to Adam a ſpous out of his owne ribbe: in the Redemption, he formed the Church of God out of the blood of Chriſt: there he gaue life, in commanding that to be which was not: here he giues life, not by life, but by death, & by the death euen of his owne Sonne. Albeit in the worke of Creation great, and more than wonderfull doth his wiſdome appeare, in making this glorious and beautifull fabricke, & in making all things, euen contraries, to agree in ſuch an harmonie: yet in the worke of Redemption, God by finding out a way, which no creature, neither man nor Angell, could inuent, how that iustice and mercie could ſtand together, hath ſhewed greater wiſdome: his wiſdome is ſuch, that the Angels admires, and deſires to looke in it, 1. Pet. 1.22. Albeit great anger & wrath did the Lord vtter many times againſt ſinners: as in the olde world by the Flood, and on Sodome & Gomorrhe, by raining from heauen brimſtone and fire, he deſtroyed man, woman, young, olde, rich and poore without exception: yet more clearely was his anger againſt ſinne ſeene, when for the ſinnes of the Elect he ſpared not his own wel beloued Son, on whō they were laid: but made his wrath ſo fearfully to purſue him, that he cried, My ſoule is very heauie, euē vnto the death, Marc. 14.34: and, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? Matt. 27.46. And albeit great loue did the Lord ſhew toward men, & gaue many testimonies therof, in giuing them life, & breath, & all things, Act. 17.25, in making his ſun to ſhine on them, his raine to fal on them, giuing them fruitfull ſeaſons, & filling their hearts with food &

gladneſſe, Act. 14.17: yet neuer ſuch loue ſhewed he, as when he ſent the Son of God to be the Sonne of man, that the ſonnes of mē might be made the ſonnes of God againe: and when he made him to die, that men might liue. Herein (ſayes Ioh. 4.10) is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and ſent his Sonne to be a reconciliation for our ſinnes: here only is an incontrollable teſtimonie of an undoubted loue: and if ye will duly conſider all the reſt of Gods glorious properties, ye ſhall finde them all moſt clearly manifested in the perſon of Ieſus Chriſt. Now wouldſt thou know that in him thou ſhalt find all things that the ſoule of man ſtands in neede of, & can require? What can the ſoule of man require? Deſireſt thou honour? If thou beleeueſt in him, he ſhall grant thee that power & prerogatiue, that thou ſhalt be the Sonne of God, Ioh. 1.12. Deſireſt thou riches? He was made poore, that thou through his pouertie mighteſt be made rich, 2. Cor. 8.9: not with tranſitorie and corruptible riches, but with riches and treaſures incorruptible & permanent: deſireſt thou food, meat, drinke to thy ſoule? He is that bread of life, he is that water of life: deſireſt thou wiſdome, ſanctification and redemption? Chriſt is all theſe vnto thee, 1. Cor. 1.29: Ioh. 8.12: Deſireſt thou light? He is the light of the world, Ioh. 8.12. Deſireſt thou life? He is thy life, Col. 3.4: What euer he ſuffered, it was for thee: for by his ſtripes we are healed, Eſai 53.5: He was burthened with ſhame, that he might redeeme thee from ſhame, and cloth thee with glory: he was taken and bound, to ſet thee at libertie, who was bound with Sathan and ſinne: he was mocked, and was dumbe before the earthly Iudge, that thou whoſe mouth before was cloſed through the guilt of ſinne before God, might haue boldneſſe & peartneſſe in thy prayers & ſupplications: he ſuffered-anguiſh and griefe, that thou mightſt finde comfort & ioy▪ he dranke the gall, that thou mightſt drinke of a ſweet and ioyfull cuppe: he was naked, that thou mightſt be clothed: and if thou wilt goe through all the points of his ſuffering, and apply them to thy broken and caſten downe ſoule, thou ſhalt finde, that euery one of them ſhall furniſh comfort vnto thee: yea, if thou be a true penitent

ſinner, & beleeueſt in him, thou ſhalt find all theſe miracles to be wrought and performed in thy ſoule, which euer the Lord in the dayes of his humiliy wrought on the body of any: thou ſhalt finde life to thy dead ſoule, eyes to thy blind ſoule, eares to thy deafe ſoule, limbes to thy lame ſoule, a new tongue to thy dumbe ſoule, &c. Therefore, as we ſhould take pleaſure & delite in reading the whole parts of the Scripture (for it is all by diuine inſpiration, & is profitable to teach, to cōuince, to correct, & to inſtruct in righteouſnes, 2. Tim. 3.16) ſo chiefly, that part which cōtaines the hiſtorie of the paſsion & reſurrection of Chriſt: for of all there is none more profitable, none more neceſſarie, none more eaſie to be vnderstood by the ſimple, none more eaſie to be kept in memorie, none more forcible to mooue the affections, either to admire the incomprehenſible and infinite loue of God toward ſinners, or the fiercenes of his wrath for ſinne, or the ſeueritie of his iuſtice in ſeeking ſuch exact ſatisfactiō, or to moue to deteſt & abhorre ſin, which made the Sonne of God to be made ſo vnworthily alwayes handled, & at laſt to be ſo ſhamefully crucified, or to reioyce for theſe incomprehenſible benefits that Chriſt hath acquired to vs, our effectuall calling frō the kingdome of darknes to his marueilous light, our iustification in pacifying the wrath of God, in ſatisfying for ſinne, in abſoluing vs from guiltines, in dying that we might liue, in bringing peace & ioy to the conſcience, &c. our ſanctificatiō, whereby we are repaired to his owne Image. Nothing ſerues more for the mortificatiō, nor when we conſider how Chriſt hang vpon the Croſſe for ſin, nothing will moue vs more effectually to cōforme our ſelues to him as an enſample in his humility▪ patience, obediēce, loue: & finally in offering our ſelues to him, as he offered himſelfe for vs, nor when by faith we beholde Christ on the Croſſe crucified for vs.
            Now this history of the death & reſurrectiō of Chriſt haue many worthy men learnedly & cōfortably handled & exponed with great painfulnes, & no leſſe cōmendatiō: amōgſt the reſt, that reuerent & faithful man of God, M. Robert Rollocke of bleſſed memory for his learned & iudicious expoſitiō thereof, & for his manifold

other graces which God vouchſafed on him, deſerues with the firſt to be cōmēnded: for God in him, as in a vine enſample, gaue vs a ſhew of ſuch qualities & cōditiōs, as are required to be in a Biſhop of Ieſus Chriſt, 1. Tim. 3. In him learning & godlines ſtroue together, knowledge & conſciēce, art & nature, a profeſsiō & an anſwerable conuerſatiō: he was faithfull & painfull in his calling, & his calling did he decore with an holy & harmleſſe life: for betweene theſe two there was ſuch an harmony & cōſent, that in reading his writtings, any man might ſee the maner of his life: & in ſeeing his life, he might alſo therein read his writtings: for his life ſpake what his pen wrote & his perſon was a patterne of his writtē precepts: he was neuer idle, but euer doing the office of a Miniſter of Ieſus: either did he read, meditate, pray, comfort, preach or write: no trauell did he refuſe that he might glorifie God, who ſent him, enlarge the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt, & acquire miſerable ſoules from miſery to felicity, from darknes to light, & from death to life, that ſo at laſt he might finiſh his courſe with ioy: that was his meat & his drink, the delite & pleaſure of his ſoule. Great graces did the Lord beſtow vpō him, excellēt knowledge, great humility, feruēt zeale, charitable interpreting of all mēs doings, compaſsiō toward all ſorts of ſinners. Who in cōceiuing was more quick? in iudgmēt more ſolide? in memory more ſtedfaſt & ſure? in deliuery more pithy, in conuincing more powerful? who with learning had greater facility & eaſines in declaring his mind, & reſoluing ye
                text of Scripture? greater clearnes in raiſing ye
                grounds of doctrine? greater power in applying, greater wiſdome in furniſhing cōſolation, & greater dexterity in looſing of things obſcure & doubtſome? In one word we may be bold to ſay of him, that which Nazianzene ſpake of Athanaſius, that his life was a good definition of a true Miniſter & preacher of the Goſpell. But we need not to inſiſt in prayſing him, ſeeing ſo many: euen all that knew him by face, or heard him, doe praiſe him for the ſingulare & excellēt vertues & graces, that God beſtowed on him: yea, they who neuer knew him by face, but by his learned & iudicious writtings dwelling afarre off, haue highly commēded him, & the

poſteritie whoſe profite ſo much hee regarded in his labours, wee doubt not, ſhall know & praiſe him, and we had rather be ſilent, than to ſpeake too litle.
            Now, Sir, becauſe we thought, that theſe Lectures on this history of the paſsion & reſurrectiō of Chriſt in it ſelfe: for the matter ſo mouing & alluring, would profite & edifie many, if not of the moſt learned, at leaſt, of the ſimple ſort: & that other Sermons that were deliuered by him, and ſet out by vs of before, were well liked of by many, & that ſundry hearing that they were in hands, longed to ſee them come to light, we haue takē ſome paines in reuiſing & correcting them, not only for the loue & duty that we ought to that faithfull & reuerend Author of them, who was our maſter: but alſo that with the greater liking & profite they might be read by al them that deſire to be edified. And what our paines herein hath bene, few can well iudge, but thoſe who haue bene acquainted with ſuch caſes: we haue endeuoured to giue the true meaning of the Author clearly, to make his methode plaine: we haue omitted many ſuperfluous repetitions: we filled out vnperfect ſentēces: we cleared things obſcure: we rectified the ſentēces which were inuerted: we endeuoured ſo far as was poſsible, to giue out his owne phraſe, ſtile and matter. As for the matter, this we may boldly affirme, that it is fully ſet down, and that it is as good at leaſt, if it be not better than his Latine Commentarie ſet foorth by himſelfe: yea, we doubt nothing, but the matter ſhall ſatisfie all men, who craue edification: but as for the phraſe & ſtile, we dare not ſay, that it will be found ſo abſolute and exact in all thinges, as if it had beene finiſhed by himſelfe, before he ended his courſe, neither as we would wiſh, and other men woulde require: And what maruell? ſeeing neither did hee deliuer them of purpoſe to bee printed, neither did hee euer ſee them thereafter, neither were they receiued by his Schollers vpon that purpoſe: but onely for the helping of their owne memorie: yea, and at the first time after, that vpon your requeſt, Sir, wee tooke paines vpon them,

we foūd ſuch hardnes & imperfections, & that his own phraſe & elegancy was not obſerued, that we feared to hazard the name and credite of the learned & iudicious Author, who deſerued ſo well of vs, yea, of the whole Church of God, & had left off the worke as vnperfect, if the earneſt requeſt of you, & of ſome other of the learned, (whoſe iudgmēts are to be reuerēced) had not encouraged vs therto. Yet we truſt, that the ſtile ſhal not be much blamed, except by thoſe, who beeing delicate eared, regardes language more thā matter: for there is here an eaſy methode, with a familiar ſtile condeſcēding to the capacity of the meaneſt, & anſwerable to the matter entreated, to wit, the croſſe of Chriſt, which refuſes to be decored with humane eloquēce, that ye
                matter be not obſcured by the ſtile, but may appeare aboue it, as oft times M. Rollocke himſelfe was wont to ſpeake. Yea albeit it may be, that the ſtile in ſome few of the firſt Sermons be ſomewhat hard and vnpleaſant, which we might eaſily haue amended, if we had not thought it vnmeete to haue ſet out his matter in our words: yet if any will read forward: eſpecially, from that part where the Harmony of all the Euangeliſts is taken in, & all the foure are in ſuch ſort conferred together, that no circumſtāce of the hiſtory of Chriſts death & reſurrection is omitted, he ſhall euer find more & more contētment in all things. And as we haue taken paines for the profite & edificatiō of many: ſo we doubt not, but the ſucceſſe & euent ſhal anſwere to our deſire. For to ſpeake nothing of the hiſtory it ſelfe, which is ſo pleſāt, ſweet, plaine, eaſy & forcible to moue all the affections of the ſoule: here ye will find, how euery clauſe & ſentēce of euery one of the Euāgeliſts are linked together, & depend one vpon another; according to the order of nature: here ye will ſee a plaine and an eaſy methode: here ye will ſee how clearly the doctrine reſultes off the doctrine laid down: here ye will ſee fit applications to theſe times: & here ye wil ſee, when occaſion offers, how the enemies of the trueth of God, are pithily conuinced and confuted.
            And now, if we would preſume to dedicate this worke & our labours therein to any other than to you, Sir, whoſe deſeruings haue bin ſo great, both towards the Author himſelfe, & vs alſo, we might

be iuſtly blamed, and could haue no ſhew of reaſonable excuſe: for firſt, who knew M. Robert Rollocke, but they alſo knew what entire affectiō you caried towards him, & how carefull you were in all things to pleaſe him: euen frō the time that firſt your acquaintance began, till the time that he finiſhed his courſe: none loued him more tēderly, none vſed him more familiarly, none delited more to conferre with him priuately, & to heare his preachings publikely, none ſhewed greater gratitude towards him: for it was knowne by many, that it would haue bene your pleaſure, if from your hand he would haue receiued a teſtimony of your loue, as a fruite of your faith wrought by his Miniſterie: yea, he himſelfe did acknowledge, that none was to be cōpared with you for gratitude & goodwill towards him: but chiefly, you declared your loue towards him▪ whē in his laſt diſeaſe you would haue him to come to your houſe, where you entertained him (& for his cauſe many that came to viſite him) liberally & honourably to his laſt breath, without any regarde of expēſes, euen as a louing ſonne entertaineth his father. Next, ſeeing the wil of the Teſtator ſhould be ſacred & inviolable: & in his teſtamēt he ordained, that whatſoeuer of his works ſhould ſee the light thereafter, ſhould be dedicate to you, with theſe ſolemne words, expreſly dyted by himſelfe, GVLIELMO SCOTO in perpetuum teſtimoniū amicitiae noſtrae dedico, cōſecróque (that where euer his works were read, your kindnes & affectiō towards him might be knowne, & your memoriall might endure to the poſterity) who can iuſtly be offended, that this worke be dedicate vnto you? who can enuie your praiſe herein? thirdly, if there were no more, this one cauſe may be more than ſufficiēt, to make this worke to come out vnder your patronage & protectiō, that you haue bene the only inſtrumēt to make it to ſee the light: for through your great care, earneſt endeuoure & large expēſes theſe Lectures were collected & gathered from all the partes of the Countrey, Eaſt, West, South, North, how far distant that euer they were, from the hands of his ſchollers, who wrote them from his mouth: by your dealing & procurement they were written ouer and ouer againe, reuiſed, corrected, & now made apt for the

Printing: ſo that by your means they now go abroad in the hands of mē, we truſt, to the cōfort of many: laſtly, we for our own parts offer our trauels in this worke vnto your patronage, as a monument, that we acknowledge our ſelues to be more obliged vnto you, thā we can requite: & of minds deſirous not to be foūd vnthākfull for the vndeſerued fauour you ſhewed to vs particularly: to ſpeake nothing of the teſtimonies of your loue, which you ſhewed many wayes towards them whō the Lord hath ſet in his ſeruice, both far & near, which they thēſelues doe acknowledge & profeſſe. We offer therefore theſe Lectures, & our labours therein, vnto your patronage & protectiō, not only as a testimony of the Authors great liking and gratitude toward you, but alſo as a monumēt of our thākfulnes for your kindnes ſhewed vnto vs: finally, Sir, as God hath preuented you many wayes with his bleſsings, & hath made you ſēſible of his loue, & hath giuen you an honorable accoūt, & eſtate in this world: ſo continue in the honouring of God, & doing good vnto his Saints, for his ſake, & the Lord ſhall performe the fruite of his promiſes in you, which his Saints find by experience, his mercy ſhall neuer leaue you, vntill the time that he accompliſh the worke he hath begun, & he crowne his grace with glory. Now, the God of all grace & peace, who is able to doe all things exceeding aboundantly, aboue all that we can aske or thinke, grant to you, Sir, according to the riches of his mercy, a long, happy & peaceable life here, to the comfort of his Church & Commonwelth, & that you may abound in euery word & worke, & that you may fight conſtantly the good fight of faith here on earth, that whē your courſe is finiſhed, ye may be aſſured to receiue that crowne of glory in the heauens, which Ieſus hath acquired to them that loue him: To whoſe gracious protection we recommend you in body and ſoule, with all the actions you enterpriſe according to his will, for now and euer, AMEN.
            
            
               Yours in the Lord,

                     H.C.
                     W.A.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST LECTVRE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     WHEN IESVS had ſpoken theſe thinges, hee went foorth, with his Diſciples ouer the Brooke Cedron; where was a Garden, into the which he entred, and his Diſciples.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 And Iudas, who betrayed him, knew alſo the place: for IESVS oft times reſorted thither, with his Diſciples.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 
                     Iudas then, after he had receiued a band of men, and officers of the high Prieſts, & of the Phariſes, came thither with lanterns, & torches, & weapons.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Then IESVS, knowing all thinges that ſhould come vnto him, went foorth, and ſaid vnto them, Whom ſeeke yee?
                  
                     
                        verse 5 They anſwered him, IESVS of Nazareth. IESVS ſaid vnto them, I am hee. Now Iudas alſo, who betraid him, ſtood with them.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Aſſoone then as hee had ſaid vnto them, I am hee, they went away backwardes, and fell to the ground.
               
            
            
               VNTO this part of this GOSPELL (beloued in the LORD IESVS) the LORD hath done the office of a Prophet and Doctor, going about to inſtruct the people of the IEWES in the way of Life and ſaluation, and to inſtruct and comfort His owne Diſciples eſpecially in theſe laſt CHAPTERS. Nowe in the eighteenth and nineteenth CHAPTERS following, He doeth the office of a Prieſt. Ye know the LORD he is a King, a Prieſt, and a Prophet: He playeth the part of a Prieſt, in offering vp himſelfe: Hee offered vp none other ſacrifice than his owne bodie for the world, and for

the redemption and ſaluation of mankind. As concerning his paſſion and ſuffering, which is rehearſed in theſe two CHAPTERS, the hiſtorie diuideth it ſelfe verie clearly: Firſt, wee haue his Paſſion and ſuffering in the Garden: Next, wee haue his ſuffering in the Hall of Caiaphas the high Prieſt: Thirdly, we haue his ſuffering before Pontius Pilate the Iudge: Fourthly, wee haue his ſuffering in the place of Execution, which is called Caluaria, or in Hebrewe GOLGOTHA, where he was crucified: And laſt, in the ende of the nineteenth Chap. we haue the laſt poinct of his ſuffering, ſtanding in his ſepulchre and buriall, which is the laſt part of his humiliation. Nowe this day wee ſhall ſpeake ſomewhat, as the time ſhall ſerue, of his ſuffering in the Garden.
            In this firſt head of Chriſtes ſuffering in the Garden, firſt wee haue the part of Chriſt, offering himſelfe to bee taken and bound willingly, and of a ſet purpoſe: Next, we haue the part of Iudas, in comming out with a companie of men of warre againſt him, to the ſame Garden: hee knewe the place well enough, becauſe the Lord, with his Diſciples, were wont to reſort thither: In the thirde place, wee haue the communication betwixt the Lord and them that came with Iudas to take him: And fourthly, wee haue a fact of Peter, who will ſhew his loue towards his Maſter, and his manhood, by cutting off the eare of Malchus, the high Prieſtes ſeruant: And laſt, the taking of Chriſt, offering himſelfe willingly, his putting into the hands of his enemies, and his binding. Theſe things are ſet downe in the firſt part of this hiſtorie, Of the Paſſion of the Lord, concerning his ſuffering in the Garden.
            Now to come to the words, and firſt to Chriſtes part: It is ſaid, When IESVS had ſpoken theſe things, he went foorth, with his Diſciples, ouer the Brooke Cedron, where was a Garden, into the which hee entered, and his Diſciples. There is Chriſtes part:
of verie purpoſe he caſteth himſelfe to that place, which Iudas knew, and where hee knew that hee was wont to reſort: of verie purpoſe hee went thither, becauſe the houre of his death was at hand. The time is well to bee noted when he doeth this, when he had ſpoken theſe things, that is, when 
                  •
               ee had ſufficiently inſtructed and comforted his Diſciples, and made that prayer for them, and recommended them to the Father, to keepe them in his abſence: then hee maketh himſelfe for death, and purpoſely he went to that place to be taken. Heere is a plaine leſſon offered vnto vs in the perſon of Chriſt: when hee had

diſcharged a duetie, eſpecially to them who were concredite vnto him, after that he had inſtructed them, and after that by prayer hee had commended firſt his owne ſelfe, and then all his own to God: then in ſecuritie and peace he goeth on to death: hee goeth not to die before he diſcharge a duetie to them that were committed vnto him: then willingly he addreſſeth himſelfe to death. Yee knowe the leſſon. When a man or a woman hath diſcharged their calling faithfully towardes them that were committed vnto them, and done their duetie to them to whom they are addebted, then in peace & reſt, and with a good conſcience they may offer vp themſelues at the pleaſure of God, to laye downe their life, and to die: therefore, whoſoeuer they be that would die in reſt and peace, (and alas, when ſhouldeſt thou haue reſt, peace, and quietneſſe to thy ſoule, if in the houre of death thou haue it not?) Let them take heed before they goe to die, that they haue diſcharged a faithfull duetie: and then hauing beene faithfull, when they goe to die, they may lie downe and reſt in peace, and in a good conſcience. But yee knowe againe one follie in this poinct, and this is the common faſhion of men, when they haue their health, before the Lord call on them they are ſo ſloathfull in diſcharging their duetie to them to whome they are indebted, that when the ſoule is to depart out of the bodie, they are moſt occupied with buſineſſe, and moſt troubled in making their Teſtament, and I know not what: Now make thy Teſtament before hand, and diſcharge thee of all thinges, and denude thine hand of all worldly affaires, that in that houre thy ſoule may reſt on God, and bee delited on heuenly thinges, and on that life which thou art going vnto by death.
            But to come forwards: It is ſaid, He went ouer the Brooke Cedron, with his Diſciples: This Brooke Cedron was a water, which ranne betweene Hieruſalem, and the Mount of Oliues, in a little and lowe valley: (Luke 2. Sam. 15.23.) and it was a little ſtreape that ran when it was raine, but in time of drought it was drie: Nowe heere was a Garden, into the which the Lord entered, with his Diſciples; to the ende, that euen as in the Garden (to wit, the Garden of Paradiſe) the ſaluation of mankinde was loſt through the fall of Adam and Eue; Euen ſo in a Garden, the ſaluation of mankinde ſhould begin to bee recouered. Chriſt began his agonie and paſſion in this Garden. There are ſundrie thinges concerning the ſuffering of Chriſt in this Garden of purpoſe omitted, and left out by Iohn,
               
which is mentioned and ſet downe at large by the reſt of the Euangeliſts, by Matt. in his 26. chap. & 36. verſ. Mark. 14.37. Luk. 22.9. Onely Iohn ſpeaketh of his taking and binding in the Garden: the reſt ſpeake of that agonie and conflict that hee had with the wrath of his Father in the Garden. They who are deſirous to haue theſe things more at large, let them reade the reſt of the Euangeliſts: only I ſhall touch that battell & agonie that Chriſt had in his ſoule with the terrible wrath of his Father before any laide handes vpon him. When he entereth into the gardē, the firſt thing he doth, he chooſed out three of his diſciples, Peter, Iohn, & Iames: & he calleth them aſide from the reſt, to the end, that as theſe thre were witneſſes of his glorie, in that his glorious Transfiguration vpon Mount Tabor, when Moſes and Helias appeared vnto him, Matt. 17.1. Euen ſo, the ſame three ſhould be witneſſes of his humiliation, and that dejection in the Garden: and hee commandeth the reſt to ſit downe together. So theſe he calleth apart, Peter, Iohn, and Iames, by name: and in their ſight, firſt he beginneth to enter into that combate, and he beginneth to ſhiner and quake, & to be exceedingly heauy: and he crieth out with a loude voyce in their audience, My ſoule is heauie on all ſides to the death. There beginneth he his agonie and conflict with the wrath of the Father for our ſins, wherewith he was burthened. After that, he went from theſe diſciples, about a ſtone caſt, and hee prayed to the Father with a loud voyce, ſaying, Father, if it be poſſible remoue from me this cup: that is, this cup of wrath & death, but not my will, but thy will be done. Thirdly, he goeth forward in that conflict & battell with the wrath of his Father: he feeleth the wrath of God to increaſe, & he crieth againe that they might heare, Father, if it be poſſible, remoue from me this cup. Then againe the battell increaſeth, & the agonie groweth, & then the third time he prayeth the ſame words, Father, take this cup frō me: that is, the cup of the heauy wrath of God: at the which time an Angell came from heauen, & comforteth him. Yet the battell holdeth on, and he is in a greater agony with his Father than euer he was in before, & he prayeth at greater length, and more ardently & vehemently than euer he did of before: So that in his agony the drops of purple blood fell downe from his face to the grounde: ſuch a thing was neuer ſeene, nor neuer befell vnto anie man ſince the beginning of the worlde, as to ſweate blood: no man was euer vnder ſuch a terrible and horrible wrath of God, as Chriſt was for our ſinnes, and for the ſinnes of the whole world.
            
               Now in all this meane time, he is not forgetfull of his diſciples, whō he brought with him to be witneſſes of his ſuffering, he is ay going to them, & from them, to hold them waking, & doe what he could doe, they are ay ſleeping, the Deuill is buſie with them, that in the ſuffering of CHRIST (they beeing then ſleeping) they ſhould beare no witnes of the ſuffering of Chriſt, the Deuill was as buſie to caſt them in a ſleepe, as the Lord was buſie to hold them waking, to beare witneſſe of that agonie & conflict. I will not inſiſt in this matter, reade thereof in Matth. 26. & in Luke 22. & in Marc. 14. and yee ſhall get this Hiſtorie at large: only we haue thus farre of the ſuffering of Ieſus Chriſt in the garden: firſt, how heauie 
                  •
                weightie a thing ſinne is, all this was not for his ſinne, but for our ſinnes, for the ſinnes of the world: Next, ye ſee how heauie a thing the wrath of God is, that followeth on ſinne, for as Ieſus Chriſt tooke on his backe the burthen of our ſinnes, ſo did he alſo the weight of the wrath of God, and the puniſhment that followeth vpon ſinne: if ye know not this, ye know nothing of Chriſt. Thirdly, yee ſee the greatneſſe of the loue of CHRIST to man, that firſt tooke on his backe ſo heauie a burthen of ſinne, and ſecondly, ſo heauie a burthen of wrath, and all for mankinde. If CHRIST had not ſuffered, neuer a man had beene ſafe, but theſe burthens had preſſed them downe to hell, neuer a ſoule had beene ſaued from Adam to the end of the worlde: Looke then what loue hee hath ſhewed to vs: and laſt, this agonie & ſuffering in the garden letteth vs ſee that the Sonne of God, as he is verie God, ſo he is very man alſo, and that he hath the body of a man, & the ſoule of a man, for this ſuffering in the garden was eſpecially in the ſoule: in this battell the ſoule of Ieſus Chriſt was eſpecially ſet on by the wrath of the Father. There was none, touching the body of the Lord at this time, but the wrath of the Father was fighting with the ſoule. But to leaue this, and to marke the purpoſe of IOHN, his purpoſe is onely to let you ſee, that when Ieſus Chriſt died, he died with a great willingneſſe and readineſſe, that willinglie hee goeth to death, and is not drawen out againſt his will, but knowing that IVDAS would come with a companie of men of warre to that place where hee was wont to walke and pray, of ſet purpoſe that hee ſhould be taken▪ hee reſorted thither. So this is the purpoſe of IOHN, to let vs ſee that IESVS CHRIST offered vp a voluntarie Sacrifice for the ſinnes of the world, for except

He had offered vp a voluntarie ſacrifice, His ſuffering had not bene obedience to the Father, He had not bene as is ſaid, Phil. 2.8. obedient to the Father. So the Lord died, and hee died to be obedient to the Father, that is, Hee died willingly at the good will and pleaſure of the Father. And if He had not bene obedient, His ſacrifice had neuer beene a ſatisfaction for the ſinnes of the worlde, and then what good had the ſacrifice of CHRIST done to mee, or thee, or to anie man: and therefore hereupon is our faith grounded, that we know the LORD IESVS, not onely died, but alſo, that Hee died willingly; and ſo willingly, and with ſuch a readineſſe to pleaſure his Father, and to ſatisfie the wrath of the Father, as no tongue of man nor Angell can expreſſe. And when euer thou ſettleſt thine heart on the death of CHRIST, looke that thine heart ſettle it on a willing and obedient death: for if thou thinke not that Hee died willinglie and chearefullie for thee, thou canſt haue no comfort.
            Now to come to Iudas part: Iudas knoweth the place where the LORD was: hee knoweth the Garden well enough, becauſe IESVS oftentimes was wont to reſort thither with his diſciples, and Judas was one of them: for manie times hee was there with the reſt of his diſciples, and hee knewe, that commonly the LORD was wont to reſort thither with his diſciples, and on this hee taketh occaſion to betray Him: and when hee hath gotten a band of men of warre, and the ſeruants of the high Prieſtes, and Phariſes, hee as a Captaine to them, and they as a guarde with ſwordes and ſtaues enter within the Garden to take the LORD IESVS.
            Well, Brethren, it is the acquaintance and familiaritie that Judas had with CHRIST, and with the place where He was vvont to reſort, that was the occaſion of the betraying of the Lord. If Iudas had not bene acquainted with Chriſt, Iudas had not come to this place to take Him. It is familiaritie that makes traitours: hee that will betray a man, muſt be a domeſticke & a houſhold man to him. Will euerie man betray Chriſt? No: not euerie man, hee that will betray Chriſt, muſt be one that knoweth Him, and His trueth in ſome meaſure. Then thou that knoweſt Chriſt, take good heede to thy knowledge, and to thy familiaritie, take good heede that knowledge of Chriſt be in ſinceritie, and that thou be not an Hypocrite, but bee a friend indeede, and not outwardly,

otherwiſe, if thy knowledge be but in hypocriſie, and if thy friendſhip bee coloured, thou ſhalt bee a traitour, and in the ende thou ſhalt make apoſtaſie with Judas, from Ieſus Chriſt. What is the cauſe that men become Apoſtates and traitours, and after that they haue profeſſed and ſubſcribed, they fall away from Ieſus Chriſt? what? but becauſe they were neuer true nor ſincere friends to Ieſus Chriſt: All was but diſſimulation, and ſhall end in perſecution of Ieſus Chriſt, and his members, and they ſhall end in deſtruction, as Iudas did: for after that hee had once made apoſtaſie from the Lord, and betrayed his Maſter, hee neuer tooke reſt till he hanged himſelfe. If ye will marke well, ye wil find in the companie of Iudas two rancks & ſorts of men: The firſt is a band of men of warre of the Romane Deputies, that was one part of the guarde: The other was the officers and miniſters of the high Prieſt, they make out the other part. Then the third guarde is partly of Gentiles, & partly of Iewes. How came they? They came with lanterns & weapons & lights on a naked man with feare of warre: they needed not. What needed all this companie▪ the Lord Ieſus beeing a naked man in the Garden, not minded to fight: What needed Iudas to bring ſuch a guard with him? The Spirit of God marketh in this Narratiue, that Iudas in doing this, had an euill conſcience, through his euill doing.
            The man that taketh an euill or a wicked deede in hand, will thinke that hee can neuer get men enew to doe it with him, hee ſhall feare for no cauſe: if yee ſhould guarde him with all the worlde, ſcarcely ſhall hee be in ſecuritie: for hee wantes that peace of GOD. Paul to the Philippians calles it that peace that paſſes all vnderſtanding, and that guardes the heart of man: for peace is nothing, but a good conſcience, and hee who wantes this good conſcience which is the inward guarde, that man can neuer bee ſaued with an outwarde guarde: if all the worlde ſhould ſtand about that man, hee will euer bee in feare, and albeit hee were in the mids of an armie, he will tremble and quake, but a good conſcience will reſt in peace: as Dauid ſayeth, Although I were helmed about with ten thouſand men, yet would I not be afraid, for I know aſſuredly that thou wilt bee with mee. That heart is well guarded that hath a good conſcience, for it will haue peace inwardly, and will not ſeeke that outward guarde. The ſame thing is ſet out in the manner of his comming, hee commeth with lanternes, and hee

commeth with lights, and in the night. This comming in the night manifeſteth▪ that he had an euill conſcience: for he that doeth euill, hateth the light. What needed all this company? Was not the Lord Ieſus dayly going in and out in Hieruſalem? And was He not daylie teaching in the Temple? & yet they layed not an hand vpon him. The verie ſeaſon and time of his out-cōming, teſtifieth, that he had an euill conſcience in doing of it, and therefore he came not in the day light. Hee that hath an euill conſcience feareth the Sunne, hee dreadeth the light, and hee ſeeketh to execute his purpoſe in the night. The night maketh an euill man impudent. All theſe things manifeſt vnto vs, that Iudas had an euill conſcience, but it was not well wakened, but when it was wakened, then he deſpaired, and he had Hell in his ſoule, and got no reſt, till he had hanged himſelfe.
            Nowe I goe forwarde to the communication betwixt the Lord and the Guarde: Ihon ſaith, The Lord knowing all things that ſhould happen vnto him, and that were to come vnto him, he commeth forward, he fleeth not away, he hideth not himſelfe, he is not drawne out of an hole, as men who haue done an euill fact, but vnrequired hee commeth foorth vnto them, and vpon his owne free motiue hee offereth himſelfe vnto them: then he tarrieth not till they beginne to talke, but firſt the Lord ſpeaketh, & ſaieth, Whom ſeeke ye? and they anſwere (not knowing him by the face) they ſay, IESVS of Nazareth. Hee anſwereth, not denying himſelfe, I am hee: hee confeſſed himſelfe. Will ye marke theſe thinges: when hee ſaieth, hee knewe all thinges that ſhould come vnto him, Iohn would let you ſee that the Lord Ieſus willingly and wittingly offered Himſelfe vnto the death. This taking and laying hands vpon Him, commeth not of hap-hazard: No, the Lord knew well enough all the things that ſhould come to Him: He is taken wittingly: and as He is taken wittingly, ſo is Hee taken willinglie: and Hee is readier to offer Himſelfe to bee taken, than they are to take Him.
            But to come to the wordes: Hee ſaieth, Whome ſeeke yee heere? and when they ſaye, IESVS of Nazareth, then Hee anſwereth, I am hee. Theſe wordes doe teſtifie, that wittinglie and willinglie Hee offereth Himſelfe to bee taken. And if yee marke, yee ſhall ſee in His anſwere ſuch mildneſſe as is vnſpeakeable: Hee beginneth not to ſpeake in wrath: and when they ſaye, IESVS of Nazareth, Hee giueth not an anſwere ſcornefullie: So that as Hee offereth Himſelfe willingly, ſo yee ſee alſo ſuch a mildneſſe in Him, when

Hee is taken, (euen as the Scripture ſpake) as Hee had beene a Lambe. So that ye ſee that neither in word nor deede, he vttereth anie thing to hinder his obedience to his Father: this then is the thing that IOHN recommendeth vnto vs, and letteth vs ſee, euen that Ieſus Chriſt was willing to die. And this leſſon we ſhould all learne, if it ſhall pleaſe GOD to call anie of vs to ſuffer for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, that we ſuffer with ſuch willingneſſe and pleaſure, that we run to death, and embrace it with our armes: let this mildneſſe vtter it ſelfe in all thy doings: away with that ſcorning: if thou would be like Ieſus Chriſt, die in peace, & willingly; looke not to the inſtrument, nor the Hang-man who putteth handes in thee, but lift thine heart to the God of heauen, and ſay, O LORD, ſeeing that it is thy will that I die, mine eye is on thee, and as IESVS CHRIST offered himſelfe willingly, to bee a ſacrifice for the ſinnes of the world: euen ſo am I willing to obey thy will: It is noted that Iudas was amongſt the reſt, and no queſtion the eye of the Lord is on him, but neuer a worde he ſpeaketh to him. Now I thinke that this ſtanding of Judas is mentioned, to let vs ſee two things, the firſt is, that patient ſuffering of Ieſus Chriſt, he beginneth not to vpbraide him, and to ſpeake angrie wordes to him, or to looke to him angrylie. Some would haue thought, that the LORD ſeeing Iudas, might haue ſaide to him, Well Traitour, art thou there who haſt betrayed mee: No: hee giueth him not an angrie looke, hee is euen a verie Lambe, as the Prophet ſpeaketh of him: a Lambe without anger either in looke or in worde, but in ſuffering he vſeth ſuch a mildneſſe and patience as is wonderfull: Next, to let vs ſee that impudencie of the traitour Iudas, how durſt he face the Lord IESVS whome hee betrayed? a traitour is ay impudent and ſhameleſſe, hee hath ay an hard heart, and then a braſen face to the man whome he hath betrayed. Ye ſee how dangerous a thing it is once to harden the heart againſt Chriſt, and once to beginne to doe euill againſt conſcience: if thine heart beginne once to be indured, thou ſhalt not come backe, whilſt thou commeſt to extreame induration, and at laſt, to perdition. Iudas could neuer come backe, after that once his heart was hardened againſt the Lord, but paſt forward, till he came to that finall induration and hardneſſe of heart. Therefore farre be it from vs once to beginne to harden our heartes againſt the LORD: If thou beginneſt once, thou ſhalt grow in hardneſſe, till thou commeſt to

that finall induration. Lord ſaue vs from that ſinne, the hardneſſe of heart againſt the trueth, and againſt Ieſus Chriſt. It is to bee feared, that theſe men, vvho vvith the betrayers of Ieſus Chriſt haue ſet their faces againſt Chriſt, & His true religion, & againſt their natiue countrey, and goe forwarde in ſuch induration and obſtinacie of heart, that they ſhall come to that part of Iudas. And it is a rare thing to ſee a man who hath gone ſo farre forwarde in induration, come euer backe againe to grace. Now wee haue the effect that followes on this word that Hee ſpeakes, I am hee: for theſe wordes are no ſooner ſpoken, (albeit they be few and gentle) but they are all amazed, tremble, and fall downe backward to the ground. It is an admirable thing, that one word (and that ſo mildly ſpoken) ſhould haue wrought ſuch an effect: for it is ſuch a worde, as they woulde haue wiſhed for. It is verie wonderous, that ſuch a gentle word ſhoulde as a whirle-winde, or as a flaſhe of fire, ſo haue ſtrucken them. No queſtion, this is to let them ſee, that the Lord needed not to haue beene taken with them, except it had beene His owne will: No, it was not poſſible for them to touch one haire of His head: for Hee ſaith Himſelfe in the 10. Chap. and 18. verſ. of this Goſpell, No man taketh my life from me, I haue power to lay it downe, and to take it vp againe. So the Lord, by this wonderfull effect of that word, I am hee, will let them knowe, that they had no power to lay hands on Him, if it had not bene His owne will. And no doubt, He hath had a reſpect vnto them, howbeit they were enemies to Him, yet Hee wiſhed thē well. And by the ſtriking of them to the grounde, Hee woulde let them ſee, that if they encountred with Him, they would die: and He will let them ſee His power, that He might cauſe them to repent, or elſe to make them vnexcuſable: and to let them ſee, that Hee was the Lord of Glorie, and that they put hands to the Lord of Glory, and ſlew the Lord of Life. Wee may gather of the effect of this worde, that if ſuch a ſober and gentle worde, comming out of the mouth of Ieſus Chriſt, did driue them vpon their backes, and caſt them to the ground, what if Ieſus Chriſt had ſpoken an angrie word? what force woulde that haue had? If the bleating of a Lambe had ſuch a force, what force ſhall the roaring of a Lion haue? Where ſhall the wicked ſtand? And if the voyce of the Lord Ieſus, humbly and like a Lambe, ſtanding before them Himſelfe alone, and ſpeaking with ſuch gentleneſſe, had ſuch effect, as to throwe them downe vpon the grounde, what effect ſhall that roaring, full of wrath and

indignation, at that Great day: not out of the mouth of a Lambe, nor of an humble man, Ieſus of Nazareth: but out of ye mouth of a lion, out of ye mouth of Ieſus Chriſt, the Iudge, ſitting in His Glorie & Majeſtie, & ſaying to ye wicked, Away yee curſed to that fire which is prepared for the Deuill and his angels, Mat. 25.41. What effect then ſhall that voyce haue? Whither ſhall that voyce driue them? And further marke: If that voyce had ſuch an effect, beeing no threatning, nor boaſting, but gentle and milde; nowe what effect ſhall this voyce haue, whereby Hee threatneth the worlde, by His ſeruantes, with His judgementes? If the milde ſpeaking had ſuch a force, what effect ſhall theſe terrible threatninges haue againſt the wicked? for it is another thing vvhen Chriſt threatneth in wrath, and vvhen Hee ſpeaketh meekelie. Nowe, as certainlie as this vvorde that Chriſt Himſelfe ſpake, vvrought ſuch an effect: As certainelie alſo the vvorde of Ieſus Chriſt, vvhich Hee putteth into the mouth of His faithfull Teachers and Paſtors, heere in this vvorld, ſhall bee effectuall, either to thy life, or to thy death: and as certainelie the ſame vvorde ſhall haue effect to driue the vvicked men vpon their backes: as Zacharie ſaieth, Chap. 1. verſ. 4.5.6. When the men are dead that haue ſpoken that vvorde, after it hath beene ſpoken, it ſhall bee founde liuing: and that ſame voyce ſhall haue effect vvhen vvee are dead. It is true (ſayeth the LORD) my Prophets died with your fathers: but my voyce, which I put into their mouthes, died not with them: and your fathers knewe, that that worde which I did put into their mouthes, was liuing, and neuer left them, vntill it brought on judgement vpon them. The LORD graunt, that euerie ſoule may reuerence the vvorde of IESVS CHRIST: for it ſhall bee founde, that either it vvas ſpoken to thy ſaluation, or to thy damnation: And, Heauen and Earth ſhall vaniſhe awaye, before one jote of that Worde paſſe awaye vvithout its owne effect.
            But nowe let vs ſee vvhat they doe after they are fallen downe vpon the grounde: Leaue they off? No, no, they riſe againe, and the LORD IESVS ſtandeth ſtill, and letteth them riſe againe: and vvhen they are riſen, they ſpeake nothing: but Hee ſpeaketh firſt, and Hee ſaieth, Whome ſeeke yee? and they ſaye, IESVS of NAZARETH. And Hee anſwereth, I am hee. Nowe this is a ſtrange thing: Who can thinke, that theſe men, vvho founde ſo great a power proceeding out of the mouth of the LORD IESVS CHRIST finding ſuch force, ſhoulde haue medled with

Him againe. But left they Him for all this? No: but they get vp againe, and purſue Him, and take Him, and binde Him. It is an hard matter, to bee giuen ouer to a reprobate ſenſe: that is, to want feeling, when the Lord taketh out of the ſoule in His judgement all ſight & ſenſe, that perſon is miſerable: and if thou be once ſtrucken with that ſenſeleſneſſe of the ſoule, albeit thou be throwne downe vpon thy backe, thou ſhalt get vp againe, like a drunken man, and fight againſt the Lord▪ and that man is worſe than any beaſt, horſe, or mule: for once ſtrike a Horſe downe, & he hath a feeling therof, and he will beware of the like perill againe: But a man, who ſhould haue reaſon, after that the Lord hath once ſtrucken him with ſenſeleſſeneſſe, there is no beaſt ſo ſenſeleſſe as he is: and as hee is ſenſeleſſe, ſo he ſhall not leaue off from euill doing: and hee ſhall compt no more of the power of God, than of a flee: for they feele not the hand of God, they are ſo aſtoniſhed: and they will vp againe, after they are caſten downe▪ and they will aſſaye His power againe, and will not leaue off till His wrath deſtroy him. Striue therefore, euer to keepe the ſoule in a ſenſe and feeling and let not that miſerable ſcroofe to goe ouer thy ſoule: but haue ſtill a feeling of the power of God, and mercy of God in thy ſoule, and alwayes haue a wakened conſcience: for if thine heart come to that extreame ſenſeleſſeneſſe, thy ſoule ſhall ouer-grow with ſuch a fatneſſe, that thou ſhalt haue no more ſenſe, than a dead ſtocke: and thou ſhalt bee like an Oxe fedde to deſtruction: thou ſhalt neither haue feeling of mercie, nor of judgement. To ende with this: ye ſee that Ieſus Chriſt, albeit he was but himſelfe alone, a ſimple man to looke to, and without armour: yet Hee prouoketh them, and ſpeaketh to them firſt: Hee diſchargeth them to ſtirre Him, vntill firſt they entered into a conditiō with Him, That His diſciples ſhould paſſe free, there is not ſuch a thing that one of them could haue power to put out their hand to take Him. And if there were no more but this, that they had no power to ſtirre him, they might ſee more in Ieſus Chriſt, than in a common man: they might ſee power in Him to keepe Himſelfe: yet their ſenſeleſſeneſſe is ſo great, that they cannot ſee this. The Lord keepe vs in ſenſe and feeling of Him, that when He hath adoe with vs, wee may feele Him, and ſee Him, that our conſcience may bee wakened, and our hearts mollified, through Ieſus Chriſt: to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praiſe and honour for euermore, AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON. CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Then he asked them againe, Whom ſeeke yee? And they ſaid, IESVS of Nazareth. 
                     
                        verse 8 
                     IESVS anſwered, I ſaide vnto you, that I am hee: therefore, if ye ſeeke me, let theſe goe their way. 
                        verse 9 This was that the word might bee fulfilled which hee ſpake, Of them which thou gauest mee, haue I lost none. 
                        verse 10 Then Simon Peter, hauing a ſword, drew it, and ſmote the high Prieſtes ſeruant, and cut off his right eare. Now the ſeruants name was Malchus. 
                     
                        verse 11 Then ſaide IESVS vnto Peter, Put vp thy ſworde into the ſheath: ſhall I not drinke of the cuppe which my Father hath giuen mee? 
                        verse 12 Then the band, and the captaine, and the officers of the Iewes, tooke IESVS, and bound him.
               
            
            
               THE laſt day (beloued in the LORD IESVS) wee diuided the whole Hiſtorie of the Paſſion and ſuffering of Ieſus Chriſt, which is contained in theſe two CHAPTERS, to wit, the XVIII. and XIX. of this Goſpell, in theſe parts: Firſt, wee haue his ſuffering in the Garden: Then wee haue his ſuffering in the Hall of the high Prieſt: Thirdly, we haue his ſuffering before the Iudge Pontius Pilate: Fourthly, wee haue his ſuffering in the place of Execution, in Caluaria, otherwiſe GOLGOTHA: And laſt, we haue the laſt part of his ſuffering, which is his Buriall. The laſt day wee entered into the firſt part of his ſuffering, which IOHN in this Chapter ſetteth downe to bee this: The Lord Ieſus beeing in the Garden, is taken captiue, and bounde: John paſſeth by all that

agonie and conflict that the Lord had before his taking in the Garden, with the heauie wrath of his Father, for our ſinne, which hee did beare. As concerning his taking▪ we haue firſt the part of Ieſus, who of purpoſe, wittingly, and willingly, came to this Garden to be taken: which Garden was knowne to Judas the Traitor. Then wee haue the part of Iudas, he knowing the Garden, commeth forward, (becauſe the Lord vſed, with his Diſciples, to reſort thither) accompanied with a band of men of warre, with the officers, and ſeruants of the high Prieſt, to take▪ and apprehende, the Lord. In the third place, wee haue the communing that fell out betwixt Chriſt, and them that came to take him; he knowing all things that ſhould come vnto him; hee taketh not the flight, nor ſeeketh not to goe his way, as he might haue done, becauſe it was night: but hee commeth out vnſought, and beginneth the ſpeach, and ſaieth, Whome ſeeke yee? They not knowing him by face, anſwered, IESVS of Nazareth. He anſwered againe, not denying himſelfe, I am he: as he would ſay in plaine wordes, I am the man whom yee ſeeke, why ſeeke yee anie further? to let vs ſee how wittingly, and willingly, how joyfullie, and gladly, and howe patiently hee offereth himſelfe vnto death for our ſinnes. Now he hath no ſooner ſpoken this one worde, I am he, which is a gentle worde, but aſſoone they ſtart backwardes, and fall to the grounde: whereby the Lord woulde teſtifie vnto them, that they had no power to take his life from him, as hee ſaid before himſelfe, he had both his life, and his death in his owne handes, all the power in heauen and in earth was not able to cauſe him to die, if he had pleaſed to haue liued.
            But to come to this Text: When hee hath ſtrucken them to the ground, they leaue not off: but when they are riſen, they are as bent as they were before. It is a marueilous thing, for if it had beene his will, hee might not onely haue ſtrucken them to the grounde, but hee might haue ſtrucken them thorow the earth, into hell: yet he letteth them riſe againe: but they are all ſenſeleſſe of that diuine power, wherewith they are ſtrucken. The Lord beginneth the ſpeach, and he ſaith, Whom ſeeke ye? They anſwere, not knowing him, IESVS of Nazareth. He replieth againe, I ſaid vnto you, that I am hee: hee denieth not himſelfe, but in a manner prouoketh them to diſpatch that buſineſſe which they were about: yet he entereth into a condition with them, Take not theſe that are with mee, ſtirre not my Diſciples: he giueth them a charge that they ſtirre them not: and

indeed none of that whole companie had anie power to lift vp their hand againſt them. The words are plaine: ye may eaſily perceiue the note that riſeth of this: It is a marueilous thing, that a naked and a ſimple man, (who was baſer than the King of Glorie was in the earth?) a man naked without armour: hee is ſtanding before them, who are like as many Tyrants, or tygers, and yet none of them had power to lay handes vpon him, till hee giue them power: and more, hee will not let them ſtirre him, till hee make a condition with them, That they handle not his diſciples: He imponeth lawes vnto them, and without this law, that they meddle not with his Diſciples, he will not yeelde himſelfe vnto them. So, Brethren, this is to let you ſee firſt that diuine power which was in the Lord Ieſus: Beholde it, for it is a comfortable thing for Chriſtians, to knowe that diuine power that is in Ieſus Chriſt: for although hee neuer touched one of them, yet that diuine power did ſo binde faſt their hands, and ſo reſtrained that pride of their heartes, that they had no power once to moue againſt him. Next, behold a miſerable ſenſeleſſeneſſe in them; for it is a wonderfull thing, that they cannot perceiue nor feele this power that was in him. If they had had anie ſight of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, would they not haue ceaſſed from ſuch a wicked enterpriſe? Brethren, it is an hard matter for any man or woman once to bee giuen ouer vnto a reprobate ſenſe, and to be ſtrucken with blindneſſe and hardneſſe of heart: And if God in his juſt judgement giue thee to blindneſſe and hardneſſe of ſoule, albeit hee woulde make judgement after judgement to ceaſſe vpon thee, and albeit he would ſtrike thee and beate thee vpon thy backe, thou wilt not bee the better: but thou wilt get vp againe, like a drunken man: and if thou bee once giuen ouer to thine owne ſelfe, it is as ſure a thing as is in the worlde, that except the Lord let thee ſee with his power a ſight of mercy, thou ſhalt euer become worſe and worſe: and except the face of Ieſus ſhine into thy ſoule, all afflictions ſhall harden thee like yron, that is often ſtrucken vpon: and the greater the afflictions bee, except that mercy ſhine into thine heart, thou wilt bee the more indured. Paul ſaieth, When the heart is conuerted to the Lord, the vaile is taken away, 2. Corinth. 3.16. Without conuerſion of the heart to the face of IESVS, that that mercifull face may ſhine into the heart, all the thinges in the world will not be able to mollifie thine heart: Therefore, whenſoeuer the Lord afflicteth thee, pray for mercy, that

as the power ſtriketh thee, ſo the mercie may be powerfull to conuert thee: Yea, crie aye for the mercy, or elſe the power ſhall worke a further induration in thee, and make thee worſe.
            To goe forward: Yee ſee how carefull He is of his diſciples: men would thinke, that He being ſo hard ſtraited, & ſo neare the death, ſhould haue forgotten his Diſciples: for this is our faſhion, but the Lord doeth not ſo. And Brethren, this is a true note and token of a true Shepheard: hee will forget himſelfe, and his life, and hee will remember his flocke: and when he is adying, hee will be carefull of his flocke: and when the Wolfe is worrying him, yet hee will doe what lyeth in him, that his flocke, and euery ſheepe thereof, may eſcape: and he will giue his life for the ſafetie of his flocke. This is a good paſtor. So wee ſee the viue image of a faithfull Paſtor, in the Lord Ieſus: he will giue his life for his ſheepe, as hee ſaith himſelfe, Hee is but an hyreling, that will not for the loue of his ſheepe laye downe his life. And this is the thing that I note chiefely here: When the Lord becommeth weake in himſelfe, thorow infirmitie, yea, voluntarie infirmitie (hee needed not to bee infirme: what need had the God of glorie to bee infirme?) hee ſuffereth himſelfe to bee bound till he become infirme. In the meane time he is ſtrong and powerfull in his Diſciples to their ſafetie: for although theſe that were in the Garden would neuer ſo faine, yet they could not gette their hands laide vpon his Diſciples. The Lord Ieſus, when he was hanging vpon the Croſſe, the Iewes ſcorned him, and tauntinglie ſaide vnto him, Thou who ſauedst others, come downe and ſaue thy ſelfe: meaning he could not ſaue himſelf, becauſe he was crucified, as if he had no power: but they are deceiued, for that ſame houre that the Lord was vpon the Croſſe, and that ſame verie time that thorowe infirmitie he died, and when he was hanging dead vpon the Croſſe, that power went out from him that kept his D
                  •
               ſciples, and all the faithfull in the worlde: For except that the Lord had kept them then when he was hanging dead, they had beene a preye to the Deuill. For this is our nature and infirmitie, wee cannot ſtand a moment in this world, except it be by the power of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Well then, Brethren, if Chriſt Ieſus crucified, and crucified (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, 2. Cor. 13.4.) thorow infirmitie, and ſo weake in himſelfe in his humane nature, had ſo great a power to ſaue his Church, what ſhall wee ſay then? What a power is that which proceedeth from Ieſus Chriſt glorified? and commeth downe nowe

from the Heauen, and who liueth nowe (as the Apoſtle ſayeth there) by the power of GOD, and liueth nowe in glorie at the right hande of the Father. How great a power muſt this bee, that proceedeth out from Chriſt glorified! Alas, if the worlde ſaw this, if the blinde men ſaw the thouſand part of that terrible power that commeth from Ieſus Chriſt glorified, thinke ye, that for all the world, they durſt confederate with the King of Spaine, the Pope, and his power, and enterpriſe anie thing againſt Chriſt and his Church: but, alas, this blindneſſe and induration letteth them not ſee nor feele, but in the ende they ſhall feele it (if the Lord in mercie conuert them not) to their euerlaſting ſhame & confuſion.
            Well, to goe forward, IOHN to this purpoſe alleadgeth an olde prophecie which was prophecied before of Ieſus Chriſt long before hee came into the world; and this is the prophecie: Of them which thou gaueſt me, haue I loſt none. Nowe Iohn draweth this prophecie to the preſeruation of Chriſtes diſciples at this time, becauſe the diſciples that were concredite vnto him, eſcaped at this time. Marke, Brethren, It is true indeed, that the prophecie properly is to be vnderſtood, not ſo much of a ſafetie in this life preſently, as of a ſpirituall ſafetie to life euerlaſting: this is the meaning: Yet it hath pleaſed the Spirit of God, to apply this prophecie to this bodily preſeruation: the cauſe is this, At this time the bodily ſafetie of his diſciples, importeth that ſpirituall ſafetie & the life to come: as by the contrarie, the indangering of the preſent life, indangered the life to come. If the diſciples had bene taken at this time, to haue ſuffered with their Maſter, they had all reuolted and denied their Maſter: Wee may ſee the proofe of this in Peter, and ſo they had hazarded not onely this life, but alſo the life to come, becauſe that the diſciples were as yet but children in Ieſus Chriſt, and were not ſtrengthened enough with the power of Chriſt: and woe is to that ſoule that will denie Ieſus Chriſt, and chiefly in death. There is not one who will ſuffer their litle finger only to be burnt for the cauſe of Chriſt, except he be ſtrengthened with the power of Ieſus Chriſt, and there is not one that will now ſuffer affliction but they who are guarded with the power of God, and therefore yee ſee heere Gods mercie towardes his diſciples. This is the mercifull dealing of God with his owne, hee will neuer let one of his owne bee tempted, but hee will giue them power to beare out the

temptation, and Hee will neuer ſuffer them to be tempted, till He giue them abilitie: and when Hee hath giuen them ſtrength, then the LORD will lay on the burthen. It is a wonderfull thing, the heauier the burthen be, that the Lord layes on his owne, the greater ſtrength Hee giues them to ſuſtaine it. The world hath wondered at the Martyres of God, who had ſo great comfort in the time of their burning in the fire, and how in ſuffering they would ſing Pſalmes vnto their latter breath. The world wondereth at this: The heauier that the death hath bene, the greater hath the power of God bene, and the greater hath the life of Ieſus beene in the Martyres. And theſe diſciples whom he ſpared now, when He ſaw that they were ripe, Spared He them then? No, no, what was the whole lifetime of the diſciples, after that Chriſt departed out of this world, but a perpetuall ſuffering, till the life was taken from them, they died all by perſecution, and then by the loſſing of this life, they got life euerlaſting, in dying they died not, but in dying they entered into a more glorious life: So this is that mercifull power of God. It appeares that in this countrey there is litle ripeneſſe, becauſe of this litle ſuffering: and therefore the Lord hath dealt mercifully with vs, and in great mercie hath holden mens handes off vs: therefore wee ſhould pray, if it ſhall pleaſe him to bring any to the triall, to ſuffer for his glorious Names ſake, Lord, I am not able to behold the ſight of the fire, much leſſe to ſuffer the crueltie of the fire: therefore if thou wilt haue mee to ſuffer, giue me ſtrength whereby I may bee able to ſuffer. Now I goe to Peters part: he ſetteth downe his action, & certainly, it is worth nothing, albeit it ſeemeth to bee verie zealous. What doeth hee? hee hath a ſword about him, & he ſeeing them ruſh on his Maſter, ſhevveth his manhood. And he ſtriketh the ſeruant of the high Priest, whoſe name was Malchus, and he cut off his right eare. The reſt of the Euangeliſts, Mat, 26. Marke 14. Luke 22) ſpeake of ſome thing that was done before this: When the Lord was communing vvith them that tooke Him, then comes the traitour Iudas to the Lord, and cryes, Rabbi, Rabbi, Maſter, Maſter, & with that he kiſſeth Him: now this was a ſigne that hee had giuen vnto his companie, that that man whome hee ſhould kiſſe, was the man that they ſhould take. Now what doth the Lord, He makes no ſigne of anger, and there is none of vs, but wee thinke that He ſhould haue vttered great anger to the traitour (fie on thee, traitour, for of all men he is moſt deteſtable) but the Lord

in mildnes & meeknes of Spirit (for all this whole time He takes purpoſe to ſuffer patiently: as Eſay ſayeth: Hee was as a Lambe before the ſhearer, & as a ſheepe led to the ſlaughter, & openeth not his mouth) He ſayes, friend, betrayeſt thou the Sonne of man with a kiſſe, He aſſayeth if the conſcience will bee brought to remorſe: There is a wonderfull patience of God to the moſt vile ſinner, & whē he hath giuen them a ſigne, the whole companie rusſhed vpon Him. Then the diſciples ſaid, Maſter, ſhal we defend thee by the ſword, but Peter not ſtaying vpō an anſwere, he was hardie, & ſtriketh off the eare of Malchus the high Prieſts ſeruant. Nowe, Brethren, albeit that this Malchus the high Prieſts ſeruant, deſerued, that not only his eare ſhould be cut off, but alſo that the head & the life ſhould be taken from him (for he was in a very euill action: indeed he was cled with authority, but with an euill authoritie: if thou hadſt the authoritie of all the kings in the world, it wil neuer excuſe thee before God, if thou ſhouldeſt get a ſubſcriptiō to do euil againſt an innocent man, the Lord ſhall not alow thee, but His judgmēt ſhal ouertake thee) & whether Peter did this of zeale, for no doubt he loued his Maſter exceeding well, & he would haue had his Maſter out of his hands: yet for all this, the Lordes owne wordes teſtifie, that this fact of Peter is to be condemned. If ye will examine the zeale, it is a very prepoſterous and vnskilfull zeale: the zeale is nothing worth if a man go beyond the boundes of his calling. What was Peter but a priuate man, & this cōpany being ſent by the Magiſtrats & ſuperior power, Peter ought not to haue reſiſted them, & to recompenſe this injurie by reaſon of his calling, albeit it was the greateſt injurie that euer was done in the world. Then the words of Chriſt doe declare, that he did it of blindneſſe: for hee did that lay in him, to ſtay the worke of the redemption of the world, hee tooke no heede to his hand. Now to marke ſomething: There is nothing more common to men, than this, to cloake their actions with the pretence of zeale, & he or ſhe will ſay, I did it of zeale, but the Spirit of God in this place, (and marke it) letteth thee ſee, if thy zeale be a naked zeale, & if it go beyond the bounds of thy calling, albeit it be in a good cauſe, yet thy zeale is worth nothing: if thy zeale be with ignorance, & if thou haſt not the warrand of this worde, thy zeale is of no value, it will not warrand thine action: if yee would haue ſurer rules of actions nor zeale is, take heede to th
                  •
               ſe two thinges: Firſt, to thy calling: Looke that thou go not beyond the bounds of thy

calling. Shalt thou that art a priuate man, ſtrike with a ſworde? Is that thy calling? Then next, to Gods word: What auaileth it vnto a man to goe forward in blindneſſe? if he be not illuminate with the light of God, it is but a blinde zeale: and if thou wouldeſt haue thine actions well ruled, then take that lanterne of the word going before thee, to warrand thy conſcience in all thy proceedings: for of all graces this is one of the greateſt, to haue the worde of God thy warrand in all thine actions. As for zeale, I caſt it not awaye, (it is ouer rare to be caſten away) for it is a ſpeciall grace of God: but take heede, if thou wouldeſt haue zeale, looke that it be moderate, and paſſe not the boundes of thy calling: and then looke that thou haue a warrande of the word of God: looke that the eye of thy ſoule bee illuminate: Ioyne theſe two together, and then goe forwards to the worke of the Lord. Certainly▪ experience hath taught vs▪ that this zeale hath had an euill ſucceſſe: no man by this zeale did euer get commendation of God. It may be, that men will runne forwards raſhly in zeale, and will haue a good entrie: but the ende will tell thee, that it was but fooliſh hardineſſe, & it will forthinke them. And no doubt, Peter, when hee got this anſwere of his Maſter, he repented. No man hath neede to finde fault with men of this age: for there are few Peters nowe adayes: where yee ſhall finde one like Peter, who hath zeale, ye ſhall find ten, who haue none. The zeale of God is awaye, that did eate vp the heartes of the men of God of old. Then againe, ye ſhall ſee in this fact of Peters, Peter was a good man, and one who loued Ieſus Chriſt very well, and hee was loath to leaue Him: and when as the Lord ſaid to His diſciples, Will yee depart alſo from mee? Peter anſwered, and ſaieth: LORD, Whither ſhall wee goe? thou hast the wordes of life: hee was verie loath to depart from Him: And this action alſo which hee hath in hand, is a good action & in the defence of Chriſt. Yet for all this, in this good action, and in the cauſe of God, ſee how hee is miſcarried, & the Lord findeth fault with him. Well, this is our nature, that when we would doe the worke of the Lord, our corruption defileth it, and oftentimes in doing it we will ſinne, and we will blot it with ſome foule blotte. And Peter doing this, with ſome prepoſterous zeale, he is not allowed: for an vncleane man, as hee is vncleane, ſo hee ſhall make the worke of the Lord vncleane. So the chiefe thing that a man ſhould be exerciſed withall, is prayer, that ye Lord would ſanctifie the perſon, that the worke that ye Lord hath employed him

in may be holily done: and marke againe, the greateſt default that was in Peter, was his too great zeale. We need not to be afraide for this in this lande: Nay, we may be afraide for default of it that the worke of the Lord ſhould periſh, and wee are to pray, that the King, and thoſe whom he hath employed in this worke may haue an vpright heart, and ſuch an heart, as Dauid and good Ezechias had, an heart louing God, and hating Gods enemies, I would not doubt then, but the worke in his hande ſhould take a good end, and hee ſhould report honour and glorie. Now the Lord ſeeing what Peter did, Hee forbiddeth him, and ſheweth a greater anger againſt him, than againſt Iudas: Hee ſpake not ſo angrylie againſt Iudas, or any of them that purſued Him, as Hee did to Peter, and He ſayeth: Put vp thy ſword into the ſheath: and then he ſubjoyneth the reaſon: Shall I not drinke of the cuppe that my Father hath giuen me, Thou doeſt what lieth in thee, to holde off the cuppe, I will drinke of the cuppe that my Father hath giuen me, of neceſſitie I muſt drinke it: for it was preordinate before all times, that I ſhould drinke it: and ſeeing it is ſo, I will drinke it. Shall any thing be injoyned to vs to doe of neceſſitie, and ſhall we not doe it willingly: The Father hath propined vnto mee a bitter cuppe of affliction, and I ſhall drinke it out, dregges and all. Matthew in his 26. Chapter, giueth mo reaſons, wherefore the Lord diſallowed Peter, and this is one: Hee who ſtrikes with the ſword at his owne hande, whom the Lord hath not armed to ſtrike, he ſhall be ſtrucken with the ſword. It is a dangerous matter to ſlay, if the Lord put not the ſword into thine hand: then he giues another reaſon, will I be defended with the arme of man: No, if I would pray to my Father, Hee would ſend me twelue legions of Angels: and laſtly, ſayeth He, Shall not the Scripture bee accompliſhed of mee, Shall I make the worde of the Lord falſe, which hath foretolde of my ſuffering: and therefore ſtay thy raſhnes. And note what Luke ſayeth in his 22. Chapter, verſe 51, He takes vp the eare, and puts it on againe: Ye may ſee here, that the Lord will haue no man hurt in his taking, the Lord will haue no vnjuſt defence, Ieſus Chriſt will not bee defended with vnlawfull meanes, He will not bee defended with Peters ſword: for he had no power giuen him of the Lord, for to ſtrike, He will not haue injurie repreſſed with injurie: Nay, He will not haue the man that hath the juſt cauſe to repreſſe an authoritie. This guarde came from the authoritie, from the Romane empire, and Chriſt will not

haue Peter a priuate man, to meddle with the ſuperiour power▪ He will not haue him to defend Him againſt the authoritie. It is a dangerous thing to reſiſt authoritie, albeit it be vnlawfully vſed, & chiefly, a priuate man: and albeit that the authoritie had done wrong, yet a man who hath not authoritie, ſhould not repreſſe the injurie done by the authoritie, the Lord will not allow it, the Lord will not haue injurie repayed by an injurie. Well then, if the Lord will not haue a wrong defence againſt injuries, Hee will not haue a wrong to meete a wrong. What damnation lyes on theſe men, who do an injurie, & doe delight to oppreſſe the innocent. If Peter got ſuch a reproofe for the defence of Chriſt, againſt his enemies: What damnation ſhall theſe murtherers get, who oppreſſe the innocent man, the damnation of theſe men ſhall bee great: I denounce an heauie damnation againſt thee: Let the King, the Magiſtrates, and all the world winke at thee, the hand of the Lord ſhall light on thee, this ſhall be thy recompenſe. Thou who takeſt pleaſure in oppreſſion, ſhalt be oppreſſed▪ the Lord ſhall thruſt downe thine head, and bloodie hand, & ſhall preſſe thee downe for euer: the Lord ſaue vs from this judgement: woe to them that oppreſſe their neighbour either in word or deede. Now to goe forward: Shall I not drinke of the cuppe that my Father hath giuen me: By the cuppe is vnderſtood a meaſure of affliction, that the Lord will lay on any man: as a cuppe is a meaſure, ſo the Lord hath a meaſure of affliction to lay on his owne: as the Maſter of a familie hath a cuppe & drinketh to his familie, & ſayes, Drinke thou this, & drinke thou that: euen ſo, the Lord is the Maſter of this world, & He will fill the cuppe of affliction, & He will ſay, Drinke thou this, & drinke thou that: & if He propine thee a cup, He will cauſe thee drinke it: all the world cannot ſaue thee, but if the Lord bid thee doe it, thou muſt drinke it, He hath commandement ouer his creatures, & good reaſon that we doe His will, either to liue or die as He pleaſeth: if the Lord propine thee with a cup of affliction, if thou drinke it not willingly (heere is the danger) thou ſhalt bee compelled to drinke the dregs thereof, to thy deſtruction. Woe is to the ſoule that will in no meaſure lay down his necke to that burthen: but againe if thou take that cuppe gladly, as the Lord Ieſus did (He dranke the dregs of the bitter cuppe of the wrath of the Father: yea, Hee receiued it gladly, and thanked Him for it) albeit thou hadſt bitterneſſe in the beginning, yet in the end thou ſhalt finde joy and ſweetneſſe. What

followed on that cuppe? Glorie: the more that thou ſuffereſt, if it be patiently, the greater glorie ſhall be to thee. Then ſeeing that we muſt alſo ſuffer in this world: for it is nothing but a ſuffering life (& woe is to thee, that wilt make thy heauen into this world, thou needeſt not to looke for an heauen in the world to come,) What euer wee ſuffer, let vs ſtriue againſt our rebellious nature (for it is full of rebellion) and ſtriue to get patience, and ſay, Lord, I haue no patience in mine hand, Lord giue me patience & contentment, let this be our prayer in diſtreſſe, and they who will ſeeke this, I will promiſe them, the moſt glorious iſſue that euer was, the bitterneſſe of the affliction ſhall not ſtay that glorie. In this world we are all as it were on a Skaffold to trie our faith, & to trie our patience, that afterward all our afflictions may be turned in joy & glorie, & all the teares that will guſh out of thine eyes, the Lord with his hand ſhal wipe them away (wilt thou awaite to ſee this end) & thou ſhalt neuer againe ſee dolour nor diſpleaſure. Now remaineth one thing of the taking of the Lord, then ſayeth he, Then the band and the captaine, and the officers of the Iewes tooke Jeſus and bound him, He gaue them good leaue, or els they could neuer haue bound Him: but will yee marke how particularly they are named that tooke Him: there is the band of the men of warre, and the captaine, and the ſeruants, to let you ſee, that there was no man that was there, and was partaker of that doing, but the eye of God was on him & the holy Spirit recounteth them. Beware euer to be in euill companie, if there were neuer ſo many in that companie: yea, if there were ten thouſand with thee, the Lord ſhall ſee thee, and judge thee, whether thou be a Captaine, or a ſingle ſouldier, or a gudget, beware to bee in euill companie, Say not, I am not a principall man, but a ſeruant, I muſt obey the authoritie, and I muſt followe my Captaine: No, that ſhall bee no warrand to thee, for if thou ſhalt be in euill companie, the eye of the LORD ſhall bee vpon thee, to judge thee, let none of theſe worldly excuſes moue thee, but ſay, Lord, thou ſeeſt whither I go, & with whom I come, & what I come to do, or els thy cōſcience ſhal terrifie thee, whether thou be higheſt or loweſt in doing an ill fact, the iudgement of the Lord ſhall fall on thee. Now to come to his taking, the Lord is taken willingly, & reſiſtes not, & whē they boūd him, he put out his hands to be boūd: looke how he pointes out the ſuffering of Chriſt, Firſt, he ſayes he was taken, & then he was bound: thinke ye this is for no purpoſe

There is not a worde or a ſillabe loſt here: the taking of the Lord, and the laying handes on him, was for our cauſe, who lying vnder ſinne, the deuill, and death, and this taking recounters, and meetes our taking by the deuill, and death: Euery thing in Him and His ſuffering behoued to meete vs, and our ſuffering, Hee that ſhould redeeme vs, as wee were taken: ſo it behooued Him to be taken, and as wee were bound, ſo it behooued Him to be bound, and if His taking and binding had not anſwered to our taking and binding, Hee had not beene a meete redeemer for vs, and if he had not beene bound as we were, we had not beene deliuered from the bands of ſinne, albeit it is hard to Him, yet to the ſinner it is joyfull, and if thou findeſt thine handes bound hard: thus the Lord Ieſus was a captiue bound for thee, it would bee the joyfulleſt tithings to thee that euer was. Who is he, or ſhee that feele the bandes of death and damnation, but this will bee joyfull tithings to them, & becauſe we feele not this, when we heare word of His taking, we take litle thought of it, and are ſo litle mooued therewith. Therefore, Brethren, I recommend this leſſon to you, and my ſelfe, ſeeing we are all ſinners, lying vnder ſinne, and death, that we ſtriue to bee found in Ieſus, that by faith in Him, wee may finde his pasſion, and all the partes thereof to be forcible and effectuall to freee and deliuer vs from the bandes of ſinne and death, and ſo may be made partakers of life and glorie, through Him. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honour, praiſe and glorie. AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE THIRD LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And led him away to Annas firſt (for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was the high Prieſt that ſame yeere.) 
                        verse 14 And Caiaphas was he, that gaue counſell to the Iewes, that it was expedient, that one man ſhould die for the people. 
                        verse 15 Nowe Simon Peter followed IESVS, and another Diſciple, and that Diſciple was knowne of the high Prieſt: therefore he went in with IESVS into the Hall of the high Prieſt:  
                        verse 16  But Peter ſtood at the doore without. Then went out the other Diſciple, which was knowne vnto the high Prieſt, and ſpake to her that kept the doore, & brought in Peter. 
                     
                        verse 17 Then ſaid the maid that kept the doore vnto Peter, Art not thou alſo one of this mans Diſciples? Hee ſaide, I am not.  
                        verse 18  And the ſeruants and officers ſtood there, who had made a fire of coles: for it was colde, and they warmed themſelues: And Peter alſo ſtood among them, and warmed himſelfe.
               
            
            
               WEE haue heard (Brethren) the firſt part of the ſuffering of Chriſt, vvhich vvas in the Garden, by the Brooke Cedron, into the vvhich the Lord, as he vvas accuſtomed, entered, vvith His Diſciples. In this Garden, after that a cōmuning paſſed betwixt Him and them that came to take Him, the Lord Ieſus is taken, and bound. This is that outward ſuffering in the Garden, beſides the inward agonie in the ſoule vvith the vvrath of the Father, for our ſinnes, vvhich Hee did beare.
            Nowe, Brethren, to paſſe by all thinges vvhich vvee haue alreadie ſpoken, vvee enter into the ſecond part of His ſuffering, vvhich vvas in the Hall of the High Prieſt Caiaphas. It is ſaide, vvhen Hee is

taken and bound, they leade Him away, firſt to the houſe of Annas, who was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high Prieſt for that yeere. The reſt of the Euangeliſtes, before they come to his part, they report ſome thinges done before: and namely, they make mention of a gentle reproofe which the Lord gaue to theſe that tooke Him, & handled Him ſo roughly, being the juſteſt man in the world, He ſaies, What needeth all this, that ye ſhould come out againſt me, as a thiefe and an enemie? Might yee not haue had me daylie whileſt I was teaching in your Temple in Hieruſalem? for I auowed my doctrine before the world. Then He aduiſeth Himſelfe, and ſaies, Whereto ſhoulde I ſpeake this? this is your houre, and this is the time that the Father hath granted to you to worke the worke of darkneſſe for a time, and as the Lord hath ordained, ſo it muſt be. But ſay what He would ſay, the miſerable creatures are ſo blinded, that they goe on furiouſly againſt the Lord. Another thing likewiſe they report: In the meane time that they were binding the Lord, the diſciples are ſcattered and fled. Another thing alſo, (Marke 14.51.52.) whileſt they were leading Him to Hieruſalem, there followed a young man, clothed with linnen vpon his bare bodie: and certaine of the young men followed him, and ſought to haue caught him, but hee left his linnen cloth, and fledde from them naked. This ſeemeth to haue bene one, who in the night being in his b
                  •
               d, and hearing a noyſe and a dinne, commeth haſtily to ſee what it was. Ye ſee here the inſolencie of theſe men who will run vpon the Lord, they will take all the worlde if they might: they ſpare none. Now to come to our matter: They leade the Lord Ieſus to Hieruſalem, & they bring Him firſt to the houſe of Annas, becauſe perchance it was the firſt houſe in the way that they came to, that was an houſe of eſtimation: and again, becauſe Annas was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was High Prieſt that yeere, & they woulde gratifie him to ſee this miſerable ſpectacle, for he was a wicked man: Woe is them that delite to ſee the bands of Ieſus Chriſt. They led Him before ye world to an open ſpectacle, after they had once caught Him. In theſe words (to ſpeake this by the way) ye may marke & perceiue a great corruption at this time in the Church of ye 
               Iewes: for before the comming of Chriſt, immediatly all the eſtates of Churches and commō weales were confuſed & troubled: and the eſtate of ye High Prieſt being a moſt notable eſtate among them, was corrupted. By ye law of God it was appointed, that only one High Prieſt ſhould bee at once, & he all his dayes ſhould brooke it: yet ſuch was ye corruptiō
               
then, that they choſe moe high prieſts together: & euery one of theſe ſerued their courſe about in the office: & this was yt yere that Caiaphas ſerued: but it had bene better for him he had neuer ſerued: for in his time ye moſte miſchieuous fact was done that euer was in the world, to wit, ye crucifying of Ieſus Chriſt, ye God of glory. So it was not for his good ye he ſerued. I might tell you moe corruptions in the hie prieſthood amōg thē: the high prieſt was wont to be choſē by the people, & by the mouth of God: this power was takē frō them, & giuē to Ethnick princes, & preſidents that ruled the people, they choſe thē. And thē the high prieſts were wont to be choſē of the tribe of Leui, & poſterity of Aaron only: but then any man was takē in by bribery, it was bought & ſold: & whē they would ſhoot in one, they would ſhoot out another: this was the cōfuſiō of the hie prieſts eſtate immediatly before Chriſt came. There is nothing mentioned what vvas done vvith Ieſus in the houſe of Annas: they tooke Him in here to driue ouer a piece of time, till Caiaphas ſhould gather his coūſell, before vvhō Ieſus vvas to be accuſed: & it appeares here, that there He vvas bound more ſtraitly than before: Annas ſends Him to Caiaphas his ſon-in-law, ſtraiter bound than He vvas in the garden. It is marked vvhat Caiaphas was, not to his praiſe, but to his ſhame, This Caiaphas was he that gaue counſell, that one ſhould die for the people: ye heard of this in the 11. Chap. and 49. verſ. This vvas both a propheſie and a counſell. When the Scribes & Phariſes vvere in doubt vvhat to doe vvith Chriſt, hee ſaies, It is expedient that one ſhould die for the people. In giuing counſell, the Lord guides the foule tongue of him, as He did Balaams tongue: for vvhen Balaam vvas purpoſed to curſe Gods people, the Lord made him to bleſſe them: Euen ſo the Lord vſed the tongue of Caiaphas: hee ſhall neuer haue commendation of that propheſie: hee was ſeeking the blood of Ieſus Chriſt: yet the Lord ruled the tongue of him to propheſie of that which came to paſſe. But whereto is this repeated here, that Caiaphas gaue them counſell? Theſe words are not in vaine: Iohn would let vs ſee by this deſcription, that they who tooke the Lord, they brought Him to the greateſt enemy He had, to him that gaue coūſell that He ſhuld die: all mē would haue their counſels put in execution: & namely, a wicked mā, if he giue coūſell, he wold gladly haue it put in executiō, albeit it were neuer ſo wicked, if he ſhuld do it himſelf, he had rather hang himſelfe than it went backe, as ye may ſee in Achitophell. Iohn, the writer of this hiſtorie, leaues Chriſt, and hee returnes to Peter,
               
and makes rehearſall of a thing that befell to Peter in the meane time, of that foule fall of Peter, vvho boaſted ſo faſt of his ſtrength, to bee an example to the vvhole poſteritie neuer to truſt in the power of man: he got a vvorſe fall thā any of the reſt of the diſciples: for he denied the Lord vvith an execration, the reſt fled only. In this fact of Peters, vve haue firſt, how he tempts God: then next, becauſe he tempted the Lord, the Lord tempts him againe: he who tempts God, God will tempt him: thirdly, we haue the foule deniall of Peter by a light temptation. Then Peter firſt tempts the Lord: for when as they led away the Lord to the Hall of the High Prieſt, there followed him Peter (albeit the Lord had fore-warned him of his weakeneſſe) but afarre off, as Matt. 26.58. Marke 14.54. and Luke 22.54. doe note, and another diſciple. What this diſciple was, his name is not mentioned: ſome thinke it was Iohn, for Iohn, when hee ſpeakes of himſelfe, he vſes cōmonly to ſuppreſſe his name, as ye ſee often in this book. Others think it was not Iohn, nor any of the twelue: but ſome other godly man, who loued the Lord Ieſus well, to ſee what iſſue ſhould follow vpon that taking; and this is more prooueable: for I thinke Iohn had not ſuch an acquaintance and court with the High Prieſt▪ being but a ſimple mā, a poore fiſher, namely, a diſciple of Ieſus Chriſt: but whoſoeuer it was▪ it is not much to the purpoſe. When they come to Caiaphas Hall, the Lord is taken in: amongſt the reſt, this other diſciple getteth in, becauſe (ſaies Iohn) he was knowne to the High Priest. As for Peter, becauſe he was not knowne, hee ſtandes at the doore, which was ſtraitly kept at this time. The other diſciple pitties Peters caſe and eſtate, (but it was a prepoſterous pittie) And hee entreateth the doore-keeper to let in Peter. Take heede to friendſhip: and looke that in pleaſuring thy friende, thou bee not an inſtrument of his deſtruction. Nowe Peter commeth in, and warmeth himſelfe amongſt the reſt. This for Peters tempting of GOD: Nowe let vs examine heere what is commendable, and what is not. Indeede, there is no man that will not like of this loue which Peter did beare towardes his Maſter CHRIST IESVS, and of this zeale, and of this his vnwillingneſſe to depart from his Maſter: for hee loued Him ſo well, that hee would followe Him to the death: and would to God in this cold age, there were but a piece of this zeale in vs, that Peter had: wee haue no zeale: and if it were but this incōſideratiue zeale, yet it is better to haue it, than no zeale. So this loue is cōmendable: for albeit he did wel to loue his maſter, yet

he faileth in this, that in receiuing aduertiſement out of the mouth of the Lord, that he was not able to ſuffer for Him, yet he would go forward: & when Ieſus ſaid to His takers, If ye ſeeke me, let theſe goe their way, Peter might haue perceiued by this, that he was not able to ſuffer, hee might haue retired to ſome priuate place with prayer & mourning, but he would ſtep forward, & would not accept of that, that the Lord ſaid to him, thou art not able: ſo he falleth here very farre. We all haue our leſſon here, the day of our trial may come: let vs therefore euer haue our eye on the will of God, & that which He will haue thee to doe, that doe thou, & what the Lord requireth not of vs, that doe not. Thou canſt doe nothing better than this, to take vp thy Croſſe, and to followe Chriſt: but if the Lord bid thee not doe it, doe it not, if hee require not at thine hand that thou ſuffer, enter not to ſuffer, if he forewarne thee that thou art not able to ſuffer the fire, go thy way, ſtep aſide, and let it bee. But one will ſay, How can I get aduertiſement? Peter had the mouth of the Lord: how ſhall wee be aduertiſed by God, whether we ſhall offer our ſelues to the fire or not? Ieſus Chriſt is not amongſt vs now face to face. I anſwere, The only way to know this▪ is this: Ere any man offer to put his hand to the Croſſe of Chriſt, look what he is able to beare: looke what ſtrength of God he hath: if thou wereſt like a Giant, thou wilt not beare the Croſſe of Chriſt, with mans ſtrength: if thou findeſt in triall yt thou haſt not ſtrength enough, take it for a warning from heauen, & draw thy ſelfe away to prayer & meditatiō, & then being furniſhed with ſtrength, come out and ſuffer, & then if thou haſt ſtrength, ſtep forward & ſuffer. Another fault in Peter, when he commeth to the doore of the high Prieſt, & finding it ſhut, yet hee ſtandeth, whereas by the ſhutting of the doore he was commanded to leaue off, at leaſt, to try whether the deede in hand was lawfull or no. It was by the prouidence of God, that the doore was ſhut: he got a warning there to leaue off, yet hee would not. Theſe impediments that are caſten in, when we are of purpoſe to effectuat or do any thing ſhould not be idlely looked on, but they ſhould make vs to enter into a carefull and earneſt triall of that deede, to ſee whether it be lawfull or not: for nothing is without the prouidence of God: & when thou haſt conſidered the worke, & findeſt it a good worke conformable to Gods will, & that thou art able to doe it, then goe forward in deſpite of the Deuill, and the world; but if thou findeſt after triall otherwiſe,

either that it is an euill vvorke, or elſe a good vvorke, and yet that thou art not able to doe it: then ſtaye, and leaue off: for if thou doeſt not, thou ſhalt thinke ſhame in the ende, as Peter did: Therefore, let no man looke lightlie to ſuch impediments as they ſhall finde to bee caſten in, in doing anie thing. Well, yee ſee Peters fall in theſe two poincts: Firſt, he will not receiue aduertiſment: Secondlie, hee will not goe from the doore, till he get in. Search the grounde of his doing, and ye ſhall ſee, that albeit Peter was a verie weake man, yet he ſaw not his owne infirmitie: and when he thought himſelfe ſtrong enough in his vaine conciet, he was blinded: hee ſaw not his owne infirmitie, & this is the ground of his fall. It was the ſtrength of fleſhe and blood that was in Peter, and an humane ſpirite, ſuch a courage as the Romane vvarriours had. This courage of fleſhe and blood will carry men a good piece forwarde in the cauſe of Chriſt, and will make them take vp and lift the croſſe on their ſhoulders, and to goe to the Hall of the High Prieſt, and to come to the fire: but there it leaueth them, for they will not put their hande to the fire: and in ende, this humane courage will leaue thee in the mire: for thou wilt neither die, nor put thine head vnder ye axe: therfore, if thou find boldnes in thee, look whether it be throw ye ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt, or of manly courage: whether it be ſpiritual or humane: and if it be of man, thou ſhalt fal, and if it be of God, thou ſhalt know it. He who is ſtrong in Ieſus Chriſt▪ he is ſtrong in infirmitie: & he who hath greateſt faith in Ieſus Chriſt, he hath greateſt ſenſe & ſight of his own weaknes: & when he finds Chriſt liuing in him, he will find himſelfe dying in himſelfe: if thou find thy ſelfe nothing, thou haſt ſtrength in God: if thou take a conceite of thy ſelfe, & boaſt of thy power, thou haſt no power in Ieſus Chriſt. Our Lord ſaid to Paul, My grace may ſuffice thee only, for my power is made perfect thorow weakeneſſe. The Martyrs haue confeſſed in ye houre of death, that they had no ſtrength in themſelues, but that they were ſtrong in Chriſt: if thou haue ſtrength of thy ſelfe, & not of Chriſt, it ſhall leaue thee in the end. Now when Peter hath tempted God, God meeteth him, & tempts him againe: he commeth in, & who is ye inſtrument that the Lord vſeth to tempt him with? euen ſhe that would gratifie him to let him in: he bought his comming in too deare, with the deniall of his Maſter: And ſhe ſaith, Art not thou alſo one of this mans diſciples? Firſt marke this well, ye wil thinke this to be a light temptation. Who is the inſtrument that temptes him? who, but a ſillie damſell? if it had

bene a man of war, or a man, it had bin thought he had had ſome occaſion to fall back. And what ſ
                  •
               ies ſhe to him? not boaſtingly, Art thou one of this ſeducers ſeruants? but in ſimplicitie & gentlenes, Art thou one of this mans diſciples? So, whether we looke to the tempter, or to the temptation, it is very light: & therfore, the greater is his fall and ſhame: thou getteſt a foule ſhame, who for a light temptation falleſt abacke. Beholde howe the Lord will humble the vaine and proude confidence of man: Peter was too proude: & the Lord will raiſe vp the ſillieſt of all His creatures, to tempt that man that is proude. All this naturall boldnes is nothing but weaknes, & Hee will not encounter it with a great ſtrength, but with a ſillie inſtrument: that man may ſee, that his own ſtrēgth is nothing. Beſide the fall of the proude man, there is ſhame with it, that ſhall pearce the heart more, than the hurt, that it ſhould be ſmitten to the dirt with ſuch an inſtrument. He will not raiſe vp a champiō againſt thē, nor He will not enter Himſelf with thē, but He will ſtir vp a thing of nothing to beat downe carnall courage. She ſaies, Art thou a diſciple of this mans? He ſaies, I am not. Is this he, that bragges and ſaies, I will not leaue thee Lord, though al ſhould leaue thee? is this he that denies his maſter? By this example we haue a liuely image of the vaine pride and ſtrength of man. The Lord will cauſe a girle to caſt thee downe & it both: yea, the very ſhaking of a leafe, ſhall make thee tremble: and vaine fantaſies and imaginations ſhall terrifie thee, although there were nothing out with thee: for whoſoeuer hath a confidence in himſelfe, the Lord ſhall caſt ſuch terrours into his heart, as ſhall ouer-throw him. The terroures of his minde, though all the worlde ſhould let him be, ſhall trouble him, and caſt him downe, ſo that he ſhall get no reſt. Therefore, be neuer ſtrong in the power of man: for if thou hadſt all the worlde, yet the baſeſt thing in the worlde ſhall caſt thee downe. But he or ſhe, that would take vp the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhould ſtriue to bee ſtrong in God, and care not howe weake thou art in thy ſelfe, for that ſtrength of God will hold thee vp. Paul ſaies to Timothie, Bee partaker of my affliction by the power of God: and ground thine afflictions vpō this power, for it is ye ſtrength which will holde thee vp: & this is the thing that will beare vp the croſſe thorow all temptations manfully to the end. In the next verſ. the Euangeliſt telleth where Peter is ſtanding, and ſetteth down the place, & a certaine occaſion of his temptation, He is ſtanding with a companie of the ſeruantes and officers of the Prieſtes and Phariſes, who had

made a fire of Coles, for it was colde, & they warmed themſelues. And then the Maiden commeth vnto him: hee was gone in too farre: for it is not good to enter ouer farre into the houſes of wicked men: neither is it good for thee to warme thy ſelfe in the companie of wicked men, nor yet to bee at their table: it were farre better for thee to abide the cold: for if thou accompanie thy ſelfe with them, & take pleaſure at their fire ſide, then a tempter ſhall come vnto thee, either a Damſell, or a Boy: And therefore, let euery man & woman beware, and as they woulde bee free from temptation, ſo let them eſchewe euill companie. Hee is well worthie to bee tempted, who knoweth his owne weaknes, & yet will not tarrie out of the companie of the wicked: And it is Gods juſt judgement, that our men make Apoſtaſie, and come home foule Apoſtates, and Atheiſtes, who will not tarrie out of FRANCE, and SPAINE, vvhere all is full of temptation: It were better to ſit at home, and ſerue the LORD: for it is harde to knowe, if euer thou ſhalt get grace to take vp thy ſelfe, as PETER did. The reſt of the Euangeliſtes ſay, that PETER had ſcarce ſaid that, (when as the Cocke crew, euen as the Lord had fore-tolde him) but hee getteth the vvarning, that hee had made defection. Nowe after ſinne, there commeth commonly an induration and blindneſſe; and in ſinning the conſcience ſleepeth, yea, it ſleepeth ſo ſound, that vvhen it getteth aduertiſement, it cannot bee vvakened: but the third time it vvas vvakned: for PETER denied his Maſter once, twiſe, yea thriſe, but at length hee vvakeneth; and yet not ſo much for the crowing of the Cocke, as for the looke of his Maſter; vvhereof LVKE maketh mention, CHAP. XXII. VERS. 61. And PAVL ſaieth, When the heart ſhall bee turned vnto the LORD, the vaile is taken away, 2. COR. CHAP. III. VERS. 16. This is my leſſon: When a man committeth ſinne, the conſcience vvill bee aſleepe, and vvill not bee vvakened: and this falleth not out in the vvicked onelie, but alſo in the godlie: Yee reade of DAVID, after he had committed adulterie, his conſcience ſleepeth ſtill; and after the adulterie, hee falleth out in murther, and yet hee is not vvakened, till the Prophet of the LORD came vnto him. The longer that thy conſcience lieth ſtill in ſinne, the bitterer the vvakening vvill bee. A reprobate vvill get an harde vvakening, Iudas got a ſore vvakening, he vvas aſleepe vvhileſt hee kiſſed his Maſter, but vvhen hee vvakened, he hanged himſelfe. But the Lord dealeth otherwiſe vvith His owne, Hee vvill

vvaken them in mercie: and in the heauieſt diſpleaſure, they ſhall haue the ſweeteſt joye: and in the greateſt aboundance of teares, the greateſt comfort.
            Of all the thinges in the vvorlde, take beſt heede to the conſcience: for it is alwayes verie readie to fall aſleepe, and of all judgementes, a ſleeping conſcience is the greateſt: and therefore let vs ſtriue night and daye to haue a waking conſcience, which may rounde in our eares, when vvee lay vs downe at Euen, vvhat vvee haue done all the daye: if thou haſt done good, then thou mayeſt ſleepe vvith a ſound conſcience: but if thou haſt done euill, it is better a thouſand times, to vveepe vvith teares, and vvake in mourning, till thou findeſt thy ſelfe to be recōciled to God againe, than to ſleepe. We ſhould neuer let the conſcience ſleepe, but euer hold it vvaking, to tell vs vvhen vve doe euill, that vve may haue dolour: & vvhē vve haue done vvell, vve may haue joy, through Ieſus Chriſt: To vvhome, vvith the Father, and the Holy Spirite, bee all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            THE FOVRTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 (The high Priest then asked IESVS of his Diſciples, and of his Doctrine.  
                        verse 20 
                     IESVS anſwered him, I ſpake openly to the worlde, I euer taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Iewes reſort continually, and in ſecret haue I ſaid nothing. 
                        verse 21 Why askeſt thou mee? aske them that heard me what I ſaid vnto them: beholde, they know what I ſaid. 
                        verse 22 When he had ſpoken theſe things, one of the officers which ſtood by, ſmote IESVS with his rodde, ſaying, Anſwerest thou the high Priest ſo? 
                        verse 23 
                     IESVS anſwered him, if I haue euill ſpoken, beare witneſſe of the euill: but if I haue well ſpoken, why ſmiteſt thou me? 
                        verse 24 Now Annas had ſent him bound vnto Caiaphas the high Prieſt.) 
                        verse 25 And Simon

Peter ſtood and warmed himſelfe, and they ſaide vnto him, Art not thou alſo one of his Diſciples? He denied it, and ſaid, I am not. 
                        verse 26 One of the ſeruants of the high Prieſt, his couſin whoſe eare Peter ſmote off, ſaide, Did not I ſee thee in the Garden with him? 
                        verse 27 
                     Peter then denied againe, and immediatly the Cocke crew.
               
            
            
               BELOVED in the LORD IESVS, we haue heard the firſt part of the Paſſion of the LORD, which was in the Garden; beſide that inward agonie with the wrath of His Father, that Hee felt in His ſoule, outwardly in the Garden, where Hee was taken like a thiefe & bound: Hee was taken to deliuer vs from that captiuitie and bondage of ſinne and death. And then after we entered into the ſeconde part of His ſuffering which was in the Hall of Caiaphas: being taken and bound, He is led away to Hieruſalem. The firſt houſe that He is brought vnto, is the houſe of Anna
                     •
                  , the father-in-lawe to Caiaphas: and there Hee tarrieth a certaine time, till the Prieſtes, the Elders, and Scribes were aſſembled in the houſe of Caiaphas: and then Annas ſendes Him bound to Caiaphas the High Prieſt.
            Now we heard the laſt day the Hiſtorie of Peter, how hee denied his Lord and Maſter: Peter, vpon a vaine confidence, notwithſtanding of an admonition of the Lord, hee will followe Him to the houſe of the High Prieſt. Now the Lord entereth in, and the other diſciple vvho knewe the High Prieſt, and Peter vvas ſtopped at the doore: this might haue beene an aduertiſement for him to haue left off, but yet hee would not: and the other diſciple, thinking to gratifie him, he deſireth the maiden that kept the doore, to let him in: and beeing no ſooner entered in, but that ſame ſeruant vvoman tempteth him. This temptation is by a ſober inſtrument, neither vttered ſhe any reuiling vvordes vnto him: yet neuertheleſſe Peter falleth: vvhereby yee maye ſee vvhereunto the confidence of fleſhe and blood turneth, for the lighteſt aſſault vvill throwe him downe vvho truſteth in it. Hee is ſtanding vvarming himſelfe vvith euill companie: and being ſtanding ſecurely, he getteth his reward: hee deare bought his vvarming there: for hee is tempted, and denieth his Lord and Maſter.
            Now to come to this Text: There are two parts of it ſhortly: the firſt containes the ſuffering of the Lord Ieſus in the Hall of the

high Prieſt: the ſecond containes the ſecond and third deniall of Peter. As for the firſt, it is ſaide, that Caiaphas the high Prieſt begineth to aske of Ieſus concerning his doctrine and his diſciples: he layeth not downe firſt ſuch and ſuch particular pointes of falſe doctrine, becauſe he had none to lay to the charge of the Lord, and therefore this was no formall proceeding and dealing, to draw a man before a judge, and then not to haue one word to lay to his charge. Should not the dittay be made before the man was taken: ye may ſee the malice of this perſecution. Well then, to examine his words, he enquireth about his doctrine, and then for his diſciples, whilſt he asked him of his doctrine, he would meane, that his doctrine was not allowable, and that it might not abide the light, and that Hee teached lies, and whilſt as hee ſpeaketh of His diſciples, hee would meane, that the Lord was a ſeducer, and had ſeduced ſo many among the people: the Lord anſweres, The thing that I haue teached, I haue teached openly before the world: and therefore, why askeſt thou me of my doctrine, as though it were not allowable, and as if I had teached in ſecret holes and caues: then he appealeth to the witnesſing of his enemies, aske of theſe men, who haue heard me, I will bee judged by them. This is the effect firſt, of the queſtion of the high Prieſt, and next of the anſwere of the Lord. The firſt thing that wee marke here, is ſhortly this, Beholde in the perſon of Caiaphas, the malice of the enemies of the trueth in their heartes, they know the trueth, and yet they will ſeeme that they knowe it not: CAAIPHAS knewe the trueth, but hee ſeemeth not to knowe it, the enemies will count light darkneſſe, albeit the truth ſhould ſhine in their faces more bright than the Sunne in the noone-tide of the day, yet they will ſay, Light is darkneſſe: But to come to Chriſts part, as the trueth loues the light, and deſires not to be hid, neither to bee teached in ſecret holes and caues: ſo the trueth (ſo farre as is posſible) is publikely to bee teached, in the preſence of the worlde, it would haue all men to know it, it would euer bee heard, and the light would euer ſhine through the world. The Miniſters of the trueth ſhould euer ſtriue to preach in publike, that all the men and women of the worlde may heare, euen to preach in the moſt publike places of the world, and if it were for no other thing than this: that thou mayeſt anſwere to the Lord, if it fall out that the light come to bee challenged for darkneſſe, thē thou maieſt appeale & ſay, We haue teached nothing in holes,

and that the enemies of the trueth may be conuicted in their conſcience, and compelled to beare witneſſe of the trueth: I meane not, that at no time it is lawfull to preach in ſecret places, and as though the trueth of God had euer a free courſe, and were publikly preached: for experience hath teached, that the trueth of God hath fled to the wilderneſſe in time of perſecution, and the Saints of God haue bene glad to goe to holes, to get the comfort of the worde: but I meane this, that ſo farre as posſibly can be, is to bee preached openly, and if that libertie of the trueth be reſtrained, let vs bee content to ſuffer, and deliuer in ſecret conſolation by the word. Then marke againe in Chriſtes anſwere: albeit the Lord ſuffereth willingly, offereth Himſelfe to be taken, & giueth his hands to bee bound, yet yee may ſee, that the Lord will not yeeld to the enemies, that He is a falſe teacher, or that He is a ſeducer, or that that light is darknes, or that the trueth is a lie. It is true, that if it pleaſe the Lord, that we ſuffer for the trueths ſake, wee are bound to ſuffer patiently and willingly: but looke to this againe, let neuer the trueth of God be ſaide to be a lie, neuer yeeld to the enemies that the trueth of God is falſe, for all the torments of the world: Peter ſayeth, Let vs ſuffer for a good cauſe, and not as theeues and murtherers, 1. Pet. 4.15, 16. It is a paine to ſuffer for an euill cauſe, ſo long as the Lord giueth vs a mouth, let vs proteſt that the trueth is trueth. Paul ſayes, 2. Tim. 2.9. I am in bands, and I am afflicted in bands as though I were an euill doer: yet the word of God that He hath put in my mouth is not bound, & all the enemies in the world, ſo long as I haue a mouth, ſhall not reſtraine it. The Martyres were neuer brought to this, to cōfeſſe that they ſuffered for an euill cauſe: albeit thou yeeld hands and foot to any torture, beware of this, that thou neuer confeſſe that it is an euill cauſe, wherefore thou dieſt; let euer the veritie be free in all our ſuffering. When the Lord makes this anſwere, One of the officers which ſtood by, ſmote Ieſus with his rod, and ſaide, Anſwereſt thou the high Prieſt ſo? Meaning▪ that the Lord had not anſwered him ſo reuerently as Hee ſhould haue done. The Lord anſwereth, If I haue euil ſpoken, beare witnes of the euil, but if I haue well ſpoken, why ſmiteſt thou me. Alwayes, whether He had well or euill ſpoken, He findeth fault with him, that he ſhould haue ſmitten Him ſo raſh
                  •
               y: ſo, brethren, this is another part of the ſuffering of Ieſus Chriſt: He ſuffers not onely of the high Prieſt, but of his ſeruants alſo: Hee ſuffers of all men, all this was done without any order of law. The high Prieſt

ſpeakes to Him againſt order of Law, and the officer ſtrikes Him againſt order of Law: he failes in this, becauſe he ſtrikes Him for well doing, for He maintained the trueth of His father. Thē againe, why ſhould he haue ſtrucken Him, till He had bene judged? and then, if He were judged, yet it was no place to puniſh a man in judgement, though he were neuer ſo euill. So yee ſee in how many things theſe men faile. What ſhall I ſay? Ye ſhall commonly find the moſt innocent man, who hath bene brought before euill men, and corrupted judges of the worlde, of all ſort of men haue beene handeled moſt vnformally, & vnreaſonably. A thiefe, or a murtherer hath not bene ſo euill handeled, as the moſte innocent: for they will let a murtherer, or the wickedeſt man in the world, tell his tale in patience: and they will delay ſtriking of him till the place of execution: but experience hath taught this, that whē an innocent man is judged, all the proceeding is without order: as we ſee in this example of Chriſt, the moſt innocent man that euer was. And ſuch like in the Martyrs of God; neuer thiefe nor robber was ſo vnreaſonably handled as they. What is the cauſe of this? Euen this, the malice of the heart of man was neuer ſo bent againſt an euill man, as the wicked man is againſt the innocēt: yea, a juſt judge hates not ſo much vnrighteouſnes, as a wicked judge hates innocēcie. And therfore, it is a wonder that the judgemēt of the wicked proceedes vnorderly againſt the godly: the Lord anſweres, If I haue ſpoken euill, thou ſhouldſt not ſtrike mee without order, & if well, why ſmiteſt thou me. The Lord binds him that he hath done wrong, howbeit Hee ſuffered moſt willingly & patiently: but Hee ſtrikes not againe. Yet marke, in this patient ſuffering Hee will haue wrong appeare to be wrong, & that which is vnjuſt to be vnjuſt. In all our patient ſuffering let ay right appeare to be right, and wrong to be wrong. Let not a man yt ſuffers be ſo dumbe that he ſay not that wrong is wrong. No, let them ſpeake, that the cōſcience of the wicked man may be conuict, and brought to ſome remorſe. The Lord no doubt pities this man that ſtrook Him, & would haue had his conſcience cōuict, yt he might repent. So let the wicked ſee, that wrong is wrong in the moſt patient ſuffering, that the wicked may bee conuict, and God glorified. Nowe is ſubjoyned, that Annas had ſent Him bounde to Caiaphas. Hee returnes to the grounde of His accuſation: and the grounde is this, Annas ſent Him bounde vnto Caiaphas: howbeit in the houſe of Annas the Lord was not ſtruckē, yet Annas was not blameleſſe: for theſe words are regiſtrated to his

euerlaſting ſhame, that he ſent ſuch an innocent man to ſuch a burrio, & this makes him guiltie of the blood of the Lord Ieſus. Meddle nothing with the ſuffering of an innocent man, for if once thou ſeemeſt to conſent to his death, thou art guiltie, and if thou rejoyceſt in the wracke of the innocent, for if thou ſhalt once conſent vnto it, thou art guiltie of all the innocent blood, frō the blood of Abel that was ſhed, vnto the end of the world: for whoſoeuer will conſent to the blood of an innocēt man, he may eaſily be brought on to conſent to the ſhedding of the blood of all innocents yt euer was: keepe therefore thine hands, thine eyes, & thine heart cleane from any aſſent to the wracke of the innocent. Now to come to the ſecond part of our text, which containes the two denialls of Peter. All this time, Peter is ſtanding warming him with the officers of the High Prieſt: on this riſes another temptation, Some ſay, Art thou not one of his diſciples, there he denies, ſaying, I am not. Firſt, ye haue the occaſion of the temptation, Secondly, the temptation it ſelfe, Thirdly, the ſecond fall, and deniall. The occaſion is, he is ſtanding warming him in ſuch a companie, the words import a great ſecuritie in Peter, he is ſo farre from a remorſe, that is, careleſſe: thinke yee not, that hauing denied his Maſter once, that hee ſhould haue gone aſide & mourned & wept bitterly, but ye ſee he did not ſo. Sin when it is committed, bringeth on commonly a careleſſe ſecurity: when a man hath fallen into a great ſinne, he will commonly ly ſtill in a deadneſſe & ſenſleſneſſe, & as a man who falles downe from an high place, for a certaine ſpace lyes without ſenſe, & is dammiſhed with the fall: euen ſo▪ (what is ſinne but a fall from God) after that once we are fallen frō God, we are ſenleſſe altogether, we ly without ſenſe or motion, & the greater alwayes that the ſinne be whereinto we fall, the greater is the ſenſleſneſſe: but aboue all ſinnes, the deniall of the Lord Ieſus, & of His trueth, bringes on moſt fearfull & deadly ſenſleſneſſe, eſpecially if that ſinne proceede of a malitiouſneſſe of the heart, as that ſinne of Iuda
                     •
                  
                did: he was ſenſleſſe, he was ſo impudent in ſinning, that he kiſſed His Maſter, to ſhew Him to his takers. It is true, the ſin of Iudas, was of the hatred of the heart, but the ſinne of Peter was not of malice, but of infirmitie, yet hee falles into a deadneſſe and ſleepe: So, Brethren, euer beware to fall, for after a fall comes a ſecuritie. The eſtate of ſecuritie is the moſt dangerous eſtate that euer was, better to be mourning day & night, than to be in this ſecuritie: ſo then falling, he lyes ſtill ſenſleſſe But

looke what followes, lying ſtill in ſecurity, another tempter cōmeth againe, to wit, One of the ſeruants of the high Prieſt, his couſin, whoſe ca
                     •
                  e Peter ſmote off, ſayd, Did not I ſee thee in the garden with him? looke what the eſtate of ſecuritie bringes on it, neuer wantes temptation, & if thou ſhalt be put to that pinch, that thou ſhould denie thy Lord, let a man ly ſtill in ſecuritie frō houre to houre, he ſhall neuer want temptation: when the deuill lulles thee aſleepe in ſecuritie, then he thinkes that he gets his will. Peter ſayes, I am not his diſciple: the temptatiō is but light, yet for all the lightnes of it he denies his Lord: for denying Him to be his diſciple (albeit he ſpake ſlenderly) he denies Chriſt to be his Maſter: & in effect he denies the Meſſias: then, Brethren, a man or a woman lying in ſecuritie, the leaſt thing in the world, will draw him away, as a ſleeping man with a ſmall motion will fall: ſo when thou art ſleeping, if the deuill commeth, the leaſt finger of the tempter will put thee ouer: aboue all things in the world, keepe thee from ſecuritie: for the ſmalleſt temptation will put thee away frō thy God: ſo men in this life ſhould euer be groaning vnder the burthen of ſinne: had Peter bene groaning after his firſt deniall, hee had not beene ſo eaſily ouercome. Now to take it vp in one worde, ſinne bringes on ſecuritie, & when one lyes in ſecuritie, the deuill is buſie to tempt him, & that perſon is eaſily put ouer: ſo beware of ſinne, and ſtriue to get a waking conſcience, that thou ſleep not in ſecuritie: for the end of ſecuritie is death euerlaſting▪ when hee is crying peace, peace, then commeth a ſudden judgement, like the paines of a woman in trauel. Now come to the laſt deniall of Peter: he hath denied the Lord twiſe: after his ſecond deniall, he is no more touched, than he was of before: & the ſecond fall bringes on a greater ſenſleſneſſe, than the firſt fall: the oftener that a man or woman falles, they are the more ſenſleſſe, & once falling, & falling againe, thou contracteſt the greater ſecuritie. There is not a man or a woman that continues in ſinne: but after the ſecond fall, that perſon ſhall be more ſenſleſſe, than after the firſt: ſo growing in ſinne, bringes on a growing in deadly ſecuritie, & continuance in a dead ſleepe, thou ſhalt finde thy ſelfe after the ſecond ſinne more ſenſleſſe than after the firſt: Well then, Peter conti
                  •
               ues in a ſecuritie, & as Luke noteth, there interu
                  •
               enes one houre betweene the ſecond & third deniall: yet he is without remorſe, & he is not moued▪ ſo continuing in this dead ſleepe of ſecuritie, commeth on the third temptation, by a couſin of Malchus, whoſe

eare hee ſmote off: if thou ſleepeſt in ſecuritie, thou ſhalt not want new temptation: when thou ſleepeſt, thy tempter is buſily waking about thee: the more thou ſleepeſt, and lyeſt in ſecuritie, the more buſie is the deuil to tempt thee: albeit thou feeleſt it not. Now when Peter hath denied Him once and twiſe, & as the other Euangeliſts doe note, hee putteth to a curſe: Marke, as continuance in ſecuritie bringeth on continuance in temptation: ſo continuance in temptation bringeth on continuance in ſinne. Now, I thinke, if the Lord had not ſtayed him in the ende, hee had denied Him a thouſand times: euen ſo oft as they had asked of him. So there is neuer an ende of tumbling ouer and ouer, till the creature tumble in hell, where there ſhall be a blacke wakening: for if thou denieſt the Lord once, thou ſhalt denie Him againe and againe: it is noted when he denied the third time, Then the cocke crew, and Luke noteth, euen as the cocke crew, the Lord looked ouer his ſhoulder: there goes two things together, the crowing of the cocke, & the looking of the Lord. S. Marke notes, the cocke crew the ſecond time: well then, doth Peter waken at the crowing of the cocke? beganne hee to get a remorſe by it? No, all the crying & crowing of the world, wil not waken the ſoule out of ſinne, except the Lord looke in, by the beames of his countenance, and ſtrike in to the heart, if the gratious beames of the Lords face had not ſtrucken on Peters heart, he had neuer wakened. This is to let you ſee, how hard a thing it is to raiſe a dead body that lyes in ſinne: what crying in the world wil raiſe a dead body: & ſo there is no crying, or remedie in heauen or in earth, to thy dead ſoule, except Ieſus Chriſt looke fauorably vnto thee, & make his gratious countenance to ſhine in thy ſoule: who would haue that remorſe of ſinne that Peter got, and that waking conſcience, let that perſon ſtriue to turne the heart to Ieſus Chriſt: whē the heart is turned to the Lord, thē the vaile ſhalbe taken away: all the light of knowledge is in the face of Ieſus Chriſt: no heat in the worlde is able to mollifie thine heart, except that heat that commeth from the face of Ieſus Chriſt: ſo, hold euer thine heart vp to the face of Ieſus Chriſt, that thou mayeſt haue a continuall remorſe: for in the bitterneſſe of ſinne, is the ſweetneſſe of joy: Nowe to make an ende, and ſhortly to examine this fall of Peters. Certainely, there are many faults in this fall: Firſt, he is caried away with a vaine confidence of fleſh and blood: he will take vp his croſſe and follow the Lord, albeit that the Lord aduertiſed him that hee

was not able: and then the doore was ſhut vpon him, to aduertiſe him, and put him in minde, yet he would not ſtay: then when he is let in, alas, he denies his Lord once, he denies Him twiſe & thriſe, till the LORD did ſtaye him: I dare not ſay, but all this time Peter caried a good heart towards his Lord, & a ſpunke of faith, & a ſpunke of loue in the heart, albeit his faith & loue were choked: it was ſuppreſſed with infirmities of the fleſh, & namely with feare: then when he is entered in and come vnto the fire ſide, if that faith and loue was ſuppreſſed before with his nature, then it was farre more ſuppreſſed, & this litle ſpunke of loue in the man, was ſmoothered, & there falles ſuch a weight of infirmitie on it, that it was preſſed downe vnder the burthen of corruption, and vnder ſecuritie: if thou be ſleeping in ſecuritie, albeit thou haue a ſpunke of loue, it will be ſmoothered, and this is moſt true, that this ſpunke of loue was ſo ſmoothered, yea, I ſay more, it was preſſed, that except the Lord had looked ouer his ſhoulder, with the eye of his mercie, and wakened that ſpunke of loue, it had died out. In Peter we haue a cleare example of the weakneſſe of the godly men, into this life: albeit we haue faith, and loue, yet in the example of Peter we ſee, that the ſpunke of grace will be choaked with corruption & infirmitie: and then will ye come to God: Peter is one of the chiefe examples of the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt: Paul to Timothie countes, that he was one of the greateſt examples of mercie in the world: but if yee looke to the ſinne of Peter, ye will finde that it was greater than the ſinne of Paul: for Paul did all of ignorance, and ſo if Paul, as hee ſayes, was made an example of the mercie of God to ſinners: ſurely this example of Peter, ought much more to bee an example to all ſinners: let no ſinner that lookes to him, deſpaire of mercie, how burthened ſo euer hee be with ſinne: for that ſame Ieſus Chriſt, who was mercifull to Peter, hath ſtore of mercie for all them, that it pleaſeth him mercifully to looke vpon: To Him therefore, with the Father, and holy Spirit, be all honour and glorie, AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE FIFT LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Then led they IESVS from Caiaphas, into the common Hall. Now it was morning, and they themſelues went not into the common Hall, leſt they ſhould bee defiled, but that they might eate the Paſſeouer 
                        verse 29 
                     Pilate then went out vnto them, and ſaid, What accuſation bring you againſt this man? 
                        verse 30 They anſwered, and ſaid vnto him. If he were not an euill doer, we would not haue deliuered him vnto thee. 
                        verse 31 Then ſaide Pilate vnto them, Take yee him, and judge him after your owne Lawe. Then the Iewes ſaide vnto him, It is not lawfull for vs to put anie man to death. 
                        verse 32 It was that the word of IESVS might be fulfilled which he ſpake, ſignifying what death he ſhould die.
               
            
            
               IN the eighteenth and nineteenth Chapters of this Goſpell (Brethren) is contained the Hiſtory of the Paſſion of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt; and it is diuided in theſe parts: The firſt is the ſuffering of the Lord in the Garden: The next, is the ſuffering of the Lord vnder the High Prieſt Caiaphas, the Eccleſi
                  •
               ſticall Iudge: The third, is the ſuffering of the Lord vnder Pontius Pilate, the Ciuill and Romane Magiſtrate: The fourth, is the ſuffering of the Lord in the place of Execution: The laſt, in the ſepulchre. Wee haue ſpoken of ye firſt part of His ſuffering in the Garden▪ beſides the inward cōflict He had with ye wrath of His Father for ye ſins of ye elect which Hee did beare vpon Him. The▪ Lord is taken like a thiefe or vagabond, and bound, & led to Hieruſalem. We heard alſo the ſuffering of the Lord in ye Hall of the High Prieſt, whoſe name was Caiaphas. When the High Prieſts & Elders are ſet down in coūcell. He is

brought in before them: and being brought, they haue not a word to ſay againſt Him, howbeit they bound Him, & brought Him to judgemēt. This was an vnformall dealing: therfore the hie prieſt demands of Him His doctrine, & of His diſciples, to catch a word out of His mouth, wherupō he might make his accuſatiō: whē they preuaile not this way, the reſt of the Euāgeliſts note, that they begin to ſuborne falſe witnes: but they get no vantage that way neither: for they cānot agree together. Thē the hie prieſt begins in wrath to adjure Him, to tell him, whether he be that Chriſt or no? The Lord denies it not, but ſaies, Thou haſt ſaid it: He giues him a faire teſtimony of this: after this Hee ſaies, Yee ſhall ſee the ſonne of man ſitting at the right hād of the power of God, & come in the clouds of heauē. Then the high prieſt rent his clothes, as though He had blaſphemed, & ſaid What haue we more need of witnes? behold, now ye heard His blaſphemy, what think ye? Then he, & the reſt of the councell, cōcluded, yt 
               the Lord was worthy of death, & ſo the coūcel departed. In the meane time the Lord is kept ſtill in the Hall of the hie prieſt, & the officers are al about Him, working all kind of injury againſt Him: ye rebukes yt ſhuld haue befallē to vs, are laide on Him, as the prophet ſaid of Him, Pſal. 69.10. Some ſpitted on Him, ſome put a vaile on His face▪ & ſmote Him, ſaying in ſcorn, Propheſie Chriſt, who it is that ſtriketh thee: nothing in the Lord but patiēce, He ſpake nothing He made no more reſiſtāce than a ſilly lābe before the ſhearer: whē it is begun to become light in the morning, the Prieſts & Elders begin to ſit down in councell: & the hie prieſt aſked of Him the ſame again, whether he was that Chriſt or no? He anſwereth, If I ſhould tell you, ye will not belieue mee (what auailes it to ſpeak to an indured heart?) & He teſtifies again, Thou haſt ſaid it: & he giues an argumēt of this, hereafter ſhall the ſon of man ſit at the right hād of the power of God: Then the hie prieſt and the Elders, the ſecond time, concludes Him to be worthie of death, & adjudges Him to die: thē the councell ariſes: & the firſt thing they doe, they lead Him to Pontius Pilate the Romane deputie to the judgemēt Hall, to him to execute yt ſentence they had giuen out. In this Text wee enter into the thirde part of the ſuffering of Chriſt vnder Pōtius Pilate, the Romane gouernour. Firſt, in the Text wee haue read howe the Lord is led into the Common Hall of Pilate: then vve haue what conferēce was betwixt Pilate & the Iewes, cōcerning Chriſt. Then it is ſaid, They led him into the common Hall: which is, as vve call it, the Seſſion-houſe, where the Romane Gouernour ſate for the time, and miniſtrated judgement.

Now Brethren, it would be well marked, when it is that they ledde Him to Pilate: it appeares plainly in the writings of the Euāgeliſts: namely, Mat. 26.59. Mark. 14.55. & Luk. 22.63. that they led Him in after they adjudged Him to bee worthie of death. They led Him not in thinking that Pilate ſhould ſit downe & trie whether He was worthie of death or no: but that Pilate vpon their word ſhould giue out the ſentence of condemnation againſt Him. Marke & cōſider how they abuſed ye judge a man better thā thēſelues, they make him but a torturer, & the beſt is, a damner to giue out the ſentēce. Ye may ſee here a liuely image of him who wil be called the hie prieſt in ye Kirke this day: I meane that beaſt of Rome, the Romane antichriſt. Indeed, this day, there is no hie prieſt, but Ieſus Chriſt onely, who did put an end to that office amōg the Iewes: there is no hie prieſt, or ſmall prieſt, great or ſmall in the world, all is but vſurped authority, He is that only hie prieſt according to the order of Melchiſedeck, who endureth for euer. But he who falſely takes vpon him that ſtile, followes the fact & example of Caiaphas, firſt condemning Chriſt, and then giuing Him ouer to Pilate to execute the ſentence: for he will ſit downe in his councell, & adjudge the innocent to death▪ as Caiaphas did Chriſt, & then he will vſe the power & arme of the Emperour: for what is the Emp. & ſo many kings, who haue giuen thēſelues ouer to his ſlauery, but like as many hangmen to the Pope? What is the king of Spaine, but a Burrio to the Pope? he dare not but execute the decree of the inquiſition: was he not compelled to pleaſure the Pope & his crue in putting his own ſonne to death? Ye ſaw neuer two things liker to other, than the Pope & Caiaphas. The time is noted when the Lord Ieſus is led to the Common Hall: firſt it is in the morning, after the riſing of the Sunne, and after the councell of the hie prieſt, and of the Elders was looſed. The manner of the deliuery is noted: whē they come to the place of judgmēt, the Iewes will not enter in, becauſe they wil not defile thēſelues, if it were with the touching of a profane ethnik, or the walles of an houſe. O hypocrites! The cauſe is ſet downe, They were in a preparatiō to eat the paſſeouer yt ſame night: now wil ye ſee theſe holy folk, they wil not be polluted with the touching of Pilate: they had polluted thēſelues miſerably with touching of Ieſus that innocent, & polluted both hād & heart, in taking him, & leading him to the judge, accuſing him, & abuſing him: yet whē they haue done al this, they will not be defiled with Pilate: they are profane in the greateſt thing in the world, to ſlay the Lord Ieſus: they are religious in a light ceremonie

of their owne inuention. Looke the nature of Hypocrites, Paul Epheſ. 5.12: It is aſhame euen to ſpeake of thoſe things which an Hypocrite will doe in ſecret: and if ye will come to ceremonies and outward obſeruations, no man is ſo preciſe, and will ſeeme ſo holy as they, the faithfulleſt creature will not be ſo holy in bodily exerciſe as they: yea, I ſay vnto you, if there be no more, but this bodily exerciſe, & keeping of ceremonies, the Lord countes all but abominations, as ye may ſee in Eſay Chap. 1. Preaching and hearing, ſpeaking, conferring, the Lord countes no more of them, than if He had neuer ordained them, if there be no more but this outward action, and as before, euen ſo nowe I ſay, we haue a viue image of the deceiuers of the world. The Popes religion is nothing but a deceiuing of the world, by keeping of vaine and vnprofitable ceremonies inuented by him: will yee come to trifles, of their owne inuentions, they appeare to be very religious, and exceeding holy, touch not, handle not, taſte not, but their Cloyſter Monkes are ſo defiled, that they defile the world: offer him golde, or ſiluer, hee will not touch it, and if a woman come into their Cloyſter, all muſt be purified with fire, after that ſhe is come out, though ſhe were a Queene: there is the lounes religion. I pronounce that in Popedome there is but a ſhew of godlineſſe, & haue denied the power thereof: follow the Papiſtes who will, they haue nothing almoſt but trifles, & their own inuentions. Well then, come to the conference betweene the Iewes & Pilate, Pilate yeelding to their vanitie, & ſuperſtition, not ſo much to their religion, He cometh out to them, & ſeeing he muſt judge the Lord, He asketh if they had any accuſation againſt Him, becauſe they would not come in. It is not enough to judge a man, except the purſuer haue an accuſation, & Pilate would not ſit down to judge, except hee ſaw the accuſation: indeed, the Iewes tooke him, bound Him, and in the high Prieſts hall handled Him vnworthily, before they had any accuſation againſt Him, & they bring Him in judgement, but Pilate an Ethnicke & a ſinner as they called him, wil not proceed that way, he is more formall, he wil not ſit down in judgement, till he heare the accuſation, an Ethnicke who liues without God in the world and without the promiſes, as Paul ſpeakes, he is more juſt & formall in judgement, than all the Iewes who profeſſed the true God. This falls out oftentimes, that a 
                  
                     •
                  urke or Pagane who liuing without God in the world) will deale more vprightly in judgement, and eſpecially with Chriſtians who are perſecuted

for the Name of Chriſt, than they that take vpon them the name of the Church. It is better for a Chriſtian to fall into the handes of the Turke, than of the Pope▪ or of the Inquiſition of Spaine, let them aſſay it vvho pleaſe. Well, Brethren, there is no crueltie or vvrong comparable to the crueltie of theſe vvho take vpon them the name of the Church: Experience hath prooued this. Nowe hee requires a vardict of the Iewes: but vvhat anſwere they? If hee had not beene an euill doer, wee had not deliuered him vnto thee. They anſwere preſumptuouſly, What needeſt thou to doubt of his deſeruing? or of vs? Thinkeſt thou, that this man vvould haue bene condemned by vs vvithout a ſufficient cauſe of death? So yee ſee, it is not that hee ſhoulde ſit downe, and trie vvhether Hee vvere innocent or no, that they brought Him to Pilate, but that vpon their vvordes hee might giue out the ſentence: Yet there is ſome accuſation heere, that he is an euill doer. Is that ſufficient, vvhen a man is deliuered to the Iudge, to ſay, This man is an euill man? No, hee muſt qualifie it in particular, wherein he is euill, and hath failed: if they had found anie, they woulde not haue paſſed by it: in their owne judgement ſeate they coulde get nothing to ſay againſt Him. Nowe when they came to the judgement of Pilate, and ſtriuing to accuſe Him, they can ſaye nothing, but in generall, This is an euill man. Then this I marke thorow this whole proceſſe, that the Lord will alwayes haue theſe two thinges to bee ſeene manifeſtly: Firſt, the innocencie of Chriſt, for (looke the whole proceſſe, yea, when He is ſlaine & dead vpon the Croſſe) His very enemies themſelues are conſtrained to teſtifie, that He is an innocent man, as the Centurion did: The next is the wrongfull dealing of the Iewes againſt their conſciences.
            Now Brethren, as it was in this matter of Ieſus Chriſt, ſo it hath beene ſince in all the Martyrs: The Lord hath made both the innocencie of the Martyrs to appeare clearly, and alſo He hath made the crueltie and tyrannie of their enemies to appeare. Reade the bookes of the Martyrs, and yee ſhall finde theſe two. So Brethren, it is well for them that will ſuffer for a good cauſe, and chiefely, for the cauſe of Ieſus Chriſt: yea, although it were but in this, That the Lord will haue their innocencie appearing. What and if all the worlde condemne thee, ſo the Lord Ieſus juſtifie thee? for albeit thou die, yet thine innocencie dieth neuer. And this is our comfort indeede, that albeit this bodie ſhoulde bee burnt▪ yet the daye ſhall come that our innocencie ſhall appeare: for at the glorious comming

of the Lord Ieſus, thou, and thine innocencie ſhall ſtand vp to ſhame the Tyrants of the world: Thus for their anſwere. Pilate ſayes againe, Yee haue a lawe, take and iudge Him after your lawe. Albeit Pilate ſeeme to ſpeake theſe thinges tauntingly, to mocke the Iewes, ſpeaking one thing, and thinking another, to repreſſe their pride: yet the Text following, teſtifies, that he ſpake it in earneſtneſſe, as he would ſay, Before that I ſhould condemne any man this way without an accuſation, for your pleaſure, I had rather renounce of my right, and permit judgement to you, condemne and doe as ye will. Well then, it is to be marked: I ſee here, that ere Pilate had judged the Lord wrangouſly, he had rather haue giuen ouer his right, and the judgement of Capitall crimes: and well had it bene for Pilate, if he had ſtood to this ſentence, and it had bene better that he had giuen ouer his right that the Romanes had, albeit that hee ſhould haue immediatly beene taken and hanged by the Emperour for it. Alas, the miſerable man loſt himſelfe by the malitiouſneſſe of the Iewes: yet albeit he be an Ethnicke, hee is a man of better conſcience than the Jewes were: The light of a naturall conſcience in this Pilate ſurpaſſes all the knowledge of the Iewes: And the Lord at this time did ſet vp that light of Pilates on a Skaffolde, as a lanterne and light, to condemne theſe Iewes that had no cōſcience. The very words of Pilate are a lanterne to let the Iewes ſee, that they had no conſcience: God in his wiſdome, from time to time vſes to doe ſo, Hee will make the Paganes to ſtand vp like light, to ſhame the profeſſours of the Goſpell, whoſe conſcience is as it were burnt vp with a hote irone. Is it not a great ſhame to thee, when the Lord will raiſe him vp to be a light vnto thee, who ſhould bee a light to him: and as in this worlde Hee will make men without God, to ſtand before the Profeſſours in this world to ſhame them: So in the world to come, He will raiſe them vp to ſhame, and to condemne them: Sodome and Gomorrha ſhall riſe vp to the judgement of many in this age who profeſſe Chriſt. Yee ſhall ſee howe Pilate, although he was a very euill man, yet hee pities the Lord Ieſus, & wil not for their importunity cōſent to his death: They ſay, It is not lawfull for vs, to put any man to death: They require not that power to bee giuen them▪ that the Romanes had: for fourtie yeere before the deſtruction of the towne and Temple of Ieruſalem, they loſt all authoritie to judge on Capitall crimes: they ſpake truely; And heere they would appeare to gratifie Pilate,
               
when they would acknowledge him to judge in capitall crimes: but in effect they take the power of a judge from Pilate, when vpon their ſentence onely, without accuſation, triall, or verdict they will haue him to condemne Chriſt: But better had it beene a thouſand times for Pilate, that they had taken that power to themſelues: for they inuolued the man in their guiltineſſe by condemning Chriſt Ieſus. And I ſay more, it had bene better for the Prieſtes, that they had taken the whole judgement vnto themſelues, becauſe that blood of Pilate lies vpon them. This is a true thing; the moc thou draweſt to communicate with thy ſinne, thy damnation ſhall be the greater. It were better for the Princes of this worlde, who are like as many ſlaues to the Pope, the Emperour, the King of Spaine, &c. to renounce all the right they haue of judgement to the Pope, when he and his crue haue condemned on innocent of Hereſie, to execute him; rather than to be the Popes Burrio. It had bene better for Sigiſmundus the Emperour, that hee had reſigned all authoritie to the Pope in burning Iohn Huſſe, and Ierome of La Prage, than breaking promiſe and oath, to haue executed the Popes malice vpon them: it had beene better he had neuer ſeene that councell: and one daye the Princes of the earth ſhall curſe the time, that euer they were executers to the Pope. And it were good for the Pope alſo, that hee inuolued not theſe Princes in the ſame guiltineſſe, for their blood lies vpon him. Would God their eyes could bee opened, to ſee that deceiuer.
            To returne againe: It is not they that muſt condemne the Lord: no, but it muſt be Pilate, hee muſt doe all, that they may bee cleane: and when the Lord is ſlaine, are they cleane? no Brethren, let Pilate condemne Him, and put Him to execution, yet the Prieſtes and the Iewes are greater murtherers of Ieſus Chriſt, than Pilate was: indeed Pilate hath his part in that woefull action, & woe vnto him that euer he medled with it, and now hee findeth that hee hath his part therein. But thoſe High Prieſts, & thoſe Iewes, are the greateſt murtherers of Ieſus Chriſt. Ye know the Papiſtes vſe to ſay when a man is put to death, It is not we yt ſlay the man, it is the ciuill ſword of the ſecular power. Who burnt Iohn Huſſe, and Ierome of Prage, but the Emperour? The Pope is holy, and his handes are cleane, and theſe ſinnes hurt him not which are done by the hands of the Emperour. Who executes them in the Inquiſition? The Kinges, the Popes holy hāds are cleane of all. Excuſe as they will, I pronounce

(and the Lord ſhall ratifie it in that Great day) that they are greater murtherers than the ſecular power. Away with their vaine excuſes. When they haue murthered the man, they will put the fault in the Magiſtrate. Wil God accept ſuch excuſes? In the next verſ. Iohn ſubjoynes wherfore ye 
               Iewes would not take vpon them to judge of ye life or death of Ieſus Chriſt, and ſaies, that they anſwered ſo, that that might be fulfilled, that the Lord ſpake, ſignifying what death he ſhould die. When He was conuerſant with His Diſciples, He fore-told them, that He ſhould die vpon the Croſſe. Now the Iewes will not take vpon them the right of the judging Him, that theſe words might be fulfilled. If the Iewes had taken it vpon them, they would not haue crucified him, becauſe it was not vſuall among the Iewes: they vſed to ſtone a deceiuer or blaſphemer to the death, according to the lawe, as they did Steuen afterwards. This death of the Croſſe was familiar, and vſuall among the Romanes. Then Brethrē, we ſee here, the God of Heauen is the diſpoſer of the whole action of the perſecution & paſſion of Chriſt, what euer be mans part. There is not a word vttered, nor an action done, either by Pilate, or any of the Iewes, which the Lord did not diſpoſe. All that Pilate did, & all that the Iewes did, as that ſpitting and buffeting of Chriſt, were all diſpoſed by the Lord, And this is it that ye reade in that prayer in ye 
               Acts of the Apoſtles, cap. 4. verſ. 28. The princes of the earth are gathered againſt thine anointed, Herode, Pilate, and the Gentiles. Whereto? That they ſhould doe that thing that thine hand and thy councell hath ordained. Neither Herode, Pilate, nor any of the Iewes or Gentiles, did anie thing in this execution, but that vvhich God appointed. The vnderſtanding herof ſerues to this, that there was nothing done to our Redeamer, but that which His father appointed: they were but perſecuters appointed by God, euen as the hang-man: the Iewes, & Pilate & Herod, were like as many hangmen, to execute that decree of God. This would ſeeme a very light word that the Iewes ſay, We haue no power to ſit ouer the life or death of men: yet this is a meane whereby the Lord bringes to paſſe that forme of Curſed death. Brethren, we may ſpeake as lightly of thinges as wee pleaſe, and many times to little purpoſe: but there is nothing that paſſes GODS decree. Looke to that prouidence that GOD hath in His creatures. The LORD diſpoſes the lighteſt wordes that thou ſpeakeſt, & He rules thine hand ſo, that whatſoeuer thou doeſt, He makes al to effectuate & produce that which He hath decerned: the thing that thou wilt ſpeake or doe, it will ſerue for ſome

purpoſe to Him, how beit little for thee. In the meane time, let no man thinke, that when men ſpeake or doe euill, that they ſhall bee the more excuſable: for if there were no more but this, it ſhall make thee vnexcuſable: becauſe in ſpeaking euill, and in doing euill, thou haſt not the LORD before thine eyes. Thou doeſt it not for obedience to His vvill. Take this leſſon: Let euerie man and vvoman take good heede, that they bee vvell exerciſed: and if our GOD employe vs, let vs take good heede, that vvee bee in a good ſeruice, in ſpeaking good, and doing good: Lende not thine heart, thine hande, nor thy tongue to the Deuill in vnrighteouſneſſe: And ſeeing thou canſt not ſleepe from morning to euening, but muſt bee ſpeaking and doing; praye, that the LORD maye employe thee to doe vvell, and to ſpeake vvell; and ſaye, LORD, let mee bee an inſtrument to doe well: And more, in doing vvell, bee not content of the outwarde face of the action: but in doing, vvhether it bee little or much, goe euer to the heart, and ſee the diſpoſition thereof: and looke thou doe it in ſinceritie, hauing regarde to GOD. Thinke it not enough, and if the LORD vvorke a good vvorke by thee as an inſtrument: but looke ſtill, that Hee vvorke in thee, that thou mayeſt finde a good motion in thine heart: For alas, vvhat auaileth the outwarde action, if the heart bee foule, vvhich defileth all? Indeed vvee maye not thinke, that there is anie perfection in vs, or in our actions in this life: but this is the perfect ground that makes that action to ſmell ſweetelie in the ſight of GOD, to vvit, Faith in IESVS CHRIST. If that thou findeſt that thou haſt IESVS CHRIST in thine heart by Faith, albeit vvith great vveakeneſſe in thy ſelfe, yet in CHRIST all the imperfection and vveakeneſſe is hidden: and vvhen the action commeth before the LORD, it is pleaſant and acceptable to Him. All thinges are pleaſant that come to the Father thorowe the Sonne: there is the grounde of all grace and acceptation. Sticke to the LORD IESVS, and haue Him not in thy mouth onelie, as the Hypocrites doe: but let Him alſo bee incloſed in thine heart, and dwell therein: for then thou ſhalt bee acceptable to GOD, through Him: To vvhome, vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirit, bee all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, for euer and euer, vvorlde vvithout ende: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE SIXT LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33 So Pilate entered into the common Hall againe, and called IESVS, and ſaide vnto him, Art thou the King of the Iewes? 
                     
                        verse 34 
                     IESVS anſwered him, Sayeſt thou that of thy ſelfe, or did other tell it thee of mee? 
                        verse 35 
                     Pilate anſwered, Am I a Iew? Thine owne nation, and the high Prieſts, haue deliuered thee vnto mee. What haſt thou done? 
                        verse 36 
                     IESVS anſwered, My Kingdome is not of this world: if my Kingdome were of this world, my ſeruants would ſurely fight, that I ſhould not bee deliuered to the Iewes: but nowe is my Kingdome not from hence. 
                        verse 37 
                     Pilate then ſaide vnto him, Art thou a King then? IESVS anſwered, Thou ſayeſt that I am a King: for this cauſe am I borne, and for this cauſe came I into the world, that I ſhould beare witneſſe vnto the trueth: euerie one that is of the trueth, heareth my voyce.
               
            
            
               THE laſt day (Brethren) we entered into the ſuffering of Chriſt vnder Pontius Pilate, the Romane Gouernour, & Ciuill Iudge in Iudeae for the time. Ieſus is led into the Common Hall to the Houſe of Iuſtice, as ye heard, where Pilate ſate. Now Pilate is not raſh in judging: but before he ſit downe to judge, hee will haue an inditement, and will ſee what things the Iewes haue to lay to the charge of the Lord: He ſaw the accuſers of Him, the Iewes in multitudes: he ſaw no accuſation: therefore he goes out vnto them (becauſe they would not come to him) and asketh, what accuſation haue they againſt Him: hee receiueth little anſwere, or at leaſt, little to the purpoſe: for they anſwere preſumptuouſly, If he had not bene an euill doer, we had not brought him vnto thee. The thing they delate is very generall: it is a ſober

inditement to ſay, He is an euill man, that muſt be qualified, and Pilate thinkes this of no valour, and caſtes it off: at the laſt, after many words, he throwes another accuſatiō out of the Iewes: the accuſation is this, as may be gathered of the Text: he calles Him a king, and king of the Iewes, and an enemie to Caeſar, who would reaue the kingdome from him, and a traitor, and guiltie againſt the Majeſty of Caeſar. The reſt of the Euangeliſts haue this accuſation more plainelie, and at greater length. The Iewes ſay (Luke 23.2,) Wee haue founde this man peruerting the people, and forbidding the people to paye tribute to Caeſar, ſaying, he is Chriſt and king. So howbeit in this Goſpell of Iohn is not mentioned, that the Jewes gaue vp this poinct of accuſatiō, but that Pilate inquires, whether Hee was a king or no? It is manifeſt, that they were delators of Chriſt to Pilate: and Pilate knewe not this of his own head, as the Text following declares. Let vs examine this more deepely: The Iewes that perſecuted Him, they delate Him not before Pilate, for blaſphemie, they had adjudged Him alreadie worthy of death in their owne councell for blaſphemie: but when it cōmeth to the Romane judge, Hee is deleated of treaſon againſt the Emperour. This is a piece of craft, and of the wiſedome of the childrē of this world: they knew the judge to be a profane man, who coūted of religion, but as of a triſle, and knew that hee was deputie to Caeſar, and that hee woulde bee loath to ſee Caeſars hurt: therfore, they applie well their accuſation to the honour of the man, and delates Ieſus, as one who had committed treaſon againſt Caeſar. Yee ſhall then note heere a piece of craft in this their doing. Yet conſider it more deepely: The thing that they deleate to Pilate of Ieſus, was a lie: for Ieſus was ſo farre from that, to accept a kingdome in this world, that when the people aſſembled to make Him a King, Hee conuayed Himſelfe ſecretlie awaye to the Wilderneſſe: (IOHN CHAP. VI.) and vvhereas they ſaye, that Hee forbade to paye tribute vnto Caeſar, that was falſe alſo: for Hee payed tribute vnto Caeſar for Him and Peter, and gaue commaundement, to giue vnto Caeſar, that which was Caeſars. So this poinct of accuſation is nothing elſe, but a calumnie, and a falſe accuſation.
            Yet let vs looke ſomething further heere. The IEWES woulde ſeeme to bee carefull for CAESARS kingdome, and take delite to haue CAESAR to reigne ouer them: but indeed CAESAR was the only man in the world that they loued worſt, and hated moſt: and the thing that mooued them to giue vp this accuſation, vvas

an hatred they had againſt Chriſt. They flatter the Iudge: and as they are craftie in their accuſation, ſo they are flatterers, and all to get the innocent blood ſhed: they haue an euill action in hand, yea, the worſt that euer man had: and ſo they care not by what euill meanes, craft, calumnie, or flatterie they bring their purpoſe to paſſe. If thou once takeſt purpoſe to doe an euill turne, thou wilt not care by what vnlawfull doing thou bringeſt it to paſſe: & to ſpeake the truth, if once a man take an euill action in hand, then he will of neceſſity be compelled to follow out euil meanes: for an euill turne cannot be done but by euill meanes. If a man once ſet his minde to purſue innocent blood, of force he muſt vſe flattery, calumnies, and euill meanes. Therefore, as ye would eſchewe euill doing, eſchewe euill purpoſes: for thou wilt not care to get thy purpoſe, by all vnlawfull things. Now to come to Pilates part: when hee hath gotten this inditemēt, he enters into the Cōmon Hall, & calles on Ieſus, & ſaies, Art thou the king of the Iewes? no doubt, they thought, that they hauing accuſed Him ſo, that Pilate ſhould not haue looked on Him, but incontinent ſhould haue giuen out the doome: for treaſon againſt great Caeſar was no ſmall matter, yet Pilate was ſo farre from that, that he ſpeakes not a rough word to Him, hee ſaies not, What traitor, art thou ſeeking the empire of Caeſar? but modeſtly, Art thou the king of the Iewes? A faire example of modeſty and equity, to be in ſuch a man, a profane Ethnick. Chriſtian Iudges may learne at Pilate, vvhat modeſtie and equitie they ſhould vſe in judgement. This telles vs plainly, that the mind of Pilate vvas voyde of ſuch affectiōs as makes Iudges to peruert judgement: hee ſhewes hee vvas voyde of hatred, hee carried no hatred againſt Chriſt, neither ſought hee His blood: the man is euill abuſed by the High Prieſtes and the Iewes: he doeth all his endeauour to get Ieſus abſolued. Looke this vvhole diſcourſe. So Pilates minde is voyde of theſe affections, of hatred, deſire of reuenge, and ſeeking of innocent blood: for Brethren, vve know it is theſe affections that peruerts judgement. The judge vvho hates and enuies the perſon accuſed, he vvill haue him ſlaine, though he vvere as innocent as Ieſus Chriſt Himſelfe. Therefore, let Iudges learne this leſſon▪ To bee voyde of hatred in judgement: I ſuppoſe the man be the vvickedeſt in the vvorld, yet ſeeke not the deſtruction of the creature, but hate his crime, & looke that thine affections ſlaye not the man, but looke that juſtice ſlaye him: for if thou ſeekeſt the blood of the man, thou ſhalt bee guiltie

of his blood in the latter day. The Lord anſwereth, and He anſwereth not at the firſt time to the point: but firſt, He ſayes to Pilate Aſkeſt thou that of thy ſelfe, Is that crime that thou layeſt to my charge, of thine owne head: Or hath any other tolde it thee: There is the meaning: So ye ſee, before the Lord will anſwere, Hee will vnderſtand who is the inuenter of this accuſation. Well, Brethren, I ſee this through all this Hiſtorie, that the Lord will haue euery mans part knowne in the action: He will know, who is the delator, and who giues out the verdict: He wil haue Herodes part, Pilates part, the Iewes part, Caiaphas part, all their parts diſtinctly knowne, what each man doeth: the Lord hath a great eye to this action, as it were the greateſt in the world: and when all is tried, ye ſhall ſee that the burthen is laide vpon the Iewes, and eſpecially vpon the Clergie, to ſpeake it ſo: Pilate had his part, Herode had his part, and both were guilty of the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, but the ſinne of Pilate is laid vpon the Jewes, & of his blood they are guiltie. So Pilate this day may curſe the Iewes, that euer hee was gouernour of Iudea. Let the Papiſtes ſay what they will, and extenuate their martyring of the Saintes, and ſay, that it was the ciuile ſworde that ſlew them: I affirme in the preſence of God, that the whole blood of the Saints ſhall be required at their hands, & the ſinnes of the Princes, whome they haue abuſed, ſhall be laide to their charge, and the blood of thoſe who periſh, ſhall bee required at their handes, and we ſhall ſee, that the blood of all that haue bene ſlaine from Abel the juſt, ſhall be laide vpon the backe of the Pope, and his Clergie. The Lord ſaue the Princes of the world from them. Another thing I would marke here: Ieſus would haue Pilate to take heede, not to the delation only, but to theſe alſo, who giues it vp: He would haue him to looke to the Iewes, and to their diſpoſition and affection. It is not enough to a Iudge, to looke to the crime, but he muſt looke to the accuſers, and trie their diſpoſition: for if the accuſer ſeeke the mans blood, he will be a calumniator. There is not a Iudge who is ſet on life and death, but he is bound to ſet his eye on the delators. Take heede to Pilates anſwere: when Ieſus hath demanded him thus, then Pilate growes ſomewhat angrie, that Chriſt ſhould haue meaned that that ſentence ſhould haue proceeded from him: So this is a ſure argument, that Pilate very gladly would haue kept his hands free of that blood of Ieſus: for hee ſawe that He was an innocent man, & that it was a falſe accuſation which was laid againſt Him.

               Am I a Iew, ſayes he, Thine owne nation, and the High Prieſtes haue deliuered thee vnto me. What haſt thou done? Firſt, he cleanſes himſelfe, that he was not the author thereof, becauſe he was not a Iew: and therefore knewe not perfectly His doings: Next, he ſheweth who was ye author, to wit, His countrey men, & namely the High Prieſts: for in conſcience hee was perſwaded, both of Chriſts innocencie, and of their calumnie: and therefore cleanſes himſelfe▪ but he was farre intangled in this judgement, that hee could not get himſelfe free: he had done well, if hee had ſaide, I will haue nothing to doe with thee, or if he had deliuered Him from theſe Iewes, by his power, but putting his hands once to judgement, he could not get himſelfe free. Looke what it is, once to beginne to judge the innocent: when the Iudge beginnes to ſatisfie the appetite of wicked men, he can not well quite himſelfe, till he defile himſelfe with the blood of the innocent, albeit hee would abſolue the man, yet his mouth ſhal condemne him. So, for no mans appetite let not a Iudge enter in judgement againſt an innocent man, whome he knowes in his conſcience to bee innocent: And if thou enter in judgement with him, abſolue him, vnder the paine of thy life, or els thou ſhalt be guilty of his blood. This is a corruptiō ſometime of the judgment of SCOTLAND, how the Iudge will ſay, I behooued to doe it, I did it againſt my will, I was compelled to doe it. Well, that ſhall be none excuſe to th
                  •
               e, for if thou doe it, thou ſhalt bee condemned for it: it is no ſmall thing be a Iudge. We haue heard Pilates cleanſing of Chriſt, he is ſo touched in his conſcience, with the innocencie of Ieſus Chriſt, that hee is compelled to cleanſe himſelfe firſt to Ieſus Chriſt, before that Ieſus cleanſes Himſelfe to him. Now followes the anſwere of Chriſt to this calumnie: My Kingdome is not in this world: Thou askeſt at me, if I be a King: I anſwere, My Kingdome is not in this world▪
                he denies not abſolutely that Hee was a King: for the Lord Ieſus is the moſt glorious King that euer was, or ſhall be, but He denies yt He was an earthly king. As the Iewes accuſed Him, He giues a reaſon, If my Kingdome were of this world, my ſeruants would fight for me: he who aſpires to a kingdome▪ he wil fight & all yt may doe for him to the very death: if he had bene ſeeking a kingdome, He would not haue ſtayed Peter frō fighting as He did. Now to examine Chriſts anſwere, Firſt, He denies not yt He is a king, Next, not denying yt He is a King▪ commeth to a diſtinction, I am a King, But what a King? Not an earthly, but a ſpirituall King,

that is true, the Iewes lay to my charge, yt I affect an earthly Kingdome yt is not true. Now, Brethren, this is to be marked, He telleth him indeede, that his Kingdome is not of this world, but He telleth him not where His Kingdome was: Hee ſayes not▪ My Kingdome is in Heauen, Hee ſayes not this, My Kingdome is in the conſcience of men and women in the world: He teaches not Pilate: this. Some would thinke, that He ſhould ſpeake more clearly of this matter to Pilate, but Chriſt entred not into the common Hall to play the Doctour, and to teach: but the Lord Ieſus ſet Himſelfe to play the Prieſt, & to ſuffer patiently, yt part of teaching was ended but knowing that the houre of His ſuffering was come, & that Pontius Pilate ſhould be his judge, He would not ſtay him: And therefore Hee would not enter in doctrine, becauſe the time of teaching was paſt: if Pilate would haue bene taught, he might haue heard Ieſus teach before, but he would not heare Him: He teaches Pilate as much as might make him inexcuſable. Then, Brethren, I ſee, as Chriſt hath a time of teaching, wherein He will teach men, yea, his verie enemies, as He vttereth, when they would haue taken Him▪ & ſought his life: ſo He hath a time of ſilence, when He will not open his mouth, Hee ſpeaketh ſome thing, albeit litle to Pilate, but Hee ſpeakes not ſo much as one word to the High Prieſts, becauſe Hee would haue rather had him ſafe than them, becauſe they were malitious. Chriſt hath not as yet ſhut his mouth in this land, but Hee teaches, not ſparingly nor ſcantly, for to ſpeake it ſo: The raine of the word of God, is powred aboundantly out of Heauen, to water the thirſtie ſoules of men: & if thou ſpendeſt thy time, & wilt not vſe it well, I warne thee, that the day will come, when thou ſhalt not get one word to thy comfort: wilt thou alwayes haue the bleſſed Euangell, and the miniſtrie thereof? No, as Chriſt had but one time, & when that time was paſt, He would teach no more: ſo hath his miniſters: all their teaching ſhall end as His did: I ſay, GOD ſheweth grace on the perſecuters of this Land, when as yet He offereth grace to them: but I denounce, as the Lord liues, if they repent not in time, they ſhall not get ſo much as one good worde to comfort them. Wherefore, let not the opportunitie ſlip, & whilſt it called the day, let vs not harden our hearts. Thus far ye Lord hath purged himſelf, & hath teached Pilate, what a King He was, not an earthly but a ſpirituall King. I will not digreſſe here, to ſpeake of the kingdome of Chriſt, & therefore I come to Pilates anſwere, Art thou a

King? well then, would Pilate ſay, thou denieſt not that thou art a King: he ſhould haue asked what a King He was, & where his kingdome was, that He might haue gotten a part of it: there is ye cōfeſſiō that Ieſus gaue vnder Pontius Pilate, as is ſaide 1. Tim. 6.13. Pilate ſhould haue bin inquiſitiue of theſe things, and followed out that purpoſe about his kingdome: but he breakes off the conference, by an accuſation of Ieſus. An earthly hearted man knowes not things heauenly, & ſo he cannot ſpeake of them, but rather he will ſtay an heauenly purpoſe: Ye ſee earthly hearted men, when one will begin to ſpeake of heauenly things, hath no more pleaſure in them, than Pilate had: begin once to ſpeake of heauenly things to a prophane man, then he cannot keepe purpoſe with thee, but hee will breake off purpoſe, & ſpeake of earthly things, Paul 1. Cor, 2. ſets down the groūd here: The naturall man, ſayes he, knowes, not the things of the Spirit of God: yea, he will wonder what that means, when thou ſpeakeſt of Heauen, yea, he hath no power nor ſpirituall ſenſe: for they are but fooliſhnes to him: the moſt wiſe things of God, are but fooliſhnes to the naturall man, he delites not in them, becauſe he hath not taſted how ſweet the Lord is: So Pilate interrupteth Chriſt, Chriſt anſweres, & He ſayes, Thou ſayeſt that I am a King. In the which anſwere, the Lord denies not that He is a King, but He takes the mouth of Pilate to be witnes that He was a King. Then he lets vs ſee for what cauſe He came into the world: not to be an earthly King, Came I into the world: but that I might beare witneſſe of the trueth: I came not to be an earthly King, as other Kings are, but I came from the throne of a King, & a glorious Kingdome, that I may play the part of a ſeruāt in bearing witnes to the trueth. Ieſus Chriſt, was God, equall with the Father, & thought it no robberie, but He made Himſelfe of no reputation, by taking on the forme of a ſervant, Phil. 2.6. As though he would ſay, I came into the world, & tooke on the fleſh of man to be a ſeruant to my Father, & to be a witnes to the trueth: then He ſubjoynes, leſt that Pilate ſhould thinke that office of litle effect, & that He laboured in vaine, & ſayes, They who are of veritie, to wit, begotten of the word, the immortal ſeed of the word of God: (for by veritie here is meant the word of veritie, as Chap, 17. verſ. 17. preceeding, They heare my word. He draweth ne
                  •
               re vnto Pilate: if thou be ſuch an one as is begotten of the trueth, thou wilt heare my word: albeit Chriſt be ſtayed from ſpeaking▪ & Pilate would haue put Him off. Hee leaues not, but ſpeakes againe to Pilate: He would haue winne Pilate it had

bene poſſible. Albeit we be interrupted when we ſpeake of heauenlie things to profane men and women, wee ought not to leaue off, by the example of Chriſt: but howbeit wee bee interrupted, wee ſhould returne againe, and follow out the thing we haue begun, to ſee if ſome wordes will ſinke in their hearts: or if they will not returne, that they may be vnexcuſable. Speake of Chriſt, and of Heauen, it ſhall neuer be in vaine, but as Paul ſaies, 2. Corin. 2. it ſhall bee a ſweet odour to God, either to their ſaluation or damnation that God may be glorified, either in mercy in winning of them, or in juſtice in their perdition. And therfore, it is good to ſpeake of things Heauē
               lie, the ſoule is nouriſhed therby. A man that redreſſes himſelfe to a kingdome, would euer take delite to ſpeake of it: if thou haſt no pleaſure at no time to ſpeake of Heauenly things, it is a ſure token that thou haſt no part of that kingdom, thou haſt neuer taſted the ſweetnes of it: for they who haue taſted thereof, will haue ſomtimes a delite to ſpeake of thinges Heauenly, and will deſire that ſincere milke of the word, as Peter ſpeakes. So if thou findeſt the worde of life ſweet, why ſhouldſt thou not deſire it continually? for it is that only food by the which ye life of God is nouriſhed within thee here: and one day it ſhall preſent vnto thee ſuch ſatiety of all pleaſure and joy in the face of God, as the heart cannot thinke of now, howbeit thou getteſt but ſcant in this world. Alas, that we ſhould let ſuch a joy paſſe away, for fault of feeling & taſting! What is the veritie, ſaies Pilate? he askes this not with pleaſure, but loathing & diſdaining, & taries no anſwere, but goes his way: His ſtomack loathes Chriſt. Then in Pilate we haue an example of naturall men: if any will ſpeake of things Heauenly vnto them, of Chriſt, and of His benefits, they will ſtay the ſpeach ſo farre as they can: and if thereafter any will inſiſt, and yet ſpeake on, then at the laſt, if thou wilt vrge them, they muſt ſpeake ſomething, but they will ſpeake as Pilate did, lightly and diſdainfully: and when they haue asked, they will leaue off, and will not care for an anſwere but askes for the faſhions cauſe, when they are conſtrained thereunto. We are by nature like to Pilate, either we will not ſpeake one word of things Heauenly, or elſe if wee bee compelled to ſpeake, and wordes bee throwne out of vs, wee will ſpeake with a loathing, and diſdaining of the heart. There vvas neuer any thing in the world that could moue the naturall man more to loathing, than ye word of God, he will heare it with ſuch diſdain, that when one thing is ſaide in word, hee will ſay another in heart,

and he vvill thinke him vvho teaches him the moſt fooliſh man in the vvorld. And he vvho is vviſeſt, if he be not regenerated and renewed, hee ſhall count Chriſt, and things Heauenly, moſt fooliſh. A ſimple bodie is ſooner vvonne, than hee vvho is vviſe in his owne conceit in the vvorld. If thou vvouldeſt be an hearer or ſpeaker of Heauenly things, ſtriue alwayes to get a reformation of thine own corrupt nature, and let thy meditation and prayer be thus, Lord, reforme mine heart, that thy vvord maye bee fruitfull in mee, ſo that both I may heare vvith pleaſure, and alſo that the vvords come not from the teeth forward, but from the deepnes of mine heart, when I ſpeake of Thee, and things Heauenly, that ſo thy vvord may edifie both mee and others. It is a more dangerous thing, to come to heare, if vve be not duely prepared, than to tarrie away: and better not to ſpeake at all, than to ſpeake of thinges Heauenly vvithout the inward ſenſe of the heart. Now the Lord grant vs grace, that in hearing & ſpeaking of things Heauenly, vve may haue this Heauenly diſpoſition in ſome meaſure, for Chriſtes ſake: To vvhom vvith the Father and Holy Spirit, be all Praiſe, Honour and Glory, both now and euermore: Amen.
            
         
         
            THE SEVENTH LECTVRE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 38 
                     Pilate ſaid vnto him, What is trueth? And when he had ſaid that, hee went out againe vnto the Iewes, and ſaid vnto them, I finde in him no cauſe at all. 
                        verse 39 But you haue a custome, that I ſhould deliuer you one looſe at the Paſſeouer: will yee then, that I looſe vnto you the King of the Iewes? 
                     
                        verse 40 Then cryed they all againe, ſaying, Not him, but Barabbas: nowe this Barabbas was a murtherer.
               
            
            
               
               WEE heard theſe dayes paſt (Brethren) of the ſuffering of the Lord, Firſt, in the Garden, Next, vnder Caiaphas, the High Prieſt for the time, and then vvee entered into the thirde part of His ſuffering vnder Pontius Pilate, the Romane gouernour, who abode in Hieruſalem for the time. We heard the accuſatiō that the Hie Prieſts and the Iewes alledge to Pilate the judge, vvhere hee ſate in judgement againſt Ieſus Chriſt: the accuſation was not blaſphemous againſt God, for when the Prieſts thought Him afore in their own judgement ſeat worthy of death, but treaſon againſt the maieſty of Caeſar, he calles himſelf, ſay they, the king of the Iewes, as though Chriſt had come into ye world to be an earthly king, and to take the kingdom ouer Caeſars head. Whē 
               Pilate had poſed Chriſt about this, after one or two anſweres, he findes this accuſation vaine, falſe, & fained. And therefore, Brethren, firſt in this Text we haue read this day, we haue the purgatiō of Ieſus, and yt out of Pilates own mouth: Next, howe hee ſeekes by all meanes to get Him out of the Iewes hands: Thirdly, we haue the part of the Iewes, how they ſeeke maliciouſly the life of the innocent, & preferres Barabbas (a murtherer) vnto Him. As to the firſt part, it is ſaid, that Pilate went out again to the Iewes, out of the Hall, and profeſſed before them all, that hee found no fault in that man worthie of death. Then Pilate, after his inquiſition, finding Ieſus Chriſt, vvho vvas accuſed before him, free of all affectation of Caeſars kingdome, yet finding that Hee denied not but that Hee vvas a king: and that vvas that good vvitneſſing that Chriſt gaue vnder Pontius Pilate, as Paul (1. Tim. 6.13.) ſaies: but Hee vvas no king of this vvorld. Then Pilate thinkes there vvas no crime in Chriſt Ieſus: as concerning the other kingdome, Pilate thought it but an imagination & fantaſie: therefore, thinking that Ieſus made Himſelfe to be a fantaſticke king, and ſought not Caeſars kingdome from him, he vvould not count Him vvorthie of death, but he clenſes Him. Politicke and prophane hearted men in this vvorld, vvho ſmell of nothing, but of the earth, and haue no ſenſe of Heauenlie thinges, if ye will but leaue them the thinges of this worlde, as Caeſars kingdome, the glory, the honour, the riches, and the pleaſures of this worlde, vnto them, they care not what men ſpeake of God, or His kingdome, or of Ieſus Chriſt, or of matters of religion: howbeit that they would ſay, that they would climbe vp to the Heauen,

and raue it from God: they care not for it, as Paul ſayes, The natural man countes heauenly things but fooliſhnes: ſpeake to them of heauenly things, all is but imagination, & Heauen is as dreame to them. Lyſias the chiefe Captaine who was in Jeruſalem after this man, vnder the Gouernour Felix, when Paul was perſecuted in Ieruſalem, ye remember what he wrote to Felix, They accuſe him of trifles, and of queſtions of their law, but I finde no thing in the man worthie either of death, or of bands, Acts 23.29. Wordly men countes it not a crime, or a thing worthie of puniſhment, to derogate from Gods glorie. Well, let men ſpend their time, one day they ſhall feele it to their griefe, that religion is the moſt earneſt & excellent thing that euer was: and they ſhall curſe the time that euer they eſteemed any thing excellent, but religion. Yet this is commendable in Pilate, that he giues ſo faire a teſtimonie of Ieſus, a Ethnicke, who had no knowledge of God, nor ſenſe of the life to come, to ſtand vp in ye face of them, who ſhould haue knowne Ieſus Chriſt, & to purge the innocent, might haue made the High Prieſts & the Iewes aſhamed. Yet, will ye marke this more narrowly, albeit his purgation bee faire, yet hee faileth farre, for in purgation he vttereth a prophane heart, whilſt he purges Him in words, he ſcorneth Him in his heart, & condemneth that Kingdome of His, & that trueth whereof He ſpake, as a fable. Prophane men, who haue no part of ſanctification, whē they ſpeake faireſt, and when they ſeeme to doe beſt, they doe nothing but ſinne: Why? becauſe in the meane time when they ſpeeke faireſt, their heart is full of vanitie, & in their heart they ſcorne God: Albeit thou ſtandeſt vp & ſpeakeſt much for the defence of Chriſt, & ſeemeſt to be angrie at the Iewes, as Pilate did: if in the meane time thine heart beleeue not in that Ieſus, thou art but a ſcorner, & all thy ſpeach ſerueth for no purpoſe to thee, if thou beleeueſt not: therefore in ſpeaking of Heauen, & of religiō, & of Ieſus Chriſt, we ſhould take heede to the heart yt it be ſanctified, & remember, yt while the mouth ſpeakes God ſees the heart, & whē thou ſpeakeſt of that Name of Ieſus Chriſt, let tihne heart grippe into Him, & ſo thy ſpeach ſhalbe edifying and gratious. Now when he hath cleanſed Him by word, thereafter by deede he ſeekes to get him looſe; And it is ſubjoyned that Pilate ſayes: Ye haue a cuſtome that I ſhould deliuer you a priſoner looſe at the Paſſeouer, Will ye that I let looſe the King of the Iewes. The reſt of the Euangeliſts, Matthew 27.12. Marke 15.3. Luke 23. ſetteth downe another accuſation that paſt in order

before this immediatly, which I ſhal touch ſhortly: the High Prieſts ſeeing that they obtained nothing by the firſt accuſation, wherein they accuſe Him of treaſon againſt Caeſar, yet they will not leaue off, but delates to Pilate many things, and heapes calumnie vpon calumnie, and oppreſſes Him with accuſations, as for Ieſus, Hee made none anſwere: Pilate ſeeing this, he vrges Him once & twiſe to ſpeake: He will not ſpeake: Pilate wondereth at his great ſilence: the High Prieſts inſiſt, & at laſt they accuſe Him of falſe doctrine, which He had vttered from Galile vnto Hieruſalem. When Pilate vnderſtood that He was a Galilean, he ſendes Him to Herode, who was Tetrarch of Galile, thinking to gratifie Herode, that beeing at variance, friendſhip ſhould haue beene made: Herode rejoyced at his comming, and hoped that hee ſhould haue ſeene ſome wonders of Him: for both Pilate and Herode thought to make a Iugler of Ieſus: but Herode gets not one word of Him, much leſſe a ſigne or a wonder: then Herode beginnes to mocke Him, & puttes on a garment on Him, in token of deriſion, and ſends Him to Pilate: then Pilate the ſecond time with his owne voyce cleanſes Him. Some will maruell, what moued Ieſus to keepe ſuch a ſilence to them all: and ſome may thinke that this proceeded from ſtubburneneſſe in Ieſus: No, Brethren, in this He was ſo farre from diſobedience either to God, or to the Magiſtrate, that the Lord Ieſus vttered a great obedience to God, and the Magiſtrate, and a wonderfull patience, in that He will not repine in one word, knowing well, that it was the will of his Father in heauen, the houre was come: and therefore the houre comming, He will not helpe Himſelfe in one word: ſo pleaſantly and willingly Hee offereth Himſelfe to the death. This was prophecied of Him in the 53. of Eſay: Hee maketh no more repining, than a ſheepe or a lambe that ſtands before the ſhearer, Hee opened not His mouth, not for ſtubburneſſe, but Hee was patient. Brethren, ſome would maruell of the boldneſſe of the Martyres when they ſuffered (O the boldneſſe that they had in anſwering, euē in the fire) they ſuffered not one word to ſl
                  •
               p, but they anſwered for Gods glorie, and well of them that ſtood by: O! but the Lord kept ſilence. Some would thinke that Ieſus Chriſt in this point was inferiour to the Martyres: but this is the m
                  •
               tter, Chriſt was ſilent, that the Martyres might ſpeake: for except Hee had beene ſilent, they in perſecution ſhould not haue opened their mouthes: He was dumbe, that wee might ſpeake: and was made nothing that wee

might be ſome thing. Now to returne to our text againe: Pilate vſes all meanes to get Ieſus looſe: he vſes the preſent occaſion to that purpoſe, knowing the vſe of the Iewes, hee would haue beene glad to haue had Ieſus ſet at libertie, aboue all the priſoners. To ſpeake ſomewhat of this cuſtome: they had this cuſtome, to get a priſoner ſet at libertie at feſtiuall times, to the honour of their Feaſtes: the Paſſeouer was a Feaſt, in rememberance of that deliuerance out of Egypt, now as they were deliuered, ſo they would haue a priſoner deliuered, but therewith they diſhonoured God: is that to honour God, to breake His commandement? this cuſtome was not from the beginning, but entred in, when the Romane Emperour entred in, and this manner of doing wanted not a faire pretence, it had a pretence of clemencie & mercie of the Gouernour: we know this, there is nothing wherein a Prince reſembleth God, more, than in clemencie: but it is a ſin to let a wicked man eſcape, or that the Emperour ſhould let him goe: for Gods Lawe ſayes, Deut 11.12.13. Thine eye ſhal not ſpare the murtherer, neither looke vpō him with a pittifull eye. Will ye ſee what things theſe men haue for them, who thinke, that Princes may giue men that are conuict of Capital crimes their liues. Some will ſay, hath not a free Prince licence to giue him his life, albeit the Law of God ſay, The murtherer ſhall die the death: well, I ſay, and it is the trueth, that were as much, as to giue him an abſolute power, but all the worlde ſhall not giue him ſuch a power, hee may well vſurpe it: but not an Angell in Heauen hath abſolute power ouer a begger, to put him to death, and to keepe him aliue at his pleaſure: much leſſe a mortall man: only the great Creator (whoſe will is the rule of all righteouſneſſe) hath this power ouer his creature. It is true indeed, a Prince ſhould be loth to put out that life yt God hath put in, & ſhould beware to judge raſhly in Capitall crimes: It is no ſmall matter, to make a crime Capitall, but if the crime bee Capitall and deadly, the Prince hath no power to holde his hand abacke from execution, and to forgiue. Indeede for weightie and great conſiderations a Prince may mitigate the puniſhment, but to ſay, he may let the man goe free, hee hath no power: but yet they will inſiſt further and ſay, Is not this one of the judiciall lawes, that was giuen to the Jewes, then what haue we to doe with it. I anſwere, theſe lawes, ſeeing the Iewes and their Commonwealth, and lawes politicke, are abrogate, in ſo far as they concerned that people, wee haue nothing adoe with them,

they are aboliſhed, but for aſmuch as they are grounded vpon nature, and naturall law, we haue adoe with them: as for this law, it is naturall. Ye know that naturall men, Ethnickes, who had neuer the law of the Iewes, they executed the murtherer: but yet they inſiſt, & they will bring in the example of good kings, who forgaue Capitall crimes committed againſt the very vniuerſall and naturall law: and namely of Dauid: forgaue he not Joab for ſlaying of Abner and Amaſa? and Amnon for committing inceſt: and againe, forgaue he not Abſolom for ſlaying of Amnon his brother: but I anſwere: We are bound to liue by Gods lawes, & not by examples: as for Dauid if hee had power to haue puniſhed thoſe men, hee failed: but it lay not in the handes of Dauid: ſayes hee not of Ioab, the ſonnes of Seruia, are too ſtrong for me, 2. Sam. 3.39. Ye know what he left in his Teſtament to Salomon concerning Joab? 1 Kings 1. Ioab was a great man, if Dauid might haue puniſhed, he failed: ſinne cannot be excuſed, albeit he puniſhed it not. Some will ſay further, Should not, and ought not each priuate man forgiue a priuate offence: is not that Gods will and commandement? Hereupon they would conclude, and make it to follow: A Prince may forgiue a wicked man for Capitall crimes: but I ſay and affirme, that there is a great difference betweene a priuate man and a King: When a King forgiues a Capitall crime, hee forgiues Gods right, hee is free in another mans right: indeede there is a difference betweene theſe crimes that are Capitall, and the crimes that in their owne nature are not Capitall, but by the lawes of Princes are made Capitall: for vpon juſt conſiderations the Prince hath power to diſpenſe with them: as for Exāple, It was not deadly of ye own nature to Simei, to go out of the Portes of Ieruſalem, but becauſe Salomon forbade it, it became deadly. Like as it is in the handes of Princes, to make & to change ſuch ſpecial lawes: ſo it lyes in his hands to forgiue ſuch a man, trāſgreſſing them vpon weightie and great conſiderations. So to returne, theſe crimes that are Capitall by naturall law, a Prince hath no power to remit them, albeit hee were ruler of all the world, hee derogates to Gods glorie: and ſecondly, if there were no more to let vs ſee, that God hath not giuen that power to forgiue Capitall crimes, againſt Gods Lawe and nature, the Iudgements of God, which ceazed on ſuch men and their poſteritie, were ſufficient to ſhevv it: for if thou forgiueſt a thiefe, he vvould hang thee on the ſame gallovves. That ſad example of the Iudgement of God

vpon Saul, who againſt Gods expreſſe commandement, ſpared Agag king of Amaleck, might terrifie other Princes to remit ſuch perſons. Some will come forth, and his remiſſion to his abhominable murther and crimes in his boſome, vpon whome the ſunne is not worthie to ſhine: God forgiue them, who giues or purchaſes ſuch remiſſions: the King of Heauen will not haue any to vſurpe His authoritie.
            Now, let vs returne, and conſider Pilates part: Pilate is carefull to get Ieſus the innocent let looſe, and at libertie: and herein hee is worthie of ſome praiſe. They who ſhould haue ſaued Him, are perſecuting Him: and yet marke well, and ye ſhall ſee, that Pilate in thus doing and ſpeaking ſinneth. When he is of purpoſe to ſet Him free and at libertie: he cares not, albeit Ieſus was moſt innocent, that He were counted nocent and guiltie: he cares not, although Hee paſſe free as one worthie of death, and hee compares Him with Barabbas: and when hee doth the beſt hee can, he doth but euill. Marke the dutie of Iudges, It is not enough to ſeeke to ſet the innocent free and at libertie only: No, but alſo thou muſt ſee that the innocent be ſet free as an innocent man, albeit that all the world ſhould ſpeake againſt it. The will of that great Iudge is, that not onely the innocent ſhould eſcape with their life, but alſo that they eſcape as innocent, that their innocencie may ſerue to the glorie of God: thou ſuppreſſes the glory of that great Iudge, if thou clea
                  •
               ſeſt him not as an innocent: it were better for an innocent to die the death innocently, than to take on him a crime which he hath not done, or to take a remiſſion of a crime whereof he is not guiltie. To come to the part of the Iewes, Pilate goes farre beyond them, albeit hee doeth euill▪ yet they doe ten times worſe: Alas, the judgement of Pilate in that day ſhall be nothing to the judgement of the malitious Iewes: in doing of this, that he compares Him with Barabbas, & albeit hee compares Him with him, yet he countes Him an innocent: but he compares Him with Barabbas by a policie, to pleaſure the Iewes: they wil not only compare Him with Barabbas, but will preferre Barabbas to Him: Pilate compares, they preferre. Brethren, an vngodly man will hate more extreamelie vertue, and grace in a good man▪ than vice in an euill man: as concerning the wicked man, becauſe he is wicked himſelfe, he will not hate ſinne as it is ſinne: the pleaſure that a wicked man hath, is to ſee the GOD of heauen diſpleaſed, that is his meat,

that is his drinke: if hee doe hate vice, it is not for the vices ſake, but becauſe the vice troubles him, becauſe of ſome skathe and ſhame that followes it, and becauſe he vvould haue an eaſie life.
            But to come to the grounde: An vngodly man hates vertue, becauſe it is vertue, and becauſe godlineſſe is of GOD, hee hates it; and hee hates a godly man, becauſe hee beares the image of GOD: the extreamitie of his hatred is againſt GOD: hee vvill rather ſuffer a vvicked man, than an innocent or godly man: but hee neuer hates v
                  •
               ce, becauſe it is vice. The Pope vvill ſuffer Sodomites to dwell beſide him, and Bordels: but hee cannot heare of a godly man, but vvill perſecute him vvho vvill profeſſe to teach Chriſt truely: yea, hee vvill purſue him to the death. There is greater hatred in the heart of an obſtinate Papiſt againſt a Chriſtian, than in ye heart of a Turke: & the greateſt hatred, is euer vnder cloke of religion. So there is not one that hates a godly man ſo greatly, as they who clokes all thinges vnder the name of the Church: The LORD ſaue vs from them. I ſay, I had rather fall into the hands of a Turke, than into the handes of a Papiſt.
            What is CHRISTES part? there is nothing but ſhame for Him: Where was there euer ſuch an ignominie as this? Barabbas is preferred vnto that juſt one: (if thou be an innocent man, and art counted vvorſe than the vvicked, it is a great ſhame:) and then not onely is hee preferred vnto Him, but in hanging vpon the Croſſe, Hee is put betweene two thieues, to teſtifie, that they counted Him more vvorthie of death, than they vvere. And then, beſides the ſuffering of that paine, He ſuffered paine in that they blaſphemed Him, and helde Him in deriſion. What euer vvas the part of the Iewes, and of Pilate, the Father of IESVS CHRIST hath His part alſo: there was not a vvorde ſpoken, but that vvhich He directed: the Iewes ſpake not this, but by the Lords diſpoſition, who ruled all this action: they did nothing, (as yee may reade, Acts 4.28.) but that vvhich Hee had appointed from all eternitie. Nowe, His diſpenſation was for thy vveale: the diſpenſation of His ſhame was for thine honour, and, if Hee had not died in this ignominie, thou hadſt died ignominious euerlaſtingly, and He had not beene a perfect Redeamer, if Hee had not ſuffered this: and as the Lord diſpenſed all this, how euer it bee that they did vnjuſtlie, yet it is all turned to our weale. See the wonderfull juſt dealing of GOD, when they are doing vnjuſtly, He burthens His Sonne, with

no burthen either in bodie or ſoule, but that which our ſinne (that IESVS CHRIST did beare vpon His backe) procured and deſerued. Hee vvas moſte innocent in Himſelfe, and altogether without ſinne, but our ſinnes vvere laide vpon His backe: for Hee who knewe no ſinne, was made ſinne for vs, as the Apoſtle ſaies, 2. Cor. 5.21. Looke to theſe ſinnes that Chriſt had vpon Him: they were a thouſand times greater than the ſinnes of Barabbas: for Hee bare vpon Him the ſinnes of all the world, many murthers, many adulteries, the LORD IESVS bare them all. So there is nothing that falles to IESVS CHRIST, but that which wee procured vnto Him. What euer CHRIST ſuſtained, the reproches, ſhame, and blaſphemies, the paine, and extreamitie of paine in ſoule and bodie, it is thy ſinne that procured all this. Brethren, marke this well: When men either heare or reade this Hiſtorie, they turne them to the Iewes, and vvill defie the Prieſtes, and the Phariſes, and Pilate, and in the meane time they looke not to themſelues: but looke not to others, but to thine owne ſelfe, for it is thy ſinne alſo that pearced Him thorow: and, if thou wouldeſt weepe, weepe for thine owne ſinne. I meane not this, that any man ſhould thinke to take his ſinnes away from Chriſt, and lay them vpon his owne backe: for there is no bodie that is able to beare ſo much as an euill thought: then let thy ſinnes lie vpon Chriſt, for Hee is able to beare them all: And as thou layeſt thy ſinnes vpon Him, ſeeke to bee cladde with His righteouſneſſe: and as Hee is made ſinne for thee, looke that thou be made righteous before God in Him, for if thou be clothed with that euerlaſting righteouſneſſe in that Great daye, thou ſhalt bee counted juſt, and get that life of IESVS. Wherefore, to ende heere, let vs ſo abhorre the malice, indignitie, and crueltie of the Iewes againſt CHRIST the innocent, that vpon the other part vvee maye vvith our vvhole heart reuerence and embrace that moſte juſt diſpenſation of GOD vpon Him as guiltie in vs, and for our cauſe: and let vs giue Him thankes and praiſe continuallie, becauſe Hee hath giuen His onelie Sonne for vs, and Hee hath made Him ſinne for vs, and Hee hath made Him ſubject to all ſhame, ignominie, dolour, and paine, both of bodie and ſoule, for our ſakes. To Him, therefore, with the Father, and the Holie Spirit, bee all Praiſe, Honour, Power, and Glorie for euer and euer: Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     THEN Pilate tooke IESVS, and ſcourged him. 
                        verse 2 And the Souldiers platted a Crowne of Thornes, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple garment, 
                        verse 3 And ſaid, Haile King of the Iewes. And they ſmote him with their roddes. 
                        verse 4 Then Pilate went foorth againe, and ſaid vnto them, Beholde, I bring him foorth to you, that yee may know, that I find no fault in him at all. 
                        verse 5 Then came IESVS foorth, wearing a Crowne of Thornes, and a purple garment. And Pilate ſaid vnto them, Beholde the man. 
                        verse 6 Then when the high Prieſtes and officers ſawe him, they cryed, ſaying, Crucifie him, crucifie him. Pilate ſaide vnto them, Take yee him, and crucifie him: for I finde no fault in him.
               
            
            
               NOwe Brethren, wee inſiſt further in the ſuffering of CHRIST, vnder Pontius Pilate, the Romane Gouernour, who abode in Hieruſalem. Wee haue hearde of two accuſations that were laid againſt the innocent Ieſus Chriſt: The firſt was, that Hee called Himſelfe The king of the Iewes, & ſo was guilty of treaſon againſt Caeſar. Yee hearde the effect of this accuſation to bee nothing: and therefore hee goes foorth, and with his voyce before them all, purgeth the innocent. In the next accuſation, there were many things laide to His charge: and this chiefely, that He had corrupted the whole Countrey, from Galilee to Hieruſalem with falſe doctrine. Nowe when this was tryed, Pilate yet holdes Him innocent, in teſtifying His innocencie: and therefore, hee ſeekes yet to gette Him ſet at libertie out of the handes of the Iewes: and conſidering that the Iewes at the Paſſeouer were accuſtomed to ſeeke the liberty of a

priſoner, who was guiltie of a capitall crime, hee vſes this oportunitie, and askes of them vvhether they vvould haue IESVS or Barabbas ſet at libertie? Wee hearde the anſwere to this propoſition, to vvit, they crie, they vvill not haue Him deliuered, but Barabbas. Nowe the other Euangeliſtes doe inſiſt more largelie in this purpoſe, and vvrite more of it: and they report, that Pilate, when hee hearde this worde, hee asketh, What ſhall I doe with Ieſus? They crie all with one voyce, Crucifie him. Pilate the third time hearing this, hee cleanſes the innocent. Yet they report more, that whileſt Pilate vvas ſitting in judgement, there commeth a meſſenger from his vvife, and ſaies, Haue nothing adoe with this innocent man: Why? for I haue beene troubled for Him in my ſleepe. This is an aduertiſement ſharpe enough vnto him, and the LORD vvanted not His owne vvorke therein: for the LORD brought this to paſſe, partlie in reſpect of IESVS CHRIST, that His innocencie might clearelie appeare before the vvorlde, and that Hee might receaue a teſtimonie of His innocencie from them vvho had little regarde vnto it: for, had not Ieſus beene innocent, vvee had beene little the better of Him, for Hee coulde not haue juſtified vs: for, ere our faith reſt on Him, vvee muſt haue the full aſſurance of His innocencie: partly in reſpect of Pilate, that hee ſhould be conuerted, or made vnexcuſable, if hee would goe forward. The working of the Lord is wonderfull in the reprobate: for ere that decree of their reprobation bee put in execution, the Lord aſſaies to bring them to repentance. Rom. 9.22. He ſuffers with a long ſuffering the veſſels of wrath. Rom. 2.4. Hee inuites the reprobate to repentance: Yea, ere Hee put them in Hell, Hee will inuite them to Heauen: There is not a reprobate that periſhes in the juſtice of God, but ere Hee vtter His juſtice towards them, Hee will vtter His mercie in warning them to repent. We come, Brethren, to our Text: He followes out the ſuffering in theſe words which we haue read: He telles vs how earneſtly Pilate ſeekes the libertie of Ieſus: and he lets vs ſee the meanes that Pilate vſes to ſet Ieſus at libertie: firſt, he takes Him out, and ſcourges Him, & puts Him out to be mocked; thinking that this would ſatisfie the Iewes; and then the fourth time, hee profeſſes His innocencie: Then he bringes Him out to them with a crowne of thornes and a purple garment, thinking that he ſhould haue contented and moued the Iewes to pittie, but all was in vaine. It is ſaid, Pilate tooke IESVS, and ſcourged him, and not content with this, commanded

His ſouldiers to put a crowne of thornes vpon His head, and a purple garment on Him, to ſcorne the Kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt: and then ſmiteth Him with roddes. Ye ſee, the Lord ſuffers mocking, & paine in bodie: the Lord of glorie is put to ignominie: conſider well & let it neuer goe out of thy minde, that the Lord of Glorie ſuffered ſuch ſhame for thy cauſe: But to examine this fact of Pilates, this is commendable, that he ſpeakes ſo, to get the innocent Ieſus ſet at libertie, but in the meane that he vſeth, he failes very farre: Yee ſhall marke this, in prophane and vngodly men, that one of theſe two things falles out, if not both: Either they ſhall not take in hand a good and godly purpoſe, or els, if any time it falles out, that they enterpriſe any good deede, that they ſhall chuſe vngodly & vnlawfull meanes to affectuate it, they ſhall doe euill, that good may come of it. Caſt your eyes vpon this Land, & ye ſhall ſee this to be true: Yet let vs ſearch vp the ground of this proceeding of Pilate: It cannot bee denied, but that he hath a good purpoſe and deed in hand: but it is as true againe, that as he hath a good deed in hand: hee lookes not vpon it with an vpright eye, hee hath not God, nor his Glorie before his eyes: for his conſcience rather than any regard to Gods Glorie, or His will mooued him to purpoſe to looſe Him. Thou muſt not propone only to doe good, but alſo thou muſt propone it, for Gods cauſe, and for His glorie, Pilate hauing no reſpect to God, goes aſtray, and out of the way. This is certaine, Brethren, if the purpoſe were neuer ſo good and if thou haue not the Glorie of God before thine eyes, thou ſhalt wauer: but by the contrarie, that man that hath reſpect vnto the Lord, he ſhall not readily wauer, but the Glorie of God ſhall glance before him as a lanterne into his way, vntill hee proſecute that deede. Bleſſed is he that hath the Glorie of God before him: there is no light to bring vs thorow this thornie way, but only the Glory of our God. Next, I ſee in this fact, in following out the means, that hee would haue had the innocent looſed, but ſo, that it were with contentment of the Iewes, hee would pleaſe all parties,, and for their pleaſure, when hee would cleanſe the innocent, hee puniſhes Him as a nocent: ſeeing then that he depended vpon the appetite of vngodlie men, it could not bee poſſible, that hee could bring a good action to paſſe: yea, whomſoeuer dependes vpon the luſt of malitious men, can neuer affectuate any good thing: or if they doe any thing, they doe it by euill meanes, and ſo faile

greatly: let vs therefore ay ſtudie to pleaſe God, let vs, if we ſhould die in the meane time, doe that which is pleaſant vnto God, ſetting aſide the pleaſure of men. Marke Pilates forme of doing, hee vſeth worſe & worſe meanes: The firſt meane is euill, in comparing Ieſus with Barabbas the wicked man, the murtherer: yet he thought by that meanes to ſet Ieſus at libertie, but now he ſcourges Him: this is a higher degree of euill, and now he failes further: beginne once to doe againſt conſcience, for pleaſuring of wicked men, as Pilate doeth all this againſt conſcience: if thou hadſt neuer ſo good & ſo faire a pretence, thou ſhalt be compelled by proceſſe of time, to doe a greater euill, albeit thou beganneſt with leſſe euill, & thou ſhalt not ſpeed at laſt: It is true, Pilate would doe a leſſe euill to get a greater Good done: but when he hath once or twiſe, againſt his conſcience moſt vnworthely abuſed the Lord Ieſus: thou ſhalt ſee the end of it, he preuailed not. Thus for Pilates part: The men of warre vnder him, haue their part of this action, they platte a crowne of thornes, and put it on His head to his ſcorne, and to his paine, and they clothe Him with a purple garment, & ſmites Him with their roddes, and then they goe before Him, and ſay, Haile King of the Iewes, and this they did at the commandement of Pilate: Lamentable is the eſtate of the ſubjects, when the Prince is vngodly, and it is a ſore thing for the officers, when the Iudge is vnrighteous, yea, all the inferiours, euen to the Hangman, may curſe the wicked Iudge. This commandement excuſes not the ſouldiers: they lend their hands the members of their bodie, to be weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe: and this ſheweth that there was ſome malice in their heartes: there is none that lendeth the members of their bodie to bee weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe, but they will bee condemned: thou mayeſt not ſay, It was my maſters will & commandement, & therefore I behooued to doe it: the commandement of thy maſter will not excuſe thee for no mans pleaſure doe euill, for his commandement ſhall be none excuſe to thee at that great day: ye ſhal find that theſe ſouldiers were worſe inclined than Pilat was: this falles out, if the maſter command them to doe one euill deed, oftentimes the ſeruants will doe two: they deſire but one word, or one winke to ſet all the countrey in a fire. Looke the Acts of the Apoſtles, Chap. 4. verſ. 27, Euery man in particular who had part in this worke are counted: Herode firſt, and next Pilate: leaueth hee the part of the men of warre: he calleth them the Gentiles, & next

the people of Iſrael. This witneſſes that the eye of the Lord was on them that did this fact, and not one of them all ſhall be excuſed: and if it were but a common ſouldier that is in an euill fact, he ſhal die at that day. Vaine therefore is the opinion of ſillie ignorant bodies, who thinke that the commandement and will of their maſter will excuſe them, for they ſhall die for their owne ſinnes, but their blood ſhall be required at the hands of their maſters. Chriſt hath his part, Pilate is a worker of euill, and the men of warre alſo. Now let vs conſider the part of Ieſus the innocent. He is the ſufferer, He ſuffers dolours and ſhame, and many vnworthie things, & that by the moſt juſt diſpenſatiō of God: & beeing our ſuretie, he bare our ſinnes and iniquities: therefore the wrath of God ceaſed vpon Him moſt vehemently. There is not a deed done here, or a word ſpoken, but the Lord decreed it from all eternitie, and diſpenſeth it in time, and on his part all was juſt, becauſe Ieſus had taken on Him the ſinnes of the Lord, therefore this paine and ſhame followes that burthen. See the weight of the wrath of God, that lyes on Him who had no ſinne in Himſelfe: and further, the wrath of God, lyeth not on a common man, but on His only begotten Sonne our cautioner. The Apoſtle to the Hebrewes Chap, 5. verſe 9, ſayes, Although Hee was the onely begotten Sonne of God, yet He learned obndience through His ſuffering, that is, He learned, what, and how good a thing obedience was, and what wrath & damnation followes diſobedience: And there is not one of the Sonnes of God, but by afflictions they learne the ſame thing that the firſt begotten learned, how good a thing it is not to ſinne: It is good therefore that God humble vs, that we may ſay, Nowe I learne what is wrath, and how good a thing it is to ſerue God, and to beſtow my life for Him: & the godly when they feele a portion of this wrath, they will take vp a better courſe, and will ſay, What if this God would powre on His whole wrath, on mee, it is no childrens play to play with God, & make a paſtime of ſin, and then cry peace, that wrath ſhall come vpon thee like a mountaine, and then thou ſhalt cry, Curſed bee the time that I haue diſobeyed God, for now I ſhall feele that infinite wrath. If yee will marke the Text well, ye will ſee in the whole paſſion of Chriſt, that the Lord endeuoures to manifeſt two thinges, and thinges contrarie the one to the other by appearance. By appearance Hee will haue Him appeare before the worlde the moſt innocent man, and

the moſt guiltie man in the world: How can theſe two ſtand? The Lord thus wiſe will haue Chriſt to appeare, in Himſelfe the moſt innocent man, and in vs the moſt guilty man in the world. Hereupon it commeth to paſſe, that Pilate abſolued Him as innocent, & yet puniſhes Him as nocent: for Ieſus Chriſt bare the ſinnes of the whole faithfull: and it is for this purpoſe, that we ſeeing theſe two things in Him, that we ſhould account Him a meet Mediatour for vs, and our faith ſhould reſt on Him: Come to Experience, Except I vnderſtand that my Redeemer bee innocent in Himſelfe, I will neuer beleeue, that Hee can bee able to beare my ſinne, and to redeeme mee: for Hee could not bee able to beare his owne ſinne, much leſſe another mans ſinne, except He were innocent, Heb. 7.26: ſuch a Prieſt it behooued vs to haue, which is holy, harmeleſſe, vndefiled, and ſeparated from ſinners: Next, except I vnderſtand that my ſinnes are taken off my backe, and laid on His backe, and that He hath taken my guiltineſſe on Him, the conſideration of His innocencie will neuer mooue mee to account Him my Redeemer: for without this, what is His innocencie to mee. But when thine heart is perſwaded of theſe two things, ye would maruell what great and marueilous effects will follow in the heart of a faithfull man: when I looke to His innocencie, I will bee moued with commiſeration towards Him, I will pitie Him: As the women followed Him out of Ieruſalem weeping and pitying His innocencie, Luke 23.17, and when I ſee, that Hee beeing moſt innocent in Himſelfe, is become guiltie for mee: then ariſes in mine heart a dolour and diſpleaſure for that, that I ſhould be the cauſe that He ſuffered innocently, I am moued for that, that I ſhould haue pierced the Lord through with my ſinnes: I will bee moued with ſadneſſe, as it is ſaide in the firſt Chapter of the Reuelation, and ſeuenth verſe. They ſhall waile before Him whome they pierced thorow: Then againe, when I finde my ſelfe disburthened of my ſinne and guiltineſſe through His guiltineſſe, mine heart will be filled with a joy vnſpeakable: it is a wonder what a joy will bee mingled with the diſpleaſure, that the world would wonder that theſe contrarie effectes ſhould bee in the heart of a Chriſtian, this is the effect of repentance, if any man hath felt it: Againe, when I ſee, that Hee hath loued mee, mine heart will melt with loue to Him againe, as Paul ſayes in the 2, Epiſtle to the Corinthians, 5.14, 15. The loue of Chriſt conſtraines me, & binds vp faſt my ſenſes, becauſe that

once we know that we were dead, and He hath died for vs: And, he to whome much is forgiuen, loueth much. (LVKE CHAP. VII. VERS. XLVII.)
            Brethren, yee that haue hearde of the Hiſtorie of that notable Martyr IOHN HVSSE, who was burnt for the loue of CHRIST: nowe when hee was brought foorth to bee burnt quicke, then his executers put a paper vpon his head, whereupon were pictured three Deuils, with this title ſet ouer their heads, HAERESIARCHA: the which when hee ſawe, hee ſaide, My LORD IESVS CHRIST for my ſake did weare a Crowne of thornes; why ſhould not I therefore for His ſake, weare this light crowne, bee it neuer ſo ignominious? Suffer on: thou ſhalt not ſuffer the extreamity: thou who wilt ſuffer paine or ſhame for Him, thou ſhalt bee partaker of glorie with Him.
            Nowe I goe to the reſt of the meanes that Pilate vſes. Pilate, when this is done, hee goeth into the Common Hall, and commeth out himſelfe, and the fourth time hee witneſſeth of the innocencie of IESVS, that hee could finde no fault in Him. I ſee this, and it appeares well by the teſtimonie that hee giues to Ieſus, that all that Pilate did to Ieſus, was againſt conſcience: for woulde hee immediatlie after hee had ſcourged Him, haue cryed out to cleanſe Him, if his conſcience had not tolde him that Hee was juſt? Hee did it to a good end to deliuer Him from death. This is the doing of vngodlie men, who are not drawne out of the puddle of nature: they will doe a ſmaller euill, for a greater good, as they thinke againſt conſcience: they will not ſtart at a ſtraye; but beholde the ende; it may bee that a good thing may followe thereupon: yet thou ſhalt haue no rewarde for it. Beware to ſinne againſt conſcience, and vvhen thou goeſt about to doe any thing that thy conſcience forbiddeth thee, leaue it off, and let it bee, or elſe thou ſhalt goe forwarde, till thou crucifie Chriſt, and make ſhipwracke of Faith: Therefore, doe nothing againſt conſcience, yea, albeit it were a good deede.
            The thirde thing: hee cauſed IESVS to bee brought foorth before the people, with a Crowne of Thornes, and a purple Garment, to ſee if the Jewes woulde pittie Him: To ſee an innocent man ſo handeled, it would haue mooued any man to pittie: then hee ſaies, Beholde the man, I haue done enough vnto Him, yee may bee ſatisfied nowe. I ſee heere, that euen during the time that hee ſawe Ieſus miſuſed ſo ſharply, this doing ſhewes that hee was mooued with ſome pittie

of the innocent: for his conſcience tolde him, that Hee was innocent: and not only did hee this againſt conſcience, but euen againſt naturall pittie: and yet hee went forwardes to examination. If a man haue but a naturall pittie, nature, and all the power therein will neuer hinder him to doe a miſchiefe.
            Then Brethren, let vs alwayes ſeeke night and daye, to bee raiſed vp aboue nature, for if wee haue but the power of nature to holde vs from ſinne, wee and our nature both will goe to Hell. Albeit that nature mooue vs to pittie men, yet if there bee no more but nature, the malice of the heart ſmoothers it, and ouercomes it: onely, the Spirit of GOD is able to fight and preuaile againſt nature. Otherwiſe, albeit the light of nature were neuer ſo great, the worſe ſhall preuaile. Therefore, as yee woulde bee ſaued from euill, ſtriue to get the Spirit of grace, and ſaye, Lord, giue m
                  •
               e Thy Spirit, that by his power I may ſtriue againſt the corruption of nature. This ſhoulde bee our exerciſe, if wee woulde bee partakers of Heauen: for neuer a ſoule ſhall ſee Heauen by nature. Looke what effect this workes in the heartes of the Iewes: nothing can ſatisfie them but the blood of the innocent: they cryed, Crucifie him, crucifie him. When men are giuen ouer to crueltie, nothing will ſatisfie them but the blood of the innocent. Pilate by all meanes aſſayed to ſet Ieſus the innocent at libertie, yet all in vaine: for nothing will ſatisfie them, becauſe malice poſſeſſes their heartes. Indeede it is true, that by the eternall decree of God it behooued Chriſt to die: but in the meane time they are vnexcuſable: for they did all of malice. If yee will compare them with Pilate, they did worſe than hee: hee is to bee preferred to them a thouſand degrees: they had the light of the worde of God to haue inſtructed them, which Pilate wanted: when Pilate got ſundrie warninges, and laſt a ſharpe warning from his wife, he in a manner gainſtood them not, but he had a conſcience of the innocencie of Chriſt, and he had a naturall pittie in his heart, and faine would haue deliuered Him, yea, foure ſeuerall times hee preached to the Iewes, that Chriſt was innocent. But as for the Iewes, for as oft as they are tolde of Chriſtes innocencie, yet their conſcience is not wakened, neither can they bee moued ſo much as to a naturall pitie. So if ye ſpeake of want of conſcience, of induration, there is no compariſon betwixt Pilate and the Iewes. Thinke not that there is anie man in the worlde that

vvill haue leſſe pittie in their heartes, than they vvho are lyers againſt the Trueth, & than they that ſay they are Church-men, Holie men, and Defenders of the Trueth: And I ſaye, that the Pope makes leſſe conſcience of euill, than the Turke: And it vvere better for an innocent perſon to fall into the handes of a Turke, than into the handes of the Pope, and thoſe ſillie ſoules that lye in the Holie houſe would exchaunge the one with the other. The judgement of GOD is lying vpon theſe doers, on HERODE, on PILATE, on the High Prieſtes, and vpon the IEWES: yet PILATE gettes this grace, that hee hath ſome conſcience, and it is holden waking, and ſounding in his eare, and ſtaying him from that wicked action; and then Pilate gettes a pittifull heart. But come to them, to wit, the Iewes and High Prieſtes, the judgement of GOD lyes ſo vpon them, that they proceede from degree to degree to fearefull induration, till the action bee finiſhed, and the heartes of them are locked vp from all pitie, and their conſciences are blotted awaye; ſo heauie is the judgement that lies vpon the Iewes. Therefore, thinke not that wee are free from judgement, when wee are ſitting in eaſe, eating, and drinking, in wealth, honour, and glorie: for I affirme, that the heauieſt judgement that euer GOD layes vpon anie creature, is a ſenſeleſſeneſſe: For, when as a man or a woman is doing euill, and hath no ſenſe of that their evill doing; O! that is the moſte miſerable eſtate that can bee: for it is a ſure fore-runner of eternall damnation. No outwarde croſſe, neither ſickneſſe nor pouertie, is ſo ſure a token of GODS judgement, as to bee rocked vp in ſecuritie, and to bee lying ſleeping in ſinne. Senſeleſſeneſſe is a ſure token of a ſore judgement which ſhall ouertake thee, ſo that thou ſhalt not bee able to open thy mouth, to ſaye, GOD helpe mee: and therefore, beware of ſenſeleſneſſe. Now the LORD holde our conſciences waking, although it ſhould trouble vs, that we may ceaſe from going forwardes in ſinne, for CHRISTES ſake, To whome bee all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, for euermore:
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE NINTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 The Iewes anſwered him, Wee haue a Lawe, and by our Lawe he ought to die, becauſe hee made himſelfe the Sonne of GOD. 
                        verse 8 When Pilate then heard that word, hee was the more afraid, 
                        verse 9 And went againe into the common Hall, and ſaid vnto IESVS, Whence art thou? But IESVS gaue him none anſwere.
               
            
            
               WEE heard in the beginning of this CHAPTER (Brethren) how Pilate the Iudge inſiſted earneſtlie to get IESVS (whom his conſcience dited to bee innocent) ſet free and looſed: and therfore, firſt he commandes Him to bee taken and ſcourged, to bee crowned with a Crowne of Thornes, and clad with a purple Garment, in deriſion of His kingdome; thinking thereby to haue ſatisfied the Iewes. Then, when he had done this, he commeth foorth himſelfe, and in preſence of all the people, proteſtes the fourth time, that He was innocent. Thirdly, when hee bringes Him foorth with a Crowne of Thornes, and with a purple rayment, hee vtters a pittifull voyce, ſaying, Beholde the man, to mooue the Iewes to be content: but their malice could not be ſatisfied, but the Iewes and Prieſtes cried out, Crucifie him crucifie him. Thus much we haue heard alreadie. Now in the beginning of this Text, wee haue the replie of Pilate to the Iewes, and the communication betwixt him and them: Take yee him (ſaies he) and crucifie him, as for mee, I finde no fault in him: He anſweres indeed with an anger for he is commoned with the obſtinacie of the Iewes, becauſe nothing woulde mooue them, but ſtill they cried out, Crucifie him: but he ſaies, If ye will take it on your cōſcience, crucifie ye Him, as for me, albeit I have right to

crucifie Him, I had rather giue my right to you, than to de
                  •
               ile mine hands with the blood of the innocent. Ye heard, when they vrged Pilate, to condemne Him without a verdict: hee anſwered, on this manner, Ye haue a law, judge Him according to your law: Before I judged a man without a crime, I had rather reſigne my right to you. Ye ſee there, Pilate had rather giue ouer his right, that he had of the Romane Emperour, in judging and executing, before he had condemned an innocent man: this had bene very commendable in this Ethnicke man, if it had not beene forced out of him by the guiltineſſe of his conſcience: his conſcience cried within him, Ieſus is innocent. So this is forced out of him: for Brethren, ye ſhall vnderſtand, that men doe things in conſcience two wayes: either againſt their will, when they are compelled violently to doe it: or els, with their will, when they doe any thing willingly, when the heart is as readie to doe it, as the conſcience charges. When a man doeth a thing vpon conſtraint, hee getteth litle praiſe before God: when a man doeth willingly, then there is matter of true praiſe▪ if yee compare Pilate with the Iewes, who had loſt their conſcience, he hath his owne praiſe: for it is better to be commoned on conſcience, to doe any thing, than to doe againſt conſcience: But let him who would haue the true praiſe: not do any thing on cōſtraint of cōſcience only, but alſo with a willing heart, as the conſcience requireth, that he doe it: ſo let him be as glad to doe it. Naturall men will haue a conſcience, and doe vpon conſcience, albeit they were neuer ſo prophane, but if the heart agree willingly to do God ſeruice, there is more than nature there: if thou wouldeſt haue praiſe of God, take not onely heede to thy conſcience, but looke alſo that thou haue a joy in thine heart in well doing. Will ye marke through this whole diſcourſe, that the Lord lets not the conſcience of Pilate ſleepe (Iudges now who will be counted Chriſtians, haue not ſuch a conſcience) and as it is waking, ſo it lets him not reſt, but cauſes him ſpeake: if thy conſcience be wakned, thou ſhalt bee ſpeaking, and ſhalt be compelled to ſay, the good cauſe is the good cauſe. But looke to the High Prieſts: there is as great difference betweene them and Pilate, as it betweene the heauen & the earth: ye ſhall ſee nothing in them, but the conſcience ſleeping & locked vp in a ſound ſleep: & the more that Pilate teſtifies of the innocencie of Chriſt, they are the more hardened. This is a wonder, Pilate was but a naturall man, who had none illumination, but

through the light of nature: & ye muſt know that it is knowledge that makes a conſcience. As for the High Prieſts, they had light by the word of God, yet come to the conſcience, Pilate had a better conſcience than they had all. Would ye ſearch the ground of it: the High Prieſts, albeit they had the word of God, and light and illumination there thorow: yet the malitiouſneſſe of their hearts put out that light, corruption blotted it out: and when once a man is illuminate, and then beginneth to extinguiſh that light, it cōmeth by the juſt Iudgement of God, that the light of nature is put out, and then all conſcience is ſcraped out, and then hee becommeth like a beaſt, and ſo falleth into a reprobate ſenſe: keepe the light that ye haue gotten by the word of God, and by that Spirit, as ye would ſee life: and if yee put it out, the Lord ſhall make you as ſenſleſſe as a beaſt. They cried both, but Pilate cries, Judge ye him, They crie, crucifie him: Pilate cries, I find no fault in him worthy of death. What euer be Pilates part, who was a judge: what euer was the part of the Iewes the accuſers, the Lord hath His part alſo in it, and hee appointes it by His eternall decree: the houre was come, and Hee will haue His onely begotten Sonne to die for the ſinnes of the world, and He will be glorified in His death at this houre, and He will not haue Him to die as one worthie of death in Himſelfe, but like an innocent in the ſight of the world. Now looke to this wiſdome, that his innocencie ſhould appeare: He will haue the Iudge proteſting His innocencie oftentimes, before He ſhould die. On the other part, Hee will haue the conſcience of the High Prieſts ſcraped out, and He will haue them getting His blood: if the High Prieſts conſcience had beene wakned, Ieſus had not died at this time for the ſinnes of the worlde: and therefore to the ende that He ſhould die, He hardened the hearts of the accuſers. When any innocent man ſuffers, and chi
                  •
               fly for Chriſt, the Lord hath diſpoſed the worlde ſo, that Hee hath made ſome to teſtifie of the innocencie of the Martyres, and ſome hath Hee hardened to ſeeke the blood of the Martyres, that He might be glorified. Looke to Daniel, Darius had a conſcience of his innocencie, but the Princes had hardened hearts, Daniel 6.1. Looke when Paul was accuſed, the Romane Gouernours, Lyſias, Felix, and Festus, had a conſcience of the innocencie of Paul: but the High Prieſtes perſecutes Him to the death. When a malefactor ſufferes, the Lord will not vſe this manner of doing: He will not haue the Iudge to teſtifie the mans innocencie

where there is none, but he willl let him die and ſuffer, like a murtherer, an oppreſſour, or a blaſphemer, as he is in very deed, hee will haue Iudge, accuſers, and all men conſpire together to take awaye ſuch peſtes from the earth: Therefore, if there were no more but this, if wee muſt die, it ſhould moue vs to die in a good cauſe, and the beſt cauſe is the cauſe of Ieſus Chriſt. Take heede, that thou ſuffer not like a nocent, and guiltie perſon, but like an innocent: ſo thy death ſhall be glorious: it is a paine to die, and a greater paine to die for an euill cauſe. Now the Prieſts anſwere: Wee haue a lawe, and according to our lawe Hee merites the death: they challenge not a lawe to crucifie Him, or any power to puniſh Him capitallie: for all power of this was taken away from them by the Romanes, yet for all this, they forget not the right of their lawe, That the blaſphemer ſhould die the death: according to this lawe they affirme Him worthie of death. So, Brethren, What euer Pilate can doe, or ſay, to mitigate and to aſſwage their malice: ſpeake what he can ſpeake, they continue in hardnes againſt Chriſt: looke what blindes them: The word of God that ſhould make them to ſee it, it blindes them, and they vſe it to their blinding. All the things in the world, yea, the beſt thinges: the very word of God ſerues to wicked men for nothing els, but for their farder induration: the more they ſeee, the blinder they are, they will read, but the more they reade, the blinder are they: for why? they abuſe the word, they will not make it a rule to direct their affections and actions: but they abuſe it to their fantaſie, & makes a ſlaue of it. Looke to the Papiſts this day, they abuſe the old and new Teſtaments, they make them to ſerue their appetites, they interpret, expone and applie the word as they pleaſe, they make the word of God the author of their lies. I affirme, that the word of God doth nothing to the Papiſts but blinde them: it had bene good for them, that they had neuer ſeene, heard, nor read the Scripture of God: Write on, ſay on, this ſhall bee verified one day: but let vs conſider their reaſoning: The lawe ordaines, that the blaſphemer ſhall die the death, but ſo it is, that this man is a blaſphemer: for Hee hath made himſelfe the Sonne of God: therefore He ſhould die ye death, If ye looke the ground, & the general: No mā can find fault with it: for it is ſet downe in ye Law, Leuit: 24.14▪
                but come to the applicatiō where they ſubſume, Ieſus is a blaſphemer, there they faile for Ieſus was, is, and ſhall be that only begottē Son of God: & therefore the

concluſion is falſe, that Hee ought to die the death. So yee ſee the generall is true, but the aſſumption, and the concluſion, is a lye. In wicked men yee ſhall finde this, that no man will laye downe fairer generalles out of the worde of God than they, no man will doe that better: but come on to the application, there they goe aſtraye, they applie not right, but they applie either to this affection or that: As for example, The murtherer ſhould die the death: if there be an hatred in them againſt the man, they will applie it vnto him, but by the contrarie, if hee bee a kinſman or a friende, they will ſay, this man is no murtherer, howbeit hee bee as great a murtherer as Barabbas was, and therfore, he ſhould not die. Take heed to thine heart, and thinke it not enough to knowe the generall to bee true, but take heede to thine heart, and to the affections thereof, that they maye bee ſanctified, and chiefely thou who art a Iudge: looke that thine heart bee free of hatred, and of peruerſe loue: or elſe thy loue, thine hatred, and thy peruerſe affections ſhall bee poyſon to thee, and ſhall blinde thee, and ſhall make thee pronounce falſe judgement. For, what auailes knowledge, what auailes it thee to haue a great light in thine head, either thorowe nature, or yet thorowe the worde of God, if thou wanteſt reformation and ſanctification to thine affections? all is for nothing. True Chriſtianitie ſtands in the reformation of the heart, and without this, all the knowledge in the Scripture ſhall poyſon thee to the death: for except thou be reformed, it had bene better for thee that thou hadſt bene ignorant, and neuer ſeene the Scripture. Nowe to goe forwarde: When they haue anſwered Pilate, hee continues: and it is ſaid, when he heard that that man was the Sonne of God, if hee had a conſcience before, now he hath a greater conſcience: Euen, as whatſoeuer Pilate can ſpeake to the hie prieſts, did no more but hardē them on: ſo all the wordes they vſe to put out his conſcience, ſtirres it vp, and wakens it the more: Indeede they ſought by all meanes to blotte out his conſcience. And all the doing of a conſcienceleſſe man is to blinde thee, and put out thy conſcience, like as his conſcience is put out, and ſuch a man is dangerous companie: But the Lord, who only hath power ouer the conſcience, diſappointes their purpoſe. The Lord hath ſuch power ouer the ſoule & conſcience of man, that whē He will haue it blinded, all ye doings in the world will not waken it: by the contrary, when God will haue it wakened, all the worlde ſhall not ſtill it: the more meanes thou vſeſt to ſtill it,

it ſhall be the more aloft: None hath power of the conſcience, to waken it, or to ſtill it: No, not a King, nor an Emperour, no, not all the worlde hath power of the conſcience, but onely God: Hee hath His throne in the conſcience. Yet let vs examine this better, When Pilate heard this, he was the more afraid. Pilate had no knowledge of God, but ſo much as nature furniſhed him: he was a man who liued without God in the world, yet at the Name of GOD, and at the Name of the Sonne of God hee is terrified, and his conſcience abhorreth to doe any thing againſt Him. Albeit thou neuer heard of the Scripture, nor neuer ſaw one of Gods workes, there is one thing within thee, that will tell thee, that there is a God, whom thou ſhouldeſt feare and honour: that is, thy conſcience, & if thou honoureſt not that God, thy cōſcience ſhal ſtand vp & judge thee: I ſay more, this conſcience is verie powerfull: for if it ſerue not to thy ſaluatiō, it ſhall ſerue thee to thy damnation conſcience naturall abhorreth to violate that Majeſtie, it telleth thee this, honour this God, if thou diſhonoureſt Him, thou ſhalt die, albeit thou neuer ſaweſt the Scripture, & if there come a wicked thought in thine heart, the conſcience will ſtand vp to challenge it, & like an armed man to ſl
                  •
               y thee, & if thou wereſt but a naturall man, ere euer thou get that Majeſtie violate, thy conſcience ſhall ſtand vp to plead for God, & to guarde Him frō thine injuries, & ere thou get Him diſhonoured, thou ſhalt tread vpon the bellie of thy conſcience. It is true indeed, albeit this naturall ſpunke of light of conſcience in man be as a precious raine to bridle man from ſin, that the Lord hath left him after his fall (He hath left it of mercy) for if it had bin taken away, men had bene more miſerable than beaſts) yet it is very weake, there is nothing perfect in vs, and there is nothing in vs by nature, that will be able to holde vs in the feare of God. This naturall conſcience for a time will brangle and ſtand vp againſt the malitiouſneſſe of the heart: and if thou haue no more, thou mayeſt ſtand for a while, but in the ende thou ſhalt giue it ouer and ſuccumbe. It is a pitie to ſee, how Pilate ſtriues, and then how in the ende the conſcience failes, and againſt conſcience, hee giues ſentence againſt the innocent, and gainſtanding the conſcience, hee ouerthrowes it. Truſt not to nature, but ſtriue to get grace: nothing is able to ouercome nature, but the Holy Spirit, for it ſtriues and gettes the victorie in the end: Therefore as wee would bee ſafe in that great day, let vs ſtriue to get that Spirit to

pingill out, and get the victorie againſt this canker in the heart. I ſee ſome thing more in Pilate: hee gets not only a ſight of God, and ſo is terrified: but hee commeth forward, and his conſcience gets aduertiſement of that ſame verie man, who was ſtanding before them all, that that ſame verie man was God, not only that He was an innocent man, but that Hee was the God of heauen, hee gets a ſupernaturall knowledge, that that ſillie man was God: the reaſon is: if hee had not gotten that aduertiſement, that that man ſtanding in ſuch contempt before him a glorious Iudge, was God: would his conſcience haue accuſed him, would he haue bene ſo terrified, and would he haue deſired to abſolue Him, if hee had not gotten aduertiſement, that Ieſus Chriſt was the God of glorie? It is a naturall thing to the conſcience to ſpeake of God, but not to ſpeake of Chriſt, that Hee is the Sonne of God: Pilate was more afraide for Chriſt, who ſtood before him, like a poore ſillie man, than Chriſt was for him, albeit he was a glorious Iudge in the eyes of the world, but this ſight was like the glance of a flaſh of fire that went ouer the conſcience of Pilate. The Lord will giue the wicked glances & taſtes of Heauen, but all is but in vaine. Ye ſee of Agripp
                     •
                   Acts.26.28. When Paul was ſpeaking to him, he ſayes, Thou perſwadeſt me almoſt to be a Christian: his heart was almoſt bowed, and was beginning to be perſwaded, he ſcarcely beginnes to haue this perſwaſion, when it euaniſhes: the Lord will furniſh to wicked men glimmerings of that life, but they euaniſh away: thou wilt dreame of happineſſe, but this is happineſſe, when the Lord giues thee a light, & bowes thine heart, & eſtabliſhes grace in thee & grace bides with thee, there is thy happines. This glimmering is not for nothing: it ſerueth for this, to make Pilate vnexcuſable, and if it were no more: When Pilate ſhall appeare before that Iudge, this ſame blencke ſhall bee a teſtimonie againſt him to his euerlaſting damnation. If thou getteſt a blencke of Heauen, purſue it, or els better it had beene for thee, if thou hadſt neuer ſeene it, or neuer to haue ſeene Chriſt, or to haue read the Scriptures. Againe this glimmering that Pilate got, ſhall ſtand vp againſt the High Prieſtes, and giue ſentence againſt them, who had not onely nature, but the worde to guide them. Pilate lookes in thorow that baſeneſſe, and gets a ſight of that glorie, that was in our nature in Chriſt, they cannot looke in thorow that baſeneſſe: And if there were no more, Pilate ſhall ſtand vp like a

Iudge to condemne all the Iewes, who by the word was informed, that CHRIST ſhould come in baſeneſſe and humilitie, Eſay 53.2. I come nearer: And if there were no more, but that light that Pilate gote, it ſhall condemne all them that doe ſtumble at the miniſtrie of the Goſpell. The LORD will not haue the Goſpell with an outward glorie, Hee will haue it to ſhine in baſeneſſe: and if that outward baſeneſſe ſtoppe thee to looke into it, thou ſhalt periſh, and if thou get not a fight of that glorie, therein Pilate ſhall condemne thee one day: yea, Pilate in that great day ſhall ſtand vp againſt all men, who are offended at the voyce of Chriſt: if thou contemneſt ye baſe miniſtrie, I promiſe thee, yt thou ſhalt neuer get life by that Goſpell: if the Goſpell be baſe, humble thy ſelfe vnder it, and ſtriue to get thine eyes opened, to looke to that glorie of the Goſpell, Looke not to men, who doe preach, and be not offended at the outward face of the Goſpell, as thou wouldeſt be ſaued: Bleſſed are they who are not offended at the baſeneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt. Nowe Pilate beeing terrified in conſcience, and getting litle blenckes, immediately he goes in againe to the common Hall, and takes in Ieſus Chriſt, and he ſayes to Ieſus, Whence art thou? Art thou the Sonne of God: hee had no certaintie of this: this is worthie of commendation, that hee getting a blencke, hee will follow it out: who vvill ſay? but this was worthie of commendation in an Ethnicke. If it ſhall pleaſe GOD, to giue vs a blencke any time, let vs ſtriue to follow it foorth, and let that glimmering mooue thee to follow it out further: for all the joy in the worlde, is in the ſight of GOD, thou neuer kneweſt what joy is, who haſt not taſted of the pleaſure of Heauen: fye on thee, who haſt not taſted of this joy.
            So, if it ſhall pleaſe the Lord to giue vs a glance of Ieſus Chriſt, Pilate learnes vs to followe it: albeit it goe out of thine eyes for a time, reſt neuer till thou getteſt it againe, although men would giue thee all the pleaſures in the world.
            Now, Brethren, we muſt not thinke that it was the loue of the trueth, that mooued Pilate to aske this: No, it vvas rather the feare of danger, that mooued him to aske it: for hee feared ſome danger to come vnto himſelfe, when hee heard that hee vvas the Sonne of God: therefore partly for this cauſe, and partly, becauſe Chriſt knew that Pilate diſdained Him, and all ſpirituall graces in Him: Hee gaue him none anſvvere. But let vs follovv out the

knowledge of CHRIST once begunne vpon the loue of the trueth, then vvee may bee aſſured, that according to His promiſe Hee vvill heare vs: for Hee ſaies, Verily, verily, whatſoeuer ye ſhall aske the Father in my name, that ſhall hee giue you, IOH. XVI. 23. Thou vvho haſt that ſweet promiſe, Knocke, and it ſhall bee opened, ſhouldeſt thou not bee inſtant to make inquirie of IESVS, vvho offereth Himſelfe ſo vvillingly, and ſaies, I am the Light of the worlde: and, Come to Mee to get the water of Life: Alas, that thou ſhouldeſt periſhe for default of ſeeking of grace! Yee vvoulde maruell, that IESVS anſwered not a vvorde: I ſpake of this ſomewhat before I ſhall ſaye onely this for the preſent: The Lord Hee knewe His houre vvas comming that Hee ſhoulde die, and Hee knewe it vvas His Fathers vvill: therefore Hee vvould not vtter ſo much as a vvorde to ſtaye and holde backe His death. If Hee had giuen Pilate euident and ſure information vvhat manner of perſon Hee vvas, then happily Hee vvoulde haue ſtayed, and vvoulde haue proceeded no further, and vvoulde not haue ſlaine Him: but hee knewe not vvith vvhome hee dealt, vvhen hee gaue out the ſentence of death againſt Him. But it maye bee asked (vvith reuerence vvee ſpeake it) Was not this an harde matter, that Chriſt vvould not doe ſo much as to tell Pilate that this vvas Gods vvorke, and that Hee Himſelfe vvas the Sonne of God? vvas it not an hard matter ſo to hinder this mans ſaluation? But I ſaye, What reckoning is to bee made of Pilate, and all the creatures in the vvorlde, Angels, and men, ſo that God bee glorified? We are all made to glorifie Him, and except He had a reſpect to His owne glorie in the creature, He would neuer haue made man nor Angell: If it pleaſe the Lord to be glorified in thy damnation, holde thee content: Hath not the Potter (ſaies Paul) power of the claye, to make of the ſame lumpe one veſſell to honour, and another to diſhonour. Roman. 9.21. I ſaye more, God in that his great ſa nilie, hath ſome veſſels of honour, and ſome of diſhonour. 2. Tim
                     •
                  th. 2.20. If that thou finde thy ſelfe to bee one of the veſſels of honour, thou haſt no cauſe to complaine, and to ſaye, Wherefore was this man made to ſhame? for thou haſt enough: if thou haſt gotten mercie, thanke GOD, that of His free will He hath put a difference betwixt thee and him. There are none who are ordained to be veſſels of honour, but they wil ſeeke the honour of God, euē ſuppoſe it were by their own deſtructiō, as ye may read of Moſes. This is the nature of all them who haue gotten ſome aſſurance of

GODS fauour in IESVS: and if thou haue this aſſurance in thine heart, certainly thou art an inſtrument of glorie.
            Now to ende: Yee ſee, Brethren, in this whole action the pittifull eſtate of Pilate: he is toſſed to and fro betwixt two parties, his own conſcience on the one part, vrges and forces him to ſtand and pleade for Chriſt; and on the other part, the deſire that he hath to pleaſure the vnportunate Iewes, and the feare that he hath to offend Ceſar, moues him to goe on in that proceſſe againſt Chriſt, till at laſt he pronounces ſentence againſt Him. Iudges by his example are to take good heed to their proceedinges in judgement, and to keepe their hands from euill; and that they ſit not in a wicked judgemēt. Be not Iudge againſt the innocent: Pilate ſate in judgement doing wickedly, pronoūcing ſentence againſt the Lord of Glorie. If thou ſit in judgement, pronounce not ſentence againſt ye innocent, either leaue that judgement, or then abſolue the innocent in deſpite of the worlde. It is no ſmall matter to pronounce ſentence of damnation. The Lord grant vs this conſcience, that whenſoeuer wee ſhall be employed, we may be employed in doing of good deedes, and in glorifying God, that wee may haue that aſſurance of grace in Ieſus Chriſt: To whome with the Father, and Holy Spirit, bee all Honour and Praiſe, for euer: Amen.
            
         
         
            THE TENTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Then ſaide Pilate vnto him, Speakest thou not vnto mee? Knowest thou not that I haue power to crucifie thee, and haue power to looſe thee?
                  
                     
                        verse 11 
                     IESVS anſwered, Thou couldest haue no power at all againſt mee, except it were giuen thee from aboue: therefore, hee that deliuered mee vnto thee, hath the greater ſinne.
               
            
            
               
               IN this whole Hiſtorie of the ſuffering of IESVS CHRIST vnder Pontius Pilate, we ſee a continuall ſtrife betwixt the Iudge Pilate, and the accuſers. Pilate laboures by all meanes to get the innocent ſet free: The Hie Prieſts be ye contrary endeuour themſelues to get Ieſus Chriſt crucified. Pilate ſeekes, if it had beene poſſible, to followe his conſcience: they ſeeke by all meanes the contrarie, to harden the heart of Pilate. The laſt words as yee heard, the Iewes roſe, and ſaide, Wee haue a law, by the which hee ought to die, becauſe hee made himſelfe the Sonne of God: Theſe wordes of theirs are ſo farre from that, that they take away the conſcience of Pilate, that by the contrarie, by theſe words the conſcience of Pilate is more wakened than before, and he begins to feare IESVS CHRIST, and humbles himſelfe more than euer hee did, yea, in ſuch ſort, that when as hee heares tell, that IESVS was the Sonne of GOD, hee demaundes of Him, Whether Hee was the Sonne of GOD, or no? but hee receiues no anſwere: for the LORD IESVS had concluded to ſuffer in all patience, and to obey the Heauenly will of His Father. Now in this Text that we haue read, we haue heard how Pilate in anger ſpeakes to Ieſus, thinking that Hee had not knowne him, and that Hee gaue him not his due honour, and ſaies, Knowest thou not, with whom thou haſt to doe? and that I haue power to crucifie thee, and I haue power to looſe thee? The Lord anſweres, No, thou would haue no power, except it were giuē thee frō aboue: he therefore, who hath deliuered mee vnto thee hath the greater ſinne. In the firſt part of this Text, wee haue the conference betwixt Pilate and Ieſus. To ſpeake of this demand of Pilates, ye may ſee by his wordes that the warning that he got a little before, that Ieſus was the Son of God, that feare & reuerence of Ieſus Chriſt, wherwith the heart was touched, it was but vaniſhing. Wee may marke heere the inſtabilitie of Pilate: firſt, hee hath no feare of IESVS, and then of a ſuddaintie hee is mooued with a reuerence and feare: and laſt, this reuerence is ſcarcelie entered into his heart, when it euaniſhes away: and beeing angrie againſt CHRIST, hee falles out in blaſphemie againſt GOD. And this is no newe thing, for wee ſee this ſame in men now adayes: Yee will ſee men who haue liued verie looſely, taking their paſtime, and vpon a ſuddaintie yee ſhall ſee them haue a kind of repentance and reuerence, but ere ye looke

about you, all ſhall euaniſh. This is too plentifull in great men and ſmall. The ground is this, the heart was neuer truely renued, but in the meane time of the fained repentance the heart was full, of the gall of bitterneſſe, as Peter ſpeaketh to Simon Magus. The reuerence or repentance, was but like a ſcroofe of honey rubbed on venome, and then when the venome breakes out, the ſcroofe goes away, as the morning dew before the ſunne. Then, if thou wouldeſt haue the feare of God to abide in thine heart, thou muſt alwayes be deluing and digging downe into the heart, there is an infinite deepeneſſe of malitiouſneſſe in it. Therefore, hee who would haue ſtabilitie, let him ſee, that that ground be honeſt and good, and be not content with the dregges, looke that the heart be ſound. There is nothing ſo deceitfull as the heart of man, Ierem. 17.9: it will not onely beguile another man, but it will be guile a man himſelfe, and if that fraud bide in thee, it will not leaue thee, till it bring thee to deſtruction.
            Now, let vs marke the wordes of Pilate, Knoweſt thou not that I haue pow
                     •
                  r to crucifie thee, and to abſolue thee. Brethren, wl at els is this, but to claime to himſelfe an abſolute power, either to ſlay the innocent, or to let Him goe free, as he pleaſes: this is ſuch a power, as only the God of Heauen hath: Hee hath not giuen this power to no creature, neither to man, nor Angell, this is only proper to the great God. We ſee by the example of Pilate, that this is naturall to Magiſtrates and Princes, to thinke that their power cannot bee reſtrained or limitated by any lawe, to ſlay, or ſaue by the lawe, but to doe with the lawe: as they pleaſe. Albeit Princes or Iudges will ſeeme to be verie modeſt, and to claime nothing, but that which is right, and agreeable both to Gods Lawe, and mans lawe. Pilate ſaid a litle before, I will not crucifie Chriſt, becauſe he is innocent: yet for all this modeſtie: prouoke them once, make them angrie once, they ſhall vtter ſuddenly in wrath, what they thinke and eſteeme of their power, they will then blaſpheme, and & ſay that their power is abſolute.
            Experience may teach this, that of all men in the world, the eſtate of Princes, Iudges and Potentates is moſt dangerous. The more that a man haue of power, of riches, or of the goods of this worlde, his eſtate is more dangerous. There is nothing more dangerous, than to put a ſword or a ſcepter in the hand of a naturall man: for, Brethren, to put power in the hands of a naturall man,

is as much as to put the ſword in the hands of a mad man. Paul the third Chapter to Titus, and third verſe, calles a naturall man a mad man, albeit hee were neuer ſo diſcreete, he is mad. Wee were all madde, ſayes Paul, as they are. A mad man will ſlay others, and laſtly, hee will ſlay himſelfe in the ende, and ſo ſhall hee who hath power, if hee be no more but a naturall man.
            Would to God, that Princes and Magiſtrates, would take heed to this, it is required that all eſtates be renued by the Spirit. Woe is to the King, and to the ſubject, the rich and the begger, who is not borne againe. In the Euangell according to John, Chriſt ſayes to Nicodemus, Except a man bee borne againe, hee ſhall not ſee the Kingdome of GOD. But it is moſt requiſite that theſe men who are ſet in high roomes, and haue gotten all the pleaſures in the world at their will, that they bee renued: for without ſanctification, all outwarde thinges will make thee worſe: As great riches, and honours, as great tentations to make thee to forget GOD. All thy pleaſures ſhall bring to thee as great diſpleaſure: yea, they ſhall worke damnation to thee in hell, except the LORD giue thee His Spirit. There was neuer a King ſo wiſe, great and high, but if hee got not regeneration, hee ſhall kill himſelfe with that ſame power he got in his hand.
            So let vs all ſeeke this regeneration, and chiefly Kings, who thinke, & will ſay, Who ſhould be renued but poore ſillie perſons: they thinke it lawfull for themſelues to commit all vncleanneſſe, fornication, blaſphemie, &c. and to ſell themſelues to all ſinne: No, if thou, who haſt gotten honour be not renued, thy damnation ſhall farre exceede the damnation of the begger.
            Let vs weigh the words: This is a marueilous thing Pilate ſtood vp before and proteſted that Chriſt Ieſus was innocent: Nowe hee ſtands vp againe, and ſayes, That hee hath power to doe with him what he pleaſed. How can theſe ſtand? what can be gathered of theſe two voyces: Euen this, that notwithſtanding of His innocencie, hee might crucifie Him: for it is as much as this, Ieſus, for all thine innocencie I haue power to crucifie thee.
            Who will ſ
                  •
               and vp and ſay, that hee hath power ouer an innocent man, to ſlay, but only hee who is a murtherer: So Pilate in effect profeſſes himſelfe to be a murtherer, for it is as much as hee ſaid, I am a murtherer, & will take thy life from thee, albeit thou be

an innocent. Is not this a great madneſſe to a Magiſtrate, who is placed in power aboue others, to call himſelfe a murtherer? The ground of this, is pride againſt God in the heart: a proud man is euer a mad man, for pride is againſt God, & it makes a man mad: and therefore as the heart is proud, ſo the mouth is fooliſh: the moſt proud man is the moſt fooliſh in talking: Looke and conſider the proud man when thou heareſt him ſpeake, and thou wilt ſay: Yonder man is a fooliſh man. And this proceedes of the Lords juſt and wiſe diſpenſation: the proud man in his heart diſhonoures the Majeſtie of GOD. (Thou who art proud haſt adoe with God, and not with thy fellowes) Therefore the LORD in His juſt Iudgement will cauſe thy mouth to ſpeake to thy ſhame to accuſe thy ſelfe: Hee will cauſe thee who art a proude King call thy ſelfe a murtherer to ſhame thy ſelfe, and to be reuenged of thy proud heart. Thus much for Pilates demand: which containes a blaſphemie againſt that Majeſtie: and therefore IESVS will not let him goe away vnreprooued: Hee ſayes to him, Well, Thou wouldſt haue no power ouer me, except it were giuen thee from aboue: as for them who haue put mee in thine hands, woe is to them. their ſinne is the greater, & their damnation the more: to wit, the Prieſts & the Iewes. There are two partes of this anſwere: The firſt concernes the Majeſtie of GOD, the ſecond concernes the High Prieſtes, and the Iewes: for the LORD hath adoe with two ſorts of perſons: for there was two ſortes of perſons who put Him in the handes of Pilate: The firſt was GOD: The next was the Iewes▪
                who deliuered Him to be condemned: As for GOD, Looke what Hee ſpeakes of him, and howe reuerently, Thou wouldeſt haue no power, except it were giuen thee from aboue: As for man, Hee accuſes him of ſinne. Nowe let vs examine euery part of theſe: Thou wouldeſt haue no power ouer me, except it were giuen thee from aboue: Thou glorieſt too much of thy power, as though it were of thy ſelfe, and not of GOD: for if thou forgetteſt that heauenlie prouidence, without the which nothing can come vnto mee: But I tell thee, Pilate, if thou ſhouldeſt haue had power ouer me, if it were not giuen thee: this is ſpoken for two reſpects: Firſt, becauſe all ſuperiour power is of God: Next, in this reſpect becauſe when a man hath gotten power ouer others, hee can doe nothing to them, nor ſtirre an haire of their head, but by the prouidence of God: Pilate was ignorant of both theſe, he beleeued he

had his power of Ceſar only, but Chriſt lettes him know that there was one higher than Ceſar, from whome he had his power: hee was ignorant of Gods prouidence, hee vttered him to be a blaſphemer of God: & therefore the Lord hearing this blaſphemer, albeit Hee held His tongue before, now He ſpeakes when He heares His Father diſhonoured: for all His ſuffering was for the honour of His Father: therefore He will now reprooue Pilate: how far are we from thus doing, we are cleane contrarie to this: the very ſillieſt of vs all, if wee heare any thing tending to our owne reproach, then there is ſuch anger in vs, that we cannot be pacified: but who is angrie to heare God diſhonoured: Where ſhall the Lord finde a zealous man in this Land, few in Court, or Councell hath that zeale: they vvho are greateſt blaſphemers, & greateſt enemies to God, by conuoyes are moſt aduanced: the zeale of God is out of the hearts of men for the moſt part ſo that by all appearance, certainely a judgement ſhal light vpon this Nation, for albeit we were created & redeemed for Gods glorie, yet we haue no care of it, all that is away: vvherefore ſerues our creation, it had bene better we had neuer bene created, if wee ſet not our ſelues to glorifie Him. Yet to weigh the wordes better, we ſee this plainely, albeit a man be in the handes of a ſuperiour power, whether he be an innocent man, or wicked, yet he is in the hands of God: & there is not a King in the world that is able to open his mouth againſt a man, but by the ſpeciall diſpenſation of God: ſo that the life, or the death of the man hangeth not ſo much on the ſentence of the King, as it doth on the decree of God, the life of man hanges more on that decree of His, than all the decrees of Kings. There is great blindneſſe and beaſtlineſſe in vs, that we ſee not that prouidence: therefore now and then the Lord will let men ſee, and feele, that the life and death of men hanges not ſo much on the ſentence and decree of the Prince▪ as on that eternall decree & ſentence of God. 1. Sam. Chap. 14. When Saul had giuen out the ſentence that Ionathan ſhould die, & that for breaking of an vnlawfull law, it lay not in his hands to ſlay him: & then in Chap. 15 when hee ordained that Agag ſhould liue, the Lord ſtirred vp the ſpirit of Samuel, and hewed him with a ſword. The Lord will let vs ſee, that the ſentence of Kings makes not a man to die, or liue, but His eternall decree. This is not to be paſſed by: Ieſus warneth Pilate of two things: Firſt, that he hath his authoritie not of Ceſar, He ſends him to the heauens aboue Ceſars throne, to Gods Throne:

Next, vvhatſoeuer hee did in his office and authoritie, hee did it by the diſpenſation of God. So vvee haue firſt this leſſon: to wit, it appertaineth vnto Princes to knowe, that the authoritie vvhich they haue, it is of GOD: Monarches ſhoulde vnderſtande, that they haue that power of GOD, and ſo ſhoulde inferiour Magiſtrates, how beit they ſhould acknowledge the ſuperiour. Knowe yee not howe Nabuchadonezer learned, that all the power was of God, he was ſent foorth like a beaſt, to liue ſeuē yeeres among the beaſts, to learne this leſſon, that all the power hee had was of God, Dan. 4. Next learne, howbeit Princes haue gotten that power of God, yet God will not denude Himſelfe of power ouer them: but He ſo rules them by His providence, that they cānot ſtirre without His will. Then Princes ſhould looke to God, ſeeing they can doe nothing without His bleſſed prouidence, Eſa
                     •
                  . 10. When Aſſur boaſted, that he had done all things by his own hands, & his own wiſedome, ye Lord is more angrie at him for not acknowledging of his power to be from God in that perſecution, than Hee is for the perſecution it ſelfe. He pronounces the ſentence againſt Him, What art thou but an axe or a ſawe, in the hands of the ſawer? It is a vaine thing for a king, to aſcribe power to himſelf, & not to God: woe is him! it is a ſore thing to match with God. Then againe, when Ieſus was in the hands of Pilate, denied He the power of Pilate? No, He acknowledges his power, but He acknowledged it vvas of God, and therefore He willingly ſubmits Himſelf vnto it. Wherefore, all ſubjects ſhould learne this leſſon: When they looke to their Princes, or to their ſuperiours, not to looke ſo much to the man as to God, who hath armed him with that power: he is fooliſh that thinks not that the power yt the Magiſtrate or Prince hath gottē, is of God: & this ſhould be the groūd of obediēce, vvhē I ſee the image of God in him, whē I ſee him armed vvith ye power of God, I ought to obey him for the conſcience of God. Then a game: marke in Ieſus Chriſt, vvhen Pilate the earthly Iudge hath to doe vvith Him, Hee lookes not ſo much to Pilate, as to His Father. Ieſus Chriſt all this time when He is pulled here and there, ſets not His eye ſo much vpon men, as vpon His Father, and vpon His prouidence. This teaches a leſſon vnto all men, but chiefely to them vvho fall into the handes of men of authoritie and power. They ought not ſo much to ſet their eyes vppon this or that man, as vpon God and acknowledge, albeit it were in the middeſt of all torments, it is not man that deales vvith me,

it is not ſo much any perſon deales with me, as it is my God. The King hath not an hand to moue, or a word to ſpeake againſt me, if my God giue it not to him: he who is in the handes of men, and lookes not to this, is worſe than a beaſt. This is a chiefe point, whereby thou glorifieſt God, to acknowledge His prouidence, in ſuffering or in torment▪ none can haue conſolation, but hee who ſeeth this, there is the matter of conſolation, and patience in torments, to ſee, that when hee is in the hands of a Tyrant, hee is in the handes of a mercifulll Father, and to ſay, Albeit theſe torments bee ſore and grieuous, and albeit men deale with mee, it is my Father that deales with mee in mercie. Let thee bee torne and rent, yet acknowledge this, thou ſhalt finde joy that ſhall exceede all thy torments: Looke to the Martyres, So, Brethren, it is no ſmall comfort to a man, for to ſet his eyes alwayes vpon God, and eſpecially when hee is into the handes of a Iudge or Tyrant. Nowe thus farre the Lord hath giuen an anſwere to Pilate: and hath challenged the glorie of that Majeſtie. Would to God, we could learne that leſſon, to defend the glorie of God, which is blaſphemed in this world. Come to the other part it is in reſpect of the High Prieſtes: they were the inſtruments of God, working by his prouidence, to put Chriſt in his handes: Pilate, thou glorieſt ouer me, but woe is to them who haue put mee into thine hands. Woe is to them who put an innocent man in the handes of a Tyrant. Marke this: There is nothing ſpoken of Pilate, that hee ſinned, albeit hee ſinned, but Hee ſpeakes of the ſinnes of the Iewes, and of the High Prieſtes, this lets vs ſee, that albeit Pilate ſinned, yet they ſinned more, and their damnation is greater than his: hee that beginnes miſchiefe, the wrath of God ſhall eſpecially ouertake him, and if there were no more but the example of Iudas, it may tell vs this, that Iudas was the firſt that beganne this worke, Iudas put Him firſt in the handes of the High Prieſt: On whome ſtrikes the wrath firſt? What befell to Iudas? Whilſt the Lord Ieſus is ſo handled, the traitour Iudas is put to the torture, and the Lord rents the ſoule of him in pieces: the miſerable Catiue to be free of that torture, he hangs himſelfe: Did the wrath of God light firſt vpon Iudas, who was the firſt traitour: the wrath of God lightes firſt vpon the traitours, yet the Jewes are ſleeping, they thought they were free of judgement, but ſtill the wrath proſecutes them to induration. Thinke yee that theſe traitours are free of wrath,

No, no, the dolour and vengeance in its owne time ſhall ouertake them, and they ſhall not haue a worde to ſpeake. The Papiſtes, when they haue caught a Chriſtian, who confeſſeth Ieſus Chriſt, when they haue tryed Him, they will put Him into the handes of the Emperour, or King of Spaine, they will waſhe their handes as cleane of the blood of the innocent, and who tooke his life, but the King of Spaine? O! but the wrath of GOD perſecutes them, and all the blood of the innocent lies vpon them, becauſe they deliuered them into their handes to bee tormented by them. The judgement of that Antichrist, and of that accurſed crue, ſhall bee heauier than the judgement of the Kinges, who execute their malice. I denounce this IN THE NAME OF GOD: and therefore, let euery man and woman beware that they be not partakers in the murther of the innocent: yea, if the Hangman knowe that hee is innocent, (albeit hee thinkes howſoeuer the matter goes, he is free) let him not touch him. Reade yee not in the Hiſtorie of the three Children, Sidrach, Meſach, and Abednego, who being taken and caſten into the hote fierie fornace at the commaundement of Nebuchadnezar the King, that the men that caſt them into the fornace were ſlaine with the flame of the fire? Yea, if it were but in a thought, take heede thou conſent not to the death of the innocent.
            Nowe to ende in a worde: Yee ſee heere, when Ieſus ſpeakes of His Father, and of His doinges, Hee blames Him not, but Hee ſpeakes in all ſubmiſſion of Him: but when Hee ſpeakes of the Iewes, who were inſtruments of this worke of God: Hee rebukes them ſhamefullie, and imputes ſinne vnto them. This is a wonder, and yet it is the worke of God, and they are inſtrumentes ruled by God: yet the Lord is Holy, and they are vnholy and wicked, Act. chap. 2. verſ 23. They crucified Him with wicked ha
                     •
                  des: now the Lord was cleane, and the Iewes handes were vnholie. Howe was this? The cauſe was, becauſe in all this doing there was not ſuch a thing as that anie of theſe wicked inſtrumentes looked vnto God: they are ſatisfying the affection of their heartes, and drinking vp the innocent blood maliciouſly. Marke this: Whatſoeuer thou doeſt in this worlde, whether thou goeſt out or in, eateſt or drinkeſt, ſet alwayes thine eyes vpon the Lord, and doe it all to His pleaſure, and ſaye vvith thy ſelfe, I doe this to pleaſure and to glorifie thee, O Lord, And I aduertiſe thee, that albeit thou doeſt anie

thing agreeable in it ſelfe to the vvill of GOD, yet if thine heart bee not ſet vpon GOD in the doing, that vvorke is vnholie in thine hand. There is nothing to ſanctifie thy ſoule, if thine eye be not ſet vpon GOD: for vvhen the eye of the ſoule is ſet vpon the LORD, there commeth light downe from Him, that ſanctifieth the heart. And this is it in a vvorde that I vvoulde ſaye: Bee neuer at the ende of an euill thing: if thy conſcience tell thee in thine eare, that thou art at an euill turne, doe it not: I appeale you, when yee doe anie thing in ſecret, if your conſcience vvill not ſaye, O catiue, that vvhich thou doeſt vvill bring thee to deſtruction? Manie men in this Lande, thinke themſelues neuer vvell, but vvhen they are at an euill turne: But I forewarne thee, as thou vvouldeſt bee ſafe, and finde mercie at that Great day, to holde thine handes cleane from all euill turnes: and chiefelie, from the blood of the innocent. Whatſoeuer thou doeſt, looke that thou haue a vvarrande of that reuealed vvill of GOD. And thinke it not enough to bee an executer of the decree of GOD: but ſee thou bee aſſured of this reuealed will. And yet more: Be not an Hypocrite in thy doing, but doe all thinges vvith ſinceritie, and not for mans cauſe, but for GODS cauſe, that thou mayeſt be partaker of that euerlaſting glorie vvith IESVS: To vvhome, vvith the Father, and the Holie Ghoſte, bee all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, both nowe, and foreuer, AMEN.
         
         
            THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 From thencefoorth Pilate ſought to looſ
                        •
                      him, but the Iewes cryed, ſaying If thou deliuer him, thou art not Caeſars friend: for whoſoeuer m
                        •
                     k
                        •
                     th himſelfe a King▪ ſpe
                        •
                     keth againſt Caeſar. 
                        verse 13 When Pilate heard this word, hee brought IESVS foorth, and ſate downe in the Iudgement-ſeate, in a

place called the Pauement, and in Hebrew GABBATHA, 
                     
                        verse 14 And it was the Preparation of the Paſſeouer, and about the ſixt houre: and he ſaid vnto the Iewes, Beholde your King. 
                        verse 15 
                     But they cryed, Away with him, away with him, crucifie him. Pilate ſaide vnto them, Shall I crucifie your King? The high Priests anſwered, We haue no King but Caeſar.
                  
               
            
            
               YEE haue heard (Brethren) that in this whole Hiſtorie of the ſuffering of IESVS CHRIST, vnder Pontius Pilate, the Romane Deputie, we might clearlie ſee a continuall ſtrife and debate betwixt the Iudge Pilate, and the accuſers, Pilate euer ſtriuing to get Ieſus, that juſt one, and that innocent (for his conſcience tolde him that Hee was innocent) ſet at libertie: The accuſers on the other part, ſtriue to blotte out the conſcience of Pilate, and to get Ieſus crucified: and as wee haue found this debate in the whole Hiſtorie before, ſo alſo in theſe words which wee haue read, wee finde the ſame ſtrife: And, if Pilate before was earneſt to get Ieſus ſet looſe, hee is farre more earneſt nowe than euer hee was: and with all his might hee ſeekes to get Him ſet at libertie: but looke howe earneſt Pilate is to haue Him looſed, the High Prieſtes and the Iewes are as earneſt to haue Him crucified: In ende, as wee ſhall heare, the victorie inclines to the accuſers: Pilate giues it ouer, and ſits downe to condemne the innocent.
            Nowe to come to the wordes, they are plaine, and offer verie plaine and eaſie doctrine, therefore we ſhall bee alſo plaine by Gods grace. It is ſaide concerning Pilate, that from that time when he had heard theſe laſt wordes of Ieſus, accuſing Him for that blaſphemie againſt His Father, then hee tooke a greater feare, and from that time hee ſtudied more and more to abſolue Ieſus. Brethren, wee ſee heere thorowe this whole Hiſtorie, that the more Pilate heares of Ieſus, and the more that Ieſus inſiſtes with him, continually the conſcience is the more wakened: and the more that it is wakened, the more earneſtly ſtriues hee to get Him ſet at libertie. So it is a wonder, to ſee an Ethnick, without God, to haue ſuch a conſcience of the innocencie of Ieſus: and then, that ſuch a man ſhould labour to get Him looſe. I know not if many of our Iudges now adayes, will haue ſuch a conſcience, and would be ſo earneſt to haue the innocent ſet at libertie. So when I looke to the vigilantneſſe of his conſcience, I am compelled to ſaye, that this man had a ſpeciall

grace in this poinct: for one of the beſt bleſſinges of a judge, vvho ſits on life and death, is to haue a vigilant conſcience: By the contrarie, a Iudge wanting conſcience of right and wrong, of all men hee is the moſte accurſed. Then, Brethren, if ye will looke to this matter narrowly, yee ſhall ſay, that Pilate had a great vigilantneſſe in his conſcience: but alas, hee falles at the laſt: for certainely, this conſcience had beene a bleſſing, if hee had obeyed this counſell of the conſcience: but becauſe hee falles in the ende, and obeyes not his conſcience, that which was giuen for a bleſſing, becomes a curſing vnto him. If God giue thee a bleſſing, as a vigilant conſcience, if thou abuſe it, and refuſe to heare thy conſcience, the bleſſing ſh
                  •
               ll turne to a curſe, and that conſcience, which was a counſeller, becomes a ſore tormenter, and vrges thee to put hand into thine owne ſoule, and teare it in pieces. Pilates conſcience ſo judged and tormented him, till hee was faine to put hand in himſelfe, that was his ende. Nowe, what doe Chriſtes accuſers? looke how b
                  •
               ſie Pilate can be to get the innocent ſet at libertie, as earneſt are they to get Him crucified: and now they begin to handle Pilate more ſharply than before. The greateſt arguments they vſed before was taken from a crime laid to the charge of Ieſus, from Ieſus treaſon againſt Caeſar the Emperour, and from His blaſphemie againſt God. Now they leaue off ſuch accuſation, and they laye treaſon to Pilate, & accuſe him of treaſon againſt his Maſter Caeſar, If thou lettest this man looſe, thou art no friend to thy Maſter Caeſar, thou wilt endanger thy ſelfe, and make thy ſelfe guiltie of treaſon: and more, this man will pull the Crowne from Caeſars head: ſo if thou let ſuch a man looſe, thou ſhalt be guiltie of treaſon as well as he, and thou ſhalt be the friend of the enemies of Caeſar: The effect of the accuſation is this, They accuſe Pilate of treaſon againſt Caeſa
                     •
                  
               : now Pilate heard not the like of this all the day before: and as hee ſtudies to keepe a good conſci
                  •
               nce towardes the innocent IESVS, ſo the temptation gro
                  •
               es on. Nowe, it is not poſſible to keepe a good conſcience without temptation both inwardly and outwardly, and aye the better conſcience, the greater temptation, and the laſt the worſt. The Deuill and his impes begins ſoftly with 
                  •
               lluring but in ende, if thou yeeldeſt not they will threaten thee, & ſaye, Thou ſhalt either looſe thy conſcience, or els thy life. Then ye ſhall marke what is the foreſt temptation that the deuill & euill men c
                  •
               n vſe againſt men who haue a conſcience, Either doe or die, as though one tooke

a dagger, and helde it to thy breaſt, and ſaid, Doe, or die, either renounce thy conſcience, or die: there is a ſore temptation: but to whom is this a grieuous temptation? euen to ſuch a man as Pilate was, whoſe God was Caeſar, a man whoſe Heauen was in the honour of this world, a man who ſaw no better life than this preſent life. And marke the craft of Sathan and his inſtruments: vvhen they goe to tempt, there is not a mediciner who can apply their medicine better than they: ere they tempt, they wil ſee the quality of the perſon. So that if they finde a man onely wordly hearted without God, without hope of life, as Pilate was, then they can well bring againſt him tentations from worldly things, if thou wilt not doe it, thou ſhalt looſe the worlde, and thy ſelfe. But if thou doe as I bid thee doe, thou ſhalt haue the world. By worldly things hee will allure the naturall man: and by the loſſe of them, he will terrifie him, and make him to yeeld. This is our leſſon. Let neuer any man againe after Pilate truſt to a naturall conſcience, except hee finde the conſcience propped vp by faith, and with better thinges, and higher things, than the things of this world: and if this conſcience be backed with hope of that life, it will bee a wonder to ſee howe a man will ſtand to the ende: No Crowne, but to him vvho ſtandes to the ende. Hee vvho is ſo backed, hee vvill ſtand againſt the Deuill, and hee vvill ſaye, I care not for this life, vvhen the Deuill tempts him, if I looſe this life, I ſhall get a better, if I looſe the king. I ſhall ſee a more glorious king, if I looſe this vvorld, I ſhall find a better: happie is that man, vvho hath his conſcience backed vvith faith in Ieſus Chriſt, and hath a ſight of Heauen, and of God: It is onely this man and vvoman that can ſtand in temptations againſt the Deuill, and the vvorld.
            Now let vs ſee the effect: Alas, this aſſault vvas ſore to Pilate: we ſhall ſee how by little & little he looſes his conſcience, & inclines to pronounce ye ſentence of damnation againſt the innocent: aſſoone as he heares theſe vvords, he is aſtoniſhed, and in all haſt he brings foorth Ieſus, and comes out in ſight of the vvhole people, and ſits downe in his tribunall: he calles it The Pauement, in Hebrew GABBATHA: we call it an high ſeate or loft vvhere the Iudge ſate: The time is noted when he goes to that vvoefull judgement, to wit, when as the Jewes were in a preparation to the Paſſeouer: the houre is noted. The ſixt houre, which in our account is the twelft houre: the Lord Ieſus was condemned, and deliuered to the men of warre. I neede not to

ſpeake of the calculation of the Iewes; they diuide the day and the night into twelue houres, ſixe houres before noone, and ſixe after noone. The time and the place is ſo particularly noted, that vvee ſhould giue greater credite to the Hiſtorie. But to come to ye matter: Ye ſee clearly, that this laſt temptation had the greateſt force, & aſtoniſhed Pilate, and that conſcience that had ſtood ſo long, it began to ſaile him, and he begins to decline. Then Brethren, note the force of ſuch temptations, what force they haue in reſpect of naturall men: It is impoſſible for a man, who hath nothing but nature, without anie portion of grace in him, to abide the force of ſuch a temptation: When hee is ſtraited with theſe, either to looſe conſcience, or els to looſe honour, riches, life, &c. & ſo to die the death, it is impoſſible for him to keep a naturall cōſcience, & he will think that man to be a wiſe man, who will redeame his life by the loſſe of his conſcience, & will think him a foole, who will lay down his life ere he want his conſcience. Whereto ſhould we inſiſt in this point? O foole! what is thy life when thou haſt loſt ſenſe & conſcience? the ſenſes, wherby men properly liue, are not ſo much theſe outwarde ſenſes, as taſting, touching, ſeeing, hearing, & ſmelling, as the fealing of that inward cōſcience: So if once thou looſe that inward feeling, thou art no better than a beaſt, for they haue all theſe outward ſenſes. What better art thou than dead? No, the carion is not ſo dead as thou, whē thou art paſt feeling: but yet there is worſe: well were it for a ſenſeles man to liue in ſecuritie, that that cōſcience ſhould ſleep: but marke that ſame cōſciēce yt before was a coūſeller, telling thee what was right & wrong, vvhat thou ſhouldeſt doe, and what thou ſhouldeſt not doe, (it is the faithfulleſt counſeller that a man can haue, for it will counſell thee night & day to doe good, & leaue euill) after once thou haſt hardened thine heart againſt cōſcience, ſuppoſe thou lay it aſleepe, and paſſe thy time, yet it will not ſleepe for euer: I forewarne all that haue a ſleeping cōſcience, that it ſhall not ſleepe aye, but it ſhall come with the terribleſt face that euer was, ere all be done. The face of the Burrio was neuer ſo terrible as thy conſcience, when it comes againe to teare thee, rent thee, and draw in pieces thy miſerable ſoule. Howbeit wicked mē for a while will be buſie, playing, riding, and running, to get the tormenter at reſt: yet I tell thee, that if the LORD haue not mercie vpon thee, it ſhall vvaken ſo, that it ſhall neuer ſleepe againe, & neuer let thee reſt. Of all the torments in the world, the worſt is the torment

of the conſcience, driuing thee before the terrible tribunall, to cling in thy ſoule, and drie it vp with the fire of the wrath of God: No peace for the wicked▪ ſleepe on as they will, they ſhall be wakened. Now, Brethren, beſide the force of this tentation, there is an inward malice of the heart againſt the conſcience: Certainely, a conſcience in a naturall man is good, and it is a remnent of grace after the fall, but there is as euill a thing that dwelleth in thine heart, ſince that fall, & that is a bitterneſſe & malice of thine heart, there is ſuch a gall of bitterneſſe, that if there were no more to ſlay them, it is enough. It is not this outwarde tentation onely, that drawes Pilate ſo farre backe, but alſo the malice of the heart: when the conſcience ſounded in his eare, and ſaid, Pilate doe not this, the malice of the heart caried him againſt conſcience. I ſay againe, albeit that there were nothing without thee to moue thee, there is too much within thee. Theſe men who runne headlong vnto blood, to wracke religion, and their countrey, thinke yee not, but they haue aduertiſment in the meane time, by their conſcience, and they know that they doe wrong: But, alas, ſuch is the gall of bitterneſſe, ſuch is the malice of their heart, againſt conſcience that it caries them as mad men with a furie, ouer the belly of their conſcience. Nowe, Brethren, this is well to be marked, When Pilate is ſet downe in His tribunall, albeit he be caried away by his conſcience, will yee looke, yee ſhall ſee a priuie battell betweene the ſpunke of the conſcience he had, and the malice of the heart. When hee ſits downe, he hath a doubt in his heart, that conſcience drawes him backe, that hee dare not at the firſt pronounce the ſentence, but hee ſayes, Behold your King. He ſayes ſcornefully of His Kingdome, yet hee meaneth in his heart, to haue Him looſe: as if he had ſaide: Is this the man? Alas, hee is little likely to bee a King, a poore miſerable ſillie poore man: this is his meaning, that he might moue them to let Him liue: So, as I marked before: the force of the tentation outwarde, and of the inward malice of the heart againſt the conſcience. So I cannot paſſe by this, but in theſe wordes, I muſt marke the ſtriuing of the poore conſcience, albeit it be once dumbe, yet it will come againe & ſay, O miſerable man, thou art gone too farre in this euill action, repent, As the naturall conſcience is a continuall torture, ſo it wil cleaue vnto him, & will not leaue him. Brethren, as the conſcience is an admoniſher, ſo it cleaueth faſt, and no man will get it extinguiſhed, albeit the loune

vvill ſtriue to ſhake it off, yet it vvill ſticke to him, and vvhiſper again to him: but after it be once changed from an admoniſher to a tormentor, vvhen thou haſt tempted it, if it ſtacke to thee before it ſhall ſticke an hundreth times ſorer, and ſhall faſten it ſelfe in thy miſerable ſoule; ſo that if thou vvouldeſt hang thy ſelfe to eſcape, yet the torment ſhall neuer die out. Well ſhake on, and contemne her, ſhee ſhall come, and bee the terribleſt ſight that euer vvas: and, if thou g
                  •
               tteſt no mercie, ſhee ſhall bee thine euerlaſting tormentor in the Hell for euer and euer. Thus farre for Pilates part.
            Now vvee come to the Iewes: They vvould haue nothing but the death of Ieſus, and that a moſt ignominious death: they ſeeing Pilate yet ſtriuing, howbeit they had his head downe, (for nowe they had him at the downefall and ſweruing from conſcience) they had him downe vvith mightier force than before, and they double their temptation: they ſpeake no more modeſtly, but for ſpeaking they ſhout in his eare, that he cannot heare one thing or other, & double the ſhoutings & cryings. Away with him, away with him, Crucifie him, crucifie him. Take heed to this: if once the deuill haue gottē thy head down, that thou ſwerueſt, then he will come with a double force & hee will cry & deaffen thine head: & howbeit the conſcience would cry to thee, hee will make thee ſo daſhed, yt thou canſt not heare the conſcience. Ye know (2. Chron. chap. 28) cōcerning the idolaters who took their ſons & burnt thē quick in a valley neare Ieruſa
                     •
                  ē. whē the children wept, they cauſed timbrels to ſounde, that they might not heare yt pitifull voyce: So it is yt whē the deuill hath gottē thine head once down he ſhal make it ſo dumpiſh, & ſo daſh thee with double forces that he will make thy conſcience to haue no place: therfore, let euery man with al his maine fore reſiſt, & let no tētation ſunder thee from thy conſcience: for once down, & aye down: when a man once ſtumbles on the head of a banke, he will neuer ſtay til he goe ouer the mountaine: cloſe once the eare of the conſcience, and the deuill will deaffen thee, & ſhout ſo in thine eare, that thou ſhalt not heare againe a word of thy conſcience: there is none of vs▪ but wee may find this by experience. Now come to Pilate: whē they ſhout & cry, he ſaies, Shall I crucifie your king? yet hee giues not ouer, hee ha
                  •
               h a doubt in the heart, and a ſtrange fighting: as hee would ſay, Call ye it a well fauoured thing that I ſhould crucifie your king? this he ſpake ſomewhat ſcornefully, halfe in jeſt, and halfe in earneſt. This is a voyce of the conſcience, but of vveake and decaying

conſcience, he ſpeakes doubtfully now by an interrogation putting it in their option: now the conſcience is drawing its laſt breath, & after that ſpeakes not a worde. There are two voyces in the conſcience: one voyce that will ſay reſolutely, I will not doe euill, I will not doe againſt my conſcience for all the world: that is a token of a ſtrong conſcience: The other is, which will ſaye doubtfully, Shall I doe this or not? that is a weake cōſcience, when a man will ſay, Shall I ſlay? ſhal I ſtrike? I will ſay, that man hath done with his conſciēce. The voyce of a ſtrong conſcience will ſay, I will doe this, if God will giue me grace, and for the world I will not doe euill. Come to their part againe, We haue none other king but Caeſar. Alas! woe woe to them that renounce ſuch a King: Hee, and Caeſar might both haue beene their king: Caeſar was but His lieuetennant: and the wickedeſt men that nowe moſt repine againſt Him, ſhall confeſſe Him once to bee their king. Alas, Caeſar is caſten in the poore mans teeth, becauſe he had none other God: and all the care he had, was to pleaſure Caeſar. But marke the hypocriſie of the Jewes: they ſaye, they haue no king but Caeſar: but loued the Iewes Caeſar? No, there was nothing yt they would fainer haue bene quite of, than of him, yet they pretende the authoritie of Caeſar to ſlay the poore mans conſcience, & to crucifie Ieſus Chriſt. This is hypocriſie, they loued not, ye king, for they who loues not God, loue not the King, nor the Kirke. Looke the forme of Hypocrites: Papiſtrie is but Hypocriſie: the Pope is an Hypocrite, and all that rabble, haters of God, of Caeſar, and of the king: they deſire no king, but the king of Spaine, becauſe hee is their Burrio: and, if hee woulde refuſe to be their Hangman, they would hate him as they doe others. They pretend the authoritie of Caeſar to ſlay Chriſt, when they would haue the king ſlaine, and they will pretend God and religion, to murther the king of Fraunce: Fie vpon theſe lownes, let neuer king credite them, woe ſhall be to him. What doe our men pretend? Religion. Our Earles pretend Religion, and Reformation. What is this? a pretence to deſtroy Religion and the King: Shame and confuſion ſhall light on all, and firſt on them, if they gette their intention. The Lord giue euery man and vvoman grace to take heed, that they haue no medling with ſuch men, who vnder the pretence of Religion ſeeke to ſpoyle Religion, the king, and the Countrey for Chriſts ſake: To whom with the Father and the Holie Spirit, be all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, both now and euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE TWELFTH LECTVRE. OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 When Pilate ſawe, that hee auailed nothing, but that more tumult was made, he tooke water, and waſhed his hands before the multitude, ſaying, I am innocent of the blood of this just man: looke you to it. 
                        verse 25 Then anſwered all the people, and ſaide, His blood bee on vs, and on our children. 
                        verse 26 Thus let he Barabbas looſe vnto them, and ſcourged IESVS, and deliuered him to bee crucified.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Then deliuered hee him vnto them to bee crucified. And they tooke IESVS, and led him away.
               
            
            
               WEE haue hearde (Brethren) that Pilate the Romane Gouernour hath ſtriuen verie long againſt the importunitie and obſtinacie of the Iewes and High Prieſtes, to get the Lord Ieſus, whom his cōſcience tolde him was innocent, ſet looſe and at libertie, but all in vaine: for they are as earneſt to haue Him condemned, as Pilate was to haue Him abſolued. At the laſt, when they could preuaile nothing at the hands of Pilate, by any delation, or poinct of inditement againſt Ieſus, whether treaſon againſt Caeſar, or blaſphemie againſt GOD, they come more roundly to the matter, and come to the accuſation of Pilate, & lay treaſon againſt him, If thou let this man goe (ſay they) thou art not Caeſars friend: This is the greateſt temptation that euer Pilate got, hee had no God but Caeſar, he ſought for no honour but in this world, he ſaw no life but this life: therefore, hearing treaſon laide to his charge hee begins to faint & faile, and then quickly hee enters into judgement, and

commeth out, and bringeth out Ieſus, and commeth to his tribunall, in a place called the Pauement, an open place, and there ſitteth downe to giue judgement againſt the innocent: yet hee hath a doubt in conſcience: yea, when hee is running to pronounce ſentence of damnation, hee ſayes, Behold your King, to moue them yet to ſuffer the innocent to eſcape, but hee preuailes not: for once getting Him vnder, Prieſtes and people beginne to ſhout in the eare of the miſerable man, ſo that hee could not heare his conſcience crying, Ieſus is innocent yet for all this, yet he hath a doubt & ſtirre in his conſcience, and ſayes, Shall I crucifie your King. They anſwere, We haue no King but Ceſar: Woe to them that made ſuch change, and they finde it in experience. Now, brethren, Iohn in his Goſpel, Chap. 19. verſe 16: he ſubjoynes that Pilate deliuered Ieſus in the hands of the men of warre, to be crucified, & that they receiued Him, and led Him to the place of execution, But Matthew, as ye heard read, reportes of ſome things that interueened & there are three thinges in ſpeciall (as he recordes) that paſſed before the leading of Ieſus to the place of execution: The firſt thing, Pilate by a ceremonie of waſhing his handes, cleanſes him of the innocent blood: and as hee disburthens himſelfe, ſo he burthenes the Iewes, as guiltie of the moſt innocent blood, that euer was, or ſhall be ſhed: And they are more glad to take on the burthen, than he is to lay it ouer on them: for with their own tongue they bound the blood of the innocent on their owne backe, ſaying, His blood be on vs, and on our children: The ſecond thing that Matthew rehearſes, is, after that he hath exonered himſelfe, as he thought (a vaine thought▪ he was neuer quite of it, nor neuer ſhall be) when he thinkes he is exonered, then he goes quickly to worke, then hee begins to ſerue the foule and cruell appetite of the Iewes, hee lets looſe Barabbas, a foule murtherer: Then as Luke, markes, hee giues out the ſentence of condemnation againſt the innocent, then hee takes Him, and ſcourges Him the ſecond time, and laſtly, hee puts Him in the handes of the Burrio, this is the ſecond thing: yet there is one third thing: when they get Him, they lead Him not incontin
                  •
               nt out of the Portes, to that filthie place of execution: but to ſatisfie the malitiouſneſſe of their heartes, they led Him to the common Hall againe, and there miſ-vſe the Lord of glorie. When all this was done, they leade Him out to the place of execution.
            
               Wee ſhall ſpeake of theſe thinges according to the rehearſall of Matthew: As for the firſt, Matthew ſayes that, When Pilate ſawe that hee could preuaile nothing at their handes, but that more tumult was made, hee cries for water, and waſhes his handes, and makes a proteſtation, I am innocent of the blood of this Iuſt man: And as he proteſts that he is cleane, hee turnes it ouer vpon the Iewes, ſaying, See yee to it: ye ſhall giue an account for this dayes worke, it ſhall be the deareſt worke that euer ye wrought: They ſay, Let His blood be on vs, and on our children. Firſt, wee ſhall marke ſomewhat on the part of Pilate, Secondly, on the part of the High Prieſtes, and the reſt of the Iewes. The Hiſtorie is very plaine. This miſerable man Pilate hath fought on a reaſonable ſpace: yea, a long time for the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, againſt the obſtinacie of the Jewes, at the laſt, when he is charged as guiltie of treaſon, when hee ſees, hee cannot preuaile, and findes him ſo ſtraited with ſo great incommodities, he is compelled to yeelde, and hee thinkes that this neceſſitie ſhould excuſe him for his part well eneugh. Brethren, this is the leſſon: Men commonly, and eſpecially, ſuch as Pilate was: men without God, naturall men, that ſee not another life, that ſee not another world, they will ſtriue, and they will ſtriue wonderfully through the inſtinct of nature, to keep a good cōſcience: but at the laſt if they be importunately ſtraited with great incommoditie, and feare of dangers, they will yeeld and giue ouer. Alas, nature, and all the benefites thereof is but a weake ground, at the laſt they will yeelde: and that good conſcience that they contended to keepe they bid farewell, and at the laſt they will yeelde to a miſchiefe: and when they haue done, they will thinke that neceſſitie, wherewith they were ſtraited: that importunitie of men that compelled them, will excuſe them for their doing ſufficiently: they will thinke, that albeit they put to their hand, to doe the moſt wicked action in the world, that that neceſſitie will disburthen them: This is the judgement of naturall men: But this is as true: What euer hee or ſhee be that perſeueres not to the end, ſhall neuer get the crowne. Take the ſentence: Albeit thou haſt begunne well, if thou go
                  •
               ſt not on to the end, thou ſhalt nor get the crowne of glorie, and the Lord ſhall neuer account of thy former well doing, more than if thou hadſt neuer done a good action. Indeede, I grant, that neceſſity which is without the cōſent & forces & compelles men againſt their wils: As

for example: When our bodies mooued with externall force and violence, without conſent, or voluntarie mouing of the members thereof hurteth another: I ſay, that neceſſitie excuſeth a man, but as for that neceſſitie, which for feare of inconueniences and great dangers to followe, makes a man conſent to an euill action, it excuſeth not. Some will ſay, I was ſore ſtraitted, and I behooued to doe, or die, I ſtroue ſo long as I might: and I ſawe I could not eſcape, if I had not done it: But I ſay, that kinde of neceſſitie, and com
                  •
               ulſion, th
                  •
               t drawes on an euill action vpon thy conſcience, ſhal neu
                  •
               r excuſe thee albeit all the King
                  •
                of ye world ſhould threaten thee, & terrifie thee with the feare of torture, & if thou once conſenteſt, all that ſhall neuer excuſe thee: No, if we once conſent to an euill action, which may hurt the conſcience, wee ſhould rather ſuffer to be beheaded or hanged, & die ten thouſand deathes. The Lord of life, can and will giue thee life, if thou dieſt in his feare: but miſerable ſhall that life bee, that thou ſhalt liue, when thou haſt done againſt the Lord, and a good conſcience. Pilate calleth for water and waſheth his hands: then marke what hee ſayes, I am innocent of the blood of this iuſt man: See yee to it. Well, is this out of his owne mouth: both the ſpeaking and doing of Pilate teſtifieth, that Ieſus was innocent: he confeſſeth, that he was going to condemne an innocent man: ſo I ſee, that the conſcience of the innocencie of Chriſt, neuer leaues Pilate: I doubt not, but hee would gladly haue wanted it. It is a maruell, that during all the time of the ſuffering of Ieſus Chriſt, the Lord will haue the innocencie of His deare Sonne to appeare in the beginning, in the mids, and in the ending thereof. All the time of His accuſation, Pilate preaches His innocencie, when it commeth to condemnation, the Iudge both by word and deed teſtifies that He was innocent: it is not a common perſon, that proteſtes this but the Iudge himſelfe: then againe, looke to the end of this worke, when Ieſus is lifted on the croſſe, then the Father frō the heauen teſtifies, that He was innocent, then the Centurion with the burrio & the men of warre, ſeeing the wonders, are compelled to ſay, this is the Sonne of God, and the people ſeeing this, goe home thumping on their breaſts, & ſay, alas: & ſo they had cauſe: ſo the innocencie of Ieſus Chriſt is declared all this whole time out of the mouth of the Iudge himſelfe, & of many others. What meanes all this? No doubt but ye Father herein had reſpect to ye honour of His Son, for indeede

the moſt honourable death, is to die as an innocent, and if thou wouldeſt die honourably, die not as a guiltie perſon, but die innocently: And this was to aggreadge Pilates damnation, and the damnation of the Iewes: But brethren, there is another cauſe that pertaines more to vs, and ſerues more to our comfort, euen, that we ſhould haue faith in this Mediatour the Lord Ieſus: for except He had died as an innocent, I would neuer lay my ſinne on Him: the thing that makes mee to beleeue, that Hee hath made ſatisfaction, is becauſe He ſuffered innocently, and had no ſinne in Himſelfe, Heb. 7.26. and as Peter ſayes, Hee bare our ſinnnes, becauſe I am perſwaded, He bare my ſinnes vpon Him, I beleeue in Him: ſo this redounds to the comforte of the members of the Church of God. Yet I ſee more here, Pilate he hath not only the cōſcience of the innocencie of Ieſus, but this ſame very cōſcience, it makes him to turne to the Iewes, & to ſummond them before that terrible tribunall. See yee to it, ſayes he, I tell you, ye will giue an account of this dayes worke: ſo this is a citation of the Jewes before that terrible tribunall, and they haue found it, and ſhall finde it: No, Brethren, take heede, thou ſhalt neuer want ſummonding: let Kings, and them who are in authoritie, ceaſe to ſummound thee, let thine owne conſcience neuer ſpeake a worde to thee, nor charge thee, the Lord ſhall not let thee bee without a citation: if thy conſcience will not waken thee, He will waken the conſcience of a Turke or a Pagane, and he ſhall charge thee to appeare before that terrible Tribunall. Thou thinkeſt when thou ſleepeſt, and thy conſcience accuſes thee not, that all is well, no, the Lord ſhall raiſe vp the conſcience of a Pagane to ſummound thee, and I ſay to thee, albeit thou thinkeſt thou art at reſt, when thy cōſcience is ſleeping & wilt ſpend thy time, thou wilt eat & drinke be merrie & take thy paſtime, yet it is one of the moſt heauieſt judgements yt euer God laid on any: & then, whē He hath raiſed the conſcience of another man to warne thee, it is a ſore warning that if thou ſleepe on, and repent not▪ thou ſhalt be wakened, that thou ſhalt not get leaſure to ſay, God be mercifull to mee. This world knowes not what it is doing. Yet marke further, Notwithſtanding all this conſcience of ye innocencie of Ieſus: Alas, I ſ
                  •
               e not this, that his owne conſcience accuſes him, or ſayes to him, Woe to thee, Pilate, thou art going an euill way, thou wilt make thy ſelfe guiltie of that innocent blood, that will burthen thee euerlaſtingly: his conſcience is buſier to

accuſe the Iewes as himſelfe: hee ſhoulde not bee ſo buſie to accuſe the Iewes, as himſelfe: for if his conſcience had accuſed himſelfe ſharply, had he euer ſaid, Thus I am cleane of the blood of this juſt & innocent one? By the contrary, it had vrged out another confeſſion & ſentence, There is nothing but damnation for me, for the cōdemning of the innocent. What ſhould haue bene the cauſe of this? He vvas bu
                  •
                a ſilly naturall man, & his conſciēce was wrong informed concerning that thing: & hee thought himſelfe well enough, ſeeing he had ſtri
                  •
               ē ſo long, & yeelded thorow neceſſity. All this ſluggiſhnes of his conſciēce came of a wrong information, he knew no better. The more thou knoweſt, the better informed conſciēce thou haſt. Striue ay to get knowledge. Alas, that blindnes that man lyes in by nature, that makes thee think, that ſin is no ſin: that is deceit. Striue ay to get a cleare mind, & a well informed conſcience, whereof thou ſhould excuſe thee, and whereof to accuſe thee. Get this out of the word of God, which is the only rule of our life & of all our actiōs, from that light that comes from Heauen, for the light of nature will beguile thee, and it will ſay, that thou art bleſſed, when the malediction of God is vpon thee, and it wil ſay, Thou doeſt well, when thou doeſt euill: Therefore, get that light that comes from Heauen to make thee to ſee. This for Pilates part. Now let vs come to the part of the Iewes: Their part is far worſe. This is a great deformitie, vvhen theſe vvho haue the Oracles of God, are warned by Turkes and Paganes: This is to turne the vp-ſide of the vvorlde downe. Looke howe readie Pilate is to laye off the burthen from himſelfe vpon the Iewes; as readie are they to laye it both vpon their owne backes, and vpon their poſteritie. If this exoneration of himſelfe vvhen hee disburthens himſelfe of the blood of Ieſus, teſtifies, that hee had a conſcience of His blood that vvas innocent: It muſt followe, if the Iewes vvere readie to take on this burthen, then they had no ſight of His innocencie, neither vvere they touched therewith in conſcience: and therefore, like blinded bodies, ſeeing nothing, vvith an imprecation, they tranſlate the burthen from Pilate, and laye it vpon themſelues. Ignorance is euer temerarious: the blinder the bodie is, the more raſhly vvill it endanger it ſelfe. A blind bodie vvithout knowledge, will run it ſelfe ſpeedily & without remorſe into Hell, and will take on ſuch a burthen that it ſhall neuer bee able to laye it off againe. What meanes all this running ſo ſpeedilie in vvicked courſes, but that men vvant conſcience, and

their owne corruption hath blindfolded them: Is there anie man that hath light, that will run on to their death, to daſh themſelues on the ſworde to deuoure them? It is a miſerable thing to want the light of the ſoule: ſo the Iewes ſaw not with whome they had to doe they had no conſcience, as Pilate had, and therefore beeing through malice and appetite of reuenge, incenſed againſt the Lord Ieſus: blindfolded, they regard not what imprecations they vtter, for they ſaw not Hell: or els if theſe Iewes had a light of conſcience, they did ſo raſhly againſt Ieſus with knowledge, which is moſt likely: thē it followes, that they were marueilous malitious: as ignorance is hardie, ſo is malitiouſneſſe more hardie, albeit ſuch a man ſhould ſee, yet againſt the light, his malice will make him to runne ouer the bellie of his conſcience. Yee knowe the voyces of prophane men, Ere I were not reuenged of him, I had rather be in Hell: this commeth of malitiouſneſſe, to get the ſoule ſpirit within him ſatisfied: but if thou felt one twitch of Hell, thou wouldeſt recant theſe wordes: for it would cauſe thee ſhoute, and ſqueele hiddeouſly: & I incline to this judgement, that this wicked action is more to be aſcribed to malice than ignorance: the Iewes and the High Prieſtes had the word of God, and the Prophets, whereby they might haue knowne the Meſsias. When I read of the Prophets that ſpeake of induration in the time of Ieſus Chriſt, I ſay, it hath come of an hardneſſe and induration of heart: And when I ſee the wordes of the Apoſtles, that ſay, O ſtiffe necked people, I thinke that they put their owne fingers in their eyes, that they ſhould not ſee. The Lord ſaue vs from malitiouſneſſe, and namely from ſuch malitiouſneſſe as is not without knowledge: when a man ſees, and will pull out his eyes. Compare the Iewes with Pilate: now Pilate ſinneth, hee k
                  •
               lled himſelfe in the end, and the Lord made his owne hands to be his burrio▪ No doubt, he ſinned, who can excuſe him? he ſinned malitiouſly he had a conſcience, & goes againſt it malitiouſly. But Brethren, to ſpeake the trueth, it was not ſo much malice that puſhed him forward, as great infirmitie and feare for firſt, he feares to be accuſed of treaſon againſt Ceſar: it was no maruell to ſuch a man to feare, who had no God, but Ceſar: 
                  •
               hen hee ſaw appearance of great tumult to riſe amongſt the Iewes. What neceſſitie was laide on them to haue the blood of the innocent So I ſee nothing in them but malice, if it were but in this reſpect, that the ſinne of the Iewes weigheth downe the ſinne

of Pilate, and their damnation is a thouſand times greater. What had this man? He had nothing but nature: The contrauenſion of the light of nature will neuer make vp the ſinne againſt the Holy Ghoſt, which gets no mercie: but come to them. They had the light of nature, and the light that commeth from Heauen: they had the worde of GOD amongſt them, they contraueened an heauenly light that came downe from Heauen, and was wrought into their heartes by the Spirit. Steuen ſayes in the 7. Chapter, and 51. verſe of the Actes of the Apoſtles, Yee haue alwayes reſiſted the Holy Ghoſt, as did your fathers, ſo doe you, that is not a naturall light but a light that came from aboue. There were ſome of theſe men who ſinned malitiouſly againſt the Holy Spirit. What maruell was it then, that they got no grace to repent: for of all ſinnes the ſinne againſt the Holy Spirit, is the moſt dangerous: they that commit this ſinne, haue no grace to repent, & therefore no mercy to them, the Lord ſtrikes their ſoules with impenitencie: ſo that ſoule is euerlaſtingly hardened: and ſo beeing ſtrucken with impenitencie they got neuer grace to ſay, God bee mercifull to me. Seeing then their ſinne againſt Chriſt, was ſo great, ſeeing it was not ſo much of ignorance, as of malice: it was not only againſt the light of nature, but alſo againſt the illumination of the Holy Spirit: what maruell was it, that ſuch a terrible Iudgement ouertooke them, as neuer lighted on any nation. The Iewes found this innocent blood in experience laide to their charge. Ioſeph that ſaw all theſe thinges with his eyes, writeth, what heauie vengeance and judgement fell vpon Jeruſalem & the Iewes: for he teſtifies, that there was ſlaine at the ſiege of Ieruſalem eleuen hundreth thouſand, beſide ninetie thouſand that were tane captiues: thereafter the towne was lamentably deſtroyed and ſacked. So the blood of the innocent neuer left them: & theſe yt remaine, yet feele the judgement of the blood of the innocent: for according as they deſired yt His blood ſhould be vpon them & their poſteritie: ſo the wrath of God came vpon them to the vttermoſt 1. Theſſ: 2.16. It is a wonder that a Iew ſhould be ſafe, & if ye heare of a Iew to be conuerted, thinke it to be a great mercie. Now to apply this ſhortly to vs, if it were but this terrible example of vengeance which folowed the Iewes, it ſhould terrifie to the end of the world, all ſoules to take on the blood of the innocent, take on one, & take on all: if thou takeſt on the blood of one ſeruant of God, thou ſhalt take on all the innocent blood from

               Abel, to that man whom thou haſt ſlaine. Fye vpon foule butchers who are more meete to be butchers dogges, than men. What care they to waſh their handes in innocent blood. But I ſay to thee, if euer thou getteſt grace it is a wonder: fye vpon the butchers of Scotland: No, if the Lord would waken thy conſcience to torment thee, & preſent to thee the ſight of Him of whoſe blood thou haſt ſhed, it would bee ſo terrible, that it would make thee to curſe the time that euer thou did it, & one day fearefully without comfort it will torment thee: when will theſe bloodie men leaue off ye ſheading of innocent blood, in this bloodie & barbarous nation: o
                  •
                all nations it is the moſt barbarous and bloodie. Aboue all things dip not thine hands in the blood of Ieſus Chriſt. Thou who ſheadeſt innocent blood, & is a perſecuter of the ſeruants of Ieſus Chriſt, and who reſiſteſt the trueth, thou wilt ſay, If thou hadſt bene in Chriſts dayes, thou wouldſt not haue cōſented to His death, but thou who ſayeſt ſo, if thou hadſt fallen in theſe dayes, thou hadſt malitiouſly bene partaker of the death of Chriſt, & hadſt put handes in Him, thou wanteſt nothing but time: I will tell you, who is it that ſheds the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, & takes His blood on them, what euer he or ſhe be that will reſiſt this knowne trueth of Ieſus Chriſt, and perſecute the profeſſours thereof, I affirme, they are as guiltie of the blood of Chriſt, as the Iewes & the High Prieſts were, and that ſame blood ſhall bee laide to their charge in the great daye of the Lord▪ Read ye not in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, Chap. 6. and 10. of them who haue repined, & haue begun to caſt off that heauenly power, & ſo goe like dogges to their vomite, & ſpues out the light they had receiued, they are as guiltie of the blood of Chriſt, as Pilate, & trampe the blood of the Couenant vnder their feete. Woe to them that reſiſt the Goſpell, woe to the apoſtate Lordes of this Land, for thus reſiſting the light: there is no light but this, to leade thee to heauen. I denounce woe to them if they continue, the treaſure of wrath, and woe ſhall bee heaped on them, they ſhall be as guiltie as Iudas, or Pilate, or the Iewes: haſtie & ſudden ſhall be their judgement, except the Lord preuent them with repentance, they & their poſteritie ſhall be curſed, & vnderly a terrible vengeance: Woe to their friends, who will joyne with them: Separate thee frō them, as thou wouldeſt ſee ſaluation: Away out of Babylon. Yee would thinke this a light worde, Let his blood bee vpon our head: As they wiſh the blood of the innocent to light on them, ſo it neuer

leaues them, nor ſhall neuer leaue ſo many of them as repented not, the blood of the innocent ſhall lye vpon their backes euerlaſtingly. This ſhould learne vs to take good heed to our wordes: it was but a worde to caſt off the God of glorie, and to take on a Tyrant: They got Caeſar to be their King, and he ſpoyled them: Take good heede to thy words, for thou who vſeſt againſt thy ſelfe imprecations and curſings, and wilt ſay, God plague mee, Gods vengeance light vpon mee, I giue my ſoule to the Deuill, if this or that be not. Well, haſt thou giuen thy ſoule to the Deuill, he ſhall get it: haſt thou taken a curſe vpon thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt bee curſed: it is a wonder that the earth ſhould not open to ſwallowe ſuch men. The Lord makes theſe thinges to come to paſſe: nowe and then Hee makes the curſed creature that vſes ſuch ſpeaches to bee a terrible example. And if thou be a prophane perſon, who wilt ſay, I giue my ſoule to the Deuill, I ſaye, and if the Deuill get thee not then, and thou be not thruſt into Hell, but getteſt repentance, it is a wonder. Such is the judgement of God, that oft times He will let no reuerſion be, except that earneſtly thou ſeeke for grace and mercie, the Lord, I ſay, ſhall make that worde which thou ſakeſt to haue no reuerſion, wilt thou, or wilt thou not: but like as thy foule mouth ſpake it, ſo thou ſhalt bee giuen to the Deuill: for there is nothing more effectuall to a mans deſtruction, than the wordes which proceede out of his owne mouth.
            Well, Pilate is lying in ſecuritie, and hee thinkes himſelfe well enough: when he hath once disburthened himſelfe, he ſits downe, and giues out ſentence, and abſolues a ſeditious vagabonde, He letteth Barabbas looſe vnto them. Woe to them, who will abſolue a ſeditious lowne, and a murtherer. The next thing is more woefull, he begins to giue out the ſentence againſt the innocent, he comes on and ſtrikes Him, hee ſcourges Him: this is the ſeconde time, and when hee hath done, hee giueth Him into the handes of the Jewes, to ſatisfie their wicked appetite. As long as thou haſt a wakened conſcience, and ſo long as it telles thee, This is good, and this is euill, thou wilt not goe ſo boldly and forwardly in euill. (Well is that bodie who hath a wakened conſcience, ſuppoſe it terrifie thee, and holde thee waking) But after it bee once lulled in a ſleepe and ſecuritie, then thou runneſt on, as the arrowe doeth out of the bow, to a miſchife: there is nothing to holde thee, but thou runneſt ſwiftly to miſchiefe. Epheſ. 4.19. After they once loſt feeling, they ranne

out to all wantonneſſe, commiting all vncleanneſſe, with griedineſſe. There was neuer any creature ſo griedy of any thing in the world, as men who liue without conſcience will be of filthineſſe. As thou wouldeſt keepe thy ſelfe, ſo keepe feeling in thy conſcience, & count it more precious than all thinges in the worlde. Nothing can guarde thy ſoule from Sathan, but the approbation of a feeling conſcience. Thou wilt come out with thy Pearles, and with decked cloathing: but if thou want this conſcience, thou art a preye to the Deuill. Fy on theſe men, who lye in ſuch a ſenſeleſneſſe, ſhame and confuſion ſhall light vpon them. Was there euer ſuch a dead and ſenſeleſſe Generation as this? It is a token that Hell is ouer-taking them, ſeeing they lye all in ſuch a ſenſeleſſe ſecuritie. Marke notes a word here that would bee conſidered, Chap. 15. verſ. 15. Pilate did this, to gratifie an euill people: hee would not diſpleaſe the Jewes. This is the common faſhion of Princes, to ſeeke to be populare, to ſeeke the fauour of the people. Looke that a Prince ſeeke not by euill meanes the fauour of the people: for he will hang an innocent man, and let a murtherer goe free, for the fauour of the people: thou buyeſt it too deare, with the loſſe of the fauour of God. Woe be vnto the man, though he were a King, that miſchieuouſly falles abacke from the Trueth, and ſo looſes the fauour of God, for the fauour of Idolaters. But will yee come on yet? Got Pilate the fauour of the people? No: they perſecuted him to the death, they delated him to the Emperour, and hee was baniſhed: and for feare of greater ſhame, hee put handes in himſelfe, and ſlew himſelfe. Yea, if he were all the kings in the world, who ſeekes to gratifie a wicked people in an euill cauſe, namely, in Idolatrie, and if the LORD haue not mercy on him, that ſame people ſhall be his deſtruction. The Lord graunt Kinges and Princes to ſee that howbeit they haue the fauour of the people by vnlawfull meanes, and want the fauour of God, that all the fauour of the people that they can haue, without Gods fauour is nothing: that they may ſeeke Gods fauour aboue all things. And the Lord be mercifull to our King for Chriſtes ſake: To whom be all Honour and Glory, foreuermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XIII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Then the Souldiers of the Gouernour tooke IESVS into the common hall, and gathered about him the whole bande. 
                        verse 28. And they ſtripped him, and put about him a skarlet robe, 
                        verse 29 And platted a crowne of thornes, and put it vpon his head, and a reede in his right hand, and bowed their knees before him, and mocked him, ſaying, God ſaue thee King of the Jewes, 
                        verse 30 And ſpitted vpon him, and tooke a reede, and ſmote him on the head. 
                        verse 31 Thus when they had mocked him, they tooke the robe from him, and put his owne rayment on him, and led him away to crucifie him. 
                        verse 32 And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon: him they compelled to beare his Croſſe.
               
               
                  
                     MARC. CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Then the ſouldiers led him away into the hall, which is the common hall, and called together the whole band,  
                        verse 17  And clad him with purple, & platted a crowne of thornes, and put it about his head,  
                        verse 18  And beganne to ſalute him, ſaying, Haile King of the Jewes.  
                        verse 19  And they ſmote him on the headwith a reede, and ſpate vpon him, and bowed the knees, and did him reuerence.  
                        verse 20  And when they had mocked him, they tooke the purple off him, and put his owne clothes on him, and ledde him out to crucifie him.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 And they compelled one that paſſed by, called Simon of Cyrene (who came out of the countrey, and was father of Alexander and Rufus) to beare his Croſſe.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 So Pilate gaue ſentence, that it ſhould be as they required. 
                        verse 25 And he let looſe vnto them him that for inſurrection and murther was cast into priſon, whome they deſired, and deliuered IESVS to doe with him what they would. 
                        verse 26 And as they led him away, they caught one Simon of Cyrene,

comming out of the fielde, and on him they laide the croſſe, to beare it after IESVS. 
                     
                        verse 27 And there followed him a great multitude of people, and of women, which women bewayled and lamented him. 
                        verse 28 But IESVS turned back: vnto them, and ſaide, Daughters of Ieruſalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your ſelues, and for your children. 
                        verse 29 For behold, the dayes will come, when men ſhall ſay, Bleſſed are the barren, and the wombes that neuer bare, and the paps which neuer gaue ſucke. 
                        verse 30 Then ſhall they begin to ſay to the mountaines, Fall on vs: and to the hilles, Couer vs. 
                        verse 31 For if they do theſe thinges to a greene tree, what ſhall be done to the drie?
               
            
            
               WEE haue hearde (Brethren) theſe dayes paſt, the vvhole accuſation of Chriſt before the Iudge, & the Romane Gouernour Pilate. Laſt, wee came to that woeful ſentence of damnation, pronounced againſt this innocent. Now Ieſus being condemned to die, & to die the ignominious death of ye Croſſe; it reſts, that we ſhould come to His ſuffering on the Croſſe; but before we come to it, wee haue to ſpeake of theſe thinges, namelie, which we haue read vnto you, partlie out of MATTHEVV, and partlie out of LVKE: Then firſt vvee haue to ſpeake of the deliuering of Ieſus into the handes of men of vvarre, to bee crucified at the pleaſure of the Iewes; and howe they receiued Him: and then vvee ſhall ſee vvhat they doe vvith Him, being receiued: they bring Him backe againe beeing receiued, to the common Hall, to a ſecret part thereof, and miſuſes Him at their pleaſure: therefore, vve ſhall come to the leading of Him out: vvith the Croſſe, out of the portes of Hieruſalem, to that vile place vvhere Hee ſhould bee crucified. We ſhall ſpeake of the manner of His going out; howe hee goes out to ſuffer the death of the Croſſe: and laſt, of two incidentes that fell in by the vvaye, as they vvere leading Him out: The one howe Hee met vvith a man, named SYMON of CYRENE, vvhom they compelled to helpe Him to beare His Croſſe: Another, the multitude that followed Him: and as all Nations reſorted to HIERVSALEM at the Paſſeouer, they followed Him, and vvomen followed Him vveeping, Hee turnes, and anſweres them, as yee vvill heare.
            It is ſaide then, that Pilate deliuered IESƲS, vvhen Hee vvas condemned, to the Souldioures to bee crucified: and it is ſaid of them, that as hee deliuered the innocent vnto them, ſo they tooke Him to
               
the common Hall: they are farre readier to receiue Him, and to crucifie Him, than He was to deliuer Him. The leſſon, Brethren, is verie eaſie, and many experiences teaches it dayly: There was neuer yet a wicked Iudge in the world, ſo readie to deliuer the innocent to ſuffer, or to deſire an euill action to be done, as hee will finde wicked executioners vnder him, to put his wicked ſentence in execution: the good Iudges could neuer finde good officers vnder them ſo readily to execute an euill action as the wicked Iudges finde for an euill action.
            
               Saul, when he had Achimeleck, and the Prieſtes of the LORD to ſlay, hee found Doeg the Edomite the knaue readie, and he ſlew fourſcore fiue Prieſts of the LORD, 1: Sam. 22.18. But Dauid the good King, when hee had to doe with Ioab, who had committed many foule murthers, could not put in excution his will, therefore hee laments, and ſayes: I am this day weake, and newly annoynted King: and theſe men, the ſonnes of Seruia are too ſtrong for mee, me, 2. Sam. 3.38, 39. This is oft ſeene of good men: that there are verie few good counſellers in the world, to helpe a good King in a good action: and where ye ſhall finde one good, yee ſhall finde foure euill: Euill men and wicked counſellers are verie riſe: a wicked King ſhall not want, but ſhall get moe than hee deſires: the deuill hath many ſeruants in the worlde, but GOD hath few: Our owne Countrey may ſpeake of the experience of this.
            But to goe forward: When hee hath deliuered the innocent Ieſus to the ſouldiers, and they receiued Him: Take they Him to the place of execution? No, but whilſt all was in preparation, whilſt the place, and the Croſſe, was in preparation, and whilſt all things were making readie, in the meane time the ſouldiers, with the malitious Jewes could neuer get their heart ſatisfied with CHRIST, They bring Him to the common Hall, to the Seſſion houſe, to a ſecret part of it, and vſes Him more cruelly, than they did before: and there They beeing gathered, like as many torturers, there is not one of them, but they abuſe Him: Firſt, They put a crowne of thornes vpon His heade: This is the ſecond time: Next they take off His owne cloathes, and cloathes Him with Purple, and they put a reede in His hande, and they kneele before Him, and mockes the King of Glorie, ſaying, Haile King of the Iewes: Then they take the reede, and ſtrikes Him with it, and in despite ſpits on His face:

When they haue done this, they take off that Royall rayment, and leade Him out, to crucifie Him. Yee woulde wonder at this, for a man, though hee were neuer ſo wicked, a thiefe and a murtherer. yet after hee bee once condemned, men will giue him peace till he die, and men will ſtriue to comfort him before hee die againſt the terroures of death, that hee maye die in peace: yea, his verie enemies will thinke they haue gotten enough, when they haue gotten him condemned, and they deſire no more: But beholde the enemies of our LORD and SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST▪ they can neuer gette their heartes ſatisfied vpon Him, they cannot ſuffer Him to reſt or breathe, their inſatiable vvrath cannot bee ſatiated. The malice of men againſt vvickedneſſe vvill ende, but the malice of men againſt an Innocent, will neuer ende, and namelie againſt him vvho ſuffers for CHRISTES ſake: there is no meaſure of their crueltie, there is nothing that can ſatiate their bloodie heartes: for the children of darkeneſſe doe deadlie hate the children of light: the ſuffering of the Martyres hath euer proued this, that the Antichriſt coulde neuer bee ſatisfied in drinking of their blood. The perſecuters of the Trueth will neuer be ſatiate, there is no ſatietie of the malice of the haert of ye childe of darknes againſt the child of light. If thou hadſt ſlaine a mans father, it may be he would haue forgiuen thee: but and if thou bee the childe of GOD, and if hee bee the childe of darkeneſſe, hee vvill neuer bee ſatiate, till he gette thine heart blood. The IEVVES and the Souldiours could neuer bee ſatiate, till they had gotten the heart blood of the Innocent.
            But Brethren, we muſt looke vp higher: for it was not ſo much with theſe Iewes and Souldiours that IESVS hath to doe, as with an angrie GOD▪ and th
                  •
               t becauſe Hee bare the burthen of our ſinnes: theſe torturers were but inſtrumentes of that terrible wrath of the Father vpon the Sonne: It was not ſo much their wrath, as the wrath of the Father that purſued Him ſo ardently. After Hee was once deliuered into the hands of theſe Hangmē, wrath begins ſo to be powred foorth on Him frō Heauen, that He got no reſt till He was crucified & dead on the croſſe. It is a terrible thing for a ſinner, yea, if hee were a king, who is not in Ieſus, and partaker of His ſuffering, to fall into the hands of an angrie God and a conſuming fire: if thou bee out of Chriſt, thou ſhalt feele it the terribleſt ſight that euer was, howbeit wanton men and women make their paſtime

to anger that great Iudge, going to murther, defiling their bodies and ſoules by harlotrie: it may be for a time, that they get reſt: but after that once that righteous Iudge put hands in thee, I promiſe thee, that thou ſhalt neuer get reſt: The verie reprobate when they ſhall ſee that there is none ende of wrath, ſhall crie: O Lord, ſhall neuer this wrath haue an end: if thou goeſt to Hell, thou ſhalt finde none end of wrath. Now bleſſed is that ſinner that gets grace to haue recourſe to Ieſus Chriſt, & to lurke vnder His ſuffering. When they haue vſed Him ſo vnworthily within the common Hall, and when all is made readie: Then they leade out Ieſus, & caries Him out of the Portes of Hieruſalem, to an ignominious death: and as they lead Him out: ſo Ieſus Chriſt goes out willingly to ſuffer, at the good pleaſure of His Father, knowing that now His houre was come. God forbid, but that wee ſhould thinke that Ieſus Chriſt ſuffered willingly: No, Brethren, in this example of Ieſus Chriſt the innocent: and that His willing going to death, wee ſee, that it is the innocent who goe to death willingly, and namely, they who are innocent in the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, that haue their conſcience ſprinkled with the blood of the immaculate Lambe: As for men, who are not cled with this innocencie, alas for them, It is not poſſible, that theſe can haue conſolation, or can with gladneſſe offer vp their liues: it may bee, that ſome will pretend willingneſſe, but that is but a ſhew: Againe, it may be, that there bee ſome ſenſleſſe bodies, that knowes not how terrible death is, and what euill is in it. O! death is terrible for either Heauen or Hell followes on the taile thereof: and wilt thou count litle of that port, by the which thou paſſeſt from this life to eternitie. So, ſome may be ſenſleſſe, as a Kow goes to the ſhambles: and ſome may haue a falſe conſcience: but if thou haue not an aſſurance, that thou art waſhed with the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, Woe ſhall come to thee, wrath ſhall light on thee. There is no conſolation in death to any, but to theſe who die in the innocencencie of Ieſus Chriſt. I marke the manner how He goes out: He goes out, bearing His owne Croſſe: or rather drew it after Him: this was after the manner of the Romanes, that the man whome they condemned to die this death, they commanded to beare His Croſſe, and therefore they were called Furciferi, gallowes bearers: now they practiſe this on the innocent Ieſus.
            Nowe to come to it, that falles out whilſt Hee is bearing His

Croſſe. As they are going out, They meete a man by the way whoſe name was Simon, the father of Alexander and Rufus, a man in a towne of Africa, and the towne was called Cyrene, a laborious man, retu
                  •
               ning from the Countrey, to Hieruſalem, they meete the poore man, and compelles the man to take vp the one ende of the Croſſe Ieſus goes before, and he goes behind: they would not haue Ieſus relieued: No, they pitied Him not, but they would haue Him formeſt in the burthen. Thinke not, Brethren, that this re
                  •
               ieuing was of any compaſſion they had to Ieſus: No, they had no pitie vpon Him: but it came to p
                  •
               ſſe, becauſe Chriſt Ieſus was faint, weake, and we
                  •
               ried vnder the burthen: and no wonder, He was a man: He tooke on our nature, and all the infirmities thereof, that wee might bee made ſtrong. After that once the Lord had fallen in their handes, Hee got no reſt, Hee got no ſleepe that night, Hee faſted, and His ſoule was vexed: and then all that night, and all that day following, from the morning to the noone-tide, hee got no reſt, but was twiſe ſcourged, and buffeted: As for the ſouldiers, they thought themſelues too gay: As for the Iewes they thought themſelues too holy, and in end He was made a curſe (but for our cauſe) And therefore meeting with this Gentile, Simon, they compelled him to helpe Him. This wants not a Myſterie: This Simon was a figure of the Gentiles, and this calling, albeit of compulſion, ſignifies our calling, beeing Gentiles, to take vp our croſſe, and followe Ieſus out of the portes of Hieruſalem. And as the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes Chap, 13. verſe 13. ſayes, Goe foorth of the Ca
                     •••
                  e bearing His reproach: for here we haue no continuing citie: but wee ſeeke for one to come. As for the Iewes, they would neither touch Chriſt, nor His Croſſe with their finger, becauſe they judged Him accurſed. Indeede, I grant, GOD made Him accurſed, but Hee was made a curſe, that wee ſhould bee the bleſſing of GOD, through H
                  •
               m: As Paul ſayes to the Galathians, Chap. 3. verſe 13. Wouldeſt thou know thy felicitie in this worlde, and in the worlde to come: it ſtands in joyning with that man that was accurſed, & whoſoeuer thou be, yt ſhalt not joyne with this man who is accurſed, I giue thee this doome, Curſed ſhalt thou be euerlaſtingly, vengeance & malediction ſhall lie on thine head euerlaſtingly. We are Gētiles, not Iewes: let vs thē with this Simon of Cyrene take vp ye Croſſe of Chriſt, & follow Him out of the portes of Hieruſalem, to beare His ſhame, yt we may be partakers of His glory: if thou be not partaker

of His ignominie and ſhame, I denounce to thee, thou ſhalt not be partaker of His glorie: thou who waſt not humbled with Chriſt, thou ſhalt neuer be exalted with Him: this for the firſt incident. There is another thing that falles out, whereof wee read in the 23 Chapter Luke, as He goes to the place of execution, it is ſaid, that the multitude followed Him: This multitude was not onely of the Iewes, but alſo of all Nations who reſorted to Hieruſalem, at the time of the Paſſeouer. Nowe this multitude followed to ſee what ſhould become of Him, as men who are inclined to ſee wonders. S
                  •
               e on what minde thou followeſt a man to death, theſe ſpectacles are ſpectacles of thy miſerie: they followe to ſee the faſhion: but ſurely this following of Chriſt, and this going of Chriſt to His ſuffering with ſuch a multitude, learneth vs a leſſon: it pleaſed the Father, that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould ſuffer an open ſhame: He would not haue Him ſtollen down, or ſecretly executed in the night: He would haue Him accuſed publikly before the great Iudge, who repreſented Ceſars perſon: Then as Hee went out, He would haue all the worlde to ſee Him: and then Hee would haue Him mounted vp, and nailed vpon the Croſſe in the face of the world: in a worde, the Father would haue the Sonne who became ſuretie for vs, to die; and not onely to die, but alſo to be pined: and not onely pined, but alſo to bee pined ſhamefully. There is not a ſinne in the worlde, (let wanton men take their paſtime in ſinne, albeit it were done neuer ſo ſecretly, goe to thy chamber & doe it, doe it in the night, goe to holes and moſt ſecret places and commit wickedneſſe) but the end thereof, how ſecret ſo euer it was, ſhall bee with open ſhame: I denounce againſt ſecret ſinnes againſt God, thy ſecret ſinnes ſhall bring an open ſhame to thee, if thou haue not recourſe to the ſhame of Ieſus: either of neceſſitie thou muſt ſuffer in thy perſon eternally, and drinke out the full cuppe of the wrath of God: or els, thou muſt haue recourſe to the ſhame of Ieſus Chriſt: and this is our comfort, that wee haue: Wilt thou firſt of all repent thee (an impenitent man will neuer get the cloake of Chriſts righteouſneſſe to couer his ſhame) and turne and beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt: Wilt thou haue recourſe to Him, and loure vnder His Paſſion: I promiſe thee, that thou ſhalt neuer come to an open ſhame: it my bee that men come to an open ſhame for ſinne in this worlde, but in the worlde to come, I promiſe thee, thou ſhalt not ſuffer any ſhame, in that daye thy

ſinnes ſhall not come to the light, neither man nor Angell ſhall ſee them. But if thou haue not recourſe to Ieſus, thou ſhalt bee roo
                  •
               ed out like a thiefe out of a hoale, before millions of millions of Angels, and before all the worlde, and the ſecrets of thine heart ſhall bee reueiled, and heapes of the wrath of God, ſhall bee powred on thy miſerable head: Hell ſtands not only in paine, but in ſhame and confuſion: thou ſhalt goe downe to Hell with a fearefull ſhoute, from the ſight of this world, at that judgement.
            Now to come to theſe women: amongſt the reſt there followes Him certaine women out of Hieruſalem: there is a great difference betweene them and the multitude: women oft times ſhames men. The ſouldiers pities Him not, their pleaſure is in His miſerie: wee ſee not heere, that any of the multitude mournes, but it is ſaide, that the women of Hieruſalem that followed Him, wept for Him. This was done of the Father, to teſtifie His innocencie, the Father at all times, will haue the innocencie of His Sonne witneſſed: during the time of His accuſation, the Iudge preached His innocency: & as he was giuing out the ſentēce againſt Him: he both by deed, in waſhing of his hands, & word, teſtifies His innocencie: And now whilſt He goes out, Hee makes theſe women to bewaile Him. No queſtion all this was done by the Lords prouidence, Ieſus the innocent Hee was lamented for. Wilt thou bee innocent like to Him, thou ſhalt not want bewailing: ye ſee this, if he be a thiefe, and hee bee penitent, and haue recourſe to Ieſus, and ſeeke to be innocent with that innocencie of Ieſus Chriſt, men will pitie him: but eſpecially in that great daye, if thou appeareſt innocent in the innocencie of Ieſus Chriſt, thou ſhalt get ſuch pittying of God, and of all the Angels, that thou ſhalt neuer die, but ſhalt be receiued to glorie: and if thou appeareſt before Him without this innocencie, thou ſhalt not be bewailed: none ſhall pitie thee, neither God, nor Angell, but thou ſhalt goe to deſtruction: and when thou art going to Hell, thy father nor thy mother ſhall not weepe nor lament for it, but ſhall rejoyce & approue Gods judgement. Yee ſee then, howe good a thing it is to be innocent in the innocencie of Ieſus Chriſt, albeit wee be not innocent, but guiltie in ourſelues. When Chriſt heares the lamentation and mourning of the women, Hee lookes ouer His ſhoulder, And beholding them, He ſtandes, and ſpeakes, Daughters of Hieruſalem, weepe not for mee, but

for your ſelues, and for your children: and He giues the reaſon wherefore they ſhould weepe ſo, becauſe of that fearce & terrible judgement which ſhould ouer-take Hieruſalem, and all for this innocēt blood, and for the refuſall of that innocent One: For beholde, the dayes will come (ſaies Hee) when men will ſay, Bleſſed are the barren, and the wombes that neuer bare, and the pappes that neuer gaue ſucke. Then ſhall they begin to ſay to the mountaines, Fall on vs: and to the hilles, Couer vs. And vn
                  •
               er the deſtruction of Hieruſalem, Hee vnderſtands & adumbrates that terrible judgement & wrath in the latter day, & that great deſtruction that remaines for the wicked: & He confirmes this judgemēt which He threatens, by an argument taken from the greateſt to the ſmalleſt, If they doe ſo to a griene tree, what ſhall they doe to a withered? what ſhall they doe to you? By the greene tree Hee meanes Himſelfe, who in Himſelfe was freſhe, ſappie, greene, and fruitfull, albeit for vs Hee was like a drie tree, becauſe Hee was guiltie for vs. And by the drie tree Hee meanes vs, who are vnfruitfull in our ſelues, and meete for nothing, but for confuſion, to be caſten into the fire. Marke heere ſhortly of this: It is the ſenſe of miſery that makes any bodie to weepe: No doubt when one weepes ſore, the heart hath a ſenſe of miſery: and this ſenſe is either of a mans owne miſery, or for a ſympathie of the miſerie of another. They who haue a ſenſe of the miſerie of others, they will mourne. I ſee fewe of this ſort in theſe dayes. There are few now that will weepe for the miſery of another. All ſympathie is out of the world, and the pleaſure of men is in the pleaſure of others. Indeede I thinke that Ieſus condemned not this compaſſion. Certainely, compaſſion vpon the eſtate of another is good. Away with a pittileſſe heart, for it hath not felt the mercie of God, and bowels of His compaſſion. But this is Chriſtes will, that the ground of their lamētation ſhuld not be ſo much His ſuffring for them as the ſenſe of their owne miſery & ſinne, which brought Him to ſuch a miſery. The Lord would haue the women conſidering the greatneſſe of their owne miſery, which made Chriſt for their cauſe to bee ſo miſerable: that should haue beene chiefelie the cauſe of their mourning: that shoulde haue beene the cauſe of their dolour: for as Iohn ſaies out of Zacharie, They ſhall ſee Him whome they pearced. Our ſinnes haue pearced Him. The godly in the latter daye, when they ſhall ſee Him, they shall mourne. It was not ſo much the Souldiours that pearced Him, as thy ſinnes. Haue not therefore thine eye ſo much on Pilate, Herode, or the Iewes, or on the

men of warre, or Hang-man, as on thy ſelfe, and on thine owne ſinnes: for it was thy ſinnes that pearced Him thorowe: and in the latter day, when the godly shall ſee Him, whome they haue pearced, they shall weepe. Turne thine eyes on thy ſelfe, and let the ground of thy weeping bee for thine owne ſinne, that pearced the Innocent.
            There is another thing heere worthie to bee conſidered: I ſee it is a good thing to bee in heauineſſe: and yee ſee that the LORD ſpeakes nothing to the men of warre, nor to anie others in the way, but onely to the poore women who were weeping: Hee comfortes them, and inſtructes them, Hee leades them to the grounde of their weeping, to the ende that they shoulde repent, and haue recourſe vnto Him. The beſt eſtate of men and women, is to bee ſadde in heart, and mourning, either for their owne miſery, or the miſery of others: for the Lord ſaies, Bleſſed are they that mourne, for they ſhall bee comforted. And, GOD dwelles in a coutrite heart, ESAY. CHAP. 66. VERS. 2. PSAL. 51. VERS. 19. Thou who laugheſt, thou needeſt no comfort. Thou who art mourning for thy ſinnes, and the ſinnes of the worlde, the Lord Hee shall ſpeake to thee, and giue thee conſolation with His owne mouth. Nothing becommeth a Chriſtian better, than ſadneſſe, and to haue his ſinnes before his eyes, and to bee ſadde both at noone and at Euen: for all this joye that a true Chriſtian hath, is ſadneſſe. Awaye with wantonneſſe, mocking, and jeſting, there is no true joye there: and the Lord vſes not to comfort ſuch, nor ſpeake to ſuch, for they neede it not. I fore-warne thee, that thou shalt neuer gette the taſte of that joye, but in teares: and then vvhen the heart is broken, and caſten downe, then the LORD is mighty to raiſe thee vp, and to comfort thee. The Lord therefore giue vs grace, when wee looke to the death and paſſion of CHRIST, that wee maye gette a ſenſe of our owne miſerie: and that wee maye bee in ſadneſſe, and mourne, that our ſinnes pearced the ſides of the innocent, vvho vvas the GOD of Glorie: and that vvee maye haue recourſe to this ſuffering, and gette grace in our LORD: To vvhom with the Father and the Holie Spirite, bee all Honour, Praiſe, and Glorie, for euer and euer: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XIV. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33 And when they came vnto the place called Golgotha, (that is to ſay, the place of dead mens skulles) 
                        verse 34 They gaue him vineger to drinke, mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drinke.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE 15.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And they brought him to a place named Golgotha, which is by interpretation, the place of dead mens skulles. 
                        verse 23 And they gaue h
                        •
                     m to drinke wine mingled with myrrhe: but he receiued it not.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 32 And there were two others which were euill doers, led with him to be ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And hee bare his owne croſſe, and came into a place named of dead mens skulles, which is called in Hebrewe, Golgotha:
               
            
            
               NOwe ye haue heard (Brethren) of the accuſation of CHRIST before the Iudge Pontius Pilate, and of His condemnation out of the mouth of the Iudge Pilate, and then wee heard that after the ſentence of damnation was pronounced, he deliuered Him into the handes of the Iewes to bee crucified, they take Him, and firſt of all they leade Him in againe to a moſte ſecret part of the Common Hall, and there they handeled Him more freely, yea, more vilely than euer before, ſeeing Hee was a condemned man: and when they had vſed whatſoeuer indignitie they pleaſed againſt Him, they leade Him to the place where Hee ſhould be executed. In the Hiſtorie wee haue marked three or foure things that

fell out in the way: Firſt, how the Lord is bearing His owne Croſſe to the place of execution: Next, Hee beeing wearied vnder the burthen, one Simon of Cyrene comming from the Countrey to the towne, is compelled to take vp one ende of the Croſſe, to helpe him: So Ieſus goes before, and beares the one end of the Croſſe, Simon of Cyrene followes, bearing the other end thereof: The third thing: the multitude followes, men of all countreyes, that were conueened, and come out of Ieruſalem, at ſuch a ſolemne time at the Paſſeouer: Amongſt the reſt, there were women of Ieruſalem, better than the reſt of the multitude, who followed him, and wept for him. Wee haue heard what anſwere the Lord gaue them, and how he inſtructed them in the right cauſe of their weeping. Now the laſt thing that is marked: it is this, that we haue read out of the Goſpel of Luke, there were led out two thieues with him. Then in this dayes exerciſe, we ſhall heare of theſe points: The firſt, concerning the two thieues that were led out with him: The next is concerning the place: The third is concerning the ſowre & bitter drinke that they gaue him to drinke: The fourth, concerning the act of the ſuffering, and fiftly, concerning the houre.
            To returne to the firſt: As hee goes out to the place where hee ſhould ſuffer: There are ledde out with Him two thieues, to ſuffer with him in that ſame place: Ieſus is ledde out to the place of execution like a thiefe, beeing innocent, and ledde out with thieues to ſuffer with thieues. Amongſt all the reſt of the things that Ieſus Chriſt ſuffered, beſide the paine that he ſuffered in ſoule and bodie, he ſuffered extreame ſhame, as we ſay, hee was ſhamed and ſhent: I ſhewed to you, that ſhame followed alwayes vpon ſinne. Ieſus Chriſt tooke vpon him the ſinnes of the world, and therefore hee behooued to ſuffer ſhame before the worlde. The Lord Ieſus Chriſt was ignominious in reſpect of the painfull and ignominious death: for hee was mounted vp vpon the Croſſe, in preſence of them all: and in reſpect of the multitude, all the worlde was gazing vpon him: and in this reſpect, when hee goes out to ſuffer, hee is counted a thiefe among the thieues, and the Lord was alſo ignominious in reſpect of the place.
            Brethren, in this matter, I looke not ſo much to the Iewes, or to the ſouldiers, as I looke to his Father in heauen: who was the diſpoſer of this whole worke. There was nothing done, but that which GOD the Father had decreed to

bee done, and vvhat Hee does concerning His Sonne, Hee does it moſte juſtlie: for IESVS became ſuretie for the ſinnes of the vvorlde, and Hee bare the burthen not onelie of murther and theft: but of all the ſinnes of the Elect. And as He goes out with the two Thieues, Hee bare the burthen of one of them, and relieued him of his ſinnes: and the one of them that ſame night ſupped with Him in Paradiſe: Therefore, ſaye I, vvhatſoeuer was the part of the Jewes or of the Souldioures▪ yet the doing of the FATHER to the SONNE was moſte juſt. And when wee reade of this, let vs bleſſe the FATHER of IESVS CHRIST, for wee haue good cauſe ſo to doe: For in this juſtice Hee ſhewes great mercie towardes vs: and, if Hee had not done this, woefull and miſerable had the eſtate of man beene. Now I come to the place, which in Hebrew is called GOLGOTHA, that is, a place of dead mens skulles, or braine pannes. This place was without the portes of the Towne of Hieruſalem. And no queſtion Ieſus like an vnworthie reprobate was carried out of the portes of Hieruſalem to ſuffer, and this was figured vnder the Lawe. The beaſtes that were to be offered were carried out of the campes of the people, and there vvere burnt, and afterwardes their blood was carried into the Sanctuarie, to bee a typicall propitiation for the ſinnes of the people, and the people were ſprinkled therewith: Euen ſo, IESVS CHRIST, that eternall Sacrifice, was carried out like an out-caſt out of the portes of the Towne, to ſuffer that ignominious death, that when Hee had ſuffered Hee might enter in with His precious blood into that Heauenlie Sanctuarie for the ſinnes of the world by that eternall propitiation, HEBR. CHAP. XIII. VERS. 11. and 12. Concerning the name of the place wherefore it is ſo called, there is great controuerſie and doubting: Some thinke that it was ſo named, becauſe the skull (or braine panne) of ADAM was delued vp out of that ſame place where the Croſſe was ſet, and vvhere IESVS ſuffered. But I count this but a vaine fable of the vain Papiſts, for their Legēds are full of ſuch like fables. And again, ſome thinke that it was ſo named, becauſe in this place were vſed to bee caſten heapes of skulles, and dead mens bones to bee kept, which vſe may bee ſeene in ſundrie partes, and this is more likely. And laſt, others thinke that it was ſo named, in reſpect of the figure & ſhape of the place: It was a round knoll, like a mans head, riſing vp, and round at the height; alſo, it was high, that theſe who were

executed might be a ſpectacle to the people to be wondred at, and therefore in reſpect of the ſhape, it was called Caluarie, that is, the skull of a dead man: and thoſe who haue reſorted to thoſe parts, they report this day, that the ſame place is a round knolle like a dead mans skull, where the Lord Ieſus was crucified beſide Ieruſalem. But how euer it be, this is moſt certaine, that this place was ſhamefull and ignominious: and the innocent is conueyed to that place where the murtherers vſed to bee execute. No doubt, it was vile, and ſtinked, yet it hindred not that ſweete ſauour to aſcend to the Father, through His death, and the more ignominious that the death was, the glorie and triumph was the greater, and the more ſtinking that the place was, the more ſweetly ſauoured Hee to the Father, His ſacrifice had a moſt ſweet ſmell in the noſthirles of the Father. This is the thing that I marke: I ſee, that theſe Iewes who perſecuted the Lord of glorie to the death, cannot bee ſatisfied, and the hatred againſt the innocent is endleſſe. They are not content that He die a ſhamefull death: but they will haue Him to die a ſhamefull death in a ſhamefull place, and they will haue Him conuoyed and led out like a thiefe. No, brethren, the hatred of the worlde againſt the children of the light, hath none ende: they hated the Lord firſt: The Lord Ieſus is the light of the world, and euer from that day the children of darkneſſe ſhall neuer ceaſe to hate the children of light: aſſoone ſo euer as a man ſhall profeſſe that he appertaines to Ieſus Chriſt, at that ſame moment, the worlde, and the children of darkneſſe ſhall beginne to hate them, and to perſecute them: As the rage of the Iewes was vnquencheable againſt Chriſt, ſo it was after His paſſion and aſcenſion againſt all Chriſtians. Brethren, in this matter, we muſt paſſe aboue the malice of the Iewes, and behold the counſell of God, and ſee, that all this doing comes from Heauen, for the Father doth it, albeit He vſe the miniſterie of theſe Hangmen: I ſee this, He layes on ſhame vpon His owne Sonne: and not only ſhame, but He heapes ſhame vpon ſhame vpon Him: He will firſt haue Him ſhamed in respect of the death of the Croſſe: then Hee will haue the world to gaze vpon Him: and next, in reſpect of the two thieues that were ledde out with Him: and then in reſpect of the place: Hee will haue Him to ſuffer ſhame in all things, in preſence of the world: So that one would wonder, that the Father would purſue the Sonne with ſuch extremitie of wrath: it is no

ſmall thing to take on the burthen of ſinne. O ſinfull ſoule! runne vnder ſinne as thou wilt, yet one day thou ſhalt find it the heauieſt burthen that euer was. If the ſuretie ſuffered ſuch a paine, and ſuch a burthen, what ſhall become of thee? If thou by thy ſelfe ſhalt vndertake ſuch an heauie burthē of wrath for thy ſins? But Brethren, the thing that appertaines to vs concerning the place of execution is this: All this proceſſe & judgement is a type of that great & terrible judgement of the world in that Great day: & ye ſhall ſee that viſible judgement to bee like this judgement that was holden on Ieſus. He ſuffers like a reprobate, and is judged, and that ſame thing that Ieſus ſuffered temporally, when the great Iudge ſhall ſit, the reprobate ſhall ſuffer eternally. Then take heede: It is a terrible thing to fal into the hands of that liuing God, who is a conſuming fire. Looke to it as yee will, for whoſoeuer hee be that ſhall not bee ſaued in Ieſus in that day, beſide all the ſhame that they ſhall beare, the verie place wherein they ſhall ſuffer ſhall adde ſomething to their ſhame: As their ſoule and bodie ſhall bee ignominious; ſo the place ſhall be ſtinking: the very place ſhall heape ſhame after ſhame: let Hell bee where it will, it is the moſt ſhamefull and ignominious place that euer was: and thou ſhalt bee ſhamed and ſhent whoſoeuer ſhall bee caſten into it. And by the contrarie, in that Great daye of Iudgement, they who ſhall bee ſaued in this IESVS, as they ſhall be glorious manie wayes: ſo euen in reſpect of the place, they ſhall be glorious. That Heauenlie Hieruſalem is the pleaſandeſt place that euer was, and thoſe that ſhall come to Heauen, beſide all that glorie that they ſhall haue therein, they ſhall haue glorie in the verie place: for Chriſt ſuffered in a place, foule, vile and ignominious, that they might dwell for euer moſt glorious in that glorious place, that Heauenlie Paradiſe.
            Nowe to come to the third, vvhich is that drinke vvhich is propined vnto CHRIST when He comes to that place: no queſtion He was verie thirſtie: beſide the paine, He had an extreame thirſt: and beeing thirſtie, Hee deſired to drinke: Hee vvas a vvearied man, for He vvas holden all the vvhole night ouer vvithout either meate, drinke, or ſleepe, yea, and all the next daye alſo, beſide the feare of death: and therefore, it vvas no maruell that Hee deſired to drinke. And MATTHEVV ſaies, that they gaue Him Vineger to drinke, mixed with Gall: Then, both ſoure and bitter vvas His drinke. Now it is true that Sainct MARKE ſaies, that it vvas Wine mixed

with Myrrhe: All is alike: for Myrrhe hath the bitterneſſe of the gall. There are ſundrie opinions about this drinke, which they gaue Him: Some thinkes that this was a delicious drinke, and that it was caried there, and offered by the women who followed Him weeping: to the end He might feele the leſſe paine, ſo long as Hee vnderlay ſo longſome and cruell death. There are others who thinke that this drinke ſerued to haſten the death: becauſe the death was painfull, for they count Myrrhe to be of this force, that it will caſt out blood at any wound. So when the LORD had drunke, they thought, that the blood ſhould haue ſpringed out at the wounds, and ſhould haue moſt haſtely procured His death.
            But I leaue theſe opinions, and I thinke, that this was no delicious drinke: and I thinke againe, that this drinke was not giuen to haſten His death: & I think that this ſowre & bitter drinke, was offered in deriſion and ſcorne by the Iewes, and ſouldiers, who had no pitie nor compaſſion vpon Him, and that of the bitter malice of their heartes they offered it to Him. No mercie for Chriſt now, but all extremitie: and to thinke ſo, I am partly moued by that Prophecie which is contained in the 62. Pſalme, and 22. verſe, wherein the LORD is brought in, complaining and ſaying, In my thirſt they gaue mee vineger to drinke: and partly, by the Hiſtorie following, wherein it is ſaide, Then they brought Him in deriſion a ſponge with vineger, and put it to His mouth: and this His drinke is to bee counted a part of His Paſſion. Of this we haue this leſſon, alwayes keeping this ground, That this Iudgement is a type of the latter Iudgement. Amongſt all the paines that they ſhall ſuffer, who ſhall not bee found in IESVS CHRIST, they ſhall thirſt to death, both of ſoule and bodie, as the LORD thirſted, who was counted as a reprobate: ſo the reprobate ſhall thirſt exceedingly: And as the LORD got not ſo much as a drinke of water, to quench His thirſt, no more ſhalt thou.
            As the rich Glutton, when hee was in Hell, could not get one droppe of water to coole his tongue, that was ſo ſore burning in torment: no more ſhalt thou bee quenched of that eternall wrath: for ſinne brings the moſt terrible drowght and hotneſſe in the ſoule and body that euer was. Thou ſhalt drinke the cuppe of the bitter wrath of God for euer & euer▪ 
               Bleſſed are they who hunger &

thirſtes for righteouſneſſe they ſhall be filled, ſayes Chriſt. They who ſhall bee ſaued in Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall neuer thirſt, for they ſhall haue in their bellies the fountaine of liuing water. Ieſus Chriſt, when this drinke is propined, Hee taſtes it, and would haue no more of it, becauſe as Ieſus Chriſt bare the nature of man, ſo Hee had this naturall taſte, and nature abhorred this drinke: And albeit that patiently He ſuffered all injuries of others: yet Hee would not vſe violence againſt nature to His owne ſelfe: let one ſuffer violence of others, but doe no violence to thine owne ſelfe: Yet we ſee, that albeit He knew well eneugh, both the bitterneſſe and ſowreneſſe of it, yet Hee taſted it: This learnes vs, that there was no bitterneſſe nor ſowrneſſe but the LORD would taſte it, that thou ſhouldeſt not onely taſte, but alſo drinke, yea quaffe all delicious and ſweet drinke euermore: yea, not only of the water of life, but euen the delicious drinke of this worlde, for refreſhment of our bodie. Then when thou art drinking a ſweet drinke, remember that Ieſus Chriſt dranke a bitter drinke, that thou ſhouldeſt drinke a ſweete drinke. Otherwiſe, I tell thee, drinke on, and pamper thy belly as thou wilt, thy ſweete drinke ſhall become a bitter curſe vnto thee.
            Now we come to the very action of crucifying: Hee is thirſtie, He cannot get the thirſt quenched: He muſt ſuffer the death with an extreame thirſt: there is not a thiefe, but hee will get a drinke. The men of warre come to the execution: and firſt, they ſtripped the LORD of glorie: They take His garments off Him: So the LORD, before Hee was mounted vpon the Croſſe, Hee was ſtripped naked, and then beeing ſtarke naked, they mount and ſpread out that glorious bodie on the Croſſe, And nailes Him with nailes: and this is complained of before: They pierced through mine hands and my feete, Pſalme 22.17. And now beeing nailed on the Croſſe, it commeth to paſſe, as Paul ſayes in the Epiſtle to the Galathians, Chap. 3. verſe 13, 14: Hee is become a curſe for vs, that wee ſhould become the bleſsing of God in Him: Not that Ieſus beganne then to be accurſed of the Father, when He hang vpon the Croſſe: No, from the time of His conception: euen all the time that Hee was in the world: As our ſinnes were laide vpon Him, ſo the curſe of God was on Him, purſuing our ſinne: All theſe three and thirtie yeeres that Hee liued in the worlde, the curſe of God goes neuer off Him: for the curſe of God neuer leaues ſinne. A wicked man

will ſeeme to bee bleſſed, and to proſper, and who will ſit at ſuch eaſe as he will, play him, and bleſſe himſelfe in his owne heart, but vvhen hee comes to a miſerable ende, and dies a miſerable death, when the miſerable death appeares, then the world ſees, that that man was curſed. It appeared not that Ieſus Chriſt vvas curſed, till He vvas dying, and going to be nailed on the Croſſe, then all the vvorld ſees that Hee is curſed, beſide all the things that ſinne brings on a man to: it ſhall bring thee to a ſhamefull death: and if thou bee not found in Ieſus Chriſt, and bee not couered with His Croſſe, then thou ſhalt die in the ende a curſed death: although thou be in thy bed, and thy Wife, thy friends, and all thy children about thee, the death that thou ſhalt die, ſhall be accurſed. Bleſſed are they who die in the Lord: Curſed are they vvho die not in the Lord, let them be hanged, beheaded, or die in their bed, terrible ſhall be that death that followes after this death: The death that He died, vvas a ſore & odious kinde of death, to a man to be taken quicke, and nailed quicke on the Croſſe: and no doubt, Hee hang for the ſpace of three houres: ſo as ye death of thoſe vvho are not in Chriſt, is accurſed, ſo it is ſore: He ſuffered not only this paine in body, No, the chiefe torment vvas in ye ſoule, & it vvas tormented vvith that bitter ſenſe of the vvrath of the Father. It is not a death of the body that ſinne brings on, it brings an extreame bitter paine to the ſoule. The Lord dies not in a moment, hee is dying, and not dead, a viue image of the death of hell: thou ſhalt die in the paine of hell, and neuer get an end. Thoſe vvho die in Chriſt, die vvhat death they will, bee they beheaded, or hanged, or drawne in raxes, or burnt, they ſhall neuer die a curſed death: their death is a ſweete death, and all the joyes that euer was, ſhall iſſue of their death: It muſt be ſo, What makes a curſed death but ſinne: and if thou be in Him, as IESVS was crucified: ſo thy ſinne is nailed vpon His backe: and therefore beeing taken away, what muſt followe, but that thou muſt be glorified.
            And either thou ſhalt bee crucified thy ſelfe, No, not in the Earth, but in the Hells euerlaſtingly: or els thou muſt haue thy ſinnes crucified on the Croſſe of IESVS CHRIST, and be partaker of his death: and therefore, if any of vs would die a bleſſed death (it is certaine, that wee muſt die) let vs ſee whether our ſinne was crucified with Chriſt, or not: Shall I haue no warrand of the death of ſinne in mee, and that I was crucified with

IESVS CHRIST, and am freed of all paine eternallie, thorowe His Croſſe? Will yee that I ſhall tell you, howe yee ſhall get the certaintie of this? Looke if thou findeſt a continuall death of ſinne, looke if thou findeſt this regeneration and a newe life, and loue of GOD and a delite to ſerue Him in ſome meaſure, then aſſure thy ſelfe, that thy ſinne was crucified on the Croſſe with IESVS CHRIST: and, if thou liueſt in wantonneſſe, and getteſt no mortification, thou ſhalt bee crucified in the Hell, yea, though thou were a King. Our lordes and gentlemen will paſſe their time, but I denounce, albeit thou bee an Emperour, thou ſhalt bee tormented, and conſumed awaye by that eternall vvrath of GOD in Hell. Goe on thy vvayes. O, the vvorlde is ſleeping! Shall they neuer knowe vvhat they are adoing? What are theſe oppreſſors doing? theſe murtherers doing? theſe adulterers and fornicators doing? Is there anie care of Heauen in them? Is Heauen or Hell but tales? No, no: it ſhall bee the terribleſt ſight that euer thou ſawe. It is not as men ſaye, to wit, Hell is but a boggarde to ſcarre children onelie: No, thy miſerable ſoule ſhall finde in wofull experience the dolour and woe of that place.
            Nowe it reſtes, that I ſpeake about the houre in the which Hee vvas crucified. Onelie Sainct MARKE calles it, About the thirde houre. Then apparentlie, the LORD IESVS vvas nayled on the Croſſe betwixt eleuen and twelue of the clocke: And a little before twelue Hee vvas mounted vp vpon the Croſſe: for betwixt the ſentence of Condemnation and Execution, there paſſed not an houre: For there vvas a malicious earneſtneſſe to haſten Him to the Croſſe, neither vvoulde they giue Him leaſure to drawe His breath. This lets vs ſee the fearceneſſe of the vvrath of the Father vvhen Hee judges ſinne. After that Hee vvas once condemned, Hee gotte no reſt, but vvas haſtened to the place of Execution, to ſuffer paine and ſhame. Looke ſtill to the grounde. This judgement is the type of the latter judgement: if the ſentence of condemnation bee paſſed, immediatelie thou ſhalt bee pulled awaye (looke to it as yee vvill) to euerlaſting torment. Therefore, bleſſed is that ſoule that hath part of the ſuffering of IESVS CHRIST. To Him, therefore, vvho once vvas ignominious, and now is glorious, bee all Honour for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XV. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35 And when they had crucified him, they parted his garmentes, and did cast lots, that it might bee fulfilled, which was ſpoken by the Prophet, They diuided my garmentes among them, and vpon my vesture did cast lots. 
                        verse 36 And they ſate and watched him there. 
                        verse 37 They ſet vp alſo ouer his head his cauſe written, THIS IS IESVS, THE KING OF THE IEVVES. 
                     
                        verse 38 And there were two thickes crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lottes for them, what euerie man ſhould haue. 
                        verse 25 And it was the thirde houre when they crucified him. 
                        verse 26 And the title of his cauſe was written aboue, THAT KING OF THE IEVVES. 
                     
                        verse 27 They crucified alſo with him two thieues, the one on the right hand, and the other on his left. 
                        verse 28 Thus the Scripture was fulfilled, which ſaieth, And hee was counted among the wicked.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33 And when they were come to the place which is called Caluarie, there they crucified him, and the euill doers; one at the right hand, and the other at the left. 
                        verse 34 Then ſaid IESVS, Father, forgiue them: for they knowe not what they doe. And they parted his raiment, and caſt lottes.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 And the people ſtood, and behelde: and the Rulers mocked him with them, ſaying, Hee ſaued others: let him ſaued himſelfe, if hee be that Christ, the Choſen of God. 
                        verse 36 The ſouldiers alſo mocked him, and came, and offered him vineger, 
                        verse 37 And ſaid, If thou bee the King of the Iewes, ſaue thy ſelfe. 
                        verse 38 And a ſuperſcription was alſo written ouer him, in Greeke letters, and in Latine, and in Hebrew, THIS IS THAT KING OF THE IEVVES.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either ſide one, and IESVS in the mids. 
                        verse 19 And Pilate wrote alſo a title, and put it on the Croſſe, and it was written, IESVS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE IEVVES.  
                     
                        verse 20 This title then read manie of the Iewes: for the place where IESVS was crucified, was neare to the Citie: & it was written in Hebrew Greeke, and Latine. 
                     
                        verse 21 Then ſaid the hie Priests of the Iewes to Pilate, Write not, The King of the Iewes, but that he ſaid, I am King of the Iewes. 
                           verse 20 Pilate anſwered, What I haue written, I haue written.
               
            
            
               IN theſe dayes paſt (beloued in the LORD IESVS) wee haue brought this Hiſtorie of the Paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, to the verie act it ſelfe, to the crucifying of Him vpon the Croſſe. The laſt daye we ſpake ſomething of His crucifying, and laſt wee ſpake of the houre of the day, in the which He was crucified: MARKE names it to haue bene about the third houre of the daye, which according to our reckoning, and our faſhion of diuiding of the daye, fell about the twelfth houre of the daye: which manifeſtes a verie haſtie diſpatch and a ſhort ſpace betwixt the doome, and the execution: yea, all this matter was very haſtilie diſpatched, for Hee was taken in the night, in the which Hee gotte no reſt, but was hurried firſt to Annas, and from him to Caiaphas Hall, and then before Pilate the Romane Iudge, and there before him condemned: So that Hee is taken in the night, and the next day before twelue a clocke Hee is crucified. In the night Hee is taken, and brought before the Iudge: The accuſation paſſeth: The doome is giuen: and He is crucified on the morrow following before twelue of the clocke. Nowe to paſſe by the malice of the Jewes, and their earneſtneſſe to haue the Lord put to death, we ſhall marke, that all this judgement wee maye ſee the ſwiftneſſe of the wrath of the Father, which purſued the Sonne, becauſe He bare the ſinnes of the worlde. It lets vs ſee plainlie that the judgement that ſhall bee in the latter daye, to the which this is proportionate (it is a type of the latter judgement) that judgemēt alſo, I ſay ſhall paſſe ouer ſwiftlie, and the reprobate in that judgement, when the Lord is once entred into judgement, ſhall not gette leaue nor leaſure to

draw their breath, till they be caſtē into Hel. And after that the terrible Iudge ſhall once enter into accompt with them, and giue out that ſentence, Depart from mee yee curſed of my Father, with the Deuill and his angelles, immediatelie thoſe damned ſoules ſhall bee hurled to Hell. If the wrath was ſo ſwift vpon the Sonne of God Himſelfe, what ſhall bee the ſwiftneſſe of the wrath vpon the reprobate in that Great daye? Then come to the Text which we haue read, and to goe forwardes to ſpeake of the thinges and circumſtances that fell out in the time that the Lord did hang quicke nayled vpon the Croſſe: for, as I haue already declared, Hee hung the 
                  •
               pace of three houres quicke, nayled vpon the Croſſe, ere Hee gaue vp the ghoſte. The firſt thing we haue to ſpeake of, is concerning the two Thieues that were crucified with Him, the one at the one hande, and the other at the other hand. Next, wee ſhall ſpeake of that prayer that Ieſus conceiued whileſt Hee was hanging on the Croſſe before His enemies. And thirdly, wee ſhall ſpeake of that title and inſcription that Pilate commanded to bee fixed on the Croſſe: to wit, IESƲS of Nazareth, the King of the Iewes: and this contained the crime and cauſe of His ſuffering. Laſt, wee ſhall ſpeake of the diuiding of His garmentes, and howe they caſt lottes on His coate. All theſe heads are plaine, & they offer plaine doctrine. Then to come to the firſt; It is ſaide, that They crucified with him two thieues, two vagabondes, two throat-cutters, and they crucified the one of them at his right hand, and the other at his left hand. And Hee hung on the Croſſe in the middeſt betweene them both. They crucifie not the Lord Ieſus Himſelfe alone but betwixt two Thieues: and not at the ſide, but one of them at each ſide, and Him in the middeſt: g
                  •
               uing out thereby to bee vnderſtood by all the worlde, who looked on Him, (and there was an hudge multitude of Iewes, Romanes, and Gentiles, looking on) that of all Malefactors He was the greateſt. Brethren, I ſee this thorowe all the Hiſtorie of the Paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, euer His dolour enc
                  •
               eaſſes, till it come to the ende & to the height. And I ſee this, that as His paine growes continually, So ſhame is heaped on His head continually: and whileſt Hee is hanging on the Croſſe, at the ſame time the greateſt ſhame is heaped on His head: for Hee hanges vpon the Tree, betwixt the euill doers▪ as Prince of all euill doers in the worlde. To let you ſee, that as the paine of the reprobate ſhall bee extreame; ſo the ſh
                  •
               me and confuſion that they ſhall ſuffer in Hell, ſhall paſſe all meaſure. In this circumſtance,

as in all the reſt, I looke not ſo much to the Iewes, and to their malice, as I looke to His Father in Heauen, to His wrath, and to His Iuſtice: it is Hee who is the chiefe worker of all theſe things. All the
                  •
               e men, Pilate, Herode, the men of warre, and the High Prieſtes, they are like as many burrioes to that Iudge.
            The LORD hanges on the Croſſe in extreame paine of bodie and ſoule: and as Hee hanges, in extreame paine, ſo there is extreame ſhame joyned with it. Nowe, if the ſhame and paine was extreame, it muſt followe, that Hee bare an extreame but then of ſinne: theſe goe together in GODS Iuſtice, extreame burthen of ſinne, extreame paine, and extreame ſhame: for the Iuſtice of GOD requires, that extreame ſinne bee puniſhed by extreame paine and ſhame. It is true, the Martyres ſuffered greater ſhame & paine, than euer murtherer did, or malefactour: yet it followes not, that their ſinne was greater than the ſinne of them who ſuffers not ſo great paine. Why? The Martyres ſuffered not for ſinne, Non eo nomine. Neuer a Martyre ſuffered for ſinne, but for the teſtimonie of the ſame Lord Ieſus Chriſt who ſuffered for their ſinne: and therefore in their ſuffering they had an exceeding great joy, aſſuring them, that they had a remiſſiō of their ſinnes in the blood of the Lambe IESVS CHRIST. But IESVS CHRIST ſuffered for ſinne Eo nomine: it is one thing to a ſinner to ſuffer, & it is another thing to ſuffer for ſin: No, if the Lord make thee to ſuffer for the leaſt ſin, if it were but for an euill thought, thou ſhalt feele howe terrible a Iudge Hee is. The LORD ſuffers, and is ſhamed for ſinne: the Lord IESVS ſuffered extreame ſhame and paine: therefore the conſequent followes, He bare an extreame but then of ſinne. When I looke to this vtter ſhame, as I call to minde all the ſinnes that IESVS ſuffered for: ſo chiefly, I looke to that high pride of Adam, and of vs all in Adam, whereby wee aſpire to bee like to that High and glorious Majeſtie, that pride, whereby we would haue ſpoyled that great GOD of that honour and glorie which was due to Him: Therefore in this vtter ſhame, the Father of Heauen meetes, randers and requites that high pride of Adam
               ▪ and for that Hee heapes ſhame on the head of His Sonne: As thou aſpireſt to diſhonour Him by pride, ſo Hee meetes thy pride in His deare Sonne. If thou be not found in IESVS in that great day: the prouder thou bee in the worlde, the greater ſhall be thy ſhame, beſide that

vnſpeakable torment of ſoule and bodie. Now, will yee ſee in this extreame paine & ſhame that the Lord ſuffers, how the wonder of our ſaluation is wrought: it is ſo farre from that, that it is wrought with a glorious pompe (the Iewes would haue had this worke wrought gloriouſly, and would haue had the Sauiour a glorious King, and therefore they ſtumbled at this, at the ignominious Croſſe of Ieſus,) Yee ſee by the plaine contrarie, that there cannot be a greater paine nor ſhame. We are not bought by glorie nor pompe: wee are redeemed from death and ſhame, by death and ſhame: ſuch a redemption cannot ſtand with His Iuſtice: His Iuſtice requires blood, Heb. 9.22, Noremiſsion of ſinnes without blood, Then euery one of vs, who would attaine to ſaluation, we muſt not looke to Heauen firſt, to get it in IESVS glorified, but we muſt looke to Hieruſalem, and to Golgotha: firſt, To ſee Him there hanging and crucified: ſpare not to kiſſe Him on the Croſſe, and to bathe thy ſelfe in His blood: and if thou takeſt offence at His Croſſe, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Him in glorie, but to thy ſhame: No, by the contrarie, take on perſecution with Him, that in that great day thou mayeſt be glorified with Him.
            To goe forward, Luke in his 23. Chapter, verſe 34. markes a circumſtance which is not marked by the reſt, to wit, that IESVS prayed to His Father for His perſecuters. This prayer apparantlie hath beene either at this time when they were ſtriking the nailes thorow Him, or els very ſoone thereafter: howſoeuer, He is hanging on the Croſſe at that time: The words are, Father, forgiue them▪ for they know not what they do: 1. Pet. Chap. 2. ver. 23, ſayes of Him: When He was reuiled, Hee reuiled not againe: He rendred none euill words againe, when He ſuffered, Hee threatned not againe, but committed it to Him who judges righteouſlie. When they were nailing Him on the Croſſe, and ſcorning Him on it Hee ſhew not an angrie countenance: Hee committed the vengeance to GOD. In theſe wordes, hee would let you ſee, a marueilous meekneſſe and patience in IESVS CHRIST, and therefore by the Prophets Hee was compared to a Lambe. No, neuer a Lambe ſuffered with ſuch mildneſſe, as IESVS did. But now in this Hiſtorie he goes ſomewhat further: hee lets vs ſee, that the LORD IEnot onely recompenſed euill with euill: but Hee rewarded good for euill, & whilſt they torment Him, he conceiues a feruent prayer for them: and this lets vs ſee not onely a wonderfull patience,

but alſo a great loue and pitie He bare to His enemies. It is a wonderfull thing to ſee any in torment to bee patient toward the tormenter, but it is greater in the torment, both to be patient, & to pray to GOD for him who torments him: and this is the greateſt of all, to ſuffer for the tormenter. This loue properly pertain es to IESVS CHRIST onely. The Martyres haue prayed for them who perſecuted them, as STEVEN did, Act, Chapter 7. verſe 60. LORD, lay not this ſinne to their change: but neither STEVEN, nor any other Martyre in the earth ſuffered extreame torment for the tormenter. Neuer a man had ſuch a loue, to ſuffer for his tormenter: No, this loue is proper only to IESVS CHRIST: and in the Scripture it is aſcribed vnto IESVS CHRIST, that Hee died for His enemies His tormenters. Theſe laſt wordes of that place of Peter, where hee ſayes, Hee committed vengeance to Him who iudges righteouſly, are worthie of conſideration: for there hee will let vs ſee the ground of patience in ſuffering, His eye was on His Father, and Hee ſawe his Father to bee a juſt Iudge, and to take vengeance on them who perſecuted them. Wouldeſt thou bee patient in ſuffering, goe not to reuenge, but put the reuenge in the hand of the Iudge: except a man haue this conſideration, it is impoſſible for him to ſuffer a wrong patiently. And it is as true, that theſe men of this Lande, who in no meaſure are patient, but are ay reuenging: thoſe who will doe two wrongs for one, (hee will glorie that hee hath ſlaine two for one, and hee will bragge of his foule murther: and ſay, I haue one ſlaine, he hath two, he hath better than his owne) It is impoſſible, I ſay, that theſe men cannot haue GOD before their eyes, they looke not to GOD, becauſe in ſuffering injuries, they leaue not the reuenge to GOD, and ſo their damnation ſhall not bee ſo much for the wrongs, as becauſe they vſurped the office of the Iudge, and gaue him not vengeance to whome it belongeth. Some of you may aske, how can this be, that Peter ſayes. The LORD committed vengeance to His Father, ſtand with this, that Luke ſayes, Hee prayed for them? howe can theſe two ſtand? To commit the vengeance to God, and to pray for thine enemies? I anſwere, Theſe things are different, To commit vengeance to GOD, to commit a wicked man to his owne Iudge, and to begge a vengeance to a wicked man: IESVS gaue them ouer to their owne Iudge, and gaue the Iudgement to GOD: hee begged not

vengeance on them: hee prayes for them to his Father, that hee would forgiue them. To ſpeake my minde heere: This Prayer that the LORD made vpon the Croſſe, I take it not ſo much to be for the malitious Scribes, Phariſes, and Prieſtes, who did this, not ſo much of ignorance, as of malice: For in the 17. Chapter and 9. verſe hee ſayes, I pray not for the worlde, but for them that thou haſt giuen mee: As for the poore multitude of the Jewes, and the men of warre, and for the ignorant Gentiles, who were there. The effect declares the force and power of this Prayer, for by one preaching of Peter, there were three thouſand ſoules cōuerted of the enemies of Chriſt, Act. Chapter 2. verſe 41. No queſtion this haſtie conuerſion of ſo many, came of the effectualneſſe of the Prayer that hee made to the Father, on the Croſſe: yea, by appearance the force of that Prayer vttered it ſelfe then, when the multitude came from the ſpectacle of the Croſſe home againe, knocking on their breaſts. But conſider the forme of the Prayer, hee ſayes, Father, forgiue them, the reaſon is, They know not what they doe: But they are ſillie blinded people, Paul 2. Cor. 2. Chapter verſe. 8. ſayes: If they had knowne what Hee was, they would not haue crucified the LORD of Glorie. Yee ſhall euer marke, Brethren, two ſeries of ſinners, and two ſorts of ſinning. There are ſome malitious ſinners, woe to thoſe. Some are ignorant: ſome ſinnes of knowledge: yea, the malice of the heart drawes them to a miſchiefe: and ſome becauſe they know no better, beeing wrong informed. No doubt, many of this multitude thought they were doing good ſeruice to GOD: Malice in ſinning, makes a man inexcuſable, and cloſes his mouth before that Iudge: yee ſhall ſee this one day. The malicious ſinners, when the ſentence ſhall bee pronounced againſt them, ſhall not whiſper once againe: But ignorance, albeit it makes not a man inexcuſable (it will neuer excuſe thee before that great Iudge, Beguile not thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt not once open thy mouth, and ſay, LORD, the thing that I did, I did it of ignorance: and therefore I deſerued not death) yet it is not ſo euill as malice: for whereas malice prouokes the wrath, and judgement of the Iudge: for it is a terrible thing to haue an malicious heart, and of ſet purpoſe to ſinne againſt the Iudge. Ignorance will mooue the Iudge to pitie and commiſeration: and ſo, ye ſee, the LORD ſeeing the poore ignorant multitude Hee pities them, and as Hee pities them, ſo Hee prayes for them:

Ignorance mooued Him to pittie, and to praye for them. In a worde: The Chriſtian man that is perſecuted wrongfullie, either hath to doe with malicious men, (wee may finde this in experience ere wee die) who perſecute of malice: or with enemies, who are not ſo much malicious, as ignorant: if hee haue to doe vvith malicious perſons, patience is required: but if hee haue to doe with ignorant bodies, then not onelie patience is required, but alſo rueth and loue. Wouldeſt thou haue patience? then commit vengeance vnto Him vvho judges juſtlie: for if thou vvouldeſt bee patient, looke to thy GOD, and ſaye, I commit thee in the hands of the Iudge. And, if thou haue to doe vvith an ignorant, ſee that thou bee pittifull: looke to the ignorance of them that perſecute thee; and thou ſhalt not ſo ſoone looke to their blindneſſe, but thou ſhalt not onelie bee patient, but alſo pittifull, and the ignorant vvill ſeeme to bee miſerable, and to bee pittied: for this is certaine, that the innocent man, vvho is perſecuted, is not ſo much to bee pittied, as hee vvho of blinde ignorance perſecutes him. Alas! What is to bee pittied, but that vvhich procures damnation before GOD? So ignorant blinded bodies are moſte to bee pittied.
            Nowe conſider howe all rankes and ſortes of people ſhame Him: and firſt Pilate ſhames Him, and commaundes an inſcription and title to be vvritten on the Croſſe, bearing the crime and cauſe of His death: It is ſaide, that Pilate the Iudge, Writeth a title to bee fixed on the Croſſe: and bee writeth it, in Hebrew, and in Grecke, and in Latine, to the ende, that men of all Languages might reade it, and vnderſtand it, and the effect thereof is this, IESƲS of Nazareth, the King of the Jewes. This was in Hebrewe, in Greeke, and in Latine: three Languages, to bee read by Hebrewes, Graecians, & Romanes. There is no queſtion, but this was written according to the faſhion of that time: for among the people of GOD, both the judgementes and alſo the puniſhmentes, vvith inſcriptions containing the cauſe thereof, vſed to bee publicked. And this vvas a commendable and allowable cuſtome, that vvhen a man vvas condemned to die, they alwayes vſed to put vp an inſcription, containing the crime and cauſe: to teſtifie, that hee vvas vvorthilie executed. According hereunto they handle the Lord IESVS: for they lead ye whole proces in the ſight of ye people, & went not into a corner to judge Him, but in the preſēce of ye whole people, they led

Him out of the Portes of Hieruſalem, to execute Him. Reade of this cuſtome, Ioſh. Chapter 7. verſe 19. Of Achan, who ſtolle the Babylonians garment, how hee was judged of the whole people. Read of that blaſphemer, in the wilderneſſe, Leuit. 24.23. how before the whole people hee was executed publikly. Reade of Ionathan, how hee was judged and condemned of his father Saul, in the ſight of the whole people, 1. Sam. Chapter 14. verſe 5. As the Iudgement was publicke, ſo they vſed to put an inſcription aboue them, to teſtifie to the people their crime, and the cauſe of their death, that they died juſtly. It is no ſmall matter to ſlay a man, albeit hee were the pooreſt that euer was, and there is not a Prince in the face of the earth, that may ſlay a man without a good cauſe: No, not the Emperour hath that power. And as no man ſhould bee ſlaine lightly: ſo if there bee a juſt cauſe of execution, the man may not be executed priuily at the pleaſure of the Iudge, but if there bee good juſtice, the Iudgement muſt be before the people. The people haue their owne right and entreſſe in judgement ſeates.
            Yee know in that great Iudgement of the world, which ſhall be at the latter day, not one ſhall be judged and condemned without the approbation and conſent of the whole Elect, which ſhall ſtand round about their Lord. Then, how much more hath the people, at the leaſt the beſt part, entreſſe in earthly Iudgements, to ſee good adminiſtration of juſtice, and Iudgement, and that the Iudge vſe no Tyrannie. This then was the cauſe of this Inſcription, euen that the cauſe of the death of Ieſus ſhould bee made manifeſt to the people, according to common commendable cuſtome. But Pilate had another reſpect: Pilate did this, not ſo much, that the people ſhould know the cauſe of His death: for his conſcience tolde him that He was innocent, as he put it vp, to reuenge him on the malicious Iewes, who compelled him againſt his heart and conſcience to condemne Him. Hee will haue this put vp, that their King was hanged, and that they hanged Him with their owne hands. But GOD hath His part heere, and all was gouerned by that heauenlie Prouidence, Neither is Pilate, nor the Iewes heere ſo much to be looked to, as the diſpenſation of the Father, As Pilate did it for one ende, ſo the LORD did it for another ende: Men will doe a thing vpon an euill intent, GOD will doe the ſame thing by a wicked inſtrument to His good ende, by

His effectuall prouidence Hee will haue this to be put vp, to ratifie the Heauenly and Spirituall Kingdome of IESVS CHRIST: and Hee vvill let them all ſee, that IESVS is the onely King: and inſpeciall by this inſcription the LORD vvill haue it teſtified to the vvorlde, that as IESVS hung vpon the Croſſe vvith paine and shame, that ſo likewiſe vpon the ſame Croſſe He triumphed gloriouſly ouer His enemies: ere Hee came to Heauen, on the Croſſe Hee gotte victorie, and Hee triumphed ouer them all, and ledde them all captiues on the Croſſe, as it is vvritten to the COLOSS. CHAP. 2. VERS. 15. More than this: The LORD did it to this ende, To fore-ſhaddowe, that the preaching of the Kingdome of IESVS CHRIST, to followe on His Aſcenſion ſhould bee to all Nations▪ Kingdomes, and Languages: for immediately after that Hee paſſed out of the vvorld, IESVS vvas proclaimed to all Nations the King of Glory, and continues to this day, and shall bee for euer. Pilate is a preacher heereof, albeit hee haue little minde of it: but hee vvas like Caiaphas, vvho propheſied, that it vvas expedient, that one shoulde die for the ſinnes of the vvhole people, CHAP. 11. VERS. 40. And this is done by the ſpeciall prouidence of GOD, no doubt. The conſtancie of Pilate in his ſentence and vvriting, notwithſtanding the ſtrong oppoſition of the Scribes and the High Prieſtes, vvho deſired him to alter and change the title, and for that vvhich vvas vvritten by Pilate, to vvit, This is the King of the Jewes, to vvrite, That Hee ſaide Hee was the King of the Iewes: this declares that it vvas of the immutable decree of GOD. Pilate had no power to alter one letter of it for his life. GOD ledde the pene of him ſo, that hee had no power to doe otherwiſe, to teſtifie, that it vvas of that Eternall decree. And this is that drecree vvhereof vvee reade, PSAL. 2.7. I will declare the decree, that is, The Lord hath ſaide vnto mee, Thou art my Sonne, &c. This decree is vnchangeable, it muſt bee executed, and it shall laſt to the ende of the vvorlde: And I ſaye, the LORD IESVS shall bee King in deſpite of the IEVVES and the High Prieſtes, and all His enemies, and that one daye vvee shall ſee to the full joy of our heartes: To that Glorious King, vvith His Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee Honour and Glorie for euermore, Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE XVI. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 39 And they that paſſed by, reuiled him, wagging their heads,
                  
                     
                        verse 40 And ſaying, Thou that deſtroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three dayes, ſaue thy ſelfe: if thou bee the Sonne of God, come downe from the Croſſe. 
                        verse 41 Likewiſe alſo the high Prieſles mocking him, with the Scribes, and Elders, and Phariſes, ſaid, 
                        verse 42 Hee ſaued others, but hee cannot ſaue himſelfe: if hee bee the King of Iſrael, let him nowe come downe from the Croſſe, and wee will beleeue in him. 
                        verse 43 Hee trusted in God, let him deliuer him now, if hee will haue him: for hee ſaid, I am the Sonne of God.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 The ſelfe ſame thing alſo the thieues which were crucified with him, cast in his teeth.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29 And they that went by, railed on him, wagging their heads, and ſaying, Hey, thou that deſtroyest the Temple, and buildeſt it in three dayes,
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Saue thy ſelfe, and come downe from the Croſſe. 
                        verse 31 Likewiſe alſo, euen the high Prieſtes, mocking, ſaide among themſelues, with the Scribes, Hee ſaued other men, himſelfe hee cannot ſaue. 
                        verse 32 Let Chriſt the King of Iſrael now come downe from the Croſſe, that wee may ſee, and belieue. They alſo that were crucified with him, reuiled him.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35 And the people ſtood, and behelde: and the Rulers mocked him with them, ſaying, Hee ſaued others: let him ſaue himſelfe, if hee be that Christ, the Choſen of God. 
                        verse 36 The ſouldiers alſo mocked him, and came, and offered him vineger, 
                        verse 37 And ſaid, If thou bee the King of the Iewes, ſaue thy ſelfe. 
                        verse 38 And a ſuperſcription was alſo written ouer him, in Greeke letters, and in Latine, and in Hebrew, THIS IS THAT KING OF THE IEVVES.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Then the Souldiours, when they had crucified Ieſus, tooke his garmentes, (and made foure partes, to euerie Souldiour a part) and his coat: and the coat was without ſeame, wouen from the top thorowout.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Therefore they ſaid one to another, Let vs not diuide it, but caſt lots for it, whoſe it ſhall bee. This was, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled, which ſaieth, They parted my garmentes among them, and on my coat did they cast lottes. So the Souldiours did theſe thinges indeede.
               
            
            
               THE time that IESVS CHRIST is hanging on the Croſſe, (Brethren) and whileſt Hee is in extreame paine and torment, thoſe that ſtand by they ſet themſelues to doe Him all the ſhame they can, to the ende, that in that agonie Hee might haue the more annoy and griefe. I cannot diuide better that shame that they did Him, than from the perſons who went about to shame Him: the whole, both Iewes and Gentiles, are ſet to shame Him: And therefore, after He is condemned, they take two Thieues, and they crucifie them with Him, the one at the one hand, and the other at the other, and Ieſus the Innocent in the middeſt, as if He had beene the greateſt of all. Then there is not a ranke of perſons amongſt them, but euery one begins to raile vpon Him, and ſhame Him. And firſt to begin at Pilate, hee begins and ſhames Him, for hee writes an inſcription concerning treaſon againſt the Majeſtie of Caeſar, and affixes it on the Croſſe, where Hee hung, This is the King of the Iewes: howbeit to ſpeake the trueth, Pilate ſought more the ſhame of the Iewes, who by their obſtinacie compelled him to giue out the ſentence of death againſt the Innocent, than the ſhame of Ieſus Chriſt: and by the inſcription the Lord will haue the Iewes ſhamed, becauſe they hanged their King. But we haue ſpoken of Pilates part the laſt day: therefore nowe let vs goe forward to the partes of all the reſt. Then after Pilate, comes in the executioners, who with their hands had nayled Him on the Croſſe. It appeares by the wordes of Iohn, ſpeaking of the diuiding of His garmentes into foure partes, that there vvere foure Executioners: (or Hang-men) So that euery one of them got a part thereof. Theſe in contempt, and in deſpite of Him, in His face, whileſt as Hee hanges on the Croſſe, they take His garmentes,

and diuide them in foure partes, and on his coat they cast lottes. Then after the Hang-men, comes the people, and they wagge their heads on him, and in deſpite, and bitterneſſe of heart, they raile on him, and ſaye, Is this the man that ſaide hee woulde destroye the Temple, and builde it vp againe? Is it likelie that Hee can doe this, vvho cannot ſaue Himſelfe from the Croſſe? Then comes there the Princes of the IEWES, the SCRIBES, the High PRIESTES, and PHARISES, and they taunt Him alſo, ſaying, Thou who ſauedst others, ſaue thy ſelfe. And after them, comes in the men of vvarre, the ROMANE Souldioures, and they beginne to raile out alſo, and They offered him Vineger to drinke, and ſaide, If thou bee the King of the IEVVES ſaue thy ſelfe, and come downe from the Croſſe. And laſt, one of the Thieues, vvho vvas hanged vvith Him, falles out in rayling, If thou bee that CHRIST, ſaue thy ſelfe and vs.
            
            But nowe wee ſhall ſpeake of euerie one of theſe in particular as the LORD ſhall giue vs grace: and firſt vvee beginne at the part of the Hang-men. Then in His ſight, whileſt hee hanges, they take his garmentes, (and made foure partes of them, that euerie one of the men might haue a part thereof: and as for his coat, becauſe it had no ſeame, and was not ſowed, but was a wouen coat, from the toppe thorowout: therefore, they woulde not diuide it, but woulde cast lottes for it, whoſe it ſhoulde bee. And all this was done, that that which was propheſied (by Dauid, vvho vvas the figure of Chriſt, Pſal. 22.19.) might bee fulfilled, which ſaieth, They diuided my garmentes among them, and on my coat did cast lottes.
            
            Now to let you ſee that theſe Hangmen did nothing in all this action, but that which from all eternitie was appointed to bee done in the councell of GOD. To examine this fact better: Firſt they doe Him vvrong in ſpoyling the LORD IESVS of His owne goods: (Howſoeuer they eſteemed of Him, yet Hee vvas innocent) Next, they doe Him ſhame, in ſtripping Him, and ſetting Him naked vpon the Croſſe, in the ſight of all the worlde. And laſt of all, they deſpite Him, and contemne Him, in taking His garmentes, and parting them in His owne preſence, vvhere He Himſelfe might behold it. So they did Him vvrong, ſhame, and deſpite. But Brethren, as in all other circumſtances conjoyned with the Paſſion. I looke not ſo much to men, as to the Lord: So heere I looke not ſo much to theſe executioners in parting of theſe garments, as to that Heauēly Iudge His Father, & to His juſtice in this matter: for whatſoeuer bee their part, and howe vnjuſt ſoeuer they

bee, that Heauenly Father is juſt, and that burthen of our ſinne vvhich Ieſus Chriſt tooke vpon Him, deſerued all this: as ſuretie for vs, Hee demerited all this.
            Nowe to examine more narrowly euerie one of theſe: to wit, the wrong, ſhame, and deſpite, wee ſhall ſee howe juſtly all is done: if yee will looke to His Father, and firſt conſider the wrong done vnto Him, in taking His cloathes: Hee was wearied of His garments, becauſe Hee was cledde with our ſinne. Nowe woulde to GOD that wee could feele in mercy this weight of ſinne, which our Mediator did beare vpon His backe for vs: for then wee woulde not runne on ſo wantonly as wee doe. And it telles vs this, That a ſinner that is not in Ieſus Chriſt, vvho hath not put off ſinne, but yet beares the burthen of ſinne, hath no right to weare ſo much as a moſte vile garment, yea, though it were but a bratte of a ſacke to hide his ſhame from the ſight of the worlde; let bee Golde, Siluer, or precious rayment: and if it ſhall fall out at any time, that hee be reaued and ſpoyled of his cloathes, let him take it to bee of the juſt judgement of GOD, whatſoeuer bee mans part therein. And though the Thieues bereaue him, yet the GOD of Heauen is juſt in puniſhing of him, whatſoeuer part man hath in the action. Yet it telles vs more, for I tell you ſtill, that this judgement of Ieſus Chriſt is the image and figure of the latter judgement: for ſuch proceſſe as is vſed heere, ſhall bee vſed in the latter judgement. Then, I ſaye, it telles vs, that in that latter daye, a reprobate and ſinner, vvho ſhall not bee founde in Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall bee depriued, and ſpoyled of all the creatures, made for the vſe and ornament of man, and there ſhall neuer a one of them bee left him, neither ſhall hee haue ſo much a foot-breadth of earth, or the meaneſt commoditie in the worlde: yea, albeit hee were a king, let him haue poſſeſſions, kingdomes, and the whole earth now, but then there ſhall not bee any thing in this worlde that hee ſhall poſſeſſe at that daye, but ſhame in the Hell for euermore. Where by the contrary, they who ſhall bee founde in Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall not onelie bee cladde with incorruption and glory in Chriſt; but alſo ſhall be put in poſſeſſion of a newe Heauen and newe Earth, to reigne with their Head and Lord Ieſus Chriſt for euermore. Yee ſee then what happineſſe it is to bee founde in Ieſus Chriſt at that Great daye. O the miſery of him vvho ſhall bee founde out of Him!
            Nowe to come to that ſhame which Hee ſuffers on the Croſſe.

The Father, thorowe His nakedneſſe heerein alſo is juſt: Hee vvas cledde on the Croſſe with our ſinnes. It telles vs this: that among all the punishmentes of ſinne, this is one, to wit, nakedneſſe, to ſet the body naked in the ſight of the worlde. Yee reade in Eſay. 3.17. where the ſinfull women are threatned for their pride, that the Lord IEHOVAH ſhall make naked and diſcouer their ſecret parts to the world. But to ſpeake of the latter day: beſide all the reſt of the punishments of the reprobate, the nakedneſſe of their carcaſes ſhal be a punishment, they ſhall riſe with foule bodies, whereas the Elect shall riſe with glorified bodies: and the reprobate shall ſtand vp in the ſight of all men & Angels, with naked bodies, that their shame may be ſeene, & they shall crie (to hide their shame) on the mountaines, to couer them, and on the hilles to fall on them. Now laſt to ſpeake of that deſpite that Hee ſuffered: They parte His garmentes before Him, in deſpite of Him: They goe not to a backſide to deale them. Looke to Gods dealing heere: this is a juſt thing with God, that hee who is a ſinner, and who in contempt and deſpite of God hath ſinned, that he be contemned againe, and ſuffer deſpite openlie. And Chriſt, among all other punishmēts, bare this punishment of contempt vpon the Croſſe. Then if contempt be done vnto thee, who art a ſinner, & not in Ieſus Chriſt, not cledde with His juſtice, in reſpect of God; it is due juſtice, if thy goods be taken and pulled from thee before thine eyes, if thy ſonnes bee ſlaine in deſpite of thee, or thy virgins deſtored, thy ſelfe looking on, take it for the juſt judgement of God. In the latter daye, beſide all the punishmentes that shall fall vpon a reprobate, deſpite shall be done to them. If it were but this, that the perſons whome they diſdained, contemned, and ſpitted vpon, shall bee glorified in deſpite of them. So to ende this: This teaches vs, howe good a thing it is to bee in Ieſus Chriſt, and howe bleſſed that bodie ſhall bee vvho is founde in Him. And as for thee, who art out of Ieſus Chriſt, woe ſhall be to thee, ſuppoſe thou were an Emperour. Nowe to goe forwarde: After the Hang-man, and after their deſpite, followes the part of the people vvho gazed on Him, they beginne, and wagge their heads. Dauid foretelles of that in the 22. Pſalme, verſ. 7. They had mee in deriſion, and made a mowe, and nodde their heads, and they ſaid, Is this the man who ſaide, hee would deſtroy the glorious Temple of Hieruſalem, and builde it after in three dayes▪ Come downe from the Croſſe, and ſaue thy ſelfe. They miſtooke the LORD, for the LORD vnderſtood of the Temple of His bodie,

which after three dayes by His glorious reſurrection, hee ſhould reedifie and builde vp againe: ſo the opprobrie that they caſt vp to Him is this: He was wount to ſay, He would caſt downe the Temple, and builde it vp againe in three dayes: But this is a thing impoſſible: and their ground they take from His preſent infirme eſtate, that inhabilitie He was in on the Croſſe. So they gather of that, Seeing He could not free Himſelfe, that the other was impoſſible. Before I marke or obſerue any thing on this place, I ſhall followe out the ſcoffing, rayling, and mocking of others, After the people came in the Princes of the people, as High Prieſtes, Scribes, Phariſes, Elders, and Rulers, and they raile on Him, ſaying, This man tooke on Him the Name of CHRIST, let vs ſee if He can ſaue Himſelfe: As they would ſay, It is impoſſible to Him who now hangs ſo ignominiouſly to ſaue Himſelfe. After them came the men of war
                  •
               e, and in deriſion: They offer Him vineger to drinke, And they ſay, this is very like a King. How can He doe the dutie of a King, to deliuer the people, who cannot deliuer Himſelfe. This they ſaide, becauſe Hee had called Himſelfe a King, to the prejudice, as they thought, of Ceſars Kingdome▪ And laſtly, one of the thieues rayled on Him, to wit, He that hang at His left hand, ſaying, So like as thou art that Chriſt who can neither ſaue vs nor thy ſelfe. Nowe, becauſe the rayling of the whole is all to one effect: therefore, ſhortly I ſhall obſerue ſome things in generall, as the Lord ſhall offer.
            In all this rayling out againſt Him, yee ſee the extreame humiliation of IESVS CHRIST, for our ſinnes: Hee is made of no reputation: No, He is trodde on as a worme: And no queſtion, that extreame torment of bodie was not ſo grieuous to Him, as was this rayling on Him. They ſpeake to Him as a verie reprobate: and ſo farre as lay in them, they endeuoured to make Him to deſpare of all helpe. So yee may ſeee, this rayling was a thing moſt grieuous to Him. And Dauid beeing His type, he complaines on this ſhame, that they heaped on Him, in the 22. Pſalme. All this lets vs ſee, howe dearely the Lord hath bought our life and Saluation: And wee are more than miſerable, if we ſee not this: And alſo it lets vs ſee, what ſhould haue become of vs, if He had not ſatisfied for vs: and what ſhould become of thee, if thou bee not in CHRIST in that great day. And it tells thee, ſeeing all this is for thy ſinne, that thou ſhouldeſt haue a ſadde heart

to haue ſuch a Redeemer made ſuch a ſpectacle, and thou ſhouldeſt groane vnder the burthen of ſinne: and when thou readeſt of the Croſſe, thine heart ſhould bee ſorrowfull, that euer thou ſhouldeſt haue moued the GOD of glorie to ſuch vengeance of His deare Sonne for thee. Thinke not that euery man ſhall bee relieued of his ſinne by Him. No, onlie thoſe who learne to groane vnder the burthen of their owne ſinnes, by the which they haue pierced Him: and turne to the LORD vnfainedly, and get fauour. So if thou learneſt not at one time or other to groane, vnder the burthen of thy ſinne, thou ſhalt neuer be relieued by Him.
            But to marke ſomething of this railing: I ſee, that theſe things they caſt vp to Him, is the verie verdict, whereupon they accuſed Him. They accuſed Him, becauſe He called Himſelfe the Chriſt, and becauſe He called Himſelfe the King of the Iewes: and becauſe He ſaid, that He would deſtroy the Temple, and build it vp againe the third day. So the very thing yt they caſt vp to Him in deſpite, is ye very crime wherefore they condemned Him. Men would thinke, yt it ſhould haue cōtented them to had Him hanging in torment: but Brethren, alas, the malice of the enemies of Ieſus Chriſt is endleſſe, there is none end of it: it will not bee the death of one Chriſtian: yt wil ſatisfie them, it wil not be thy blood that wil quench their thirſt: but in thy torment they will raile on, and ſtriue to cauſe thee to deſpare, that thy ſoule may periſh. There is ſuch an extreame deſpite in their heartes, that they would haue thine aſhes and thy bones to be exponed to opprobrie and ſhame, which hath lyen ſo long in the graue. See wee not this, howe the bones of faithfull Chriſtians haue beene taken vp, and burnt by the Antichriſt. The LORD ſaue vs from their crueltie: But here I lift vp mine eyes, and looke vnto GOD. The Lord Ieſus, He ſuffered moſt juſtly, who was cled with our ſinnes, and bare them on the Croſſe for our cauſe: and it learnes thee this, that if thou ſuffereſt opprobrie and ſhame▪ and men raile on thee, that thou goe euer to ſee, if thou be in Chriſt, in thy ſuffering: for if thou be out of Chriſt, woe is to thee, for that is but the beginning and forerunner of that paine and ſhame that thou ſhalt ſuffer in Hell. I tell this more, in that latter day, when ye reprobate ſhalbe cōdemned, their ſin which was the cauſe of their death, ſhall euer be had in memory, but if once thou goeſt to Hell, ye remembrance of thy ſin ſhall neuer be buried▪ but thy verdict ſhalbe caſt in thy teeth, & thy cōſcience ſhal taunt thee,

and ſhal ſay to thee, Murtherer, thou delitedſt in murther, now goe to murther, nowe free thy ſelfe out of Hell, if thou canſt: and to them who followed Harlots, Thou delitedſt in Harlotrie, and in offending of GOD thou vvho couldeſt not bee ſatisfied in pleaſuring thy foole luſtes, nowe ſatisfie thy ſelfe vvith theſe extreame tormentes; nowe goe to thy harlotrie, let ſee: And to the blaſphemer, Thou delitedſt in blaſpheming of GOD, nowe let ſee if thou dare blaſpheme, goe thy way nowe, and blaſpheme: And to the Idolater, Thou delitedſt in worſhipping of Idolles, and lefteſt the worſhipping of the true GOD; nowe goe thy waye to Idolatrie, &c. Nowe, woulde to GOD the worlde coulde think
                  •
                Hell to be earneſt. This torment and rayling in the death of CHRIST, is an image of the torment of Hell.
            I ſee heere further, that beſides this, there is a grounde of all their opprobrie, to wit, that ſhamefull Croſſe which IESVS was hanging on: They thought, that ſeeing IESVS was crucified, it was impoſſible for Him to caſt downe the Temple, and to build it vp againe: They thought it was impoſſible for Him to ſaue the worlde, ſeeing Hee coulde not ſaue Himſelfe: and that Hee coulde not doe the duetie of a King, vvho was alreadie hanged: How becomes it a King to bee hanged? The cauſe of their offence vvas that ſhame which Hee ſuffered and that they ſawe that Hee could not deliuer Himſelfe. The Croſſe of Ieſus is fooliſhneſſe to the worlde: & bleſſed are they who will not take offence at the Croſſe of Chriſt. Looke howe they are deceiued in their judgements: Becauſe the Croſſe was the onely meane whereby Hee ſhoulde haue done all things, when Hee was hanging, was He not deſtroying the Temple of His body, that after three dayes, by His glorious reſurrection Hee might builde it vp againe? And when Hee was on the Croſſe, did Hee not the office of Chriſt? that is, of an anointed Prieſt: for then Hee was offering that Sacrifice of His body to the Father: And was He not by the Croſſe purchaſing to Himſelfe and to vs a glorious Kingdome? Yea, on the Croſſe, Hee like a glorious King, triumphed ouer the Deuils and made an open ſhew of them: for Hee had a battell with the Deuils on the Croſſe, and triumphed ouer them all. Col. 2.15. This ſame blindnes of the world remaines ſtill in it: for when the world ſees a body vnder afflictiō, in pouerty, bu
                  •
               nt or martyred for Chriſts ſake, then the world thinkes it is impoſſible that that body can attaine to glory. They thinke him as an

out-caſt, and will ſcorne his profeſſion. They will ſaye, Are theſe your Chriſtians? of all men they are the moſte miſerable, if that be the waye to Heauen, I will renounce to goe that way, this is rather the waye to goe to Hell. This is the voyce of the worlde: And the cauſe is, becauſe miſerable catiues know not what ſinne is, which at that time behooued to bee purged by the Croſſe: for the juſtice and Majeſtie of GOD beeing offended, required that it ſhoulde bee ſo: and nowe in vs ſinne thorowe manifolde croſſes and afflictions muſt bee mortified. Let the vvorlde thinke and ſpeake as it pleaſes, the onely waye whereby thou ſhalt come to life, is ſuffering and affliction: and thou muſt thinke this, that wee muſt bee racked thorowe Hell, ere wee come to Heauen. Our redemption is wrought by the Croſſe: thou ſhalt not come to Heauen, but by the Croſſe. The ground of all is ſinne: But alas, the world ſees it not. The word will teach thee, that there is no other vvay to come to Heauen, but by affliction: and it will thee, that if thou bee not purged and changed by trouble and affliction, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. Alas, that wee coulde once grone vnder ſinne. And bleſſed is the ſoule, that hath a ſight of the weight of ſinne: and vvoe to that ſoule, that hath no ſight of ſinne.
            To goe forwarde: I ſee in this Thiefe, vvho rayles on Chriſt, ſome ſpeciall thing: hee hath a particular of his owne, hee is in torment, and therefore hee ſaies, Jf thou bee that CHRIST, ſaue thy ſelfe and vs. Brethren, a torment, vvhatſoeuer it bee, if it bee not the better ſanctified, it vvill mooue the creature to fall out in blaſphemie: thou vvilt blaſpheme both in heart and mouth, and thou vvilt ſaye, that there is no power in GOD to ſaue thee: And the Thiefe in effect ſaide this, There is no power in thee to ſaue mee▪ I renounce thee as a Sauiour: and, if thou confeſſe His power, thou wilt denie His mercie, and vvilt ſaye, GOD is but a Tyrant. And, if thou vvilt ſaye, Hee is mercifull: bee mercifull to vvhome Hee vvill, Hee cannot bee mercifull vnto mee: This laſt diſtruſting of mercie to thy ſelfe, is a great ſinne. And that to ſaye altogether, that there is no mercie in GOD, it is a plaine blaſphemie. And laſt, to ſaye, there is no power in GOD it is to denie GOD to bee GOD: For howe can Hee bee GOD, if Hee vvant power? So I thinke, that this catiue hath beene a great blaſphemer of that Majeſtie: and vvhen I looke on it, I ſee in him the image of the death of the reprobate, vvhen they are dying and

changing this life. (The Lord giue vs grace to die well.) The reprobate ſhall thinke, that in their doing, God hath no power to ſaue them: for, of all men in the worlde, the reprobate is the moſt Ioath to die: for either they ſhall thinke that God is not mercifull at all, or elſe at leaſt, that there is no mercie in Him for them: and ſo the miſerable creature will turne his backe on GOD, and immediately ſhall caſt himſelfe into Hell and damnation. Wee reade of Sidrach, Meſach, and Abednego, that they were ſo farre from this blaſphemie, that when the Tyrant falles out in blaſphemie, they meete him, and ſaye, Our GOD is Almightie, and Hee hath power to deliuer vs if Hee pleaſe. Neuer come thou to deſpaire, though thou ſhouldeſt die tenne thouſande deathes: but ſleepe in His boſome, & hang on Him, and ſaue His honour, and thinke not that which maye derogate His honour, and ſaye, Though thou ſhouldeſt ſlaye mee, LORD, yet will I truſt in thee, and ſo die ſweetlie, reſting in His armes. Well, I ſee this hath beene a miſerable bodie, and hath died miſerablie, blaſpheming the God of Glorie: and this is euen as the reprobate ſhall doe at the latter Iudgement. And yet when I compare him with the Phariſes and Prieſts, I find their blaſphemie greater than his. Well ſhall it bee to the Thiefe, in reſpect of them, for they had knowledge, and hee wanted. Who ſhoulde haue had knowledge but they? They had no torment, hee had ſore torment. What neede had they to blaſpheme? Therefore, their condemnation ſhall bee greater than his. And vvhen I compare this blaſphemie of the Thiefe with the blaſphemie of ſome men in theſe dayes, vvho when anie croſſe falles vpon them without their expectation, vvill ſaye, What can GOD doe more vnto mee? ſo in effect denying power to bee in GOD, and in IESVS CHRIST: I count the blaſphemie of theſe men to bee greater than his vvas. For nowe IESVS is in Glorie: and the Thiefe ſaw Him on the Croſſe in miſerie vvith himſelfe. If thou now blaſphemeſt Him ſo, it were well done, that thy mouth were ſowed vp, that thou neuer ſpakeſt a vvorde.
            Nowe to ende vvith this. The LORD giue vs grace, that neither in thought nor in vvorde vvee diſhonour that MAIESTIE, but maye acknowledge His mercie and power towardes vs in IESVS CHRIST: To vvhome bee all Honour, Glorie, Praiſe, Power, and Dominion, both nowe and euermore, Worlde vvithout ende: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XVII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 40 But the other anſwered, and rebuked him, ſaying, Fearest thou not GOD, ſeeing thou art in the ſame condemnation? 
                        verse 41 We are indeede righteouſly heere: for wee receiue things worthie of that we haue done: but this man hath done nothing amiſſe. 
                        verse 42 And hee ſaide vnto Ieſus, Lord, remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome.
               
            
            
               WEE heard the laſt day (Brethren) of all theſe railings and blaſphemies that the Lord Ieſus ſuffered of all rankes and eſtates of perſons, whileſt Hee hang on the Croſſe naked, liuing in torment. Pilate began, & fixed on the Croſſe an ignominious inſcription, That Ieſus was a Traitor againſt Caeſar, and that He ſuffered death for His treaſon. Then the Hang-men, foure in number, in deſpite, and in His ſight, tooke his garmentes, and diuided them in foure partes: and becauſe his coate had no ſeame, but was wouen thorowout, therefore they caſt lottes for it, who ſhoulde haue it whole. Then comes on the people, with their part, and raile vpon Him, and blaſpheme Him, ſaying, Nowe if thou bee that Chriſt, come downe and ſaue thy ſelfe. Then followe the high Prieſtes, the Scribes, and the Elders, who raile on Him, and ſaye, Is this hee who will ſaue others? let ſee if hee can bee able to ſaue himſelfe. Then the men of warre and Gentiles beginne to raile, if thou bee the King of the Iewes, ſaue thy ſelfe, and come downe from the Croſſe. And then one of the Thieues railes out on Him, If thou be that Chriſt, ſaue thy ſelfe, and vs both: but nowe ſo like as thou art the Chriſt, thou art adying as vvell as vvee, and art neither able to ſ
                  •
               ue thy ſelfe, nor vs: and therefore thou art not a King. Nowe, Brethren, yee maye perceiue that it was no

prayer that this thiefe made to CHRIST, as ſome thinke.
            Wee ſpake of this thiefe the laſt day: now we haue to ſpeake of the part of the other thiefe: he is twitched with repentance: in an inſtant hee becomes penitent: and the inward conuerſion of the heart to GOD, hee vtters outwardly in ſundrie effects: Firſt, perceiuing the other thiefe his companion to blaſpheme GOD, the firſt action that he does, he defends the honour of the LORD againſt the other thiefe, and rebukes him: and after that, giues a free confeſſion of his ſinnes: and laſt, hee turnes to Ieſus Chriſt hanging on the Croſſe, and ſayes, LORD remember mee when thou commeſt to thy Kingdome. The LORD anſweres immediatly to the thiefe: Verily, thou ſhalt be with mee this day in Paradiſe.
            
            To come then firſt to the rebuke hee giues to the other thiefe, Feareſt thou not GOD? The meaning is, Thiefe, fye on thee, ſeeing thou hangs in a common miſerie and torment with mee, and this man, feareſt thou not GOD, who wilt blaſpheme and rayle on Him, ſeeing thou art ſhortly to appeare before that Tribunall, and giue an account of all thine euill deedes, & chiefly of the blaſpheming of the innocent. So hee takes vp the blaſpheming from the fountaine, and hee lets him ſee that his heart was voyde of the feare of GOD: for if hee had any ſponke of the feare of GOD, he had not fallen out in rayling againſt the GOD of glorie.
            We learne this leſſon, that when the hand of GOD is lying on any man, and preſſing him to the death, then it is time to be humble, and to feare the LORD, and that terrible Iudgement wherein thou muſt ſtand immediatly after this life: and if there appeare no feare of that Iudge in thee, and if thou vttereſt a plaine rebellion, that teſtifies that his hande ſhall neuer leaue thee, vntill it bruiſe thee in powder, and thruſt thee to the loweſt Hells. This is the thing that affliction ſhould worke in vs, Humiliation and the feare of GOD. Learne the leſſon at the thiefe. Proud ſoule, and proud creature, if thou wilt not learne at others: But as this rebuke teſtifies, that this ſhould be: ſo the rayling of the other teſtifies, that it is not ay in men. There are ſome men whome all the torments in the worlde will not moue, ere they be the better, they will bee in Hell, hang them, naile them to the Croſſe, teare them with pincers, they ſhall neuer bee the better. What is the cauſe of this? It is a wonderfull thing, that ſuch trouble & torment ſhould

not worke ſome feare of GOD in the creature. But how can any affliction preſſe out of the creature that which was neuer in it. The feare of GOD is not in the hearts of many, and therefore howe can they vtter it: a rotten and withered ſticke was neuer more meete to be burnt, than thou by nature. So we beeing by nature like as many rotten ſtickes, albeit wee were preſſed with mountaines, we ſhall neuer yeeld a ſweete ſappe, or any repentance: No, before we yeelde any droppe of repentance, we ſhall be bruiſed in powder: fye on nature: if thou wereſt a Prince, thou ſhalt goe to Hell, if thou haue no more but nature, if thou getteſt not one d
                  •
               oppe of grace. Yet yee ſee, that the other thiefe, when hee is preſſed, yeeldes one droppe of ſappe: hee becomes penitent, and is zealous of the glorie of the Lord IESVS. Theſe are good effects: The Croſſe that wrought euill in the other thiefe, workes good in this thiefe: But who made the difference? Who diſcerneth thee, ſaith Paul: Not nature: They were alike in nature, alike in miſdeedes, alike in a wicked life, the one had liued as wickedly as the other, alike in torment: It was IESVS that made the ſeparation, it was a happie time for the one thiefe, that euer he was crucified beſide the LORD of glorie. The Lord IESVS made the difference: out of that fulneſſe Hee powres out one droppe of His grace: He giues none to the other.
            Learne this, that all troubles and afflictions, croſſes, and all the torments in the worlde, ſhall neuer make thee better: All the torments in the world, ſhall not worke one droppe of ſpirituall moyſture out of thee: the torments may vvell p
                  •
               eſſe out ſowre and bitter ſappe, as blaſphemie, rayling, and deſpare, but no good ſappe, as Faith, or Repentance: except thou get it of the fulneſſe of IESVS CHRIST: and therefore my counſell is, When thou feeleſt the hand of the Lord on thee, & namely in the houre of death (a dangerous houre) turne thee to Ieſus Chriſt, and ſay, thou mayeſt preſſe mee downe, but long ere I yeelde one droppe of grace, except thou giue it me: Lord, therefore giue me one drop of grace. Another thing I marke in the rebuke of the other thiefe. Common miſerie ſhould worke a mutual compaſſion: thou ſhould piti
                  •
                them who are in a like miſerie with thee, and if thou doeſt it not, thou do
                  •
               ſt as the euill thiefe did: I ſay thou haſt no feare of God: & if thou rayleſt on him who is in miſerie with thee, thine heart is full of the gall of bitterneſſe. By nature we are all alike in

miſerie: there is not a thing that becomes a ſinner better, than to haue compaſſion on others: an heart without pitie, ſhall neuer be pitied, not neuer ſhall ſee life.
            Now, to goe forward, when he hath ſaid, Thou art in like damnation, leſt that ye thiefe rebuked ſhould haue thought, yt Chriſt ſhould haue deſerued that paine as well as hee (thinke not that they who are alike in miſerie, are alike guiltie: No, no, ye are deceiued) Well, he meetes this, we ſuffer nothing but that which we demerite: I & thou are iuſtly in this common condemnation, but this man hath done nothing amiſſe. This rayling and paine, this man demerites not: yet if ye will weigh the wordes narrowly: wee ſhall ſee other two arguments, whereby hee rebukes this blaſphemous companion. The firſt is, from their merites: The ſecond from the innocencie of Chriſt: The firſt, thou meriteſt this torment: and therefore ſhould not thy merite worke a feare of God, and a feare of an heauier judgement: Lord ſaue vs from the merite of ſinne. When a man is in torment, and chiefly in death, the paine ſhould worke a feare of God: and then conſidering the merite, there ſhould ſtrike a greater feare in the heart, that there ſhould enſue a greater damnation afterward. The conſideration of merite ſhould worke a feare, and the conſcience ſhould not ſo ſoone ſtand vp to accuſe vs of ſinne, but wee ſhould be ſtriken with a feare of that terrible Iudge: but euery man hath not this ſenſe: the thiefe hath not that ſenſe of the merite of the preſent paine, nor yet of the greater paine that was to inſue. What is the cauſe of this, that euery man feeles not this, The conſcience of the merite of ſinne is not giuen to euery man: We are all ſinners, and merites all our paine, we merite death and Hell. But, alas, where one gets the conſcience of their merite, and feeles that they deſerue death, ten wants it. It is a pitie to ſee, how many dies without ſenſe like dogges, and then if it fall ſo, that one get the conſcience of ſinne in the houre of death, it falles out ofttimes, that they get not the ſenſe of mercie. It may bee, that thou get the ſenſe of ſinne, and be ſtricken with a feare, but with a deſperate feare: for with the ſenſe and feeling of ſinne, if there bee not alſo a ſenſe of mercie, there is nothing but terrour, and a ſeruile feare. So thou ſhalt die like a vile ſlaue in damnation. So the conſcience of this thiefes merite makes him to feare God: & no doubt, hee hath had a ſweet ſenſe of the mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt. But who made this difference? It was the Lord:

It was a happie thing for this thiefe to be crucified with IESVS CHRIST: for all this ſlowed out of the Croſſe of IESVS CHRIST. Therefore take vp the leſſon. Thinke not that in the houre of death thou ſhalt bee twitched as thou ſhouldeſt, either with the feeling of thy ſinne and miſerie, or yet of mercie: except that thou ſweetely turne thee to the Croſſe of CHRIST, and ſay, LORD, I feele neither ſenſe of my merite, and what my ſinnes deſerues, nor of mercie: LORD, therefore giue mee it, then the ſweetneſſe of that ſenſe ſhall ſwallow vp that paine. No comfort in death but in IESVS CHRIST: except thine eyes be ſet on that Croſſe, Woe is to thee, and woe to thee againe, and better for thee, if thou hadſt neuer come in the world. Thou and I, ſayes hee, ſuffer iuſtly. This confeſſion witneſſes the inward conuerſion to IESVS CHRIST: for when the heart of a ſinner is turned to IESVS CHRIST, it will taſte a ſuch ſweetneſſe, that the creature will not care by that it bee ſhamed, ſo it can get that LORD in whome it feeles ſuch a ſweetneſſe, glorified: it is a ſure token, that theſe ſhameleſſe ſinners, theſe men who will not ſhame themſelues in the ſight of the worlde, but will ſtand in their pointes of honour, with GOD, theſe miſerable ſoules, theſe bloodie murtherers, theſe adulterers, taſted neuer of that mercie in IESVS CHRIST.
            If thou wouldeſt haue thy ſinnes hid from the eyes of GOD, that terrible Iudge, then open them to the world, that the LORD may be glorified: and if thou hideſt thy ſinnes, the LORD ſhall rippe vp thy breſt in that great daye, and let all the world ſee the moſt hid and ſecret corner of thine heart, to thy ſhame and confuſion.
            Nowe come to the thirde argument of reproofe, and it is taken from the innocencie of Ieſus: This is an innocent and iust man, Feareſt thou not GOD, to raile on the innocent: if He were guiltie, as thou and I am, thy railing were more tollerable, but howe canſt thou raile on this juſt man? The leſſon is, Iuſt ones who ſuffer innocently, ſhould not be railed vpon: the LORD keepe our mouthes from railing on them: if thy conſcience tell thee of their innocency, reuile them not: & a man who ſuffers, may be innocent two manner of wayes: for either hee is innocent in himſelfe, and not guiltie of that for which hee ſuffers, or els if hee bee a malefactour, and guiltie, he may be innocent through Faith

and repentance through the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, as this thiefe was innocent in Chriſt. Now if a man be innocent of that crime for which hee ſuffers, raile not on him on paine of thy life: and if thou findeſt him innocent in the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, and findeſt him to haue true and vnfained repentance in Him, albeit he bee neuer ſo wicked, let him die, and ſuffer theſe paines hee ſhould ſuffer: for repentance ſhould not exeeme and free him from ciuile puniſhment: but beware thou raile on him: ſurely thy mouth ſhould be ſtopped, to raile out on him. God forbid that an euill word be ſpoken out againſt him as a reprobate, whom the LORD Ieſus countes innocent in His blood: for this railing teſtifies that thou counts that man as a reprobate: and that is too ſore a judgement thou takes to thee. I ſee heere further, the LORD neuer leaues His Sonne without a teſtimonie of His innocencie: Pilate euer on teſtified His innocencie before hee condemned Him, and ſaid, once, twiſe, thriſe, I finde nothing worthie of death in Him: No, Pilate was neuer brought to ſay, that Chriſt was guiltie, ſuppoſe he condemned Him, but euer preached, and proclaimed His innocencie. Then when Hee is comming to ſuffer, the poore women followes and teſtifies: and now the poore penitent thiefe teſtifies the innocencie of Chriſt: and laſtly, the men of warre were compelled to ſay, Of a trueth, this is the Sonne of God. And if ye conſider well, yee ſhall ſee two thinges very contrarie: that of all men that ſuffered, He was both the moſt juſt, and the moſt vnjuſt: He was innocent in Himſelfe, and Hee was guiltie in vs: and this for our conſolation: for this lets vs ſeee, how meete a Mediatour He was for vs: my Sauiour muſt be innocent in Himſelfe, Heb. 7.26. and He muſt bee guiltie in me. Thus farre this thiefe hath vttered that inward repentance, in rebuking the other for his blaſphemie, and ſinne, and in confeſſing his ſinnes before the other thiefe and thoſe that ſtood by: now followes the third effect, he turnes him to the Lord, and in all humilitie ſeeking remiſſion, grace, and life, and ſayes, Lord remember me when thou commeſt to thy Kingdome. Prayer ſhould follow vpon confeſſion of ſinnes: but marke the word, hee calls Him Lord, albeit he ſaw Him hanging on the tree▪ there like a vile ſlaue, yet he acknowledges Him to be a King, when he aſcribeth a Kingdome to Him, albeit he ſees Him hanging there like a ſlaue, yet he askes life of Him: albeit he ſaw Him in weakneſſe, in torment, and at the point of death. All theſe things are marueilous,

and ye ſhall ſee them the more marueilous, if ye will conſider well the perſon of him who prayes, what a man before this time he was, and then what is his eſtate preſent, and laſt, the perſon of Him to whom he directs his Prayer.
            This his conuerſion was marueilous: if this man had beene trained vp in the ſchoole of Chriſt any ſpace of time, it had beene leſſe marueilous: but beeing trained vp in a denne of thieues, where hee had loſt all kinde of equitie and naturalitie, where hee had liued like a beaſt, like a lyon, liuing by cutting of throates, theft, and by the bloode of men: this man to be turned from ſuch an foule heart: to get faith, and ſeeke mercie ſo ſuddenly in a moment: ſuch ſudden mutation is more than marueilous aad wonderfull.
            Then will yee looke to his preſent eſtate: if he had bene free in the body without paine, ſo that he had gotten leaſure and licence to looke thorow that body to His Kingdome, and to that eternall Life: then this doing had beene leſſe marueilous: but beeing nailed quicke on the Croſſe, in ſuch extreame paine, that might haue occupied and exerciſed all his ſenſes: and when he is looking and waiting for the hand of the hangman to breake him quicke on the Croſſe, to this man to haue driuen his ſenſes, and to haue ſet them on a better life, from that hell hee was in, to that heauenly Life, it was more than wonderfull: and I ſay, it was as wonderfull, as if he had leapt out of the loweſt hell, to the higheſt heauen.
            Then come to the perſon of him to whome he prayes: if hee had ſeene Ieſus Chriſt ſtanding before him like a glorious King, it had beene leſſe to haue beene wondered at, but hee is hanging in that ſhamefull death, and in greater ſhame than he: for they railed not on him, as they did on Chriſt (which, no queſtion, was more grieuous than all torments, as if Hee had beene a reprobate from GOD) So if he had ſeene Him in glorie, it had bene no maruell, but to ſeeke life in a man who was dying ignominiouſly, and who was hanging in a worſe eſtate than Himſelfe, and to haue pierced thorow, and ſeene thorow ſuch a cloud of ignominie, ſuch a faire Life and glorie: I ſay, it was more than wonderfull.
            Further, if he had ſeene Him before, and bene familiar with Him, heard Him teach, and had ſeene His wonders, as the Apoſtles did, it had not bene much to maruell at: but this beeing the firſt meeting, the firſt acquaintance, and neuer to haue ſpoken with Him

before, they met in an ignominious Croſſe together, then to ſeeke in ſuch a death, ſuch a life: in ſuch ignominie, ſuch glorie, it is a thing more than marueilous. Came anie of the Iewes then, and prayed vnto Him? Yea, came anie of the Apoſtles? Came anie of His Diſciples? Came either Peter, or Iohn, or Matthew? No, all were offended with Him. I ſaye of this man, to the glorie of God, that hee ſhamed all that ſtood by, hee ſhamed the Apoſtles, and made them to caſt downe their faces: And I ſaye, hee ſhames all men and women, who will not beleeue when they ſee Him not crucified, as hee ſawe, but glorified nowe in the Heauens, ſitting at the right hande of that Majeſtie: ſhame ſhall light on thee, and this Thiefe ſhall bee ſette vp in glorie, to teſtifie againſt thee, and to condemne thee. 1. COR. 1.27. Paul ſaies, GOD will raiſe vp thinges naughtie, to ſhame thinges high in the worlde, and to humble the pride of the fleſhe. If euer this was practiſed, it is practiſed in this Thiefe. Therefore, in time learne thy leſſon at this Thiefe: for if hee doe thee no good, hee ſhall doe thee euill: and this ſame preaching ſhall doe thee euill, if it doe thee no good. The LORD raiſed him vp vpon a Gallowes, to bee a Teacher of Faith and Repentance, of Hope, of Patience, of Loue, and of all graces: and thinke no ſhame to learne at him: for, if thou thinkeſt ſhame of the Thiefe to bee thy maſter, hee ſhall giue out a teſtimonie to aggreadge thy damnation: and hee ſhall ſaye, I went to teach the Infideles on the Croſſe with Thee, and they hearde it, and beleeued not, Lord, let their damnation bee aggreadged. All this that I ſpeake tendes to this, That hee who glories, maye glorie in the Lord: And they who woulde maruell, let them maruell at the Lord. I ſpeake not theſe thinges, that yee ſhoulde wonder at the Thiefe, that ſillie creature: But all this is, That yee ſhoulde wonder at Ieſus Chriſt, who wrought ſuch a wonder at this time, and ſhewed ſuch a power when Hee was weakened: It is a wonder to ſhewe ſuch power in His humiliation, and ſuch mercy on ſuch a vile ſinner, who was not worthie that the earth ſhoulde beare him, let bee to dwell in Heauen. Wonder at Him who is ſo mercifull and gracious to poore ſinners. To Him therefore, bee praiſe for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XVIII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 43 Then Ieſus ſaid vnto him, Verely, J ſay vnto thee, to day ſhalt thou be with me in Paradiſe.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Then ſtood by the croſſe of Ieſus his mother, and his mothers ſister, Marie the wife of Cleopas, and Marie Magdalene. 
                        verse 26 And when Ieſus ſaw his mother, and the diſciples ſtanding by, whome he loued, He ſaid vnto his mother, woman, beholde thy ſonne. 
                        verse 27 Then ſaid He to the diſciple, behold thy mother: and from that houre, the diſciple tooke her home vnto him.
               
            
            
               WEE heard the laſt day (Beloued in Ieſus) of the repentance of one of the Thieues that hung on the Croſſe with Chriſt: in a moment, wonderfully hee begins to be penitent for all his miſdeedes, and former life: and hee vtters his penitencie, and the diſpleaſure that was in his heart for ſinne in ſundry effectes: Firſt, hee rebukes bitterlie that blaſphemie that the other Thiefe ſpeakes out againſt the Lord, and ſaies, Fearest thou not God, ſeeing thou art in the ſame damnation? Thou and I ſuffer justly, for we haue demerited all this: but this man (pointing out Chriſt) hath done nothing amiſſe. When hee hath thus rebuked the Thiefe, hee turnes him about to Ieſus Chriſt, who hung in the middeſt, and hee directs his prayer to Him, and ſaies, Lord remember mee when thou commest to thy Kingdome. The other, the blaſphemer, would faine haue liued in the vvorlde: And therefore, becauſe hee ſawe that IESVS had no power to giue him this earthlie life: therefore, hee blaſphemeth CHRIST in His face.
            
               But the penitent Thiefe ſeekes not this preſent life, but deſires that hee may gette entrie in to that Heauenly Kingdome. The laſt day I ſpake concerning the petition of the penitent Thiefe. I repeate nothing. Onely wonder not at the Thiefe, or at ſuch an earneſt repentance in him ſuddenly: b
                  ••
                wonder at Ieſus Chriſt, vvho in ſuch vveakneſſe, hanging ſo ſhamefully vpon the Croſſe, yet vttered ſuch mercie, and ſuch infinite power, yea, one of the moſte miſerable catiues that euer was in the vvorlde. I goe forwarde, and firſt I ſhall ſhewe you of the anſwere that the Lord giues to the penitent Thiefe: and then I ſhall come to the earneſt recommendation that Ieſus made of His Mother MARIE, vnto IOHN. The Lord anſweres him, Verily I ſay vnto thee, this day thou ſhalt be with me in Paradiſe. The anſwere containes a promiſe: and the thing that the Lord promiſes, is, Thou ſhalt bee vvith mee: thou ſeekeſt to bee vvith mee in my Kingdome: thou ſhalt bee vvith mee, and thou ſhalt bee a ſubject vvith mee and more, a follower: and vvhereas thou wereſt a vile Thiefe, I ſhall make thee a glorious King in the Heauen. And when ſhall this bee? Without delay: it ſhall not be to morrowe, or other morrowe, but this ſame day immediately thou ſhalt bee tranſported to that vnſpeakeable glorie. And where ſhall this bee? It ſhall bee in Paradiſe. Thou ſhalt not goe to Purgatorie, but into Celeſti
                  •
               ll Paradiſe. Of this worde Paradiſe wee reade in ſundrie places of the Newe Teſtament, as namely, 2. COR. 12.4. (where PAVL ſpeakes of his rauiſhing to Paradiſe) and alſo REVEL. 2.7. But to leaue the vvordes, and to come to the meaning: This Paradiſe ſignifies none other thing, but that Houſe of the Father, in the which is manie manſions, as wee ſaide in the foureteenth Chapter. Nowe woulde yee knowe the place of it? PAVL ſaies, It is farre aboue theſe viſible heauens, where Chriſt himſelfe aſcended, EPHES. 4.10. It is the place of the Throne of that Majeſtie of that Glorie, and of that euerlaſting reſt of the Kirke of Ieſus Chriſt, and of His Sainctes, where they ſhall reſt in a wonderfull glorie euerlaſtinglie. The vvorde is borrowed from that Paradiſe, that Parke of pleaſure, in the vvhich ADAM and EVAH vvere planted, to liue in a vvonderfull pleaſure for euer, if they had ſtoode vvithout ſinne.
            But to come to the matter. Firſt in this anſwere that the Lord makes to the penitent Thiefe, yee may ſee a vvonderfull readineſſe in Chriſt, to heare the petition of a miſerable ſinner: for hee hath

ſcarcely ſpoken the worde, when the Lord makes an anſwere: and no maruell; for Hee that preuentes thee with grace, ere thou thinkeſt of grace, Hee will followe after with grace: Hee who giues grace to begge grace, Hee will giue a gracious anſwere. ROMAN. 8.26. The Spirite of GOD interceadeth for vs, with ſighes vnſpeakeable. That is the firſt grace. Then hee ſubjoynes▪ 
               The Lord who ſearcheth the heart, knoweth the ſenſe and meaning of his owne Spirite. There is the ſeconde grace. Thou ſhalt not ſo ſoone open thy mouth to ſpeake to Him with the Spirite, but Hee ſhall as ſoone heare thy vvorde: thou ſhalt not ſo ſoone haue a meaning, but it ſhall as ſoone touch the heart of the Lorde, as it touches thine heart: becauſe it is not thy ſpirite, but the Lordes Spirite who ſpeakes in thee. So all the difficultie and hardneſſe, is, to gette the firſt grace to praye: there is no difficultie of the next. And there are wonderous fewe vvho gettes this grace, to begge, to ſigh, to ſobb, &c. yea, where one hath it, ten wantes it: and when this is once gotten, the other followes of its owne will: for if thou askeſt ſpirituall graces, of neceſſitie thou ſhalt gette thy petition graunted. And, if wee aske earthly thinges, either ſhall wee gette our petition, or elſe the Lord once ſhall ſhewe vs, why Hee will not graunt it: and ſo wee ſhall haue contentment to vndertake His will, and ſhall heartily thanke Him. There is more yet in this anſwere: Beſides this eaſineſſe to heare, marke an abounding mercie, and exceeding liberalitie, of the Lord, paſſing aboue the petition: The Thiefe onely prayed the Lord to remember him, when He came in His Kingdome: The Lord aunſweres, Beholde, euen I giue thee more than thou requireſt, for thou ſhalt be with me this day in Paradiſe, ſo thou needeſt not to feare that I forget thee. The Thiefe ſeekes but a little thing: the Lord giues him more than hee can ſeeke: the hande of the Lorde is not ſo ſcarce. Wilt thou ſeeke a litle thing? the Lord shall giue a thouſand times more than thou canſt ſeeke: the Lord hath neither ſcant nor want. Brethren, the glory which we shall finde one day, ſhall bee greater than we can looke or hope for in this world. No, things Heauenlie, which He shall giue, ſurmountes further aboue our capacitie, than the Heauen does aboue the Earth. Yea, if thou ſpeakeſt of earthlie things, findes not many by experiēce, that they get ſuch an eſtate in the world, as they would neuer haue looked or hoped for: I ſought but life (ſaies Dauid, Pſal. 21.5) yet the Lord gaue me to be a king: that is, He gaue me not only a priuate & obſcure life, but a glorious life in

the ſight of the people. Beſides this eaſineſſe and liberalitie of the Lord, to grant to a poore man, aboue that that he durſt preſume, He preſcribes no time, but this ſame day. I know not if he durſt haue bene ſo bold, as to haue ſought ſuch a time, that ſame day. Marke further here, a wonderfull power in the Lord, at that time when Hee was in a moſt vile and ignominious death, which was the image of Hell, to pull a man quicke on the Croſſe, to breake Him on a Croſſe. The Lord is weakned: the Iewes thought more of the dirt they trode on, than of Ieſus: yet ye ſee what a wonderfull power which ſtrikes out from Him to the thiefe: this is the power of a King, This day thou ſhalt be with Me in Paradiſe What Emperour durſt ſpeake this? Yea, He vtters the power of GOD Himſelfe: This promiſe is proper to GOD only, to promiſe participation of that heauenly Kingdome. What Angell durſt doe this? None, but the eternall and immortall GOD. It is true, the LORD Ieſus, whilſt as Hee hang vpon the Croſſe, was wonderfully weakned, and that glorious Godhead that dwelt in the humane Nature kept it ſelfe cloſſe for a time, and held in the beames of His glorie for a time, within that vaile of His bodie (for if Hee had not kept cloſſe that Glorie of His Godhead, the world, could not haue crucified Him) yet He kept Him not ſo cloſſe, but in the Croſſe Hee manifeſts Himſelfe, Hee does the part of a King, and fought a fiercer battell, than all the Kings in the world. Hee fought againſt all the enemies, and in the ende Hee triumphes in that Croſſe, as in a Chariote, and leades them all, as thieues before Him: And if there were no more to ſhewe that Hee was a King, than this haſtie conuerſion of the thiefe, it may tell you, if Chriſt had ſuch a power, whilſt as Hee hang in ſuch weakneſſe on the Croſſe: What power hath He now when He is in the Heauen, exalted in the Throne of glorie. If it bee ſo, that wee feele not CHRIST powerfull in vs to life, as the thiefe felt. Blame not IESVS, as if Hee wanted power ſufficient nowe in glorie, who had ſuch power in His humilitie: but blame thy ſelfe: Thou wants that which the thiefe had: thou wants Faith in Chriſt glorified: the thiefe may ſhame thee, who beleeued in Him, whē He was in extreame ignominie. Then to end all this yt hath bin ſpokē of this anſwere in a word. Seeing ye Lord of lords, ye Lord Ieſus is ſo readie (Neuer was there King ſo ready to heare a ſubject, as Ieſus is:) if thou wereſt the vileſt bodie that goes,

a Thiefe, a Harlot, &c. yet if thou wilt ſaye this, Lord, remember on mee, and giue mee a part of thy Kingdome: if thou prayeſt to Him from a penitent heart, with confidence and aſſurance, I promiſe vnto thee, Heauen and Earth ſhall goe together, ere thou vvanteſt thine asking. Seeing our Lord Ieſus is ſo liberall, then ſeeke more than enough, more than a Kingdome, and thou ſhalt get more. The only cauſe why we want, is in vs, we haue no hearts to ſeeke it. And laſt: Seeing He is ſo powerfull, let vs ſeeke from Him with this aſſurance, that Hee can giue all thinges which either wee can ſeeke, or can conceiue, and that according to His effectuall power working in vs. Now I end with this Hiſtory of the Thiefe, & I come to the other Hiſtory, concerning that recommendation that Ieſus makes of His Mother Marie, to John, His Diſciple, whom Hee loued. The Lord Ieſus hanging on the Croſſe in extreame torment & paine: He is not only a ſufferer (howbeit indeed He ſufferes all extreamitie) but in ſuffering Hee does manie workes: Firſt, Hee does like a King, in giuing life and glorie to the Thiefe. All the Kinges in the Earth in their Royall Robes, ſhall not doe ſo much as Hee did on that vile Croſſe. Nowe next, Hee vtters a verie naturall and louing affection to His Mother, who bare Him, when He is to depart out of this life and to be taken away haſtily, He is carefull how ſhee ſhall liue when Hee is gone from her. To come to the Hiſtorie: Wee haue firſt the occaſion that bringes on this: and ſecondly, the commendation it ſelfe: and thirdly, how Ihon accepts of her. As concerning the occaſion: There ſtandes by the Croſſe, a man and three women, whileſt the LORD is hanging quicke in extreame torment, Hee ſpyes out theſe foure perſons, MARIE His Mother, and MARIE His Mothers Siſter, that is, her kinſwoman according to ther HEBREVV phraſe, who was either the Wiſe, or the Daughter of Cleopas, and MARIE MAGDALENE, a kinde vvoman, out of vvhom He had caſten ſeuen deuils: (kindneſſe meetes kindneſſe) Their heartes vvere vvith Him, howbeit Hee vvas hanging vpon the Croſſe. Then, if thou canſt doe no more vnto Him, yet follow Him with theſe women to the death of the Croſſe. There are three Maries, better Maries were neuer in the world: and Iohn, whom here he calles the diſciple whō Jeſus loued: this ſtile he gets in ye Goſpel, becauſe, as Ieſus loued him entirely, ſo hee findes this loue deeply ſetled in his ſoule: & well is he that finds that the Lord loues him: All the Kingdoms in the Earth are nothing in reſpect of that ſenſe.

Well. Theſe are the foure that are ſtanding by the Croſſe, together. As for Iohn, I ſee now certainely this doing of his in the following of the Lord, & this ſtanding by the Croſſe, ſhewes, albeit that Faith in Ieſus Chriſt, in the heart of Iohn, and all the reſt, was wonderfully ſmoothered, for all were offended in Him that night: yet that Faith in his heart was not altogether quenched: No, it was not quenched in one of the Apoſtles, nor in Peter, who denied Him. To ſpeake of Iohn, Thinke, ye that except hee had had Faith, that euer hee would haue followed Him to the Croſſe, and except hee had beleeued that Ieſus after ſuch a death ſhould haue riſen againe in glorie, except he had looked for a glorious reſurrection, that euer hee could haue beholden ſuch a miſerable ſpectacle: Faith gaue him boldneſſe to follow Chriſt to the Croſſe, Hope furniſhed him comfort, when he beheld Him in ignominie and paine. Theſe three women vtters a tender and louing heart towards Him. Brethren, if there had bene no more, but this naturall loue that a mother beares to the ſonne, Marie would neuer haue followed her Sonne, to ſuch a vile death, if ſhee had not beleeued that death ſhould haue turned into ſuch a glorious Life. Would ſhe haue ſtood beſide her Sonne, and ſeene Him torne and rent quicke in ſuch torments? What mother would haue done it? 1. Theſſ, 4.13. ye read what Paul writes to them: I would not haue you ignorant, that yee mourne not for them which are aſleepe, as the Gentiles who are deſperat in their displeaſure. If thou haue but a naturall loue in thine heart, when thou ſeeſt him, or her, whom thou loueſt, depart, that loue ſhall worke but impatiencie in thee, & a deſperate diſpleaſure, that is, if with that loue thou haue no hope of a glorious reſurrection, deſperate ſhall be thy dolour, and it were better for thee to want thy naturall affection. Indeede it is true, our Faith▪ and Hope of glorie after this life, will not extinguiſh the naturall loue, neither puts it away the dolour that one ſhould haue.
            I deſire not that a man ſhould bee ſenſleſſe without loue: and I count more of a ſtone, than of one without loue, and better were it, that that perſon were a ſtone So I ſay, Faith and Hope will not extinguiſh diſpleaſure, but it will mitigate it ſo, that in a wonderfull heauineſſe it will finde joy, and thou wilt ſay, albeit wee ſunder nowe, the day will come, wherein wee ſhall haue a joyfull meeting.
            Come yet to theſe women: They may teach all men and women

to the end of the worlde: Thinke yee not, that they ſhould haue bene terrified at ſuch a Croſſe, and that Marie ſhould haue thought ſhame of her Sonne, ſo ſhamefully tormented, and railed out on by all men. Well then, if theſe women by the ſight of that ſhameful death of Ieſus Chriſt on the Croſſe are not terrified nor diuerted from following, albeit they ſaw His glorie to come, but very obſcurely, and if their hearts were knit with Him, whilſt as Hee hang on the Croſſe, and there was neuer a band ſo ſurely knit, as their hearts were with Him. Fye on all men and women after theſe women, who will thinke ſhame of the Croſſe of Chriſt, albeit they haue greater preſence and ſight of the glorie of Ieſus Chriſt, than theſe women had. Shall a ſillie worde, ſhall the ſword, ſhall the fire, terrifie thee? And if it bee ſo, theſe ſame women ſhall ſtand vp and condemne thee in that great day. Now let vs conſider theſe wordes, whereby He recommends His mother to Iohn. The Lord, as He is looking from Him, He ſees theſe foure ſtanding together, (for wicked ſcorners ſtood together, ſo the godly who mourne for Chriſt drew together) and Hee directs His ſpeech to two of them: Firſt, to Marie, and next to Iohn: Woman, He ſayes, Beholde thy ſonne, poynting to Iohn, not to Himſelfe. This ſtile that He giues her would not be paſſed by, He calls her not mother, but Woman, and this is the common ſtile which Ieſus gaue her, whilſt as He was in the world: it lets vs ſee whilſt Ieſus was in the worlde, as at all times, ſo eſpecially at the houre of death, whilſt Hee is liuing in the world, He had His eyes raiſed vp from all earthly and carnall things, which men in this life count much of, as are, mother, ſonne, daughter, husband, wife, kinred, Countrie: And by His example, Hee would teach vs, when we are here to know none according to the fleſh: No, not Chriſt Himſelfe: for in Heauens there ſhall bee neither father nor mother, nor husband, nor wife: but we ſhall be (all olde things which accompanie the olde creature, beeing aboliſhed) like Angels in Heauen. Therefore, Ieſus, as a patterne, teaches vs this, to turne away the eye piece and piece from this Earth, & all that is in it, that we count not much of them, but that 
                  •
               e behold that heauenly life. Paul. 2. Cor. 5.16. When he was ſpeaking of the redemption that the Lord bought with His precious blood, ſayes, From henceforth I will knowe no man according to the fleſh, and if I did know Jeſus ſometimes according to the fleſh now I will not know Him & hee giues a reaſon Who euer is in Chriſt, let him bee a newe creature,

the olde creatures are paſt away, behold all things are made new. Fye on thee, that haſt thine heart fixed on theſe earthly thinges, and forgetteſt Heauen. This for the ſtile that He giues her: Come to the words, He ſayes, Behold thy ſonne: As if He had ſaid, Woman, I am to depart this life, and I put Iohn in my ſtead, and I ordaine him to take the protection of thee, and to doe the dutie of a ſonne to thee, in my ſteade: then Hee turnes Him to Iohn, and Hee ſayes, Beholde thy mother: As if Hee had ſaid, I goe out of the world, and I leaue my mother to thee, and I ordaine that thou be a ſonne to her, and ſhe a mother to thee, and that thou keepe her, and intertaine her, ſo long as thou and ſhe liue together. It may be asked, The LORD IESVS CHRIST going to Heauen, might Hee not from the Heauen haue kept His owne mother? might Hee not haue taken the defence of His owne mother? might He not haue preſerued Her from all dangers? No queſtion, He might haue kept her well eneugh: yet He committes her to Iohn, whom Hee loues, becauſe He loues His mother well, Hee commends her to a man whom He loued intierely, He will not contemne the ordinarie meanes, and manner of doing, this ſame Hee does dayly, the LORD IESVS hath power to ſaue His Church, and all the members of the ſame, to protect and defend them, but He will not contemne theſe ordinarie meanes, He will haue euery one to keepe another, as Hee commended His mother to Iohn to bee kept: And woe bee to thee, who may, if thou keepe none: And namely the LORD hath a care of that infirme ſexe, that women bee kept by the protection of men, who are faithfull. She who is kept vnder the protection of any in the worlde, let her giue CHRIST glorie for it: for it is by His direction: as Marie was directed to Iohn. Conſider heere further: The LORD at this time is in the ſeruice of His heauenly Father: and there was neuer a man ſo occupied in His life, as He was at this houre, and He was neuer ſo occupied all His time, as now: and Hee was now occupied chiefly in ſuffering. It is an eaſie thing to bee occupied in performing duties of the ſeruice of GOD, in reſpect of ſuffering: it is a ſore thing to ſuffer, as to be caſt in a fire, to bee nailed on a Croſſe: yet in ſuffering albeit He is occupied ſo, that He forgets His owne ſelfe, yet when Hee ſees His mother, Hee forgets not her. I would all men ſhould marke this leſſon: The malediction of GOD ſhall fall on theſe that deſerue the curſe of their

mother, who glorie in it, let them glorie in it as they will: our dutie to GOD prejudges nothing our dutie to father or mother: thou was neuer ſo occupied in the ſeruice of GOD, as was Ieſus Chriſt, at this houre, who in the middeſt of all this did His dutie to His mother: and Chriſt will let vs ſee, that our dutie to our GOD ſtands well with our duetie to man. Wilt thou pull the firſt and the ſecond Table aſunder, the one from the other: Wilt thou ſay, that the firſt prejudges the ſecond, thou doeſt lie: But looke the order: That CHRIST keepes in theſe duties: doth He firſt His dutie to His mother? No, firſt, He doth His dutie to His Father: Hee is obedient to His Father, to the death, and in the middeſt of that obedience to the Father, Hee doth His dutie to His mother. Beginne at thy GOD, if thou wouldeſt doe thy dutie: and next, come to man, and if thou paſſeſt by GOD, to doe thy dutie to man, thou ſhalt doe nothing of loue, nor of ſinceritie. Fye on thee, and that loue, and that dutie thou vttereſt to man: followe not on that loue thou beareſt to GOD, and wilt thou ſay this: I ſee my dutie to the King, and to my father bindes me, I will doe my dutie to them, and laſt, I will ſerue GOD: any thing will ſerue Him: wilt thou jeſt ſo with the LORD, I ſay to thee, if thou beginneſt at man, euen at the King, or at thy father or mother, and poſtpone the LORD, I ſay to thee, the LORD will haue none of thy ſeruice: And if thou hateſt not, ſayes CHRIST, father and mother for my cauſe, thou art not worthie of mee, Luke 14.26. Then, what ſhall become of them, who preferre father and mother to GOD, he is but a knaue, that will take on him the name of a Chriſtian, and will ſerue men before GOD: No, that name ſhall turne to thy ſhame. Therefore vnder the paine of thy life, doe thy dutie firſt to GOD, and then for GODS cauſe doe thy dutie to man, that GOD may haue the glorie of it. Further, there are ſome in the houre of death that will take ſo litle care of the worlde, and of them whome they leaue behinde them, that they are deſtitute of naturall affection, that they regard not if they die, though all the world ſhould fall in one moment: for men wanting that naturall affection, will ſay, What care I, if once I bee gone from the world. Nowe there are others, albeit they looſe not altogether that naturall affection, who haue their ſenſes ſo occupied, and exerciſed about the preſent paine, that they will not know their parents, kinsfolks, or any

that appertaine vnto them. Who was euer in ſuch a paine as Ieſus was? And yet out of the middeſt of torment, of blaſphemies, of wraſtling with death euerlaſting, with the wrath of the Father, and with all the Infernall powers, Hee is carefull of His Mother. No man was euer borne, that had ſuch a naturall affection as Hee: no ſonne in this worlde euer loued his mother ſo well as Hee. And except thou be in Ieſus Chriſt, and He ſanctifie thy affections, that in the houre of death thou mayeſt ſleepe in Him ſweetly; either thou ſhalt looſe altogether this naturall affection, or elſe it ſhall bee ſuffocate: that albeit thy Parentes, and all thy kinred were about thee, thou ſhalt haue no care of them: No, thou ſhalt not once by thine head and countenance vtter anie meaning, that thou haſt a care of their weale. IESVS CHRIST honoured His Mother beyonde anie man, euen on the Croſſe, in ſuch a paine, and ſuch a diſpleaſure. And this teſtifies, that naturall affection was greater in Ieſus, than in anie man. Further: Seeing Ieſus from the Croſſe, in ſhame, in torment, in that fearefull battell, &c. commendes His Mother to Iohn, it telles vs, that the duety which wee owe to Parentes, ſtandes not in ceremonies, ſo much as in performing of neceſſarie dueties. One word is greater in the houre of death (or the meaneſt care; than all that thou couldeſt doe being in health. It is ſaid, Honour thy father, and thy mother. But our lordes and gentlemen thinke it enough to take off their hats, and to bowe their knees to them. Standes the honour of thy Parentes in a ceremonie? Commendes God hypocriſie? Learne at Ieſus Chriſt: the honour of thy Parentes ſtandes in performing all eſſentiall partes of thy duetie to them. Was thy Mother bounde to giue thee ſucke? and to bring thee vp in thy youth? I ſaye thou art as ſtraitly bounde to honour thy Mother, and to nouriſhe her in her olde age. Woe to them that procure their mothers curſe, and who are not tender to their mothers, and will neither foſter them, nor haue a care of them. This example of Ieſus Chriſt, which is regiſtrate in the Goſpell, ſhall beare witneſſe againſt thee, when thy conſcience ſhal rent and teare thee. Men are come to ſuch vnnaturalneſſe, that the Lyon was neuer ſo cruell, as men in Scotland, to them out of whoſe bellies they came. Now what does Iohn? He takes her home heartily. John takes ano
                  •
               her mans mother and entertaines her, and he gets but this direction from the Croſſe Fie on thee that getteſt a direction from the throne of heauē, to honour thy own mother. I ſay not (ſaies Chriſt)

my mother, but thy mother. When men will not obeye Chriſt from that Heauēly Throne, what ſhall become of them in that great day? Shame ſhall be heaped on them. And Iohn who tooke not home his own mother, but another mans mother, ſhall ſtand vp & condemne thee, who would not entertaine thine own mother. All the ſpeaches of the worlde will not learne men in this wicked generation. Further, this is not to be p
                  •
               ſſed by, that Iohn had an Houſe, and ſo had the reſt of the Apoſtles: ſay not yt they were beggers: it is but folly to place religion in beggery. I ſay it in a word, Theſe priuiledges in the world, Houſes, wiues, children, &c. are as well ſanctified to a Miniſter, as thy lordſhip is to thee. Nowe I beſeech thee, as euer thou woldeſt yt the Lord ſhold bleſſe thee & thy poſſeſhōs in this world, & ſhold giue thee an hope of yt life to come, let the Miniſters of the Goſpell haue a part of their own: (It is not yours:) as euer ye would giue an accompt to the Iudge, & to be anſwerable to Him in yt great Checker: for all the blood of periſhing ſoules ſhall bee required at them, who with-draw theſe temporal things whereon thoſe ſhould bee ſuſtained, whom God hath ſent to feede the ſoules of men and women to that Heauenly life. To the Lord of that life, be all Honour, Praiſe, and Glorie, for euermore: Amen.
            
         
         
            THE XIX. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 45 Nowe from the ſixt houre was there darkneſſe ouer all the lande, vnto the ninth houre.
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And about the ninth houre Ieſus cried with a loude voyce ſaying, Eli, Eli, lamaſabachthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forſaken mee?
               
               
                  
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Now when the ſixt houre was come, darkneſſe aroſe ouer all the land, vntill the ninth houre.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 And at the ninth houre, Ieſus cried with a loude voyce, ſaying, Eloi, Eloi, lamma-ſabachthani? which is by interpretation, My God, my God, why hast thou forſaken mee?
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 44 And it was about the ſixt houre: and there was a darkneſſe ouer all the land, vntill the ninth houre.
                  
                     
                        verse 45 And the Sunne was darkened, and the vaile of the Temple rent through the middes.
               
            
            
               BELOVED in the LORD IESVS CHRIST, we haue heard the laſt day, that the Lord, when Hee is hanging on the Croſſe, Hee was not onely occupied in ſuffering, at the will of His Heauenly Father; but alſo Hee was occupied in doing. Firſt we heard Hee did like a king, howbeit He hung on the Croſſe like a vile ſlaue in the ſight of the worlde: Yea, Hee did like God, Hee appardoned the poore Thiefe that hung at His right hand, and was penitent, and ſought grace and mercie at Him for his ſinnes: and Hee makes a promiſe to him, that hee ſhoulde bee with Him ſhortly in Paradiſe. Then next wee hearde, that when as Hee hung quick on the Croſſe, He did like a louing & kind Sonne to His Mother, who bare Him: He recommends her earneſtly to be entertained with Iohn His well beloued diſciple. Nowe in this dayes exerciſe wee haue a rehearſall of other thinges that fell ou
                  •
                when as Ieſus hung on the Croſſe: there falles a wonder, there falles a darkeneſſe at the noone-tide, the Sunne is obſcured: the time is noted, when, at the ſixt houre, the ſpace of three houres, as we ſhall heare: All the time that Hee hung on the Croſſe, the darkneſſe continued on the Earth: The next thing wee haue, namely, out of Matthew and Marke, an heauie complaint, that the Lorde falles out into vvhen Hee had hung on the Croſſe about three houres: for Hee falles out in the beginning of the ninth houre into an heauie complaint to His Father, ſaying, My GOD, my GOD, why hast thou forſaken mee? Then vve haue how the Iewes miſconſtrues the voyce of the Lord: but firſt we ſhall ſpeake of the wonder: there falles a darknes in

the whole land: or as ſome interprete, on the whole earth, the cauſe is noted: The Sunne which ſhould haue giuen light, is obſcured: a marueilous Ecclipſe contrarie to the common courſe of Nature, fell on the Sunne. The time is noted: When it was the ſixt houre. Now, Brethren, This place requires, that I ſhould ſpeake ſomething concerning the diuiſion of the night, and the day: for this is requiſite for the vnderſtanding of the Hiſtorie of the Paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt: the Iewes tooke vp the beginning of their night, from the going downe of the Sunne, and ended at the riſing of the Sunne: they diuided their night in twelue houres, whether long or ſhort: they had a more compendious diuiſion, and diuided it in foure partes, which they called quatuor vigilias, foure watches, euery watch containing three houres: as for their day, they meaſured it from the riſing of the Sunne in the morning, to the going downe: and as they diuided the night: ſo did they the daye in twelue houres, whether it were long or ſhort: and as they diuided the night, ſo did they the daye in foure partes, each part containing three houres: they called the firſt part of the day, the firſt morning, prima diluculi, and the firſt houre, albeit it contained three houres, taking the name from the houre vvhere it beganne, the ſecond part, vvhich contained other three houres: they called the thirde houre, taking the name from the houre it beganne at, ſpeaking excluſivè, as vve vſe to ſay: the third part taking the name from the part it beganne at, they called the ſixt houre: the fourth part they called the ninth houre. This much for the diuiſion of the daye and night, after the faſhion of the Iewes. To apply this to our purpoſe, In this Hiſtorie of the Paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, yee ſhall finde mention of all theſe foure partes: of the firſt, the third, ſixt, and ninth. In the firſt houre, or in the morning, the LORD IESVS was led into the Common-Hall, to Pilate to bee accuſed: His accuſation continued the firſt three houres, and much of the third houre, or ſecond quarter, as wee counted it: His accuſation continued about the ſpace of fiue houres: Then alitle after the ſixt houre in the ende of the thirde houre: as IOHN in his nineteene Chapter ſayes, The doome and ſentence of damnation was giuen out againſt the Lord, In the ſame third houre, as MARKE in his fourteenth Chapter ſayes, The Lord Ieſus was crucified, ſo that He was both condemned & crucified in the end of the third houre: So betweene eleuen

and twelue, a ſhort ſpace paſſed betweene the ſentence of damnation, and the execution. In the ſixt houre, which was the thirde part of their day: yee ſee, there falles out, a fearfull and terrible darkneſſe on the face of the earth: and according to our account the darkneſſe remaines from twelue houres, to three in the afternoone, the ſpace of three houres: for ſo long hang the Lord vpon the Croſſe. Then yee haue mention here of the ninth houre, the fourth part of their day. The Lord then vttered His complaint to His Father: My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee? This is according to our account when it was three after noone: and haſtily after this, Hee yeeldes His bleſſed Spirit in the hands of His Father. So the Lord Ieſus died, and yeelded the Spirit, betweene three and foure houres afternoone. Now this ſhortly, for the better vnderſtanding of the Hiſtorie. Nowe to ſpeake of this wonder and darkneſſe, His heauenly Father would teſtifie by this darkneſſe, that whilſt His glorious Son was humbled on that vile & ignominious Croſſe: & as Paul to the Philippians 2. ſayes Whilſt as He was weakned, and made of no reputation, at this time His Father would teſtifie, not onely of His innocencie, as Hee was man, but alſo of His glorie, as He was God. In humbling of Him, the Father would glorifie Him: But will yee looke to the Sunne, and the ſenſleſſe creatures of Heauen and Earth, the very Sunne and ſenſleſſe creatures would teſtifie, that they were addebted vnto that glorious Creator: they would teſtifie that ſorrowe that they had, that the Lord of glorie ſhould ſuffer ſuch an ignominious death. The ſenſleſſe creatures were moued, the Sunne gloomes, & hides his face at that wicked action: the earth ſhiuers and quakes, readie to ſwallow vp and deuoure thoſe miſerable perſons: and the Sunne, and the ſenſleſſe creatures beginne to teach that ſenſleſſe and hardened people, with whom they had to doe: Not with a man, but with the Lord of glorie: but teach what they would teach (heere is a miſerable example of induration) this miſerable people for all this darkneſſe was not moued, they would not turne. So, Brethren, ſee what it is once to be giuen to a reprobate ſenſe: if the LORD giue thee vp to a reprobate ſenſe, the earth ſhall not be ſo ſenſleſſe as thou: and though the earth ſhould ſtand vp and teach thee, thou ſhalt not heare nor ſee what it ſayes: Of all judgements that falles on the ſoule, this reprobate ſenſe is the heauieſt and moſt dangerous: and if thou continueſt in it, it were a thouſand times better

for thee, when thou wereſt made a man or a woman, to haue bene made a ſtocke or a ſtone: for if there be not a wakning in time out of ſo dead a ſleepe, ere euer thou beware, the wrath of God from He
                  •
               uen ſhall ouertake thee, when thou crieſt peace: then ſhall the wrath come, thou ſhalt not get leaſure to thinke of mercie. The Lord waken this ſenſleſſe generation, for there was neuer a generation more ſenſleſſe than this generation is, notwithſtanding of ſo many voyces ſounding, not only voyces of men, but of the heauen, the earth, and ſenſleſſe creatures. I will ſpeake ſparingly of this darkning, and (as the Philoſopher calles it) the ecclipſe of the Sunne, for it ſerues not much to edification: Onely thus far, that yee may ſee the greatneſſe of the wonder, and that ye may wonder at the Lord Ieſus hanging on the Croſſe: This Ecclipſe was not naturall, for the naturall Ecclipſe of the Sunne, falles out, when the Moone is in the changing, at the which time there is a concurſe and conjunction betweene the two Planets, the Sunne, and the Moone: The Moone goes vnder the Sunne, and takes away a great part of the light of the Sunne from the Earth. But this Ecclipſe falles out in the full moone. The Law commanded the Paſſeouer to be celebrate in the moneth of March, the fourteenth day of their moneth, in the which time, the Sunne and the Moone are as far aſunder as they can be, the one beeing in the one ſide of the Heauen, & the other on the other ſide: ſo that betweene them the whole Globe of the Earth is caſt in. But in this Ecclipſe againſt Nature, the Moone which was now oppoſite to the Sunne, turnes her ſuddenly about, and comes vnder the Sunne, and hides the ſight thereof, and brings on a terrible darkneſſe on the world: So that, as yee will read in prophane writings, during that darkneſſe, the ſtarres were ſeene at the Noonetide, as at Midnight. And to be ſhort, it is written that the Philoſophers in Athens marking this Ecclipſe, endeuoured to ſearch the cauſe of it, could not finde out the naturall cauſe, and one Dioniſius Areopagita ſaide, It behooued to be that, either the God of Nature ſuffered, or els the worlde ſhould ſuddenly be diſſolued, and be lied not. The Lord Ieſus the GOD of Nature ſuffered, and they raiſed vp an Altar then, and wrote on it, To the vnknowne God, whereof ye read in the Actes 17.
            This for the wonder. Nowe let vs come to that that fell out in the ninth houre, that is, our three houres afternoone: Marke, This ſerues for our edification: ye heard, the Lord Ieſus was in extreame

agonie, and anguiſhe in His ſoule, and alſo Hee ſuffered great paine in His bodie: yet all was nothing to that extreame bitterneſſe, that Hee felt in His ſoule when as Hee hung on the Croſſe. Nowe in this agonie, Hee vtters this voyce with a crie, Eli, Eli, lamaſabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forſaken mee? Theſe are the firſt wordes of the XXII. PSALME: for Dauid beeing the Type of Chriſt, and feeling that vexation of ſpirit in ſome meaſure, which Chriſt felt out of meaſure, hee cryes out, My God, my God, why hast thou forſaken me? This place & theſe words miniſter occaſion vnto vs, to ſpeake of the inward conflict & paſſion that Ieſus had in His ſoule: And, that yee maye vnderſtande this matter the better, I ſhall rehearſe vnto you the vvhole Paſſion of IESVS CHRIST, in as fewe vvordes as I can. Then, the whole life of Ieſus Chriſt whileſt Hee was in this vvorlde, vvas a continuall ſuffering of the burthen of our ſinnes that Hee bare, and that obedience to His Father, required, that not onely in His life-time ſhoulde Hee doe for our ſaluation: but chiefely, it required, that the Mediator ſhoulde die. All that Hee did had beene nothing worth to vs, and if Hee had not died: for as the Apoſtle ſayeth, HEBR. CHAP. IX. VERS. XXII. No remiſſion of ſinnes without blood. Thinke not, that euer thy ſinnes ſhall bee forgiuen thee, without the ſhedding of the blood of Ieſus Chriſt: And either thou muſt die, or haue part in the death of the Mediator. The ende of His ſuffering, was the perfect aboliſhing and vndoing of the ſinnes of the Elect, as yee may reade in the ninth CHAPTER to the HEBREVVES. Now marke againe: This perfect aboliſhing and vndoing of our ſinnes required a perfect paſſion and ſuffering of the Mediator. Whether ye looke to the time, it required a perfect time: or will yee looke to the greatneſſe of it, it required an infinite quantitie of greatneſſe: for if it had not bene perfect in time and quantitie, thou hadſt neuer beene redeamed.
            Brethren, that yee maye the better vnderſtande the vvhole Paſſion of IESVS CHRIST, I ſhall point out vnto you the vvhole manner of His ſufferinges: For, why ſhoulde vvee not knowe this? Our life ſtandes in His death: Hee ſuffered all for vs. And I ſee thorowe out the Scripture, the vvhole ſufferinges of Chriſt maye bee drawne to theſe three ſortes: The firſt is, The Lord Ieſus ſuffered temptations: Secondlie, The Lord Ieſus ſuffered ſhame and ignominie: the GOD of glorie ſuffered ſhame:

Howe agree theſe two together, Shame and Glorie? The thirde, the LORD IESVS ſuffered paine, and that verie grieuous paine in ſoule and bodie: I ſhall goe thorowe all theſe three kinds of ſuffering ſhortlie, and ſo I ſhall make an ende: And firſt, to ſpeake of theſe temptations ſhortlie. I call the temptations that the LORD ſuffered, thoſe tryalles of Him, by the Deuill His enemie, for hee let Him neuer reſt, (and woefull was that battell that Hee had with him on the Croſſe) and His temptations by the miniſters of the Deuill in the worlde, who ſolicitated Him to leaue His GOD, euen ſuch temptations as wee are ſubject to in this worlde, onelie except ſinne: for Hee knewe no ſinne, there vvas not one ſpotte of ſinne in that holie One: and ſo Hee was not ſubject to theſe foule motions, & inwarde temptations, as we are, who dare not face the Sunne nor the Moone. And wherefore ſuffered Hee all theſe temptations? Euen for thy cauſe: the ende of all His ſuffering was, that Hee might ſuccour all them who were tempted either in bodie or ſoule. HEBR. Chap. 2. verſ. 18. Art thou tempted: if thou canſt haue recourſe to Him, who was tempted for thy ſake, Hee will pittie thee: As Hee ſuffered, and was tempted, ſo by His ſuffering, Hee hath learned to pittie thee. Hee who neuer hath taſted of miſerie, hee cannot pittie the miſerable bodie: And therefore, when thou art tempted, goe to CHRIST, and ſaye, LORD, thou waſt tempted as I am, therefore, now helpe and ſuccour mee. Thus farre for the firſt ſort of Chriſtes ſufferinges.
            The ſeconde ſort was His ſhame and ignominie, that open ignominie that He ſuffered, eſpeciallie on the Croſſe. Whether ye looke to His accuſation, (they accuſed that moſt innocent One, as a vile ſinner) or whether ye looke to all theſe falſe Teſtimonies that were brought againſt Him, or yet whether yee looke to the tauntes and mockinges that Hee ſuffered, and to that ſpitting on His face, and blaſphemies vpon the Croſſe. In all theſe yee ſhall ſ
                  •
               e that ſhame He ſuffered for our ſinnes. The Apoſtle, ROMAN. Chap. 15. verſ. 3. ſaies, Ieſus Christ, when hee was in the worlde, hee ſpared not, nor hee pleaſed not himſelfe, as wee doe: but, as it is written. The rebukes of them which rebuke thee fell on me. All theſe deſpites thou ſhouldeſt haue ſuffered, but the LORDE Hee tranſlated them vpon Himſelfe. O the ſhame that the ſinner ſhoulde haue ſuffered, and if the LORD IESVS had not taken it off the backe of the ſinner, and

laid it on His owne backe. Come to the laſt ſort: Thou who wouldeſt bee freed of paine, either in bodie, or ſoule: Marke the paine of the Lord, lay holde on it, and apply it to thy ſoule: for otherwiſe, Nothing ſhall remaine for thee, but paine euerlaſtingly: all the kingdomes of the worlde ſhall not ſaue thee. Then the laſt ſort, was paine and dolour in body, and paine and dolour in ſoule, but in the ſoule chiefly: Looke to the time of it, from His firſt conception, to His laſt breath: ſcarcely was the Lord well borne when thorow the perſecution of Herode the Tyranne, His mother was compelled to flee with Him to Egypt, from that time He was vnder continuall affliction, whilſt as Hee entered into the thirtie yeere of His age, when Hee takes vpon Him the part of a Mediator for mankinde: from this foorth (for Hee liued after this ſpace three yeeres, and an halfe) His paine grew, and increaſed in body and ſoule: and ay nearer the laſt houre His diſpleaſure and paine grew the more.
            Now, Brethren, we ſhall ſpeake ſhortly of theſe paines and dolours that the Lord ſuffered in the time of theſe three yeeres, and an halfe: for the Goſpell makes mention of that ſuffering: during this ſpace, the Lord Ieſus is in continuall paine both of body and ſoule: not in body onely, but chiefly in the ſoule. His paine during this time is chiefly that inwarde anguiſh: all His paine was for our ſinnes: if yee compare the ſoule and the body together, the ſoule is ten times worſe, and more ſinfull than the bodie: the ſoule is nothing but a ſinke of ſinne: all ſinne proceedes out of that ſtinking puddle of the ſoule: The body hath no life in it, but that which it hath of the ſoule: and therefore ſeeing the Lord offered Him to ſuffer for our ſinnes, Hee behooued to ſuffer chiefly in the ſoule.
            What ſhall I ſay of the impudent Papiſts, who maintaine this doctrine, that the Lord ſuffered not that inward paine of the ſoule: O! that they dare be ſo bolde, as to auouch ſuch doctrine againſt the manifeſt wordes of the Holy Spirit: They knowe not what ſinne is: They knowe not what is the greatneſſe of the euill of ſinne, or the Iuſtice of GOD: and laſtly they know not what is the mercie of IESVS CHRIST, In a worde I proclaime both before GOD, and His Angels, the Pope and his ſhauelings are open enemies to the Croſſe of CHRIST, if it were but in this, that they take away the chiefe part of His ſuffering. Bee thou a

Papiſt, if thou continueſt in that fantaſie, thou ſhalt neuer haue no part, nor portion of His ſuffering.
            Concerning the ſuffering of His bodie, and of that ignominious death of the Croſſe, wee haue bene ſpeaking: Only nowe I ſhall point out the ground whereupon the ſufferings of the LORD ariſes: Firſt, they riſe of that naturall infirmitie: He was an infirme man without ſinne: He hungred, as we doe, He thirſted, as we, and through trauelling (Hee reſted neuer daye nor night) and ſojourned through the world: Hee wearied, as we doe.
            Then another ground was, that ſadneſſe and heauineſſe of the ſoule: Hee was in a continuall ſadneſſe: there was neuer ſo ſad a man as He was: we read that He did weepe, but we neuer read that Hee did laugh. And thinke not, that when the ſoule is in heauineſſe, that the bodie can bee well. And laſt, His ſuffering proceeded of a violent dealing againſt Him, and nayling Him on the Croſſe: (vvho vvas ſo violently handled, as the LORD of glory was.)
            I leaue this, and vve vvill ſpeake of the dolours which Hee ſuffered in His ſoule: Firſt, the LORD IESVS, whilſt as Hee trauelled vp and downe amongſt His people, Hee vvas in a continuall diſpleaſure. When Hee looked vpon that obſtinate people, Hee was ſad vvhen Hee entred in Ieruſalem, Hee vvepes and ſayes, Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem, faine would J haue gathered you, as a henne gathereth her birdes vnder her wings, but thou wouldest not.
            
            The moſte ſpeciall griefe that the LORD ſuffered in His ſoule, was that vvhich Luke in his tvventieth tvvo Chapter names an agonie, that is, an anguiſh in the ſoule, and an heauie paine proceeding from a battell that Hee had in His ſoule: it proceeded from the wreſtling with the wrath of GOD, and infinite wrath) vvith Hell, and the povvers of it, vvith death not temporall, but euerlaſtingly.
            Novve this agonie Hee vtters in the Garden, when Hee ſayes, My ſoule is heauie on all ſides, euen to the death. That vvorde was expreſſed out of that bitter anguiſh that Hee had in His ſoule, whilſt He ſpake ſo.
            To ſpeake of the time of it, I am of that minde, that it vvas not only when Hee vvas in the Garden, but before in the twelfth Chapter of Iohn, vvhen Hee vvas ſpeaking to His diſciples Hee ſayes, My ſoule is troubled: And Hee turnes Him to His Father,

and Hee ſayes, Father ſaue mee from this houre, yet the nearer He drew to death, it grew greater and greater: it was greater in the Garden, than it was of before: but now on the Croſſe, when Hee ſaide, My God, my God why haſt thou forſaken Mee? it was the greateſt of all. I will ſpeake ſomething of this, I will certifie you, the ſpeciall vnderſtanding of the ſuffering of Ieſus Chriſt ſtands in the knowing of this inward agonie which IESVS CHRIST had in His ſoule: and if yee knovve not this, yee know nothing of His ſuffering: it is true, that no tongue is able to tell it: No, all the tongues of Angels: the heart of man, nor Angell, is not able to conceiue the greatneſſe of it. The wordes of the Scriptures expreſſe not the greatneſſe of the anguiſh but ſo far foorth as the LORD will giue mee the grace, I will ſpeake ſomewhat of it. In the wordes that the Spirit vſes in the Scripture yee ſhall finde this: The LORD ſuffers a torment in His ſoule: then yee ſhall ſee in the wordes, an exceeding greatneſſe of the anguiſh in the ſoule: and laſtly, yee ſhall ſee in the wordes of the Spirit, not only that He ſuffered anguiſh in the ſoule, and the greatneſſe of it, but the very degrees and partes of it particularly.
            Firſt, goe to the olde Teſtament, in the fiftieth and third Chapter, and fifth verſe of the prophecie of Eſay, hath theſe wordes, It pleaſed the LORD IEHOVAH, to breake Him, the wordes importes, not only the breaking of the body, but alſo of the ſoule.
            Then in the hundreth and ſixteene Pſalme, and at the fifth verſe Dauid who was a type of CHRIST ſayes, The ſorrowes of death haue compaſſed Mee, and the anguiſh of Hell hath ouertaken Mee: Theſe wordes importe not onely a bodily ſuffering, but they importe an anguiſh in the ſoule.
            Come to the Newe Teſtament▪ 
               Matthew in his twentieth and ſixt Chapter, My ſoule is heauie and compaſſed to the death. Wouldeſt thou haue the greatneſſe of it, Hee ſayes, On all ſides: And whereto? Euen to the death: not of the temporall death▪ but euen to the death of the ſoule. Then Luke in his twentieth and two Chapter ſayes, Hee was in an agonie: Hee was in anguiſh, Hee was wreſtling. With whome was this? His diſciples were away from Him: There vvas no man vvith Him. It vvas vvith the wrath of the Father from Heauen with a vvrath vnſpeakable. Peter 2. Actes ſayes, GOD rayſed Him vp from death,

and rayſed Him the doloures of death, beeing looſed, He could not bee retained vvith them. The vvordes in their owne language is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and ſignifies extreame dolour, like as a woman hath in bearing her birth. The Spirite of GOD vſeth to expreſſe the paine of the Hell in the ſoule by a ſimilitude of a vvoman vvho trauelleth in birth: for of all paines in the bodie, it is the greateſt and ſoreſt, and yee that haue felt it, yee knowe, that yee could not liue, if it continued with you. 1. THESSALON. CHAP. 5. VERS. 3. Hee ſettes downe the paine of Hell, by that ſimilitude, When they ſhall ſaye, Peace, then ſhall come the ſuddaine doloure vpon them, like a woman trauelling, then ſhall they not eſcape. And MARKE, CHAP. 14. VERS. 33. comes on more particularlie, and ſaies, Not onelie hee had a paine in the ſoule: but alſo hee ſettes downe the degrees of the paine. The natiue Language is moſte proper, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : that is, Hee beganne to bee astoniſhed: and then 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Hee beganne to bee in a grieuous and extreame anguiſhe. When the vvrath beganne to preſſe downe the ſoule, then the anguiſhe aroſe, and the extreamitie of paine.
            But I leaue the opening vp of all theſs vvordes vntill the next occaſion, and ſo to ende: As vvee ſpeake of the ſuffering of CHRIST, So I beſeech GOD to open our ſoules, and our heartes, to feele it: For there is no life, but in His ſuffering: And the LORDE giue vs grace, that our heartes maye take faſt holde of his ſadneſſe and dolour to our joye euerlaſting. To this LORDE bee Honour and Praiſe, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XX. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And about the ninth houre IESVS cryed with a loude voyce, ſaying, ELI, ELI, LAMASABACHTHANI? that is, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee?
               
            
            
               THE laſt daye (welbeloued in Chriſt) vpon occaſion offered in this place, wee began to rehearſe ouer all the whole Paſſion of Chriſt: and vvee brought the matter to that agonie, and that inwarde anguiſh of the ſoule, which the Lord ſuffered, beſide all the outward paſſions of His bodie, eſpecially during the time of three yeeres and an halfe, to wit, the time in the which Hee bare openly the office of a Mediator betwixt God and man. Nowe as the Lord will giue vs grace, by occaſion of this voyce, wherby the Lord vttered this heauie complaint to His Father, before He yeelde vp the ghoſte, when He ſaies, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? we ſhall ſpeake this day of that inwarde agony and anguiſhe of the ſoule that the Lord was in, when Hee vttered this voyce. I perceiue three groundes whereby we maye bee able in ſome meaſure (for who is able to attaine to the perfect knowledge of the greatneſſe of that agony that the Lord ſuffered?) to come to the knowledge of that agony. The firſt grounde I ſhall take out of the vvordes of Scripture, vvhereby that agonie is expreſſed. The ſecond ground I take from theſe effectes, that the Lord vttered, partly in prayer, and partly in heauie complaint in that agonie. And the thirde ground I ſhall take from

our owne feeling. What auailes all the knowledge in the vvorlde without feeling of His Paſſion, and of His Reſurrection? Then to goe forward in order, and to open vp euerie one of theſe grounds: The laſt day I began to bring to you the words of Scripture, ſome out of the old Teſtamēt, & ſome out of the New, by the which this inward agony yt the Lord ſuffred in his ſoule is expreſſed moſt viuely. I cited to you thoſe words that are in the 53. chap. of Eſay, where there is a viue and liuely propheſie of Ieſus to come into the world: The Lord (ſaies the Prophet) tooke pleaſure to breake him. This breaking is not onely of the body on the Croſſe, but chiefely in breaking of the ſoule: for the ſoule of Ieſus was rent with ſorrow. Then I cited out of the 116. Pſalme, the words of Dauid, being the type of Chriſt: The dolours of death haue compaſſed me, the ſorrowes of Hell haue ouertaken me. Then I came to the Goſpel of Matthew, and I cited theſe words out of the 26. CHAP. My ſoule is heauie on all ſides to the death. There is the heauineſſe of the ſoule, and an heauineſſe without any joy, and a heauineſſe to death, euen to euerlaſting death. Then I came to Luke, who in his 22. CHAP. hath theſe words, And he was in an agony: there is a battell. But where? In the Gardē. With whom? None was fighting with Him: no man was neare Him. Whom with, but with the heauie wrath of the Father, that He felt in His ſoule? In the 2. of the Acts I cited the wordes of Peter, Whome God raiſed vp againe, when He had looſed the dolours of death: The word in its owne languague ſignifies that paine that women ſuffer in trauelling, wherby the Scripture vſes to expreſſe the paine of Hell. And laſt of all I came to the words of Marke, in his 14. Chap. where he not onely vtters this inward paine that the Lord had in His ſoule, but alſo the greatneſſe of it, and the degrees, and partes thereof. The wordes are, When the Lord was in the Garden, he began to be afraid, and aſtoniſhed, and then to bee in a wonderfull heauineſſe. The words in their owne language are more ſignificatiue.
            Nowe Brethren, wee ſhall examine and weigh theſe wordes of Marke.The firſt word that Marke vſes ſignifies an aſtoniſhment, a feare, and an horrour, whereby the Lord in the Garden was troubled ſuddenly from the Heauen: ſo that all the members of His bodie ſhooke and trembled. It is not a matter of jeſtes: it aroſe vpon a ſenſe of the wrath of God comming from Heauē: and a moſt vehement ſenſe thereof, that lighted on Him ſuddenly, becauſe Hee bare our ſinnes, and this terrible wrath ouer-tooke all the powers of His

ſoule, and occupied them. Brethren, I take this to be none other thing, but that firſt ſtroke of euerlaſting death, whereby the reprobate ſh
                  •
               ll bee ſtricken in the firſt entrie to Hell, when they ſet in their head firſt to Hell, the wrath ſhall ſo ſtrike them, that all the powers of the ſoule ſhall be dammiſhed. The ſuffering of Chriſt in His ſoule is the viue image of the ſuffering of the reprobate in Hell. And 
                  •
               t is it that Paul in the 1. Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, ſets downe, When they ſhall crie peace, & all things are ſure, then ſudden deſtruction approaches: the wrath and vengeance from Heauen lightes on ſuddenly: ſo that all the haires of their heads ſhall ſtand on end, and it ſhall come vpon them ſuddenly, euen as the ſhowres and dolour, comes on a woman who is trauelling in birth. I can giue no better example of it, than ye haue in the Prophecie of Daniel, in Belſhazzar the prophane man, he is ſitting with his Princes, banketting and prophaning the holy veſſels of the Houſe of the Lord. What falles out? hee ſees come out of the wall ſuddenly, an hand writting, he ſees it not ſo ſoone, (look the firſt ſtroke of Hel) but he is ſtricken with a feare & horrour, his knees ſhiuer & ſmite one another, & he becomes like a dead man: a viue image of Hell.
            This for the firſt worde that Marke vſes, and the firſt part of that agonie that IESVS CHRIST ſuffered for vs in His ſoule. Now wee haue to weigh the ſecond word, Hee ſayes, Hee beganne to bee aſtoniſhed, and to be in a wonderfull heauineſſe, The word in its owne language ſignifies an extreame paine in the ſoule: Who is able to tell it? (The Lord ſaue vs from the extreamitie thereof) it roſe vpon that horrible wrath that He was ſtricken with, and was lying on Him, and preſſing downe His ſoule: Firſt, Hee was ſtricken, then the heauie wrath of GOD lyes ſtill on the ſoule ſo that Hee hath dolour in His ſoule, that all the powers of His ſoule is full of wrath. Who can beare the wrath of the Omnipotent GOD: No, not CHRIST as He was man only, no not all the Angels in Heauen: The LORD ſaue vs from it. When the wrath of the great GOD ſtrikes on any in the Hell, all the powers of the ſoule faile, and all leaue off to doe their duties, beeing full of diſpleaſure.
            It is a mar
                  •
               eilous thing (for as carefull as the LORD was wount to bee of the redemption of man▪ for that was His only care night and day, it was His meate and drinke) yet all that care was nowe away, and He forgets it, and Hee falles out in a Prayer,

and Hee ſayes, Take away this cuppe from Mee: and that was the cuppe of His Paſſion for our Redemption: yea Hee bids His Father take it away, which if it had beene taken from Him, neuer a ſoule ſhould haue beene redeemed: Conſider then, if Hee was in an agonie, or not: when Hee forgate the worke of our Redemption. Now we muſt not thinke that this forgetfulneſſe came of ſinne (our forgetfulneſſe comes of ſinne) the Holy one had no ſinne: but it roſe of an infirmitie of Nature, wherewith Hee was cled for our ſinne. Yee ſee, if a man be in a diſtreſſe in the ſoule the ſenſes, and all the powers of the ſoule are ſo occupied about that ſorrowe, that they forget their owne functions and operations, to helpe the part that is diſtreſſed: Euen ſo it was with the LORD: for when for our ſinnes Hee was vnderlying the wrath of that Omnipotent Iudge, all the faculties of His ſoule, His vnderſtanding, His memorie▪ &c, left all their functions, that all might concurre to helpe Him in that common agonie. Well, Brethren, if yee would ſee Hell, yee haue here the viue image of it: The reprobate after that at the firſt they are aſtoniſhed vvith the ſudden vvrath: as they continue in Hell, their dolour and paine ſhall euer be augmented: the vvrath ſhall ſtill lye vpon them, like a mountaine tumbling on them, and preſſing them euer in ſoule & body: ſo that they remaine euer in this euerlaſting paine. Chriſt made an end of it: but if thou be a reprobate: this anguiſh ſhall neuer leaue thee. Oh! that the vvorld vvill not knovv this, and once pauſe on it: vvould they then, thinke ye, runne to all miſchiefe as they doe. And if once thou be caſt into Hell, mountaines of dolour, and heapes of vvrath ſhall be heaped on thee for euermore. Theſe are tvvo parts of that Hell that the Lord ſuffers: novv vvould yee haue the thirde part▪ I remit you to the 5. Chapter to the Hebrewes vvhere there Paul ſayes, that the Lord vvhen Hee prayed in the dayes of His fleſh, vvith ſtrong cries, and vvith teares, Hee vvas heard: He had a terrible feare, beſide the preſent paine: He vvas in a feare of a greater danger to inſue. If thou goeſt to Hell once, beſide the preſent paine that thou ſhalt be in: And, O the vveight of that paine that ſhall be on thee! thou ſhalt euer haue a terrible feare of a greater paine to fall on thee, ye paine of Hell is not ended in a moment, but yu ſhalt finde the paine g
                  •
               ovving euerlaſtingly, & a mountaine of vvrath ſhall come after another, as ye vvaues of the ſea follovving one another. It is a ſore matter to be in this paine euerlaſtingly.
            
               Now we haue heard the firſt ground out of the wordes of the Holy Spirit: Come to the ſecond ground. When He was in the agonie, He vtters ſuch effects, that they who ſaw Him, and heard that pitifull voyce, might eaſily ſee, what anguiſh Hee had in the ſoule, He falles out in a prayer, Father, take away this cuppe; that is, the cuppe of thy wrath, wherein He vtters a forgetfulneſſe of our redemption, the dolour ſo increaſes vpon Him, that Hee prayes with greater intention, with teares, and with ſtrong cries, and with weeping. Hell will cauſe thee to mourne, and compell thee to ſqueele, and houle like a dogge: laugh not, it will cauſe thee to gnaſh thy teeth, if thou be caſt in vtter darkneſſe: yet as He prayes, the wrath increaſes, that He did ſweate blood, and the droppes of blood fell from His face to the ground. What man read ye of, or heard yee euer of, or euer ſhall, that was in ſuch a feare, in ſuch a torment, that for the feare of the torment, he did ſweat blood. So, that ye ſee, that the Lord was in ſuch anguiſh, as neuer a man was. Were any of the Martyres in ſuch a feare, or ſuch an anguiſh, as this? No, no: Then as Hee vtters His agonie in prayer, ſo Hee vtters it in many, heauie and bitter complaints, Iohn 12. When hee is ſpeaking of His glorification ſuddenly, He breakes off, and ſayes, My ſoule is troubled, what ſhall I ſay? and then Hee turned Him to His Father, and ſayes, Saue mee from this houre: and laſt Hee ſayes, My ſoule is heavie on all ſides, euen to the death. But of all complaints, this that Hee vtters on the Croſſe: My God, my God why haſt thou forſaken mee? is the moſt heauie, and it proceedes from the moſt bitter anguiſh of the ſoule. Nowe the Lord grant, that this complaint may ſaue vs from that complaint of the reprobate, that they ſhall vtter in Hell: No queſtion, theſe words vtter a forſaking of Him, and that Hee was deſerted for a time: He was left off, without all comfort in the world: Of all joy that He was wount to haue: all joy was taken from Him: They import not a diuulſion of the Godhead from the manhead: the glorious Godhead dwelt in the Lord Ieſus, whilſt as He hang on the Croſſe: GOD neuer left Him at any time, after that once the Sonne of God tooke to Himſelfe our fleſh: Hee left it neuer, no, not on the Croſſe, nor in the graue: Hee left it neuer, nor neuer ſhall, but the Godhead kept it ſelfe ſo cloſſe in Chriſt the man, that it would let Him haue no joy, whilſt He ſhould pay that ranſom to the vttermoſt farthing, whereby the juſtice of God was ſatisfied for our ſinnes. And this is

the thing He complaines on: Yet whilſt He ſayes, My God, my God, He lets vs ſee Hee deſpaires not, but in the meane time whilſt Hee was left, He cleau
                  •
               th to God, & hath His confidence in His God, the Deuill and all the world cannot ſeparate Him from His GOD that dwelt within Him. Confidence in God will ofttimes be in the godly without feeling of joy, albeit that Spirit will not be out of their ſoules: The Spirit will miniſter no joy to them, yet the poore ſoule will neuer leaue off to put confidence in God. Well, this complaint tells vs, that Ieſus Chriſt was deſerted for a time, to ſaue vs, who ſhould haue bene reprobates for euer. But there is a great difference betweene Ieſus Chriſt, and the reprobate. Indeede they agree in this, that both He and they are left comfor
                  •
               l
                  •
               ſſe, He vttered a great complaint: ſo they ſhall complaine and houle: And as He cried and wept, ſo ſhall they: But here is the difference. He was for a time in a manner reprobate, they ſhall bee made reprobates for euer: Hee complained for a time, but they ſhall complaine for euer: He ceaſes not to put His confidence in God: the reprobate ſhall haue no confidence, but as God ſhall leaue them, ſo ſhall they leaue God, & as God ſhall turne His backe on them, ſo ſhall they turne their backe on God. This is a ſore matter. Then Ieſus Hee vttered this complaint, My God, my God: They ſhall not ſay, My God, why haſt thou left mee: but ſhall crie, alas, for euer! God hath left me for euer, and caſt me off from His preſence for euer. This ſpeech My God, is a ſpeech of confidence, and He cleaues to God in His heart, they ſhall ſhoute and cry, GOD hath left mee for euermore & caſt me off. This for the two grounds, come to the third ground, that is, our owne feeling: for if thou feeleſt not, all thy knowledge auailes not a ſtraw, Paul to the Phillippians Chapter 3. ſayes, He counted all things to be but loſſe and dung, that he might knowe Him, that is, Ieſus Chriſt. Thē he ſets down the parts of this knowledge, that I may know Him, & the vertue of His reſurrectiō, & the cōmunion of His Paſſions, & be made conformable to His death. Wherin ſtands ye knowledge of the reſurrection of Chriſt? It is not eneugh to know it only: The knowledge ſtands in a fe
                  •
               ling of the force of the glorious reſurrection in thine heart, and thou ſhalt feele the olde canker of ſinne mortified, and thee to bee quickned with a new life to liue to God. And likewiſe wherein ſtands the knowledge of His ſuffering? It ſtands of the feeling in thine heart of the mortification of ſinne: Thou muſt feele a regeneration in

thee, or elſe thou feeleſt nothing, and thy ſoule ſhall get no life, howbeit thou kneweſt all the Bible: All this knowledge of Chriſt is but a dreame, without a feeling: and thou art but ſleeping, except thou findeſt a vertue proceeding from His ſuffering to thy ſoule, to reforme it. But to ſpeake of that feeling-knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt vvho died for our ſinnes: Howe ſhalt thou find and feele in thine heart that Hee ſuff
                  •
               red anguiſhe for thy ſinnes, not onely in bodie, but alſo in ſoule? I thinke there ſhoulde bee no bodie, but they ſhould bee meditating on an anſwere: I ſhall tell you, how I, and thou, and euerie one of vs ſhall feele that curſe and malediction that Ieſus ſuffered, and that was layde on Him for our ſinnes. If I finde in my ſoule in ſome meaſure that wrath for my ſinnes, which Ieſus felt in full meaſure (Lord ſaue vs from that meaſure) if I taſte and get a proouing of that bitter cuppe of the wrath of God, that Ieſus dranke the dregges of, and all for my ſinnes: if I taſte of it, and put it to my mouth, vvhen I feele this vvaye and taſte, I vvill begin and reaſon: If I finde my ſinnes and the burthen thereof ſo heauie, that I can ſcarcely beare one ſinne among a thouſand, yea, though it were but an euill thought: If I finde the burthen of my ſinnes ſo heauie, who am but a man, O howe heauie muſt all the ſinnes of the Elect bee, that Ieſus bare on His backe! (Looke how I come to His feeling from the other.) Then I vvill ſaye, O howe heauie vvere the ſinnes that IESVS bare on His backe! And then I ſhall ſaye, If once I can but taſte one droppe of that wrath that followes my ſinnes, and findes it to bee ſo bitter: (Let them taſte of that cuppe vvho will, they neuer taſted of ſo bitter a thing) Then vvill I ſaye, O howe bitter vvas that full cuppe of vvrath vvhereof IESVS dranke out the dregges and all, ſeeing one droppe of it is ſo bitter in my ſoule. There vvee come in ſome meaſure to the feeling of that bitter vvrath that IESVS felt. Beholde the dealing of GOD vvith His owne: for although He loued them neuer ſo vvell, yet Hee vvill let them feele the burthen of their owne ſinnes in ſome meaſure, & He vvill tye the burthen of them on their owne backes, whileſt they grone and peach: and He will touch them with the ſenſe of wrath from heauen; and that to let them vnderſtand howe ſadde and heauie a wrath it was that Ieſus ſuffered for our redemption. And when wee feele anie burthen for ſinne, let vs runne to meditate on the ſore burthen of IESVS CHRIST, or elſe thy ſickneſſe and thy trouble is not ſanctified

to thee, if thou feeleſt not that Ieſus Chriſt hath borne the burthen of thy ſinne. Well, Brethren, this is a vvay, vvhereby vvee come to the feeling knowledge of the paine that CHRIST ſuffered, and this is bitter. But there is a ſweeter manner: If I feele that ſweete mercie of GOD in mine heart, and that peace of conſcience in my ſoule, I will beginne and reaſon with my ſelfe after this manner: This mercie that I taſte of, this peace of conſcience that I haue, this joy and gladneſſe that I taſte, it behooued to proceede out of the malediction, and out of the wrath that lighted on my Mediator, it had beene vnpoſſible for mee to taſte of mercie, if my Redeemer had not drunken out that full cuppe of wrath. And I ſaye, indeede to thee, if the Lord Ieſus Chriſt had not drunken out that cuppe of the wrath of God, there had neuer beene ſuch a thing, as any joy, or any piece of conſcience in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come, if it had not beene ranſomed with the precious blood of Ieſus Chriſt; there is not one droppe of grace, peace or joy, but that which is bought and which the blood of Ieſus Chriſt, hath payed for. Alas, if the world could vnderſtand howe deare one drop of grace is: No, ere one drop of grace came, it behoued the Lord to be taken, & put in the winepreſſe of Hell, & tread on, & tramped on with the feete of the wrath of God: for this Iuſtice of God who was offended, ſhould neuer haue ſuffered one droppe of grace to come, if it had not beene ſatisfied by the blood of the mediatour.
            Now to ende this purpoſe, I know perfectly that all this ſpeech of the Croſſe, is but fooliſhneſſe to the wiſe of the world: Theſe wiſe Heades who compaſſe the Worlde with wiſdome, all is but fooliſhneſſe to them. It is fooliſhneſſe to them who periſh, as Paul ſayes, 2. Cor. 4.4. If thou findeſt the Croſſe of Ieſus but fooliſhneſſe, take thee a doome: thou ſhalt periſh, all the world ſhall not ſaue thee: & againe by the contrary ſayes Paul, The ſpeech of the Croſſe is the wiſdome of God, & the power of God to them who are ſaued. All is but fooliſhneſſe in reſpect of the Croſſe: all the ſtrength & might of the world, & things vnder Heauen is but weakneſſe, in reſpect of Ieſus Chriſt, and His ſtrength. If thou counteſt the ſpeech of the Croſſe, to be power & vviſdome: aſſure thy ſelfe, thou haſt an earneſt pennie, that thou ſhalt get life, & bleſſed is that ſoule that delites to heare of ye Croſſe of Chriſt, & counts it to be the povver & wiſdome of God, which ſhines wonderfully in this baſe Croſſe: ye wiſdome of

GOD ſhined neuer ſo in the creation of the Heauens, and of the worlde, as in the vile and abject Croſſe of IESVS CHRIST. The power of GOD ſhined not ſo much in creating thee of nothing, as it ſhines in thy redemption: The more fooliſhe that this meane is that the LORD vſes in redemption, to wit, a ſillie Croſſe; the more baſe it appeares to bee, the greater is the glorie of the wiſedome of GOD, who wrought ſuch a great worke of redemption thorow ſuch baſe meanes. I ſay, the more infirme that this meane is, (for what is more infirme than a ſillie poore man, or a vile Croſſe?) the power of GOD appeares ye greater, who hath wrought ſuch a glorious worke out of ſuch a baſe meane. And I ſaye, if thy redemption had beene wrought with a glorie, as the Iewes and the Gentiles imagined, if GOD had yeelded to their fantaſie, and wrought our redemption by a glorious meane, that glorie of GOD had beene obſcured, and the meane had gotten all the glorie. But it hath pleaſed the LORD to worke this worke of redemption and ſaluation by baſe and naughty meanes, that the world reſpects no more of, than the dirt which they treade on. Looke what is the difference betwixt the wiſedome of GOD, and the wiſedome of man: Will yee looke to the cauſe of our redemption, to IESVS CHRIST, or to the Profeſſors, and to Miniſters, they are the fooliſheſt in the vvorlde: ſillie bodies, and compare them vvith potent men, they are but contemptible, and of no valour: and, compare them with wiſe men, they are but fooles. So looke to the Croſſe, and to the Miniſterie thereof, whereby wee are ſaued, all is weake, baſe, and contemptible: and all to this ende, that the LORD onelie maye gette the glorie: and, as the APOSTLE ſaies, He that glorieth, may onlie glory in the LORD: And let euerie one of vs giue glorie to that LORD of Glorie: To whome with the Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee all Honour and Praiſe for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXI. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 47 And ſome of them that ſtood there, when they heard it, ſaide, This man calleth Elias.
                  
                     
                        verse 48 And ſtraightway one of them ranne, and tooke a ſpunge, and filled it with vineger, and put it on a reede, and gaue him to dri
                        •
                     ke.
                  
                     
                        verse 49 Other ſaid, Let be: let vs ſee if Elias will come and ſaue him.
                  
                     
                        verse 50 Then Ieſus cryed againe with a loude voyce, & yeelded vp the ghoſt.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35 And ſome of them that ſtood by, when they heard it, ſaid, Beholde, hee calleth Elias.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 And one ranne, and filled a ſpunge full of vineger, and put it on a reede, and gaue him to drinke, ſaying, Let him alone: let vs ſee if Elias will come, and take him downe.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 And Ieſus cryed with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the ghoſt.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And Ieſus cryed with a loude voyce, and ſaide, Father, into thine handes I commende my ſpirite. And when hee had thus ſaid, hee gaue vp the ghost.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 28 After, when Ieſus knewe that all thinges were performed, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled, hee ſaide, I thirſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 And there was ſet a veſſell, full of vineger, and they filled a ſpunge with vineger, and put it about an hyſſope ſtalke, and put it to his mouth.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Now when Ieſus had receiued of the vineger, hee ſaid, It is finiſhed, and bowed his head, and gaue vp the ghost.
               
            
            
               
               DVRING the time that the LORD IESVS hung quicke on the Croſſe, which was three houres, and large more, yee may reade (well-beloued in Chriſt) ſundrie voyces that He vttered. When I looke thorowe the foure Euangeliſtes, I finde in number ſixe ſundrie voyces, and euery one of them is well to be marked: for at that time Hee vttered nothing in vaine. The firſt voyce wee reade of, was a voyce of diuine power, together vvith mercy, when one of the Thieues, who hung at His right hand, ſaid to Him, Lord remember me, when thou commest to thy Kingdome: The Lord anſwered him like a King, and like a powerfull and mercifull God, Verily J ſay vnto thee, this day thou ſhalt bee with mee in Paradiſe
               ▪ The next voyce, was a voyce of humane pittie, and naturall affection toward His Mother: ſhe being by the Croſſe with Iohn, and other women, He recommendes her to the cuſtodie of His w
                  •
               ll beloued Diſciple. The thirde voyce wee reade of, was a voyce of ſadneſſe, proceeding from an heart that was ſadde on euery ſide to the death, and from that agonie on the Croſſe, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee? The fourth voyce in like manner, was a voyce of ſadneſſe, proceeding from a wonderfull heate in the ſoule and body, I thirst. The fifth voyce by all appearance was a voyce of joye, ſeeing the worke of Redemption to bee wrought, and the wrath of His Father to be aſſwaged, He ſaies, after He had drunken the vineger, Jt is finiſhed. The ſixt and laſt voyce in like manner was a voyce of joye: for finding Hee was to giue vp the ghoſte immediately, and finding His Father ſweetly to looſe His ſoule from His bodie, He ſaies, Father, into thine hands I commend my ſpirit.
            
            Now Brethren, all th
                  •
               ſe foreſaid voyces the Lord vttered during the time that He hung quick on ye Croſſe: Of theſe we haue heard, the firſt, the ſecond, & the third, which was that heauie complaint that Hee made to His Father, My God, my God, &c. This daye as God ſhall giue vs grace, wee ſhall ſpeake of the three other voyces; one of them of ſadneſſe, and the other two of joye. But before wee come to theſe voyces which are the three l
                  •
               ſt voyces, wee haue to ſpeake ſomething of the miſconſtruing of the complaint of the Lord vttered to His God. Nowe the Iewes that ſtood by Him, and heard Him crie, Eli, Eli, (for Hee cryed aloude) of maliciouſneſſe, not of miſtaking Him, they begin to calumniate and to miſconſtrue

His wordes, becauſe the worde Eli, which is, My God, ſounded like Elias: Therefore they ſaid, Hee cryed for Elias, when Hee cryed on His God, Let vs ſee if Elias will come, and take Him downe. In the which wordes wee may ſee clearely, that they ſought not onelie to deſtroy His bodie, but the Deuill in them ſought to ſunder and ſeuer Him both in ſoule and bodie from His God: they woulde not heare Him crye vpon His God, but they ſought to deſtroy His bodie and His ſoule, ſuch was the inſatiable malice of the hearts of theſe Iewes againſt Ieſus Chriſt. This is the common dealing of the Deuill and his inſtruments with the godly, and chiefely in that laſt houre, when the ſeparation of the ſoule from the body is to follow: Not only to get the body dead, but the ſoule & God ſeparated: if thou beginneſt to pray & call on God, they will ſcorne thy prayer, & ſeeke to cut thee frō God, & all hope of life. But to leaue them, & their bitter maliciouſnes: As in all the poinctes of the ſuffering of Chriſt, I looke more to the diſpoſition of His Father, than to the Iewes, to the deuil, or his inſtrumēts: So I doe in this. No queſtion as His Father exerciſes Him inwardly with a bitter wrath: euē ſo, whē as the Lord by making an heauy mone, ſeekes an outgaet, & cries, My God, my God, &c: Hee will haue Him met outwardly with bitternes. Aime where He wil, He meetes Him with nothing but bitternes & wrath inwardly & outwardly, hell inward & outward, no refuge, nor eſcaping till yt ranſome be payed to the leaſt farthing. Wel Brethrē, if ye would ſee an image of hell, ſee it here. The Lord Ieſus was for a time, & fealt nothing but extreame bitternes. But the reprobate, after they be once caſten into hell, there is nothing for them but bitternes: let thē aime here & there to eſcape, houle & cry, they ſhalbe met wi
                  •
               h bitternes. What if it were but for a time! The Lord eſcaped, His ſuffering was but for a time; but no eſcaping for thee, if thou be thruſt into hell, thou ſhalt neuer get out, and ſhalt find nothing but bitternes, aime here or there, all ſhalbe in vaine, & euerlaſting bitternes ſhalbe caſten in thy teeth, and compaſſe thee on all ſides: that is a ſore word, An euerlaſting bitternes, neuer to haue an ende. So bleſſed is that ſoule for euer, who in that Day ſhalbe found in Chriſt to get a part of that paſſiō yt He ſuffred: the Lord giue euery one of vs grace now while we haue time, to know Him, & to ſeek to be foūd in Him for wo to yt ſoule yt ſhalbe foūd out of Him in ye great day. Now I come 
                  •
               o ye voyces, & firſt to that fourth voyce yt the Lord vttered, whē He ſaid, I thirst. When vttered He it? When He knew that

all 
                     •
                  hinges were ended: To the ende that the propheſie might bee fulfi
                  •
               led that was ſpoken of Him before, Hee ſaide, I thirst. A voyce of ſadneſſ
                  •
               , comming from an extreame drought of bodie. The Lord Ieſus, as He too
                  •
               e our nature vpon Him, ſo He tooke on all our infirmities ſinne ex
                  •
               epted. Many times was Hee hungry and thirſty: but chiefely wh
                  •
               n He hanges on the Croſſe in that extreame heat of His ſoule and His body. The ſoule was burnt vp with wrath, and all the moyſture of the bodie likewiſe dryed vp with wrath: at this time the Lord had ſuch a thirſt, that the tongue of man cannot expreſſe it: thou ſufferedſt neuer ſuch a thirſt, in any Feuer or diſeaſe, as the Lord Ieſus ſuffered for thee on the Croſſe. And no doubt, beſide other paines, this exceeding thirſt was a part of His paine, and a part of that ranſome that He payed to the Father for our redemption. Yee ſee when a man is in a Feuer, the thirſt will bee a ſpeciall part of the paine that hee hath: Therefore, albeit the thirſt that the Lord ſ
                  •
               ffered on the Croſſe, was an exceeding great paine: yet He will not vtter His voyce, I thirst, till the ranſome was payed: Hee would not ſeeke to quench that thirſt, till that wrath of the Father was ſatisfied. The drought was inſatiable: for the infinite wrath of God thirſted after the blood of the Mediator, bearing our ſins, and was not quenched till the blood of the Mediator was drunken vp. No quenching of ſin, but by the blood of the Mediator: if thou bee not in Him, the wrath of God will thirſt for thy blood. After this, followes that bodily thirſt: The ſoule is dried vp: the moyſture of the body is clung vp: the wrath ſuckes all vp. On this riſes the thirſt of the body: for except the Lorde had had a ſpirituall thirſt, and a pleaſure to obey His Father to the death, & to ſaue thy ſoule from Hell; it had beene vnpoſſible for Him to haue ſuffered that bodily thirſt ſo long. Learne this leſſon at the Lorde Ieſus, and followe His example: wee ſhould ſuffer patiently all paine that it pleaſes the Lord to lay on body and ſoule, knowing that it is according to His will, and that by thy ſuffering, thy obedience to Him is tryed. And, as we ſhould ſuffer patiently all paine
                  •
               ; ſo wee learne at Chriſt to abide patiently this bodily thirſt in ſicknes or Feuers, knowing well that the Lord layes it on vs, to trie our obedience & patience. But wilt thou know how thou ſhouldeſt abide it patiētly? The Lord Ieſus had a ſpirituall thirſt to obey His Heauēly Father, & for thy ſaluation, that ſwallowed vp that bodily thirſt. Gette thee an earneſt thirſt to obey thy God: it will bee a wondrous thing how patientlie

thou wilt ſuffer whatſoeuer God wil lay on thee. Therfore Brethrē, in all things we ſhould ſet our hearts to obey God: and winke and cloſe thy eyes at all dangers: yea, if thou be in extreame thirſt, and going to die, ſay, Lord, I wil obey thee: &, if thou get thy heart thus reſolued, and humbled vnder the hand of thy God, howbeit thou be in pain for a time, thou ſhalt ſee a faire end. The Lord Ieſus after this thirſt, and after death, ſaw a glorious end. So no queſtion, wilt thou leane on thy God, as He did, & abide His will patiently, thou ſhalt ſee the joyfulleſt, & moſt glorious end that euer was. The Lord giue vs grace to obey God, and to ſay, Caſt me here, or there, & lay on me what thou wilt, I ſhall obey thee, though thou ſhouldeſt ſlay mee, I will truſt in thee. This is an happy r
                  •
               ſolution. We ſhall ſpeake of the end wherefore the Lord vttered this voyce: To the ende (ſaies Iohn) that the Scripture might be fulfilled. In the 5. of Matt. the Lord ſaies, J come not to diſſolue the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill the Lawe, and to fulfill euerie jote of that Lawe: Heauen and Earth ſhall periſh, ere one jote of that Lawe ſhall paſſe away. Now among all the propheſies that Chriſt fulfilled, there is one here made mention of in the 69. Pſalme, Jn my meat they gaue mee bitterneſſe, and in my drinke they gaue mee g
                     •
                  ll to drinke. Nowe this propheſie is accompliſhed: Dauid ſpake this in his owne perſon typically: but the veri
                  •
               y thereof was fulfilled in Chriſt. Dauid got no vineger to drinke: but Ieſus Chriſt drunke vineger. When the Lord came into the world▪ & wrought the worke of our redemption there was not ſo much as a title that was foretold of Him, but He fulfilled it: there was not a circumſtance of His death, but it was fore-tolde: That nayling was fore-tolde, where it is ſaid, They pearced mine hands, and my feete: The hanging of Him betwixt two Thieues was fore-tolde, They reckon me (ſaies the Prophet) amo
                     •
                  g the vnjust: The diuiding of His garmentes was fore-ſpoken, They diuid
                     •
                  d my garmentes among them, and cast lottes for my coat. Looke the XXII. and IXVI. PSALMES, and the LIII. CHAPTER of ESAY. So this drinking of vineger was foretolde. Nowe what learnes this vnto vs? Was there euer any man whoſe death was pointed out this waye? No, neuer any one. All the Kinges, nor all the Emperoures, had neuer ſuch a particular pointing out of their death. This lets vs ſee, that the Father had a more ſpeciall care of the death of IESVS, than of the death of anie man that euer vvas: and conſequentlie, it lets vs ſee▪ that there vvas neuer ſuch a vvorthie perſonage in the vvorlde as IESVS,

and that there was neuer ſuch excellencie in the death of any, as in the death of Ieſus: in it ſtood the life of the world. Let men make pompes of the death of Emperours, the Lord had neuer ſuch an eye to the death of any, as to the death of His onely well beloued Sonne, and all the predictions of His death are to this end, that wee comparing the iſſue of His death, with the predictions, wee might beleeue that Ieſus was ſent to bee the onely Sauiour of the world. When I thinke on this, I wonder at the blindneſſe of ye 
               Iewes, yt cannot know Him to be the Mediator, but after that once a man be giuen to a reprobate ſenſe, he will ſay, the Sun in ye noone-tide is but darknes. The Goſpel is hid, ſayes Paul 2. Cor. 4.4. to them who periſh: if thou ſee not & beleeue not ye Goſpell, thou haſt an earneſt pennie in thy boſome, yt thy damnatiō is ſealed vp Thus farre for His thirſt they gaue Him a drinke: There is a veſſell full of vineger: This was a cuſtome that they vſed: they had a drinke beſide them who were crucified: Some thinke it was for this end, that the paine might be ſtanched: There is a drinke of vineger ſtanding beſide the Lord: but I knowe not if they gaue ſuch a ſowre drinke to the thieues. So this veſſell ſtanding beſide one of them ſteps to it in ſcorne, and takes a water ſponge, and puts it on a reede, and puts it to His head, he got litle thanke for his worke: I take this giuing of this drinke to the Lord at this time, to haue proceeded from bitter malice. The wrath of His Father was begun to be aſſwaged: yet the wrath of the Iewes could not be aſſwaged. There is none end of the malice of the Iewes, ſo long as breath is in Him, they neuer ceaſe to rage againſt Him. Whē He was dead they perſecute Him: whē He was in glorie, they thought to ſhame Him. Whē ye Lord looſes ye raines of ye deuill, & of wicked men to chaſtiſe his own, they run headlongs to wracke His Church: ye Lord ſeekes but chaſtiſemēt: they ſeek wrack of body & ſoule: he yt knowes not this, he knowes nothing, & if theſe perſecuters got their will, they would not only ſeeke ye wracke of ye body, but alſo of ye ſoule. What doth ye Lord for this? when ye Lord hath pulled in their raines, Hee takes ye ſcourge, & caſts it in ye fire, becauſe they run far beyond their cōmiſſion. This ſhalbe ye end of their miſerable ſoules. O yt damnation yt ſhal ouertake them! when ye Lord hath chaſtened vs by them, they ſhalbe caſt in ye fire for euer. Refuſes ye Lord ye drinke? indeede before He was raiſed vp on ye Croſſe, He taſted of this, but would not drinke, but He beeing on the Croſſe▪ it is ſaid, He dranke it. It may

by that after ſuch a troubleſome labour, that His drought was ſo great, that Hee was glad to drinke any liquour. Alwayes, this I know, except the Lord had had a thirſt of thy ſaluation, Hee had not drunken it. The thirſt of thy ſaluation made Him as Hee dranke out the cuppe of the wrath of His Father: So to drinke out this bitter cuppe that was propined to Him, out of the bitterneſſe of their heartes, Hee dranke out the wrath of God, and the wrath of man, that thou ſhouldeſt drinke the water of Life. I ſay, remember vpon that drinke that Ieſus dranke, when thou drinkeſt delicious drinkes: it is not thy money that buyes the wine, except it be bought with the precious blood of Ieſus: not a piece of bread, or any thing pertaines to thee, if it bee not bought with the blood of Ieſus: to them who are ſanctified, all thing is ſanctified, & if thou be not in Him, thou ſhalt bee accuſed as a violent poſſeſſour of all things, in yt great day. Now I goe to the next voyce, when He hath drunkē, He ſaies, Jt is ſiniſhed, that is, yt weariſome worke is now put to an end: now the ranſom is payed: now the work of Redemptiō is ended. Brethren, that yee may vnderſtand this, The Lord when He was in the Garden, had two workes: The firſt was, to buy Heauen, to conquere life to vs: The ſecond, to put vs in poſſeſſion of it. The firſt worke He beganne it in the firſt moment of His conception, and continues ſtill from that time to that moment: He gaue vp the Spirit to the Father. Now that worke beeing ended, He proclaimes on the Croſſe, cries out in the audience of them all, Conſummatum eſt, it is finiſhed. Now that weariſome worke is ended, the deare worke is ended, Heauen and life, and righteouſneſſe is conquered to the worlde for euer. This is the ſumme of the Goſpel, the worke of our Redemption is ended: this is all our preaching, Heauen, life, & glorie is conquered againe, to the loſt world. Thou needeſt not to giue one pennie out of thy purſe for Heauen. Curſed are they from the High Heauen, to the low Hell, that open their mouth to ſay, Thou muſt pay ſome of that ranſom out of thy purſe: Woe to the Papiſtes who will ſtand vp & ſay, Thou muſt pay ſome part of that ranſome, wo to that foule mouth that dare be ſo bold to open it, and ſay, pay thou a part of that ranſome with thy money, ſeeing that Ieſus Chriſt hath proclaimed that all is finiſhed & bought by His blood, woe, vengeance and euerlaſting damnation ſhall light on the Pope, and all the Papiſtes that dare open their mouthes to ſpeake ſuch preſumptuous wordes. Yet there is

another worke remaining, which is to put vs in poſſeſſion of Heauen, and He began this, at His reſurrection: and He holdes it on y
                  •
               t, and ſhall continue it vnto His comming againe: And at that day of His comming, yee ſhall heare Him crying, All is ended: not on His Croſſe, but in glory: and all the Angels and all the Sainctes ſhall crie, All is ended, Glorie to him who hath ended all, & no more ſhall bee. Looke downe to His heart, and to the ſenſe, from whence this voyce aroſe, whē He ſaies this: ye ſhall find that Ieſus felt the wrath of His Father aſſwaged. Before Hee was in an agony: now Hee feeles the agony to ceaſe: where before He foūd no joy, now joy returnes: On the ſenſe of all theſe thinges, falles out this voyce, All is ended. Whē I looke to this, I thinke I ſee ye image of a godly Sainct dying: for the godly are like to him in death and life. Before the laſt moment they are in a battell, and ſuddenly they will ſay, I haue gotten the victorie in Ieſus: and thē laſt they will yeeld vp the ſpirit. Come to the laſt voyce: It is a voyce of joy. I am of that opinion, that before the Lord yeelded vp the ghoſt, the agony left him, and that joy that had left him, returned againe, and made him to vtter joyfull words. The Euangeliſts ſay, He cryed with a loud voyce. What voyce this is, Luke expreſſes, Father, into thine hands I recommend my ſpirit. All that were ſtanding about might haue heard him vttering this powerfull voyce. Now ye would wonder, that a man immediatly yeelding vp his ſpirit, ſhould haue ſuch a ſtrong voyce. Ye ſee men and women, in death their voyce will faile them: ſome will not haue any voyce, and ſome not any ſigne: ſome, if they get that grace to ſpeake, yet it will be a weake voyce, becauſe the ſtrength of nature failes. Yet Ieſus all the day before vttered not ſo ſhrill a voyce. So it muſt follow, that naturall ſtrength was not failed in Ieſus Chriſt, and that by the ſtrength of nature, hee might haue liued long: for the other two liued long, and were not dead, till they came and brake their legges. Ieſus died againſt nature: neither was hee broken as they were. What followes of this? Ieſus Chriſt in that ſame moment that he yeelded the ſpirit, hee had a power aboue nature: and a diuine power againſt nature, which puts out the life: and, if he had power againſt nature to put out his life, hee vttered before the Iewes, that they had no power to put out his life, and that hee had a power to keepe his life if it had pleaſed him: And that is it which he ſaies, None takes my life from mee, but I laye it downe, and I take it vp againe. Yee will heare, that when worde came to Pilate that IESVS

was dead, hee wondered, and all the world wondered at this yeelding vp of the ſpirit. And by this the Lord would ſhewe, that hee was not a common man: hee would ſhewe, that he was God, either to keepe his life, or to put it out, at his pleaſure. Hee ſaies, Father, into thine handes I commende my ſpirite. Theſe wordes are farre from this, My God, my God, why hast, &c. for thoſe words proceeded of great ſadneſſe mixed with confidence, but of no joye: but theſe wordes, Father, into thine handes, &c. as they proceeded of confidence, ſo they proceeded of a wonderfull joye. No doubt, at this time hee feeles that ſweete hande of the Father dealing with him moſte ſweetelie: not as the reprobate: Alas, the hande of the Lorde in juſtice ſtriking the ſoule of the reprobate, looſes it from the bodie, with the ſenſe of extreame wrath. But the Lord feeles the hande of the Father looſing his ſoule from the bodie with ſweetneſſe. And all they who die in CHRIST, will feele the Father looſing the ſoule with ſweetneſſe, as theſe laſt wordes vtter. Looke to the Martyres: they neuer vtter the firſt voyce, My God, my God, &c. No, but the ſecond, Father, into thine handes I commende my ſpirite, becauſe they find joye in torment▪ 
               Steuen, the firſt Martyr, vttered the ſecond voyce, ACTS, CHAP. VII. VERS. 59. And the reſt of the Martyres followed him: which teſtifies plainelie, that this was a voyce of joye that IESVS vttered. But marke the wordes of CHRIST: yee ſee that euerie man and vvoman, beſide the bodie, they haue a ſpirite, and more beautifull, and farre more precious of ſubſtance than the bodie, and yet it lodges in an houſe of claye, and in an earthlie Tabernacle. Next, there will bee a ſeparation of the ſoule and the bodie. Thou thinkeſt euer to liue, but whether thou wilt or thou wilt not, thy ſoule ſhall bee ſeparate from the bodie, and then the bodie ſhall die. Shall thy ſoule die? No, if thou bee in CHRIST, the Father ſhall take thy ſoule.
            Nowe againe, Brethren, ſee how carefull the Lord is of his ſoule at the poinct of death. If Ieſus, who had no ſinne, is ſo carefull of his ſoule; I pray thee, who art a ſinfull bodie, how carefull ſhouldeſt thou bee thereof? It muſt liue, either in Heauen, or in Hell: if the Lord cryed ſo loude that the earth quaked again, & till the Temple rent aſunder; wilt not thou, a ſinfull creature, bee carefull of thy ſoule? A man ſhould haue care of the ſoule at all times, but chiefly at the houre of the ſeparation, for at that time the Deuill is buſie to deuour thee, and the golfe of Hell to ſwallowe thee vp. Then

looke how carefull thou ſhouldeſt be in following the example of Ieſus, to recommend the ſoule into the handes of the Father: and looke how carefull thou art to render the ſoule into the handes of the Father; the Father ſhall be as carefull to looſe the ſoule, if thou bee in Ieſus Chriſt, to conuoy it with Him to reſt for euermore in His bleſſed boſome. The LORD giue vs grace to commende our ſoules into the hands of that faithfull keeper in the houre of death, and that wee maye finde Him readie to receiue and conuoye them with Him to that euerlaſting reſt, purchaſed to vs through Chriſt: To whom with the Father, and the bleſſed Spirit, be praiſe for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            THE XXII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 50 Then Jeſus cryed againe with a loud voyce, and yeelded vp the ghoſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 51 And beholde, the vaile of the Temple was rent in twaine, from the top to the bottome, and the earth did quake, and the ſtones were clouen.
                  
                     
                        verse 52 And the graues did open themſelues, and many bodies of the Saincts, which ſlept, aroſe,
                  
                     
                        verse 53 And came out of the graues, after his reſurrection, and went into the holie Citie, and appeared vnto manie.
                  
                     
                        verse 54 When the Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Ieſus, ſaw the earthquake, and the things that were done, they feared greatly, ſaying, Truely this was the Sonne of God.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37 And Ieſus cryed with a loude voyce, and gaue vp the ghost.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 And the vaile of the Temple was rent in twaine, from the top to the bottome.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 Now when the Centurion, who ſtood ouer againſt him, ſaw that he thus crying, gaue vp the ghost, he ſaid, Truely this man was the Son of God.
               
               
                  
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And Ieſus cryed with a loude voyce, and ſaide, Father, into thine handes I commende my ſpirite. And when hee had thus ſaid, hee gaue vp the ghost.
                  
                     
                        verse 47 Now when the Centurion ſawe what was done, hee glorified God, ſaying, Of a ſuretie this man was juſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 48 And all the people that came together to that ſight, beholding the things that were done, ſmote their breaſts, and returned.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Now when Ieſus had receiued of the vineger, hee ſaid, It is finiſhed, and bowed his head, and gaue vp the ghost.
               
            
            
               WEE heard the laſt daye (vvelbeloued Brethren) the ſundrie voyces and ſpeaches vvhich Ieſus Chriſt, vvhileſt Hee hung quicke on the Croſſe, and vvas nayled thorow handes and feete vttered in the audience of the vvhole people. The firſt two voyces vvere the voyces of pittie and mercie. The one of mercie, to one of the Thieues, that vvas crucified vvith Him, Verily (ſaies the Lord) this day ſhalt thou bee with mee in Paradiſe. The other of pittie, to His owne Mother, (vvho ſtood by, looking on Him, when as Hee hung vpon the Croſſe in extreame paine) recommending her to IOHN, His welbeloued Diſciple. Other two voyces, were voyces of ſadneſſe, and heauineſſe of heart: The one an heauie complaint to His Father, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee? The other proceeding from an extreame drought, that came of that ſenſe of wrath and paine which Hee felt during the time that Hee hung vpon the Croſſe, I thirſt. The laſt two voyces vvere of joye, for it appeares well, that before the Lord gaue vp the ghoſt, comfort and joye returned to Him againe. And I am of this mind, that there are none, who are Gods owne, but before their departure out of this life, (ſooner or later) they will get a ſenſe of that joye which they are to paſſe vnto immediatelie. The firſt voyce of joye, was, All is ended: As though Hee vvoulde ſaye, This w
                     ••
                  ke is done, and ended, and nowe the ranſome of the redemption of man is payed to the leaſt farthing. Nowe the laſt voyce vvas vvhen Hee vvas immediatelie readie to render vp His ſpirite into the

handes of the Father, ſayes, with a feeling of joy in the heart, Into thine hands, Father, J commend my Spirit. Now this day, we haue to ſpeake by His grace, Firſt, of His death, and the yeelding vp of His Spirit: Next, of thoſe wonders that fell out immediatly after the Lord had rendered the Spirit: and thirdly, we haue to ſpeake how the multitude were mooued when they ſawe theſe wonders. Novve as concerning His death, the words are but few. Iohn ſayes, When Hee had ſpoken, and cried with a loude voyce, Hee bowed downe His head, and He rendered His Spirit. The wordes are to be marked, Hee renders His Spirit, firſt, as it were, Hee tooke His ſoule in His owne Hande, and deliuered it in the handes of the Father, deſiring Him to keepe it well, to the day of His glorious reſurrection: for, Brethren, this is the difference betweene the godly, & vngodly in their death: as they differ, and are vnlike to other in their life: ſo eſpecially in their death. The vngodly caſt away the ſoule and life, and cares not where it goes: but woe is to them that doe ſo, they will neuer take vp ſuch a life againe, when they haue caſt it▪ awaye, not regarding where it goes to, but thinking lightly of it. No, let no man nor woman caſt away this life, or diſlodge this ſoule lightly: if the ſoule goe from thee lightly, and thou careſt not for it: better it were for thee, neuer to haue had a life, a ſoule, or a body. But againe, Brethren, The Lord Ieſus, as all His lifetime Hee is carefull for the ſoule that is lodged in an earthly tabernacle: ſo chiefly, in the moment, when it is to fllit, The godly, they will not let the ſoule flit out of the body, vntill they know that the hand of the Lord, is ſweetly looſing the ſoule, to keepe it, vntill the day of their glorious reſurrection. Brethren, it would be well marked, There is not one of the foure Euangeliſts, Matthew, Marke, Luke, or Iohn, but they note very preciſely the death of the Lord, and the yeelding vp of His Spirit. As for the circumſtances that fell out in His Paſſion: ſome will note one thing and leaue another. As for example, Theſe voyces that He vtters on the Croſſe, not one of the Euangeliſts hath them all, ſome hath one, and ſome another. But when it comes to the yeelding of the Spirit, they all in one harmonie note, The Lord gaue vp the Spirit. This is a thing not to be paſſed by, nor to be lightly looked on, and it lets vs ſee, the death of our Sauiour, the ſeparation of His ſoule from His body, is ſo ſubſtantiall, and ſo needfull a thing both to Him to haue ſuffered, and vs to knowe, that except the Lord had

ſuffered the death, all the crucifying of Him inwardly & outwardly, all the reſt of His ſuffering had auailed vs nothing, the ranſome of our ſinnes had not bene payed: for that was the curſe that was laide vpon vs, to pull our ſoule from our bodie: and as it was needfull that He ſhould ſuffer the death for vs, ſo it is needfull to euery one of vs to knowe this, that my Sauiour died, and His ſoule was really ſeparated from His body, it is needfull that thou haue euermore the Lord Ieſus crucified before thee, and know that the ſoule was ſeparated from His bleſſed body: for grace and remiſsion of ſinnes is conquered thorow the death of the Mediatour: if thou haſt not Faith of the death of the Mediatour, it is vnpoſſible that thou canſt beleeue that thy ſoule ſhall come to Heauen. The Apoſt. Heb. 9. hath a notable compariſon, hee ſayes, When a man hath made a Teſtament, and his legacie, wherein hee leaues ſuch inheritance to any man: his Teſtament can neuer bee ſure, nor ratified, before the man be dead: and if he ratifie not the Teſtament with his death, it cannot bee ſure: for the man in this life may alter the Teſtament: But after that once he die, there it ſtands, it cannot be reuoked: Euen ſo ſayes the Apoſtle, The Heire of the world, Ieſus Chriſt hath made a Teſtament, and ſuch one as neuer man made, leauing ſuch goods and heritage to His Saints, as neuer man left, euen that heauenly Heritage, that exceeding Glorie, Now, ſayes the Apoſtle, If the Heire of the World, Ieſus Chriſt had not ſealed vp His Teſtament by His blood, it had neuer beene ſure, but His death interueening and cloſing it, then the Teſtament is ſure, & all the world is not able to alter one jote of it, to adde or diminiſh it. Woe be to him that will adde any thing to the Teſtament of Ieſus Chriſt: he is counted a villaine, who will adde to a mans Teſtament. Wilt thou adde or diminiſh any thing at thy pleaſure, from the Teſtament of Ieſus Chriſt. This Newe Teſtament is the beſt Teſtament that euer was: Let Worldlings bee content with the Teſtaments of their forefathers, yet count thou nothing at all, except thou get a part of the legacie left in His Teſtament. Woe bee to thee, albeit thou get Ea
                  •
               ledomes and Kingdomes and great poſſeſſions left to thee by the Teſtament of thy forefathers, if thou getteſt not this Teſtament. Well, Brethren, this Teſtament can not be ratified, but by the blood of the Teſtator. How can I beleeue it, except I know that He died, and that the ſoule was as verily ſeparated from the body as euer the ſoule of man was: ſo when

I conſider the death of my Sauiour, who hath made ſuch a Teſtament, I am ſo farre from that, to bee offended at that ſhamefull death, that the death is the ground of my ſaluation, and that in His death is all my glorie, & the aſſurance of my life is in the aſſurance of His death, and His ignominie and ſhame is my glorie.
            Now thus farre for the death of the Lord Ieſus, Now come to the conſideration of theſe wonders that fell out immediately, as He gaue vp the Ghoſt: The Ʋaile of the Temple rent aſunder, from the toppe to the bottome, The earth quaked: Such things neuer fell out in all the deathes of men in the world: No, not in the deathes of all the Kings in the world: The ſtones were clouen, the graues of the dead did open. Theſe are the foure wonders that are noted to haue fallen out immediatly, when the Lord gaue vp the Ghoſt. Brethren, the Lord in His death, Hee was euen in the extreamitie of His humiliation, Hee was weakned, made of no reputation the Lord of glorie was tread vpon by the feete of death, death ſtamping on Him, He could not be further humbled: there is nothing ſo ignominious as death: except it be ſanctified: it is terrible and ignominious, ſo that if it be not ſanctified in the death of the Lord Ieſus: it is but a curſe to thee, & a vengeance from Heauen: yet for all this caſting downe of Him, His heauenly Father leaues Him not, but in His greateſt humiliation the Father giues the greateſt tokens of His glory, and He teſtifies that He was not only innocent, but that He was the Lord of glory, & yt Godhead neuer left Him in that ignominious death, nor neuer ſhall leaue Him, albeit it kept the ſelfe cloſe, y• He might ſuffer that ignominious death, becauſe it was not expedient that Hee ſhould vtter His power: yet yt Godhead in His death wrought ſuch wonders, that He teſtifies before the Iewes that yt ſame man which hung there was the Lord of glorie and the Lord of life. Will yee come further, that albeit that miſerable people had not a tongue to ſpeake, and would not giue a teſtimonie of the glory of CHRIST, the dumbe and ſenſleſſe creatures, who had not mouth, nor tongue, nor life, will not bee ſilent, but will doe their homage to the Lord. Fye on thee, and woe is thee, that euer thou got ye mouth or tongue: the dumbe creatures in their kinds do homage to their God, & glorifies Him, & ſhames all the world, & they ſhame all ye diſciples: for al were offēded at Him now. So now ye earth and the rockes ſhame them all: fye on them. The Lord as Hee came riding to Ieruſalem, like a glorious King, to giue them a ſhew of His

glorie, Luke 19. When the diſciples cryes, Hoſanna, Bleſſed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord, the Phariſes were angrie at it: they were offended to ſee the Lord glorified. Then Ieſus anſwered, if theſe would holde their tongue, the ſtones would cry: Theſe ſtones & ſenſleſſe creatures ſhall cry and glorifie Me, there ſhould not be a wall in Ieruſalem, but they ſhould haue cried: if the diſciples and the multitude had holden their tongue: and if men had their tongue, and glorifie not God, the ſtones ſhall riſe vp, and ſhame them, and glorifie Him. Now the mouth of the people is cloſe, and not one of the diſciples cried, Hoſanna: yet the earth forgets Him not, ſhee cries in her owne manner, Hoſanna: the rockes cry: the vaile of the Temple cries, Hoſanna whilſt it rent aſunder. Well, Brethren, bleſſed is the ſoule ye hath a mouth to glorifie God: woe to thee that hath gotten a tongue to glorifie the Lord, & does it not: if the Lord in humiliation was glorified by the dumbe creatures, can Hee want His glory now in Heauen? if thou glorifieſt not God, another ſhal glorifie Him: if no man ſhall glorifie Him, the ſea, the earth, the ſunne, & the moone ſhall glorifie Him: & thou, albeit thou were a King, ſhalt be thruſt in Hell to thine euerlaſting ſhame. Now Brethren, there is not one of theſe foure wonders, but particularly they would be cōſidered: & firſt, The renting of the vaile of the Temple. The vaile of ye Temple was a faire wall, ouergilt wt fine gold there was neuer a thing ſo glorious outward in this world, as yt Temple, vpō ye which hang a glorious Tapeſtrie wrought curiouſly: it diuided ye moſt holy place, called the Sanctuarie, wherein the Lord gaue His preſence, & it was ye type of that heauenly Sanctuary, wherein Ieſus Chriſt entred by His blood, it got the name from the office & vſe, it was called a vaile, a couering, becauſe it hid the Sanctuarie from the ſight of the people, & of the Prieſts: only the High Prieſts excepted who entred in it once in the yeere, and that not without blood: No, for his life hee durſt not enter in it without blood. Nowe when the LORD giues vp the Ghoſt, this Vaile cleaues in twaine▪ and in a manner he makes an anſwere to the voyce of the Lord. Wilt thou who haſt life, reaſon, mou
                  •
               h, and tongue, anſwere Him, He will make the vaile to anſwere Him. The Lord ſaide a litle, before He gaue vp the Ghoſt, Conſummatum eſt: All is ended, the ceremonies of the Law of Moyſes are ended: the ſh
                  •
               ddowes are away: there is no more vſe of that vaile. When the vaile heares this, The vaile ſayes, Amen, it is true my Lord, & here for my part,

I giue ouer my office, and I giue the ſight of the Sanctuarie to the people, and ſhall not hide it any mo
                  •
               e: for Ieſus Chriſt hath opene
                  •
                vp the Vaile, and pulled it downe, and mad
                  •
                an entrie to the Sanctuarie by His blood. Well, this is the preaching of the Vaile to the Iewes. But heard they this? Take the High Pri
                  •
               ſtes any h
                  •
               ed to this lang
                  •
               age of the Vaile? No, they were neuer buſier in the Ceremonies, than after they heard this ſpeech: They ſaw the Vaile rent, but they tooke no leſſon by it, there is a wonderfull induration, Paul 2. Cor. 3. tells the cauſe, There was another vaile laide on their heartes, ſo that they could neither ſee not heare. It was harder to rent that vaile, than an hundreth vailes of ſtone. Lord keepe vs from that reprobate ſenſe: alas, that wee ſhould not take heede to this: The earthly vaile rent aſunder at the voyce of the Lord, but the vaile of their heart could not b
                  •
               e rent, neither for the voyce of the Lord, nor yet for the wonders. This is the leſſon: Euery one of vs ſhould take heede to our heart: after that once a man bee giuen vp to a reprobate ſenſe, as this people was: after that once thou beginneſt to doe againſt thy knowledge, either in manners, or in religion: after that once thou beginneſt to doe againſt: conſcience, thou wilt do the contrarie of all that it biddes thee▪ thy conſcience telling thee, when thou art going to murther, to harlotrie, to oppreſſion, to anger thy God, all is wrong doe it not: yet thou wilt trampe on the belly of thy conſcience. In the firſt Chapter to the Romanes yee may read the end of this, As thou wilt not heare thy conſcience, and the voyce of God, the Lord catches thy conſcience from thee, and caſts thee ouer to a reprobate ſenſe: ſo that thou art paſt feeling, that it were better to ſpeake to a ſtone, than to thine heart, and when I ſpeake to that piller, it ſh
                  •
               ll rather rent than thine heart. Wouldeſt thou ſee a wonder: The Papiſts would bring in wonders, but bring in a man who is regenerate that is a wonder: yea, it is a great wonder, to alter thine hard and ſtonie heart, than to cleaue the hardeſt rocke that euer was. Let mee ſee an regenerate man, from whom that ſcroofe is taken away: it is a greater wonder to ſee a regenerate man from whome that ſcroofe is taken away, than that all the rockes ſhould rent. This for the firſt wonder: now followes the ſecond. The Earth quakes: No doubt, but with the quaking of the earth, there was a ſore dinne, whilſt the ſoule of the Lord ſeparated from the body. O! what a thing was it to draw the ſoule of the Sauiour of the world from

the body: No, the renting of the rockes was nothing in reſpect of that drawing of the ſoule of the Mediatour from the body: The Earth is holden vp by the mightie hand of the Lord: and when it ſhakes, the mightie hand of the Lord ſhakes it. When the Lord begins to ſhake His arme, all the mountaines ſhakes: it is no jeſting for if Hee hit thee, Hee will bruſe thee in pieces, although all the world were about thee. What is miſerable man doing, that will not knowe the power of the Almightie God: This ſhaking meanes a threatning to this people: and the earth threatens to ſwallowe them all vp, for their indignitie they wrought to their Lord their Maker. If thou diſhonoureſt thy Maker, the earth ſhall open and ſwallow thee vp, as it did Core, Dathan and Abiram
               ▪ who withſtood Moyſes: No, it is a wonder that the earth ſhould beare men. No, I proteſt, I would not wonder ſo much, if the earth opened and ſwallowed ſome men, as I wonder that the Lord in His long ſuffering patience ſpares them, and holds His hand and Iudgement off them. It is a wonder that the houſes fall not downe on the blaſphemers, and the chambers, where they commit their filthineſſe ſhould not ſmoother them▪ But Hee ſhall cauſe an heauier thing fall on the body and ſoule, than a thouſand mountaines were tumbled on them: thou doeſt nothing but heapes vp wrath, as the Apoſt. ſayes, againſt the day of wrath. No, wrath, and heauie wrath ſhall be heaped on them. So the earth threatens th
                  •
               m, for the indignitie they did to their Lord. Yee ſee, that after the earth quaked, it will ſwallow vp townes and people: but ſhee ſwallowes them not vp now, but the earth vomites them out, as not worthie to beare them in her bellie No, ſhe thought them ouer bitter to be within her, who had diſhonoured her Creator: but afterward looke what came on them. The earth will reuenge that foule thing done to her Lord: the land of Iudea ſpued them out, and the earth will not let that curſed kinde haue a foot-breadth of her. O! what is it to haue battell with the Creator, when He begins to arme the earth or any creature againſt thee, we would thinke that this ſhaking of the earth ſhould haue mooued them, yet t
                  •
               ey take no thought for it. At the voyce of the Lord the earth did ſhake, but did the Prieſts and the Scribes ſhake? Are they mooued at the dinne and ſhaking of the earth? So againe, I ſay there is nothing ſo vnmooueable: No, not the earth, as thine hardened heart will be at all the denunciations that will come from Heauen, or Hell: ſaue thy

ſelfe from a reprobate ſenſe, or elſe thou ſhalt neuer bee wakened, till thou bee thruſt into hell, where thou ſhalt bee tormented vvith endleſſe vexation without any hope of comfort. This for the ſecond wonder. Nowe let vs come to the clieuing of the Mountaines. This followes on the former: as the earth opened to ſwallow them, ſo the mountaines cloue to tumble vpon them: The mountaines will not ſuffer them to diſhonour their maker. What mooued this, the Iewes? Euen as much as the other two. No queſtion it was a great and terrible noyſe, when the mountaines cloue. Woe to a ſenſeleſſe heart: The mountaines may clieue, and ſhiuer and quake, but if thy ſoule bee giuen to induration, the ſtones & mountaines ſhall bee mooued, and broken, but thine heart ſhall neuer breake. Woe againe to a ſenſeleſſe heart, which is not mooued at the word of God: that Scepter of yron (whereof ye reade, 2. Pſal.) ſhall light on thee, & bruiſe thee in pieces: Therfore, caſt away that vaile frō thine heart, and ſtriue to keepe light in thy ſoule & conſcience, and walke in ſobriety, till thy God call on thee, and then thou ſhalt ſee a bleſſed ende. Nowe wee come to the laſt wonder which was wrought. The graues doe their duetie: they forget not their maker: but in their manner, they glorifie their Lord God, and honour Him: yea, death it ſelfe, with the graue, doe Him homage and honour. But miſerable man will not honour Him: The graues laye open from three a clock after noone (for about three a clock the Lord gaue vp the ghoſt,) and they lay open all that day & all that night, & all the daye following, and the next night till the morning that the Lord riſes: and then the bodies of the Sainctes alſo arole, by vertue of His reſurrection, and went into the Citie. The graues will tell the miſerable people, that the Lord Ieſus had looſed the bandes of the graue by His death. By death He ſlew death: with her owne ſword He ſlew her, as wee ſpeake. Shee would teach them, that the bodies in that Great day ſhall riſe vp by the vertue of that reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt. This queſtion may bee asked. What became of thoſe bodies which aroſe & went into the City? Did they lay them down againe in the graue, or aſcended they to Heauen? I will not bee curious in this purpoſe: But in my judgement, they were taken vp to the heauēs with Ieſus Chriſt, to be an argumēt of our reſurrection & going to the heauens. This was a faire leſſon: but this miſerable people was not moued. Woe to a ſtonie & ſenſeleſſe heart: the graue may open, but nothing will open a ſenſeleſſe ſoule. Therefore, I beſeech

you ſtriue to get a ſoft and mollified heart. The voyce of Ieſus made the earth to quake, the rockes to rent, the graues to open, the deade to riſe: but the voyce of the LORD opened not their heartes: then He opens the graues: It is an eaſier thing to raiſe a dead body out of the graue, than to raiſe thy ſoule, if it bee once ha
                  •
               dened: it is more wonderfull to raiſe a deade ſoule, and to ſee that ſoule get a ſenſe of Heauen, than to ſee all the bodies of the Church-yard riſing.
            Nowe to compare theſe wonders, There are two of them, The firſt and the laſt that teach this people: The other two, the ſecond and the third that threatens them. The quaking of the earth, and the renting of the rockes threaten a damnage and deſtruction to them: and in this temperature of His wonders: As the power of God, ſo the wiſdome of God appeares wonderfully: He threatens this people for the indignitie, that they had done to the LORD of glorie, with Hell and death, yet Hee holds vp His handes. O! how vnwilling He is to ſtrike, but if He light on thee, Hee will cauſe thee ſqueele: He is ayming: Hee is ſhaking that terrible arme, and threatning them: in the meane time the Lord is remembring His mercie, and teaches them by wonders, to looke yet if they will take a leſſon, to repent of all the indignitie that they had done: Hee threatens them with the one hand, and offers mercie with the other, to ſee if they will repent. This is the dealing of the Lord Hee warnes them, and He ſayes. Yet I will not ſwallow thee vp with the earth, and I will not let the rockes tumble downe on thee, to deuoure thee, yet repent: for there is g
                  •
               ace for thee, if thou turneſt. Brethren, no man ſhall goe to Hell, without aduertiſement to ſtand, to the end, that if thou wilt not repent, when the Lord begins to put hand in thee, and to rent thee, thy mouth may be cloſed, that thou canſt not ſay: Lord▪ I got no warning, all excuſes ſhall be put away. Alas, will not men learne for all this ſhaking of the mountaines. Lord ſhake theſe hearts of ours, & the Lord be merciful to all ſinful ſoules, & to ſenſleſſe creatures, leſt whē they ſhall cry Peace, & all things are ſure enough, thē ſudden iudgement approach & the wrath come & ouertake them. Now come to ye laſt thing & I ſhall end. Are there none yt are moued at all at theſe wonders? Amongſt ſo many hundreths & thouſands is there not one moued? yes there are ſome moued, & who are theſe? are the high Prieſts moued? No, not a whit, is there any of ye reſt of ye order of ye Prieſts moued? Not,

They continue blinde and dumbe. Are the Phariſes, and the Scribes, or the Elders mooued? No: They are not mooued; but the more they heare, their heartes are the more hardened. Who are then mooued at theſe vvonders? It is an Ethnicke bodie, a Captaine of men of vvarre vnder PILATE, and a Pagane, vvho neuer once knewe GOD, yet vvhen hee ſees this, and hearde the voyces, hee ſaies, Of a ſuretie this man was juſt: And more hee ſaies, Truely this was the Sonne of GOD. Is there anie moe? Yes: A bande of men of vvarre: Not of the IEVVES, but ſuch as had liued on robberie, vvithout the feare of GOD, they feared greatly, and ſaide alſo, Truely this man was the Son of GOD. Who of the IEVVES is mooued? Not the Scribes, and the Phariſes, and the reſt of the Order, they are nothing moued: but the ſillie multitude, vvho cryed before, Crucifie him, nowe they goe home, ſmiting on their breastes, and crying, vvoe to them for that dayes labour: but there vvas neuer a motion in the Priestes, or in anie of the Princes or Phariſes▪
                or Scribes. It is a vvonderfull thing, to ſee that they vvho had judgement and vnderſtanding, and who had read all the prophecies of the MESSIAS to come, gotte no ſenſe: yet a ſillie multitude gettes ſome ſight and ſenſe. Woulde yee knowe and poinct out a ſenſeleſſe creature, vvho vvill not bee mooued neither by vvorke nor vvorde: It is ſuch a man, as hath this vvorldly wiſedome: Such a man, as hath knowledge, and yet does againſt his knowledge and conſcience: for all that theſe Priestes and Phariſes did, vvas both againſt knowledge and conſcience: They repined againſt the Holy Spirit, and againſt their conſcience, they crucifie Ieſus. Whoſoeuer thou art, who opponeſt thee to the brightnes of the Goſpell, thou crucifieſt the Lord of glory: and as it ſhalbe layed to the charge of the high Prieſts and Phariſes, and of Pilate, and Herode, in that Great daye, that they crucified IESVS CHRIST: So it ſhall bee layed to thy charge, and thou ſhalt bee as guiltie of His blood, as they. Woe to that ſoule which vvill reſiſt that word and the Holy Spirite. Woe ſhall bee to the great men in this land, vvho againſt conſcience conſpires againſt CHRIST, Religion, and their natiue Countrey, for vvrath and vengeance remaineth for them, if they leaue not off this vnhappie courſe: The King of SPAINE, and all their aſſociates ſhall not bee able to holde vengeance off them, that ſhall one daye bee heaped vpon their heads. The LORD ſaue vs from induration, and neuer ſuffer vs to repine

againſt Light, nor to ſcrape it out of our ſoule and conſcience.
            I ſee heere further: The LORD gettes moe friendes in His death, than in His life: The Centurion, and the men of vvarre, they curſe the time that euer they vvere employed in that ſeruice: The multitude, vvho bad crucifie Him, thorowe blindneſſe and ignorance; nowe they repent the time that euer they did it, and they returne homewardes, knocking vpon their breaſtes. That immaculate Lambe, that precious Sacrifice, hanging thus on the Croſſe, Hee caſt ſuch a ſweete ſmell on the earth, and on the people, that they vvho vvere His enemies, goe awaye mourning. This falles out often times in the Martyres, for ſome people goes out with them, who woulde eate them: and yet the LORD IESVS makes their death to caſt ſuch a ſweete ſmell, that it is effectuall to mooue manie thouſandes to mourne, and to bee conuerted: So that it is founde to bee true, that the bloode of the Martyres is the ſeede of the Kirke. And they who woulde haue ſwallowed them before in their death, pitties them, and become their friendes, thorowe the ſweete ſmell, which they felt comming from their death, and would goe home mourning, that euer they were enemies vnto them, and were inſtrumentes of their death.
            Therefore, let the enemies of the trueth perſecute the Sainctes of GOD, and His Trueth, with Fire and Sworde, as they pleaſe; They ſhall gette no vantage, and they ſhall not gette this Light quenched: for there ſhall ſuch a ſweete ſmell ariſe out of the aſhes of the Sainctes, which in deſpight of the enemies farre moe ſhall bee wonne to IESVS CHRIST by their death, than euer was wonne to Him by their life: To Him, therefore, vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee all Honour, Praiſe, and Glorie, for euermore:
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXIII. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 55 And many women were there, beholding him afarre off, who had followed Ieſus from Galile, miniſtring vnto him.
                  
                     
                        verse 56 Among whom was Marie Magdalene, and Marie the Mother of Iames, and Ioſes, and the mother of Zebedeus ſonnes.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 40 There were alſo women, who behelde afarre off, among whome was Marie Magdalene, and Marie the Mother of James the leſſe, and of Ioſes, and Salome,
                  
                     
                        verse 41 Who alſo when Hee was in Galile, followed Him, and miniſtred vnto Him, and manie other women, who came vp with Him vnto Hieruſalem.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 49 And all his acquaintance ſtoode afarre off, and the women that followed him from Galile, beholding theſe thinges.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 31 The Iewes then (becauſe it was the Preparation, that the bodies ſhoulde not remaine vpon the Croſſe on the Sabbath daye: for that Sabbath was an high day
                        •
                     ) beſought Pilate, that their legges might bee broken, and that they might bee taken downe.
               
            
            
               
               WEE haue heard theſe dayes paſt (beloued Brethren in Chriſt) what was the part of the whole multitude of the wicked, and perſecuters of IESVS CHRIST, in crucifying Him, in taunting and ſcorning Him: Doubtleſſe, there were in that companie ſome of the godlie, who loued the LORD IESVS: but ſeeing we haue heard nothing of them as yet, therefore this daye wee ſhall ſpeake ſomewhat in their behalfe. Nowe, what are they doing in the meane time? They are ſtanding afar off. Some men & many women, who all that time had followed Him before, ſtanding to ſee that ſadde ſpectacle: yet with ſadneſſe they had joye, no queſtion: And this is the firſt part of our TEXT, which wee haue read, out of MATTHEVV, MARKE, and LVKE. After this wee enter into the Hiſtorie of Chriſts buriall: But before we come to His buriall, wee haue in the XIX. CHAPTER of IOHN, the Hiſtorie of the taking downe of His bodie from the Croſſe: So at this time, by Gods grace, wee ſhall ſpeake of theſe two, to wit, Of the part of the godlie, who loued Him, and next, Of the taking downe of that bleſſed bodie from the Croſſe, after it was dead. Then, to come ſhortly to the purpoſe: It is ſaide, And all his acquaintance ſtood afarre off. There is the generall: Then comes on the particular, Manie women: particular mention is made of them: Manie women are ſtanding afarre off, looking on. Wee heard of before in the XIX. of IOHN, verſ. 23. of three women chiefely, Marie the Mother of Ieſus, and other two Maries, together with His well-beloued Diſciple IOHN: and they were ſtanding at that time when Hee hung quicke vpon the Croſſe, ſo neare hand Him, that He ſpeakes to them from the Croſſe, and they hearde Him. So Brethren, this ſtanding afarre off at this time, as I take it, hath beene after the Lord had giuen vp the ghoſt, when the women are returning home againe, being loath to part companie with Him: and as they were going home, they turned about, & looked to Ieſus hinging on the Croſſe, on Moūt Caluarie: They ſtand firſt near, & thē turning home again, they ſtand afar off. No queſtiō, it was ye loue they bare to the Lord, that drue thē after him, whē he went to be crucified, & yt ſame loue yt they bare to him was ſo tender & entire, yt it made them to ſtand & look on him when he hung on the Croſſe: and yt loue they bare to ye Lord Ieſus made thē to ſeuer frō the reſt of the multitude,

and to gather themſelues together, and looke backe to Him where Hee was hanging. For this is a ſure thing, Thoſe that meete together in one faith and loue in the Lord Ieſus, of meere force they muſt meet together among themſelues, and be linked together by the band of loue in one bodie. By the contrary, thoſe who meet not together in one faith in Ieſus Chriſt, their hearts will neuer be joyned in this world, they will neuer meet to make one body, they will neuer ſeparate themſelues from the multitude of this world: No, if it were all my kinred, father, and mother, brother, and ſiſter, if they loue not the Lord Ieſus, mine heart and his ſhall neuer bee linked together in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come: Hee that loueth not the Lord Ieſus, (as Paul ſaies, 1. Corin. Chap. 16.) let him be Anathema maran-atha▪
                that is, curſed for euermore. But hee who loues the Lord Ieſus, and meetes with mee in Him, let him bee what hee will, let him bee in the vtmoſte corner of the worlde, mine heart and his is linked together, and there is a conjunction which neuer ſhall bee ſeparated, neither in the Heauen, nor in the Earth: it ſhall laſt for euer.
            Brethren, when I conſider this multitude heere ſtanding, looking vpon Him when Hee hung vpon the Croſſe, I thinke I ſee an image of the whole worlde: for it is a worlde of people, who are ſtanding about Him: there are Gentiles, there are Jewes, and the falſe adulterous kirke, there are Prieſtes, Phariſes, Elders, blinde guides of the people, & a prophane multitude, enemies of all ſorts: And as there are manie enemies to Chriſt, So there is a ſillie handfull of godlie men and women, gathered together, looking vpon that ſadde ſpectacle; who reſembled the true Kirke militant heere vpon the face of the earth: And as in all this multitude, like drawes to like, The vvicked and the vngodlie ranke themſelues together, The Prieſts ranke themſelues together. The ſouldiours ranke themſelues together; and alſo the godly ranke themſelues together, and looke vpon that ſadde ſpectacle, their Lord crucified. Well, this is common to all: all are ſtanding looking to CHRIST, hanging on the Croſſe vpon the toppe of the Mount Caluarie, Jewe, and Gentile, wicked, and godlie, all are looking: But in looking there is a great difference: There are ſome delighting their eyes vvith the ſpectacle, there are ſome feeding the malice of their heartes, and drinking the blood of IESVS CHRIST, the Prieſtes, the Phariſes, and the Elders: But the godlie are looking on vvith

ſadneſſe of their heartes: And I doubt not, but as with ſadneſſe, ſo alſo they are looking on Him vvith joy, by faith in His glorious reſurrection. There are manie this ſame houre who haue their eyes fixed on Chriſt, both Turkes and Paganes, and the true Kirke, and the falſe Kirke: but one cauſe mooues not all. Take heede, therefore, howe thou lookeſt, either to His Croſſe, or to His glorie: looke that thy ſoule bee ſet on Him, and ſee that by looking vnto Him, thou preaſſe to bee partaker of the fruite of His death and reſurrection: for if thou lookeſt to Him for the faſhion, or in malice, as the Turkes doe, and the Pagans, and the Papiſtes, enemies to His Croſſe, thou ſhalt periſh: & better had it bene to thee neuer to haue heard of Ieſus, or neuer to haue ſeene Him. Further, this would be well conſidered: We ſee if we haue a friend, whō we loue well, if he betaken out to a ſhamefull death (there was neuer ſuch a ſhamefull death as this) we will thinke ſhame of him, and he will thinke ſhame that his friendes ſhoulde ſee him in that eſtate. Who would thinke but that the acquaintances of Ieſus ſhould haue thought ſhame of Him, to haue conuoyed their friend to ſuch an ignominious death, and to haue ſeene Him ſo ſhamefully demained. So that, Brethren, when I cōſider this matter well, I perceiue that thoſe His familiars and acquaintance haue ſeene further into Chriſt, than men & women doe commonly. No doubt but the friends of Chriſt, who came to ſee Him hanging in ignominie, ſawe life in that death: they ſawe glory in His ignominie; otherwiſe they had neuer come to ſee Him hanging in ignominie: And no doubt they felt a ſweete perfume flowing from that Sacrifice: It was the ſweeteſt ſmelling Sacrifice that euer was offered. All the perfume and incenſe that euer was offered, paſſed not vp with ſuch a ſweete ſmell in the noſethrilles of the Father, as that one bleſſed ſacrifice did: And as it ſmelled ſweetly in the noſethrilles of the Father: ſo did it caſt a ſweeter ſmell in the noſe of the godlie, than euer they founde: and they thought it had ſuch a fragrant odour, and ſuch a ſweet ſmell vnto them, that they thought, ere they had beene ſeparated from Him in His death, they had rather choſen to haue dyed a thouſande deathes: for as the Lord ſaies, Whereſoeuer the carion is, there must the Eagles reſort. Well is the man who in his death findes the ſweete ſmell of ye death of Ieſus Chriſt. I haue no more to ſay of this matter, but if this acquaintance of Ieſus for the time tooke ſuch a pleaſure in His death, (beeing ſhamefull,) that they could not bee ſeparated

from Him, it is a ſhame to vs to draw ſo far backe from Him, not now hanging in ignominie on the croſſe, but moſt glorious in the Heauens. Fye on this dull headed and dead world, that hath no ſenſe of that glorie, and is not allured by that vnſpeakable glorie, rather to ſuffer a thou and deathes, albeit it were the ſword, the fire, and all torments, than to be ſeparated from this Ieſus Chriſt: But the womens part is more particularly to bee conſidered: Let all women take heede: it is ſaide, Many women were there, Moe of them, haue followed the Lord to the croſſe, than men, that I may ſpeake to the glorie of GOD, and ſhame of men. As for men, I finde nothing but this generall. In Luke a companie of men and women, but in Matthew and Marke, I finde of women eſpecially: they are looking on Him with ſadneſſe mixed with joy: And from whence came they? It is ſaid, that They came out of Galile, following on Him: they neuer left Him, they wearied not to follow ſuch a guide, they miniſtred to Him on their owne charge: As they were fedde with that bread of life, that came out of His mouth, ſo they ſpared not, freely and liberally to communicate all that they had to Him: And happie is the man, who ſo findes the effect of the word of life in his heart, that hee would beſtowe againe, all that he hath for the loue of that word. Brethren, yee know, what is in hand preſently: many words neede not: ſeeing this diuiſion of the towne in competent Congregations intended, is to feede your ſoules with the word of life: ſpare not for goods to get that word of life.
            Nowe, I ſee beſide the multitude, mention made of three women, Marie Magdalene, then, Marie the mother of Iames the leſſe, and of Ioſes, and Salome, the mother of the two ſonnes of Zebedeus: No queſtion, theſe women mentioned here haue borne a tender affection to the Lord: forgets the Lord that loue they bare to Him in all times before, in following Him from Galile to Ieruſalem, and from Ieruſalem vnto the ignominious death of the croſſe and there ſtaying with the Lord, and not leauing Him, but miniſtring to Him: forgets the Lord this? No, but He remembers vpon it: thou ſhalt neuer doe a good deede to IESVS CHRIST, but Hee ſhall meete thee: they loue Him, and Hee honours them: they neuer left Him: they ſhamed the men yea, His diſciples: yea, euen the very Apoſtles: for we read not of any of all His Apoſtles, that any of them was there preſent, except Iohn: Peter had taken

him to a backe ſide, for all his ſtoutneſſe before: the reſt were offended in Him: Theſe women did cleaue to Him through the band of loue: forgets the Lord this? No: as they loue Him beyond His Apoſtles: ſo the Lord honoures them aboue the Apoſtles. It is no ſmall thing to get the honour to be an eye witnes of the death and reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST: it is greater honour than all the honour in the world. No doubt, the LORD made theſe women in their turning backe preachers to the Apoſtles themſelues: they tolde Peter, Iames and Matthew what they had ſeene: there is none end of honour, when the Lord begins to honour: as He honours them to be witneſſes of His death, and preachers of it to others: ſo Hee will haue the names of ſome of them to bee regiſtrate to the poſteritie. And it is the will of IESVS CHRIST, that this day I promulgate the names of theſe women in your audience, to their honour, after ſo many hundreth yeeres, and their names ſhall be regiſtrate perpetually to their euerlaſting honour, whilſt IESVS CHRIST come againe: yea, their names ſhall bee written in the Heauens euerlaſtingly. Neuer one repents the gratitude done to IESVS CHRIST: thou ſhalt get two good deedes for one. Againe, the LORD will let vs ſee in the example of theſe women that oft times in women there will be a more tender loue to the Lord IESVS, than in men, who are the ſtronger ſexe: ye will ſee the weaker and ſimpler that the ſexe bee, and the leſſe worldly wit that it haue, the more ſpiritually it is diſpoſed, the more affectionate it is to heauenly thinges, the greater heauenly wiſdome it hath. If any man, ſayes PAVL, ſeeme to bee wiſe in this world, let him bee a foole, that hee may bee wiſe, that is tru
                  •
               ly wiſe, wiſe in GOD, 1. Cor. 3.18. And as their loue is great, ſo the Lord will honour them to the ſhame of men, and whereas men ſhould preach CHRIST, Hee will make women to preach IESVS CHRIST to men, to the ſhame of men, and His owne glorie. All tends to this, that as men and women doe deſire to bee honoured of God, ſo all men and women ſhould ſtriue continually to loue and glorifie GOD. GOD loues none, nor honoures none, but only thoſe who loue and honour the Lord Ieſus Chriſt: if thou loueſt not the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, thou ſhalt get no loue nor honour of God: yet further, this is not to be paſſed by, the world vvonders novv, that Hee had ſuch an eye to theſe three vvomen:

There were many hundreth men, but how many of their names were regiſtrate to their honour? Hee had ſuch a reſpect to them, that He eſpied them out beſide the reſt of thouſands that were there, and by His Holy Spirit cauſed regiſtrate them. This regiſtrating of them came not raſhly, but from an ordinance of God, and His eſpeciall Prouidence. There is not a publike conuention, albeit it were a man hanged, where multitudes of men and women run together to heare & ſee, but the all-ſeeing eye of the Lord is vpon euery perſon in particular, man, woman, ladde, or laſſe. Neuer an head there, great or ſmall, poore or rich, noble, or ignoble, but the eye of the Lord is on them: yea, it goes downe to the inward affections, to rippe and ſearch them, to ſee of what diſpoſition euery ſoule is. As for example, we are all met together here, ſundry men and women, ſome greater, ſome ſmaller, ſome younger, ſome older: yet there is not one of vs, on whome the Lord hath not His eye. We are met, to ſee Ieſus Chriſt crucified on mount Caluarie, there is not one of our hearts, but the eye of the Lord ſees it, and Hee ſees wherefore, and for what end thou art come to that meeting, whether it be to feede thine eares, and to take delectation in hearing of new things, or to take paſtime to ſee, and be ſeene, or to eſchew the ſhame of the world, or whether thou commeſt to reape profite, and to be edified of that thou heareſt, and to get life of that Croſſe and death of Chriſt: for therein ſtands thy life, and this ſhould be the end of thy meeting with Gods children. Th
                  •
               n ſeeing the eye of the Lord is ſet on euery ſoule: therefore it becomes euery one of vs, to ſtriue to approue our heartes to the Lord: ſo that euery one of vs may ſaye to the Lord, for this ende am I come, O Lord, to be partaker of the fruit of the death of Ieſus Chriſt. Woe to them who come for another cauſe, or ſiniſtrous reſpect, and come not to be edified: for the Goſpell ſhall neuer be a worde of life to them, but a ſauour of death vnto death. If it worke not life in thee, and if the Spirit worke not life by the preaching of the Croſſe, it ſhall be the power of death to thy ſoule.
            Brethren, we haue heare the firſt part: Now we haue to ſpeake of the ſecond part: The taking of His bodie downe from the Croſſe before His buriall. The taking downe of the body of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the Lord of lords▪ comes of a r
                  •
               queſt made to Pilate, and made not by His friends, but by His enemies. I ſee this, this miſerable people of the Iewes were ſpoyled of all power,

as they had no power to hang any: ſo they had no power to take any downe from the Croſſe, or from the gallowes, without the leaue of the Magiſtrate: they were ſpoyled of all power by the judgement of God, & therefore, they behooued to haue recourſe to Pilate: they were ſlaues, yet they would not acknowledge the true King of glorie, who might haue made them free. I ſee heere a commendable thing in the Romane policie, As it was not lawfull to hang any without the command and licence of the Magiſtrate, ſo they who were hanged, might not be taken without the licence of the Iudge. There ſould nothing be done to a guiltie perſon, but by the authoritie of the Iudge. God in His judiciall Law, gaue not only Lawes concerning the lifting of men vpon the croſſe, but alſo of ye taking down of them frō the croſſe. It is wel to be marked, who it is that giues the aduiſe, that the Lord with the other two ſhould bee taken downe from the croſſe, to put an ende both to their paine, and their ignominie. It is not one of His diſciples, it is not Peter, nor Iohn, nor Matthew, they are not ſo bold, they durſt not preſume it: No, it was His enemies that crucified Him, that interponed their requeſt for Him? Was this a benefite they did to Him? Certainely this was a benefite they did to Him, to take Him downe from the croſſe: yet they doe it, not to benefite Him, for any pitie they had on Him: for they thought, that Hee was liuing but the Lord had giuen vp the Ghoſt. When thy friendes will not make a ſuite for thee, the Lord will raiſe vp thine enemies to doe thee good: He cannot only make thy friend doe thee good, but thy foe alſo. If thou bee the Lordes, He can make them who would wiſh thee woe, to doe thee good: if thou be the Lords, the fire, the water, and the ſworde, which otherwiſe would deuoure thee, ſhall benefite thee: the Lord, againſt all mens expectation, ſhall doe thee good, if thou bee the Lords▪ thou ſhalt not want reliefe. Now, what was the ſumme of their requeſt? They beſought Pilate, that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken downe. That is, that they might bee put out of paine, and that they might make an end of them: for they thought they were quicke. Now, whether this requeſt was vpon a cuſtome vſed amongſt them, or not, the Text declares not: but it ſeemes, except the feaſt of the Paſſeouer had interueened that ſame time, that they would not haue bene carefull of them▪ but would haue ſuffered them to hang whilſt they had yeelded vp ye Ghoſt. The other two were quicke in

paine, when the Lord yeelded vp the ſpirit. I note this: When thy enemies doe thee a good turne, they doe it neuer of loue. Theſe might haue diſpatched the Lorde, and the two Thieues, with leſſe paine, than to haue broken their thies: They had taken their liues ſooner from them, if they had beaten out their braines. So when thy enemie benefites thee, and does thee anie good turne, bee ſure he does it not of purpoſe, to doe thee good: as we cōmonly ſpeake, If he giue thee a bit, he will giue thee a buffet with it: Soure and bitter is the benefite of the enemie. Indeede it is true, that the Lord, who makes all thinges to worke for the beſt, to them that loues Him, will diſpoſe their doings otherwiſe, and make them to worke thy good: And therefore, haue thine eye ſet vpon the Lord, and He ſhall make the malice and bitterneſſe of thine enemie to turne to thy comfort. There is another thing to bee marked: The Lord had ordained, that there ſhould not bee one bone broken of CHRIST, and ſo it was fore-tolde. Nowe will yee ſee the force of the word and prouidence of God: The force of the worde and prouidence of God appeares the more clearelie by this oppoſition which is made to His ordinance: The Iewes requeſted to haue His bones broken, and Pilate gaue commandement to breake them: But is there any bone broken, notwithſtanding their ſute, and Pilates commandement? No, not one. This lets vs ſee, That if God haue ordained & ſaid any thing, it lies not in the hands of any man to diſanull it: If God ſhall ſay, There ſhall not be one bone of my anointed broken; great Caeſar, and al the Kings of the earth, the king of Spaine, and the Pope, and all their adherents, ſhall not be able to doe the contrary. So in the middeſt of all feare and danger, let vs depende vpon the prouidence of God, and ſaye, Lord, if thou haſt ſaide otherwiſe, than theſe mens intentions are, I will not bee affraide for them, I know they are not able to do any thing without thy prouidence▪ and ſo, Lord, I leane onely on thy prouidence, and am content with thy will. So in theſe miſerable dayes, we are to leane to God, and to depende on His prouidence, and wee ſhall ſee the vaine enterpriſes of men vaniſh away like ſmoake, and we ſhall ſee the wicked to bee made ſpectacles to all the worlde. Let vs ſee what moued the IEVVES to make this requeſt: Was it pittie that mooued them? No: They had no pittie of Him. Was it obedience to the commandement of God, who commāded, that an hanged man ſhould be cut down yt ſame day, becauſe he was accurſed? Deu. 21.22.23.
               
No, it was a vaine ſuperſtition that moued them, they were to celebrate the Paſſ
                  •
               ouer, and this was the day of their preparation, they were preparing them by crucifying the innocent, the Lorde of glorie. Was this an holy preparation? This was the Fryday, and the morne was the Pa
                  •
               che. Iohn ſayes, that was, an high day, or a great Sabbath, becauſe they kept two holy dayes together, both their owne ordinarie Sabbath, and the extraordinarie Paſſeouer, and this they did contrarie to the ordinance of GOD: for they ſhould haue celebrated the Paſſeouer on Thurſeday, as the LORD did: for He celebrated it that night that He was betrayed by Iudas, and led away captiue by the Iewes. So they did caſt in the two Holy dayes together, according to their cuſtome: for when ye Paſſeouer fell to bee on Thurſeday, they vſed to delay it vntill the Satterday which was their Sabbath day, leſt yt if theſe feaſts which are ſo neare other, had bene both kept, the people ſhould haue wearied, and if Chriſt & the other had not bene taken downe, tha
                  •
                yt Holy exerciſe wold haue bin defiled. So they thought, if they had bin taken down from the croſſe, and put away, they had bene holy eneugh. And vpon that ſame pretence, when they were to accuſe Chriſt, they would not enter in the common Hall, leſt they ſhould haue beene polluted. They were Hypocrites, they polluted the world, and defiled the earth that they tread on. A polluted body who hath no ſanctification in Chriſt, there is nothing that he touches, meat, or drinke: yea, the earth he walkes on, but he defiles all: yet theſe foule Hypocrites thought, that if Ieſus who ſanctifies the Sabbath, and ſanctifies the heart, had beene taken away they had beene holie eneugh. An Hypocrite is a foule body, & defiles all that he handles. All his religion is outward ſtanding in bodily exerciſes: and when he hath polluted all, yea, the very earth he treades on: he will ſay, Handle not, touch not, taſte not, that will pollute thee, Coloſſ. 2.21. There is his religion: When the foule body defiles the aire, the earth, the Heauen, hee bids thee touch it not, leſt it defile thee, when he defiles all that he touches.
            Nowe they get the requeſt granted them, and gets a commandement of Pilate, and ſo The men of warre came forward, and brake the legges of the one firſt▪ and then they came to the other, and brake his alſo: They brake both their legges with great paine and torment.
            Now, will ye ſee theſe 2 thieues, they are like in their death, both

are crucified, & in end both their thighes are brokē: yet for al this, the one of them is a veſſell of glorie, and he had a promiſe of glorie, and an aſſurance of it in his heart: the other had none. So, Brethren, take heede: though the death of the wicked, and the godlie bee alike: yet they are not alike in condition: Iudge not of mens eſtate by the outwarde miſerie: meaſure not Heauen and Hell by the outwarde death: The Elect and the wicked will be oft times alike in death, and oft times the Elect will die in the greateſt torments. Who ſuffered more painefull deathes, than the Martyres did: Beware that thou ſay, as the Papiſtes, who are enemies to Chriſt, ſay: They teach, albeit that in Ieſus Chriſt thy ſinne be forgiuen: yet the paine is not forgiuen: and they ſay, that the paine that the godly ſuffer in death, is a ſatisfaction for ſinne: They ſay that the paine of the penitent thiefe was the puniſhment of his ſinne: but they lie, and the Lord ſhall juſtifie it. The Elect ſuffer no paine for ſinne: torment them as they will, burne them, ſcalde them, all is but a mercifull chaſtiſement, and death to them is a faire port to Heauen: He makes darkneſſe to be light to His owne.
            Well, this for the execution of the two thieues: They come to the Lord, to ſee whether He was dead or not: they are not raſh: they finde Him dead: they finde no ſponke of life in Him: therefore they offer not to breake His thighes: See how the word and prouidence of God takes effect. The Lord had ſaid, One bone of Him ſhould not be broken: and therefore to preueene the breaking, the Lord miraculouſly tooke the Spirit from His Sonne: His death was miraculous, as ye heard before: by the ſtrength of nature He might haue liued longer, as that great and mightie voyce which he vttered laſt, teſtifies: and ſo His ſudden death was a meane to performe the Lordes ordinance: Hee would vſe this, as the ordinarie meane to execute the eternall decree of the Father. It is a follie to thee, to ſay, thou wilt depend on the prouidence of God, and in the meane time to leaue off meanes: for by ſo doing thou tempteſt God, who as He hath ordained the ende, ſo He hath alſo ordained the meanes to the end. As for example, If thou wouldeſt goe to Heauen, thou muſt vſe the meanes, the hearing of the word, &c. Yet many will contemne the meanes, and yet bragge they are aſſured to come to Heauen, they will contemne the preaching which is the inſtrument that God vſes. But I ſay to thee, thou deceiueſt thy ſelfe: for I denounce, if thou wereſt an Emperour, thou ſhalt neuer

ſee Heauen, nor life, who contemneſt that meane and inſtrument which the Lord hath ordained to bee vſed, to bring thee to Heauen, which is the preaching of His trueth. Now, Brethren, ye ſee here the teſtimonie of the death of Chriſt, giuen by the bu
                  •
               rioes, they preach His death, as though they had ſaid, Marke, all people: This Ieſus whom we haue crucified is dead: and therefore in token that this is true, wee will not breake His bones: after that comes another burrio, a man of warre, and giues the laſt witneſſe, Hee ſmites Him with a ſpeare: ſo that out of the wound guſhed out blood and water: As though the knaue had ſaid, I ſhall let you ſee, that Hee is dead, & that there is no life in Him, and ſo hee ſmites Him to the heart, with a ſpeare: The Lord would haue the death of the Lord teſtified ſundrie wayes for thy comfort: for the moſt ſhamefull thing that euer was, is death, except it be ſanctified: it is the greateſt miſerie that can come to man: if thou getteſt no remedie againſt it, for that death of the body is a port to that death euerlaſting. It is no childrens play to haue the ſoule diſlodged: No, it was an ignominie to the Lord of glorie, to be holden vnder the bands of death, and to be tread vnder the feete of death: yet the Father will haue His death teſtified ſundrie wayes: Firſt, Hee will haue it teſtified with a cry, when He cried with a loude voyce, Father, into thine hands I commend my Spirit: Next, Hee will haue the burrioes to teſtifie His death, and then He will haue a ſpeare thruſt to His heart, to teſtifie His death, beſides the teſtimonie that all the creatures gaue of His death. Is this for nothing? No, for ſuppoſe the Lord Ieſus had bene crucified, taunted and ſcorned, and ſuffered all the ignominie that euer could haue bene, and yet had bene taken downe quicke, and the nailes looſed, & gotten His wounds healed, thou hadſt not beene ſ
                  •
               u
                  •
               d, thy ſaluation had not beene wrought: Our ſinnes had neuer bene forgiuen vs, for without ſhedding of blood, and death, there had bene no remiſſion of ſinnes, except I know, beſide all the paine the Lord ſuffered that He ſuffered the death alſo, I would neuer beleeue to get life▪ & to be ſaued. Now to end in a word, Looke to the witneſſes: the burrioes, they were euill witneſſes for themſelues but good witneſſes for vs▪ for their witneſſing teſtifies to our w
                  •
               ll, that the Lord was dead: and ſo theſe burrioes haue done a notable good worke to vs, but not to themſelues, becauſe they were His enemies. It is as t
                  •
               ue this day, as it was that day: there is, and ſhall be witneſſes, preaching

the death of CHRIST, crying, That CHRIST died for the redemption of the vvorlde, and teaching ſaluation by CHRIST to others, and others ſhall gette good by them, yet they ſhall gette no good themſelues. Why? Becauſe they are enemies to the Croſſe of CHRIST. An enemie to His death, can preach His death vvell enough. All Preachers of the death of IESVS CHRIST ought to take heede to this: That vvhen they preach to others (as the Apoſtle ſaieth) they be not reprobate themſelues. Woe to the man who preaches ſaluation to others, if in the meane time hee bee a reprobate himſelfe. I muſt bee as carefull for mine owne ſaluation, as for the ſaluation of others: And therefore, if thou ſpeakeſt of the death of CHRIST to thy Neighbour, ſtriue to bee aſſured, that thou thy ſelfe art partaker of that ſaluation, through IESVS: To vvhome, vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee all Honour, Praiſe, and Glorie, for euermore, Amen.
            
         
         
            THE XXIV. LECTVRE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 34 But one of the Souldiours, with a Speare, pearced his ſide, and foorthwith came there out blood and water.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 And hee that ſawe it, bare recorde, and his recorde is true: and hee knoweth that hee ſaieth true, that yee might beleeue it.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 For theſe thinges were done, that the Scripture ſhould bee fulfilled, Not a bone of him ſhall bee broken.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 And againe another Scripture ſaieth, They ſhall ſee him, whome they haue thruſt thorow.
               
            
            
               
               THE laſt day (beloued Brethren in Chriſt) we entered into the Hiſtory of the taking of the Lord from the Croſſe, before Hee was buried: The taking of Him from the Croſſe, it came by a requeſt: The Iewes His enemies, made requeſt to Pilate, the Romane deputy, and Iudge for the time. The ſumme of the requeſt was, that the thies of the crucified men might bee broken, and ſo they might bee taken from the Croſſe▪ 
               Pilate the Iudge yeelded to the requeſt, & gaue commandement to the ſouldiers▪ & to the burreo, to execute & ſlay them, that afterward they might be buried. The ſouldiers came firſt to the one thief, & broke his thies: thē they came to the other thief, & broke his thies alſo: and laſt, they came to Ieſus, and finding Him already dead, and to haue giuen vp 
                  •
               he ſpirit, they would not breake His legges: Yet to put the matter out of doubt, one of the ſouldiers came with a ſpeare, and pearced the Lords ſide, thorow ye heart, & out of the wound there guſh
                  •
               d blood and water. Nowe Brethren, this day, as the Lord ſhall giue vs grace, we ſhal follow out this Hiſtory, and we ſhall ſpeake of three things: Firſt, of the effuſion & guſhing out of the blood & the water out of the ſide of the Lord. Then we ſh
                  •
               ll ſpeake of that graue teſtimonie that Iohn, the writer of this Goſpel, gaue to the Hiſtory, & narration, that the bones of the Lord were not broken, and that His ſide was pearced, and that thereafter the bloode and the water guſhed out: Laſt, we ſhall ſpeake of the end wherfore theſe things came to paſſe. There was not one bone of Him brokē: His ſide was pearced, to the end that the word of the Lord (long time ſpoken of before) might be accōpliſhed: And he brings in two Scriptures, the one cōcerning that His bones ſhuld not be brokē, & the other cōcerning the pearcing of His ſide with the ſpeare. Now come to ye firſt of theſe heads. I leaue the vaine dreame of the papiſtes (for all their religion is but dreames & fantaſies) I paſſe their dreame cōcerning this ſouldier yt pierced the ſide of the Lord with a ſpeare how they ſay yt the Griek worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which ſignifies a ſpeare, was the name of the man that pearced Chriſtes ſide, and how they ſaye, that this man was a Centurion, & an olde Captaine, who was blind: & after he had pearced the Lords ſide, hee waſhed his eyes with the blood that iſſued out, & got his ſight, & the
                  •
               eafter in an inſtant was conuerted, & became a Chriſtian man and a Martyre: and this is he whom they worſhip,

and whoſe bones are kept as a relict, and he is called Sainct Longimus. I leaue the ſpirit of vanities: fie on them, they fill the hearts of the people of God with ſuch vanities, and therefore ſhame and confuſion ſhall come vpō them in the end. Now Brethren, to ſpeake of that which is more profitable, Of the guſhing out of the blood and water out of the ſide of the Lord. IOHN ſaies, that one of the ſouldiours, with a ſpeare, pearced his ſide, and foorthwith came there out blood and water. No doubt this effuſion of the blood and water in a part was naturall and ordinarie: for, they who haue skill in the things which concerne the bodie of man, and knowe the Anatomie, they knowe that the heart of man is a receptacle of bloode, and in the heart is the cleanneſt and fineſt blood: The vitall blood is fined in the heart of man, and the bloode there is finer than in the reſt of the bodie: Yee heare commonlie that the heart blood is the fineſt blood, and moſte precious: Ye know likewiſe that there is a fliece, which compaſſeth and goes about the heart, which is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : and in it there is ſome liquor and water wherewith the heat in the heart is cooled and refreſhed. Then to come to the purpoſe: The Lord being pearced thorow the ſid
                  •
               , and in thorow the heart, it was no wonder, that that bloode in the heart: and that water in the fliece ſhould haue guſhed out, eſpeciallie ſeeing that Hee had but newlie giuen vp the ghoſte, and Hee was yet warme: ſo that this blood and this water coulde not bee yet much altered, by reaſon of the ſhortneſſe of time. But Brethren, when I weigh this matter more deepelie, and conſider that this bloode and this vvater guſhes out in ſuch aboundance, and ſo diſtinctlie, that the one is ſo ſeuered from the other, that they who ſtoode beſide might diſcerne verie well the blood from the water, and the water from the blood. I ſee heere ſomething aboue nature, and I am compelled to thinke, and ſaye, that there was ſomething heere extraordinarie: As all thinges that fell out in the death of the LORD IESVS was extraordinarie, and ſhewed Him to bee more and greater than anie common man that euer died: The giuing vp of the ghoſte, with a loude voyce, ſhewed, that Hee was more than a man. For Brethren, to leaue the ſpeaking of this matter, let vs ſee what this blood & this water meanes, and to what vſe the guſhing out of the blood & the water ſerues for. No queſtion, the guſhing out of the blood and the water out of the wounde teſtifies, that the Lord was verily dead. What man will liue when his heart blood is

ſhed? The heart is the moſt vitall part of the bodie: It is the ſeat of the life: Perſe it, and there is no life for the man: So this effuſion of the blood & water teſtifies, that the Lord was dead, and there was no life in Him. Yet Brethren, this blood & this water meaned more than this: they teſtified of the force of that death: they teſtified not of a death only, but of a powerfull death. No mans death was euer ſo powerfull, as the death of the Lord Ieſus. All the Emperoures in the world had no ſuch power in their death▪ as Chriſt had. It teſtifies of a power to purge the ſinnes of man. What Emperoures bloode ranſomed ſinfull man, or could purge him from his ſins? What water came there euer from an Emperours heart, which waſhed away the corruptiō of thy nature? Now to ſpeak it in a word: This blood and this water teſtified of a power that flowed from the death of Chriſt, to the remiſſion of ſinnes, and the waſhing of our foule nature: with the bloode bracke out remiſſion of ſinnes, and with the water burſt out regeneration. Yet to make this plainer: By the bloode of Chriſt, (which is the bloode of God, God and man in one) wee are ranſomed from death and Hell, the guiltineſſe of all our ſinnes is taken awaye, the puniſhment with the guilt is taken awaye, Hell is taken awaye, the juſtice of God that required our blood, is ſatisfied by that bloode of Chriſt, that wrath that would haue ſucked vp thy bloode, (it woulde not haue left one droppe of thy bloode vnſucked) and that vvrath which cannot be ſatiate vvithout bloode, is ſatiate by the onelie bloode of CHRIST. Marke vvell: It vvas not bloode onelie that came out of His ſide, but it was bloode and vvater: it vvas a vvaterie bloode: IOHN, vvho ſtoode by, left this in regiſter, That ſenſiblie in the bloode hee perceiued vvater: to teſtifie, That by that bloode of IESVS vvee obtaine not onelie remiſſion of our ſinnes: but by this ſame bloode the fouleneſſe and vncleanneſſe of our nature is vvaſhen away: for vvater ſerues to vvaſh away filthineſſe. This ſame IOHN, in his firſt Epiſtle, Chap. 5. verſ. 6. ſaies, that Christ came into the world by water, meaning the vvater vvhich guſhed out of His ſide: (IOHN coulde neuer forget this ſight) Hee came by vvater to vvaſhe awaye this inherent corruption vvhich is in vs: for if it bee not purged, there is no entrie to Heauē. I fore-warne thee, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen, if thy corruption be not purged away. Then he ſaies, He came by water and blood: not by water onely, but by water and blood: meaning this blood was waterie, and this water was bloodie: Not

only to waſh away the inherent corruption, but alſo to ranſom
                  •
                vs, to obtaine to vs remiſſion of our ſinnes, and to take away the guiltineſſe of our ſinne, both originall and actuall, and that puniſhment, and wrath that was due to vs: In that ſame Chapter Iohn poyntes out the three witneſſes of Chriſt in the Heauens, and three witneſſes of Chriſt in the earth: And for the witneſſing in the earth, hee counts theſe ſame two, the blood and the water, & the third, the Spirit, who teſtifies th
                  •
               t Ieſus came & died for thee: where we may ſee, that this blood and this water that came out of the ſide of the Lord neuer leaues the earth, neuer ceaſes to crie, The Redeemer of the worlde is come. If thou be in Ieſus, that blood ſprinkling thine heart, & conſcience within thee ſhall teſtifie vnto thee, that Ieſus is come in the world for thy purgation. So that, Brethren, I affirme this, that all the words in the world, and all the hearing, ſhall not put that perſwaſion in thine heart, that Ieſus Chriſt is come for thy Redemption: except that blood and that water cry within thee: certainly, we haue no better aſſurance that the Lord is come, than when we feele that effectuall working of the remiſſion of our ſinnes, and the purgation of them by the mortifying of ſinne. Now we haue dayly in our Sacraments of Baptiſme, & the Lords Supper outward ſignes of this water, and this blood whereby they are outwardly repreſented to our eyes. In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we haue the ſigne of the blood, in the Sacrament of Baptiſme, we haue the ſigne of the water: and therefore the blood & the water remaine euer in the earth, as witneſſes, teſtifying that Chriſt is come, and they are euer repreſented to vs in theſe outward ſignes and ſymboles in the Sacraments. So in a word, this blood guſhing out of the Lords ſide, and this water teſtifies: Firſt, that the Lord was truely dead: Next, that His death is forceable to the remiſſion of our ſinnes, and to our regeneration. Vnto theſe two vſes, we may joyne the third: this guſhingou
                  •
                of the blood and water out of the Lords ſide, teſtified, that the ſacrifices, purgations, and waſhing of the Law, were now aboliſhed they were now no more to haue place, becauſe they were only certaine types and ſhadowes of the blood and water to come, whic
                  •
                guſhed out both together out of the Lords ſide. Now I come t
                  •
                the teſtimonie of Iohn, concerning the breaking of the thighes o
                  •
                the Lord, & ye piercing of His ſide with ye ſpeare, Iohn ſeales vp this & firſt, he ſaies, I teſtify this, J beare witnes to this, thē he aggreages hi
                  •
               
               
teſtimonie in ſundry words: Firſt, I, as an eye-ſeeing witneſſe, ſtood by, and I ſawe with mine eyes, that the thies of the Lorde were not broken, and that a ſouldier pearced H
                  •
               m tho
                  •
               ow 
                  •
               he ſide vnto the heart, and that bloode and water came out of His ſide. Next: As I ſaw theſe, ſo I tell thee, that my teſtimony is true. Thirdly, I know, & am perſwaded, my teſtimonie to bee true: my conſcience perſwades me, that it is true, & I belieue it my ſelfe, to the end that yee may beleeue it. So therefore, as I beleeue, beleeue thou: This he ſaies to all, to the end of the world yea, who heares this, beleeue it as well as I. Yee ſee heere, IOHN is earneſt to teſtifie the death of Chriſt, that verily He died: And he teſtifies it with great weight, and manie graue wordes. Wee haue hearde before ſundrie teſtimonies of His death. The Lord in the laſt wordes Hee teſtifies of His owne death, when Hee cryes, Father, into thine handes I commende my ſpirite: All thoſe wonders from the Heauen teſtified, that the Lorde had giuen vp the ghoſte: His Heauenlie Father made the Burreoes and the men of warre to teſtifie, that Hee was dead, and to preach it to all the people about. Now IOHN comes in laſt, and with many words, and wordes of great weight, teſtifies, that the Lorde gaue vp the ghoſte. What meanes all this? Ye ſee there is not any thing in all the hiſtorie teſtified by ſo many teſtimonies. The Spirit of God labours not to perſwade vs of any thing in all His Paſſion, ſo much, as that He died: and to certifie this, that Hee was pearced with a ſpeare. To leaue the Hereſies, which fell in the worlde, concerning the death of Chriſt, for it was much to perſwade the world of it: they would not beleeue that IESVS died truelie. All theſe teſtimonies lets vs ſee ſuch a neceſſitie to bee in the death of IESVS, that except the LORD had died as truelie as euer man died, Hee coulde not haue beene our Redeemer: And except Hee had died truelie, wee coulde neuer haue beleeued to haue beene ſaued by Him. Except I knowe as truelie as euer I knewe any thing in the worlde, that my Redeemer died for mee, I woulde neuer goe ſeeke life out of His death. Indeed, a wanton ſinner, who is ladē with ſin, & feeles not the weight thereof, ſo lōg as his cōſcience is ſleeping, that he feeles not ye burreo, & ſees not yt fearfull wrath that cānot be quenched without bloode & that terrible juſtice of God, yt cannot be ſatisfied, but by death, will count little of the death of Chriſt: It is alike to him, whether He had died or no: ſo lōg as thou ſleepeſt al is alike, but after the cōſciēce is wakened, & the Lord once let thee

feele the weight of thy ſinnes, wherewith thou art ladned: No, if thou diddeſt but feele the weight of an euill thought, thou wouldeſt groane as faſt as if the mountaines and rockes were tumbled on thee▪ and then thou would
                  •
               ſt thinke no life nor ſaluation for thee, but Hell and damnation, if thou gotteſt not a Sauiour for thee: and if thou feeleſt that Iuſtice of God, and the terrours of Hell before thee, the ſight of the death of Ieſus would be the moſt joyfull and comfortable ſight that euer thou ſaweſt, and all thy joy & glorie would be in that death of Chriſt, Paul ſayes Gal. 6.14 Far be it from me, that I ſhould re
                     •
                  oyce in any thing, but in the death of Chriſt: he foūd all his life to be in that death, 1. Cor. 2.2. he ſayes, When I came amongſt you, to ſpeake of the death of Chriſt to you who knew not what it meant (a vaine companie they were, who delited in vaine oratorie) I would not begin to clawe your itching eares, but I decreed to know nothing but Ieſus Christ, and Him crucified. Nowe, Brethren, beſides this, In theſe wordes that IOHN ſets downe, and 
                  〈◊〉
                the which hee aggreadges his teſtimonie, marke another leſſon. Will ye ſee, from whence our Faith comes? from whence comes our Faith? from whence flowes it? IOHN ſayes, And he that ſaw it, bare record, and his recorde is true and he knoweth that hee ſaith true, that they ſhould beleeue. From whence then comes Faith in this death? it comes by hearing: Faith is of hearing of a teſtimonie and recorde: and if thou heareſt not a record, thou ſhalt not beleeue, and if thou beleeueſt not, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. And if thou contemneſt the recorde, I giue thee this doome, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen with thine eyes, if thou wereſt a King: So Faith is wrought in the heart by the Holy Spirit, by a recorde and witneſſe bearing. So ere thou getteſt Faith, ſome witneſſe muſt ſtand vp and beare recorde. The Lord muſt ſend out ſome witneſſe to cry and preach? but what witneſſes muſt theſe be? IOHN ſayes, He that ſaw theſe things, hath teſtified of them. The witneſſes muſt be ſeeing witneſſes: it muſt be Iohn, and ſuch as ſaw Him, and felt Him with their handes. Then, who muſt bee the witneſſes? They muſt be the Apoſtles that were conuerſant in this world with Ieſus Chriſt, who heard Him preach, and ſaw Him vvorke vvonders, and ſavv Him dead, and ſavv Him crucified, and ſavve Him pierced thorovv the ſide: They muſt be the firſt witneſſes. But more, Brethren, Is it enough that they ſavve Him with their bodily eye? No, Iohn addes more, that hee vvas perſvvaded that his teſtimonie was true. The vvitneſſes, as

they teſtifie that vvhich they ſavve: ſo they muſt beleeue it vvith their heartes. There were great multitudes, hundreths, thouſands, vvho heard Him, touched Him, and ſavv Him crucified, and ſome of them crucified Him too: yet none of theſe are made vvitneſſes, to preach to the vvorld, but the Apoſtles vvho ſavv and beleeued: theſe are ſet vp as witn
                  •
               ſſes in ye world, that all ſhould beleeue. Thē the firſt ground of thy Faith is the very eye of the Apoſtles, & their ſight and ſenſe: The next ground, is Faith in the heartes of the Apoſtles. And if yee will ſay to me, Why beleeue ye the Goſpell of Iohn? and the Goſpell of Matthew, and the Epiſtles of Paul, &c. I anſwere, becauſe theſe were men who heard and ſaw Chriſt, and I will ſay more, I beleeue them, becauſe they beleeued in their heartes that thing which they ſaw, and goe before not onely by ſight of the body, but alſo by Faith in the heart.
            When yee heare theſe recordes (albeit the men be not liuing, yet we haue that ſame thing that they wrote, and that which they themſelues beleeued) I beſeech you conſider them, and paſſe not ouer lightly, when yee reade of Iohn or Paul, or the reſt: I beſeech you paſſe not lightly, ſeeing the ground of thy Faith is not onely their ſight, but the ſenſe of their heartes and Faith: ye who would read with judgement, trauell to goe into the heart, to ſeeke that Faith into the heart, and that joy, and that ſadneſſe that they felt: and pray, LORD, ſeeing theſe men vtter a feeling of theſe things that they ſaw, and which they wrote, touch mine heart, and giue me thine Holy Spirit, that I may attaine to the ſenſe and feeling of theſe things. If ye would haue a teſtimonie of this: beholde what PAVL ſayes, in the ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthians the fourth Chapter, and fourteenth verſe, I beleeue, that I my ſelfe ſhall gloriouſly riſe: and then he brings in Dauids wordes: J beleeued, and therefore I ſpake. Alwayes, looke that in reading we ſtriue to haue a feeling and ſenſe in our heart of that which we read: otherwiſe we make no fruit of our reading, we ſpeake like parrats, wee know not what we ſpeake: I ſay to thee, if the word of grace riſe not from the deepe perſwaſion of thine heart, thou ſpeakeſt like a Parrat, thou prophaneſt that Holy word, and knoweſt not what thou ſpeakeſt.
            Now all the Apoſtles are away yet their teſtimonie remaines, & this is that bleſſed Goſpell that wee haue this day, yet the Lord leaues not the world, deſtitute of witneſſes, who haue liuelie

voyces, who will preach like the Apoſtles, & indeede their record ſhould bee beleeued: if thou beleeuedſt neuer a preaching, I ſay, thou haſt no Faith, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. Indeede we are not Apoſtles, but ſinfull men, yet if thou beleeueſt vs not, thou ſhalt die, as well as they who would not beleeue the Apoſtles: I bid no man nor woman beleeue vs ſimply, but only ſo farre as our record agrees vvith the recorde of the Apoſtles: We may not compare with the Apoſtles: we haue not ſeene Him, we haue not heard Him, as they did: they had a greater meaſure of perſwaſion, & of Faith, and of feeling, than any Preacher hath nowe (yet the Lord hath giuen His meaſure to euery one) therefore we deſire not that yee ſhould beleeue vs ſimply, to beleeue euery thing that we ſay, as the Pope, and that ſoule crue will bid you beleeue all that they affirme: No, if he were the beſt Miniſter that euer preached, beleeue his recorde, if it agree not with the writting of the Apoſtles: They haue ſet downe the ground, and they who teach any other thing but that which is written by the Apoſtles, or els that follow on their writes by a neceſſarie conſequence, I pronounce a vengeance and a curſe ſhall be on them. Woe to deceiuers, who poyſon ſoules dayly by their vengeance and poyſon. Now to come to the laſt heade, Iohn layes downe the ende wherefore His thighes were not broken, and by piercing of His ſide: Theſe thinges were ſet downe, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled, and he cites two teſtimonies: The firſt is out of the twelfth Chapter of Exodus, Not one bone of Him ſhall be broken. The next is out of the twelfth Chapter of Zacharie, They ſhall ſee Him whome they haue pierced. Some will maruell, that it is ſaid oft times in the Goſpell, this was done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled: Some would thinke that this had bene but a light cauſe, that the thighes of Chriſt, and the bones were not broken: Wherefore? That the Scripture might be fulfilled: the ſide was pierced, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Men would count this but light: but wilt thou count that light, that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled. Thinkeſt thou it a light thing▪ that that thing that the Lord ſpake long time before, ſhould come to paſſe, and the LORD ſhould be glorified in His Trueth. Thinkeſt thou it a light thing that the Lord ſhould bee found a lyer: No, ere He be a lyer, and ere a jote or title that Hee hath ſpoken, ſhould paſſe away vnf
                  •
               lfilled, it is better that Heauen and Earth, men, and Angels, and all the creatures ſhould vaniſh

to nothing. The Lord ſpeakes none idle talke, as man will doe, but what thing ſo euer that Hee ſpeakes, Hee ſpeakes it of ſet purpoſe, to the glorie of God, and to the well of His Church: and therefore it is very requiſite, both for His owne glorie, and for the well of His Church, that His word be accompliſhed. Would to God we could conſider how highly we ſould regarde the glory of God, in beleeuing of His promiſes of mercie, and His threatnings of Iuſtice: Well, the end of theſe thinges was, that GOD ſhould be glorified, in the trueth of His word. There is nothing the Lord ſeekes more, than to be knowne in the trueth of His worde, and therefore looke what He will doe to bee knowne to be true in His promiſe: rather than His promiſe be not performed, Hee will inuert the courſe of nature: the thing that the Lord hath once ſpoken, it ſhall be performed, albeit all the world ſhould ſay the contrarie. It is ſaid, Numb. 23.19. God is not as man, that He ſhould lie, neither as the ſonne of man, that Hee ſhould repent: hath Hee ſaid it, and ſhall Hee not doe it? and hath Hee ſpoken, and ſhall Hee not accompliſh it? Men may lie, but God cannot lie: ere Hee bring not about the thing that Hee hath ſpoken, Hee will mixe the Heauen and the Earth together, He will bring things about, againſt all the meanes in the worlde: not onely by and aboue nature, but alſo contrarie and againſt nature: As Hee brought the promiſe made to Abraham to paſſe. Nature can be no impediment to the LORD, albeit a creature can doe nothing againſt Nature. Looke then what a Faith wee ſhould haue? Wee ſhould beleeue His promiſe, albeit it were neuer ſo vnpoſſible to Nature: Thou muſt not only glorifie God, when thou ſeeſt His promiſe come to paſſe, but alſo thou muſt alſo glorifie Him, by depending and hanging on His worde, ere euer thou ſee it accompliſhed. It is an eaſie thing, when thou ſeeſt the Lordes promiſe come to paſſe, to ſay▪ Glorified bee GOD in the trueth of His promiſe: but except thou glorifie Him by Faith in His worde, ere euer thou ſee the promiſe effectuate, thou doeſt nothing worthie of praiſe: belee
                  •
               e His word, let neuer death, nor life, nor power in Heauen or i
                  •
                Earth or the Deuils ſeparate thee from that Faith in His worde. No▪ I ſay further, thou muſt ſo glorifie God by Faith in His word that albeit thou ſavveſt all things threaten the contrarie: yet notw
                  •
               thſtanding thou feeleſt in thine heart that God is true, & this was a fined and purified Faith. Such was the Faith of Abraham, who

aboue hope beleeued vnder hope, that hee ſhould haue a ſeede, not conſidering the deadneſſe of his owne bodie, nor the deadneſſe of Saraes vvombe; hee beleeued in deſpite of nature, and all ordinarie meanes; and therefore worthilie hee is called, The Father of the Faithfull. Then, wouldeſt thou haue ſuch a faith as the Lord commendes; beleeue in His promiſe, though all the thinges in the worlde ſhoulde threaten the contrarie: Hath Hee promiſed to thee Heauen and Life, and albeit thou ſawe nothing but Hell and Death; yet beleeue Him, for there is nothing more contrarie to Life than Death: And yet, albeit thine owne heart woulde make oppoſition, and ſaye vnto thee, It cannot bee that euer thou canſt get Life and Heauen, for what ſeeſt thou but Death and Hell? Yet thou wouldeſt glorifie God by beleeuing His promiſe in deſpight of Hell and Death: Notwithſtanding thou ſeeſt the Deuill, man, Death, and Hell threatning, that thou ſhalt not get life, yet beleeue the Lordes promiſe. And if in this caſe thou beleeueſt, thou haſt a fined faith, fined and made more precious than Golde in the fornace. And, except thou bee tried by ſuch temptations, thou knoweſt not what faith meanes. Faith muſt bee tried by temptations, by troubles, and afflictions. Our Chriſtians woulde paſſe thorowe the worlde with eaſe and reſt: they will beleeue: but howe? In peace and reſt: they cannot abide to bee charged with fire and ſworde, but woulde ſlippe ouer in wealth and quietneſſe. But true faith muſt abide the triall of the fire, of manifolde temptations and afflictions. Well, the daye ſhall come when it will bee ſeene who among vs hath this fined faith: They haue the fined faith, who will ſeeke to Ieſus Chriſt, and to His promiſe in the fire.
            I woulde haue ſpoken of theſe two Teſtimonies, but I leaue them vntill the next occaſion, and ſo I ende heere, beſeeching the Lorde to haue a care of euerie one of vs, and to furniſhe vs vvith grace and ſtrength, that wee maye ſticke faſt vnto Him, and His promiſes: Not onelie nowe in peace, but euen in the middeſt of the fire, and in death it ſelfe: That after this life bee ended, vvee maye bee glorified in the Heauens, thorowe Chriſt: To whome, vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee all Honour and Glorie, for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXV. LECTVRE, OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 57 And when the euen was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Ioſeph, who had alſo himſelfe beene Ieſus diſciple.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 42 And now when the night was come, (becauſe it was the day of the preparation that is before the Sabbath)
                  
                     
                        verse 43 Ioſeph of Arimathea, an honourable Counſellour, who alſo looked for the Kingdome of God, came, and went in boldlie vnto Pilate, and asked the bodie of Jeſus.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 50 And beholde, there was a man named Ioſeph, who was a Counſeller, a good man, and a juſt.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 38 And after theſe things, Ioſeph of Arimathea (who was a diſciple of Ieſus, but ſecretly for feare of the Iewes) b
                        •
                     ſought Pilate that hee might take downe the body of Ieſus. And Pilate gaue him licence. Hee came then, and tooke Ieſus bodie.
               
            
            
               THeſe dayes paſt (beloued Brethren in Chriſt) we haue ſpoken of the taking downe of ye Lord from the Croſſe, after He was dead, which came as yee heard by a requeſt made to Pilate: theſe who made the requeſt were the Iewes, his enemies: they requeſted that he ſhould be taken from the croſſe: not for any loue they bare to him, but becauſe it was the time of the preparation to the Paſſeouer: & they beleeued, that Ieſus & the other two crucified mē who hung on ye Croſſe ſhould haue polluted their holy feaſt, & holy actiō: & requeſt Pilate, that ye thies of the crucified men might be brokē, that therafter they might be takē down from

from the Croſſe. The ſouldiers came firſt to the one thiefe, & broke his thie, thē they came to the other, & broke his thie alſo: laſt, they came to Ieſus, & finding Him to be dead, they would not break His thie: but one of the ſouldiers came with a ſpeare in his hand, and to put the matter out of doubt, he thruſt Him thorow ye heart, ſo that out of the wound ran blood & water in abundance. Whē 
               Iohn hath made a rehearſal of theſe things, he joynes to a weighty teſtimony, He who ſaw theſe things, hath teſtified of them, & his teſtimony is true, & he knowes, that they are true, that ye might beleeue. Laſt, he ſets down the end of theſe things: firſt, wherfore the thies of Ieſus were not brokē: thē, wherfore His ſide was pearced: Theſe things were done (ſais Iohn) that ye Scripture might be fulfilled: & for this he alledges firſt ye which is ſpokē of the type (Exod. 12) Not one bone of the Paſcal lambe might be brokē
               : and Zachar. 12. They ſhall ſee him whom they haue pearced thorow. The laſt day, Brethren, we left off at theſe teſtimonies of Scripture: therfore this day, as God ſhal giue vs grace, we ſhal ſpeak firſt of theſe 2 teſtimonies, & therafter we ſhal enter to the next Hiſtory, yt is, to the burial of Ieſus. Then to ſpeak of the firſt teſtimony, Not one bone of him ſhal be brokē. Moſes ſpeakes theſe words (Exod. 12) of the paſcall lamb: he giues a commandement, that in the eating of the paſcall lamb, not one bone of it ſhould bee broken. That which Moſes ſpeakes of the paſcall lambe, Ioh. drawes it vnto Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe the Lord Ieſus was the true paſcall lambe: and that lambe that the Iewes ate, was but a figure & ſhadow of that true lambe, the Lord Ieſus, who tooke away the ſinnes of the world: therfore, ſeing the type & ſhadow had ceaſed by the death of Ieſus Chriſt (there was not a paſcall lambe any more, and all the celebration of the Paſſeouer that the Iewes vſed after the death of Ieſus Chriſt, was but vanitie) it was good reaſon, that Iohn ſhoulde draw that which was ſpoken of the figure, to the thing ſignified by the figure: for theſe wordes that Moſes ſpake of the paſcall lambe were accompliſhed in Chriſt: there was not one jot of it, but it was perfected and accompliſhed in Him. Paul (1. Cor. 5) drawes to Chriſt the very words which Moſes vſed in preſcribing of the eating of the paſcall lambe, Put away the olde leauen, that wee may bee a newe lumpe, as wee are vnleauened, for Christ our Paſſeouer is ſacrificed for vs. Marke this leſſon for our inſtruction: When thou readeſt of the Types and Figures in the olde Teſtament, caſt away the Types, and keepe the veritie, and appl
                  •
               e it to CHRIST, who is figured by the Types. We are euer reading yt olde Scripture yt ſpeakes of the types vſed in

the old Church of the Iewes, as that Scripture of the Paſchal lambe and all the other ceremonies of the Iewes: but take heede how yee read them: read them not, as the Iewes read them: read not theſe Scriptures, as though they were to bee vnderſtood of as many types, yet to bee kept in the earth: bevvare of that: Heare them not, as though they vvere any figures and ſhadowes vnfulfilled, for that were, to exclude the Lord Ieſus, vvho only is the body. But in reading caſt avvay the types, becauſe they haue alll ceaſed at the comming, and after the death of Chriſt. Caſt not away the Scripture, but dravv it vnto Ieſus: and that vvhole Scripture which the Iewes vnderſtood of the type, vnderſtand thou of Chriſt. As for Example, In reading of this Scripture, Exod. 12.41. Caſt aſide the type, the Paſchall Lambe, but caſt not away the Scripture, Ye ſhall not breake one bone of Him, Take this Scripture and vnderſtand it of Ieſus Chriſt, that Lambe of God, and His bones. And vve muſt not thinke, Brethren, that this is any vvrying and vvreſting of the old Scripture by the ovvne ſenſe, becauſe the ſame Scripture vvhich ſpake of the Type, ſpake of Ieſus, but mediatly by the Types: and the Fathers of olde, by reading of the Types, got a ſight of the body, looking in thorovv the ſhaddovv to the body. This is no vvreſting of the Scripture. But novv, ſeeing all Types are avvay, it is good reaſon, that thoſe Scriptures novv immediatly be vnderſtood of Chriſt, vvhich before mediatly vvere applied to Chriſt. I goe to the ſecond teſtimonie, Zacharie 12.10. prophecies that the Iewes that pierced thorovv Chriſt, ſhould ſee Him: and vvhen they ſee Him, they ſhould vveepe for Him, as for their only begotten ſonne. It is a prophecie of the repentance of the Jewes, vvho had crucified Chriſt, & pierced Him thorovv: a promiſe of their repentance for that vvofull deede they did. This ſame thing came to paſſe in the 2. of the Acts vvhen Peter in his preaching laide to their charge that wicked deede, that they had crucified the Lord of glorie, & had put hand into the Lord of life, at his preaching their hearts were pricked & pierced thorow with bitterneſſe, & they demand of Peter, & the reſt, What ſhall they doe to be ſafe? & it is ſaid, three thouſand of them repented & beleeued at that one preaching. The words wold be marked, How is this, that They pierced Ieſus. They pierced Him firſt with their ſins: it was the Jewes ſins chiefly that procured the death of Chriſt: Next, they pierced Him when they perſecuted Him, when they crucified Him, & blaſphemed Him, and rayled on Him

hanging on the croſſe: & laſt they pierced Him, when by the ſpeare in the handes of a ſouldier, they thruſt Him thorow, and pierced His ſide. And who is this that pierced Him. It was not ſo much the Ethnicke man that did this, as the Iewes, for whoſe ſinnes Hee came to die: for they were the occaſion of all this wickednes. If we will marke narrowly, and will weigh narrowly this matter aright, we will ſee great wickedneſſe, malice, and vnthankfulneſſe to haue bene in this people: The Lord came to die for them? And who are theſe that ſlay Him? Euen theſe for whome He came to die. Was not this a miſchieuous deede? Who will not abhorre and deteſt ſuch a villanie and malice? Alas, ſhould I who am a ſinner, when an innocent man comes to die for my ſinnes, ſlay that man, and be a burrio to Him? Lord ſaue mee from ſuch wickedneſſe, and let neuer mine hands be a ſlayer of that man: and yet this was the malice of the vngratefull Iewes. Againe, will ye conſider the wonderfull loue that Chriſt caried to this people, when they deſerued nothing at His hands but death, He dies for them, when they were His enemies: He ſhed His blood ſor them: & thereafter when they executed Him and crucified Him, (beholde His wonderfull loue) Hee brings them to repentance, His mercie ouercomes their malice: ſo that in them ye ſee that which is ſaid to be verified, Where ſinne aboundes, grace and mercie ſuperabounds, ROM. 5.20. There is no compariſon betweene the loue of Ieſus, and the ſinnes of men: Albeit thy ſinnes were neuer ſo great and hainous, yet the loue & mercie of Chriſt, will compaſſe them, and goe round about them all: ſo that no ſinner hath occaſion to deſpare of mercie and of grace. I doubt not, there is none of vs all, but we will condemne the Jewes, and will finde fault with the malice of this people: but looke to thy ſelfe, whilſt as thou condemneſt them, that thou disfigure thine owne face, and condemne thine owne ſelfe. Are there none in this land that haue put hand in Ieſus, that died for them, as ſurely, as euer the Iewes did. Who dare cleanſe themſelues? Thou dareſt not ſay, but thou haſt pierced the Lord, either one way or other: There is not a ſinne that thou committeſt, but therewith thou haſt pierced the Lord. Haſt thou opponed thy ſelfe to the Trueth, and perſecuted the Goſpell, then thou haſt pierced Chriſt. Haſt thou perſecuted the Church of Chriſt, and troubled His members on the earth? thou haſt pierced the Lord: for Hee cries out: Saul, Saul, why perſecuteſt thou mee 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? Haſt thou beene

giuen ouer to thy luſtes, and led a wicked life? I ſay, if thou bee in any of theſe rankes: if thou gaine ſtandeſt His Trueth, perſecuteſt Him in His members, or by thy euill life: Proteſt as thou wilt, thou haſt pierced Him, as well, as the Iewes, and thou ſhalt bee as guiltie of His death, as they were, and as Pilate, Herode, Iudas and Caiaphas were challenged for His death, ſo ſhalt thou, except the Lord of His mercie grant thee grace to repent. The Lord giue euery one of vs grace in time to repent, IOH. REVEL. 1.7. drawes this Scripture to the ſecond comming of Chriſt in the cloudes: for hee ſayes, They ſhall ſee Him whom they haue pierced, and all the Tribes of the earth ſhall mourne before Him. Of the which wee may gather, that in the latter daye the very Elect, when they ſhall riſe, and ſee the Lord, when they ſhall ſee theſe handes, and theſe ſeete, and that ſide, which by their ſinnes they haue pierced thorow, their firſt meeting ſhall bee with bitter mourning, they ſhall mourne, as a man will doe for His onely begotten ſonne, but immediatly that weeping ſhall be turned into joy, and the Lord ſhall wipe away all teares from their eyes, ſo that they ſhall neuer mourne nor ſorrow any more, but they ſhall be with the Lord, and rejoyce with a ſolide joy for euer more,
            Now I come to the buriall of that bleſſed body: As the downe taking from the croſſe came by a requeſt, ſo this buriall alſo comes by requeſt. But who requeſts for His buriall? Not the Iewes that requeſted for His downe taking, but good Ioſeph of Ar
                     •
                  mathea requeſts for the buriall. The Iewes requeſted not for any loue they bare to Him, but Joſeph that worthy diſciple of Chriſt requeſts vpon loue. Then the thinges that we ſhall ſpeake of the buriall this day are theſe: Firſt, by the conference of the foure Euangeliſts, wee haue a faire deſcription of this man Ioſeph: Next, we haue eſpecially in the Goſpell of Luke, how boldly he comes to Pilate: thirdly, we haue the ſuite it ſelfe: then the good and humane anſwere that he receiues out of the mouth of Pilate. Then looke how this man is pointed out: Firſt, he is deſcribed by his name, his name is Ioſeph: Next, hee is deſcribed by his countrey: he vvas of Arimathea, a tovvne in Iudea: Thirdly, he vvas deſcribed from his ſubſtance, Hee was a rich and wealthie man: and vvhat more? What matter of all outvvard things, of our birth, of the place of it, or all the riches and ſubſtance in the vvorld, if there be no more: Fourthly, he is deſcribed from his office, He was a wiſe and graue Senator, and apparantly

hee was in that Councell of the IEVVES, which was called SANEDRIM: yea, apparantly he was on PILATES coūſell, becauſe he was a wiſe and potent man. But all theſe are outwarde thinges, therefore the Spirit afterward paints him out by his inward qualities: for if thou haue no good properties, I will not giue a pennie for all thy calling, thy ſubſtance, and all outwarde thinges: Hee is painted out in theſe qualities, which concerne this life, & his behauior toward mē: he is called a good & vpright mā
                in his life. But what helpe all theſe ciuill and morall vertues, if there bee no more, they are little worth. Therfore, the Spirit of God deſcribes him from the inwarde grace of the heart, from faith and hope. And it is ſaide Hee waited for the kingdome of God. All his riches cloſed not his eyes from the ſight of that life to come. Then as hee hoped for yt Kingdome, ſo hee vſed the meanes: Hee beleeued in Ieſus Chriſt, and was His Diſciple. So then, if thou bee not a ſcholler to Chriſt in this earth, looke neuer to dwell with Him in Heauen. Yet there is ſomething wanting: Hee durſt not avowe himſelfe openlie, for feare of his riches and honour: But now at laſt, when it comes to extreame perſecution, hee manifeſtes himſelfe: When they ſate in the Counſell, concerning the death of Chriſt, IOSEPH would not giue his counſell nor conſent thereunto. But yet there is an impediment in this man: for he ſhould not only haue refrained to haue giuen his conſent, but ſhould haue opponed himſelfe againſt them, as Nicodemus did, for he opponed himſelfe boldly vnto them: Doeth our law (ſaies he) condemne a man before he be heard? IOH. 7.50. where learne yee that? So yee ſee, it is an hard and dangerous matter to bee a Counſeller, either in Kirke or in Policie. There will bee many impedimentes in Counſellers; yea, euen in the beſt of them: and yee ſee that when harde matters doe come in queſtion, men will abſent themſelues from the Councell: but that is not well done. For, if thou bee a Counſeller, albeit there were neuer ſo hard a matter in hand, thou art bound in conſcience to bee preſent: But indeede it is better to abſent thy ſelfe, than to come and giue an euill vote. Againe, there are ſome, who will come, but will not conſent to euill; as IOSEPH here did: But this is not enough: there is an infirmity here: for thou that art a Counſeller, art bound to make oppoſition to euill. Again there are other ſome who will come, & not only refuſe to conſent to that which their cōſcience judges to be euil: but alſo wil oppone themſelues boldly thereunto, as Nicodemus did. And theſe are the

beſt ſort of Counſellers. Alwayes, wee ſee this: It is an harde matter to be a good Counſeller: for often times this terrour and that terrour will bee caſten in to thee, if thou incline either this waye or that way: and ſomtimes the matter will fall out ſo ambiguouſly, that thou wilt not know howe to vote, or what way to turne thee: So that of all men, he who is a Coūſeller, either in Kirke or Policie in theſe dangerous dayes, wherein ſuch terrours are caſten in, hath moſt need to depēd vpon the coūſel of God, reuealed in His word: & in all things to keepe a good cōſcience. Let no man offer to doe againſt his conſciēce, for then the cōſcience ſhall take hold on him, intend a proceſſe againſt him, and challenge him, conuict him, and torment him with anguiſh before the Lords Tribunall▪ This for the deſcription of the man. We muſt not thinke yt by fortune or chance or of his owne accord raſhly he came to this point: No, the prouidence of God guided him, led him out for that purpoſe. And in this action God had reſpect, not only to the Heauēly honour of Chriſt: but alſo to the worldly things, to riches & power. The Lord choſe a worldly, rich, & potent man to bury Him; to this end, that the Iewes who by all meanes ſought to heape ſhame & ignominie vpon the Lord, ſhould not oppone themſelues, & ſtaye Him to be buried: for if it had bene a poore or meane man, that had taken this in hande, doubtleſſe they had opponed themſelues, & hindered His buriall. Againe: an honourable man is choſen to bury His Sonne honourablie. The Father will haue an Honourable riche man to burie His deare Sonne. Indeede Ioſeph of Arimathea got neuer ſuch honour, as by yt buriall of the bleſſed body of Ieſus, the Son of God. His calling was nothing: he had neuer bin regiſtrate for yt he was a Senator in Iudea, except that the Lord had put in his hand the buriall of His deare Son. It is true, the buriall of the Lord Ieſus is the laſt point of His humiliation: for what is the buriall of the body, but the continuance of ye body vnder death? And, if thy burial be not ſanctified, it is a terrible thing to be caſten in a hole, & to be bound vnder the earth. Woe to that bodie who is caſten into a hole, and in the bellie of the earth, and if it bee not ſanctified in the buriall of IESVS CHRIST. So I ſay, the buriall of Ieſus Chriſt was the laſt poinct of His humiliation. Hee was holden in the fetters of death. Yet the Lorde begins the glory of the Son at that which was ignominious in it ſelfe. He will not employ euery man in this work, but the moſt honourable man in the Citie. And then Hee will haue His Buriall

not in a vile place, nor in a backſide, but in a notable & faire place, couered with a ſtone. So the Heauenly Father will haue the honour of the Sōne & His glory, to begin at the buriall, which was ſhamefull in it ſelfe: and then Hee goes forward, till His reſurrection, and to His aſcending to Heauen, & ſitting at the right hand of the Father. To worldlinges, this honour of their buriall, is but a part of worldly honour: but heere vnto Chriſt, that ſame piece of honour was ye beginning of his heauenly glory. If thou be in Ieſus this ſame honour which is done to thy bodie in this life in thy buriall, is the beginning of thy glory which thou ſhalt enjoy in the Heauens. The diſhonour of the faithful in this life ſhal be turned to their honour and glorie, and it ſhall be turned to their weale: All things worke together for the beſt vnto them that loue God, ſaies Paul, Rom. 8.29. If thou loueſt the Lord, that ſhame that ſhall be heaped on thee in this earth, ſhall bee the beginning of thine honour. Then much more ſhall the honour that thou ſhalt get in this life, bee the beginning of that euerlaſting honour. Now when Ioſeph takes vp the body of ye Lord lying ſo low at the Gallowes foot, and intends to bury that body: I doubt not, but he hath an eye to that glorious reſurrection, and he ſaw that glory wherewith that body ſhould be glorified & ſhould glorifie the bodies of the faithfull, & make them like His glorious body. If there were no more but that reſpect of the reſurrection of the bodies of the faithfull, in that daye it ſhoulde make vs count of the bodies of the faithfull, of their death and buriall. 1. Pet. 3.7. Ye reade, that husband ſhoulde giue honour to their wiues, becauſe they are the infirmer and weake
                     •
                   veſſels, and becauſe that with them they are to bee heires of the kingdome of glorie, and of that life. Yee ſee this, that if there vvere but an earthly body, who were appearing heire to a kingdome, men will count of him: Much more then, when we ſee a man or woman ordained to that Heauenly kingdome, and to that glory, ſhoulde we not honour them for that reſpect of glory. Paul to Tim. ſaies, In a great houſe are many veſſels, ſome to honour, & ſome to diſhonour. Yee ſee in a Noble mans houſe howe honourably they will handle golden and ſilu
                  •
               r veſſels. Then when we looke to a faithfull man, ſhould we not count greatly of him, becauſe hee is ſo glorious a veſſell, and is to be partaker of that glory? All the glory of this world appertains properly to the faithfull: Indeede, often times they haue leaſt part thereof (that they maye knowe their happineſſe ſtandes not in this earthly glory, but in that glory of Heauen) & the wicked haue moſt

of it. Yet I ſay: All the glory euen of this world appertaines to the faithfull only. No honour appertains to a king who is a reprobate: He is but a violent vſurper of theſe worldly things, and he ſhal one day giue account of his violent vſurpation: nothing but ſhame appertaines to him, and all his honour ſhall bee turned into ſhame.
            Now I goe to the next thing: The boldnes that Ioſeph had in cō
               ming to Pilate: Hee lurked before, but nowe when Ieſus is lying in greateſt ignominy, as wee vſe to ſpeake, At the Gallowes foot: The man takes boldnes, & ſteps in to Pilates Hall, & makes his requeſt. His riches, his ſubſtāce, & honour held him abacke awhile: but now he comes out & forgets all, & interceades for the body of Ieſus, to burie it. Thy riches & honour of the worlde, are like as many fetters & yron chaines, to retaine thee & hold thee abacke from Chriſt. Yet all the riches & honour in the world cannot hinder nor hold backe GODS calling, when Hee puts out His hande to drawe thee in to Him: But if He put not out His hand, & draw thee out, thou art ſo faſt detained, that all the ſtrength in the worlde will not be able to draw thee. It is true that Paul ſaies, 1. Cor. 1.26. Ye ſee your calling, how that not many wiſe men after the fleſh, nor many noble are called; It is a rare thing to ſee the Lord draw ſuch men: He vſes not to call many wiſe men, out of the hands of their wiſdome; nor many rich men, out of the hands of their riches; nor many Noble men, out of the handes of their Nobility: No, He lets them be. We reade not of any potent men among the Jewes, whom the Lord pulled out to be His Diſciples, except theſe two, Ioſeph & Nicodemus. There might haue beene moe among the Princes of the Iewes, but wee find the names of no moe regiſtrate. O how hard a thing it is, to draw a wiſe mā a mightie man, or a Noble man to Chriſt: for it is true that Chriſt ſaies,It is as hard to drawe a rich man to Chriſt, as to draw a Camell thorowe a needles eye. To draw a great body thorow a needles eye, is no leſſe difficulty than to draw thee to Chriſt, who art a Noble man, who wilt ſit vp, & talke of thy kinred, & of thy blood. This doing of Ioſeph may bee marueiled at. Think ye not yt 
               Ioſeph ſhould haue manifeſted himſelfe rather in Ieſus lifetime, than nowe after His death? When Hee was going, working wonders, and ſpeaking ſuch ſweet ſentences as neuer man ſpake, yet all this moued him not to come foorth, and ſhew himſelfe. But now Chriſt being in ſhame, he comes out. Whereunto ſhall I aſcribe this? I aſcribe it to the force yt came from the death of Ieſus. There was neuer a liuing man in the world, that had ſuch

force as yt dead body had. No, I ſay, He had more power hanging dead on the croſſe, than when Hee was liuing in the world, & more mighty was His death than His life. The Lord giue vs a ſenſe & feeling of ye force of ye death of Chriſt▪ it is able to cauſe a dead body riſe from death to life. Iohn 12.24. He foretold ye power of His death: When the corne of wheat lyes in the ground and dies, it fructifies and brings foorth much fruit: ſo the dead body of Ieſus fructifi
                  •
               d, and brought with it out of the graue to life many thouſand ſoules, & ſo does it to the end of the world. Haſt thou life into thee, From whom came that life? Euen from the death of Ieſus Chriſt: if Chriſt had not died, thou hadſt neuer felt life. Hee vſes alſo for this purpoſe another ſimilitude, Where euer the dead carcaſſe
                     •
                  s, thither reſorte the Eagles: Meaning, where His dead body was, the faithfull where euer they were, they ſhould take them to their wings, from all the ends of the earth, & leaue their riches and honour, and by Faith flee to Him, to feede vpon Him, for His deade body caſts ſuch a ſweete ſmell thorow the Heauens, and the Earth (a carioun caſts ſuch an euill ſmell, but the body of Ieſus hath a ſweete ſmell) that it will allure men & women to come to it. The Lord giue euery one ſuch a taſte of His ſweetneſſe, as Ioſeph and Nicodemus found, that with pleaſure we may flee to Him, and feede on Him. Now followes the requeſt, he comes in to Pilates Hall, and deſires leaue to take vp the dead body of Ieſus, as yee ſaw before, the body of Ieſus was not taken from the croſſe without the licence of the Iudge, Pontius Pilate: ſo they durſt not burie the body of Ieſus without leaue, Why? The Lord vvas condemned, and the man who is condemned, is yet in the hands of the Iudge, vntill he giue Him ouer. If we conſider wel this whole Hiſtorie of the ſuffering of Chriſt, vve ſhall finde one thing vvorthy to be marked, Albeit the Lord Ieſus vvas the moſte innocent man that euer vvas in the vvorlde, yet hauing to doe vvith Magiſtrates, both ciuile and eccleſiaſticall, as Pontius Pilate, Caiaphas, and the reſt, from the beginning to the end, Hee will haue nothing done but vvith their leaue: vvhen the Magiſtrate ſent out men of vvarre to take Him, He vvould not ſuffer Peter to reſiſt them, but He reprooued him for drawing his ſword: Hee would not haue His body taken downe from the Croſſe, without the leaue of the Magiſtrate: Hee would haue nothing done to Him: Hee would not be buried without the leaue of the Magiſtrate. Hee leaues thee His example, to teach thee, if thou wereſt neuer ſo innocent, yet if thou falleſt

in the handes of the Magiſtrate, ſuffer nothing to be done to thee with offence, and with the diſgrace of juſtice and judgement: hee who would die well, and in the Lord, let Him proteſt that nothing be done to him that will diſgrace juſtice, albeit he ſuffer innocently. I might let you ſee an higher ground of this matter, but I wil touch it only. The Lord that came in the world to relieue thee from that great Iudge, and from all the pointes of his Iuſtice, it behoued Him to ſuffer all the points of Iuſtice vnder the earthly judge Pontius Pilate, in His condemnation, in His taking from the croſſe, & in His burial: this was all to the intent, that thou mighteſt be fully freed from all the points of the Iuſtice of GOD, for whatſoeuer thing He either did or ſuffered, it was for thy cauſe. There is another thing here, that would not be paſſed by: There is no queſtion, but it comes of the Prouidence of God, that this body is neither reaued away by violence, nor ſtollen away by ſlight, but the taking away comes of a ſpeciall requeſt
                  •
               : no queſtion, this matter was ſo diſpenſed, that the death of Ieſus ſhould bee made notable, and come to the eares of Pilate, and all other men: the death was to be made notable to the world, & likewiſe the buriall was to be made notable, to the end, that His glorious reſurrection might be made knowne to the world. Theſe are the two pillars of our Faith, the death of Chriſt, and His reſurrection, & theſe are the two points that the deuill and the Heretiques haue from time to time ſtriuen to hew and cut downe, that they ſhould not appeare to the world, becauſe they are the chiefe pillars of our Faith: but honour & glory be to the Lord, who of His grace hath kept theſe pillars conſtantly in His Church, in deſpite of the deuill, & all his inſtrumēts. Now the God of Heauen grant vs grace to take holde on His death, and glorious reſurrection, that through His death and reſurrection we may bee raiſed from death to newneſſe of life here, that hereafter wee may reigne in glory with Him, To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirite, bee all honour, praiſe and glorie, world without end.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXVI. LECTVRE, OF THE BVRIALL OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 44 And Pilate marueiled; if hee were alreadie dead, and called vnto him the Centurion, and asked of him, whether hee had beene any while dead?
                  
                     
                        verse 45 And when hee know the trueth of the Centurion, hee gaue the bodie to Ioſeph:
                  
                     
                        verse 46 Who bought a linnen cloth, and tooke him downe, and wrapped him in the linnen cloth, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 38 And after theſe things, Ioſeph of Arimathea (who was a diſciple of Ieſus, but ſecretly for feare of the Iewes) beſought Pilate that hee might take downe the body of Ieſus. And Pilate gaue him licence. Hee came then, and tooke Ieſus bodie.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 And there came alſo Nicodemus (who first came to Ieſus by night) and brought of myrrhe and aloes mingled together about an hundreth pound.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 Then tooke they the bodie of Ieſus, and wrapped it in linnen clothes, with the odours, as the manner of the Iewes is to burie.
               
            
            
               THE laſt day (welbeloued in Ieſus Chriſt) wee entered into the Hiſtory of the Buriall of the Lord Ieſus: and wee hearde that the Buriall came by a requeſt, made to Pilate the Romane Deputie for the time: The requeſt maker was one IOSEPH: Hee is ſet down and deſcribed by all the foure EVANGELISTES, in all his properties: Hee was a man of ARIMATHEA, a Towne in IVRIE. Hee vvas a rich man, and alſo an honourable and graue Counſeller. Then, as concerning the

qualities of his perſon: Hee was a good and an vpright man, who liued vprightlie in the worlde: and yet hee had a further reſpect than vnto this life, for he waited conſtantlie for the Kingdome of God. And therefore, when Chriſt came into the worlde, and tooke vpon Him that great office of the Mediator betwixt GOD and man, hee enters into His ſchoole, and became His Diſciple, howbeit for feare of the IEVVES, hee durſt not manifeſt himſelfe, but lurked ſecretlie for a time, euen to this time that it came to the Buriall of the bodie of Ieſus; and then hee ſhewes himſelfe to bee a Diſciple of Chriſt. In that Councell, which was againſt the Lorde, hee vvas a Counſeller; but hee vvoulde neither giue counſell, nor conſent to the condemning and ſlaying of CHRIST. Thus much yee hearde before concerning this man and his properties: Then wee hearde howe hee goes forwarde boldlie to Pilate to ſeeke the Lordes bodie. Hee lurked before, ſo long as Ieſus was in the worlde, working ſuch wonders as neuer man wrought, & ſpeaking with ſuch a grace as neuer man ſpake with. But nowe when Hee is dead, hee comes out boldlie, and goes to Pilate, and hee manifeſtes himſelfe: To let vs ſee, that IESVS in His death, had greater force to drawe the ſoules of men vnto Him, than Hee had in His life: for from that death there came ſo ſweete and ſenſible a ſmell to the ſoules of ſinners, that it drewe the ſoules of ſinners vnto Him: Namelie, the heart of this man IOSEPH: So that hee comes out boldlie, as ſaide is, and hee goes to PILATE, and requeſtes him to giue him the bodie of IESVS to bee buried. Thus farre vvee hearde the laſt daye: Nowe this daye wee haue PILATES anſwere to IOSEPHS requeſt.
            PILATE wonders that He was dead ſo ſoone: and for the more certaintie hee calles a Centurion, and askes him, if Hee was dead alreadie. The Centurion affirmes, that Hee was dead alreadie. PILATE grantes the requeſt. After this we come to the maner of His Buriall. Wee ſhall goe forward as time ſhall ſuffer, & God ſhall giue vs grace. Pilate wonders that hee was ſo ſoone dead. This wondering of Pilate, no queſtion, imports, that the death of Ieſus was extraordinary: It was not after the common faſhion of men yt were crucified, for men who were crucified, they vſed to hing long on the Croſſe, before they yeelded the ſpirit, dayes & nights; and in end, ere they yeelded the ſpirite, the life was taken from them by violence: They were broken on the Croſſe. So Pilate hearing, that the Lorde was ſo

ſoone dead, hee wondered, as at an extraordinarie thing. There are ſundrie thinges that teſtifie that death of Ieſus to haue beene extraordinary: as firſt, That mighty and loude voyce & crying which the Lord vttered on the Croſſe immediately before He yeelded the ſpirit: for who will giue a loud crie at the yeelding of his ſpirit? for at the poinct of death, when nature failes, it is a rare thing to finde a man to haue a voyce or a word. Next, The yeelding of His ſpirit ſo ſuddenly, whē by the power of nature He might haue liued longer. Laſt: This wondering of Pilate teſtifies, That His death was extraordinarie, & that there was a power in Ieſus which controlled nature. When nature would haue kept life, the diuine power puts it out. In a word: This wondering teſtifies, That the death of Ieſus was the death of God, the death of a man, but God in the man, glorious and bleſſed for euermore.
            Now it is ſaid, Pilate vnderſtood of the Centurion, that Ieſus was dead, when hee granted the requeſt of Ioſeph, and gaue the bodie to him to bee buried. Firſt, I ſee Pilate is a good Iuſtitier, (the Romane Iuſtice was a good Iuſtice, the Romane Iuſtitiers were good) he ſhewed him ſelfe to bee a good Iuſtitier in this: a man condemned to die, hee would not giue Him out of His hands, till hee knew perfectly that He was dead. The Iudge ſhould not giue a man out of his hāds to any, till he know he be dead; Iuſtice requires that: If they did ſo to the greene tree, the Lord Himſelfe ſaies, what ſhall they doe to the withered? If ſo preciſe juſtice was kept on ye innocent, what ſhall become of the reprobate, who muſt ſuffer euery point of juſtice? Lord ſaue vs from that juſtice of the reprobate. I put it out of doubt: This juſtice kept on Ieſus is a liuely image of that juſtice, that ſhalbe kept on the reprobate. Thou ſhalt not eſcape one point of that juſtice, but thou ſhalt ſuffer in thy carcage ye extremity, if thou be not participate of His blood. Another thing is to bee marked in Pilate: I ſee a part of humanity in him: hee grants the dead body humanely. And ſurely this was by the faſhion: for the bodies of crucified mē were not giuē & yeelded at the requeſt of mē: as their death was ignominious, ſo was their buriall. I put no doubt, the cōſcience of the innocencie of Ieſus neuer left him, & the conſciēce of His innocēcie made him to be ſo eaſie to grant the body of Ieſus at the requeſt of Ioſeph. Brethren, if this matter had bene in the hands of Caiaphas, & the Prieſts, and the Scribes, & the Elders, they would not haue bene ſo ready to haue giuē the body to be buried▪ for as they ſought to ſhame Him

in His death, ſo would they in His buriall: they had buried Him like an Aſſe, & caſtē Him out like a beaſt. So who is this that diſhonours the Saints of God in their buriall? It is not Pilate, or an Ethnicke, or Turke, or Pagan: it is hypocrit profeſſors, hypocrits, Caiaphas, it is falſe prieſts, knaues, with a coloured religion: it is the counterfet hie prieſts, thoſe ſhauelings, thoſe monks & friers, who murther the innocēts: there was neuer bitternes nor gal of heart like their bitternes, who wil cal thēſelues the kirke (they are a falſe & a deceiuing kirke) they haue not bene content to martyre the deare Saincts of God, (that bloody maſſacre ſhall neuer goe out of memory, it ſhalbe recent to their perpetual ſhame, & they ſhal pay for it one day) but they haue raiſed vp ye bones of the dead to burne thē: The veſſels of diſhonour ſeeke the diſhonour of the veſſels of honour: but ſhame and confuſion ſhall light vpon them, whē the Saints of God ſhall get honour. The Lord ſaue vs from them, and that judgement which they ſhall receiue. We goe now to the māner of the Buriall. Looke the louing affection of this holy man Ioſeph, would to God we could learne at him (who loued the dead Ieſus ſo well) to loue Him now liuing and glorified in the Heauēs. When he hath gottē the body of the Lord, he takes it, & puts it, not in a foule cloth; he takes not an old ſheet, but he buyes the cleaneſt linnē, & fineſt that culd be gottē: & the Spirit of God notes, that it was a fine linnen cloth, which had neuer touched any mans body before: then he wraps the body of Ieſus in that winding ſheet. I ſuppone it was with his owne hands (for wee reade of none other that touched Him) for hee thought his owne hands ouer vnworthie to winde ſuch a precious and glorious bodie.
            Nowe Brethren, as the Buriall of the Lord was honoured by an honourable man, who was the Burier of Him: ſo it was honoured with a cleane winding-ſheet, which is a piece of the honour of the Buriall. But looke to this mans doinges better: When hee procures leaue to bury Him, he departs not, & leaues another to bury Him: he ſais not, I haue done enough. I haue gottē his body, he has other friēds thā I, here he has his mother, & his diſciples, & other womē, who came with him out of Galile, and others, let them bury him, & doe ye reſt to him: No, he ſaies not ſo: So this is a cōmendable thing in him, who hauing gottē leaue to bury him, he perfects the worke, he will bury him, himſelfe with his owne hands. Let vs learne at Ioſeph: If we put to our hāds to the work of Ieſus to honour him, (wo to him that honours him not) if thou begin to do him any ſeruice,

leaue not off, whilſt thou haue ended it: Count not that which thou haſt done, as men doe, who will ſay, I haue profeſſed, I haue ſuffered for religion, more than the beſt of them. But when thou art running that race: neuer looke ouer thy ſhoulder vntill thou commeſt to thy races ende: and ſay, thou art an vnprofitable ſeruant, ſuppoſe thou hadſt done neuer ſo much: goe forward, the crowne is not in the middeſt of the race, but at the end: and hee who perſiſtes to the end of the race, he ſhall get the crowne, & not he who goes backe againe. Yet the affection of the man would bee conſidered and weighed, after that once that ſweete ſmell (the ſweeteſt ſmell that euer was felt) comes from the body of Ieſus, that ſweet ſmell of loue (for the ſauour of that body is the ſauour of loue, ſuch loue as man neuer bare to man, ſuch loue as made the Lord to die for ſinners) after that the ſmell comes to Ioſephs ſoule, it wakened vp in his heart loue towards the Lord: for Hee muſt loue vs, before wee loue Him: and whilſt Hee begins to loue Him, he makes requeſt for Him, & euer the nearer that he drawes to that precious body: the ſweete ſmell that came from that precious body was alwayes the greater, and the heart of Ioſeph warmed ay the more with Him: ſo that he could neuer get reſt vntill he got that body in his armes, and wrapped it in linnen clothes. So when we begin to taſte that fragrant odour, that ſweet ſmell, our hearts will be allured to draw neare to Him, and as we draw the nearer to Him, wee will ay finde the ſweeter ſauour proceeding from Him: Thou ſhalt feele alwaies the more that ſweet odour, the more neare thou meete with Him: and who euer thou bee that ſeekeſt Him once, thou vvilt neuer reſt vvhilſt thou ſee Him, and be vvith Him. Paul ſpeakes this of himſelfe, 2. Cor. 4.8. I approoue rather to be with the Lord, than to dwell in this bodie. And to the Phillipians, 1.23. I deſire to be looſed, and to be with Chriſt: For as vvell as vve loue this body, vve vvill be content to ſlit out of it, to let the body fall dovvne, like a broken pitcher, that vve may be conjoyned vvith Chriſt: vve vvill be content to ſlit, and to obtaine Ieſus Chriſt, euen vvith the diſſolution of the body.
            This for the part of Ioſeph, in the burying of Chriſt, novve follovves the part of one Nicodemus: Whilſt as Ioſeph is vvrapping the body of Ieſus in the vvinding-ſheete, one Nicodemus vvho had come to Ieſus by night to be inſtructed ſecretly by Him, he comes to Him, and hee comes not emptie handed (come not emptie

handed to Chriſt, bring wt thee ſome gift) he comes with a mixture of Myrrhe, and aloes, a precious odour, and with a great weight, an hundreth pound weight, a great weight, and a great price, for this gift hath bene a coſtly gift. But to ſpeake of this Nicodemus, to compare him with Joſeph, as Ioſeph was an honourable man, & a Prince amongſt the people, ſo was Nicodemus an honourable man, & a Prince amongſt the people, read the 3. of Iohn. As Joſeph was a rich man, ſo Nicodemus was a rich and mightie man, as Ioſeph was a ſecret diſciple of Chriſt, ſo Nicodemus was a quiet diſciple of Chriſt, who lurked before, and now comes to light. I read of one propertie in Nicodemus, which was not in Ioſeph. This Nicodemus is called by Chriſt, a Doctour, and Maſter in Iſrael: He was a Phariſe, learned in the law of the Iewes, we read not this of Ioſeph. Yet to goe forward in the compariſon, As Ioſeph brought his honour and riches, and laid them downe at the feete of Ieſus Chriſt, who lay dead in ignominie in the ſight of the worlde, ſo this Nicodemus brings his honour and his riches, his learning, and his wiſedome, and layes them downe at the feete of Ieſus lying dead: there he humbles his head, as it were at the feete of Ieſus: So that this was the greateſt honour that Ieſus got in His death and buriall: the wiſdome, the honour, and the learning of the world, and the riches in the perſons of theſe men was all caſt vnder His feete, and no doubt, theſe two men, before they met with Ieſus, and knew Him, they ſtood much on their reputation, they thought their riches, and their honour was ſomething, and they counted much of their prerogatiues in the worlde, but after they got a ſight of Ieſus, all theſe, as Paul ſpeakes of himſelfe, ſeemed but loſſe vnto them: they ſeemed but dung and dirt, in respect of Ieſus Chriſt, whome they counted to be their only vantage. If thou hadſt wiſdome to compaſſe the world, it is nothing but folly, in reſpect of that eminencie of the wiſdome of Ieſus Chriſt, all would ſtincke, and be dung to thee, thou wouldeſt not endure to looke vpon them, if thou hadſt a ſight of that eminencie of the wiſdome of Ieſus Chriſt. Wiſe men will ſpitte at the Croſſe of Chriſt: theſe wiſe men, if ye ſpeake to them of the Croſſe of Chriſt, they will ſpit at it: yet albeit they bee wiſe, the fooliſhneſſe of the Croſſe of Chriſt will ſhame them all, the fooliſhneſſe of it ſhames all the wiſe in the world, the pouertie ſhames all the riches of the world, the ignominie of it ſhames all the honour, all the crownes and ſcepters in the worlde: and therefore PAVL

1. Cor. in Eſayes vvordes, he glories, Where is the wiſemen now? where are the Scribes? where is the diſputer of the world? Hath not this fooliſh Croſſe of Chriſt made all but follie: the very fooliſhnes of ye Croſſe of Chriſt hath made all ye prerogatiues of ye world but fooliſhnes: the world would not know God in His wiſdome, when He had ſet out ſuch a faire Fabricke of ye world, He determined to ſaue ſo many as ſhould beleeue. But how? by Philoſophie? No, by wiſdom? No, but by the fooliſhneſſe of preaching: thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen, I giue thee this doome, if thou be not ſaued by this fooliſh preaching. This for the perſō of Nicodemus, now let vs ſee his gift, it is a rich gift, a mixture of Myrrhe & Aloes of an hundreth pound weight what mooued ye man to doe this? now certainly there are few folks yt will caſt away their goods, & giue them for nothing: it behooued yt ſome great mater ſhould haue moued this man: if he had not ſeene ſome thing in yt body, to haue moued him to haue brought this gift, he had neuer brought ſuch a precious gift: if he had not ſeene a wonderfull preciouſnes in ye body (euen that dead body was ye moſt precious thing in ye world) he had neuer bin ſo liberal, as to haue bought ſo much precious oyntment what cauſes men be ſo loth to beſtow any thing on Chriſt, & His Goſpel: ye world ſees not how precious He is in His Goſpel, when thou ſeeſt not ye preciouſnes of ye Goſpel & of Chriſt: O! what maruell is this? yt thou beſtoweſt nothing on Ieſus & His Goſpell: I doubt not, if thou couldeſt ſee ye power of ye light, & ye preciouſnes of that Goſpel, thou wouldeſt beſtow gifts & preſents, yea, all yt thou haſt to ye glory of Ieſus, & and to ye maintenance of it: ye had need to look on this mater at this time. The Lord open the eyes of men to ſee ye price of this glorious Goſpel. But to ſpeak of Nicodemus gift: yt gift is honourable, a gift of odours: what ſhould haue moued this man to haue both ſuch a gift of odours more thā any other: if Nicodemus had not felt ye ſweeteſt ſauour & odour, that euer was, cōming frō the body of Ieſus, he had neuer brought ſuch a gift, hee meetes a ſweete ſauour with a ſweet ſauour: that body needed no odours of Nicodemus, becauſe that bodie was filled with the preſence of God, and therefore needed none odours, to preſerue it from corruption. The naturall body of a man, beeing dead, will ſtincke, but the body of the Lord Ieſus was not ſubject to corruption: ſo ye ſee, Brethren, all things honour the buriall, ye honorable mā 
               Ioſeph honoures ye burial, the winding ſheet honoures ye buriall, yt man Nicodemus honours ye buriall yt rich gift honoures ye buriall of ye Lord, ſo His buriall was on all wayes honorable: So ye
               
glorie of Ieſus beganne in His buriall. When Nicodemus is come with his gift, Joſeph & Nicodemus joyne hands in hands together, & They tooke towells, and buries the body of Ieſus, after the manner of the buriall of the Iewes: Yet I ſee in this Ioſeph a thing commendable: When Nicodemus comes with a rich gift, and a richer gift than hee gaue, he enuies him not, hee enuies neither the man, nor his gift, but hartily they take the body together, and annoynt it. Let no man enuie another, who comes with a gift to Ieſus, but let mee with my ſmall gift, and thee with thy great gift, hartily joyne hande in hande together, and glorifie Ieſus Chriſt: put away enuie and emulation, and hartily honour IESVS CHRIST, for if we ſawe that all our honour ſtandes in the honour of Ieſus Chriſt, wee would bee content, that euery man ſhould come with greater gifts to honour Ieſus Chriſt: and ſo emulation would bee put away. Now the Lord giue vs grace to ſee, that all our honour ſtands in that, that Ieſus Chriſt may be honoured, that we may be content with all men to glorifie Him: he ſayes not, Nicodemus doe thou the reſt of it, I haue done my part, I haue bought ye winding-ſheete, & now I will goe my way, doe thou the reſt, annoynt thou Him, & burie thou Him. No, he leaues Him not, but when once he put his hand to Him he wil not leaue Him: haſt thou begun to ſerue Chriſt, leaue Him not, albeit a King ſhould command thee, leaue Him not: if thou come not wt odours come with a windingſheet, if not with ye windingſheet, come, put the towell about Him, & bind Him, & if thou doeſt no more, ſtand by, & ſpeake to His honur, & glorifie Him, and if thou haſt not a tongue to ſpeake reuerently of Him, think of Him reuerently, & honour Him in thy heart If thou honour Him not, woe to thee if thou were a King: wo to thee, if yu glorify not ye God of glory, & this may let vs ſee by experience, yt ye ſoule yt hath any will to glorify Ieſus, can neuer be at reſt, but whē it is occupied in glorifying Him, he ſaies, this was done after ye cuſtome of ye Jewes: as they buried honorable men, ſo they buried Ieſus, good reaſō was it yt ſo it ſhould be, there came neuer ſuch an honorable man amōg them as Chriſt: no, not their kings, Dauid, Salomon. &c. were nothing to Him. So it appeares yt this cuſtome in ye buriall was according to their ceremonial law, & therefore theſe ceremonies yt ye 
               Iewes vſed in theſe burialls, their waſhing, their odours & the reſt were all figures of Ieſus to come, & of yt glorious reſurrectiō of His, which is ye erneſt pēny of our reſurrectiō, for our reſurrectiō depēds

on His glorious reſurrection, and if Hee had not riſen, we ſhould neuer haue riſen in glorie. Seeing therefore they were ſhadowes after His death and reſurrection, all theſe ceremonies, all this balming, waſhing, &c. take an end: and except thou wouldeſt ſay, that Ieſus is not riſen and extinguiſh the ſweet ſmel of His reſurrection, thou muſt leaue off all the ceremonies. It is true, buriall ſhould be honoured, and certainely in the buriall of men and women, a great reſpect ſhould bee had: Why ſhould the body of a man bee caſt away: the very light of Nature imprinted in the heart by the creation dites, that the dead body of a man or a woman ſhould be buried honourablie, and that in hope of immortalitie: Nature hath a ſmell of immortalitie, and it cauſes the body be had in due regarde: the beaſts bodies ye ſee, when they are dead, they are caſt avvay and no more is made of them. Come to cuſtome, the cuſtome of buriall that the Fathers vſed from the beginning, teaches vs, that the buriall of man and woman ſhould be reſpected, and that vpon the hope of reſurrection: Beginne at Adam, goe to Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Joſeph, and all the reſt of the holy Patriarkes, they had a regarde of their burialls, vpon hope of their reſurrection: for the bodies of the Sainctes vvho are buried, ſhall riſe gloriouſly in that great day: and this they did not ſo much by Nature, as by a reuelation of God, and on this hope follovved theſe ceremonies: the vvaſhing and balming of the bodies, Acts 9.37 The very vvord the Scripture vſes, the vvord of ſl
                  •
               eping, ſhevv the bodie vvould not die for euer: but that they laid downe the body in the graue to ſleepe, as if it vvere laide dovvne in a ſoft bed to ſleepe, not to lye for ay there, but to riſe again
                  •
                in the morning, vvhen the day ſhall riſe. Ieſus Chriſt is the moſt glorious morning that euer vvas: and the body that ſleepes in Him, ſh
                  •
               ll riſe againe to glorie, vvhen Hee ſhall come in the cloudes vv
                  •
               th millions of His Angels. Come to the cuſtome of the nations: their buriall vvas honoured, they did it of imitation follovving the F
                  •
               thers, like Apes, vvanting the hope of reſurrection. What h
                  •
               lpeth thee thy buriall, or the honours of it, if thou vvant
                  •
               ſt that hope of reſurrection: they vvanted the vvord of God the life of all ce
                  •
               emonies, what good doe all theſe ceremonies vvithout the vvord and promiſes of God, by them only they are quickened, by them only they liue, vvithout them they are dead ſhadovves. The very Ethnikes had a reſpect to buriall: But this vvas in hope of reſurrection, but

vpon a cuſtome for pompe and vaine glorie. As in all things the Lord gaue them vp vnto a reprobate ſenſe, ſo in buriall Hee gaue them vp to a reprobate ſenſe. They would caſt out ſome dead bodies like dogges, and ſome vſed to burne the deade bodies in the fire, theſe are barbarous and inhumane faſhions. The body ſhould be buried in the earth, thou ſhouldeſt returne to the earth, as thou cameſt of the earth: Againe, ſome amongſt the Gentiles vſed ouer great gorgeouſneſſe, and ſumptuouſneſſe in their burialls, placing the effect of the buriall in gorgeouſneſſe. But to come to vs, if thou wereſt a King, thou ſhouldeſt not followe the Ethnickes in ſumptuouſneſſe: when the Lord brings a man low, wilt thou exalt his head, and exceede meaſure in gorgeouſneſſe: vvilt thou hold vp his head, when the Lord is caſting downe his head, the Lord will caſt downe thine heade, and his both to the duſt. Eſchew two extremities, Firſt, eſchew contempt, caſt not away the body: and ſecondly, eſchew gorgeouſneſſe and ſuperfluitie, keepe a Chriſtian honour: albeit thou wereſt a King, or an Emperour, thou ſhouldeſt keepe a mediocritie, and Chriſtian honeſtie, and let that ſweete ſmell of the death and reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST ſauour into his buriall.
            What ſhall we ſay in burialls then? Shall we make none exception, No, let vs looke to Circumſtances: Burie not a begger like a King, looke to the place and time, and perſon: yet in all times places and perſons, let the buriall ſmell of that ſweet ſmelling odour of IESVS CHRIST, and let that ſimple Chriſtian honeſtie be ſeene in your burialls.
            Now becauſe the time is ſpent, and I will not wearie you: I leaue the reſt till the next daye, and commend you to GOD, beſeeching Him, that yee may bee like to Him, both in life and death, and in His buriall and reſurrection, that wee may dwell with Him for euermore in the Heauens. To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour, praiſe and glorie, world without end.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXVII. LECTVRE, OF THE BVRIALL OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 59 So Ioſeph tooke the bodie, and wrapped it in a cleane linnen cloth,
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XV.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And layed him in a tombe that was h
                        •
                     wen out of a rocke, and rolled a ſtone vnto the doore of the ſepulchre.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 53 And tooke it downe, and wrapped it in a linnen cloth, and layed it in a tombe hewen out of a rocke, wherein was neuer man yet layed.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XIX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 41 And in that place where Ieſus was crucified, was a Garden, and in the Garden a new ſepulchre, wherein was neuer man yet layed.
               
            
            
               WEE haue in hand at this preſent (well-beloued in CHRIST) this Goſpel of the Buriall of the Lord: When Hee is crucified and dead, His Buriall is obtained by a requeſt: which requeſt was made to Pilate, the Iudge and Romane Deputie: he that made the requeſt, was Ioſeph of Arimathea, an honourable man, a Senator, a rich, a good, and a godly man. There comes afterward to Ioſeph, one Nicodemus, a Doctor in Iſrael, an honourable, a wiſe, and a good man, and a Diſciple of Ieſus, albeit quietly, as Ioſeph was: and he joynes handes in this worke with Ioſeph: So theſe two take the whole worke in hand: firſt Ioſeph, and then Nicodemus. In the Hiſtorie of this Buriall wee haue theſe two partes: Firſt, wee

haue the vvinding of Chriſt, as vve ſpeake commonly, Hee is vvinded and vvrapped in a newe linnen cloth, being embaulmed vvith ſweet odors. We haue heard already of this firſt part of His Burial: The ſecōd part of His Buriall, is the laying of His precious body in the graue. Firſt this day we ſhal ſpeak of the laying of yt body in the graue: & next falles out a piece of a Hiſtory, concerning certain women, namely, Marie Magdalene, & the other Marie, the mother of Ioſes, vvho are vvitneſſes of yt buriall, & ſaw that all things vvere vvell done. Thirdly, in that part vve haue read in the Goſpel of Matthew eſpeciallie, vvee haue a piece of Hiſtorie concerning the vvatching & keeping of the graue of Ieſus, after He vvas buried. The Hiſtorie is very plaine, and the doctrine thereof ſhall be plaine alſo. Then to begin at the firſt part of the hiſtory: The burying of Ieſus after hee vvas vvrapped in the vvinding-ſheet, Iohn in his Goſpel markes the place vvhere he vvas buried: Firſt in generall, he notes it to bee in a Garden; not a Kirke, not an houſe but, a Garden, in the faire fields: not vnder a roofe, but vnder the roofe of heauē. This burying in Kirks is come in vpon ſuperſtition. It maye ſuffice the greateſt lorde of them all to be buried in the fields, as the Lord Ieſus vvas buried. So the place vvas a Garden. Next, it is deſcribed from the ſituation of it: Neare Mount Caluarie, the place vvhere hee vvas crucified: Joſeph and Nicodemus chooſed this place, of verye purpoſe, becauſe it vvas neare hande: the time ſtraited them: the time of the Paſſeouer vvas drawing neare, and they vvere to celebrate it after the going down of the Sunne: and therfore they take the commoditie of the place. This vvas their purpoſe. But the Father of heauen had his purpoſe in this vvorke. The place vvas notable, & knowne to all the indwellers in Hieruſalem. The Lorde of purpoſe choſe that place: that as the place of His Buriall was knowen to Hieruſalem, ſo the Reſurrection of the Lord ſhould be known to Hieruſalem. Al this knowledge that: Hee was buried auailes nothing: if thou knoweſt not yt Hee is riſen againe: & vvithout this knowledge no remiſſion of ſinnes, no life. But to come more particularlie to the place: Iohn, when hee had ſet it downe in generall, he comes in ſpeciall, and hee calles it, a monument; he calles it, a new graue, wherein neuer man lay. It was a graue, not hewen out of the earth: it was hewen out of a ſtone: and Ioſeph cauſed it to be hewē out, not to Ieſus, but to himſelf: but yet he vouchſafes it vpon Ieſus. All was notable; the place, the gardē, the time, the graue, that His Reſurrection might be notable & eaſily known

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
to all the indwellers in Ieruſalem, for He made all things to fall out ſo, that His reſurrection ſhould be patent: the Lord prouided that in all reſpects the buriall of Ieſus might be honourable. Looke to theſe men that buried Him, Joſeph and Nicodemus, honourable men: looke to His windingſheete, and cleane linnen cloath: looke to the odours wherewith Hee was embalmed, they were coſtly: looke to the place, it was hewen out of a ſtone, with great coſt, and trauell, it was a new graue wherein neuer man lay, it was ordained for an honourable man: the Lord will haue His Sonne honoured in all theſe things, and as He was a chiefe man, farre aboue all the kings in the world, ſeparate from ſinners, & made higher than the Heauens, as the Apoſtle ſayes, Heb. 7.26. So His heauenly Father would haue Him appearing a ſpeciall man in His buriall, and namely in His graue: for in that graue wherein Hee was laide, neuer ſinfull man come, & well worthy was He, who was ſeparate from ſinners to be laide in a graue, wherein neuer ſinner was laide: yet the newneſſe of the graue, it importes ſomething more, that when He roſe it ſhould not bee ſaide, that any other man ſhould haue riſen, but that it was onely Ieſus that had riſen. To goe forward to the laying of the body in the graue, the two men, Ioſeph & Nicodemus they take the body, & lay it in. They caſt it not in, but ſoftly & tenderly they laid that precious body that they loued ſo well, they laide it in a graue, as it were in a bed, to ſleepe: when they haue laid Him downe in ye graue, they take a great ſtone, & rolles it on the doore of the graue, & when they haue done that, they goe to the celebration of the Paſſeouer: As all this worke was directed by prouidence of God, ſo in laying on of this great ſtone, the Lord Hee had His prouidence. No queſtion, Ioſeph and Nicodemus rolled on this ſtone to honour the Lord, but the prouidence of the Lord in this ſtone was chiefly, that when the Lord roſe againe, the enemies ſhould not ſay, that the Lord was ſtollen out of the graue: for it was no ſmall matter to rolle away ſuch a great ſtone: ſo the Lord would meete the calumnies of His enemies in raiſing the ſtone, and not onely in raiſing the ſtone, but in breaking the bands of death, and of the graue, and in raiſing from death to life, wherein Hee ſhewed the power of His Godhead: for in nothing did the power of GOD appeare ſo euidently, as in the raiſing of Chriſt from the death: and therefore the Apoſtle Paul in the firſt Chapter to the Epheſians, verſe 19. brings it in as a ſingular proofe of the

ſtrong power of God. Now we haue ended this diſcourſe of the buriall, which in all reſpects ye ſee is honorable: ſo that, albeit the buriall be otherwiſe ignominious, and by the laſt part of His humiliation: yet in it the Lord begins to honour Him, He begins at it His glory: euen ſo, albeit the buriall of all men & women beeing ſhamefull of the owne nature, yet the buriall of all faithfull men and women beeing ſanctified in the buriall of Ieſus Chriſt, is the firſt part of their honour for by it they paſſe to that eternall glory: but the vnbeleeuers by their buriall paſſe to ſhame and confuſion. Now we goe vnto the ſecond part of this Text, to the part of the godly women, good Marie Magdalene, who neuer left the Lord, but followed Him from Galile, then the other Marie, the mother of Joſes: As they followed Him to the Croſſe, ſo they followed Him to the buriall, and they ſtand aſide, and ſee Him buried. O that loue! that wonderfull tender loue! that could not ſuffer them to be reaued from the LORD: for woe is the heart that is ſeparate from Ieſus, and that loue that drew them to the Croſſe, that ſame drawes them to the graue with Him: for nothing could ſeparate theſe women from Ieſus: No, the croſſe, the graue, death it ſelfe, cannot ſeparate theſe womens heartes from the LORD: ſo out of all queſtion, this following of Ieſus to the graue was a token of an intiere loue that they bare to Him: yea, it was rather a token of that loue that came from Ieſus to them: that following of Him vttered ſuch a loue and ſmell, to flow from that dead bodie, that hang on the croſſe, and was buried, that neuer man nor woman felt the like: He ſo loued the world, that He died for it, Hee gaue Himſelfe for it: for, Brethren, except that force that came from the bodie, had drawen their heartes, it had beene vnpoſſible that they could haue followed Him. No man can loue GOD firſt, but becauſe He loues vs, we loue Him: None can come to mee, ſayes Chriſt, except my Father draw him: if Hee lay not holde on vs firſt, our hearts will neuer incline to loue Him. Now certainly, I put no queſtion in it: theſe women looked with ſad and heauie hearts on this buriall: for when we ſee one buried, whom we loue, we will be ſad, nature dites this: But as they were heauie hearted in looking on ye ſpectacle: ſo their heart had joy in looking thereon, for they had a great hope to ſee: yt glorious body riſe again, ſo they had ſadnes mixed wt joy, for wo to yt ſadnes yt hath not joy mixed with it. Now yet I ſee as they cōtinued in following Him, firſt to ye croſſe, &

then to the buriall: ſo the Lord continues in honouring them, for He ſends them out as Preachers, & eye witneſſes of his death, which honour neuer one of the Apoſtles got, but Iohn: ſo He honoured them in His buriall: therefore honour Chriſt, followe Him to the croſſe, follow Him to the graue: thinke not ſhame of His croſſe or His graue, loue Him with thine heart, waite on Him, for Hee will let thee ſee the moſt glorious things that euer the eye ſaw: holde therefore the eye vpon Him, looke to Him night & day, now when He is in the Heauens: and I promiſe thee, thou ſhalt finde by experience, He ſhall make thee a proclaimer of His glory: but thou who ſetteſt not thine heart to ſeeke Him now, when He is gone to the Heauens, thou ſhalt not haue a mouth to glorifie Him, or to ſpeake of His Name hereafter. Now, will ye looke to ye carefulneſſe of theſe womē, they ſtand againſt ye graue a far off & they looke no doubt wt ſad hearts, how theſe two men, Ioſeph & Nicodemus handles the glorious body of Ieſus, & layes it in ye graue. Men & womē for curioſity & delectatiō vſe to look vpō ſuch ſpectacles, but theſe women looked wt a carefull & ſorrowfull heart, looking that this body ſhould be tēderly & honorably handled & buried. Therefore, if yu haſt yt ability to be a handler, & medler with ye worke of ye Lord, as Ioſeph & Nicodemus was: look at leaſt, yt thou be a carefull onlooker & tēder it in thy heart, & ſee yt all things go wel, & if thou doeſt that, ye Lord ſhal count it a piece of good ſeruice for ye furthering of ye glory of His Kingdom, If thou haſt not to beſtow on Chriſt, yet ſpeak wel of Him, if yu canſt not ſpeake, yet thinke well of Him: yet theſe women are not cōtent to look on only, but they will be alſo medlers in this actiō: & for this cauſe, whē ye graue is cloſed, they go home wt, vnſpeakable ſadnes, & joy mixt together, going home, they prepare ſweet odours for ye embalming of Him ye third day following, they ceaſe vpō yt morne, becauſe it was the Sabbath, & vpō ye third day He roſe & diſappointed them of ye embalming of Him, but yet their intentiō is to be cōmended, they are not cōtent to looke on Him, but according to their power, they put to their hand: but ere they prepared theſe odours, a ſweet ſmell came frō His body to them: for except a ſweeter ſmel come frō Him, except He giue thee a greater grace, yu wilt not beſtow a pēny on Him, except He giue thee a poūd: but being once benefited by Him, thou wilt beſtow if it were thy own life, (let be thy goods) for Him & His glorie: and if thou wilt not beſtovv on Chriſt, and vpon His Goſpell, I teſtifie thou haſt neuer found the ſvveetneſſe of the Lord, nor of His grace,

It may be that He caſt a Lordſhip to thee, or portion of heritage as it were a bone to a dogge, but if thou beſtoweſt nothing on Him, thou haſt neuer felt the grace of God, thy ſoule hath neuer taſted of that odour & ſweetneſſe that is in Him Nowe I come to the laſt part which I haue read out of the Goſpell of Matthew, concerning the watching of Ieſus after Hee was buried. This watching came vpon a ſuite, as all other thinges came vpon a ſuite, for nothing durſt be done without licence of the Magiſtrate, of Pilate the Romane Deputie: the Iudge was reuerenced, without him nothing was done. The time of the ſute is noted, to wit, the next day after He was buried. This was, no doubt, the Sabbath day, for they began their day at Euen, when the Sun goes downe, (as yee would ſay on Fryday at Euen) for no doubt, the vvatch ſtood about ye graue all night. The ſute is made to Pilate, & all is done by the Iudge: it is a circumſtance ſhould be vvell noted, thinke it not a light matter. The Lord in all His ſuffering is ſubject to the Iudge, it behoued Him to vnderly the ſentence of the earthly Iudge in all ſorts: if Hee had not vnderlyed it, it had behoued thee to vnderly the fearfull Iudgement of that euerlaſting Iudge. But vvho makes the ſute? It is not Ioſeph, nor Nicodemus, none of them that loued Chriſt. Ioſeph indeed made a ſute that the body ſhould bee buried? But vvho is it that makes this ſute? Who but they vvho ſuted to crucifie the LORD, The Scribes, the Phariſes, that vvere enemies to Him. Looke thorovv all this Hiſtorie, & ye ſhal finde ſundrie ſutes, ſome euil, ſome good, ſome on an euil mind, ſome on a good mind, many euill, few good, many ſuters to crucifie Him, many ſuters to breake Him, many ſuters to hold Him down in the graue: ye read of none but of one Ioſeph, vvho makes ſute to get the dead body of Ieſus buried. Read all the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, and ye ſhall finde theſe ſame things that fell out in Chriſt, to haue fallen out in His members: when a godly man hath beene drawen out before the ciuile Iudge, or to martyrdome: there hath bene ſundrie ſuters for him, ſome ſuters good, ſome euill yet euer moe euill than good. Therefore a P
                  •
               ince or Magiſtrate was neuer in ſuch danger, in any judgement, as whē he gets a good man fallen in his hands. Pilate was neuer in ſuch danger, as he was into through this action, for it loſt him his life preſent, & the life to come. When the action of a thiefe or a murtherer comes before a King there is no ſuch danger: but when a godly man is brought before him for the cauſe of CHRIST,

then he ſhould take good heede, where he ſhall get one to giue him a good counſell: he ſhall get many to giue him euill counſell, many ſhal crie, crucifie Him: & woe to him, if he aſſent, as Pilate did, for he ſhall inuolue himſelf in that ſame guiltines with them that cried crucifie him. It is true indeede, that Pilate granted a good ſuite, hee gaue leaue to Ioſeph, to burie the body of Chriſt, yet did this any good to Pilate, ſaued it him? No, Thinkeſt thou when thou haſt executed an innocent, that thou doeſt enough, when thou haſt giuen His bodie to bee buried? No, that ſhall not excuſe thee, nor free thee from guiltineſſe. O how g
                  •
               eat and weightie is the burthen of Magiſtrates! Therefore they had neede euer to haue good men about them, and we ſhould pray the Lord earneſtly to guide them and direct them in judgement.
            This much for the ſuters, now come to the ſute: the wordes are theſe: The deceiuer ſaid, whilſt as He was aliue, that within three dayes He ſhould riſe: command therefore that the ſepulchre bee made ſure, vntill the third day, leſt His diſciples come by night and ſteale Him away, and ſay to the people, that He is riſen frō the dead: ſo ſhall the laſt e
                     •
                  rour be worſe than the first. In effect this is as much, as if they had ſaid theſe wordes, this man ſaid, that He ſhould riſe the third day, therefore appoint Him a guard to teſtify of His glorious reſurrectiō: ye Lord ſo directed their words, albeit their meaning was flat contrarie: Marke therefore a good leſſon: euer more the Lord h
                  •
               th ſnared the reprobate in their wicked deuiſes, & hath euer turned them from that miſchieuous end they aymed them, to the manifeſtation of His owne glory. The Prieſts & Phariſes thought to obſcure ye glorie of Chriſts reſurrection, & if it had lyen in their hands to hold Him by force in the graue: but the Lord who workes light out of darkneſſe, makes their ſute to ſerue for the clearer manifeſtation of His reſurrection, for they could haue done no more for the manifeſtation of His reſurrection, if they had bene hired for that purpoſe: ſo looke what interpriſe wicked men will deuiſe to diſhonour Him: I ſay, the Lord ſhall turne it in end to His glory, but to their deſtruction: I will ſay further, (& it may ſeeme marueilous) peruerſe deuiſes of the wicked often times do ſerue more to His glory, than the good purpoſes & deedes of the godly: for it is not a greater glory to GOD, to bring light out of darknes, than to bring light out of light: the Lord is a moſt skilfull and mightie workeman, Hee makes His glory to appeare, by bringing light out of darkneſſe, by bringing

life out of death, and by calling the thinges that are not, as if they were: all the deuiſes of the wicked are darkneſſe, the doings of the godly are light: ſo the Lord will ſometimes bee more wōderfully glorified in the doings of the wicked, than in the doings of the godly. But this doth ye wicked no good, nor it ſerues nothing for their benefite, for in ye meane time they are more malicious againſt ye Lord, than euer they were, they call Him a deceiuer: this is a wonderfull thing, they ſaw the Lords povver in obſcuring of the ſun, in renting of the rockes, in opening of the graues, they ſaw His great glory ſhine in all theſe wonders: yet ſuch is the maliciouſnes of theſe wicked men, they call ye Lord of glory, a deceiuer, & in ſo doing not onely they oppone themſelues againſt God, but alſo they doe ſo far as in them lay, as to haue ſpitted in the face of God: yet theſe miſerable creatures, I meane the Scribes & Phariſes, came not on a ſuddaintie to this extreame maliciouſnes, but they ſhew ſome meane & ſmall beginnings of it, whē Chriſt firſt manifeſted Himſelfe, & began to preach amongſt them: then they proceeded frō worſe to worſe continually, all the time He was conuerſant amongſt them: thereafter in His Croſſe & death they taunted & mocked Him, & put Him to the moſt ſhameful death they could deuiſe: & now when He is buried & laid in ye graue, they vtter more maliciouſneſſe than euer they did, they come to the extremitie of maliciouſnes and induration, they call the Lord a deceiuer. Curſed be yt mouth that calles the Lord a deceiuer, & as Paul ſayes, He that loueth not the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, let him be anathema maranatha, 1. Cor. 16.22. This lets vs ſee the nature of their ſinne, it was a ſinne againſt the Holy Spirit, and this is the nature of that ſinne, when once thou ſhalt enter in it, thou vvilt hardly get backe againe, vntill thou commeſt to extreame excecation and induration, to thine euerlaſting deſtruction. My leſſon is this, If the Lord giue vs grace to learne it. When it pleaſes the Lord to ſhine vnto thee, albeit thou vvereſt a King, or Earle, or Lord, looke, as thou vvould eſchevv H
                  •
               ll & damnation, that thou repine not to this light, but greedily embrace it, and vvalke in it: for if thou ſtep forvvard in repining, thou ſhalt haue an hard backe-comming againe, and thou ſhalt come from excecation to excecation, vntill thou come to vtter deſtruction. Novv, I doubt not, but ye are ſorrovvfull, vvhen ye heare the Lord a deceiuer, yee are ſorrovvfull to heare light called darkneſſe▪ but comfort our ſelues vvith this, the Lord vvho vvas free of all guile

and deceit, ſuffers Himſelfe to bee called a deceiuer, to purge vs from guile and deceit: for it might ſeeme marueilous, that the Spirite of God ſhoulde regiſter this name of a deceiuer, ſuppoſe they called Him a deceiuer: for this name defiles the aire to call the Lord of Trueth a deceiuer: Yet no queſtion the Spirite hath left it in regiſter to bee hearde and read of all Chriſtians, to the ende of the worlde, that thou mayeſt knowe what the Lorde hath ſuffered for thee. And doubtleſſe this name was heauier to Him, than all the vexation that was done to Him: it was heauier than the crucifying of him it ſelfe: and when thou heareſt this name thou ſhouldeſt ſay, He was not a deceiuer, but it was I that was a deceiuer, & Hee was called a deceiuer for me who was damned for deceit, that I ſhould be deliuered from the debt & puniſhment of deceit, and deceiuers.
            Now to end ſhortly: Ye haue a watch, ſaies he, goe and make it ſure, keepe it as yee pleaſe. Hee was an eaſie man to graunt to any man whatſoeuer thing he ſought of him: either good or euill. Hee granted to Ioſeph his ſute to burie Chriſt: ſo he grants to the Prieſts and Phariſes this ſute to keepe Him in the graue: The reaſon is, becauſe being an Ethnick, he ſerued not God, but the affections of mē, whether good or euill: he looked not to God, but hee had a reſpect to his owne ſtanding: and therefore hee cares not to grant a ſute ſuppoſe it were againſt God and Chriſt: Hee had a reſpect to his owne ſtanding, when he commanded Chriſt to be crucified: Such like he reſpected his owne ſtanding, when hee gaue Ioſeph leaue to burie Him: and likewiſe now when he grantes this ſute to the Prieſtes to vvatch His graue, he reſpected his owne ſtanding. Marke this Brethren: It is a miſerable thing, vvhen a King or a Iudge hath not God before his eyes: wo to yt king who hath not God & a good cō
               ſciēce before his eyes: for he will be a ſlaue to the affections of any varlot in the Countreye. A Begger, a Horſe-rubber, and the vileſt ſlaue that can be among men, is not ſo vile a ſlaue as he who ſerues the affections of men, and hath not God and a good conſcience before him: and euer the higher, and the greater his eſtate be, he is the greater ſlaue. Nowe hauing gotten leaue of Pilate, they ſet men of vvarre to keepe Him in the graue, they make the ſepulchre ſure with the watch, to the ende Hee ſhoulde not bee ſtollen awaye: and for the more ſecuritie, they ſ
                     •
                  aled the ſtone, and ſignated it vvith Pilates ring: and then it vvas death to anie man in the vvorlde to touch it: Yet the more buſie they are, and the more they ſtriue to hold Him in the

graue, the more the Lorde glorifies Him, and the more cleare and manifeſt was his Reſurrection. Could Pilates ſeale holde him in the graue? Could the men of vvarre holde him in? No, they coulde not keepe him: but yee will haare: They fell all downe dead at his Reſurrection, and they had not a worde to ſpeake, ſuppoſe ſuch was the impudencie of the Prieſts, that although they knew that he vvas riſen: Yet they hired the men of vvarre to ſay that he vvas not riſen but his diſciples ſtole him away by night: And this errour continues in the vvorlde among the Iewes euer ſince. But the Lord Ieſus aroſe vvith great power and glorie, and now is in infinite glorie in the Heavens, at the right hand of the Father: To vvhom, vvith the Sonne, and holy Spirit, from our hearts, vvee render all praiſe, honour, and glorie, for euer and euer, AMEN.
         
         
            THE XXVIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  NOw, in the ende of the Sabbath, when the first day of the weeke began to dawne, Marie Magdalene, and the other Marie came to ſee the ſepulchre.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 And beholde, there was a great earth-quake: for the Angel of the Lord deſcended from heauen, and came, and rolled backe the ſtone from the doore, and ſate vpon it.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 And his countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as ſnowe.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 And for feare of him, the keepers were aſtonied, and became as dead men.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  ANd when the Sabbath day was past, Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames and Salome, bought ſweete ointmentes, that they might come and anoint him.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 2 Therefore earlie in the morning, the first day of the weeke, they came vnto the ſepulchre, when the Sunne was now riſen.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  NOw the firſt day of the weeke, early in the morning, they came vnto the ſepulchre, and brought the odours, which th
                        •
                     y had prepared, and certaine women with them.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XX.
                  
                  NOw the first day of the weeke, came Marie Magdalene, early when it was yet darke, vnto the ſepulchre, and ſawe the ſtone taken away from the tombe.
               
            
            
               THESE dayes paſt (beloued Brethren in Chriſt) wee haue heard at length of the death and Paſſion of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt: and in ende wee heard of His Buriall after His death and paſſion. Now it followes, as the Lord ſhall giue vs grace, that we ſpeake of His glorious reſurrectiō from the dead. In ſpeaking of the Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt, wee ſhall follow out the whole foure Euangeliſtes. Matthew in his laſt Chapter, Marke in his laſt Chapter, and Luke in his laſt Chapter, ſets downe the Hiſtorie of the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt; but John inſiſts more largelie than the reſt, for he hath two Chapters of the Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection. Then to come to the purpoſe. Wee finde in none of the foure Euangeliſts the time and the houre when the Lord aroſe from the dead preciſelie noted. We finde not the manner of His riſing out of the graue. Wee finde no mention made of any witneſſes that ſawe Him riſe out of the graue. It hath pleaſed the Lord in His wiſedome, to conceale all theſe thinges: yet it is certaine He aroſe out of the graue in the morning (what houre he knowes Himſelfe) in the morning, after ye 
               Iewiſh Sabbath, which was the beginning of the thirde day after His Buriall: for the Iewes counted their day from euen till euē: ſo the third day began at euening. As it is certaine that the Lord aroſe out of the graue in the night; ſo we find in the foure Euangeliſts, that when He is riſen, He teſtifies a little after, His glorious Reſurrection, by many witneſſes: And firſt of all the emptineſſe and roomneſſe of the graue teſtifies th
                  •
               s Reſurrection. Marie Magdalene, and the other Marie, and Salome, teſtifie of it: The Ang
                  •
               ls of Heauen teſtifie of it: The Lord Himſelfe

teſtifies of it by appearing to the vvomen: And theſe vvomen teſtifie of it to His Diſciples: And then the Lord witneſſes His Reſurrection by His owne appearing vnto them.
            To come to the Text that we haue read: We haue firſt of all out of the Goſpel of MARKE noted the occaſion, how it comes to paſſe that theſe women are made witneſſes to the Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt. Next, wee haue the cōming of theſe holy women out of Hieruſalem with odours to anoint the dead bodie of Ieſus, which they ſupponed to haue bene in the graue: Thirdly, wee haue the rehearſall of ſome things that fell out whileſt the women were comming to the graue: There falles out a great earthquake, becauſe their was a glorious Angell comming from Heauen to the graue: And laſt of all, we ſhall ſpeake of the part of Marie Magdalene particularly, becauſe ſhe preuented the other, and came firſt to the graue: ſhee vvas a woman who loued the Lord marueilouſly, and waited continuallie vpon Him. As touching the occaſion▪ MARKE ſaies, that when the Sabbath day was paſt, Marie Magdalene, & Marie the mother of Iames and Salome, bought ſweet ointments, that they might come and anoint him: that is, the dead bodie of the Lord, which, as they ſupponed, laye in the graue. Note the time well. It was after the Sabbath was paſt: for after they had ſeene the Lord layed in the graue by Ioſeph and Nicodemus, they returned home to the Preparation of the Paſſeouer, which was as we compt on the Friday at euen, when the Sun was gone downe. On the morrow after, which was their Sabbath, they celebrated the Paſſeouer, and they reſted all that day vntill the euening: Then vpon their Sabbath at euen, which is our Saturdaye at euen, when the Sunne was gone downe, their Sabbath being ended, they remember their purpoſe, and buye ſweet odours, that on the morrowe earlie they might embaulme the dead bodie of the Lord.
            Nowe Brethren, ſurely the loue and affection of theſe women cānot be paſſed by: They take a purpoſe to honor the Lord by embaulming His bodie: They reſt on the Sabbath day: a day & a night interuenes yet this time ſtayes not their purpoſe (I ſhall cauſe one night interuening put a good purpoſe out of our heads. Indeed we will keep an euill purpoſe long in our mind: But if we haue a good purpoſe at euen, wee will forget it ere the morne, it will bee buried with vs, as if wee had neuer thought it.) But this purpoſe of theſe holy women would bee better examined, that wee may ſee wherein

they are to be commended: they buy and prepare ſweete ſmelling odours to annoynt the body of the LORD, the LORD was riſen at this time, & the LORD had foretolde them oftener than once or twiſe, that He was after His death to riſe on the third day, yet they go out of very purpoſe that ſame day, this cannot be commendable in them. As for the loue that was in the hearts of theſe women, it cannot but be cōmended to all poſterities to the end of the world, & would to GOD the like loue & zeale to God were in the hearts of men & women in theſe dayes, but certainly the deed it ſelfe, ſeeing they had the word of God in ye contrarie, is not commendable: But looke againe in all this doing, the Lord takes more heed to ye heart, than to ye deed, & not only forgiues He the ſin, but alſo He workes out of it, not only His owne glory, but ye well of ye womē: they went out of ſet purpoſe to embalme Him, ye Lord turnes this ſo about, yt He makes them to be witneſſes of His glorious reſurrectiō. Now well is them yt loues ye Lord: for to them all thinges works for ye beſt, out of their ſins He workes their ſaluation, & out of darknes light. But to come forward to the next head: The ſweet odours beeing bought, confected & prepared▪ ye women go toward the graue, the time is very preciſely noted by all ye foure Euangeliſts, Matthew calles it, the end of the Sabbath, when the firſt day in the weeke began to dawne. It was in ye dawning before the Lords day (ſo called in remēbrance of His glorious reſurrectiō, which we vſe to call our Sunday). Marke ſayes, it was the firſt day of the Sabbath, early in the morning, in the beginning of the weeke, as he would ſay, Sunday, early in the morning, before ye riſing of ye ſun, Luke ſayes ye ſame, Iohn ſayes, early the firſt day of the weeke when it was darke, in a world, it was on Sunday in ye morning, at ye very point of time, whē ye ſun roſe. Now ye purpoſe of theſe women was not to be witneſſes of ye reſurrectiō of ye Lord but to embalme His body (which as they thought, was lying in the graue) but ye Lord turnes ye matter ſo about yt He makes them to be witneſſes of Chriſts reſurrectiō, & this was no ſmal honor, He makes women witneſſes of ye reſurrectiō, euen to ye ſhame of men, yea, euen to ye ſhame of His Apoſtles: for they roſe early in ye morning but His Apoſtles lay lurking ſtill, & goe not out: So in the example of theſe women, wee may ſee that to bee true which Paul ſayes, 1. Cor. 1.27. The Lord hath choſen the fooliſh things of the world, to confound the wiſe, and God hath choſen the weake things of the world, to confound the mightie things, that all glorie might redound to Him. Another thing

vve ſee in their example, that vvhich the Apoſtle ſayes, 1. Cor. 3.18. If any man ſeeme to be wiſe in this world, let him be a foole, that he may be wiſe. The LORD in this doing vvill haue His diſciples to ſit dovvn in the ſchoole of vvomen, to learne of them that glorious reſurrection, He vvil make them to be fooles, yt they may be made vviſe, and Hee vvill haue the vvomen to bee their teachers, and if thou accepteſt not of the teſtimonie of theſe vvomen, & become not as a foole, albeit thou vvereſt neuer ſo vviſe, thou ſhalt neuer get a part of the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt. Novv I goe forvvarde to the third thing vvee haue here ſet dovvne. It is an incident that falles out vvhilſt as the vvomen is on their journey, going to the graue, for as they are going to the graue, there falles out, ſayes Matthew, a great earthquake, the cauſe is noted, for as they were going to the graue, the Lord of glory ſends an Angell to tell the reſurrection of the Lord to theſe women: ſo in very deed, the Angell is a witneſſe before the women, but the women before the men: Alwayes, the Angel that comes from Heauen, he is a honorable ambaſſadour: the bleſſed Angels are very glorious, & no queſtion the Lord would haue His reſurrection firſt witneſſed by ſo glorious an ambaſſadour, He would not haue man to teſtifie firſt of it, but He would haue a glorious Angell from Heauen to tell, & proclaime the Lord of glorie was riſen, and that He had broken the bands of death, & riſen vp in deſpite of the Deuill, & death, & that to our well, yt both we may riſe to a newneſſe of life, & yt we may be aſſured, that they who ſleepe in Him, as Paul ſayes, and lies in the gaue, ſhall be raiſed with Him at that great day in glory. An Angell, a glorious creature honoures the meſſage, but yet I ſay, the meſſage and commiſſion honoures the Angel more, than the Angell does the meſſage: yea, if it were all the Angels in Heauen, they get more honour by it, than they can giue to it. Well, if the preaching of ye Goſpel, the teſtifying of Ieſus, & His reſurrection, honoures the Angels, ſhall we thinke that any man in earth is too good to preach the Goſpell of Chriſt, No, if thou wereſt a King, it is a great honour to thee, that thou ſhouldeſt haue grace to ſpeake of His bleſſed Name. Well, Brethrē, as the ambaſſadour was glorious, & the meſſage was glorious, ſo y• cōmiſſion was the joyfulleſt thing that euer yu heardeſt: al the Angels in Heauen, are too vnworthy to tel it. Now as the ambaſſador was glorious, & the meſſage more glorious, ſo the Lord of Heauen honours His Ambaſſadour wt a terrible earthquake: the ambaſſador of a King hath honour, and why ſhould not the ambaſſadour of

the LORD IESVS haue honour aboue all the Kinges of the world? No doubt the LORD in this Earthquake hath a further reſpect, for hereby He teſtified, that His glorious preſence accompanied the Angell, and that to the weale and comfort of the ſillie women: for as all the reſt was to prepare their hearts reuerentlie to receiue ſo glorious an Ambaſſadour, ſo was alſo this Earthquake: For if both men and women bee not prepared to receiue the Goſpel of IESVS CHRIST, let an Angel come from Heauen, if they be not prepared by the power of GOD, they will not beleeue, they will not heare, nor receiue the meſſage with reuerence. Therefore, let no man ſaye, What needes all this, a glorious Angell to come from Heauē
               ▪ and ſuch an Earthquake? He might haue come otherwiſe, He might haue come faire and ſoftly, and in more quyet manner, I anſwere to this: The LORD looked not ſo much to the Angell, or the meſſage, as to the women: for if it were an Angell that came from Heauen, He ſhall neuer be receiued by the ſillieſt bodie, except thine heart be prepared by the power of God.
            Now to goe forward: When this Angell comes downe firſt, wee haue what Hee does: Then wee haue a faire deſcription of this Angell: The firſt thing He does, is, Hee goes to the graue, and rowles away the ſtone from the doore. Ye would thinke this was but a ſober and ſeruile office, to ſo glorious an Ambaſſadour. Might not men haue done it? It was Joſeph and Nicodemus who rolled the ſtone to the tombe. Might not men haue rolled it awaye againe? Marke, and compare the Buriall with His glorious reſurrection: In His Buriall He kept the Godhead cloſe: for if either in the death of Chriſt, or in His Buriall, that Godhead ſhould haue vttered it ſelfe, He could neither haue died, nor yet haue bene buried: for the Godhead can neither die, nor bee buried: but in the reſurrection, the Godhead that dwelt in Him bodilie breakes out, and raiſes the ſtone. Vpon this difference there followes another: in His Buriall, the Godhead keeping it ſelfe cloſe, He had no Angels, but mortall men, to wit, Ioſeph, and Nicodemus, to ſerue Him: they winde Him, they laye Him in the graue, they roll the ſtone to the doore of the graue: But when it comes to His glorious reſurrectiō, in the which that Godhead that before kept it ſelfe cloſe, brake out, Hee vſes not the miniſterie of men, but of a glorious Angell, an Angell rolles away the ſtone, as it were with His owne hand. Nowe this lets vs ſee how highlie and honourablie wee ſhould thinke of this glorious reſurrection. It is

true, the LORD in His Buriall was honourable, but Hee was farre more honourable in His Reſurrection: for the honour that Hee had in His Buriall was but a worldlie honour; but in His Reſurrection Hee had an Heauenlie honour: Indeede Ioſeph and Nicodemus who buried Him, were two Honourable men, but an Angell is an hundreth times more Honourable and glorious than anie man, albeit he were a king, or Caeſar himſelfe. And ſo the LORD in His Buriall vttered Himſelfe to bee a Lorde ouer men, but in His glorious Reſurrection He vttered Himſelfe euen in our nature, not onelie to be Lord of men, but alſo of Angels. So Brethren, all tendes to this, to let vs ſee the glorie of the Reſurrection of Ieſus. Nowe would to God wee could ſtriue night and daye to get a ſight of it: for except we get a ſight of it, in ſome meaſure here, wee ſhall neuer ſee glorie hereafter. But before I leaue this, I ſee, that in the rolling awaye of the ſtone, the Lord hath a reſpect to the weakneſſe of theſe women, knowing well they were not able to remoue ſo heauy a ſtone, to ſee whether the Lord was there or no: He ſendes this Angell to roll it away, to the ende, that when the women came, they ſhould ſee that the LORD was riſen from the dead. Well, here wee haue a comfortable leſſon: The LORD will helpe them that ſeeke Him: Seeke the Lord where euer Hee bee: Seeke the Lord in the graue: ſeeke the Lord in the Heauen, and thou ſhalt bee aſſured, if thou bee a weake bodie, the Lord ſhall ſupplie thy weakneſſe, and Hee ſhall cauſe the ſtrong Angell to doe that which thou art not able to doe. Reade wee not how the Lord hath ſent His Angels to fight the battels of His owne? And if thou wilt ſeeke the Lord when thou art going any way, thou ſhalt find in experience that the Lord ſhall ſend His Angell before thee, and prepare thinges before thy comming. And I doubt not, but ſome of you who heares mee, haue founde this in your owne experience, in ſuch ſort, that yee haue wondered at that bleſſed prouidence of His Majeſtie, and hath bene moued glorifie Him.
            Now there is another thing to be marked: When He hath rolled the ſtone from the doore, He departs not, but he ſits downe, and abides there, to teſtifie that the Lord Ieſus was riſen. So yee ſee the firſt witneſſe of the Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt is an Angell, Hee remaines ſitting vpon the ſtone, to teſtifie, that Chriſt was riſen in glory. The firſt witneſſes of His death and Buriall, were men and women; but the firſt witneſſe of His glorious reſurrection, is His bleſſed Angell;

to let vs ſee how the Lord would honour His Reſurrection, and to make vs eſteeme of it, & to wonder at it, for in the ſight of it ſtands our life and glorie. Alas! that once our eyes coulde bee opened, to ſee the glorie of our Redeemer, ſitting at the right hande of that Majeſtie, then could wee not but wonder at the greatneſſe of that glorie.
            Well then, as I ſaide before in this poinct: The Lord had a great reſpect to the poore women. Alas! an Earthly King will haue a ſmall reſpect to the poore: But the Lorde of glory had a great reſpect to theſe poore women. Indeed, the ſight of the emptineſſe of the graue might haue beene a ſufficient teſtimonie to them of Chriſtes Reſurrection, conſidering the fore-warning they had before, to wit, That the Lord ſhoulde riſe againe the thirde daye: but they were weake in faith: And therfore, He that ſupplied the weakneſſe of their bodies, by the ſtrēgth of the Angell, He ſupplies their faith by this ſame Angel: for they began to doubt, whether He was riſen: they thought Hee was ſtollen away: Yet the Lorde Ieſus ſupplies their weakneſſe, and to the emptineſſe of the graue, Hee ſubjoynes the ſaying of the Angell, The Lord is riſen from the dead. Then the leſſon is this: Againe ſeeke the Lorde: Art thou ſicke in bodie, He will ſupplie thy weakneſſe: Art thou weake in faith, ſeeke the Lord: & as certainlie as He ſupplied the faith of theſe women, Hee ſhall ſupplie thy faith. And if thou wilt not beleeue for one teſtimonie, Hee will teſtifie againe: and I teſtifie, Hee will neuer leaue thee, if thou once aimeſt to ſeeke Him: yea, Hee will heape teſtimonie vpon teſtimonie, till Hee confirme thee, and bring thee to perfection.
            Nowe Brethren, followes heereafter a faire deſcription of this Angell. In MATTHEVV firſt he is deſcribed from his looke & countenance. The looke and his eyes glaunced, as ye ſee flaſhes of fire. Then hee is deſcribed from his rayment: Hee is cladde with faire bright rayment, white like the ſnowe: Hee hath fierie eyes, and his rayment is like white ſnow. Laſt of all, hee is deſcriued from the effect that followed on his ſight. But on whome? Not on the women, but on the ſtrong men of warre: for aſſoone as they ſaw him, they were not able to looke vpon him but fell downe as dead: they might not ſuſtaine to beholde him, and his glorious countenance. Now, as this great Earthquake, which was joyned with his comming downe from Heauen, vvas a viſible ſigne of the preſence of God, accompanying

Him, ſo that terrible countenance & white rayment were alſo viſible ſignes of that ſame preſence of GOD, accompanying Him when hee came to the graue. The Majeſtie of GOD ſhined in his face, & rayment, & the ſame preſence made the men of vvarre to fall downe as dead. Whereto vvas all this? To glorifie & honour that great commiſſion that the Angell had. Why ſhould not the ambaſſadour of a glorious King be glorious? Why ſhould not His looke, his countenance, His rayment, and all be glorious? But yet againe, all this is for the vvell of the poore women: In all this the LORD regarded them: for euen as the terrible earthquake vvas to prepare their heartes to receiue the ambaſſage reuerently: Euen ſo, vvas the bright countenance and ſhining rayment of this Angell. Novve to ſpeake ſomething of the ſignes of the preſence of God, that He hath vſed ſince the beginning, to ſet out His inuiſible glorie: No, all the Angels in Heauen had neuer povver to get acceſſe nor apprehend yt inacceſſible light. It is true, the great God hath no neede to borrovv either light from the fire-flaſh, or vvhitenes frō ye ſnovv, or hue, or hotnes from the fire, to ſet foorth His glory, for all the beauties in all the creatures are not to be cōpared to yt glory that is in Him. The fire had neuer yt glance to ſet forth His glory▪ &c. yet it hath pleaſed ye Lord, for our capacitie ſubmitting Himſelfe to our infirmitie, by thoſe things yt are moſt glorious & exquiſite in Nature, to ſet out & repreſent His incomprehenſible glory: He takes as it vvere a darke ſhadovv thereby, to let vs ſee His ſhining glory: & therefore (Brethren) take vp ye leſſon. When euer the Lord vtters His Majeſtie by outward ſignes of His creatures, hold not altogether thine eye fixed on ye outward ſignes, as though His Majeſty extended ye ſelfe no further, as though there were no greater glory in Him than in them, as though He vvere no vvhiter than the ſnow, nor brighter than the fire: for the viſible creature cannot fully expreſſe the glory of the Creator: but by the eye of Faith, thou ſhouldeſt pierce into that inward light and incomprehenſible glory, whereinto GOD dwells, bleſſed for euer, which is repreſented by the beautie of theſe outwarde ſignes. Therefore when Hee ſets out His brightneſſe by the brightneſſe of the Sunne: when thou ſeeſt the Sunne ſhining, thou ſhouldeſt ſay with thy ſelfe, I cannot abide the brightneſſe of this Sunne: & therefore what brightneſſe is in yt God that made it: and if by the eye of Faith thou lookeſt thorow the glorie of all the creatures,

to the infinite glorie of the Creator, thou ſhalt haue a faire vantage, for thou ſhalt no ſooner looke vpon His glorie, by the eye of faith, but aſſoone ſhall the Lord by the beames of His infinite glorie, and by a marueilous light ſhine in thine heart: for as the Apoſtle ſayes, 2. Cor. 4.6. God that commanded the light to ſhine out of darkneſſe, is Hee which hath ſhined in our hearts. And I doubt not but theſe poore women looking to the glory of the Angell, who was an Ambaſſadour of Ieſus: they ſaw and conſidered how glorious Ieſus was who ſent him: and ſo they found the glory of the Lord ſhining in their ſoule afterwards, which made them to rejoyce with a joy vnſpeakable, and glorious.
            Now to end ſhortly, it is ſaid, That for feare of Him the keepers were aſtoniſhed, and became as deade men. The men of warre, are ſtanding about the graue when His Angell comes: but when they ſee the Angell, the earth did not ſhake ſo faſt as they did: they ſhake and fall downe deade, as it were in a trance: theſe men were ſtout before: and it is likely that they had bragged before, that all the world ſhould not get Him out of the graue: for they were acquainted with tumultes of warre, and they had ſeene as many terrible ſights, as any men: yet for all their ſtoutneſſe, they looke not ſo ſoone to the Angels face, and rayment, but aſſoone they fall downe dead. Wel, thou art a ſtout man, if thou wilt ſay: All the deuils in Hel ſhal not ſmite thee, nor affright thee, thou thinkeſt thou wilt out-face all the world: this Land is full of ſuch fooliſh braggers, who will ſay, they will not bee afraide to meete the Deuill: but one blencke of the face of that Majeſtie of GOD, will cauſe them fall downe as dead to the ground. Will yee weigh this matter aright, It is not onely the outwarde ſight of the Angell that aſtoniſhes theſe men: for if it was the ſight of the Angell, why fell not the women downe? Why were they not aſtoniſhed? the women ſtood ſtill, and the Angel ſpake to them, and they to him: ſo there muſt be another cauſe of this terrour? and what was the cauſe? They were great ſinners: ſinne did reigne in them without repentance: they had an euill conſcience: they were enemies to Ieſus Chriſt: and therefore at the ſight of the Angell, when the light of GOD enters in, and wakens their conſciences, they are ſtricken with exceeding terrour and feare. The children of God, who haue their conſciences purged from the guiltineſſe of ſinne, vſes not to be ſtricken with ſuch terrour at the ſight of God, but rather receiue

joy thereby. It is true: The preſence of the Majeſtie of God is terrible in it ſelfe: and the Angells themſelues can not behold it in the owne brightneſſe: yet it is joyfull, ſweet and comfortable to them who are in Ieſus Chriſt: but when it meetes with a ſinfull heart, and an euill conſcience, of all things it is moſt terrible: if thou who art a ſinfull man, and who art not in the Lord Ieſus: if thou ſaweſt Him ſhine in thine heart, & if thou getteſt not a ſight of thy ſinne, thou ſhalt finde ſuch terrour and feare, that all the world cannot comfort thee, for that ſight of all ſights is moſt terrible to them who are not in Ieſus Chriſt. I grant, indeede, that the very children of God: yea, euen the beſt of them all, ſo long as this remanent corruption abides in them, they finde the Majeſtie and glorious preſence of God makes them to be afraide: We may ſee the example of this in theſe vvomen, at the ſight of the Angell they vvere afraid: but after that once ſinne be altogether aboliſhed, then His preſence ſhall not be fearfull, but comfortable. Wee ſhall haue no feare, but joy euerlaſting: As for the reprobate, they cannot bee able to abide His glorious preſence in that great day: for if that glorie was ſo terrible that ſhined in one Angell, how terrible ſhall it be to them that are out with Chriſt, when not one Angell, but millions of Angels in glorie: yea, the Lord Himſelfe as Iudge of the world, ſhall appeare in His incomprehenſible glorie, it ſhall be ſo terrible, that it ſhall cauſe them to cry, Hilles and mountaines fall on vs, and ſaue vs from the preſence of the Lambe. The Lord grant, that we may be found in the Lord Ieſus Chriſt here, and that we may haue our conſciences ſprinckled with His blood, that we may finde the Lordes preſence not onely comfortable to vs here, but chiefly in that great day, when we ſhall ſee Him face to face. To this Lord Ieſus, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all praiſe, honour and glorie for euer.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXIX. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 But the Angell anſwered, and ſaide to the women, Feare yee not: for I knowe that yee ſeeke IESVS, who was crucified:
               
               
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Therefore, earlie in the morning, the first day of the weeke, they came vnto the ſepulchre, when the Sunne was now riſen.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 And they ſaide one to another, Who ſhall roll vs away the ſtone from the doore of the ſepulchre?
                  
                     
                        verse 4 And when they looked, they ſaw that the ſtone was rolled awaye (for in was a verie great one)
                  
                     
                        verse 5 So they went into the ſepulchre, and ſawe a young man ſitting at the right ſide, clothed in a long white robe: and they were ſore troubled.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 1 Nowe the first daye of the weeke, came Marie Magdalene, earlie, when it was yet darke, vnto the ſepulchre, and ſaw the ſtone taken away from the tombe.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Then ſhee ran, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other Diſciple whome IESVS loued, and ſaide vnto them, They haue taken awaye the LORDE out of the ſepulchre, and wee knowe not where they haue layed him.
               
            
            
               
               THe Reſurrection of Ieſus (Beloued Brethren) was without any witneſſes; no man ſaw Him riſe: therfore, the foure Euangeliſts recorde not that anie man or womā ſaw the Lord riſe out of the graue: for ſo it pleaſed the Lord to ariſe from the dead, that He would not haue neither man nor woman in this world ſeeing Him riſe. The Teſtimony of the foure Euangeliſts, is, That after He was riſen without any witneſſes, then His Reſurrectiō was known & made manifeſt to ye world by many witneſſes. They ſet down two occaſions of ye Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt: The firſt occaſion was thorow the womē, Mary Magd. & Mary the mother of Iames, who after they had ſeene Him buried, returned home to buy odours to embalme the dead body of Ieſus, where He lay in the graue. Now whē the Sabbath had paſſed by, the womē buyes the ſweet odours in the night time, which proceeded the Lords day, as we term it: & in the night time they confect them, yt in the day they might enbalme the precious body of Ieſus. Theſe womē 
               (in the dawning of the day, before the Sun roſe) wēt out of ſet purpoſe to anoint the Lord. There is ye firſt occaſiō how his reſurrectiō came to light. The other occaſiō: As theſe womē came, the Angel of the Lord came down: his purpoſe is to teſtifie to theſe women yt came out of the Towne, that the Lord was riſen. Now followes the manifeſtatiō of His Reſurrection: The Angell preuents the women, and rolles the ſtone from the graue, and abides ſtill there, to teſtifie to the women, that the Lord Jeſus was riſen frō the dead. After this, the Lord Ieſus Himſelfe appeares to the womē, and confirmes the Teſtimony of the Angel. The women hauing receiued theſe two manifeſtations of His riſing, they get this honour to be made the firſt preachers of the Reſurrection before all men: yea, euen before th' Apoſtles themſelues: and this preaching of the women is the third manifeſtation. Then after the women had teſtified to His Apoſtles, that He was riſen, the Lord appeares Himſelf to the Apoſtles, and confirmes their Teſtimony, that verily He was riſen from the dead. Now Brethren, it is to be knowne firſt of all, cōcerning theſe womē, who next after the Angels were made witneſſes of the Reſurrectiō of Ieſus Chriſt, yt they came not all to the graue in one cōpany, but as it appeares wel of the Hiſtory, there has bin two cō
               panies of thē, one cōpany yt came firſt to the graue, & wēt out of Ieruſalē
                before ſun riſing: another company yt came out after this company, & came to the graue of the Lord before the other companie.

If wee marke not this difference, wee will ſee well howe the foure Euangeliſts aggree in that Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST. As for the firſt company: There were two women eſpecially, named Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James, not excluding the reſt: but they are named, becauſe among all the reſt they were moſt notable, and beſt knowne to the Apoſtles. Marke notes three to bee in the firſt company, theſe two, and one Salome. Luke notes none, but calles them certaine women, who followed Ieſus out of Galile, vnderſtanding theſe ſame women. Iohn names none, but one, Marie Magdalene, (not excluding the reſt) becauſe ſhe was beſt known for her loue, for her zeale, for her faith, and for her affectiō to Chriſt, her name is regiſtrate. Brethrē, the laſt day we heard ſomething of the firſt company, & the time whē they came, in the dawning of the day before the Lords day, which we cal Sunday. Now we heard, as they came out of Ieruſalē, the Angell of the Lord deſcē
               ded from Heauē, with a great earthquake: No queſtion the women were afraid at this: but being ſtrēgthned with the Spirit, they came forwarde: as they were comming to the graue, they fell in queſtion about the rolling away of the ſtone frō the doore of the graue: they foreſaw not this impedimēt ere they came frō home: but being carried with an earneſt deſire to anoint the Lords dead body: they were not mindfull of any impedimēts. We know whē a man or a womā, would faine haue a thing done, they will not forecaſt for all perils: but it is better to prouide & foreſee in time ye impedimēts ere thou begin the worke: Yet a man or a womā who hath the worke of the Lord, ſhould not caſt for all perils: for if he put not his hand to the work of the Lord, except he ſee al impedimēts remoued, he will neuer do any thing to the glory of God: for in performing of ye Lords work, we muſt not think yt He will remoue all impedimēts at ye firſt, as theſe womē foūd al impedimēts to be takē away. Now theſe women came forward, & as they came, they perceiued the ſtone to be rolled from the graue. Marie Magdalene ſeeing the ſtone away, ſhe ran back, & ſhewed the matter to Peter & Iames, in Jeruſalem, where they laye lurking ſhe brings in her conceit euill tidings to them, & ſaies, The body of the Lord is ſtollē away out of the graue & we know not where they haue layed him. So Brethren, in this Text yt we haue read, we haue firſt a particular Hiſtorie of Marie Magdalene, regiſtrate by Iohn: Thē we haue the Hiſtory of the reſt of the women: As concerning Mary Magdalene, wee note of her theſe foure thinges out of the Goſpel of

               Iohn: Firſt, her outcomming: Next, what ſhe ſees when ſhe is come, to wit, the ſtone rolled away: Thirdly, what ſhee does when ſhe ſees the ſtone remoued▪ ſhe returnes to Peter: & fourthly, what ſhe ſaies: ſhe brings no good tidings to Peter and Iames, but ſhe ſaies, They haue ſtollen away the body of the Lord, and I know not where they haue layed him. Touching the going out of Marie, I ſtay not on it, for ſhe came out with the reſt of the firſt cōpany of womē: only this, if any mā would aske wherfore the women got this honour aboue men, ye euen the Apoſtles, to be made firſt witneſſes of this Reſurrection of Chriſt? I anſwere, So it pleaſed the Lord yt directed thē: & this only one cauſe makes their witneſſing alſo to be autentik, yt no man ſhould except againſt it. Ye ſee in ciuil things womē are not admitted to be witneſſes: but here ye ſee in this ſpiritual m
                  •
               tter they are made witneſſes before all the world: & their teſtimony is ſo autētik, yt if Iohn or Peter or any of th'apoſtles had refuſed this teſtimony, they had hazarded their part & portion in the reſurrectiō of Ieſus Chriſt: & if thou reject their witneſſing this day, thou ſhalt neuer haue part of His reſurrection. To come to the Text: What ſees ſhe, & the reſt when they come to the graue? They ſee the ſtone rolled away, & ſo they are relieued of yt care yt troubled thē by the way. Mary Magd. & the reſt, came of a great zeale to the graue, to anoint the Lords dead body: yet I wil not cō
               mend this purpoſe, becauſe they had no warrand of the word of the Lord: for He told He would riſe the third day: & therfore they ſhold not haue come out to anoint Him ye third day. Yet whē they go out the third day to anoint Him, ere they came to the graue, they find ye impedimēt to be takē away, the ſtone to be remoued. Mark this well: If they ye came to this action without any warrande, got all impedimēts remoued: How much more, if any man or woman of zeale to God, & to His glory haue a good purpoſe, & haue an expreſſe warrād of His word, ſhal they find al impedimēts to be takē away? God is the ſame to vs now, yt He was to thē then. Yet I ſee again, it is not to be too wiſe in the work of the Lord: but aſſoon as we know what is the Lords will, we ſhuld addreſſe our ſelues to perform the ſame, & commit the ſucceſſe to Him, who can remoue al impedimēts: for in ſo doing thou honoureſt God, & giueſt Him the glory, yt is due to Him, when vnder hope againſt hope thou beleeueſt, as Abrahā did, Rom. 4.18. But ye will ſay, Albeit Marie Magd. foūd the ſtone rolled away, yet ſhe foūd not the body of the Lord, which ſhe meant to anoint with odours: I anſwere: ſhe foūd not the thing ſhe ſought: but what loſt

ſhe? She found a better thing than ſhee ſought: ſhe ſeekes the Lord among the dead, and ſhe findes Him among the liuing: the faithfull who ſeeke the Lord, ſhall neuer be diſappointed: if thou miſſeſt that thing that thou ſeekeſt, thou ſhalt get a better thing, & if thou ſeekeſt this life (if thou be in the Lord) if thou looſe it: what looſeſt thou? thou ſhalt finde a better life. Marie ſeeing ye ſtone rolled away, ſhe goes not forward but returnes home again. Now certainly I cānot deny, but this came of zeal, but I will not excuſe her but ſhe ſhuld haue ſtayed with ye reſt, & haue looked into ye graue, to heare the Angels informatiō, but on a ſuddenty ſhe returnes. Brethren, this falles out in ye beſt & moſt godly, they will oft times be miſcaried for a while, not yt there is any fault to be found with their zeale, or wt their affection to ye Lord: but ye haſtie & ſudden doing, comes more of a blindnes & ignorance than of zeale: & therefore marke ye leſſō: Who euer would be zealous in a good cauſe, & would vtter their affectiō toward ye Lord, ere they begin, they ſhuld beware & know well what they are doing: let knowledge goe before, & let it be borne as a torch, to ſhew the way, & then let zeale follow, for if zeale follow not, I wil not giue a penny for thy knowledge, zeale without knowledge is better thā knowledge without zeale: a great zeale wt a ſober meaſure of knowledge is better thā al ye knowledge in ye world without zeale: knowledge without zeale ſerues for nothing but for damnatiō: if yu vnderſtood, & couldeſt tel ouer ye whole Bible, without zeale that ſerues thee for nothing: I had rather haue one yt can ſpeake two words wt zeale, than haue all thy knowledge: litle knowledge wt zeale wil ſaue thee, but if yu hadſt all ye knowledge in ye world, without zeale it wil not ſaue thee. Now ye laſt thing concerning Marie: whē ſhe hath returned back to Peter & Iohn: here ſhe begins to make a ſad narratiō, & cōplaines, & ſayes, alas, They haue ſtollen away the body of the Lord, & we know not where to ſeeke it, ſpeaking in the plurall nūber: ſhe makes a mone & looke to ye affectiō of the woman toward ye Lord: ſhe could not be ſeparate frō Him, whē He was dead in ye graue (alas ſhe had another kind of loue to Him, thā we haue now: but now, albeit He be now glorified in ye Heauens, we will ſuffer our ſelfe eaſily to ſunder frō Him without a cōplaint or mone: but if we foūd either ye force of His death, or yet the force of His life & glory, we would neuer be glad vntill we were joyned wt Him▪ Now when ſhe ſayes, they had taken away ye Lord, albeit ſhe ſpeakes not ye trueth, yet I will not ſay, ſhe made a lie, but ſhe failed

in ignorance, ſhe ſpake as ſhe thought, but ſhe knew not yt the Lord was riſen. Ignorāce is a ſore thing: for whē once any mā cōmits a ſin through ignorance, he goes forvvard frō one ſin to another: ſo ſhe makes an euil report to ye Apoſtles: ſtriue therefore to get this miſty cloud of ignorance remoued frō thee: for if thou takeſt pleaſure to ly in it, ye end of it ſhall be vtter darknes. Brethrē, marke ye mercy of God: ye Lord layes not this to her charge: it is ſaid commonly, loue hides a multitude of ſins: ye Lord vvhen He loues a perſon, He caſts ye mantle of His mercy ouer his ſins, & hides them: He vvill be loth to reuile them vvhom He loues: a man vvil not ſhame another whō he loues vvel, much leſſe will ye Lord doe it: No, He vvill caſt ye cloak of His mercy vpō them yt they appeare not before ye judgemēt ſeat of His Father. Now, I ſee further, albeit thoſe things were not true, yet by them ye Lord brings good to ye diſciples: for they were lying in ſluggiſhnes, & ſo wakens them: ſo He works light out of darknes, yet yt is no vvarrand for thee to do euill. Let no man doe euill, that good may come of it, Rom. 3.8. Marke laſt cōcerning this womā 
               Marie, I ſee ſhe comes to ye knovvledge of ye reſurrectiō of Ieſus with great paine, for ſhe waked ye night before wt care: ſhe comes out early in ye morning to ye graue, & goes home wt great care & heauines. It is not a litle thing to come to Chriſt in His glory: thinkeſt yu to ſtep in at the firſt, to ſee God in His glory: thou vvilt not get leaue to ſee ye glory of a King at ye firſt, & thinkeſt yu to come to Chriſt at the firſt: No, yu muſt come to Chriſt, & ye ſight of His glory vvith many teares, & great paine But what if thou ſhouldſt paine thy ſelfe all thy lifetime if thou get a ſight of this reſurrection in glory, & if thou getteſt a blencke of yt countenance, if it vvere at thy laſt end, it ſhall ſvvallovv vp in a moment all thy diſpleaſure & paine: if thou ſhouldeſt ſuffer martyrdome, yet yt ſight of His glory ſhall furniſh ſuch joy, as ſhall ſwallovv vp all diſpleaſure, the ſight of that eternall weight of glory makes vs to count all the afflictions of this preſent life to be but light and momentanean, when we looke not to the things that are ſeene, but to the things that are vnſeene. Thou thinkeſt the time here to be longſome, but once thou getteſt a ſight of that glory, thou ſhalt think it but a moment. Novv leauing Marie Magdalene, I come to the reſt of the vvomen yt were at ye graue, of whō we haue theſe four things ſhortly, firſt, what they do, they enter into ye graue of ye Lord, for it was large, not an hole: ſurely they behoued to loue Him well in whoſe graue they went. Next, whē they enter in the graue, we haue ſet down what they ſee:

they ſee an Angell in the ſhape of a young man, clothed in a faire white robe ſitting in the graue: thirdly, we haue how they are terrified; and laſtly, wee haue the ſpeech of the Angell to the women. Then firſt, comming to the graue, they runne not away, as Marie Magdalene did, but enter in the graue, ſeeking the LORD: and in this point, they goe beyond Marie, ſhe went backe, but they goe forward: otherwiſe ſhe went beyond them, for loue zeale, and faith in Chriſt. No, not one of the diſciples ſurpaſt Marie Magdalene in loue, faith and zeale, yet they ſurpaſſe her in this point, and as they excell her in going forward, they get ſure information of the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt, for their reward. Marke the leſſon, they who are inferiour in ſpirituall graces, in ſome duties will excell them who are ſuperiour: and when the ſuperiour falles backe, they will goe forward: and this lets vs ſee, that it is the LORD who makes the difference? Haſt thou moe graces than thy companion: Hee that preferred thee at one time, will plucke His hand from thee, another time, and put them before thee, and to this end, that thou who glorieſt in thy graces, may glorie in the Lord: for thy grace is not in thy ſelfe, but in His Hand. This for the firſt thing, followes the next: What ſee they? They ſee in the ſhape of a young man an Angell, cled with a long robe, from top to toe. I take this Angel to be ye ſame of whō we ſpake ye laſt day, who firſt remoued away the ſtone, and then ſate downe on it, his eyes burning like lightening: and cled in white rayment. Novve this Angell withdravves himſelfe, and hides him in the graue, vvhen hee ſavv the vvomen comming neere, leſt he ſhould haue frighted them away, he goes in the graue, but he ſate on the ſtone, firſt, to terrifie the men of warre, leſt they ſhould trouble the women: & beſides this, there is another cauſe, why hee goes in the graue, beeing to teſtifie the Reſurrection, he chuſes the commodity of the place, that when he ſhould get the women in the graue, that the Lord was riſē in the graue, he might inſtruct them better by the emptineſſe and roomeneſſe of the graue, that the Lord was riſen from the dead. Well, that ſame Lord that terrifies the wicked with His looke, that ſame GOD is mercifull to His owne: and that Angell, that terrifies the men of warre, he is a miniſter of mercie to the godly women. I ſay more, at that ſame time, whilſt as He chaſes away the wicked, in doing of that, He ſhewes mercie to the godly, and He terrifies the wicked, that they ſhould not bee a ſtoppe or terrour to the godly: all the

terrours and judgements of the wicked, as they ſerue to the glorie of God: ſo they ſerue for the well of His owne: for the LORD hath not only His owne glory before His eyes: but alſo of the 
                  •
               ell of His owne. Then conſider againe the circumſtance of the place, wherein the Angell teaches theſe women, the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt. The Father of Heauen is very carefull of euery circumſtance, that ſerues for the teſtimonie of Chriſts Reſurrection: firſt, Hee is carefull of the firſt witneſſe of His Reſurrection: Hee will not haue a man to be witneſſe, but an Angell. Then He is carefull to whome this Angel ſhould tell His Reſurrection: He will not haue him teſtifying it to the men of warre (He wil not haue pearles caſten before ſvvine) but to the vvomen: The LORD is carefull of the place vvhere His doctrine ſhould be taught: He vvill haue the vvomen to goe to the graue, to the ende they ſhould receiue the doctrine of Reſurrection the better, that by the emptineſſe of the graue, the Angell might the better demonſtrate, that the LORD was riſen. Thinke yee novv, that the LORD hath caſten off that care He had then: That care He had of the perſon of the Preacher, of the perſon to vvhome He ſends Him, of the place of preaching? No, that ſame LORD hath the ſame care yet, and He vvill loue them vvell, to vvhome He concredites His glorious Euangell: He loues them vvell, vvhom He lets attentiuely and carefully heare His glorious Goſpell, and the LORD hath a care vvhere a man may moſt commodiouſly ſpeake for edification, and vvhere men & vvomen may heare Chriſt pointed out commodiouſly. This for the thing they ſavv: vvhat follovves? The ſillie vvomen are terrified▪ as the guard of the men of vvarre vvere terrified: I ſee then, in the perſon of theſe vvomen, the preſence of GOD is terrible to the godly: and more I ſee: vvhen men and vvomen are ſeeking Ieſus Chriſt, the firſt ſight they get of Him is terrible. The ground of this is not only that terrible Majeſtie, that no creature can bee able to looke on, (and why ſhould not all fleſh ſtoupe at the preſence of that glorious GOD: but this is not the onely ground: but becauſe in the moſt godly man or vvoman there is a remanent corruption: therefore they are afraide at the preſence of GOD. Feeleſt thou it not now, thou ſhalt feele it ere thou go. This remanent corruption can not abide the ſight of that glory: a ſpot of vncleanneſſe cannot ſtand in the preſence of that Holy Majeſtie: yet I ſee a greater difference betweene the women and the guard: for the men of warre

vvere terrified to the death, but ſo vvere not the vvomē. Where fro came this difference betweene the vvomen and the Guarde? That Guarde vvas but a companie of prophane bodies, vvithout God, vvithout grace, vvithout faith, vvithout hope, vvithout loue, & vvas full of ſinne, & of an euill conſcience: But the vvomen, ſuppoſe they were ſinfull, & had partly an euill conſcience (for where ſin is, there is part of an euill cōſcience) yet in a part they were purged frō ſin, & thorow the death of Ieſus Chriſt they had their conſcience ſprinkled with His blood: & as that euill cōſcience terrified them, ſo that good conſciēce held them vp. Suppoſe ſo long as we remain in this body we cānot be quit & free of ſin & corruption: ye well is ye ſoule yt in the blood of Ieſus findes their ſins forgiuen them: for ſuppoſe it be terrified, yet it wil not deſpaire. Now I come to the ſpeach of the Angell to the women: The Angell ſeeing thē terrified, he ſpeaks and encourages them firſt, and ſaies to them, Feare yee not: and then he begins to teſtifie of the Reſurrection of Christ: & laſt, he giues them a commandement, to tell the Diſciples
               ▪ Firſt hee ſaies to the women, Feare not. He ſpake not ſuch a word to the Guarde, but let them lye ſtill, till they gathered their ſpirites, and roſe vp, and ran home: for, for all the world they durſt not tarrie there. There is another difference betweene the godlie and the wicked: When the Lorde hath caſten the wicked down, He will not giue them a word to comfort them, but will let them lye ſtill. Woe to them! nothing within them to raiſe them vp, no faith, no hope, no part of good conſciēce: they are full of ſin: nothing without them: no, the Lord ſhall not vouchſafe a good word on them: He will neither giue thē an inward nor an outward comfort: and at the latter day, the Lord ſhall ſpeak one joyfull word to them: but He will ſay, Goe your way ye curſed companie to be tormented with the Deuill and his angels. Woe to the eſtate of them yt ſhalbe foūd out of Ieſus Chriſt. Albeit yt now theſe things ſound not in thy eares, & now thinkeſt Heauē & Hell to be but matters of jeſts: yet one day, though thou be a king, thou ſhalt find theſe things to be earneſt, & thou ſhalt wiſh, whē thou waſt made a mā or a womā, thou hadſt bin made a ſtock or ſtone. But by the contrary: The Lord holds vp ye godly, not only inwardly by a piece of good cōſcience, but alſo by outward means, He ſpeaks comfortablie to them: And He will ſay to them by His Miniſters, Feare not. Marke further: He will not only holde them vp, but that ſame thing yt terrified the wicked, He will make it to cōfort them: He makes this ſame Angell,

that terrified the men of vvarre, to comfort and encourage them. More than this: Hee will not onely free and relieue them from terrour, but He will poure in joye: And no queſtion, this worde had a powerfull force to raiſe them vp, & comfort thē: And then beſides this, He miniſters joye, by telling them of yt glorious reſurrection. So not only feare is put away, but the glorious Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt is tolde them, whereof there ariſes an vnſpeakeable joye. Well Brethren: albeit we feele not this joy for the preſent: yet hold ſtill thy eare, & heare on continually, howbeit with pain: for it thou get grace to hold ſtill thy eare, & heare: I promiſe thee in the name of God, thou ſhalt get ſuch a joye in the ende as ſhall make thee to thinke all thy paine to be nothing. Now one word ere I end: Mark how the Lord prepares His own to heare theſe tidings: He will not haue them to come with a light diſpoſition of heart, as wee vſe to doe, without any ſight & premeditation of ſin & miſery. Thou wilt come in, & not once think thou haſt neede of the preaching of the glorious Reſurrection of Chriſt. But look the preparation of theſe women: Ere euer the Lord will haue the Angel ſpeaking one word, Hee will haue them terrified: & no queſtion they were exceedinglie affraid: As euer thou wouldeſt look for joy, thine heart muſt be prepared with terrour, & in ſome meaſure caſtē down, ere euer the Lord ſpeake one cōfortable word to thee: And therfore, let no man take hardily with the terrours of the word. This is the firſt. Thē the next poinct of preparation is, Whē thou art caſten downe, ere He begin to ſpeak to thee the glad tidings of ſaluation, He will raiſe thee vp, He will ſay to thee who art caſten down thorow the ſenſe of thy ſin, Be not terrified, but be of good comfort. And if the Lords ſpirit accōpany this word, it will encourage thee, & it will raiſe vp thy dead ſoule. Then when the ſinner is raiſed vp to heare gladly, then hee comes on to the gladde tidings of ſaluation. Ieſus is come into the world for thy ſins, & this Ieſus is crucified, dead and buried for thy ſins: and this ſame Ieſus is riſen, and aſcended vp to the Heauen, to bee an euerlaſting Aduocate for thee. What more? This ſame Ieſus ſhall come to judge the world, and to take thee with Him one day, and to make thee partaker of His glorie. This is the vvhole ſumme of the Goſpell. The Lord giue vs grace to bee partakers of that joy vvhich the glorious Goſpell offers in this IESVS CHRIST: To whom vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirit, bee all Praiſe and Honour for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXX. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 But the Angell anſwered, and ſaide to the women, Feare yee not: for I know that yee ſeeke Jeſus, who was crucified:
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Hee is not heere, for hee is riſen, as he ſaid: come, ſee the place where the Lord was layed,
                  
                     
                        verse 7 And goe quicklie, and tell his Diſciples, that hee is riſen from the dead: and beholde, hee goeth before you into Galile: there ſhall yee ſee him: loe, I haue tolde you.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 But hee ſaide vnto them, Bee not ſo troubled: yee ſeeke Ieſus of Nazareth, who hath beene crucified: hee is riſen, hee is not heere: beholde the place where they put him.
                  
                     
                        verse 7 But goe your way, and tell his Diſciples, and Peter, that he will goe before you into Galile: there ſhall yee ſee him, as hee ſaid vnto you.
               
            
            
               WE heard the laſt day (Brethrē) that there were two companies of women, that came out of Hieruſalem, to the graue of IESVS CHRIST: The firſt companie came foorth in the dawning of the daye, before the riſing of the Sunne: The next companie came foorth ſomewhat later, I thinke about the riſing of the Sunne. In the firſt companie vvere Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames, and Salome, & others, vvho are not named: Theſe came out of Hieruſalem altogether: and as they drew neare to the graue, they ſaw the great ſtone that vvas rolled to the doore of

the graue, rolled away. Mary Magdalene, aſſoone as ſhe ſees the ſtone to bee rolled awaye, tarries no longer, but ſupponing it was done by men, and that they had ſtollen away the Lordes bodie by night: then in haſte ſhee runnes home, and telles PETER and IOHN, and ſhee ſaies to them, They haue ſtollen awaye the bodie of the Lord, and wee know not where they haue layed him. But the other women tooke more aduiſement, than Marie Magdalene, for they abode ſtill, and when ſhee was gone home, they entered into the graue, and they ſawe an Angell ſtanding in the graue, in the likeneſſe of a young man, clothed with a long white robe, ſitting at the right ſide of the graue, at which ſight they were wonderfullie aſtoniſhed. And this Angell to my judgement, was euen that ſame Angel that rolled awaye the ſtone from the graue: and with His bright looke terrified the Guarde, and frighted them, leſt they ſhould haue troubled the vvomen. The women beeing aſtoniſhed at the ſight of the glorious Angell, Hee begins to ſpeake to them of the Reſurrection, and to tell them of theſe tidinges. For the better vnderſtanding of the Oration of the Angell, wee ſhall ſpeake of it in theſe foure partes: The firſt is a voyce of comfort, a worde of encouragement, Feare not, ſaies the Angell. The next, hauing encouraged them, hee beginnes to preach to them of the Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt, teſtifying vnto them, that the Lord was riſen. And hee confirmes by one or two arguments that the Lord was riſen. In the thirde part of his Oration, hee giues a commandement to the vvomen, to tell the Apoſtles, and namelie Peter, that the Lorde was riſen: and more than that, that that ſame Lorde ſhould goe before them into Galile, and there they ſhoulde ſee him. In the fourth and laſt part, hee concludes this ſpeach, and hee ſaies, Beholde, I haue tolde you. Then after the Oration of the Angell, vvee haue the effect that the Oration vvrought in the hearts of the vvomen, to vvit, they feare and rejoyce exceedinglie, and they obey the voyce of the Angell, and they runne home with all haſte to tell the Apoſtles, that the Lord was riſen.
            
            Nowe to returne to the Oration of the Angell: It is ſhort, but wonderous pitthie: As for the firſt part of the Oration, Feare not: (Wee ſpake of it the laſt daye, and there vvee left off: therfore now wee proceede to the ſeconde part, to that graue teſtimonie, which the Angell giues to the Reſurrection of Chriſt) Before he ſpeakes, hee conciliates authoritie to his perſon. Whoſoeuer ſpeakes in the name of Chriſt, ſhoulde haue an authoritie of perſon. The vvordes

are theſe: I knowe perfectly, that yee ſeeke Ieſus of Nazareth, that was crucified, ſayes the Angell; hee askes not, Whome ſeeke ye? but hee breakes off the ſpeech, and he ſayes, I know, ye ſeeke Ieſus of Nazareth, that was crucified and buried, and by this knowledge he lets them ſee, that hee was ſent of God, and knew the purpoſe of the women, ere euer they reueiled it to Him. What man is he? that knowes the minde of a man, except that the Lord giue him knowledge extraordinarily: No, all the Angels of Heauen will not know my minde, except the Lord reueile it: No man, nor Angell, can know the heart, and ſearch the ſecrets thereof, but onely GOD, that made the heart. So he lets them ſee, that he was ſent of God: that the worde might haue the greater credite: for wherefore ſerues the authoritie of perſons, but that the worde they ſpeake, may haue the greater credite. Marke the leſſon: There is neuer one that the Lord ſends to be witneſſes in the world of Chriſt, of His croſſe, and paſſion, of His reſurrection, of the mercies and graces that paſſe all vnderſtanding, flowing from His Paſſion, and Reſurrection, but either in one meaſure or other, He wil haue them decored with heauenly reuelation, with power, euen to goe downe to the ſecret thoughts of mens hearts, and to lay them open to them, that they may ſee their owne vile heartes (for our heartes are not knowne, not to our owne ſelues, vntill wee goe downe, and pull off the vaile off them) and all to this end, that we may ſee God, in that perſon that ſpeakes: and the laſt end is this, that credite may bee giuen to that gracious word: and ſhould the word of life paſſe without credite? Paul 1. Cor. 14.24, 25. ſayes, If a Prophet ſtand vp to prophecie, or a Preacher to preach, and if an ignorant perſon come in, loadned with ſinne, and not feeling the burthen (alas, there are too many of this ſort) if this perſon come in, with the force of the word, he is dejected, and he falles downe and glorifies God, and hee will ſay, GOD is with that man that ſpeakes, and if God were not with the man that ſpeakes, the heart of the man would neuer be dejected: No, all the Kings vnder the Heauen could not deject the heart of the pooreſt begger. So to end this in a worde: The Lord will know well whome He ſends to ſpeake theſe glorious tithings, that Chriſt hath ſuffered, and is riſen: and this is ſure, theſe that He ſends▪ He will giue them power to pull downe, if it were the heart of a King to the ground: yet the ſtile hee giues to Chriſt, would not be paſt by: marke it well, hee

ſaies not, I knowe yee ſeeke IESVS the Sonne of GOD: he ſaies not ſo: but he ſaies, I knowe yee ſeeke Jeſus of Nazareth, a man who was latelie crucified: So the Angell, in ſtyling of Him, giues Him the baſeſt and vyleſt names that hee can: hee names Him from a ſillie Towne in IVRIE, IESVS OF NAZARETH: Then from that vile death of the Croſſe, That man that was crucified. I doubt not, but in this name he had a reſpect to the women, who knew theſe ſtiles which Hee had in the dayes of His fleſh, when Hee was conuerſant here: they knewe theſe ſtiles better than the ſtiles of His Godhead, which were from all eternitie: Yet he hath a further reſpect to theſe ſtiles, to let vs and theſe women ſee, that hee was not aſhamed of His infirmitie, nor at the ſhamefull death of the Croſſe: Noe, the Angels, to whom this death appertaines not ſo much, as to vs (ſaies PETER, in his firſt EPISTLE, the firſt CHAPTER, and the eleuenth VERSE) delight to looke in to CHRIST, to looke in to that infirmitie, and to that death of the Croſſe. Alas, proude ſinner! wilt thou bee offended to looke in to it? when Peter ſaies, it is the delight of the holie Angels to looke in to it: Becauſe theſe Angels in the infirmitie of CHRIST, they ſawe the power of GOD ſhining: in that fooliſhneſſe of the Croſſe of CHRIST, they ſawe that wiſedome of GOD and, in that juſtice of GOD, they founde a paſſing me 
                  〈…〉
                and therefore nowe, and euerlaſtinglie, their delight is to looke 
                  〈◊〉
                CHRIST, and His ſuffering: And as they delight to looke in to CHRIST, and His ſuffering, ſo they ſhall giue praiſe to Him: and more for that, than for the making of the worlde in His great wiſedome and power.
            Yet, if wee will weigh and conſider well, wee ſhall finde another reſpect, which the Angels haue in naming Him after ſuch baſe ſtiles, which is, That the glorie of His Reſurrection might appeare the greater. It is euen as hee ſhoulde haue ſaide, IESVS, of that ſober Village NAZARETH, who was counted vile in the worlde, and was crucified, yet for that infirmitie Hee is riſen againe, and is in the glorie of the Heauens. So hee names Him after theſe baſe ſtiles, to enlarge the glorie of His Reſurrection: for the humbler that Hee was, the Reſurrection was the more glorious. It vvas indeed a great matter, and a vvonder, to ſee a man, a vvorme, treade on by the Deuill, treade on by death, (it vvas a vvonder, to ſee Him, howe Hee vvas humbled,) that

Hee ſhould haue riſen againe to ſuch a wonderous glorie. So that at the Name of Ieſus all knees ſhall bowe, Philipp. Chap. 2. verſ. 10. But I leaue this, and I goe forwarde. Next comes on the tidinges. The wordes of MATTHEVV are theſe: Firſt, Hee is not heere. Then the next wordes, Hee is riſen. The firſt worde was an heauie worde to theſe holie women: for appar
                  •
               ntlie they conceiued with Marie Magdalene, that His bodie was ſtollen awaye out of the ſepulchre, and thought not that He was riſen againe. The next worde they heare comfortes them: The firſt worde makes them exceeding heauie, but the ſeconde worde makes them to rejoyce, when hee ſaies, Hee is riſen, He is not ſtollen away craftilie, but by His owne power He is riſen.
            In this anunciation, as in a picture, yee maye obſerue the forme which is vſed in proponing the EVANGEL and gladde tidinges of Saluation: The beginning is alwayes in dolour and in ſadneſſe, but the ende is in joye and gladneſſe. The firſt vvorde that vvee heare, is, That the LORDE is come into the worlde, and ſuffered ſhame, reproaches, and ignominie, and at laſt, the ſhamefull death of the Croſſe vnder PONTIVS PILATE: Theſe are heauie tidinges to vs, to heare that our LORDE was ſo hardlie, and ſo euill entr
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                the vvorlde; and that in ende, Hee died the vile death of 
                  •••
               oſſe for vs, and was buried: And yet immediatelie it followes, That the ſame LORDE is riſen, and aſcended vp in glorie to the Heauens, and there ſittes at the right hande of GOD; and, that thorowe His Paſſion, death, and Reſurrection, our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, wee ſhall riſe againe, and get life euerlaſting: And theſe are joyfull tidinges.
            Nowe to inſiſt further: The firſt tidinges which is tolde to the Kirke in this earth, are ſadde and heauie: Thou muſt ſuffer: And whoſoeuer will ſtriue to liue godlie in CHRIST, of neceſſitie he muſt ſuffer affliction: There are ſadde tidinges. But it followes, if thou ſuffer with Him, thou ſhalt reigne with Him: Theſe are gladde tidinges. Nowe I ſhall giue you the wordes of the Scripture for my warrande: Chriſt (Matth. 16.21.) ſaies the ſame to His Diſciples, I am to goe vp to Hieruſalem, and to ſuffer, and to bee ſlaine. And Peter tooke euill with it: Theſe are ſadde tidinges. But Hee ſaies, I will riſe againe the thirde daye: And this is joyfull. And in the XVI. CHAPTER and XXXII. VERS. of IOHN, Hee ſaies to them, The time will come when yee ſhall bee ſcattered, and leaue mee alone: (Sadde tidinges.) But

I am not alone, for the Father is with mee: Ioyfull tidinges. Then Hee ſaies to them, Yee ſhall bee hated of all men for my Names ſake: (That is ſadde tidinges to them.) But they who continue to the ende, ſhall bee ſaued: Gladde tithinges. And againe, in the 16. Chapter of IOHN, and 33. verſ. He ſaies, Jn the worlde ye ſhall haue affliction: (A ſad word) But J haue ouer-come the worlde: gladde tidinges. So yee ſee theſe tidinges alwayes beginne with ſadneſſe, but they ende with joye. And as it is of the worde, ſo it is of the diſpoſition of the hearers: The ſinner will firſt bee ſadde: and then finde ſuch a joye as is vnſpeakeable: and this ſhall bee thy diſpoſition, ſo long as thou art an hearer: But when thou ſhalt be a beholder, no heauines of heart, but joye for euer, and all teares ſhall be wiped away from thine eyes. While thou art hearing, thy teares ſhall bee mingled with joye, but when thou art ſeeing there ſhall bee perfect joy without teares. Thus farre for the tidings. He is not content to tell them onely, the Lord is riſen: no, one word will not ſuffice them, but He confirmes it by Chriſtes prediction, He ſaid it before, the Lord was to ſuffer, and to riſe the third day. Looke the XVI. Chap. of Matth. So he confirmes them by the Lords owne Teſtimonie. Theſe propheſies and predictions which are foretolde of Chriſt, are much worth: for they haue this vſe: When thou readeſt them in that olde Teſtament, they ſeale vp the worde of the Goſpell, of the manifeſtation of Chriſt in the fleſh, of His ſuffering, and glorification, that that report of olde is fulfilled. But before I leaue this: I ſee the Lord will not let His owne forget His vvorde which He hath once tolde them: ſuppoſe they would forget it, yet the Lorde will haue it called to their remembrance. Theſe vvomen woulde haue forgotten that which the chiefe Prieſtes remembred, when they ſought a guarde of Pilate to watch the ſepulchre. Sometimes it comes to paſſe, that the godlie remembers not ſo much as the wicked, who heares the worde to their deſtruction: but if thou bee one of His, Hee will haue it called to thy memorie: but if thou bee none of His, Hee vvill not regarde, that vvhen thou heareſt, thou let it goe in at thine one eare, and out at the other. Great grace they gette, vvho are in Him: Well is that ſoule for euer that is in Him. A man vvill thinke it a great thing, that a king vvill ſpeake vnto him: but it is a farre greater thing, that the King of Heauen vvill ſpeake to thee. There is ſome proportion betwixt the king and his ſubject, betwixt the king and the begger: but there is no proportion betwixt GOD and thee: So then

this is a great mercie, that He will bring that word that thou haſt contemned to thy remembrance, and ere thou remember it not, Hee will ſend downe an Angell from the Heauen, to call it to thy remembrāce. We haue not Angels now, as theſe women had then, but I ſay to thee, as many true and faithfull Miniſters, are as like many Angels: take away theſe men that preach the Goſpell (indeede I grant properly this, to call all things ſpoken to remembrance, pertaines to the Holy Spirit, Iohn 14.26.) thou ſhalt forget the word of God that is preached, and thou ſhalt grow more blockiſh than a ſtocke or a ſtone, and they that will not heare this word, He makes them like ſtones, and well were it to thee, albeit thou wereſt a King, if thou heareſt not this word, that thou wereſt a ſtone. But marke the time, when Hee brings it to their remembrance, when the Lord is riſen: this tenour of time is not ay kept, but ſometimes ere the thing be done, He calls it to remembrance: for that is a part of our felicitie, euer to be holden in memorie of grace. Woe to thee, that is not holden in memory of it, but indeed it is more joyfull to remember after it is done: and therefore at that great day, when wee ſhall ſee all thinges fulfilled, which were foretolde, our joy ſhall be perfected. I grant, that Hope hath joy, yet it hath heauineſſe joyned with it, but ſight hath perfect joy, without any heauineſſe: and when wee ſhall ſee all theſe thinges, that were foretolde vs, vvhen vve ſhall ſee that glorious God, when vve ſhall ſee euery word that euer we read in the Goſpell to be fulfilled, we ſhall remember them all with ſuch joy as no tongue can tell. Wee glorie here vnder Hope, but then our glorie ſhall bee in ſight, and vve ſhall haue it in our hand, and as vvee ſhall rejoyce then, we ſhall alſo glorifie GOD perfectly all manner of wayes, novv vve doe it with great infirmitie, but vvhen vve ſhall ſee Him, vvee ſhall glorifie Him euerlaſtingly▪ and this ſhall be a part of our ſong: Glorie for euer be to that true GOD, Hee promiſed me much, and novve, I ſee Hee hath fulfilled it: and ſo vvee ſee, there is neuer one vvord, that vvee haue heard, but that Holy and true GOD ſhall bring it to our memorie, with ſuch a joy as cannot be ſpoken.
            This for the firſt argument: nowe followes the ſecond argument: The Angell vſes to confirme his ſpeech: Come hither and ſee, ſayes the Angell: The LORD is not heere, if yee vvill not credite my vvorde, beleeue your ovvne eyes,

and ſee it, is not this a great mercie, when thou wilt not beleeue His word, the Lord will let thee ſee: the Lord is not contented to let thee heare theſe glad tythings, but He will: bring them before thine eyes. What meanes theſe viſible Sacraments, but to helpe the infirmitie of the weake Faith, & beſides the Sacraments, this word of God is not like the vvord of man, or of an Oratour, like Demoſthenes or Cicero, or any man in this world: No, that word in ye goſpel in great ſimplicitie hath a great Majeſtie ſhining in it: yea, it is viſible, as the Apoſtle ſayes in the firſt to the Corinthians 2.4. It hath an ocular demonſtration, and vvhen it ſpeakes to thee of Heauen, it will drawe thine eye to Heauen: and when it ſpeakes to thee of the Croſſe, it vvill let thee ſee Chriſt crucified, and if it ſpeake to thee of His glory, it ſhall let thee ſee Him in glory, and that is it vvhich Paul ſayes in the Epiſtle to the Galathians, Chapter 3. verſe 1. Hee preaches Chriſt ſo to them, that he made them ſee Chriſt crucified before their eyes.
            Novve I come to the thirde part: it containes a commandement that he giues to the vvomen. Tithings haue euer ſome commandement joyned with them, and commandement requires euer obedience: ſo when euer thou getteſt tithings, thou getteſt a commandement, doe this, or thou ſhalt neuer get part nor portion of the tithings. No, Brethren, a Chriſtian life is not an idle life, but practicke, if euer thou vvouldeſt be partaker of theſe good tithings, looke that thou ſtriue to doe that vvhich Hee bids thee: Ruane ſayes the Angell, home, this haue I told you, Preach ye to the Apoſtles: Goe tell the diſciples, that He is riſen. Goe your way haſtely, to teſtifie the Reſurrection. This glorious Reſurrection requires an haſtie preaching: and I ſaye to you, that teſtimonie that is giuen of Chriſt, requires expedition: and therefore if thou aymeſt to teſtifie of the Lord, doe it haſtely: the glory Hee gets, vvould not be delayed.
            The next part of the direction the Angell giues them, is that they tell the Apoſtles, that they goe to Galile, becauſe Chriſt would be before them there.
            The Papiſtes thinke that they haue gotten a great vantage of this, that Peters name was expreſſed, and not the reſt. This ſpeciall direction that is ſent to Peter, imports no ſupremacie, but rather, if ye conſider well, that hee was inferiour to them all. It importes this plainely, that Peter had done a great fault, by the

threefold deniall of the Lord. Alas, in this action he had an euill conſcience, and if there had not beene a particular direction to Him, hee durſt not for his life haue come to CHRIST. Thinke ye, that a man that hath denied GOD, dare come to Him, except He be preuented: No, Peter durſt not for his life haue looked to the LORD: ſo this is their ſupremacie, that they marke of Peter aboue the reſt. Now one thing: I thinke no man nor woman ſhould doubt, why theſe women preached this Reſurrection: The LORD giues, them a ſp
                  •
               ciall direction: firſt, from GOD, then from His Angell, and this commiſſion might ſatiſfie: ſo that the Apoſtles were bound to receiue this commiſſion, that vvas ordained by the LORD of Heauen. I marke this leſſon, There is neither man, nor woman can ſpeake in the Name of the Lord except they be ſent. So ſayes Paul to the Romanes tenth Chapter, and fifteenth verſe. None can preach, except he be ſent? How can one preach CHRIST, and if hee be not ſent by CHRIST? da
                  •
               e a knaue ſtand vp in the middeſt of a cittie, or towne, and make a proclamation in the name of the Prince, and not haue a warrand, and dareſt thou ſtand vp, and ſpeake in the Name of the great GOD of Heauen, and haue no warrand, Indeede it is the LORD who knowes who is ſent, & if thou wereſt neuer ſo admitted, and warranded by the Church, & the Lord in that great day ſhall neuer count of thy preaching, except thou haue a vvarrand in thy conſcience. Will Hee put His worde in the mouth of euery knaue: No, that is a grace, to call IESVS the LORD: No, thou canſt not call IESVS the Lord, except thou haue the Spirit of Ieſus as the Apoſtle ſayes, in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the twelfth Chapter, and third verſe. So whether wee bee Miniſters, or others, who ſpeake of IESVS, we ſhould looke that that Spirit be in the heart to direct vs when we ſpeake.
            I marke next, it was not enough to haue ſeene this reſurrection, and neuer to haue ſpoken one worde of it: No, Hee commands them to teſtifie to the Apoſtles, and the Apoſtles got this commandement to preach it againe: for the Goſpell is not a candle to put vnder a buſhell, but to holde it vp, and ſhewe it to the worlde: for it is the life, and the light of the worlde. PAVL ſayes to Timothie in his ſecond Epiſtle, the ſecond Chapter, firſt verſe, That that thou haſt heard of mee before many witneſſes, the ſame deliuer thou to faithfull men, which ſhall be able to teach others alſo. No, it is

not to be concredite to euery knaue: it is too precious a jewell to deliuer to knaues: let them deliuer it to them that are able to teach others: let the firſt deliuer to the ſecond, and the ſecond to the third, and the third to the fourth, and the fourth to the fifth, and ſo let it euer ſound in the world. Woe to that ſoule that impedes the courſe of the glorious Goſpell: for what can there be, vvhere it is not teached, but death: No, this Goſpell is a ſtumbling blocke to the world. Tell them, ſayes the Angell, Hee vvill meete them in Galile: for Iurie denied mee: No, would CHRIST ſay, I will not appoint to meete with them in Ieruſalem: for Ieruſalem is not worthie of mee, but I will meete them in Galile, and ſo they met with Him, as ye ſhall ſee hereafter by Gods grace. Then I ſee that all theſe tithings that tell vs of things that are not ſeene: hath euery one of them a promiſe joyned with them, yt we ſhall ſee them come to paſſe? Beleeue thou that He hath ſuffered, and thou ſhalt ſee that He hath ſuffered, and beleeue that He is in glorie, & thou ſhalt ſee Him in glorie. We ſavv Him not vvith our bodily eyes, but we haue that bleſſing which the LORD pronounced to Thomas, Iohn Chapter 20. verſe 29. Bleſſed are they which neuer ſaw mee, and yet doe beleeue in mee. Now bleſſed for euer ſhall that ſoule be, that neuer ſavv the LORD, and yet beleeues in Him, and I ſpeake to thee a ſore vvorde, if thou beleeueſt not, vntill thou ſee Him, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Him, if thou beleeueſt not that He died, vntill thou ſee that Hee died, thou ſhalt n
                  •
               uer ſee Him, but to thy damnation. Hope vnder hope, and againſt Hope.
            Brethren, many are the impediments that will ſtay vs: ſo that wee will ſay, I vvill neuer ſee Him: I heare much ſpeaking of Heauen, but alas, I feare I ſhall neuer ſee it: I heare much ſpoken of life, but alas, I feare, I ſhall neuer ſee life.
            And theſe are the tentations of the moſt godly men and women of this vvorld, yet againſt all theſe tentations, beleeue Gods promiſes, and hope for life: for PAVL ſayes in the Epiſtle to the Romanes. the fifth Chapter, and the fifth verſe, Faith brings foorth experience, and Hope makes not aſhamed: becauſe the loue of God is ſhed abroad in our hearts aboundantly by the holy Ghoſt which is giuen vnto vs. No, let none of theſe tentations hinder vs: that thing that holdes backe the infidels, ſhall worke for the beſt to thee that feareſt the Lord: & if thou feareſt the Lord, I promiſe thee in ye name

of GOD, all theſe tentations ſhall further thee, and thou ſhalt bee partaker of Life. Now a word, and I ſhall ende: He ſignets & ſeales vp, that which he hath told: I haue tolde you it, ſaies he: as he would ſay, It is true that I haue tolde you, and I vvill ſeale it to be true, and ye ſh
                  •
               ll find it to be true, & therefore doubt not. So our leſſon is this: Whēſoeuer thou commeſt to teſtifie to the people of God, in paine of thy life looke thou ſpeake nothing but that which God biddes thee ſpeake: and that thou mayeſt ſaye in concluſion, This is true that I haue ſaide: and that this is true, I vvill byde by it: and ſeale it vp vvith my blood. The Angell had no blood: but if thou be not of that minde to ſhedde thy blood, thou art but a deceiuer. This is a great boldneſſe to ſeale, to ſeale it vp with thy blood: but if thou haue it not ſealed vp in thine heart, thou ſhalt neuer ſeale it vp with thy blood: and vvhen it comes to the ſealing thou ſhalt ſteale away. No, it is a great vvord to ſay vvith the Prophet Dauid, I beleeued, and therefore I ſpake. Looke thou ſpeake nothing to the people of God, but that which thou ſtriueſt to beleeue. Howe is this aſſurance gotten? And vvill euerie vvanton man get this aſſurance to ſtande, and ſeale it vp vvith his blood? No, except thou ſtriue night and day to get the Lorde in thy preſence, and not to haue anie joye but in His preſence, thou ſhalt neuer haue this aſſurance. Then, howe is it kept? The Lord hath appointed reading: Take heede to thy reading, ſaies Paul to Timothie, in his firſt Epiſtle, the fourth CHAPTER, and 13. verſ. and giue thy ſelfe to meditation, and ſh
                     •
                  we thy knowledge in that that thou hast read, and get not a knowledge onelie, but a ſenſe to ſpeake to others. Reading bringes knowledge, and meditation bringes feeling: and laſt is prayer. And if it bee the duetie of all men to praye, then eſpeciallie the Miniſter is bounde to praye, both for himſelfe, and for them alſo to vvhome hee is ſent. So in a vvorde: Reade, meditate, and praye night and daye, ſo farre as is poſſible to thee to doe. And if thou doe theſe thinges, thou ſhalt ſeale it vp vvith the effuſion of thy bloode, and thou ſhalt haue more joye in thy death, than euer thou hadſt in thy life: So that thy death ſhall bee the beginning of thy life, and of that fullneſſe of joye, which thou ſhalt poſſ
                  •
               ſſe vvith Him in the Heauens for euer: To Him, therefore, vvith the Father, and His bleſſed Spirit, be all Praiſe and Honour, for euer: AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXXI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 So they departed quicklie from the ſepulchre, with feare and great, joye, and did runne to bring his diſciples word.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 And they went out quicklie, and fledde from the ſepulchre: for they trembled, and were amazed: neither ſaide they anie thing to anie man: for they were afraide.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 1 NOw the first day of the weeke, earlie in the morning, they came vnto the ſepulchre, and brought the odours which they had prepared, and certaine women with them.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 And they found the ſtone rolled away from the ſepulchre,
                  
                     
                        verse 3 And went in, but found not the bodie of the Lord Jeſus.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 And it came to paſſe, that as they were amazed thereat, beholde, two men ſuddenlie ſtoode by them in ſhining vestures.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 And as they were afraide, and bowed downe their faces to the earth, they ſaide to them, Why ſeeke yee him that liueth, among the dead?
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Hee is not heere, but is riſen: remember howe hee ſpake vnto you, when hee was yet in Galile,
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Saying, that the Sonne of man must bee deliuered into the handes of ſinfull men, and bee crucified, and the third day riſe againe.
                  
                     
                        verse 8 And they remembred his wordes,
                  
                     
                        verse 9 And returned from the ſepulchre, and tolde all theſe thinges vnto the eleuen, and to all the remnant.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 10 Nowe it was Marie Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Marie the mother of Iames, and other women with them, who tolde theſe thinges vnto the Apostles.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 But their wordes ſeemed vnto them as a fained thing, neither beleeued they them.
               
            
            
               I Shewed you from the beginning (vvelbeloued in the Lord Ieſus) that there vvere two compainies of vvomen, that came out of Hieruſalem, to the graue of the Lord: Firſt, one company, in the vvhich vvas Mary Magdalene, & Mary the mother of James & Solome, with ſome others: Thē ſoone after that there came out another company of vvomen, vvhoſe names vve finde not regiſtrated. Wee haue hearde alreadie of the Hiſtorie of the firſt vvomen, vvee hearde of their outcomming, vvee hearde vvhat they ſaw, and vvhat they hearde vvhen they came to the graue of the Lord. Now this daye vvee haue the returning of the firſt companie home to Hieruſalem, ſet downe in few vvords. Then we ſhall goe to the Hiſtorie of the ſecond company of vvomen, vvherein firſt vve haue their outcomming: Secondlie, vvhat they heare and ſee: and thirdly, their tidinges to the Apoſtles, vvhat they had hearde and ſeene. And this Hiſtorie concerning the ſeconde companie is written, by Luke, Chap. 24. verſ. 2. Matthew writes concerning the firſt companie, and Marke alſo: Iohn ſpeakes onelie of Marie Magdalene. Luke ſets downe the whole ſeconde companie. But nowe to returne to the home-comming of the firſt companie of women: It is written by MATTHEVV and MARKE, that when they had receiued direction of the Angell, They returned home with feare and great joye, to tell the eleuen Apostles (for IVDAS was fallen awaye) what they had heard and ſeene. I note ſhortlie theſe three thinges in theſe women: Firſt, I ſee that there was a feare in them: Next, I ſee that they had an exceeding joye: And laſt of all, I ſee in them obedience to the voyce of the Angell with all expedition. The feare was, becauſe of the preſence of that glorious Angell: The joye, becauſe of the joyfull newes, to wit, That the LORDE was riſen: The obedience, was, becauſe of the commaundement of the Angell, to runne home, and tell the APOSTLES. All theſe three thinges are to bee commended in them: And they teach vs this

leſſon, howe wee ſhoulde depart from the preſence of our GOD: when wee meete to heare theſe glorious tidinges, without the which there is no life: and without the hearing whereof, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. Let no man deceiue himſelfe: they teach vs howe wee ſhould depart from the worde: Depart with feare and reuerence: that is the firſt: Then depart with joye: that is the ſeconde: And thirdly: depart with a minde to obeye that which thou haſt heard: and this is the laſt. Wee ſhoulde feare, in reſpect of the preſence of the Lord, whereat all the Angels were afraid: and, where two or three are gathered together in His Name, there is His preſence. And if thou ſeeſt not His preſence in the Congregation, it were better for thee that thou preſentedſt not thy ſelfe in the Congregation: The joye ſhoulde bee of the hearing of theſe tidinges. Thou deliteſt to heare tidinges: but all the tidinges of the worlde is nothing to theſe, to wit, That Ieſus is come into the world, and hath died for thee. And laſt of all: Depart with obedience: for thou getteſt this commandement, When thou goeſt home, communicate theſe tidinges to others, that thy joye may bee encreaſed. The light of the Goſpell requires holineſſe and a godlie conuerſation: that thou liue ſoberlie in thine owne perſon, juſtlie with thy neighbour, and godly with thy God. When the daye breakes out, and when the Sunne riſes, the light of the daye is not for nothing, it cryes vpon thee, to thy labours, to fall to an honeſt conuerſation: Then much more, the Sunne of righteouſneſſe, that light of lightes, that LORDE, vvhen Hee ſhines, and cryes, Shake off the vvorkes of darkeneſſe, and put on the armour of light: Shake off thy murther, thy adulterie, and oppreſſion, in paine of thy life: Thou wilt come out, and ſticke and ſlaye a man in ſight of the Sunne: No, that murther ſhall not ſo much bee layed to thy charge, as the contemning of GOD, vvho ſhined before thee vvhen as thou ſleweſt that man. Wee are fallen nowe to ſuch a ſhamefull murther, as vvas neuer heard of among the TVRKES. What will become of this Kingdome? Suppoſe there vvere none other ſinne, but this ſinne of blood, O, it cryes for a vengeance. Marke this: ſie vpon thee, that in ſuch a light, and in the ſight of that great GOD, thou ſhouldeſt commit ſuch villanie. But I goe forwarde: and I enter to the Hiſtorie of the ſeconde companie of women, who went out to the graue of the Lord. The firſt company ſawe but one Angell, but this ſawe two Angels: and therefore they are diuerſe. The Hiſtorie is

very plaine, and there can be no other thing almoſt marked, than that which is already touched: and therefore I ſhall goe thorow it ſhortly, as God ſhall giue the grace. This ſecond companie came out ſhortly after the firſt companie: they draw neare, They ſaw the ſtone away fro
                     •
                   the ſepulchre, as the firſt did, And they enter into the graue, as the firſt 
                  •
               id, But they found not the body of the Lord Ieſus, and they are very ſad and heauie, ſuppoſing it had bene ſtollen away: they ſee two Angels, whom they ſuppoſed to be two men, fearfull to looke on: the firſt companie ſee but one Angell theſe ſee two, and the earthly witneſſes grow in number: ſo the heauenly growe: there was but one Angell only who appeared to the firſt companie, now this companie ſee two Angels, and all this was for the greater certaintie of the matter, and reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt: they ſeeing two Angels, are afraide: therefore the Angells begin and comfort the women, by telling that Chriſt was riſen, and bids them goe tell the Apoſtles. Nowe wee ſhall marke ſomething of the part of the women, and then we ſhall come to the part of the Angels. As this carefulneſſe of the Lord that was in theſe women, was worthie of praiſe: ſo the Apoſtles careleſſeneſſe of their Lord cannot be praiſed: for it became them to haue come out firſt: & as the couragiouſneſſe of theſe women is to be commended, ſo the Apoſtles cowardneſſe merites no commendation: and the moe women teſtifie of His Reſurrection, that ſame brings the greater ſh
                  ••
               c to the Apoſtles. When thou art a man, and haſt a calling, and wil
                  •
                let a Wife goe before thee, it ſhames thee: and no doubt, the force of His Reſurrection, was more powerfull in the poore women, than it was in the very Apoſtles: for all this ſpirituall courage flowes from the life of Chriſt: for except He had riſen from the death, and that vve got life thorovv His life, vvee vvould neuer haue life: yea, all the ſpirituall life, and quickneſſe that vvas in the fathers of olde, vvas by the vertue of Chriſtes Reſurrection to come, and all this quicknes of ours, is by the vertue of His Reſurrection already paſt, if thou haue that life begunne, it ſhall be a ſure earneſtpennie that thou ſhalt riſe in glorie, and liue a life, like to the glorious life of thy glorious Head and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. Then I marke another thing in theſe women: They are ſubject to diuerſe perturbations of minde: they come out with ſadneſſe, and when they found not the body of the Lord Ieſus, their dolour is increaſed: then when they ſee and heare the Angels, they are terrified, and laſt of all, they

finde joy. Wilt thou compare the godlie vvith the vngodlie, yee ſhall finde ſometimes in the heartes of the vngodly, greater peace than in the heartes of the godlie: no paine, nor vexation in them, but they ſay, peace: peace, as the Apoſtle ſayes in the firſt Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, the fifth Chapter, and the thirde verſe: but beholde the end: when they haue cried Peace, then a ſudden deſtruction from the Heauen, ſhall ouertake them, and their peace ſhall end in diſquietneſſe for euer. The trouble of the godly endes in endleſſe joy, the godly beginnes in ſadneſſe, goes forward in ſadneſſe, but euer in the ende they finde joy, and the greater trouble thou bee in, in the ende thou ſhalt finde greater joy: and vvhen thou ſhalt attaine to that joy, the verie remembrance of that trouble that thou haddeſt in this life, ſhall augment thy joy, and thou ſhalt rejoyce, that euer thou hadſt trouble here, if thou hadſt bene euen burnt or martyred for CHRISTS ſake: and by the contrarie: The wicked that haue liued heere in ſecuritie, vvhen they are thruſt in Hell, in endleſſe paine and diſpleaſure, ſhall finde that the remembrance of the joy that they had in this life ſhall augment their paine, and they ſhall curſe the time that euer they liued here in ſuch pleaſure, and had this falſe peace on earth. This Hiſtorie is plaine, and therefore I goe forvvarde: I come to the part of the Angell: the firſt ſpeech is ſomewhat rough: Why doe yee ſeeke the liuing amongſt the dead? Why doe yee this? Then Hee comes on, and ſayes, Hee is not heere, Hee is riſen. Then he confirmes it by a reaſon: Remember, women, what Hee ſaid to you, when Hee was with you in Galile, Saide Hee not, that Hee behooued to bee deliuered into the hands of ſinfull men, and bee crucified, and to riſe againe the third day. This is the meaning in effect. Then vvhere Hee beginnes with a reproofe, there muſt bee a fault in them: No, the LORD vvill not reprooue thee for nothing: I take their fault to be obliuion: for ſo the wordes of the Angell import: they had forgot that Hee ſhould riſe the thirde daye, ſuppoſe He had told them.
            Well, Brethren, I ſee this, It is the vvill of God, that vve neuer forget His word, & more I ſee, If thou letteſt it ſlip out of thy mind, as we doe too readily: the Lord will reproue thee, but in His reprouing & in His anger: He neuer forgets mercy & lenitie: in reprouing of the women, Hee makes the Angell to inſtruct and tell them that Hee vvas riſen: ſo in reproouing of thee, Hee will

teach thee, and it learnes vs this leſſon: Alwayes in all reproofes, teach them whom thou reproueſt: if thou reprooue them, without a care to inſtruct them, thy reproofe auailes nothing at all. Then looke, ſo ſoone as his anger goes away, and when he hath ſpoken two wordes, thereafter hee ſayes, Hee is not heere, Hee is riſen, Remember, He ſaid to you, He behooued to ſuffer, and die, and riſe the third day: So we learne this at the Angell, It may be, that God ſpeake a word of anger, but it will ſoone goe away, and the mercy remaines for euer: and when Hee hath laide His anger aſide, Hee teaches in mercie: and I ſpeake this to the childe of God: Manie faults in vs all, and nowe and then He ſpeakes in anger, that His owne periſh not with the wicked world: Hee will waken them with ſome angrie word, and thinke as thou wilt, and if thou be not wakened with ſome angrie worde, thou ſhalt die in thy ſtincke, and canker of thy corrupt nature: and ſo long as we are here, there is euer ſome matter of anger: ſo that now and then Hee will ſpeake to thee in anger (for wee are as fooliſh children, thinking and ſpeaking as children: and therefore haue need to be chaſtiſed) but when wee are perfect men, neuer an angrie worde, nor a gloome ſhall be, but alwayes mercie and pleaſure for euer. Then I marke another thing in the Angell, Remember (ſayes he) that the Sonne of man muſt bee deliuered into the handes of ſinfull men, and to die, and the third day to riſe againe, as Hee ſhewed to you. Well, then I ſee, the Lord He forgets not His owne worde, that He ſpeakes, ſuppoſe the women had forgotten it: No, the Lord that ſpeakes it, thinkes neuer ſo light of it as thou doeſt: Thou wilt forget ſoone, and thou takeſt no thought of it: but that word that He ſpeakes, either by Himſelfe, or by His Miniſters: He will neuer forget it. The word of a King is much, and of great might: then how weightie is the word that comes from the King of kings: Heauen and earth ſhall periſh, ere one jote of that worde periſh, or fall to the ground: and as Hee forgets not, ſo Hee will haue it called to the remembrance, not only of the godly, but alſo of the wicked: but marke the difference: When Hee brings it to the Elects memorie: H
                  •
               e brings it euer with great joy▪ as He did to theſe women. But as to the wicked, it is euer a dolefull and wofull remembrance, with paine and griefe and this is no ſmall part and cauſe of the paine of Hell, that all the words which God ſpake to them whilſt they liued, and which they contemned, ſhall bee brought to their memorie, that

booke of remembrance ſhall bee holden euer before their eyes, that there they may ſee and reade all the wicked workes that they haue done in their life: yea, the leaſt euill worde ſhall bee laide to their charge: and then the conſcience ſhall ſtand vp and accuſe them euerlaſtingly: No, if thou bee out with Chriſt, I ſay to thee, terrible ſhall that ſight bee, that thou ſhalt ſee,: for the leaſt euill thought ſhall bee laide to thy charge, let be euill deedes, and that forgetfulneſſe of the worde of God, whilſt thou liuedſt, ſhall be a great parte of thy paine and griefe: but the forgetfulneſſe of the godly ſhall bee hid, as all the reſt of their ſinnes ſhall be hidde in Him, and in that blood they ſhall bee counted as cleane, as if they had neuer ſinned, nor had forgotten Gods word.
            Thus farre for the part of the Angell: Now, I returne to the women: When the Angell hath ſpoken, and informed them of the Reſurrection: They returne, and tell to the Apoſtles, what they had heard and ſeene: Marke this leſſon, They cannot keepe it within their breſt, but they will communicate it to others, they will tell the Apoſtles: Brethren, after that once a man, or a woman hath conceiued that ſpirituall joy, all the worlde will not holde their tongue: put them in a fire, they cannot but ſpeake of it. Many Martyres haue proued this to be true, if it were but a woman, ſhe muſt preach it to others: & I ſay more, if thou haſt not pleaſure one time or other, to ſpeake with joy of Chriſt to others: to ſpeake of His Paſſion, and Reſurrection, thou neuer heardeſt with joy. We all haue pleaſure enough to talke with joy of vaine and prophane tales: but of that pleaſure of pleaſures, litle or no delite haue vve to ſpeake. I condemne not only the world, but alſo the children of GOD, and my ſelfe with the firſt. Alas, too litle pleaſure haue wee in our heartes to ſpeake of Chriſt, and His Reſurrection. But to whome go they? Goe they to tell the wicked people? No, that people was not worthie of it: they ſteale in to the Apoſtles, and them who loued Chriſt, who were lurking in Ieruſalem. So the leſſon is this: A man that findes joy, will not communicate it to the prophane man: he will knowe well, that he communicates it to ſuch one as will haue joy with him: if any man bee ſad, yee ſee they will not communicate it▪ but to them that will bee ſad with them: ſo it is with joy, they will not tell to euery man the joy, but to ſuch as wil haue joy with them. Looke the twelfth Chapter to the Romanes and the fifteenth verſe: hee wiſhes them To reioyce with them that

rejoyce, and to bee ſadde with them who are ſadde. Marke this thing alſo. Is not this joye a precious thing? Nothing ſo precious in the worlde, as joye: and maruell yee not, that they ſhoulde bee ſo liberall of it? And if thou hadſt all the worlde, it is nothing in reſpect of this joye, and yet they are liberall of it. Paul, Rom. chap. 1. verſ. 11. hee anſweres to this, J long, ſaies hee, to come to you, to impart ſome ſpirituall gift to ſtrengthen you. No, this hurt not him, for hee expones himſelfe, ſaying, That I might bee comforted, together with you, through our mutuall faith, both yours and mine. So when hee commeth to giue grace, hee gotte grace: No, it is a vvonderfull thing, vvhen two holie bodies meete, what joye the one vvill poure into the heart of the other: Put all the Infideles together, they cannot miniſter this joye one to another. So in a word, Communication of joye ſhall not empaire, but it ſhall enlarge the joye in thee. Whereto ſhoulde one ſtande vp to preach CHRIST, but that by his joye, hee maye miniſter joye to them that heare him. Nowe the LORD graunt, that both Preachers and hearers may finde in their heartes this joye, which is in CHRIST.
            Nowe I goe forwarde: As they goe in the part where the Apoſtles lurked, they finde before them that firſt companie of vvomen, who had returned from the ſepulchre, Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of Iames, and Salome: and as they enter in, they finde them telling theſe ſame newes to the eleuen Apoſtles: So that the eleuen Apoſtles wanted not witneſſes; women, after women, teſtifying, that the Lord was riſen. Will yee conſider this well, and ye ſhall ſee, that it imports a deadlie ſecuritie in the Apoſtles: alas, it ſhould haue beene they, who ſhoulde haue come to the women, to haue tolde them of the Reſurrection of Chriſt. When Hee ſendes ſo vvomen after women, it teſtifies, that they were in a dead ſecuritie, and ſo it teſtifies a great mercie of the LORDE, vvho vvill not let them ſleepe in that carnall ſecuritie.
            Brethren, this ſame mercie of God towardes His owne, abideth as yet, for in vs is nothing but ſleeping, (and if thou feeleſt it not, thou feeleſt nothing) Paſtors, people, and all ſleepes in ſecuritie, as the Apoſtles did: And I ſaye to thee, that if the LORDE vvoulde let thee alone, and vvoulde ſende to thee no vvitneſſes to vvaken thee, and to ſaye to thee, Sinner, vvake, and ariſe: No, there is none of vs, but wee woulde ſleepe to death. So looke to the LORDS mercy in this thy miſerie, He ſendes men to thee, He

ſendes croſſes and troubles to vvaken thee. Take men awaye, take awaye theſe cloudes of vvickedneſſe, take awaye c
                  •
               oſſes, I giue the vvorlde their doome (no exception, from the King to the Begger,) and if thou vvanteſt vvitneſſing, that CHRIST died, and roſe againe, thou ſhalt ſleepe to deſtruction. Thou thinkeſt that this needes not to bee preached: but thou ſhalt ſee one daye, that there vvas neuer anie thing ſo needefull in the earth, as this preaching: and thou ſhalt curſe the time that euer thou vvaſt ſette in the vvorlde, except thou compt this preaching the greateſt earneſt that euer was.
            So this is a token of great mercie towardes them: and yee will vvonder that they ſhoulde bee ſo ſluggiſhe, vvho hearde him ſo long, and that nowe they cannot bee vvakened. Alas! they were not as yet ſo vvell skilled, that Heauenlie vvit vvas not as yet in their heades, and they had more of that vvorldlie and fleſhlie vvit, than of that Heauenlie vvit: and this drewe them to this ſecuritie.
            This is the nature of the Regenerate: Suppoſe the Regenerate in this vvorlde compt, in ſome meaſure, of the croſſe of Chriſt, and of the power of God: yet in the beſt of them, there is ſome lacke, ſome infirmities, and vvantes, and they will thinke ſometime the preaching of the Croſſe and Reſurrection of Chriſt to bee but vanitie, and a dreame of vviues, as IOHN, PETER, MATTHEVV, and the reſt of the Apoſtles did: for none of them vvoulde beleeue this, That CHRIST vvas riſen. Wee vvill thinke that there is ſome great follie in theſe tidinges: (I vvill tell you my nature, and the nature of the beſt man or vvoman:) but vvhen vve ſhall ſee That joyfull Morning, as DAVID calles it, then vvee ſhall ſaye vvith SARAH, THE LORDE hath made mee nowe to laugh indeede: Shee ſcorned, vvhen ſhee hearde ſaye, ſhee ſhoulde conceaue, and beare a childe: ſhee thought ſhee coulde not beare a childe: and nowe vvhen ſhee ſees it come to paſſe, ſhee ſaies, The LORDE makes mee to laugh indeede. And ſo ſhall vvee ſaye one daye, that thing vvhich vvee thought but jeſtes, then wee ſhall ſaye, I ſee this nowe, that I coulde not beleeue vvell enough, nowe I ſee it is true indeede.
            So then, in deſpite of all naturall vvit, ſtriue to gette an hope aboue hope: and then ſhalt thou greatlie vvonder at that ſight,

and maruell foreuer, that there could be ſuch a joy. Now bleſſed is that man, or that woman that gets a taſte of it here for they ſhall be aſſured of it for euer. But to goe forward, I ſee, that it auailes not much to ſpeake to a ſleeping perſon, that is loadned with ſin, and feeles it not, that is the worſt eſtate in the worlde, neuer to groane vnder this mortalitie, vnder this burthen of death: They can neuer ſay with the Apoſtle: Miſerable man that I am, who ſhall deliuer me from this body of death. And if yee ſpeake to theſe perſons of the Reſurrection & death of Chriſt, it auaileth nothing to them. What did the Apoſtles? They thought it but a ſcorne: if the Apoſtles thought ſo, what wilt thou doe, that ſleepeſt in thy murther, in thine adulterie, in thy theft, in thine oppreſſion? If the Apoſtles ſlept, how! wilt thou ſleepe: a ſleeping ſinner muſt bee once wakened, as PAVL ſayes in the Epiſtle to the Romanes the firſt Chapter, and eighteenth verſe. The wrath of God is manifeſt from the Heauen, againſt all the vnrighteouſneſſe of men: And I ſay, the wrath and the vengeance of GOD is manifeſt vpon the ſleeping ſinner, and death comes on him, that neuer ſhall haue an end. But PAVL in the Epiſtle to the Romanes, the third CHAPTER, and the twentie and one VERSE: hee comes on with other tithings, and ſayes, That the righteouſneſſe of GOD through faith in Jeſus Chriſt is made manifeſt to them that beleeue. And I will ſay to thee, that Ieſus is come into the world, and died for thee, if thou beleeueſt thou ſhalt be freed of that burthen of ſinne and wrath; and vvhen a man heares this, he will thinke it the ſweeteſt tithings that euer he heard: for the ſinner will finde life in that death, and that blood will ſprinckle his conſcience, as the Apoſtle ſayes to the Hebrewes, and thou wilt finde a wonderfull joy, vvhen thy ſinnes are remitted in Chriſt, of all joyes vnder the Heauen, this is the greateſt. The preaching of Chriſt auailes to none, but to him who findes his ſoule loadned with ſinne.
            Now one word, and ſo I ſhall ende: I ſee in the Apoſtles, and in their great infirmitie, the great prouidence of GOD: they will neither beleeue, nor misbeleeue, but by His Prouidence: what euer vvas their part in it, the worke was good, & of a good purpoſe: The LORD will not haue them to beleeue the teſtimonie of the firſt companie, nor yet of the ſecond companie of women: No, no, He vvill not haue them to beleeue, vntill they ſee it with their

eyes, and feele it with their handes, and ere they paſſe out to others, He vvill ſpeake to them, and let them ſee, that they may be perſwaded that it was true.
            I alwayes tell you this, It is not a ſmall thing to teſtifie of the Reſurrection of Chriſt, to preach His Paſsion and Reſurrection: and wilt thou of a light knowledge preach it: No, beware thou ſpeake this, or that, vpon a report. Of all men that ſpeakes in this earth, or is ſent with a commiſsion, a Miniſter hath moſt neede to beware what hee ſpeakes: Speake hee of the Paſsion, or Reſurrection of CHRIST ere euer hee ſpeake, let him get a ſight of Him, ſuppoſe not vvith the bodily eyes, lay hold on Him by Faith in thine heart. Thinke it not enough to be an hearing witneſſe, but a ſeeing witneſſe: and vvhen thou haſt gotten that perſvvaſion, with vvhat confidence vvilt thou ſpeake of His death: thou wilt ſpeake with ſuch euidencie, that the high heartes of men ſhall be humbled, finding ſuch weight in thy wordes. The LORD giue vs grace, that vvhen vve ſtand vp to ſpeake of the Reſurrection of CHRIST to others: vvee may haue the perſwaſion of it in our ovvne heartes, and that vve may finde His gracious Spirit working in vs, and as vvee ſpeake of Heauen, and theſe joyes to others, ſo vvee may finde ſome joy beginne in our owne hearts heere, that after this life is ended, we may reigne with Him in glorie for euer with CHRIST: To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour, praiſe and glorie, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXXII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Then aroſe Peter, and ranne vnto the ſepulchre, and looked in, and ſawe the linnen clothes layed by themſelues, and departed, wondering in himſelfe at that which was come to paſſe.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Peter therefore went foorth, and the other diſciple, and they came vnto the ſepulchre.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 So they ranne both together, but the other diſciple did out-runne Peter, and came first to the ſepulchre.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 And hee ſtouped downe, and ſawe the linnen clothes lying: yet went hee not in.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Then came Simon Peter following him, and went into the ſepulchre, and ſawe the linnen clothes lie,
                  
                     
                        verse 7 And the kerchiefe that was vpon his head, not lying with the linnen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it ſelfe.
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Then went in alſo the other diſciple, who came first to the ſepulchre, and hee ſawe it, and beleeued.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 For as yet they knewe not the Scripture, That hee must riſe againe from the dead.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 And the diſciples went awaye againe vnto their owne home.
               
            
            
               
               WE haue heard theſe dayes paſt (beloued in the Lord Ieſus) of the two companies of women, that went out of Hieruſalem, towarde the graue of the Lorde, early in the morning. The one company that came firſt, wherein was Marie Magd. and Marie the mother of Iames, and Salome, with other women. And the next company of women, whoſe names are not expreſſed, nor regiſtrate: Wee hearde of their returning home againe from the graue of the Lord: how they come to the place where the XI. Apoſtles were lurking, with ſome other diſciples, who loued the Lord: We heard of ye preaching that the firſt company makes: & then the preaching of the ſecōd company, their preaching all teſtifying, that the Lord Ieſus was riſen. Wee heard laſt, what effect this preaching wrought in the heartes of the XI. Apoſtles, to wit, they thought it all but follie, fables, & a fained report, & beleeued it not. It is an hard matter, to beleeue ye report of Chriſt, of His Paſſion & glorious reſurrection. Thus far we heard the laſt day. Now to come to the Text yt we haue read: We haue firſt another effect which this report wrought: howbeit it wrought not faith, yet it had its own effect in 2. diſciples at leaſt, Peter & Iohn, they are wakened by it, to ſeeke to the graue of ye Lord, to ſee if it was ſo as the women reported. Well then, the report of the women is not altogether fruitles, at the leaſt it wakens ſome of them vp to run to the graue, to ſee if it was ſo as the womē had reported. This teſtifies clearly, yt euen al the time yt theſe Apoſtles lay lurking like cowards, yet all that time there remained in them a ſeede of faith, a ſeede of godlineſſe, & a ſponke of loue toward their Maſter Chriſt: Indeed it was ſmoothered with the droſſe of the corruption of nature, but yet it was not quite put out: and therefore, aſſoone as theſe women come, and make report of the Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt, the ſeed begins to waken and drawe ſpirits, and makes them to run to ſee if it was true yt He was riſen. For it is true, that they who once haue gotten faith in Chriſt, in whoſe heart this ſeede is once ſowne, howbeit for a time they will fall in a ſlumber, yea, in an heauy ſleepe, & that ſeed will be ſo holdē down, that it will not be ſeen to ye world, yea, they that haue it, wil not feele it thēſelues: yet it is ſure, that true ſeed of faith, ſowne once in the heart, wil neuer be clean put out & extinguiſhed altogether. It is true, it will be for a time lying dead in the heart without life or motion. The Lorde will bee lying in thee without working for a time, and taking a ſhape and faſhion, as the

birth in the mothers vvombe does, as the Apoſtle ſayes; Galath Chap. 4. verſ. 19. vntill Christ bee formed in you. And all this time Hee lyes vvithout vvorking, the man vvill ſeeme then to bee but dead: but aſſoone as that vvorde ſoundes, vvhich is the vvorde of Life, the vvorde of the Croſſe, and of the Reſurrection of Ieſus, then that man who appeared to be dead, vvill take life, and Ieſus, who appeared to be dead in thee, vvill be quicke. Howbeit they vvill not haue faith, yet it vvill ſtirre them vp to ſeeke Chriſt, and inquire vvhether it bee ſo or not. In the Hiſtorie of the Actes, (Chap. 17. verſ. 11.) yee maye reade a vine example of this: There vvere certaine of the IEVVES in a Towne called Berea, and they vvere in the ſame eſtate, they had no thought of Ieſus, but vvere enemies vnto Him: yet notwithſtanding there was ſome good ſeede vvithin them: And therefore they are ſaide to bee more Noble than the IEVVES at Theſſalonica. Now the Apoſtle PAVL comes in amongſt them, and beginnes to preach CHRIST: then that little ſeede beginnes to ſtirre, and they beginne to bee vvakened, and they are thereby mooued to reade the olde Teſtament, to ſee if it vvas true that PAVL preached or no: And then they finding it to bee ſo as PAVL had ſpoken; manie of them beleeued in CHRIST.
            Wee haue our leſſon heere: It is not good to be haſtie in judgement, bee loath to condeme anie, howbeit thou ſee men fall, and lye long, yet judge not too haſtilie of them, for who knowes if there bee a ſponke in their heartes, which neither thou, nor they themſelues knowe of: but trie, whether the ſeede bee or no: And thou ſhalt trie it by this thing: Speake of the Death, Paſſion, and Reſurrection of CHRIST vnto them: if after long ſpeaking there bee no vvakening, certainlie that is a verie euill token, that there is no good in that heart: if hee bee in ſuch a deadlie ſleepe, that nothing vvill vvaken him, that is a faithleſſe heart, and an heart full of gall and bitterneſſe, and repleniſhed vvith iniquitie: But if there bee ſome quickening, although it vvere neuer ſo little, yea, ſuppoſe hee beleeue not, and yet hath a readineſſe to heare, and ſaye this, LORDE open mine eyes to ſee, and mine heart to beleeue: And if this bee founde in him, that is a good heart, and that birth ſhall come foorth in its owne time, for as the birth is not perfected in an inſtant in the mothers wombe, ſo faith is not perfected at the firſt, but it growes by little & little.
            Nowe when they are wakened, what doe they? They runne to the

graue. They went not faire and ſoftlie, but they ranne to the graue. Nowe certainlie this running muſt needes proceede of ſome motion in the heart; ſome motion behooued to ſtirre them vp: Yee ſee what motion mooued Marie Magdalene to runne home: ſhe was in diſpleaſure, becauſe ſhee miſt the bodie of the LORD: for ſhee thought it had beene ſtollen awaye. It cannot bee diſpleaſure that mooued them to runne: No doubt it was joye in their heartes, which made their heartes light, and the light heart made the feete ſpeedie: And if thou haue joye, it will cauſe thee to runne and ſeeke Him. But from whence came this joye? I ſee no matter of joye, but in theſe tidinges which they hearde: But howe coulde they haue joye, ſeeing they beleeued them not? I anſwere to this They woulde haue beleeued, and faine woulde haue had it ſo, and that vvas the thing which they moſte deſired: And yee knowe, that vvee heare that thing vvhich vvee vvoulde faine haue come to paſſe, vvee vvill haue joye to heare of it, and our delight vvill bee to ſee if it bee ſo. And ſo ſuppoſe there vvas not a full faith in them, yet there vvas a bowing, and an inclination to faith. And it is a ſtrange thing to bowe the heart, for it will bee as hard to bow the heart, as to bowe a ſtrong Oake. So the leaſt bowing to yeelde to the report of Ieſus, is wonderfull, and there ſhall followe an vnſpeakeable joye which paſſes all vnderſtanding. The leaſt conception of that joye will bee greater, than thou wilt haue, yea, and make thee a King or a Queene. Seeke euer to that Heauenlie affection, for the Beaſt hath this earthlie affection: then ſeeke thou after the Heauenlie, or thine eſtate ſhall bee worſe than the Beaſtes one daye. So when the heart is wakened, thou wilt ſeeke the Lord: but if thine heart be not bowed, it ſhall ſtand vp like a wall, or a braſen pillar, and this ſhall bee thine eſtate, Thou vvilt haue no joye, but ſadneſſe, at the hearing of theſe tidinges: for the ſtiffe heart receiues no joye, but is in dolour, and there is no ſeeking of CHRIST there, to ſee vvhether Hee bee there or not: So in a worde, our leſſon is this: Let not a ſtiffe heart depriue thee of that ſolide joye which is in CHRIST: fie vpon that heart.
            Nowe to goe forwarde: They runne, and they ranne together, ſtriuing who ſhould bee formoſt, and who ſhould come firſt to the graue, to vnderſtande the trueth of theſe vvomens reportes. Now our leſſon is this: It is an happie thing to ſtriue in good thinges, vvho ſhoulde bee readieſt & fartheſt forwardes: No, I ſhall neuer

blame one to ſtriue to be firſt at CHRIST: No, ſtriue with thy father, and with thy mother: No, ſtriue with all thy kinred, to be firſt in Heauen, and looke that thou neuer giue place to another to goe before thee: but alas, our people ſtriue farre otherwiſe: we ſtriue who ſhould runne faſteſt from the LORD, and faſteſt forward to a miſchiefe, to murther, blood, and in oppreſſion: this is all the ſtrife in this countrey: Who ſtriues to be firſt in Heauen? The LORD ſayes, Matth. CHAPTER 11. VERSE 12. The Kingdome of Heauen ſuffer violence, and the violent take it by force, and poſſeſſe it: The LORD meaneth, that wee ſhould ſtriue to throng in, and to ſee who ſhould be firſt in Heauen: Alas, how farre are wee from this godly ſtriuing, dolefull experience teaches vs this day in Scotland. Thou wilt poſſeſſe another mans heritage, but who ſtriues to poſſeſſe that heauenly heritage. The LORD ſayes in Luke, 13. Chapter, and verſe 24. Striue to enter in at the ſtrait gate, Meaning, that we ſhould ſtriue with our whole kinred to be firſt in Heauen, ſuppoſe thou wilt let a King goe in before thee at an earthly gate, yet ſtriue to goe in before him to Heauen, and ſtriue to goe in before all thy kinred. Paul that exhorted all men to runne, hee ranne himſelfe: he ſayes, in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the ninth Chapter, and the twentie three verſe: Hee ranne, and hee ranne on, to be partaker of the Goſpell that he preached to others, and hee ran ſo faſt, that hee neuer looked behind him: No, if thou ſtandeſt to count thy footſteps, another ſhall paſſe by thee, and thou ſhalt come behind: Hee ſayes, Hee looked to that priſe of the high calling of GOD, Philip. 3.14. If two be running here on the earth, ſtriuing to get the crowne, the one will enuie the other, and he will trauell to get himſelfe forvvard, and put his companion backvvard. This earthly race is with enuie, and euery one would take the feet from another: Paul giues a reaſon hereof, in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the ninth Chapter, and the twentie foure verſe, and ſayes There is but one crowne: but it is not ſo with thee that runneſt in that heauenly race, the one will not enuie the other, the one vvill not put the other behind, he will not put him backe, but hee vvill take him by the hand & ſay, Goe forward to the end, brother, and thou ſhalt get the crowne: & this is it, that we ſhould euery one exhort another to doe, euer to goe forward to Heauen, and euery one take another by the hand, to helpe him forward, becauſe there is not a crowne only, but many crownes: looke how many runne,

there are as many crownes: wilt thou runne, thou ſhalt get a crowne, will I runne, I ſhall get a crowne, and will the third runne he ſhall get a crowne: neuer one who runnes ſhall be deſtitute of a crovvne. PAVL in the ſecond Epiſtle to Timothie, the fourth Chapter, and the 7. and eight verſes, ſayes, I haue fought a good fight, I haue finiſhed my courſe, J haue kept the faith: nowe hencefoorth is laid vp for me the crowne of righteouſneſſe, which the Lord that righteous Iudge will giue to mee at that day: No, he cannot be juſt, but He muſt giue the crowne to thee that haſt runne: And not only to mee, ſayes hee, but vnto all them alſo that loue that His appearing: As he would ſay, to all them that vvill runne vvith mee: and I ſay to thee, if thou wilt runne on, & lead thy neighbour by the hand, that is vveaker than thou: it ſhall be ſo farre from hindering thee from the crowne, that thine honour and glorie ſhall be augmented, when thou ſhalt come to Heauen. Paul ſayes in the firſt Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, the 2. Chapter, and the nineteenth verſe, What is our hope, or ioy, or crowne of reioycing? Are not yee it, euen in the preſence of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, at His comming: And therefore well is that ſoule that winnes another to Heauen, be thou King, Lord, Gentleman, or Miniſter: if thou helpeſt many to Heauē, thou ſhalt get ye more glorious crowne. To goe forward: they run together, but in ye running, ye one is ſpeedier than ye other, & Iohn leaues Peter behind him, & outruns him, but when it comes to the graue, he only lookes in, and ſees the linnen cloathes lying, but hee enters not in, to get knowledge, but ſeeing the linnen cloathes, hee ſtands ſtill: Peter that came behind him, enters firſt in into the graue, & ſees the matter as it was: the windingſheete, as we call it, lying in one place, and the kerchiefe that was vpon His head in another place by it ſelfe. To ſpeake this by the way: it lets vs vnderſtand this: Amongſt the Iewes that the windingſheete was not put ouer the whole body and head, as we vſe to doe, but from the ſhoulders downe, and the linnen was about the head: after this manner Chriſt was wrapped. Wherefore ſhould I ſpeake of the vanitie of the Papiſtes: they will ſay to you, they haue the ſame windingſheete, and this ſame kerchiefe remaining as reliques: and they will haue them in ſixe or ſeuen places at one time: is not this a great wonder it ſhould haue laſted ſo long, and yet ſhould bee kept in ſo many places at one time: and more they ſay, the vine picture of Chriſt is in that windingſheete, His body, they ſay, made ſuch a dint, that His picture might be ſeene there: but

thinke yee, if it were ſo, that the Euangeliſts, who regiſter ſmaller thinges, would haue hid and conceiled it. But I leaue them to their vanitie, as vnworthie of any refutation, and I come to the matter. In this courſe and race of Peter, and Iohn, to the graue, I ſee this courſe that wee haue in this life, is verie vnequable: it keepes not alwayes one conſtant tenour, nor wee are not ay alike ſpeedie: ſometimes one runnes faſt, ſometimes hee will ſettle and wearie, and goe ſlowly forwarde, and whilſt as hee wearies, his neighbour will outrunne him, and ere they come to the end, hee that came out laſt, will ſometimes bee firſt at the marke, and get the crowne. Marke this well▪ it lets vs ſee, that to be true which Paul writes in the ninth Chapter to the Romanes, and the ſixteenth verſe, It is not in the hands of him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in the handes of the Lord that ſheweth mercie: when the Lord holdes His hande to thee, thou wilt run, and when Hee takes His hande from thee, thou wilt ſtay behinde, and hee that dragled behinde, vvill bee before thee: this is the courſe we keepe to that marke: wee ſhould not thinke, that all men ſhould runne alike: and ſuppoſe thou ſeeſt a dragling perſon, thinke not, that perſon will neuer come to the marke.
            
               Peter gets the ſight firſt, Iohn, ſuppoſe he gote it not firſt, yet hee gets it, and it is ſaid in the Text, Hee ſaw, and hee beleeued. Marke the leſſon: Albeit there be many changes by the way, yet hee or ſhee that vvill perſeuere in dragling, ſhall not vvant the crovvne, as vvell as they that ranne ſpeedily, and came firſt. It ſtands not ſo much in the faſt running, as in the perſeuering: it is not ſaid, he or ſhee that runnes faſt, ſhall be crowned, but hee or ſhe that continues to the end, ſhall be crovvned: looke ay thou pereſeuere, if thou may not runne, goe: yet if thou may not goe, fall downe vpon thine hands and feete, and creepe as it were a ſnaile, or vvorme, albeit it vvere but two foot in the day: & as euer thou wouldeſt be ſafe,ly not ſtill: it ſtands thee vpon life & death: thou muſt weare away, and night and day thou goeſt euer to this ende: and if this outvvard man decay, grovv in the invvard man: and as thou grovveſt vveake in this life, ſtriu
                  •
                to grovv ſtrong in that heauenly life, that thou art to goe to. Paul in the ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the fourth Chapter, and the ſixteenth uerſe, ſayes, As the outwarde man decayed dayly, ſo the inward man grew dayly. So to end this in a word: As euer thou wouldeſt ſee Heauen, goe either faſt or elſe

ſoftly to that life. Well, it is ſaide, They were ignorant of the Scripture, that tolde, Hee ſhould riſe againe from the dead: and ſo becauſe he ſaw, hee beleeued: hee ſhould haue beleeued, becauſe he heard it: for hee had the Scripture for his vvarrand: hee and Peter ſhould haue grounded their Faith on the Scripture.
            Take heede to this: The Apoſtle ſayes, Wee liue by Faith, and not by ſight: yet hovv euer it be, that man or vvoman beleeue, they are bleſſed: and bleſſed art thou, man, or vvoman, that beleeueſt either for hearing or ſeeing: and ſuppoſe thou feeleſt him by the hands, and beleeueſt in Him, as Thomas did, that felt Him, thou art bleſſed: but that is an euill thing, vvhen thou haſt the vvorde, and yet ſuſpends thy faith, vntill thou ſeeſt.
            It vvas an euill thing in Peter and Iohn, that they let the vvorde paſſe, and beleeued it not: it vvas an euill thing in Thomas, that hee beleeued not, vntill hee felt Chriſt: and I ſay to thee, it is a ſure thing, if thou refuſeſt to beleeue, vntill thou ſeeſt, thou aduentoureſt and hazardeſt thy life and ſaluation: and I ſay to thee, if thou contemneſt this word, and ſay this, I will not beleeue vntill I ſee Him, I giue thee thy doome, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Him to thy comfort nor ſaluation.
            Therefore if He ſay to thee, and if Hee promiſe, Hee vvill giue thee Heauen, beleeue it, and lay holde on it, although thou vvereſt dying: and if Hee ſay to thee, that Hee vvill giue thee life, depend and ſticke by His promiſe.
            Thou honoureſt thy GOD in beleeuing and depending on His promiſe: for thou canſt not doe Him greater honour, than to beleeue His promiſe.
            And albeit thou ſee litle appearance outvvardly, and if thou beleeueſt the vvorde, vvithout doubt, thou ſhalt get a ſight of Him one day to thy comfort and endleſſe conſolation.
            Depend and waite on patiently with Abraham, and euer ſticke and lay holde on the promiſe, and I promiſe to thee in His Name, beleeue the promiſe of life, and thou ſhalt ſee life: beleeue in Him, and thou ſhalt ſee Him one day.
            Bleſſed are they vvho beleeue in Him, and yet ſee Him not: bleſſed are they who walke by Faith: for one day they ſhall vvalke by ſight. Striue to beleeue in His vvord, and looke on Him, and Heauen and earth ſhall periſh, ere thou wanteſt that ſight of

Him one daye. Yet I maye not paſſe by the vvordes of IOHN: I ſee in him a wonderfull plainneſſe, and ſingleneſſe of heart: which of vs will bee contented that another regiſtrate our faultes, that anie other might reade them. This man ſinned this waye, and that waye? Then, who will write vp his owne faultes, with his owne handes, as hee does? Hee ſayes, hee was ignorant. So then, if there were none other argument to tell vs, that this Booke is dyted by the SPIRITE of GOD, and that it is the worde of GOD, this ſingleneſſe of vvryting their owne faultes without affection or ſelfe-loue, which euer woulde entiſe vs to honoure our ſelues, telles vs ſufficientlie.
            But naturallie, rather than thou haddeſt thy Parentes, or thy kinsfolke aſhamed, thou wouldeſt rather haue GODS glorie and juſtice ſmoothered and defaced. But ſee if MOYSES ſpared to regiſter the faultes of LEVI, of vvhome hee was deſcended: ſee if hee ſpared? AARON: See if hee ſpared himſelfe: No, hee telles his owne fault, hee telles his owne infidelitie. And againe, ſee if DAVID ſpares himſelfe: ſettes hee not downe his owne adulterie, and murther? IOHN regiſtrates his owne ignorance. Let GOD bee glorified, and all creatures aſhamed: for, to that ende were wee created: for except Hee had reſpected His owne glorie, wee ſhoulde neuer haue beene made. Shoulde vvee not then ſeeke His glorie, although it were with our owne ſhame? IOHN learnes vs heere another good leſſon, howe often ſoeuer vvee faile through ignorance: (Alas, vvee faile often through ignorance and misbeliefe, and ignorance bringes on infidelitie.) And therefore, vvhenſoeuer vvee faile through ignorance, laye not the blame of thy blindneſſe vpon the Scripture: In paine of thy life ſay not, I am ignorant, becauſe the Scripture is obſcure and darke, as the Pope & his ſhauelings blaſphemouſlie alleadge: but I affirme, that it is ſo perfect, that all thinges appertaining to thy ſaluation are contained therein. And I ſay in deſpite of the Pope, thou vvho ſayeſt it is obſcure, one day thou ſhalt not bee challenged ſo much for thine ignorance, as for thy blaſphemie againſt GOD, when thou vvilt ſtande vp, and ſaye, The Scripture of GOD is not perfect, but obſcure and vvanting: I tell you, one daye theſe blaſphemers (for all their out-crying) ſhall haue their mouthes ſowed vp, and they ſhall make an offer to ſpeake, and to ſaye. The Scripture of God was not perfect: but the conſcience of them ſhall

ſo ſtrike them with feare and terrour, that they ſhall not be able to anſwere one word. Woe to them that impaire the authoritie of the Scripture: wee may pingle with them a while here, but wee remit them to that great day, that the Iudge appeare, and then they ſhall receiue their reward for their blaſphemie. But to leaue them, What are theſe Scriptures that preach CHRISTS Reſurrection from the dead? In what part is His Reſurrection foretolde? In the 13. of the Actes Paul preaching of Chriſt, he confirmes it by the olde Scriptures: The firſt Scripture is out of the 55, of Eſay, verſe 3.24. Where He ſayes, Hee will make an euerlaſting couenant with you of the ſure mercies of Dauid: Then he concludes, Therefore it behooued the Lord to riſe from death: Marke the conſequent: No, there is not ſuch a thing, as that euer mercie had continued, if Chriſt had not riſen. The Apoſtle ſayes in the 2. Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the firſt CHAPTER, and the 20. VERSE, In Him are all the promiſes of God, Yea, and Amen, No, thou, or I ſhould neuer haue had Faith, nor any ſpirituall grace, if Chriſt had not riſen: So, ſo oft as euer thou feeleſt a ſponke or motion of that ſpirituall life within thee, thou mayeſt ſay, I am ſure, that Ieſus is riſen from the death: for this is ſure, all grace and life flowes from the life of Ieſus. So, if Hee had not riſen, thou ſhouldeſt haue had no life. He hath another Scripture, out of the ſixteenth Pſalme, at the tenth verſe, Thou wilt not leaue my ſoule in the graue, neither wilt ſuffer thine Holy One, to ſee corruption. Then hee concludes, therefore Hee is riſen. How followes this? It followes well enough, for if He had not riſen, His body behoued to rot, and to be corrupted, as ours rotte. And Peter in the ſecond Chapter of the Actes, and verſe 31. vſes the ſame teſtimonie: Likewiſe in the fiftie three Chapter of Eſay, and the 8. verſe, where he prophecies of Chriſt, he ſayes, And who is able to count His generation: for all His death He is that euerlaſting Eſſence: meaning, that albeit Hee died, Hee ſhall riſe to life without end.
            There is another Scripture, Then they ſhould haue beleeued without ſight: But, alas, who is carefull to get this knowledge of this Reſurrection: and if we had a care to ſeeke Chriſt, wee would turne ouer theſe olde Scriptures, to ſee the prophecies of Chriſt to come, & then we would come to the New Teſtament▪ to ſee theſe things accompliſhed, & ſo wold meditate in ye Scriptures, night & day, to cōfirme our faith, & to get our hearts ſet & ſtabliſhed on the

LORD: for it is a matter of great difficultie, to get the heart eſtabliſhed with grace: and if thine heart bee not eſtabliſhed and filled with that worde, thou wilt neuer ſee CHRIST, nor gette anie grace in Him. So to ende this: I beſeech you, as euer yee woulde ſee CHRIST, bee diligent to ſeeke the Scriptures, that yee maye ſettle your heartes heere vpon Him, and beleeue in Him, that heereafter yee maye ſee Him to your comfort and conſolation at His ſeconde comming, when Hee ſhall appeare in the cloudes, with the millions of Angels: To Him bee glorie for euer, Amen.
            
         
         
            THE XXXIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 And when Ieſus was riſen againe, earlie the first day of the weeke, hee appeared first to Marie Magdalene, out of whome hee cast ſeuen deuils:
               
               
                  
                     IOHN CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 But Marie ſtoode without at the ſepulchre, weeping: and as ſhee wept, ſhee bowed her ſelfe into the ſepulchre,
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And ſawe two Angels in white, ſitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feete, where the bodie of Ieſus had layen.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And they ſaide vnto her, Woman, why weepest thou? Shee ſaid vnto them, They haue taken away my Lord, and I knowe not where they haue layed him.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 When ſhee had thus ſaide, ſhee turned her ſelfe backe, and ſawe Ieſus ſtanding, and knewe not that it was Ieſus.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 15 Ieſus ſaieth vnto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whome ſeekest thou? Shee ſuppoſing that hee had beene the Gardener, ſaide vnto him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell mee where thou hast layed him, and I will take him away.
               
            
            
               WEE haue heard (Brethren) before, firſt of the out-comming of the firſt companie of women to the graue of the Lorde, and of their returning home againe: Secondlie, vve heard of the out-comming of the ſecond companie of women, and their returning home againe. Thirdlie, and laſt of all, we heard how Peter and John, beeing wakened with the tidinges which the women tolde them of His Reſurrection, came out to the graue, to ſee if it was ſo, as the women had reported: They ranne, and in running, they ſtriue who ſhall bee firſt: Iohn out runnes Peter, (whether it was becauſe hee was younger, and more able in his perſon, or whether hee had greater joye in his minde, I leaue that to anie man to judge) and comes firſt to the graue, and lookes in, and goes backe againe. Peter comes after him, and lookes better about him, and ſeeing the winding-ſheete in one part of the graue, and the linnen cloth, wherewith the Lordes head was wrapped, to bee in another part, hee wonders at it, and thereafter goes into the graue. Then came IOHN againe, who afore onely looked in: and nowe the ſeconde time enters in, and when hee ſawe, hee beleeued, and went his waye. Thus farre wee hearde the laſt daye.
            Nowe in this Text, ye will ſee, MARIE MAGDALENE, of whom yee hearde before, who came to the graue of the LORD, with the firſt company: and drawing neare to the graue, ſaw that great ſtone remooued: who haſtilie ranne home, thinking verilie, that the bodie of the Lord had beene ſtollen awaye, and wiſt not where it vvas layed. This ſame MARIE, as appeares, hath followed after Peter and Iohn, ſuppoſe ſhee ranne not with them, yet ſhee came ſoone after: but before ſhee came, they had gotten the ſight of the graue, and went awaye: ſhee comming to it, goes not in, but ſtands without, at the graue vveeping. So this daye vvee returne to the Hiſtorie of MARIE MAGDALENE: and firſt, vve ſhall ſpeake of her mourning: And ſecondly, wee ſhall ſpeake of theſe thinges which ſhee ſawe in the graue, and about the graue, and how ſhee met with the LORD,

for whom ſhe mourned: and laſt, wee ſhall ſpeake of the effect that followed vpon theſe ſights, as GOD ſhall giue the grace, and as the time ſhall permit. Then to beginne at the firſt: it is ſaide in the Text, Marie Magdalene ſtood without weeping, when ſhe came to the graue. She enters not in the graue, nor lookes not into it, but abode in that opinion, that the body of the Lord, was ſtollen away, ſhe ſtands without, weeping and mourning. Nowe certainely, I muſt aſcribe this to a wonderfull loue of this woman: there is no man that can expreſſe ſufficiently this loue, that ſhe bare to Chriſt: No, well were wee, if wee could loue Him halfe ſo well, as ſhe did. Yet in this mourning, ſhee ſinneth, for all her loue, her mourning paſſed meaſure: No, yee will not finde ſcarcely in all the Scripture ſuch a mourning as was in this woman: ſhe mournes too much & almoſt deſperately for the body of the Lord: ſhe mournes in vaine, where there was no cauſe of mourning, but cauſe of joy. The ground of all this mourning was ignorance and forgetfulnes: ſhe had forgotten that which He had tolde her, that He ſhould riſe againe the third day: ſhee remembred not, but the third daye miſſing the body, ſhe thinkes it to be ſtollen away. Marke this: The godly, when they thinke they doe beſt, they are oft miſcaried with their owne affections, they are mourning for Chriſt, and alſo louing Chriſt, and yet in the meane time they are ſinning againſt Him. The ground of this in them, is ignorance and forgetfulnes of the promiſes of the Lorde, ſo that if yee would looke into that word, ye need not be ignorant concerning God: & if thou mourneſt for ignorance, blame thy ſelfe, thou lookeſt not to the worde: for if thou lookeſt into this word, and mourneſt, thou haſt forgot, as Marie Magdalene did: and therefore thou deſerueſt to be caſten in a perplexitie. Yet to conſider this ſomewhat better: Firſt, when ſhe came out to the graue, ſhee ranne home, and ſeeing the ſtone rolled away, ſhe tells falſe tithings, and ſhee once conceiues a falſe opinion. Novv ſhe ſtands, and abides in this opinion, and vvill not goe in to the graue, but ſtands without the graue, and mournes deſperately for a time. Well, Brethren, after that once a vvrong opinion & conceit enter into the head of any, it is not lightly remoued againe: thou mayeſt conceiue it lightly, as Marie Magdalene did: but thou ſhalt not lay it downe ſo lightly: Beware of opinions concerning God, & religion: & ere euer thou ſuffer an opinion to enter into thine head, conſider it in the beginning: had ſhe

conſidered it well, ſhee had not beene ouer-come with it nowe. Therefore, let not opinions concerning GOD, Religion, and that Life to come, lightlie enter into your heades. Nowe at laſt ſhe bowes her bodie, & goes in to the graue. When ſhe hath gone forwarde for a ſeaſon in this vaine diſpleaſure▪ at the laſt the Lorde bowes her heart: for if ſhe had not bowed her heart, ſhe ſhould neuer haue bowed her bodie, to haue looked in to the graue: Marke the goodneſſe of the LORDE towardes His owne: when they haue gone forwarde a while in their owne perplexitie, the LORDE lookes vnto them, and will not let them goe on ſo deſparatelie to deſtruction: but Hee wiil bowe thine heart firſt. The firſt grace is not the giuing to thee the thing thou ſeekeſt, but the moouing of thine heart to ſeeke, is the firſt. No, Hee will not preſent Himſelfe at the firſt before thee▪ but Hee will haue thee to bowe thy ſelfe to ſeeke Him. And it lyes not in the handes of anie bodie to bowe himſelfe to ſeeke Him: No, as life is of mercie, ſo ſeeking of life is of mercie: And if thou getteſt an inclination to ſeeke Chriſt and Heauen, that is the firſt grace: and He that hath g
                  •
               uen thee the fi
                  •
               ſt grace to ſeeke, without doubt Hee will alſo giue thee the ſeconde to finde Him.
            Nowe ſhee lookes in to the graue, and her looking in is not in vaine, for looking in, ſhee ſeekes; and ſeeking, ſhee findes: And marke what ſhee findes; ſhe findes not a dead bodie, as ſhe thought (ſhee woulde haue beene glad to haue founde it) but ſhee ſees two gloriou
                  •
                Angels, ſitting in the graue, clothed in bright rayment, the one where His head had layen, and the other where His feete had layen. So our leſſon is this, Bowe thy bodie, and thou ſhalt ſee, ſeeke and thou ſhalt finde: yea, I ſ
                  •
               y to thee, if thou wilt bowe thy bodie to ſeeke, thou shalt get greater thinges than thou ſeekeſt. MARIE ſought but Chriſtes deade bodie, and shee findes Angels, bearing witneſſe that Hee was riſen. So in a worde: Seeke, and thou shalt finde greater thinges than euer thou ſoughteſt. Alas, wee w
                  •
               nt grace, for fault of ſeeking: And I teſtifie this, that the worlde wantes grace and ſaluation for fault of ſeeking, for their hea
                  •
               te, cannot bowe downe to ſeeke. Nowe what ſees shee? Shee ſawe Angels. Peter and John ſaw ſomething alſo: but what ſawe they when they went to the graue? They ſawe but a winding-sheete, lying in one place of the graue, and a kerchiefe in another: but MARIE ſawe not this onelie, which might haue witneſſ
                  •
               d that the

LORD vvas riſen, and not ſtollen awaye: for if Hee had beene ſtollen, they vvoulde haue ſtollen the vvinding-ſheete and the kerchiefe alſo. Shee ſees a fairer ſight than IOHN and PETER did: MARIE that vvas a vvoman, ſees a more glorious ſight than two Apoſtles ſawe: they ſee but linnen clothes: Marie ſees two Angels: and in this, ſhee is preferred to the two Apoſtles. That vvhich I ſaye of her, I ſaye of all theſe vvomen, that they vvere preferred aboue the Apoſtles.
            Marke this, yee that are vvomen: All your ſ
                  •
               xe is honoured in theſe vvomen: The firſt and the ſeconde companie got the ſight of Angels, which none of the Apoſtles got. And vvhen I conſider this their preferment, I finde it ſtandes in theſe two poincts chiefelie: Firſt, they get the firſt reuelation: it is firſt tolde to them: and ſecondlie, it is not tolde to them by men, but by Angels. In both theſe the Apoſtles are poſtponed, they get it tolde them by vvomen, and then they get it tolde them in the ſeconde rowme: So that all vvomen haue a prerogatiue in theſe vvomen. In this, That the LORDE giues this prerogatiue to this infirme ſexe, Hee ſhames the Apoſtles: and that to this ende, that all glorie maye be giuen to GOD.
            Yet I vvill not paſſe by the ſitting of the two Angels: Nothing heere fell out raſhlie, all vvas ordained, hee that vvas appointed to ſit at the head of the graue, hee ſate at the head: and hee that vvas appointed to ſit at the feete, ſate at the feete: So the LORDE appointed, that not onelie they ſhoulde ſpeake vvith their tongue: but alſo by their placing, tell, that Hee was riſen. And the Angell of GOD that ſate at the head vvoulde ſaye, Magdalene, heere is the place where his head laye, hee is riſen. And the other that ſate at the feete, vvoulde ſaye, Heere is the place where his feete laye, hee is riſen. It is euen ſo yet in the vvorld, they whom Hee ſendes to teache, Hee diſpoſes them ſo, that by their ſitting, their going, and ſtanding, Hee will preach, and Hee vvill make their ſitting to informe them, that Hee ordained to life and ſaluation: The Lorde vvorkes all for the weale of His Elect: yea, the leaſt circumſtance is for the weale and ſaluation of His owne.
            Nowe to goe forwarde: Marie hath ſeene a faire ſight: but ſtayes the grace heere? and thinkes the LORDE Hee hath done enough, becauſe Hee hath let her ſee ſuch a glorious ſight? No, He will haue them alſo to ſpeake: They both vvith one voyce, ſaye,

               Why weepest thou? When the LORDE beginnes once to bowe the heart, Hee vvill let thee ſee grace: yea, Hee vvill not let thee ſee onelie: but Hee vvill alſo let thee heare. Hee woulde not onelie let her ſee dumme Angels, but Hee woulde haue them alſo to ſpeake vnto her, that ſhee might heare joyfullie: When Hee hath once begunne, ere Hee leaue, Hee vvill fill all the ſenſes vvith grace, Hee ſhall fill the eye with ſight, the eare with hearing, and in the ende, Hee ſhall fill thine heart fullie with grace and mercie. Nowe what heares Marie? The Angels ſaye vnto her, Woman, why mournest thou? For, as ſhee looked in to the graue, ſhee vvept bitterlie, the teares went neuer from her eyes, nor the ſadneſſe from her heart, till the LORDE Himſelfe ſaide, MARIE, why weepest thou? Marke the vvordes: The Angell no doubt rejectes her, becauſe ſhee wept without meaſure, and in vaine, becauſe ſhee thought that the bodie of the LORDE had beene ſtollen awaye: ſhee wept for Him who was liuing. But as the Angell reprooues her, ſo hee pitties her. Then, if thou weepe for the LORD, Hee ſhall cauſe the Angels of Heauen to pittie thee. Yet againe: What ſaye the Angels? They ſaye not, Woman, feare not, as they did to the reſt of the women that came before: And why ſaye they not, Feare not? Shee was ſo ouer-come with diſpleaſure, and ſo ſadde hearted, that ſhee was not afraide of the Angels, and was not aſtonied, as the other women: for they had not ſo ſad an heart as ſhee had: for her heart was ſo filled with ſadneſſe and diſpleaſure, that feare coulde not get place. The Angell ſayes, Woman why mournest thou? becauſe it was mourning that ailed her. The LORD giues alwayes medicine according to the ſore: If thou bee ſad, Hee will ſaye, Why mourneſt thou? The Angell applies the medicine, and ſtilles her. A mourning bodie for CHRIST woulde bee ſtilled: If thou weepeſt for CHRIST, ſuppoſe thou paſſe bounds, yet thou ſhalt not want ſtilling, though He ſhould ſend his Angels to ſtill thee: No, there was neuer any yt mourned for Chriſt, that wanted ſtilling: Nor there was neuer anie childe that got ſo ſweete wordes to ſtill them, as thou ſhalt get, who mourneſt for CHRIST. Then, Bleſſed are they (ſayes CHRIST) that mourne, for they ſhall receiue conſolation, Matth. 5.4. If thou mourne for the loue of the LORDE, thou ſhalt bee ſtilled and comforted, and bleſſed ſhalt thou bee one daye. Alas, this is a laughing worl
                  ••
               -woe vnto it, few men or women are nowe mourning wi
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               Magdalene: alas, vvhat neede haue vvee of ſtilling: No, vvee are laughing, notvvithſtanding of all th
                  •
               ſe judgements that approach faſt, and are neare at hand: they vvill cauſe vs all mourne one day: But vvhat ſayes the Angells to her? Say they in an anger, Why ſeeke yee the liuing amongſt the deade? Beholde the mercie of GOD to His children: ſhe merited, if yee looke to her fault, to haue beene reprooued more ſharply: ſhee forgot the vvord of our Sauiour, and ſhe vvould not looke in to the graue, yet he reprooues her not: hee ſayes not to her. Why ſeeke yee Him that is liuing amongſt the dead, as the Angell ſpake to the other vvomen. This is our leſſon in a vvorde: The LORD lookes not vvhat thou meriteſt but He lookes vvhat thou needeſt: Hee vvill not ſpeake according to thy merite, but according to thy neede and neceſsitie: for if thou mourneſt for the LORD, Hee vvill miniſter comfort to thee: No, He wil not make a ſorrowful heart more ſorrowfull: he is a cruel perſon that vvil do ſo: no, the Lord wil not do ſo He will not bru
                     •
                  ſe the brok
                     •
                  n reede▪ neither will He quench the ſmoaking flaxe▪
                as it vvas prophecied of Him long before, Eſay Chapter 42. and the third verſe: But if thou bee ſad, Hee vvill raiſe thee vp vvith ſuch comfort, as cannot be tolde.
            Novve to goe forvvarde: When they haue demanded: Why vveepeſt thou? 
                  •
               hee anſvveres without any feare: as their ſight terrifies her not, ſo neither is ſhe terrified vvith their voyce. What vvas the cauſe that ſhee feared not? and that at the voyce of the terrible Ang
                  •
               lls ſhee is not mooued? Euen becauſe her heart vvas ouercome and loadned vvith dolour and ſadneſſe, that there could be no place almoſt left to feare.
            She ſayes: They haue ſtollen away the body of the Lord, and I knowe not where they haue laid Him. What could ſhe doe vvith it▪ & wherefore vvas ſhee ſo carefull? Shee tells vvhat ſhee vvould doe vvith it: ſh
                  •
               e ſayes to Himſelfe: I would burie it: nowe all this came of a ſu
                  •
               paſsing loue: and therefore looke not ſo much to her doing, as to her loue. Learne at Marie Magdalene to loue the LORD, and ſhee may learne all the world.
            This loue and zeale of GOD is almoſt out of the heartes of men and vvomen: and when I conſider her great loue, I find it is more than any naturall affection, as father to ſonne, or man to woman.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               cept, there had come a force & vertue out of that body,

ſhe could neuer haue loued the Lord ſo well: No, except He looſe our heartes with that loue hee beares to vs, wee cannot loue Him: but when once Hee looſes thine heart, thou wilt hate thy ſelfe to loue Him: ſo what euer I diſcommend in her, I diſcommend not her loue: No, I ſhall neuer diſcommend loue, nor zeale in any perſon: Alas, we haue too litle of it, to diſcommend it: and I doubt not, but all theſe imperfections that vvere in her, were couered by the LORD IESVS whome ſhee loued. Our comfort is this, if we loue the LORD our GOD well, albeit wee had a thouſand imperfections, they ſhall be couered with the mantle of the righteouſnes of IESVS: yea, He ſhall meete thy loue vvith vnſpeakable loue.
            Thus farre for the ſight, and hearing of the Angels: The Text ſayes: aſſoone as ſhee had ſpoken, She turnes her about againe: Men would thinke this an vndiſcreet behauiour, to ſtand and heare two Angels, and then like a vaine perſon, to turne her about. I will not excuſe this altogether, but I impute this to the exceeding dolour and ſadneſſe, wherewith their ſoule was loadned: there muſt be many faultes ouerſeene in a ſad perſon: I had rather beare with twentie faultes in ſuch a perſon, as to beare with one, in a vaine perſon.
            Now as ſhe is ſpeaking to the Angels: ſo the LORD comes neare toward her backe, and ere euer He came or ſhee ſavv Him, He touches her with a ſecret and powerfull preſence of His Spirit: for I doubt not, as Hee came neare her, but His Spirit both turnes her about, and cloſes the mouth of the Angels: for He is the LORD both of man and Angell: and if He come, His preſence muſt turne thee: and when Hee comes to ſpeake, all the Angels muſt holde their tongue, and be dumbe. Yee knowe, that IOHN the BAPTIST vvas a great light before the LORD came, and many followed him: but vvhen CHRIST comes, IOHN cloſes his mouth, and as he ſayes, Ioh. Chap. 3. verſ. 29. It is the bridegroome that hath the bride: and I ſtand, ſayes he, & heare Him, and hearing Him, I reioyce with an ioy vnspeakable and glorious: No, it is the greateſt joy vnder the Heauen to heare Him ſpeake, and if thou heareſt Him, thou vvilt not deſire to ſpeake: ſhee turnes her, and ſhee ſees IESVS ſtanding vvhome ſhe ſought, ſhee ſought Himſelfe, and findes His Meſſengers, but at the laſt ſhe finds Himſelfe. In a word, we haue our leſſon: Seeke euer the Lord, thou will

not get Him at the firſt: (Thou wilt not get a King at the firſt) for Hee hath Meſſengers afore: and wee His Miniſters, are all His Meſſengers: and wee all tell you, and I tell you, that CHRIST is comming, and bleſſed bee that commer: I bidde thee ſtande a while, and then the LORDE ſhall come at thy backe: Happie and bleſſed art thou that ſhalt bee asking for Him: thou ſhalt get ſuch a joyfull meeting as Marie Magdalene did: but woefull ſhall that meeting bee to thee, who deliteſt not to heare, nor to ſpeake of Him: for Hee ſhall come vpon thee like a thiefe in the night. So, bleſſed art thou who art talking with His Meſſengers: for Hee ſhall call thee by name, as Hee did Marie, and that ſhall bee the joyef
                  •
               lleſt voyce that euer thou heardeſt. I ſaide before, that ſhee got a preferment aboue the Apoſtles, in getting a ſight of the Angels: but that was common to her with the other women: Heere yee ſee further, ſhe got a preferment aboue all women: ſhee gets the firſt ſight of Ieſus, as MARKE ſayes, after His Reſurrection. And this argues, that her deſire to ſee Him exceeded the deſire of all the Apoſtles, and all the women. So thou that longeſt moſte for the LORD ſhall ſee Him firſt, and joyefull ſhall that ſight bee to thee. Yet marke howe ſhee receiues it: Shee knowes Him not. This is a marueilous thing: ſhee neuer left Him, but followed Him from GALILE: and yet when the LORDE offers Himſelfe vnto her eyes, ſhee knowes Him not. This muſt bee imputed to that great ſtupiditie which was in her eyes, they were ſo dimme, that ſhee coulde not ſee. If the LORDE had anie ſecrete diſpenſation in it, or in what forme He appeared, I will not diſpute.
            Our leſſon is this: There enters ſuch a miſt into our eyes, that ſuppoſe the LORDE offer Himſelfe to bee ſeene in the vvorde, crucified, and glorified in His Goſpell, yet thou vvilt not ſee Him, till the beames vvhich glaunce from His face, ſhine into thine hearte, and ſcatter that cloude of darkneſſe: and vvhen that cloude is awaye, thou vvilt ſee vvith ſuch a ſweeteneſſe, as cannot bee vttered: and thou who diddeſt neuer ſee that ſight, thou neuer ſaweſt joye.
            Nowe bleſſed is that ſoule that can beholde the LORDE in the Mirrour, as it were comming behinde, and happie is that ſoule that can delite to ſee Him in the Mirrour: for certainlie they ſhall ſee Him one daye face to face, and the LORDE will turne them about, as Hee did Marie, and then theſe vile bodies, ſhall bee

like vnto His glorious bodie; and that face, which is now but vile, ſhall then glaunce as the Sunne in the Noone daye. So bleſſed are they that can awaite till the LORDE come: Thou neuer metteſt with one in this worlde, who can make thee ſo joyefull as Hee will: and euer the greater languor that thou haſt for Him, the greater ſhall bee thy joye. Alas, wee ſeeke joye heer, and there is but fewe who ſeeke CHRIST, in whome is all true joye.
            Well, Marie knewe not the LORDE, but yet Hee knewe her: No, thou mayſt wel forget Him, but He wil not forget thee: but He ſhall cauſe thee to knowe Him ere thou goe. Hee ſayes to Marie, Woman, why mournest thou? At the firſt He lyes aloofe. He ſayes not Marie, but like an vncouth man: Hee ſayes to her, Woman, why mournest thou? Then Hee ſayes not, I knowe thou weepest for mee: but Hee ſayes, Why, weepest thou? Hee ſayes not, I knowe whome thou ſeekest: but, Whome ſeekeſt thou? So then at the firſt Hee holdes Him aloofe with His owne, Hee giues them not His familiar preſence at the firſt: but as long as wee are heere on earth, His ſpeach ſhall bee a farre off: As long as wee liue by faith, Hee lookes to vs as it were afarre off: And this ſpeach is to waken a languor and piece of ſadneſſe in vs, till wee meete with the LORDE: for the more thou mourneſt, the greater ſhall bee thy joye. The Lord if Hee pleaſe, in an inſtant maye take thee to the Heauens, but Hee will let thee lye heere for a while, and the greater that thy ſadneſſe is in this life, the greater ſhall thy joye bee in the life to come. O, that joye which that bodie ſhall haue, who hath longed for the LORDE! Then, thinke long, and waite for that His bright and glorious comming, as Paul ſpeakes: for no man ſhall get a crowne, but th
                  •
               y who haue waited for Him.
            Nowe I ſhall ende in a worde: Shee ſuppoſing that hee had beene the Gardener of the Garden where the LORDE was buried, ſhee ſaide vnto him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell mee where thou hast layed him, that J maye take him away
                     •
                  . Looke if ſhee loued Him not well when Hee was liuing, for in His death ſhee coulde not bee ſeuered from Him, ſo did the loue of IESVS conſtraine her. In the twentie and fourth CHAPTER OF MATTHEVV it is ſaide, Whereſoeuer a dead carkeis is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together. Nowe ſhee is a Mirrour of loue and zeale. Alas, if thine heart coulde melt with loue as hers did. Yet I ſee in her a marueilous ſtupiditie: Shee knowes Him neither by ſight nor voyce, her heart was

ſo ouer-come with dolour & ſadneſſe. And this ſenſeleſſeneſſe that fell on good Marie Magdalene, will often-times fall on the beſt man or vvoman in this life, That, as the Prophet ſayes, in hearing, they will not heare, and in ſeeing, they will not ſee. So all tendes to this: Let euerie one judge charitablie of another: Bee loath to condemne anie, for as liuelie as thou art, thou mayeſt fall downe dead: and therefore waite on the LORDE, and the voyce of the LORDE ſhall come vnto thee, and call on thee, as Hee called on Marie: and that voyce ſhall open both the eyes of thy bodie, and of thy ſoule: and Hee shall let thee ſee and feele that it is Hee: and that joye shall bee compleate, vvhen thou shalt come and inherite that Kingdome which was prepared for thee before the foundation of the vvorlde. The LORDE graunt it maye bee our onelie joye, and that vvee maye holde vp our eyes, and vvaite night and daye for that bleſſed comming of IESVS, at the which time our joye begunne, shall bee perfected, and neuer haue ende. To this LORDE IESVS, vvith the Father, and that bleſſed SPIRIT, bee all Praiſe, Honour, and glorie, for euer and euer, AMEN.
         
         
            THE XXXIV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Ieſus ſayeth vnto her, Marie. Shee turned her ſelfe, and ſaide vnto him, Rabboni, which is to ſay, Master.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Ieſus ſayeth vnto her, Touch mee not: for I am not yet aſcended to my Father: but goe to my Brethren, and ſay vnto them, I aſcende vnto my Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and your God.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 18 Marie Magdalene came and tolde the Diſciples that ſhee had ſeene the Lord, and that hee had ſpoken theſe thinges vnto her.
               
            
            
               WEE heard theſe dayes p
                  •
               ſt (beloued in CHRIST) howe that earlie in the morning, firſt one companie of women came out of HIERVSALEM, to the graue of the LORD: and next after them another companie: Thirdlie, wee heard of PETER and IOHN, two of the Apoſtles, howe they came out to the graue of the LORDE, beeing ſtirred vp by the report of the women. And laſt, wee heard of the outcomming of MARIE MAGDALENE to the graue of the LORDE the ſeconde time, following after the Diſciples PETER and IOHNNE: after they vvere returned, ſhee comes againe to the graue: Shee offered not to looke in, but ſtoode mourning for a ſpace vvithout, thinking certainelie, that the bodie of the LORDE had beene ſtollen awaye: But at the laſt it pleaſed the LORDE to bowe her minde, and then shee bowed her bodie, and looked in to the graue, and ſawe two Angeles, the one at the head, and the other at thee feete of the graue where our LORDE had layen, ſitting, clothed in bright rayment: and when ſhee ſawe them, ſhee vvas nothing afraide, as the other vvomen: ſhee vvas ſo filled vvith diſpleaſure and ſorrowe, and her eyes vvere ſo dimme vvith mourning, that ſhee coulde not ſee. The Angels aske her, Why weepest thou? Shee anſweres them, They haue taken awaye the bodie of the LORDE, and I knowe not where they haue layed it. Yee vvill maruell at this: there is nothing in her minde, but the dead bodie of the LORDE: and as ſhee is not terrified vvith the ſight of the Angels, ſo ſhee is not terrified vvith their voyce: and ſhee turnes her about from them: and finding Him ſtanding beſide her in His owne proper perſon: and the LORDE ſaide as the Angell had ſaide before vnto her, that is, Woman, why weepest thou? Hee calles her Woman; ſpeaking ſtrangelie: and Hee proceedes further, and ſayeth, Whome ſeekest thou? as though Hee had not knowne vvhome ſhee had beene ſeeking. MARIE ſuppoſing Him to haue beene the Gardener of that Yearde vvhere the LORDE vvas buried, ſhee ſayes, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell mee where thou hast layed him, that I maye take him vp, and burie him. Nowe, as ſaide is, there is nothing elſe

in her minde but that deade body of Ieſus, which is an argument that ſhee loued Him exceedingly, when Hee vvas liuing: I ſay, all that vvas in her vvas exceeding & vehement: in her was exceeding loue to the Lord, & exceeding vehement deſire to ſee Him, & exceeding diſpleaſure for Him, & for ſtealing Him out of the graue, as ſhe ſuppoſed: ſo that I may ſay, ſhe vvas one of the violent ones, that Chriſt ſpeakes of in the 11 of Matthew, that breakes vp Heauen: he ſayes there, That violence is done to the Kingdome of Heauen, and the violent poſſeſſe it. She pulled Chriſt out of the handes of the Apoſtles and of the reſt of the women, and vvent betvvixt them and Him: and therefore ſhe meetes Him firſt, becauſe ſhe ſeekes Him before them. Thus farre we heard the laſt day: now we follow out the reſt of the Hiſtorie, and that thing that followes of the communing betwixt the Lord and her: the Lord leaues her not ſo lying in ignorance, & diſpleaſure, but as He had before ſomewhat ſtrangely and vncouthly talked with her: ſo now He comes on more homely, and Hee vtters a more kindely word, and He names Her by her name, Marie, Hee ſpeakes nothing but one word but a well choſen vvord, an homely vvord, the vvord of a Paſtor, of a ſhepheard: naming her by her ovvne name, as it is ſaid in the 10. of Iohn, The good ſhepheard will name his ſheepe by their name: this was a powerfull word, as will be ſeene by the effects that were wrought in her: ſhe ſawe not of before: it opened her eyes, to ſee, and her eares to heare: and in a vvorde, it opened all her dead ſenſes. Marke this leſſon: When the Lord hath ſpoken to vs for a time, as a ſtranger afarre off, as though He knew vs not: at laſt He will come on with an homely & kinde word, and He will let thee ſee, that He knowes thee by thy name, by thy face, by thine heart, and by thine actions: Read the 4. of Iohn, ſpeaking to the woman of Samaria, He ſpeakes to her at the firſt, as though Hee had not knowne her, but at the laſt He begins and tells her of all that ſhe had done, and that ſhee was but an harlot lying preſently in harlotrie: ſhee hearing that, ſhee vnderſtands that Hee is a Prophet, and at laſt that Hee is Chriſt the Meſſias. Brethren, though the Lord ſpeakes to vs afarre off, as a ſtranger that knowes vs not, and wee anſwere, as though we knew Him not: yet ſtay ſtill, & heare on, and thou ſhalt heare one vvorde that ſhall doe the deede: thy effectuall calling will be performed with one word, it ſtandes not in many words. When He will waken thee, one word vvill doe the deede. Yet to come to her,

aſſoon as ſhe heareſt the word, ſhe comes, & turnes her in an inſtant to Him againe: ſo it ſeemes, that ſhee had turned her from Him, as ſhe did from the Angels that ſpake to her before: ſhe ſayes, Rabboni: it is a Chaldaicke word, which in our language ſignifies Maſter, He ſpeakes but one word, & ſhe another: His vvord is a well choſen word, and ſo was hers: His word vvas homely: hers alſo vvas homely, His was the word of a Paſtour: her word is the vvorde of one of the flocke, His vvord is the vvord of a Maſter, her vvorde is the vvord of an obedient diſciple: and laſt His word is the word of povver to call her, His vvorde teſtifies his calling, and the effect of His povver. In this ſtands our calling, when the LORD names vs by our name, and ſpeakes kindely to vs, and then we anſwere Him: We may not anſwere any way: No, thou muſt anſwere like one of the flocke, like one that knowes the voyce of the ſhepheard: thou muſt anſwere like one that knowes the voyce of His Maſter: thou muſt anſwere like one that feeleſt the effect of His calling. When the Lord ſpeakes homely, if thou anſwereſt homely, there ſhall be exceeding joy, this is it that vve call effectuall calling. The thing that I note, is this ſhortly: As long as the LORD ſpeakes ſtrangely to vs, we will heare Him ſtrangely, and as long as Hee knowes not vs, wee will not know Him, if it vvere a thouſand yeeres, wee will not knowe Him: and this lets vs ſee, that neither man nor woman can doe ought, except He preuent them with grace: if He loue thee not firſt, thou wilt neuer loue Him, 1. Iohn 4. and if Hee know not thee firſt, thou ſhalt neuer know Him: No, neuer a man will know the Lord, except He know them firſt: Hee ſayes in the 4. Chapter to the Galathians, verſe 9. Now ſeeing ye knowe God, then bethinking himſelfe, hee ſayes, yea, rather are knowne of God: and therefore thou ſhouldeſt ſay, Lord, loue mee, that I may loue thee, Lord, know me, that I may know thee, &c.
            Now I go forward: When ſhe hath vttered this word Rabboni, ſhe goes forwarde to haue embraced Him in her armes: Hee meetes her, and ſayes, Touch mee not, for I am not yet aſcended to my Father: Some would maruell what mooued the Lord Ieſus to ſtay that woman that loued Him ſo intirely, to touch Him. Wee will heare hereafter, how a whole companie tooke Him by the feete and adored Him, as ye may reade, Matth. 28 8. and the diſciples touched Him, as ye may read in the 24. of Luke, and the 39. verſe, & Thomas put his handes in His ſide, in this ſame Chapter, and it cannot bee

ſaide, that theſe touched Him, after that Hee aſcended vp to Heauen, that could not be poſſible: it is a maruell then, that Hee ſhould be ſo ſtrange to MARIE: I anſvvere to this, and I take mine anſvvere firſt, out of the reaſon, and next out of the commiſſion Hee giues to Marie: for firſt, when Hee ſayes to her, I am not gone vp to my Father, and therefore touch me not now the meaning is this in effect: it is not time for thee to touch mee nowe, till that time I bee in glorie, and then touch mee by the armes of Faith, as much as thou canſt or mayeſt: yee muſt conſider, that ſhee vvas too much addicted to His bodily preſence, and ſhee thought that Hee ſhould haue remained and dvvelt with her on earth, as Hee did before: and therefore Hee vvould not let her come neare Him, vntill Hee inſtructed her of a ſpirituall touching: that He was not to ſtay here, but to dwel with His Father in the Heauens: but after He hath inſtructed her, He lets her & the other vvomen touch Him as much as they vvould: This is the firſt anſwere: The other, I take it out of the commiſſion He giues her: the commiſſion was, to tell the diſciples, and Hee vvilles her to tell haſtely: and therefore Hee will not let her come neare to touch Him, vntill ſhe haue done her commiſsion
            Now let vs marke ſomethings in Marie Magdalene: Yee read in the ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the fifth Chapter, and the fourteenth verſe, PAVL ſayes, The loue of God conſtraines mee, that is, the loue of GOD binds vp mine heart, and hand, and all my ſenſes. Novv vvould to GOD we could loue Him halfe ſo well, as he did: hee giues the reaſon: becauſe Hee loued me, and died, and gaue His life for me: I vvill conſecrate me to His ſeruice, & it is litle enough, thou ſhouldeſt doe ſo, ſeeing Hee hath bought thee, and then He defines the ſeruice: hee ſayes now, I will know no man after the fleſh, that is, for carnall reſpects, as for Countrie, land, kinred, or parentage. But I acknowledge them as new creatures, I will looke to the grace of regeneration: this is the ſeruice of Chriſt, & if I haue knowne CHRIST Himſelfe after the fleſh: yet I know Him no more: ſo, Hee had His friends, His kinred, and His Countrey as other men had: but ſince Hee is exalted aboue the Heauens: I will knowe Him no more, ſo I will compare Marie with Paul: a godlie man, with a godlie woman: ſhe is like Him in this, that ſhe loued the Lord exceeding well. He died to redeeme Paul, & therefore Hee loued Him exceeding well: ſhee loued Him, becauſe

Hee died for her: but when it comes to the ſeruice, Marie is not well learned: Paul touches Him by Faith in the Heauens: Marie lookes not to the Heauens, but ſhe goes to embrace Him in her bodily armes: in this ſhee is behind, but ſhe got better inſtruction hereafter.
            Marke this leſſon: There are ſome men that will loue the Lord intirely: and yet when they come to His ſeruice, they will faile: for ſuch is the groſſenes of our nature, that we cannot incline to that ſpirituall ſeruice, which He chiefly requires. Papiſt
                  •
               ie is full of this groſſenes, they can doe nothing, if they want His carnall preſence, either in Himſelfe, or in a ſtocke, or a ſtone, or in a piece of bread: and therefore they dreame a bodily preſence of Him in the Sacrament: all their Religion is earthly, no Spirit, no grace in it. But accepted the Lord of that groſſe ſeruice of Marie that ſhe offered: I am certaine, He loued Marie better than the Pope, & all his ſhauelings: yet for as well as He liked Marie, Hee likes not this her ſeruice: Hee ſayes to her, Touch me not: then how will he like of that perſon, that Hee loues not ſo well, that delites in groſſe and wilfull ignorance. The LORD keepe vs from ſuch groſſe ſeruice, and make vs to touch Him by Faith.
            Another thing here: He will not ſuffer her to touch Him, before that ſhe had gotten commiſſion to her brethren. This lets vs ſee, if the LORD haue giuen vs a commiſſion, He will haue vs doing it with ſpeed, not beeing intangled with any thing: Paul ſayes, in the ſecond Epiſtle to Timothie, the ſecond Chapter, and the fourth verſe: No man that warreth, intangleth himſelfe with the affaires of this life, becauſe hee would pleaſe him that hath choſen him to be a ſouldiour: if the embracing of a perſon may hinder thee, doe it not: & if the ſaluting of a perſon in the journey may hinder thee, doe it not. Yee read in 2. Kings, Chapter 4. verſe 29 Where the Prophet Eliſha ſends his ſeruant Gehazi to the Shunnamite, he ſayes, Make haſte Salute no man by the way, and if any ſalute thee, anſwere him not: and when Chriſt ſends out His diſciples, He bids them make haſle, and ſalute no man by the way, LVKE CHAPTER 10. VERSE 4. The LORD will not haue vs to decline neither to the right hand, nor to the left, if it were but a looke, if it may hinder thee in the Lords worke, doe it not. Paul receiued a commiſſion, as yee may reade, Philip. Chapter 3. verſe 13. he ranne ſo, that he neuer looked ouer his ſhoulder, but that hee forgot that which was behinde, and endeuoured to

that which was before, till he had ended his courſe: Yee remember of the wife of Lot, how ſhe was forbidden by the Lord, to looke backe to Sodome: ſhe would not goe forward in her journey, but ſhee would looke backe againe, and therefore the Lord turned her in a pillar of ſalt: Hee would haue them ſpeedie in His worke, and, Woe is them, that doe the worke of the Lord negligently, Ierem. 48.10.
            Nowe, let vs come to the commiſſion, He ſayes to her, Marie, Goe and tell my brethren, Well, gets a woman the commiſſion, where is Peter, & Iohn, and Matthew, and the reſt of the Apoſtles? alwaies in the beginning, it is a woman that gets the commiſſion. The laſt day, yee remember, I ſpake of ſundrie preferments of women, that they gote before all men: they gote the reuelation of His Reſurrection before all men in the world, and not by men, but by glorious Angels: but Marie is preferred to all men and women in this, that ſhee firſt ſees the Lord, and then ſhee gets a reuelation of the Lord, that the women got not: ſhe gets the reuelation of His aſcenſion, and yet there is more, ſhe got it not to her ſelfe alone, but He ſayes: Tell the Apoſtles, tell them, ſayes Chriſt, I goe to my Father: So this is a ſpeciall grace that women got, and eſpecially, Marie, that was furtheſt caſten downe, poſſeſſed with ſeuen deuils. What ſhould I ſay? The further thou be caſten downe: the higher ſhalt thou bee exalted. But marke the wordes, Hee ſayes, Tell my brethren. Notwithſtanding of their ſluggiſhneſſe, notwithſtanding they were offended in Him, yet Hee ſayes, Tell my brethren. In the 22. Pſalme verſe 23. DAVID ſayes, I ſhall preach to my brethren. The LORD accompliſhed heere that prophecie: heere Hee preaches to His brethren: ye read in Heb. 2.11.12. Hee that ſanctifies, and wee which are ſanctified, are all of one, that is, wee are of one common nature: and therefore He is not aſhamed to call vs brethren: and therefore he brings in this place of the 22. Pſalme, ſaying, J will declare thy Name vnto my brethren: the reaſon is this: Hee hath a common nature vvith vs, and therefore Hee is not aſhamed of vs: marke it well. Nowe vvhen He is riſen, He calles them brethren, and now vvhen Hee is in that paſſing glorie, the LORD is not aſhamed to call vs brethren: if a man of ſmall linage bee exalted in this world, hee vvill not knovve his father, or his mother: But the LORD that is exalted aboue all the Angells, is not the prouder: Hee is alſo humble to His brethren, as euer Hee vvas in the earth: Hee is not aſhamed to call vs poore wretches,

His brethren, and ſiſters, that are heere in the earth: No, if thou bee not aſhamed of Him firſt, Hee vvill neuer bee aſhamed of thee.
            Now to come to the commiſſion, He ſayes, Tell them: I goe to my Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and to your God: Tell them this: The commiſsion that is giuen before by the Angells, telles that Hee was riſen, but the commiſsion that the LORD Himſelfe giues to Marie, is of an higher degree of glorification: it is of His aſcenſion: for, Tell them, ſayes Hee, I goe to my Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and to your God: The LORD, vvhen Hee comes in proper perſon, brings euer a greater reuelation, than vvas of before: All the light that the Angels, Prophets, or IOHN the BAPTIST reueiled of Him, vvas but darkneſſe, in reſpect of that light that Himſelfe brought. Likevviſe, after His going to Heauen, the Apoſtles, the diſciples, and Miniſters: Miniſters light to the end of the vvorlde: but in that great day, vvhen the LORD ſhall come, thou ſhalt ſee a greater light: thou ſavveſt neuer light comparable to that light. It is hard for thee novve to beleeue, but ſober thinges, but then thou ſhalt ſee great things (thou ſhalt haue no ſtoppe) euen thinges, that the eye hath not ſeene, neither hath entered in the heart of man.
            
            Yet let vs vveigh the vvordes better: I goe vp to my Father: I goe not dovvne, let them not ſeeke mee in the earth: I haue beene in it, as PAVL ſayes to the Epheſians, the fourth CHAPTER, and the ninth VERSE, Hee deſcended into the loweſt partes of the earth: I goe nowe to the Heauen. The vvorde importes, that Hee vvas to leaue them, and that vvorde vvas ſad to them, and to Marie, and they tooke it heauie. I goe, ſayes Hee, to my Father, and to my God: Hee vvent not for His ovvne vvell to the Father, that the Father might communicate His glorie to Him: I goe, ſayes▪ Hee, to my Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and to your God: This imports, that as Hee vvent to His Father for His ovvne glorie and vvel, ſo Hee vvent for their glory and vvell, and aſſoone as He ſhould get that glorie, He ſhould communicate it to them: and no doubt, this vvorde, your Father, and your God raiſed their heartes to follow Him: ſuppoſe our bodies bee heere, our heartes are in the Heauen, and vve are citizens there, albeit thy body vvere burnt, if thine heart be in the Heauen, thou art vvell, and if He had not gone to Heauen, neither had He gotten glory,

neither had anie glorie beene communicated vnto vs: but Hee going to that Father of glorie, as the Apoſtle calles Him, and ſo, as the firſt begotten of GOD, beeing filled with glorie, wee are made partakers of His glorie, as yee reade in the firſt CHAPTER of this Goſpel of Iohn. The oyle yt was poured down vpon the head of AARON, ſtayed not there, but ranne downe to his bearde, his breaſt, his girdle, and the loweſt partes of his garment: So the graces that were in Ieſus Chriſt, our head, ſtayed not there, but flowed from Him, euen to the meaneſt of all His members. The Lord, who is full of grace giues euery one of vs a part here, and one day we shall bee all filled with grace and glory for euer and euer. Marke the wordes well: he calles Him firſt, Father, and then he calles Him God, which imports two natures in one perſon; The Father importes His Godhead, and that he calles Him his God, it imports that He is man: ſo that theſe two wordes import that Chriſt is both God & man▪ bleſſed for euer. But marke the order: He ſayes not, I goe to your Father, and mine: No, but to my Father, and your Father. Ere euer He be our Father, He muſt be His Father. Ere euer He be our God, He muſt bee the God of Chriſt, the man: for if it had not bene for the bloode of Chriſt, Hee had neuer bene thy God: thou haſt that bought vnto thee with the bloode of Chriſt, wee come in vnder Chriſt our elder brother. Nowe when Marie hath receiued the commiſſion, shee tarries no longer, howbeit shee was loath to depart from Him: yet becauſe shee ſaw that it was His will, she obeyes. The godly would faine goe and dwell with the Lord: Paul ſayes, I haue confidence in GOD, and J chooſe rather to remooue out of this bodie, and to dwell with GOD, 2. Corint. Chap. 5. Faine woulde the godlie ſoule bee with GOD: and ſuppoſe it bee preſſed downe with ſinne yet it breaks aye vpward toward the Heauens, to be with the Lord that this mo
                     •
                  
                  talitie may bee ſwallowed vp of Life: for, as long as wee lye heere, vv
                  •
               e liue vnder the burthen of ſinne. So faine woulde the godlie bee with Him, yet ſeeing it is his vvill, that vvee bee Pilgrimes heere a vvhile, that our joye maye bee the greater, vvhen vvee mee
                  •
               e vvith the LORDE, vvhome vvee haue longed for, vvee are contented for a time.
            Now when Marie departs, what does shee? She tolde the D
                     •
                  ſciples that ſhee had ſeene the LORDE. Shee is preaching, and telling, The LORD is going to heauen, to your Father and your GOD. Nowe Brethren, ſeeing vvee are Pilgrimes, let vs take heede vvee

bee well occupied, and looke wee diſcharge our commiſſion: for there is no man nor woman but they haue a commiſſion: Thou that art a Preacher, preache both in time and out of time to His glorie: and if thou diſcharge thy commiſſion faithfullie in thy calling, then euen as Marie was welcome vnto Him againe, ſo ſhalt thou bee alſo welcome, when thou ſhalt meete with the LORD, and Hee ſhall accept well of thee. The LORDE enable vs to take heede to this, that ſeeing wee muſt remaine abſent from our LORDE for a time heere, wee maye euer caſt vs to bee vvell occupied, and walke carefullie in that calling that Hee hath placed vs in: And then, when that the LORDE of Glorie ſhall appeare, whome wee haue ſerued in this life, our ſoules and bodies ſhall enjoye the full fruition of His preſence in Heauen: To whome be glorie for euermore, Amen.
            
         
         
            THE XXXV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 And as they went to tell his diſciples, beholde, Jeſus alſo met them, ſaying, God ſaue you. And they came, and tooke him by the feete, and worſhipped him.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Then ſaide Ieſus vnto them, Bee not afraide. Goe, and tell my Brethren, that they goe into Galile, and there ſhall yee ſee mee.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 And ſhee went, and tolde them that had beene with him, who mourned and wept.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 And when they hearde that hee was aliue, and had appeared to her, they beleeued it not.
               
            
            
               
               BELOVED BRETHREN, theſe dayes paſt vvee haue heard firſt the Hiſtorie of Marie Magdalene, how ſhee returned home, and how ſhee came againe to the graue of her LORD, and of her mourning and weeping at the graue, of her looking againe in to the graue, of the ſight of th'Angels meeting with her, of Chriſtes wordes vnto her: firſt Hee ſpake aloofe, and afarre off vnto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whome ſeekest thou? Then Hee ſpeakes homelie vnto her, calling her by her name, and ſayes, Marie: Shee anſweres Him, Rabboni: as Hee had named her homelie, ſo ſhee anſwered Him homelie: Hee named her like a Maſter, and ſhee anſwered Him like a reuerende Diſciple: Hee calles her as a Sheepehearde, and ſhee anſweres Him as one of His flocke, knowing Him by His voyce, ſhee offers to embrace Him, but Hee preuentes her, and ſayes vnto her, Touch mee not, for I am not aſcended to my Father: perceiuing her to bee ouer much addicted to His bodilie preſence: before Hee will permit her to touch Him, Hee will haue her firſt to beleeue in Him, and to touch Him in glorie, by the hande of faith. Then Hee ſendes her in commiſſion, Goe to my Brethren, ſo calling His Diſciples: A louing ſtile: Tell them of other tidinges than euer they haue hearde yet: They hearde of my Reſurrection, but they beleeued not: but nowe I goe to the Heauens, to my Father, and to your Father, to my GOD, and to your GOD: And this is the commiſſion: Marie receiuing it, ſhee executes it, and runnes to the Diſciples to tell them: and, as Iohn ſayes, ſhe preaches to them the thing that ſhee had heard of the LORDE. MARKE ſayes, that when ſhee came to them, ſhee founde them weeping: This was a weeping time, but ſhortlie after followed a time of joye. This change of courſes yee ſee in the worlde: for though thou bee wanton and laugh heere neuer ſo much, yet thou wilt weepe ſoone after: But wilt thou weepe and mourne heere for a while, when there is matter of mourning, thou ſhalt laugh and rejoyce ſhortlie afterwarde. Nowe when Marie findes the Apoſtles weeping and mourning, ſhee telles them, that the LORD is aliue: ſhee confirmes it that Hee ſpake, and ſayes, ſhee ſawe Him with her eyes, But howe takes the Apoſtles with this commiſſion? They remaine faithleſſe for all that ſhe could ſay: they would not beleeue her: No, it is an hard matter to beleeue the Article

of the Reſurrection, That a man that is dead can riſe againe, and take life: fleſhe and blood will neuer dite this vnto thee, that one that is dead can liue againe. The women vvho vvere more ſimple, and not ſo vviſe in vvorldlie vvit, as the Apoſtles vvere, are more readie to credite the Reſurrection than the Apoſtles, vvho vvere ſtrong, according to the fleſhe. The Reſurrection is harde to be beleeued of anie man: but this is ſure, The Reſurrection is hardeſt to bee beleeued of them, vvho are vviſeſt in this vvorlde: No, hee that hath this worldlie vviſedome, hee countes theſe Heauenlie and Spirituall thinges but follie, till hee bee made a foole, that hee maye bee made wiſe, as the Apoſtle PAVL ſpeakes, 1. CORIN. CHAP. 3. VERS. 18. That is, till hee renounce this worldlie wiſedome, hee ſhall neuer beleeue theſe Spirituall thinges. When I conſider the wordes of MARKE, I finde manie faultes in the Diſciples: They were lying mourning: this vvas a vaine mourning: What cauſe had they of mourning for Him whome they thought vvas dead, but yet vvas aliue? So they had matter of joye, and not of mourning. And from vvhence proceeded this mourning? Firſt, they vvere ignorant of the Scriptures, which had foretolde that he ſhoulde riſe againe: Then, they had forgotten the vvorde vvhich the LORDE had ſpoken vnto them, That hee ſhoulde die, and riſe againe the thirde daye: Yet there is vvorſe in them than this: The firſt companie of vvomen, vvho tolde them of CHRISTES Reſurrection, they woulde not beleeue them: Then the next companie comes, neither woulde they beleeue them one vvorde. And laſt, MARIE came, vvho not onelie met vvith the Angels, but alſo vvith the LORDE, and receiued a commiſſion: and yet they vvoulde not beleeue her, notwithſtanding ſhee tolde them that ſhe had ſeene Him. So there is not onelie an vnbeliefe, but a ſtiffeneſſe in them. So that if yee will count theſe faultes, their dolour is firſt without comfort, and ſecondlie an ignorance of the Scriptures, and thirdly, a forgetfulneſſe of the worde of the LORDE: and laſt, there is an infidelitie, that they would neither beleeue the women, who came from the Angels, nor MARIE, that came from the LORDE, and ſawe Him, and ſpake with Him: So that they are as new to enter to learn, as though they had neuer ſeen nor known Chriſt. Yet there was ſome good thing in them, for certainly, howbeit the dolour came of ignorance, forgetfulneſſe, and incredulitie, yet I am ſure of this, that the loue which they carried towardes

CHRIST cauſed them to mourne, for if they had not loued Him, they had not mourned for Him. No, there was none of the High Priestes that wet their cheekes for His death. So of neceſſitie, loue cauſed them to mourne for Him. And this ſponke of loue, that was couered & kept down afore, in end it brake out, & burnt thorowe all their imperfections. It is a wonder to ſee howe the LORDE will keepe in a ſponke of grace vnder an hundreth imperfections. And this ſhoulde make vs to bee loath to judge, and to giue out ſentence: for all the euill that wee ſee in anie, it maye bee that the LORDE will let thee ſee, that there was ſome ſponke of grace in that man couered; which ſponk will breake out in its owne time.
            Nowe I haue ended the Hiſtorie of MARIE MAGDALENE, who loued the LORDE ſo well, and ſo entirelie. In the words following, to wit, in the Goſpell of MATTHEVV, there are two diſcourſes: The firſt is, of the two companies of women, at their turning home againe: as they met with the Angels afore, nowe they meete with the LORDE Himſelfe: In the next diſcourſe, wee haue a piece of an Hiſtorie of them that were ſet to keepe the graue, who returned to the Scribes, and to the High Priestes vvith theſe ſame tidinges, Hee is riſen againe. Nowe I ſhall goe thorowe this daye the firſt diſcourſe, and piece of Hiſtorie, as GOD shall giue vs grace. Then to returne to the women: It is ſaide, that as they returned home, The LORDE met them: but Marie was returned before theſe women came foorth: ſhee had met with CHRIST, and returned home againe. This company meetes with the LORDE as they returned homewarde. Ye will perhaps aske, what was the cauſe that Hee met with Marie Magdalene? No doubt this was the cauſe, She loued Him beſt, ſhee loued Him aboue them all, and ſhee had the greateſt languor to ſee Him, and ſhee reſted neuer, till ſhee had ſeene Him, and met with Him. What was the cauſe that theſe women ſawe Him afore the Apoſtles? No queſtion their languor to ſee IESVS, was next to MARIE: The Apoſtles languor was laſt, and therefore they got the laſt ſight of Him. Nowe the leſſon is eaſie: Thou that longeſt moſte for the LORDE IESVS, ſhalt ſee Him firſt, with MARIE MAGDALENE: A man will thirſt for earthlie thinges, and bee diſappointed of them: but it is vnpoſſible, if thou thirſt for CHRIST, and to ſee thy LORDE, but thou ſhalt ſee Him:

So, Bleſſed are they that hunger and thirſt for righteouſneſſe: for they ſhall be ſatisfied, Matth. Chapter 5. verſe 5. So, if thou vvouldeſt ſee CHRIST, firſt, long for Him (and thou ſhalt neuer get that bleſſedneſſe, till thou ſeeſt Him) Then, if thou canſt not be the firſt, in care and deſire to ſee Him vvith Marie Magdalene, yet bee next in care vvith the reſt of the vvomen: and if thou canſt not attaine to the firſt, nor ſecond, looke that thou be in the third roome, at leaſt, that thou long vvith the Apoſtles, and thou ſhalt get the thirde ſight: for bleſſed are they that get any ſight, yea, the laſt ſight: Bleſſed are they that come either firſt, or laſt to Heauen, but thinke not, that this dravving neare of ours, to Him, is the cauſe that Hee dravves neere to vs: No, if Hee drevve not neare vnto vs firſt, vve vvould neuer thinke of Him, let be to dravv neare vnto Him.
            So, Brethren, the cauſe vvherefore our heartes doe dravv neare vnto the LORD, is not in vs, but in Him, becauſe He thirſtes for vs, and dravves vs vnto Him: and vvouldeſt thou haue an argument, that the LORD is neare vnto thee: looke if thine heart dravves neare vnto Him, and if thou findeſt thine heart longing and thirſting for Him, then the LORD is neare vnto thee, and Hee is preſent with thee: and if thou findeſt no ſenſe nor feeling of Him in thine heart, nor no deſire of Him, nor no languour for His preſence, in the vvhich is ſacietie of joy: and if thou haue no languour, bee ſure, the Lord is farre from thee, for if Hee be farre from thee, albeit thou hadſt all the world about thee, thou art but a miſerable body.
            When Hee meetes vvith theſe vvomen, Hee is not dumbe, and Hee ſpeakes not to the eare only, but alſo to the heart, He ſayes, God ſaue you: the word in the own language would be wel marked, it ſignifies rejoyce: Is not this a great thing, that Hee that hath joy to giue thee, ſhould bid thee rejoyce: and no doubt, it was an effectuall vvord, and it made them to haue joy vnſpeakable. A man when Hee bids thee, rejoyce, hath no power to worke joy in thee, but the LORD is joy it ſelfe: who hath joy to giue? but the LORD Himſelfe? or who can giue peace, but the LORD: aſſoone as He drawes neare to any perſon, and giues His preſence to Him, to ye end that His preſence may worke, He giues a joyful word: the word of the Lord is of power, as Paul ſayes, Rom. 1.16. The Gospell is the power of GOD vnto ſaluation, vnto euery one that beleeueth: So, if

thou contemneſt this word, that bids thee rejoyce, thou ſhalt get no portion of that grace that is with Him: ſo this word is the only miniſter that miniſters joy to the ſoule: all the thinges in the world, ſhal neuer miniſter joy to the ſoule that is afflicted. Whē He hath ſpoken this word (and no queſtion it was very effectuall) they are ſo filled with joy, that they tarie not to make anſwere, but they fell dovvne at His feete, And embrace Him by the feete, and adore and worſhip Him, as Thomas did, vvhen hee put his hande in His ſide: he ſaid, Thou art my Lord, and my God, IOHN Chapter 20. verſe 28. Hee refuſes not this honour, becauſe Hee vvas their LORD and GOD. Yee ſee heere, how effectuall the preſence of the LORD is, albeit it were but one worde, Reioyce: the povver that is in that worde, workes ſuch a joy in the heart of a ſinner, that the poore ſinner muſt meete Him: the LORD cannot meete thee, but if thou feeleſt that joy, but thou muſt meete Him againe, and ſtriue to haue Him in thine armes: No, ſvvord, nor fire, nor hunger, nor nakedneſſe, nor nothing can ſeparate thee from Him, if thou feeleſt Him in thine heart, but thou muſt meete Him againe, and cleaue faſt to Him. The feeling of this joy, which is through the preſence and worde of GOD, mooues vs to deſire to embrace Him, and makes our conjunction vvith Him, vvhereupon ariſes our joy againe, farre greater than before: The joy that wee haue novv, is but by Faith, and a farre meeting, as farre as is betvvene the Heauen and the Earth: yet ſayes Peter in his firſt Epiſtle, the firſt Chapter, and the eight verſe: Wee not ſeeing Him, but beleeuing in Him, reioyce with a ioy vnſpeakable and glorious. So, beleeuing in Him, vvee finde joy: but vvhen thou ſhalt ſee Him face to face: (Alas, lookeſt thou not for this) then thorovv thy conjunction with Him by ſight, there ſhall be praiſe, honour, and glory for euer: No, ſuch ſhall bee thy joy, as eye neuer ſavve, eare neuer heard, nor neuer could enter into the heart of man: thou ſhalt vvonder vvhen thou ſeeſt it, that euer there could bee ſuch joy prepared for thee: and therefore meaſure it not by thy capacitie.
            Yet this vvould not be paſſed by: They goe not to His throat, to His necke, or to His middle: but they fall dovvne, and takes Him by the feete, and vvorſhips Him. Marke it, Brethren: a ſinner vvill be homely indeede vvith his God, vvith CHRIST: No, there vvas neuer a creature ſo homely vvith another, as the

ſinner vvill be vvith the LORD. But marke it: This homelines vvill not be vvith miſnourturneſſe, and vvith an opinion of paritie: albeit thou wilt bee homely with Him, as with thy brother: yet thou mayeſt not make thy ſelfe as companion to Him, and count lightly of Him, but thou muſt be lowly, thine head muſt be reuerenced: Hee is our Head, Epheſ. Chapter. 1. verſe 22. If therefore wee ought to reuerence Him: for He is in a wonderfull ſublimitie, and highneſſe, aboue His Church: and as this is true, that the ſoule which is joyned with Him in this life by Faith, ſees in Him ſuch a Majeſtie, that it ſtoupes before Him: ſo much more vvhen wee ſhall ſee Him face to face in glorie, and His Majeſtie fully reueiled, wee ſhall reuerence Him, and in humilitie fall at His feete, ſinging, Holy, Holy, Holy, as yee haue in the ſixt Chapter of Eſay, and in the Reuelation. Nowe to goe forward: While they are ſitting at His feete, the LORD ſpeakes to them, and ſuffers them to feele Him: and all to this ende, that they might beleeue Hee was riſen, and liuing, Then He ſayes to them, Feare not: this encouragement importes, that notwithſtanding all their embracing of Him, and confidence, there vvas a piece of feare and lying backe in them: I will not commend it, becauſe the Lord hath diſcommended it. It is true indeed, our joyning with Him by Faith, ſhould be with ſuch a confidence, that it ſhould be without any feare or doubting, but with joy. This ſhould be: but marke it againe: There is ſuch an holineſſe in that Majeſtie that we joyne with, there is no ſpot in Him, & then ſo long as we are here, there is ſuch vncleanneſſe, & ſuch an euill conſcience in vs, that our Faith is joyned with doubting and feare: ſo that, if thou haſt not a recourſe to Him, no peace for thee, we will feare that that Holy one conſume vs that are ſo vnholy: but the Lord who knowes thy feare, He comfortes thee: thou knoweſt not thine owne feare ſo well as the Lord does: thou feeleſt Him not ſo ſoone by Faith, but as ſoone He knowes thy feare and thine heauineſſe, as Hee did the feare of the women, and Hee ſayes to a ſinner that faine would embrace Him: feare not, thou haſt no cauſe of feare: My terrours haue taken thy terrours away: And as the Apoſtle ſayes, Heb. Chapter 4. verſe 16. Let vs goe boldly to the throne of grace, with confidence, that we may receiue mercie: & if thou heareſt this voyce, thou mayeſt goe boldly, and He ſhall put away all te
                  •
               rours and feare. But in that life to come when all matter of ſeare, as ſinne and corruption of nature, is away, albeit vve ſhall ſee Him

more clearelie, and bee conjoyned vvith Him more perfectlie, yet all feare ſhall bee taken awaye, for perfect loue caſtes out feare, as Iohn ſaieth in his first Epistle, Chap. 4. verſ. 18.
            Nowe to goe to the commiſſion, Goe, and tell my Brethren, that they goe into Galile, and there ſhall they ſee mee: They woulde ſee mee: bid them goe before mee into Galile, and there they ſhall ſee mee. There is heere then a commiſſion giuen vnto the vvomen to the Diſciples: There was afore a commiſſion ſent vnto the Diſciples by the Angels: Firſt, of a companie of vvomen, and afterwarde another companie: and next, MARIE was ſent from the Lorde Himſelfe. Nowe Hee ſendes a newe commiſſion, to tell them, that Hee was riſen, yet they neuer beleeued. Heere vvee ſee a marueilous patience, in ſuffering their incredulitie ſo long. What King vvoulde haue had euer the tenth part of this patience. With this Hee joynes the louing ſtile, Tell my Brethren. Hee ſayes not, Tell theſe ſluggiſhe and faithleſſe bodies. His patience is joyned with loue vnſpeakeable. All the worlde cannot expreſſe the lenitie and patience of the LORDE towardes His owne: though they ſhoulde bee neuer ſo vnbeleeuing, yet Hee calles them His Brethren. Wee ſhoulde ſtudie night and daye to knowe that the LORDE loues vs: for our ſtanding is not in our loue towarde Him, but in His loue towardes vs: and if thou finde thy ſelfe rooted in His loue, as the Apoſtle ſpeakes to the EPHESIANS, thou ſhalt neuer bee ſeparated thorowe anie occaſion from that loue that is in CHRIST. Then againe, I ſee Hee hath a marueilous ſtudie to gette them inſtructed. Hee ſayes not, I haue ſent manie alreadie, and yet they will not beleeue: No, Hee ſendes euerie companie after another till they beleeue, and till faith be wrought in their heartes. What meanes all this care to inſtruct them? The Lorde was to ſende them foorth to teach others, and therefore all His ſtudie is, (before they inſtruct others,) that they might beleeue themſelues. No, if the Lorde ſende thee to tell of His Death, His Reſurrection, and Aſcention to the Heauens, and of His comming againe to Iudgement, He will haue a care that thou be inſtructed, and that thou beleeue that which thou deliuereſt vnto others. No, I will not giue a pennie for a Miniſter that hath no aſſurance, no feeling, nor no ſight of the death and Reſurrection of CHRIST, and that will ſtande vp, and ſpeake to the people of GOD. Beſides this patience, this loue, and this care that Hee hath to inſtruct

them who are to bee employed in His ſeruice, Hee ſhewes a marueilous wiſedome in humbling them thorowe the teaching of the women: And therefore Hee will not ſende an Angell vnto them, but infirme women, to ſchoole them, and ſhame them: and howbeit the commiſſion beares not this in expreſſe wordes, yet Hee will haue the women to ſaye in effect, Fie vpon you, yee are ſluggiſhe bodies, yee ſhoulde haue taught vs, and not wee you. This is it that the Apoſtles ſhoulde haue vnderſtood: They vnderſtoode His wonderfull wiſedome, Hee was to ſende them to the worlde. He was carefull to inſtruct them, He ſendes not Angels to ſchoole them, but women, to learne them humilitie, that they neuer forget this, that they were ſchooled in the ſchoole of women: for as it is required that the ſeruantes of GOD haue knowledge and a perſwaſion, ſo they muſt haue humilitie, or elſe they cannot bee faithfull Preachers. Nowe one worde, and ſo I ſhall ende, Bidde them, ſayes Hee, goe to Galile: Hee ſayes not, Goe to Hieruſalem: No, the LORDE had turned His backe on Hieruſalem: for theſe who contemned Him when Hee was humbled in the fleſhe, the LORDE will diſpiſe them when Hee is glorified. Woe to them whome Hee forbiddes His ſeruantes to goe vnto: Woe to vs, if Hee ſaye once, Goe not to EDINBVRGH: Woe is them, and woe to that Towne where the Lorde forbiddes His Meſſengers to goe. Beware of this, that the Lorde ſaye not to His Meſſenger, Goe to the North or South, but goe not to EDINBVRGH, for then ſhall wrath and deſtruction light vpon it. What confuſion and deſtruction lighted vpon Hieruſalem, after that the Lord had once turned His backe vpon it? Yet ſayes the Lorde, Bid them goe to Galile, and there they ſhall ſeeme: They beleeued not others, who tolde them of mee, but there I ſhall ſpeake vnto them mine owne ſelfe. This is the great mercie of the LORDE towardes His Diſciples, vpon whome the LORDE ſhoulde neuer haue looked, if Hee had reſpected their infidelitie: but albeit they were vnfaithfull, yet Hee remained faithfull and mercifull: for Hee coulde not denie Himſelfe, but where there ſinnes abounded, there His grace ſurmounted aboue them all: for, as the APOSTLE ſayes, Where ſinne abounded, there grace abounded much more. Now al the world was full of ſinne when Chriſt came, yet grace ſuperabounded. Now this was a meeke dealing with them, that they ſhoulde ſee mercie aboue their ſinnes, to this ende, that they ſhoulde by experience teach others:

for hee that feeles both miſerie and mercie, is the beſt teacher in in the worlde. So beeing to ſende them to teach others, Hee lets them finde grace to ſuperabounde. PAVL, Roman. 5.20. ſayes, Where ſinne abounded, there grace ſuperabounded. Reade the firſt Epiſtle to Timothie, Chap. 1. verſ. 13. there the Apoſtle ſayes, J was a blaſphemer, and an euill liuer, and a perſecuter: this was his miſerie: and if the LORDE had neuer looked to him, hee had neuer beene an Apoſtle, nor a Chriſtian man. But what ſayes hee thereafter? The grace of the LORDE IESƲS ſuperabounded: and for as high and weightie as my ſinne was, yet His mercie was greater, and it weighed it downe. So then yee ſee the LORDE cares for them that lye in miſerie, to tell them of it. I tell you this daye, yee are lying in miſerie, and Hee is carefull that the Preacher haue a ſenſe both of miſerie, and of mercie, to tell of the wrath of GOD, which is manifeſt from the Heauen vpon all impenitent ſinners: And, if thou wilt repent thee, I aſſure thee, though thou vvere the greateſt ſinner that euer was, thou ſhalt haue mercie: and therefore, if thou haſt gone long on in ſinne, yet euen for GODS cauſe at laſt, take vp thy ſelfe: and I promiſe thee exceeding mercie in that bloodie Sacrifice of our LORDE and SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST, who hath died both for thee, and mee, and all penitent ſinners: To Him therefore, with the Father and Holie Spirit, bee all Honour and Glorie for euermore, AMEN.
         
         
            THE XXXVI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Nowe when they were gone, beholde, ſome of the watch came into the Citie, and ſhewed vnto the High Priestes all the thinges that were done.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 12 And they gathered them together, with the Elders, and tooke counſell, and gaue large money vnto the Souldiours,
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Saying, Saye, His Diſciples came by night, and ſtole him awaye while wee ſlept.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And if this matter come before the Gouernour to bee hearde, we will perſwade him, and ſo vſe the matter, that yee ſhall not neede to care.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 So they tooke the money, and did as they were taught: and this ſaying is noyſed among the Iewes vnto this day.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 After that, hee appeared vnto two of them in another forme, as they walked, and went into the countrey.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And beholde, two of them went that ſame daye to a towne, which was from Hieruſalem about threeſcore furlonges, called EMMAVS.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And they talked together of all theſe thinges that were done.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And it came to paſſe, as they communed together, and reaſoned, that Ieſus himſelfe drewe neare, and went with them.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 But their eyes were holden, that they could not know him.
               
            
            
               WEE hearde hitherto in the Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST, (Beloued in Him) of ſundrie vvitneſſes of His Reſurrection: Firſt Angels, and next vvomen: Namelie, MARIE MAGDALENE vvas the firſt that gotte the ſight of Him after His Reſurrection: and after her, other vvomen gotte a ſight of Him alſo, and a direction to His Diſciples, to aſſure them, that Hee vvas riſen againe.
            Nowe in this TEXT vvhich vvee haue read out of the Goſpell of MATTHEVV, vve haue a piece of Hiſtorie of another ſorte of vvitneſſes, that teſtified of the Reſurrection of IESVS; euen of the men of vvarre, who were ſent out to watch the graue: they came not to the Diſciples, but to the High Priestes, and t
                  •
               ey teſtifie vnto them of the Reſurrection of IESVS. Then, in the Hiſtorie vvritten by MARKE and LVKE, vvee returne to the true vvitneſſes, to vvit, two of them that vvere His Diſciples:

Hee meetes with them as they vvere journeying from Ieruſalem to Emaus, and thereafter theſe two tell the reſt, that the Lord vvas riſen. Now to goe thorow theſe two pieces of Hiſtorie ſhortly, as God ſhall giue the grace, and as time ſhall permit: When the vvomen that had met with Ieſus, had returned, Some of the ſouldiours that had watched the graue, returnes home to Ieruſalem, to tell the things that had fallen out: but they came not to the place where the Apoſtles vvere, but to the place where the High Prieſts vvere, from whome they vvere ſent, and they tell the Lord was riſen.
            The Hiſtorie is plaine: theſe witneſſes are the ſouldiours that vvatched the graue: they haue not ſuch a commiſsion as the other witneſſes had: they are not ſent by CHRIST, nor by His Angels, but runne of their owne accorde: but yet they runne by the ſpeciall prouidence of GOD: No doubt, His prouidence directed them to the High Prieſtes, and not ſo much to inſtruct them: for they vvere hardened, as to let them ſee, that they vvere diſappointed of their expectation. They obtained of Pilate, to let men goe out and to keepe Him in the graue, and to haue ſmoothered His Reſurrection, that it had neuer come to light and yet the LORD ſendes theſe ſame men to Ieruſalem, as witneſſes of that reſurrection, that they would haue ſmoothered, as if they had bene ſent out by the High Prieſtes, to this ende, that they ſhould be witneſſes: they could teſtifie no better of it: the LORD turnes it about ſo, that they could doe no better, if the High Prieſts had hired and waged them, to be witneſſes of His Reſurrection. It is a vaine thing to ſtriue with GOD, and to hide that thing, that Hee will haue brought to light: for hide it as thou vvilt, in deſpite of thee He ſhall bring it to light, to thy ſhame, that Hee may bee glorified.
            Novve to ſpeake what they teſtified: they teſtified the ſame thing that the vvomen had teſtified: they teſtified the trueth, they teſtified All that was done, that IESVS vvas riſen: yet there is a great difference betvveene them, and the vvomen: when the vvomen vnderſtood, that Hee vvas riſen, they came home vvith joy, the men of vvarre came home vvith ſadneſſe, and vvith diſcontentment, and they preach this to them that were ſad to heare it, and aſhamed of it: they preach it not to the Apoſtles, as the vvomen did, but to the High Prieſtes.
            
               Marke this Leſſon: Looke how ye tell tythings: there are ſome that will make good tithings of euill tithings, and euill tithings of good, as they pleaſe, albeit they be neuer ſo good, if they be not contented with them, they vvill make them euill: but be they neuer ſo euill, if they be contented with them, they will make them good, and tell them vvith joy.
            Bevvare hovv ye tell tithings of the Church of ENGLAND of FRANCE, or of GERMANIE, or of other partes. Looke when thou ſpeakeſt of the proſperous eſtate of the Church, that thou ſpeake it with joy: and vvhen yee heare that the Church is troubled, ſpeake that not with joy, but vvith ſadneſſe: Thou that art not content vvith the proſperous eſtate of CHRISTS Church, thou vvouldeſt haue hid CHRISTES Reſurrection, as the Scribes did: and if thou hadſt beene liuing with them. So in a vvord: if the Church be ſad, tell it vvith ſadneſſe, and if ſhe be joyfull, tell thy tithings vvith joy: if thou ſpeakeſt of IESVS, and His glorie, ſpeake of Him vvith joy and pleaſure in thine heart.
            Novv to goe forvvard: The High Prieſts, when they heare theſe newes: they are nothing content therevvith, but are aſhamed: They call a Councell of the High Prieſtes, and the Senatours of the people. The thing that they decerne, is to bribe the men of vvare that vvatched the graue, and to hire their tongues to lie: they gaue them a great ſumme, to ſay, That the body of the Lord was ſtollen out of the graue by the diſciples, in the night, whilſt they ſlept: and leſt the men of vvarre ſhould bee affrighted for Pilate: and ſo refuſe to lie: they preuent that: for ſay they, take no thought of Pilate: ye ſhall get no harme: If hee heare of this, wee will perſwade him, and ſo keepe you harmeleſſe. Well, theſe men were once diſappointed, and yet leaue they off? No, they will haue His glory and Reſurrection ſmoothered: and becauſe they could not get it by violence, nowe, they will ſmoother it by craft: No, that thing that they cannot doe by violence, they ſhall ſeeke to bring it about vvith lies: No, thinke yee, that theſe Traitours and Apoſtate Lordes doe reſt: No, that thing that they could not get done by violence, they ſeeke to doe it by craft.
            Well, yee vvould maruell at this▪ yee vvould aske Whether or not they were aſſured that the LORD IESVS was riſen, and beleeued the report of the men of warre? I anſwere: It could not bee, but they beleeued that He roſe by a diuine power:

No, it could not be but they thought it: and if they had thought that the diſciples had ſtollen His body away, they would haue purſued them, and gotten the bodie againe. Then ſeeing the arme of GOD raiſed Him vp, and they knew that the Lord was riſen: Is not this a wonder, that they repent not, but will oppone them to the power of God? No, wonder not at it. Men, who haue once begunne to fight againſt the Holy Spirit, and God Himſelfe immediately, can ſcarcely euer repent, and turne backe againe, but rather goes forward to fulfill their ſinnes, as the Apoſtle ſayes, 1. Theſſ. 2.16. the wrath of God is come vpon them to the full. This is not the firſt time they fought againſt God immediatly, but they had often times done ſo before, and beginning, they leaue not off, but goe forward. So, learne this leſſon: marke how dangerous a thing it is, once to beginne to oppone thy ſelfe to God: if thou beginneſt once to oppone thy ſelfe againſt that Majeſtie, the wrath of God ſhall ſo ſeaſe on thee, that thou ſhalt not get leaue to goe backe, till thou bee ſhut in hell: So Steuen Acts 7.31. ſpeakes of theſe ſame Iewes: O ſtiffenecked people! yee euer reſiſt the Holy Spirit: that is, as yee haue begunne to ſinne againſt that Holy Spirit, ſo yee continue, ye cannot goe backe againe: So that they are ſet out as a ſpectacle of Gods judgement: and it ſhould learne vs to tremble, once to thinke euill againſt that Holy Majeſtie: theſe people may be a document to all them that oppone themſelues to Him. The Lord ſaue vs from all ſinnes, but namely, from this ſinne againſt the Holie Ghoſt, that can haue no repentance.
            Nowe to goe forwarde: The ſouldiers againſt their owne conſcience, ſell themſelues miſerably to lie: and it was a wonder, that the Iewes knew it not to be a lie: the men who made this lie, were prophane men of warre, who commonly vſe to haue litle godlineſſe or religion. Indeede, I grant, the Lord hath His owne of all ſortes: but ſeldome finde ye, that men of warre are either good or godly. Beſides this, they were Ethnikes, and without God in the world: in a word, they were prophane hearted men: then what wonder was it, that they ſell their tongue & their conſcience: No, if thine heart be prophane, thou ſhalt ſoone ſell thy tongue, and thy conſcience to any man, and thou ſhalt ſoone ſell thine hande to murther, albeit it were a King, as ye haue heard of ſundrie. Our Kings Majeſtie had neede to take heede to this, that there bee no prophane men about Him: for they will ſell him, & his kingdome

for a litle price. It is ſaid of Eſau, Heb. 12 16. He ſolde his birthright, he ſolde Heauen, he ſolde his part of Paradiſe, for a meſſe of pottage. What was the ground of all this? The Apoſtle ſayes, Let no prophane man be among you, as Eſau: prophanitie was the ground, and hee brings in this, as an effect following prophanitie: if thou be prophane, thou wilt ſell thy conſcience: and I ſay, this marchandiſe of buying and ſelling of conſciences, that is ſo frequent in this Lande, tells, that this Land is ouerſpread with prophanitie. The Apoſtle ſayes, It is the will of God, that yee bee holy: but Scotland may ſay, farewell holineſſe: Alas, if thou kept in thine heart holineſſe, thou wilt keepe thy conſcience: but if thou be prophane like Eſau, thou wilt ſell thy conſcience for a pennie: So, I direct mine exhortation to all ſortes of men: to Traffiquers, be not prophane but keepe an holy heart, and thou ſhalt keepe a good conſcience, and if thou be a Iudge, if thou bee prophane, thou wilt ſell thy: conſcience for a crowne: art thou a Marchand, if thou wanteſt an holy heart, thou wilt ſell thy conſcience: a Miniſter, if his heart be not holy, hee will ſoone ſell his tongue, and his conſcience. So in a word, Let vs ſtriue with our conſcience, to haue an holy heart: Alas, the ground of all this miſchiefe in Scotland, is prophanitie of heartes. When they haue ſold their tongue, they went, and ſaid, He was ſtollen away, and the Euangeliſts note it, That that fame remaines amongſt them vnto this day. I thinke, ye ſhould maruell, that ſuch a falſe fame ſhould haue preuailed: God diſappointed them before, but now He permits them to get the victorie. Woe to that victorie that is gotten againſt God: woe to that man that goes againſt God, if an euill action proſper with him, it is a token, that he ſhall be thruſt in Hell. This was but a ſmall victorie: for no doubt, all that He appointed for life and ſaluation beleeued, that He roſe. Nowe, Brethren, when they are away, the true perſwaſion remaines in our heartes, that the LORD roſe: ſo that euer trueth in the end gets the victorie. Ye would maruell that the people ſhould credite that His body was ſtollen out of the graue: for if it was ſtollen, by whome was it ſtollen? They ſay, by His diſciples: Is it likely, that they who were a companie of timorous and abaſhed perſons, durſt haue come out without armour againſt Pilates guarde: They ſay, whilſt they were aſleepe, they tooke it away: then they ſlept very ſound, that they could not heare ſuch an hudge ſtone taken away, and if they were ſleeping when it was

taken away, Why followed they not when they wakened: and no doubt, if it had beene true, they would haue followed, and haue brought the diſciples, and executed them. Yee would wonder now, vvhy theſe people ſhould not haue beleeued: I anſvvere, Theſe people were appointed for damnation, and they hated the light: and therefore a lie gets ſoone place in their heartes: they that hate the trueth, the Deuill cannot make ſuch a lie, but they will eaſily beleeue it. What is the cauſe, that the people beleeue the Pope, and that crue of the Antichriſtian kingdome. The cauſe is this: They hate the light: and therefore, as the Apoſtle ſayes, Becauſe they beleeued not the trueth, the Lord makes them to beleeue lies. So our leſſon is this in a word: loue the trueth, and thou ſhalt hate lies: they hate the trueth, and their heartes drinke in lies. The Lord ſet our heartes vpon Him, and make vs to beleeue the trueth.
            This for the firſt: we goe to the ſecond, and we ſhall enter in it, and leaue the reſt till the next day, becauſe the time is almoſt ſpent alreadie. Wee come againe to better and more holy witneſſes: There are two of the diſciples of Chriſt, the name of the one is Cleopas, and the name of the other is not expreſſed: theſe were not two of the eleuen diſciples, but two of the common rancke of diſciples that vſed to follow the Lord. The ſame day, ſayes the Text, to wit, the ſame day that Hee roſe, the ſame day that the women went out, and did meete Him, and that ſame day, that theſe women returned and preached to the Apoſtles: Theſe two diſciples went on their iourney, about threeſcore furlongs, which is ſeuen mile of ours, or thereabout from Ieruſalem: They are not going to ſeeke Chriſt, but they leaue Him, and as it were in a manner, they deſpared that euer they ſhould ſee Him, & they were thinking all that time that they had ſpent with Him, was loſt: yet ſuppoſe they were leauing Him, He leaues not them: Theſe women ſought Him, and they found Him: but theſe two diſciples leaue Him: but yet the Lord caſtes Him in their way. Well, Brethren, who euer findes the Lord, man, or woman, it is of grace: if thou haſt found the Lord, thou haſt gotten mercie, thou haſt found mercie: for if thou findeſt Him, thou haſt found Him, ere euer thou haſt ſought Him: or els if thou haſt ſought Him, thou haſt not ſought Him as thou oughteſt: for Marie ſought Him not as ſhe ſhould haue done: and therefore the Angell ſaid, Why ſeekeſt thou the liuing amongſt the dead? So thou that ſeekeſt Him not, and findeſt Him, thanke

GOD: and thou that ſeekeſt Him, and ſeekeſt Him not as thou oughteſt to haue ſought Him, if thou finde Him, thanke Him: for it is of grace that thou findeſt Him: for if Hee looked howe thou ſoughteſt Him, thou wouldeſt neuer finde Him. Wee faile often in ſeeking of Him: either wee ſeeke Him not with that meaſure of deſire that wee ought, (alas, the beſt of vs all in this world, cannot ſeeke Him with halfe a great deſire) or if wee ſeeke Him, wee faile, as the women did. And laſt of all, wee ſeeke Him not for that ende wee ſhould ſeeke Him. Wee ſhould ſeeke Him for that life and that grace that is in Him, that we might bee like Him, and partakers of that life. But all men for the moſt part ſeeke Him for ſome worldlie reſpect, as for a deliuerance out of miſerie: and if thou be ſicke, thou vvilt crie for thy health: & if thou be poore, thou vvilt crie for riches: and if thou bee hungrie, thou wilt crie for meate: So that the ſeeking of Him is either for the bellie, or ſome other worldlie thing: ſcarcelie one among an hundreth will ſeeke the Lorde for himſelfe, for Heauen and glorie: and if one can come thus farre to get a grone for Heauen, that vvill bee in a ſober meaſure, and with a great imperfection. Wee are by nature addicted to the thinges that are on the earth, and for them doe wee ſeeke them: but Heauenlie thinges, that cannot bee ſeene, wee ſeeke them not, vvee thinke them but follie. So I ſaye, if wee get a deſire, wee get it with ſuch an imperfection, that it is a wonder. The thing that thou and I ſhoulde moſte ſeeke for, is that ſeconde comming of CHRIST, to put an ende to this miſerie that is vvithin vs, and vvithout vs: ſo that this ſhoulde bee our ſaying, Come LORDE IESƲS, and put an ende to this miſerie. But who cryes for this comming? Yea, rather I heare men ſaye, God keepe me from that daye. Alas! knoweſt thou not, that thy miſerie ſhall neuer haue an ende vntill that daye? The Apoſtle PAVL ſayes, Wee that haue gotten the firſt fruites of the Spirite, wee ſigh in our ſelues, wayting for the adoption, euen the redemption of our bodies, Roman. Chapt. 8. verſ. 23. Wee are nowe the Sonnes of GOD, but it appeares not vvhat ſhall bee: but then it ſhall appeare vvhat thou art. Nowe the Godlyeſt is in moſte miſerie: And alas, it appeares, that the beſt of vs hath that SPIRITE but ſoberlie, and not in that meaſure that wee ſhoulde haue. And if wee had it, wee woulde ſigh and crie, Come LORD IESƲS come: that word would neuer goe out of our mouthes, and our eyes would neuer be from the Heauens, to looke when our Lord would

come and breake their cloudes, and theſe viſible Heauens, and then take thee to Himſelfe out of this vaile of miſerie, to that endleſſe joy. So to come to our purpoſe: Whether vve ſee Him firſt, or laſt, it is of grace, that all glorie may redound to Him.
            Well, as they are journeying betvvixt Ieruſalem and Emmaus, they are talking as tvvo men vſe to talke together, and all their talke vvas of CHRIST, and His crucifying: for this was but the third day after He vvas crucified. Yee ſee, Brethren, for all this leauing of the LORD, and deſparing euer to ſee Him: yet heere is a piece of godlineſſe in their heartes, and a ſponke of Hope that keepes them, that they drowned not into deſpare: for if they had not preuented, they would haue periſhed with the reſt of the Iewes: and as they are thus wreſtling betwixt Hope and Deſpare, the Lord takes them by the hande, to helpe them. It is a good thing, to haue, if it vvere but one ſponke of grace: yea, if it were but to ſpeake of Him: For none can call Ieſus the Lord, as the Apoſtle ſayes, except he haue gotteen the Spirit of Chriſt. So, holde on, and ſpeake of Him, if thou canſt doe no more.
            Yet to goe forward: When they are talking, He comes in, and goes with them: Marke it, This is an argument, that the Lord heard what they were ſpeaking, and as He heares them, Hee joynes with them ſide for ſide. Well, take heede to thine heart, & to thy words, The Lorde is nearer to thee than thou thinkeſt: walke, as if thou wereſt ſpeaking to Him, and as if He heard thee, or ſaw thee: and when thou ſpeakeſt, abhorre not the preſence of the Lord: Thou that wilt runne to an hole, wilt abhorre His preſence: but ay ſay this, Lord be preſent at my ſpeaking, what meanes all this baudrie talke and blaſphemie? Euen this, Thou ſeekeſt not to haue thine heart ſanctified by the preſence of thy God: ſo, if thou wilt ſpeake, ſay, Lord, be into mine heart, and Lord, rule my tongue, and open my mouth, & then when He openeth thy mouth, gracious words will come out. So in a word, ſeeke that preſence to ſanctifie your ſpeech and actions. It is ſaid, when He joynes with them, Their eyes are ſo bound vp, that they could not know Him: They know not His face, nor His voyce: Marke ſayes, That he appeared to them in another forme, & Luke ſets downe in plaine wordes how this was, to wit, not that He was of a diuerſe forme indeed, but becauſe their eyes were holden, & cloſed, that they could not know Him, ſo the change was in them, & not in Him, Hee remained in one forme, and was euer

like Himſelfe: in all His appearance He neuer altered His preſence, but He altered their eyes that behelde & looked vpō Him. I thinke ſome of you would aske. In what forme appeared Hee? Was Hee naked? The ſouldiours got His clothes, Whether was He naked or not? No, I thinke not that Hee was naked, but Hee appeared with His Ioynes girded, as a man addreſſed to a journey, as He appeared to Marie cled like a Gardener: yet ye will aske, had He indeede cloathes on Him or not: I haue no warrant of that: alwayes He appeared to them to be clothed indeede, & they thoght He had cloths on Him: theſe men thought He had clothes on: for their eyes vvere bound vp. It is a wonder that they could not know Him, nor His voyce, He altered not His voyce, and yet they could not know Him: albeit it be naturall by the ſight of the eye to know one with whō wee are acquainted, & it is naturall by the eare to know the voyce: yet this place lets vs ſee, that the Lord hath a commandement of theſe gifts: & when Hee ſayes, looke that thou ſee not, thou ſhalt not ſee: and if He ſay to thee, looke that thou know not thy father, thou ſhalt not know him: and more, if He ſay, know not the voyce of thy wife, thou ſhalt not knowe her voyce. All this tends to this, We ſhould beg our eyes, our eares, and all at the hands of God, & ay for that gift that thou haſt, thanke God hartily, and ſay, Lord, I thanke thee for this, that I can know the voyce of one creature frō another: ſo all our lifetime ſhould be a begging of His gifts, & if we moue, we ſhould thanke our God. Now, if we ſhould beg this naturall ſight, that we haue, much more are we bound to beg the thing we haue not, to beg a ſpirituall eye to ſee heauenly things, & then when thou getteſt it, thou ſhouldeſt render thanks to Him. Now of graces this is the beſt, that the Lord giues, an eye to ſee that life, for if thou getteſt one blencke, certainly thou ſhalt ſee Heauen, & that joy and glorie, at the which one day, thou ſhalt wonder. Now, glory bee giuen to Him for all His giftes: and euen for this, that Hee hath giuen vs theſe bodily eyes, I beſeech Him to giue euery one of vs ſpirituall eyes, that we may get a blencke of Him here, and in the Heauens enjoy His preſence for euermore, through Chriſt our Lord. To whome with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all praiſe, and honour, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XXXVII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And hee ſaide vnto them, What manner of communications are theſe that yee haue one to another as yee walke, and are ſadde?
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And the one (named Cleopas) anſwered, and ſaide vnto him. Art thou onelie a ſtranger in Hieruſalem, and hast not knowne the thinges which are come to paſſe therein in theſe dayes?
                  
                     
                        verse 19 And hee ſaide vnto them, What thinges? And they ſaide vnto him, Of Jeſus of Nazareth, who was a Prophet, mightie in deede and in worde before God, and all the people:
                  
                     
                        verse 20 And howe the high Priestes, and our Rulers, deliuered him to bee condemned to death, and haue crucified him.
               
            
            
               IN this Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST (welbeloued in Him) wee haue heard hitherto of ſundrie witneſſes, teſtifying His Reſurrection from the death: The Angels began, and they teſtified His Reſurrection to the women: The women teſtified it to the Diſciples, who were conuened at Hieruſalem, and namelie to Peter and Iohn. Then MARIE came foorth the ſeconde time, and ſhee meetes with the LORD. Then there are other women, who came foorth, and meetes vvith the LORDE. And after theſe women, there comes other witneſſes, to vvit, enemies, who were ſent to watch the graue by PILATE, and the High Priestes, and they witneſſed, That Hee was riſen. But they ſolde their tongues to the high Priestes, and the IEVVES, to make a lie, and to affirme, that the LORDES DISCIPLES had come in the night, and ſtollen awaye His bodie vvhile they ſlept: And after theſe vvitneſſes, yee hearde the

laſt daye, wee returned to other two vvitneſſes, vvho both vvere the Diſciples of the LORDE; the one is named CLEOPAS, but the name of the other is not expreſſed. Theſe two euen in a manner, deſpairing that euer they ſhoulde ſee the LORDE, they depart out of Hieruſalem, where they were with the reſt of the Diſciples, to a Village not farre off, called EMMAVS, and they were talking by the waye of the thinges which immediatlie had fallen out before. The Lorde, who ſawe them, and hearde them, addreſſes Himſelfe ſhortlie to them, and goes with them, as a paſſenger going out the waye: and Hee bindes vp their eyes, ſo that they could not knowe nor diſcerne Him, ſuppoſe they had followed Him▪ and had beene with Him long time before. Thus farre wee hearde the laſt daye. Nowe wee followe out the reſt of this Hiſtorie: and in this Text which preſentlie wee haue read, wee haue the communication which was betwixt the Lorde and them, while they vvent out the waye, they knewe Him not, and Hee makes Him not to knowe them: ſo each one of them is a ſtranger to others. The Lord beginnes the conference, and Hee demaundes of them firſt, What manner of communication it was that they had, while as they were in the waye? And next, ſeeing their countenance ſadde, Hee demaundes of them, Wherefore they were ſo ſadde? Theſe are the two things which Hee demaunded of them. Nowe to note ſomething of them. As they walked out the waye, yee ſee they haue beene ſadde, and their ſpeach and communication by appearance hath beene a monefull complaint, which they made concerning CHRIST: Not vaine and ydle talke, nor rejoycing in the tidinges: but all their talke and ſpeach came from ſadde and heauie heartes. But whileſt they are ſadde, the LORD comes to them, and Hee comes to comfort them. Well is that ſoule that is ſadde and mournes for Chriſt, and His Kirke: for that ſoule ſhall get conſolation out of Chriſtes mouth. But if where there is matter of mourning, thou be merrie, then the Lord will not come to comfort thee. It is true, theſe men were ſadde for Chriſt without a cauſe, for that was the moſte joyefull daye that euer was, and therefore, they ſhoulde eſpeciallie haue beene joyefull that daye: yet ſuppoſe they were ſadde without a cauſe, the Lord comes & comforts them. No, it is better thou bee ſadde for Chriſt for a matter that is joyfull, than to bee gladde in a ſadde matter: chooſe rather to bee ſadde for Chriſt, than to bee merrie or ouer wanton: And if thou bee ſadde, albeit there be no

matter, the LORD will pittie thee: but if thou laugh, rejoyce, and take thy paſtime, the LORDE will let thee laugh on for a time, but He will leaue thee deſtitute of all conſolation when thou haſt neede of it. I tell you this aye, There is no matter of laughing in this miſerable Lande: it were better for vs to mourne, and to bee ſadde for ſinne, that wee might gette comfort from GOD.
            Nowe to come forwarde. CHRIST perceiuing theſe men to bee ſadde, H
                  •
               e drawes neare vnto them, and Hee askes the cauſe of their heauineſſe, and what mooued them to bee ſo ſadde? and Hee deſires them to reueile their mone and care vnto Him. Suppoſe Hee makes Himſelfe vnknowne vnto them, and ſpeakes to them as though Hee had no care, yet no queſtion this is His vvill that they ſhoulde reueale the cauſe of their care and ſadneſſe vnto Him, that they might finde comfort in Him.
            Brethren, are yee ſinners, are your heartes filled vvith care, it is the will of thy GOD and Sauiour IESVS CHRIST, that thou poure out thine heart to Him, & let Him ſee thy ſadnes. Mark this. It is no ſmall matter to knowe GODS will: vvee are ſlowe and ſloathfull to turne vs: wee will conſume our ſelues, and pine awaye in our ſorrowe and griefe, ere wee make our complaint and mone vnto Him, who onelie maye furniſhe vs with conſolation: and Hee knowes vs well enough: and therefore Hee awaites not, till we firſt reueale our griefes vnto Him, and poure them into His boſome: but Hee prouokes vs firſt, and Hee will enter in, and ſeeke them out, as yee will heare: He ſought them out of theſe men with great difficultie. Come yee to mee, (ſayes Chriſt, Matth. 11.28.) all yee that are wearie, and I ſhall refr
                     •
                  ſh you: I here is His will: If thou be wearied, come to Him, and get reſt and eaſe to thy ſoule. If thou goe not to Him, thou ſhalt neuer get reſt nor eaſe, whether thy trouble bee within thee, or without thee. Yea, not onelie by word inuites and prouokes Hee vs, but alſo by His doing Hee drawes vs, Ioh. Chap. 6. verſ. 44. there Hee ſayes, No man can come to mee, except the Father drawe him. It is His will, that thou ſhouldeſt come vnto Him: but if Hee put not out His hande, and drawe thee, thou vvilt neuer come to Him in all thy life time. And therefore, vvhenſoeuer yee heare this voyce, Sinner, come vnto mee: then ſaye this againe vnto the LORDE, LORDE drawe mee, put thine hande to mine heart, and drawe mee, or elſe J cannot come to thee. No, except the Lord put out His hand, and draw thine heart to Him, thou art not come.

All the Kinges in the worlde are not able to drawe a ſinner, except GOD onelie. Nowe conſider their anſwere, and ſee this communing: The one named Cleopas, takes the ſpeach in hand, (the other diſciple is ſilent) and he anſweres the Lorde verie roughlie, not knowing with whom hee had to doe, thinking Him to haue beene a paſſenger, and ſtranger, walking out of the waye, hee ſayes vnto Him, Art thou a ſtranger in Hieruſalem, and hast not knowne the thinges which haue fallen out within theſe fewe dayes. In theſe wordes, (becauſe hee tooke the Lorde to bee a ſtranger and paſſenger, going out of the waye) yee cannot blame him in making ſuch an anſwere: And as he tooke him to bee a ſtranger, he anſweres well: for when ſuch wonderfull workes fall out in anie Countreye, it becomes no man to bee ignorant of the wonderfull workes of GOD: and if euer there was a wonderfull worke, that worke of the Crucifying of the Lorde was moſte wonderfull: And if thou bee ignorant of the wonderfull workes of GOD, thou merites a rebuke: And as Cleopas marueiled, ſo will the godlie maruell at thee, who canſt neither bee ſeeing nor hearing, nor conſider the wonderfull workes of GOD. It is a wonder to ſee the illumination of a ſinner, and the conuerſion of the heart of a man to GOD, and to ſee a regenerate man: yea, the raiſing of a deade man to life, is not ſo marueilous, as is the quickening of thee, who art deade in ſinne and treſpaſſes, as the Apoſtle PAVLE ſayes, to the EPHES. Chap. 1. verſ. 21. And as the quikening and illumination of a ſinner is a wonder, ſo alſo the blinding of a ſinner is a wonder. Is it not marueilous, that though thou crie to him as thou wilt, and albeit heauen and earth ſhoulde goe together, hee will neither heare nor ſee? As the Lorde is more than wonderfull to his owne in mercie, to cauſe them to heere and ſee, (thou wondereſt li
                  •
               tle at his mercie, but all the Angels wonder at it,) euen ſo in blinding and hardening of the wicked, the LORDE is wonderfull. Sitteſt thou heere nowe, and ſeeſt not, nor heareſt not the LORDE? All the world maye wonder at thee. So the LORDE maye bee vvondered at, either in mercy to his own, or in juſtice to the wicked: as th'Apoſtle ſpeaking in the eleuenth Chap. to the Romanes, hee wonders at it, and from morning till euening we ſhould vvonder at that God and his works, at that mighty GOD, whom the Prophet calles Deum admirabilem.
            
            To goe forward. The Lord, who knew all things, (for all thinges

are naked to His eyes) He knew better what was done, than Cleopas did, yet Hee will not take vpon Him that Hee knevv, He miſknowes them, and He askes: What are theſe things: Marke it, Brethren: Hee got a rough and ſharpe anſwere before, and yet Hee leaues not off, Hee will not leaue them, but Hee beares vvith their infirmities, and novv Hee giues another pull to the heart, & deales againe vvith them, that they ſhould povvre out their ſadneſſe and griefe to Him: No, if thou pertaineſt to the Lorde, Hee vvill not leaue thee for an hard meeting: & ſuppoſe thou dravveſt abacke, Hee vvill giue thee another pull, Albeit wee be vnfaithfull, ſayes the Apoſtle, yet the Lord abideth faithfull: Change as thou wilt, the Lord ſhall neuer change, but remaine ay conſtant in mercie to His ovvne till they be perfected, and crovvned vvith glorie. Then Cleopas ſeeing him to bee troubled with a ſtranger, at the laſt hee muſt tell the vvordes that he and his companion vvere ſpeaking, as they vvent on the way: Marke this leſſon: Repine as thou vvilt, when the Lord dravves thee, at the laſt thou muſt yeeld▪ But vvhat is the cauſe, that any ſinners vvill yeelde vvhen the Lord dravves? Euen the ſecret operation of His Holy Spirit: and if he that drew them by the vvorde, had not a ſecret power and operation by His Spirit in their hearts, they vvould neuer haue yeelded. Albeit the LORD vvould prooue them by ſpeech and language, albeit Hee vvould exhort them, admoniſh them, threaten them: yea, and ſcourge them to come to Him: and vvell is the ſoule, albeit it be ſcourged, yea if it vvere harled thorovv the middes of Hell, if it were thorow neuer ſo great difficulties in the world, if once it get grace to come to Him: yet none outward thing will make vs to come to Him, it is the inward draught of His Spirit, that makes vs to come to Him, and drawes vs by the eye, by the eare, and by the hand: if He take vs not by the hand, we can neuer come to Him. It is ſaide in the 2. Chapter to the Romanes, and the 4. verſe, Hee drawes the reprobate, and calles them, but all that calling is but outwarde: Hee vvill ſcourge them, and dravv them outwardly, but Hee neuer puts the feeling of His holy Spirit in their heartes, and ſo they can neuer come to Him: & therefore whē the Lord is outvvardly drawing and calling thee, ſay alwayes this, Lord, draw thou mine heart inwardly by thine Holy Spirit, or els, it will bee long ere it come to thee, if all the ſickneſſes, all croſſes, troubles, ſcourges, judgements that can bee, and all this preaching that I heare, will neuer cauſe

mee come to thee, except thou draw mine heart. Now to come to the vvords that Cleopas ſpeakes: there is none of them, but they vvould be marked: he beginnes and rehearſes to Him the vvhole ſumme of theſe things that hee and his companion had bene ſpeaking, and he propones them ſummarily, & he ſayes, All the things we haue ſpoken, was Concerning Ieſus of Nazareth. Alas, fewe of vs take pleaſure to talke of Him: therefore when the Lord comes & takes thee by the hand: looke thou mayeſt ſay, Lord, I haue bene talking of thee in ſome meaſure: for as ſure as the Lord laid to His eare to heare, what Cleopas, and his companion talked, as ſure He layes to His eare, to heare vvhat thou ſpeakeſt. Then vvhen he hath tolde the generall, hee lets the ſtranger know what a man Ieſus vvas, and then he telles ſhortly, what had befallen him theſe two dayes, and after he ſpeakes of the effects that it had wrought in his heart, and in the heartes of His diſciples, to wit, that He was no Redeemer. This is the whole conference, & I ſhall goe thorovv this conference, as God ſhall giue the grace, and as time ſhall permit: Firſt, in deſcribing of Him, hee calles Him Ieſus of Nazareth, That was the ſtile hee gaue Him: Marke it: The firſt thing that hee ſpeakes to Him, is an vntrueth: he calles Him Ieſus of Nazareth No doubt, he thought He had beene borne at Nazareth, ſuppoſe they had the Prophecie, that Hee ſhould be borne at Bethlehem in Iuda, Micah Chapters. verſe 2. and that He vvas borne there. The ground of this errour that vvas amongſt the Iewes, vvas becauſe of Ioſeph and Marie dwelt at Nazareth, and Ieſus was brought vp there with them, that falſe rumor ſpred, that Ioſeph vvas His father, and that He was borne there, but He was not borne there.
            I grant, it is true, that after His reſurrection, Peter in the Actes, and the Apoſtles themſelues, called Him Ieſus of Nazareth, as Cleopas here calles Him Ieſus of Nazareth.
            
            Alſo Paul in the twentie ſixe Chapter of the Actes of the Apoſtles, and the ninth verſe, calles Him Ieſus of Nazareth, but neither Peter, nor Paul ſpake this of ignorance, as if Hee had bene borne there, but becauſe they to vvhome they ſpake, knewe Him beſt vnder that name, they ſubmitted themſelues to their capacitie.
            But as for Cleopas, he knevve no better: for he thought indeede, that Ieſus had bene borne at Nazareth: ſo the firſt word he ſpeakes, is plaine vntrueth: ſo yee ſee what it is to judge vvith

the multitude: The Papiſts will ſend thee to beleeue that which the multitude beleeues, and makes the multitude a token of the true Church: but thou ſhalt be beguiled with the multitude, and if thou follovveſt them, becauſe they walke in the broad vvay, thou ſhalt periſh vvith them.
            Next, conſider His deſcription, Hee calles Him, 
                  Ʋir Propheta. Indeede He failed not in this ſtile, Hee was a man, and was a man indeede, blood, and bone, as we are: yet there is a defect in this vvord, Cleopas knewe no more, but that He vvas a man, hee knew not that He was GOD and man in one perſon. It is true, Peter in the 2. of the Actes, calles Him 
                  Ʋir Propheta: yet hee knew Hee was the Sonne of GOD, bleſſed for euer: ſo as in the firſt wordes, there is an vntrueth, ſo in the next wordes there is a defect, I marke this, to let you ſee the ignorance that was in them, before the LORD aſcended to the Heauen. It was a wonder, that they who walked ſo long with Him, ſhould haue beene ſo ignorant: the third time he calles Him A Prophet. Indeede He was ſuch a Prophet, as was neuer before, nor after Him: yet there is a fault here, he giues Him the greateſt ſtile he thought Hee had, but Hee had farre greater ſtiles: for Hee is not a Prophet onely, but alſo a Mediatour, King, and High Prieſt: Then hee comes on, and hee telles what a Prophet Hee was, ſaying, that Hee was powerfull in word and deede. Nowe would to GOD we could ſpeake of Him in loue, with this poore man that had litle knowledge: indeede in this ſtile hee would let vs ſee, that there was neuer ſuch an one in worde, nor worke: neuer one wrought ſuch miracles as Hee did, and neuer man ſpake, as Hee did, as His owne very enemies teſtified of Him, Iohn Chapter 7. yet will yee meaſure it with the knowledge of the man, there is a defect here alſo, he thoght He had bene like the reſt of the Prophets, who prophecied not by their owne ſpirit, but by the Spirit of IESVS, yet was hee ignorant that IESVS ſpake and wrought all by His owne Spirit. Why ſhould vvee not knovve theſe thinges: This is the difference betweene CHRIST, and all the Prophets: all theſe Prophets, and Moyſes himſelfe were but ſeruants: they ſpake neuer a vvord by their ſpirit, but by the Spirit of CHRIST, as Peter ſpeakes in the firſt Epiſtle: Spake Moſes, Eſay, or Ezechiell in their owne name? Dare any Miniſter ſpeake in his owne name: No, not vnder paine of his life, but IESVS is called the LORD of the houſe.

In the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, the third Chapter, Hee ſpake by His owne Spirit, and theſe preachings were preached by His owne Spirit, and He ſpake by His owne authoritie, as yee may reade in the ſeuenth Chapter of Matthew.
            
            An Herauld, if Hee ſpeakes in his name, ſhould be hanged, but the King himſelfe will ſpeake in his owne name: the LORD ſpake in His owne Name, but the Prophets ſpake not in their owne name: reade theſe Prophecies, They ſay there, Thus ſaith the LORD: but ye ſhall finde thus, when Chriſt comes, Hee ſayes, Amen, amen, dico vobis: Verilie, verilie J ſay vnto you, in mine owne Name and authoritie, and not in my Fathers only: This Cleopas knew not, but counted Him a Prophet like others, albeit more excellent than others: Cleopas thought Hee was potent by the Spirit of GOD, and ſo by another: but hee knew not, that He ſpake in His owne Name, and by His owne authoritie, beeing equall with the Father.
            Nowe to be ſhort, hee ſayes, Hee was mightie before GOD and the whole people, That is to ſay, He had the approbation of the LORD from the Heauen, and what euer He ſpake, the LORD approoued it: what euer Hee did, His Father approoued it. Then againe, He did neuer an action, but with the approbation of the people: But it would be asked, How approoued they Him, ſeeing they perſecuted Him, ſcorned Him, and crucified Him? I anſwere: Albeit that neither by word nor deede the Iewes, nor the High Prieſtes had approoued Him: yet the conſcience of the ſame High Prieſts, and Iewes approoued Him, and bare witneſſe to them that Hee was GOD, ſo that ſometimes they were compelled to ſay, Neuer man ſpake as Hee did, Iohn Chapter 6. verſe 46. and ſometimes againe, ſince the world beganne, was it not heard, that anie man opened the eyes of one that was borne blinde, Iohn Chapter 9. verſe 32.
            So that all that they did to Him, was againſt conſcience. I regarde not what thou doeſt to mee, if thou be bound in conſcience to teſtifie, that that is true which I ſpeake, and that is good which I do: for in that day, thou who ſpeakeſt againſt thy conſcience, ſhalt not haue one worde to ſpeake: thy conſcience ſhall bind vp thy mouth: ſo this is well ſaid, that Hee had the approbation both of GOD, and man: but hee thought Hee had this approbation as one of the Prophets, ſuppoſe in a greater meaſure.
            But looke the firſt Chapter to the Hebrewes, and the fifth verſe: For

vnto which of the Angels ſaide hee at anie time, (let bee Prophets) Thou art my Sonne, this daye haue I begotten thee? Then hee knew not that he had that approbation of that God who dwelt in him, God in him approoued him. Roman. Chap. 1. verſ. 4. it is ſaide, Hee was declared mightilie to bee the Sonne of GOD. And 1. Timothie, Chap. 3. verſ. 16. Hee was justified by the Spirite. And againe it is ſaide, Actes Chap. 2. verſ. 22. Jeſus of Nazareth, a man approoued of God among you, with great workes, and wonders, and ſignes, which God did by him in the middest of you. Cleopas knewe little of this.
            Nowe, Brethren, wee haue examined his wordes, and yee ſee heere a great ignorance: In the firſt wordes an vntrueth, and yee ſee in all the wordes following there is ſome want. And to whome is it that hee preaches? Hee preaches Chriſt to Chriſt, and hee deſcribes the Lorde to the Lorde: and yet the Lorde heares him patientlie. Yee will not beleeue how Hee vvill heare thy babbling, if in thine heart thou haue a loue to GOD: ſuppoſe thou babble Hee will heare thee, and if thou ſpeake vvith loue, ſuppoſe thou canſt not praye as other men and women can: Babble on to Him, and ſpeake on with a good heart, Hee vvill no more reject thee, than Hee did Cleopas: Hee is aye like to Himſelfe. For what is all our language to Him, but a babbling: yea, all our knowledge is but babbling. So ſuppoſe wee haue not knowledge, nor a tongue to ſpeake, yet let vs not leaue off to ſpeake in loue, & with our hearts, and Hee ſhall heare vs, and giue vs a comfortable anſwere. Nowe I counted neuer ſo much of knowledge, as of an heart which loueth God: Keepe an heart to thy God: come with faith and loue to thy God, and thou wilt not thinke how Hee vvill delight in thee: if vvee come vvith loue to the Lord, then vvee come boldlie to the Throne of grace. And vvhy? Becauſe vvee come not in our owne righteouſneſſe, or in our owne perfection: vvee appeare onelie in the merites of IESVS CHRIST: And ſuppoſe thou babble and be ignorant, yet if thou appeare in Him, thou art full of knowledge: for His knowledge the Lorde countes to bee thine. O, vvhat is it to bee in Chriſt! Hee vvho hath Chriſt, hath all, though hee vvere neuer ſo vveake, hee is ſtrong in Him, My power, ſayes the Lord, is perfect in infirmitie. And therefore, ſayes Paul, I will glorie in my infirmitie, that the power of God may be ſeene in mee. 2. Cor. 12. Now a word, and ſo I ende. Cleopas beginnes to tell vvhat vvas befallen to ſuch a perſonage, vvho vvas mightie in vvord and deede: yet for all this,

they handled Him moſt vnworthily of any man, Our Prieſtes and rulers, as PILATE firſt, they condemned Him to the death, without a cauſe, and next, they haue crucified Him: if ye conſider well the words, yee vvill finde, that Hee ſpeakes to them with a vvonderfull indignation, as if He had ſaid,: albeit He was ſuch a man, and ſo great a man in all reſpects, yet they condemned Him without a cauſe, and then they crucified Him. And vvhat indignitie vvas this, for as the Apoſtle ſayes, Albeit He vvas the LORD of glorie, yet moſt ſhamefully they crucified Him, 1. Cor. Chapter ſecond, and the eight verſe: Well, take vp this in His wordes, What euer is done againſt Chriſt, it is an indignitie, if vve knew that Majeſtie wee offend: if we ſaw▪ Him, we would count the leaſt euill thought to be indignitie againſt Him, by reaſon of the worthineſſe of His perſon. What euer was done againſt Chriſt, it was indignitie: No, this world was not vvorthie of Him: and I ſay more, what euer euill is done to His members for His cauſe, it is an indignitie, becauſe there is a dignitie in them.
            It is another kinde of thing to vſe a Chriſtian man, as thou wilt, than to vſe a Turke: thou thinkeſt it a ſmall thing to ſticke him: yet one day thou ſhalt know that he is a worthie perſonage: eſpecially, if he ſuffer for Chriſt.
            Take heede what the Apoſtle ſayes, They crucified the King of glory, and the Lord of life: how agree theſe two together, the King of glorie, and then, to be crucified: He countes that the greateſt indignitie was done to Him, that euer vvas done in the worlde: Then the Apoſtle ſayes of His Sainctes, Heb. 11. They haue perſecuted them, and ſlaine them with the ſword, whom the world was not worthie of: And I ſay more, The godly, who ſee the worthineſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, and of His Sainctes, and then ſ
                  •
               es the indignitie that is done againſt IESVS CHRIST, and His Sainctes, it is no vvonder that they cannot comport with it.
            Villane, if thou wereſt a King, that regardeſt not to offend Him, they cannot comporte with thee, the offending of Him is the ſoreſt vvound that euer came to their heartes: and vvhen they ſee any thing done againſt His Sainctes, they cannot comport with it: No, it could not bee poſſible, that the godly could comport, or ſuffer theſe things vnl
                  •
               ſſe they knew all theſe things were done by His prouidence. O villane, who boaſteſt thou wilt doe to the Saincts of God, what thou pleaſeſt, what art thou but His rod,

and thou ſhalt bee caſten into the fire: and ſuppoſe thou ſette thy ſelfe againſt His glorie, yet Hee ſhall make thee, in deſpight of thine heart, to ſerue to His glorie. Then thou, who art the childe of GOD, in ſuch caſes, ſhouldeſt ſaye, I ſee the finger of GOD in this, for this tyrannie coulde doe nothing, vvithout the prouidence of my GOD. Looke how PETER ſpeakes in the ACTES, Chap. 2. verſ. 23. hee ſayes, They crucified him: But this is his comfort, That they did nothing, but according to the determinate counſell of GOD. And the godlie knowe, that all comes from Him, and for His glorie, and thou that vvilt not glorifie Him, Hee ſhall bee glorified in thy deſtruction, and ſhame euerlaſting. Nowe to this glorious and bleſſed GOD, bee glorie for euer and euer: AMEN.
            
         
         
            THE XXXVIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21 But wee trusted that it had beene hee that ſhould haue deliuered Iſrael: and as touching all theſe thinges, to daye is the thirde daye, that they were done.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Yea, and certaine women among vs, made vs astonied, who came earlie vnto the ſepulchre.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 And when they founde not his bodie, they came, ſaying, that they had alſo ſeene a viſion of Angels, who ſaide, that hee was aliue.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Therefore, certaine of them who were with vs, went to the ſepulchre, and founde it euen ſo as the women had ſaide, but him they ſawe not.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 25 Then hee ſaide vnto them, O fooles, and ſlowe of heart to beleeue all that the Prophets haue ſpoken!
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Ought not CHRJST to haue ſuffered theſe thinges, and to enter into his glorie?
               
            
            
               WEE continue yet (BRETHREN) in this Hiſtorie concerning the two Diſciples of CHRIST, vvho that ſame daye of His Reſurrection, (not knowing of it) vvent out from the reſt of the Diſciples, that vvere conuened at Hieruſalem, to a Village called EMMAVS, not farre from Hieruſalem. We haue hearde of their outgoing, and of their meeting with Chriſt: howbeit Hee knewe them, yet Hee let them not knowe that Hee knewe them: but Hee bounde vp their ſenſes, their eyes, and their eares, that vvhen they looked to Him, and hearde Him ſpeake, they knewe him not: but they tooke him to bee a paſſenger: and no queſtion hee appeared vnto them in the habite and vveede of a paſſenger. And meeting vvith them, hee askes, vvhat vvas their communication, and vvherefore they vvere ſo ſadde, and diſcomforted? One of them, named CLEOPAS, takes the ſpeach in hand, and beginnes to ſpeake roughlie vnto Chriſt, That hee vvas come from Hieruſalem, and knewe not theſe thinges vvhich vvere fallen out vvithin fewe dayes. It is halfe a refuſall of an anſwere. Yet the Lorde vvill not leaue them off, but hee askes, What are theſe thinges vvhich haue fallen out? Hee anſweres, OF IESVS OF NAZARETH. Of him is the whole ſumme of their talke. Then hee comes on, and hee makes it more cleare, to the paſſenger, as hee thought: and firſt hee lets him ſee vvhat a man Ieſus vvas. There vvas neuer ſuch a man: Hee was a Prophet, mightie in worde and deede. No man euer ſpake as hee ſpake, and no man euer vvrought ſuch miracles as hee vvrought: ſo that hee had an approbation both of God and man. Then next, hee comes to theſe thinges vvhich had befallen ſo vvorthie a perſon, ſuch indignitie as neuer vvas ſeene: hee ſayes, Our high Priestes and Rulers haue condemned him to die, and haue diſpatched him by the moste vile and ignominious death that coulde bee: They haue crucified that Prophet that was mightie in worde and deede, like a villane. Thus farre hitherto.
            Nowe the reſt of this narration that followes, containes three

partes: the Hiſtorie is plaine, and therefore wee ſhall goe ſhortly thorow it, Cleopas gathereth a ſore and a comfortleſſe concluſion vpon the crucifying of Chriſt, a concluſion of deſparing▪ that Ieſus ſhould haue redeemed the world: it is ſaid, Wee hoped that hee ſhould haue redeemed Iſrael from their ſinnes: But now He is taken away, and He is dead, and therefore our hope is gone, and we can looke no more for Him to be our Redeemer.
            Marke this, if hee reaſones well or not, Ieſus is crucified, and therefore Hee cannot be our Redeemer, we cannot hope that euer He ſhall redeeme the world: By the contrarie, hee ſhould haue reaſoned, IESVS is crucified, and therefore Hee is the Redeemer: for as the Apoſtle Heb. Chapter 9. and twentie two verſe ſayes, Without ſhedding of blood, there is no remiſsion of ſinnes: for if Hee had not ſuffered, Hee could not haue beene the Redeemer, and haue redeemed vs: but Cleopas and the other, knew not what the Redeemer ſhould haue ſuffered, they knewe not what the Redeemer meant, and therefore beeing deceiued with the falſe opinion that the people had concerning the Meſsias, that Hee ſhould bee like a King, Iulius Caeſar, the Emperour by an earthly power, to deliuer them from the tyrannie of the Romanes.
            
            This falſe opiniō made them to gather this, that He could not be the Redeemer, ſeeing that Hee was crucified. And indeede if this ground that they laide, had bene true, Hee could not haue deliuered them beeing crucified. I ſpake of this the laſt day, if thou followeſt the multitude, and beleeueſt (as the Papiſtes bidde thee) as the multitude beleeue, and cloſe thine eyes, thou ſhalt periſh vvith the multitude. They vvill ſay, What adoe haſt thou vvith the Bible, thou haſt no more adoe, but beleeue as the Church beleeues▪ but I ſaye vnto thee, It ſhall happen vnto thee, as it happened vnto Cleopas: That thing that ſhould bee the matter of hope, it ſhall cut thee from hope, as it did this poore man Cleopas, yea, I ſay further, if thou beleeueſt with the multitude, thou ſhalt periſh with the multitude. Fie, is not that rabble aſhamed of this light, fie vpon them: No, the vengeance from Heauen ſhall light vpon them, except they repent.
            Novve to come to the ſecond parte of the narration that hee makes: ye haue heard his concluſion: But now ſayes Cleopas, This is the third day ſince hee was crucified and dead: Yet we heare nothing: As hee would ſay, once dead and ay dead: Marke vvhat hee vvould

gather of this: It is the thirde daye ſince hee died, and wee haue not ſeene him, alas, I feare wee ſhall neuer ſee him againe: alas, hee will neuer redeeme Iſrael: Hee dare not ſpeake this right out, but hee keepes it in his minde. Is this a good concluſion, It is the thirde daye ſince hee died, therefore hee cannot redeeme Iſrael? Hee ſhould haue concluded, It is the thirde daye, ſince hee died, therefore hee is riſen in glorie, to bee the Redeemer of Jſrael. But the ignorant man knewe not the Scriptures of GOD, as Chriſt ſayes to him heereafter: for Chriſt had foretolde, that hee woulde riſe the thirde daye, and yet hee had forgotten it: and ſo he concludes, I ſhall neuer ſee him: and hee cannot be the Redeemer. Then ye ſee vvhat it is to be ignorant of the Scriptures of GOD, and to forgette them: There is nothing concerning Chriſt, but it is fullie ſet downe in the olde and newe TESTAMENTES: So that if an Angell woulde come downe from Heauen, hee can tell no more in ſubſtance. Yet if thou wilt not looke to them, but cloſe thine eyes that thou ſee not, and ſtoppe thine eares, that thou heare not, and ſo forget them againe before thou bee well out of the Kirke; it is a wonder, that thou ſhouldeſt gette anie matter of hope. No, thou ſhalt find nothing but matter of deſparation. Whoſoeuer therefore vvoulde haue matter of joye in the heart, and haue joye in their diſtreſſe, let them alwayes haue the Scriptures before their eyes. What needed theſe men to haue beene troubled, if they had kept the Scriptures before their eyes? So in a vvorde: As thou vvouldeſt haue joye in trouble, keepe the Scriptures in thy memorie, for there is no joye, but in theſe Scriptures.
            Nowe to goe forwarde to the thirde parte of this Narration of Cleopas, concerning Chriſt. Before hee comes to it, hee makes a rehearſall of theſe ſame thinges which had happened that ſame day in the morning: for on the thirde daye in the morning, there went out ſome women (he himſelfe was not ſo ready: it had bene better for himſelfe to haue ſaid, I went out to the graue▪ and I ſaw, and I heard this) and they haue made vs, the Diſciples of Chriſt, all astonied: for they tolde vs, that they founde not the bodie of CHRIST: But they tolde vs that they founde Angels, and that the Lorde was riſen, and aliue: but for all this we beleeued not. Then ſome of vs who were men, namely Peter and Iohn, who went out, and they founde this, that the LORDE was out of the graue. But marke his laſt vvordes, But none of them ſawe the LORDE. Alas, theſe two DISCIPLES apparantlie hath come out of

HIERVSALEM, ere MARIE MAGDALENE, and ſome other women, who went out that ſame day, had returned, & ſhewed, that they had ſeene the Lord. They went away ouer ſoone to Emmaus. But looke what he concluded: They ſawe Him not, therefore Hee was not riſen: This is it that they would conclude, Becauſe they could not ſee Him with their bodily eyes, therfore they looked neuer to ſee Him: As if wee ſhould haue meaſured the Redeemer, & the Redemption by groſſe and carnall ſenſes. Looke if he concluded well? He ſhould haue concluded the contrarie, We could not ſee Him with our eyes and ſenſes, and therefore wee beleeue He is the Redeemer: That is the concluſion that Hee ſhoulde haue gathered: for faith is the demonſtration of things which are not ſeene as the Apoſtle ſpeakes, Hebr. 11.1. This is a falſe concluſion, Wee cannot ſee Him vvith our bodilie eyes, therefore wee cannot hope to ſee Him. But by the contrarie, Wee cannot ſee Him with our bodilie eyes, therefore wee beleeue and hope to ſee Him. Then wee ſee this in CLEOPAS, and his fellowe: ſuppoſe they were with CHRIST, and ſhould haue had an eye to haue ſeene: yet they are meere carnall: for leaning onelie to the ſenſes of the bodie, they are more naturall than ſpirituall: and ſo they conclude, They ſhould neuer ſee the Lord: for ſuppoſe they ſpake not this vvith their mouthes, yet they thought it in their heartes, and they were ſtanding betwixt hope and deſpaire. No, if thou bee but a naturall man, thou ſhalt beleeue nothing, but that which thou conceiueſt and feeleſt with thy ſenſes: but for Heauenlie thinges, thou canſt not beleeue them: Heauen and Hell will bee but fables to thee, and all will be but follie vnto thee. There are enough of theſe men in this Towne: and therefore, as euer thou wouldeſt ſee Heauen, as thou wouldeſt liue hereafter, and as thou wouldeſt reigne in glorie, ſeeke to haue ſpirituall ſenſes, which may paſſe farre beyonde nature: a ſpirituall eye to ſee thinges Heauenlie, and a ſpirituall hand to feele things Heauenlie, or elſe thou ſhalt die and periſhe, and thou ſhalt neuer haue life heereafter. Then in time, ſeeke to bee ſpirituall, and to ſeeke Heauen and Heauenlie thinges. A bodilie eye will neuer perceiue theſe thinges. Yee ſee then, howe falſe a concluſion hee hath gathered. Yet I perceiue in the laſt part of his narration, ſomething that ſmelles of the hope of Reſurrection: an impediment in his heart, hee is neare to deſpaire: almoſte hee hath giuen ouer both faith, and hope of CHRIST, that euer they ſhoulde ſee Him:

yet hee is fleeting aboue, hee ſwatters and ſwimmes, hee giues not cleane ouer, hee drownes not altogether: but, as yee maye perceiue, a ſponke of faith and hope remaines in him: and it beares him ſo aboue, that hee ſayes not, I deſpaire. And where got hee this? Euen of the report of the vvomen: ſuppoſe hee beleeued not them, yet hee durſt not ſaye, that they lied, or that it was vntrue that they ſpake. Well, it is alwayes good to heare of CHRIST, and if it vvere but a vvoman to ſpeake of Him: for in the daye of thy trouble, yea, if thou were betwixt hope and deſpaire, that thing which thou haſt hearde, will bee brought to thy remembrance, and keepe thee from deſpaire: But thou who haſt not hearde, thou ſhalt periſhe: and thou who haſt hearde, ſuppoſe thou beleeuedſt not at the firſt, and conceiuedſt it not: yet vvhen thou art at the brinke of deſparation, that ſhall holde thee aboue, thou getteſt further information.
            Nowe goe to the reſt. Wee haue hearde this preaching of Cleopas, to the paſſenger as he ſuppoſed. Yee ſee he was carefull to teach Him: and no queſtion, all that hee knew of Chriſt, he tolde it▪ Learne this leſſon at Cleopas: All that knowledge which thou haſt of Chriſt, tell it to another: and if thou haue little, tell it to him that hath nothing: and it may be, thou ſhalt get further information, as Cleopas did: for the ſtranger inſtructed him in all thinges. Nowe CHRIST ſpeakes, and Hee ſayes to him, (not letting him know that He was Chriſt) O fooles! Hee that Chriſt calles a foole, is a foole indeede: And if Hee call thee a foole, thou art one. And then Hee ſayes, Slowe of heart to beleeue concerning Chriſt the Meſſias. Before I come to the words, behold the clemencie & mercie of the Lord: Theſe two men were rauing like fooles, or as men in a feuer: ſuppoſe they were His Diſciples, they vtter a plaine diſtruſt: and yet the Lord caſtes them not off: Hee ſaw a little ſparke in them▪ Hee ſawe a ſponke of faith, and Hee goes not to put it out. So that it is true, that is ſpoken of Him, Eſay, Chap. 42. Hee neuer brake the bruiſed reede, nor yet put out the ſmoaking ſlaxe, but helde it in, and quickened the ſponkes thereof, where hee founde it, till it came to a perfection. No, Hee vvill neuer caſt thee awaye for a little faith: but Hee vvill entertaine it, and of a ſponke, Hee vvill make a fire.
            Yet to come to the wordes: Hee ſayes, Fooles, madde men, vvithout anie minde. And then Hee calles them, dull hearted. There are two thinges in man, A minde to ſee, and a vvill to embrace that

which he ſeees: As for their minde, they vvere bereaued of mind: as for their will, they haue not a vvill, nor an heart to embrace it: So, marke, what misbeliefe is? Alas, it leaues not one part of the whole, all the povvers of the ſoule are vitiate by misbeliefe, Faith goes thorow all the powers of the ſoule, it firſt ſtands in an illumination, and ſight of thoſe things that concernes thy ſaluation, it decernes of thinges heauenly, and then goes downe to the heart, and makes it to embrace IESVS CHRIST, and His benefites: euen theſe heauenly things, that thou canſt not ſee with the eyes of the bodie: Infidelitie, by the contrarie, beginnes and blindes the minde of the infidell, that hee ſees not, nor cannot ſee nor diſcerne of things heauenly and ſpirituall: Albeit thou canſt neuer diſcerne ſo vvell of policie, as the Heathen could, yet in heauenly things thou art but madde, and out of their minds: Chriſt would call thee vvood and madde: Looke hovv Paul calles all the Philoſophers, 1. Rom. In a worde hee calles them fooles, and then infidelitie goes from the minde, and filles the heart, and makes the heart aſtonied: if thou be an Infidell▪ thou art dull, and ſenſeleſſe: thou mayeſt lay holde on the worlde, but if thou getteſt no better, thou ſhalt die in thy dulneſſe and ſenſleſſeneſſe. So, wouldeſt thou knowe, whether thou art quicke or not, and of a good conceiuing: Trie not thy ſelfe by earthly things, and ſay not, I vnderſtand the writing of this man, or that man, but if thou wouldeſt know, whether thou wereſt not dull & ſenſleſſe or not, looke if thou ſeeſt any thing in Heauen, and heauenly things, and then thou art not dull and ſenſleſſe: but if thou feeleſt not heauenly thinges, albeit thou wereſt a King, goe thy way, thou art but a dull and ſenſleſſe creature, the Aſſe, or the Dogge is better than thou: there the ſtile Hee giues them, wood men and madde men, without a minde. Theſe men that can compaſſe theſe thinges in the worlde, thinke themſelues quicke: but I ſaye to thee, in the Name of this IESVS, if thou knoweſt not CHRIST, and heauenly thinges, thou art but a dull and ſenſleſſe man, and ſeeſt not, nor vnderſtandeſt no more, than an Aſſe.
            Marke euery word that He ſpeakes, whilſt He calles them ſlow to beleeue all that the Prophets had ſpoken: He caſtes the Prophets in their teeth, He calles them ſlow to beleeue, not this thing, or that thing, not this man, or that man, but that which the Prophets had ſpoken.
            
               It is euill, not to beleeue any that ſpeakes the trueth, but it is worſe, not to beleeue a Prophet. Any man that is ſent, or called of God, if thou beleeueſt Him not, that ſame calling of the man, augments thy judgement: looke to it, If ye beleeue not a man that is called, that calling of his, ſhall augment thy judgement. Then Hee ſayes, Beleeue yee not the thinges that they haue ſpoken to you? heareſt thou many thinges, and is this vvorde oft beaten in thine eares, and heareſt thou this daye, the morne, and other morne, and yet, wilt thou not beleeue, the more heauie is thy judgement, the more thou heareſt, if thou purpoſeſt not to beleeue, the greater is thy judgement. I giue thee my counſell, if thou purpoſeſt not to beleeue, heare not a preaching, for all the preachings that thou haſt heard, ſhal aggrauate thy judgment, & a thouſand times heauier ſhall thy judgement be, & better, that thou hadſt heard neuer a preaching, except thou purpoſe to beleeue. Marke this: He vſes a ſharp forme of rebuke, before He teach them, He telles them not vvhat Hee vvas, Hee makes as though Hee vvere a ſtranger, and yet He calles them fooles, and ſlovve to beleeue.
            Take heede to this, yee that vvill not ſuffer your ſelues to bee called fooliſh, and vvill not ſuffer your heart to be launced, but ay vvouldeſt haue good vvordes, and that vvill not heare your ſelues to be called fooles: there is the vvay to grace, there is the order of teaching, and hearing: and if thou teacheſt, call a foole, foole, albeit hee we
                  •
               e a King, call him madde, or els thou vvilt beguile him, call a ſlow hearted bodie, fooliſh, that is the only vvay to come to light and knovvledge.
            Thou that vvouldeſt preach, muſt doe this, and thou that art an hearer: Firſt, thou muſt get a ſenſe of thy miſerie, and that thou art but fooliſh, as euer thou vvouldeſt ſee Chriſt, ſtriue to get a ſight of the blindneſſe of thy ſoule, and the hardneſſe of thine heart: and if thou ſeeſt thy blindneſſe, and miſerie, then thy deſire will be vvakened, and thou vvouldeſt giue ten thouſand Kingdomes to be out of that damnable eſtate.
            Now, I ſhall bee ſhort: When H
                  •
               e hath begunne thus roughly vvith them, and hath prepared their heartes to heare, then Hee beginnes to teach. Why ſhould I call thee a foole▪ and an hard hearted bodie▪ except it be to teach thee: So Hee beginnes and teaches them a faire preaching, and no doubt, Hee made a large diſcourſe, but heere it is ſummarilie

gathered vp: Hee layes downe His propoſition, It behooued him to ſuffer, and to enter into his glorie. There is the neceſſitie: It behooued that the Lorde Ieſus by manie and ſore ſufferings ſhoulde enter into His glorie. Marke this, vvho can tell it clearer than Hee Himſelfe tolde it? So I will tell it againe, Ieſus by His ſuffering beho
               
                  •
               ued to enter into His glorie. IESVS CHRIST once leauing His glorie, got no entrie againe into it, till Hee was ſo inanited as neuer creature was. The LORDE putteth to a neceſſitie of ſuffering, ſaying, Jt behooued him to ſuffer: and ſo ſaye I, There was ſuch a neceſſitie layed vpon Him, that Hee behooued to ſuffer, and all the vvorlde coulde not ſaue Him from it, beeing once come downe into this vvorlde. Therefore, the LORDE by His Prophets had fore-tolde this neceſſitie, That hee ſhoulde ſuffer death: and therefore, ſeeing Hee fore-telles it, it behooued him to ſuffer: All the vvorlde ſhall not bring it backe againe. The Lorde as Hee had fore-tolde it, ſo Hee had ordained it from all eternitie. Wilt thou call backe againe that that the LORDE hath decreede? Thou mayeſt reduce the decreet of man, but all the world cannot reduce the decreet of GOD. Theſe are the cauſes of His ſuffering: but I ſhall come to a lower and a ſubordinate cauſe: I ſaye to thee, thy ſinne made this neceſſitie. The LORDE taking vpon Him the burthen of thy ſinne, and becomming Mediator; that immaculate Lambe, that had no ſinne, neither in bodie nor in ſoule, Hee taking once the burthen of our ſinne vpon Him, Hee was, in a manner, holden out of Heauen for a time, and Hee was made accurſed: and therfore, before He ſuffered for ſinne, He could not get entrie into Heauen, for whereſoeuer ſinne is, there is death, bee it inherent within thee, if thou get not one to die for thee, thou muſt die: for this is plaine talke, (but would to God it were vvell learned) death muſt euer followe ſinne, if thou laye it not on Him, and Hee die not for thee, thou ſhalt die for euer. Thou makeſt but a paſtime of harlotrie, and murther, and theft: but I ſay, There is no ſatisfaction of thy harlotrie and murther, but death: I ſaye to thee, harlot, thou art dead: murtherer, thou art but dead: albeit thou be a lord, I tell thee, thou art but dead, if thou get no reliefe in the Mediator, without ſatisfaction for thy ſins, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauē. Chriſt ſaw not Heauē, after He tooke on our ſin, till He was dead, and offe
                  •
               ed His blood. The high Priest durſt not enter into Sanctum ſanctorum without a baſen full of blood, vnder paine of death: Euen

ſo, Chriſt entered not into heauen, but with his owne blood: And if thy ſinne helde an innocent out of heauen, O miſerable bodie! thinkeſt thou, that thou, who art altogether defiled, canſt come to heauen? Nothing can enter there that is defiled. Murtherer, thou ſhalt neuer ſee heauen, except thou goe to Ieſus, and laye on the burthen of thy ſinne vpon him, and ſaye, Lord, take this burthen from mee: and if thou canſt ſaye this from thine heart, he will take it from thee.
            Now Brethren, a queſtion would be asked, If Ieſus hath died for thy ſinnes and mine, that we might get an entrie? Thou mayeſt ſay to mee, What to doe haue I to ſuffer, ſeeing the Lorde hath prepared the way? What to doe haue I to ſuffer in ſoule or body? or why ſhoulde I bee afflicted, ſeeing the Lorde hath made the way patent? I will not anſwere with the Papiſtes: for they will ſaye, Thou muſt paye one part: but I ſaye to thee, in deſpite of thine heart, if thou paye anie part, thou muſt paye the whole. But I anſwere, All theſe ſufferinges is no ſatisfaction to bring thee to Heauen. Then thou wilt ſaye, Why ſhould I ſuffer, if it helpe not to bring me to Heauē? I anſwere, All the afflictions which are laide on thee, are laide on thee for the ſlaughter of the remaining corruption: feeleſt thou not a remaining corruption within thee? All th'afflictiōs which are laid on thee, as ſickneſſe, want of goods, loſſe of friendes, &c. all is laid on thee to ſlaye that remaining corruption. Brethren, I will tell you plainlie. The death of Ieſus, and His ſuffering, is the only meane to enter into Heauen, in deſpite of all the Papiſtes. Againe I ſaye, Looke what neede wee haue of His death, wee haue as much need of affliction in our owne perſons, to ſlaye that ſin which remaines in vs: Suppoſe there be manie wayes to ſlay ſinne, yet except thou be chaſtiſed and vexed with affliction outwardly and inwardly, as it pleaſes the Lord to laye it on thee, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. So caſt thee not to ſleepe, but make thee for affliction and trouble to mortifie thy ſinne, or elſe thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. And vvell is thee that art afflicted, and made like Chriſt by thine afflictions. What wordes can be t
                  •
               uer, than the words of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. It behooueth you to enter into heauen, by manie tribulations. The Apoſtle ſayes, there is a neceſſitie. And againe he ſayes, Heb. 12.14. without holineſſe (affliction brings holineſſe) no man ſhall ſee the Lord. Well, thou that deliteſt to pol
                  •
               ute thy body, I tell thee, if thou be not holie, thou ſhalt neuer ſee God. And I ſaye more, Without affliction

either in ſoule or bodie, thou ſhalt neuer bee holy. Thou that ſleepeſt ſecurely, and haſt mind of nothing, but thy dinner, and thy ſupper, good chiere, and good companie: I tell thee once, twiſe, yea, thriſe, thou ſhalt neuer be holy, and thou ſhalt neuer come to Heauen: and if thou ſleepeſt on in this eſtate, thou art not one of His compt Booke. Let him, or her, who is afflicted, thanke God, and take it out of His hand, and ſaye, The Lord hath ſent it to ſanctifie me Lord giue me thy Spirit, that I may bee holy, that I may ſee thy bleſſed face one day, to my euerlaſting joye in Ieſus: To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, be glory for euermore, Amen.
         
         
            THE XXXIX. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27 And he beganne at Moſes, and at all the Prophets, and interpreted vnto them in all the Scriptures the thinges which were written of him.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 And they drewe neare vnto the towne which they went to, but hee made as though he would haue gone further.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 But they conſtrained him, ſaying, Abide with vs, for it is towardes night, and the day is farre ſpent. So he went in to tarrie with them.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 And it came to paſſe, as hee ſate at table with them, hee tooke the bread, and bleſſed, and brake it, and gaue it to them.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 Then their eyes were opened, and they knew him: and hee was no more ſeene of them.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 And they ſaide betweene themſelues, Did not our heartes burne within vs, while he talked with vs by the way, and when hee opened to vs the Scriptures?
               
            
            
               
               WEE inſiſt yet (Beloued in Chriſt) in this part of Hiſtorie concerning the two Diſciples of CHRIST, who in the daye of His reſurrection vvent out to HIERVSALEM, to a Village neare by, called Emmaus. We heard theſe dayes paſt, what Cleopas, one of the two ſpake by the waye, to Chriſt, whome hee tooke to be a paſſenger, becauſe his eyes were bounde vp, that hee could not ſee Him, nor diſcerne Him, neither by His voyce, nor by His face. All his ſpeach tēdes to this, Our hope is gone, we thought Ieſus ſhould haue beene the Redeemer, but He is dead, and continues vnder death. Wee entered in the anſwere which Ieſus makes, ſpeaking to Him like a paſſenger. The firſt entrie is rough lāguage: O fooles, ſayes Hee, and dull of heart, to beleeue all that the Prophets had ſpoken of Ieſus! An hard entrie. Thereafter He begins to inſtruct them and to teach them: The chiefe poinct of doctrine is firſt laid downe in theſe wordes, Jt behooued that CHRJST ſhoulde ſuffer, and by ſuffering, enter into his glorie. Of this which wee hearde the laſt daye▪ I repeate nothing. In this TEXT, as GOD ſhall giue vs grace, and as time ſhall ſuffer, wee haue the confirmation of this doctrine: Hee prooues this neceſſitie, that hee behooued to ſuffer, by manie teſtimonies: And then, in the ſeconde, wee haue howe Hee manifeſted Himſelfe, and howe their eyes were opened, and howe Hee let them ſee, that Hee was Chriſt. And in the thirde parte wee haue the effectes which it vvrought in them, after that they knewe Him to bee their Lorde and Maſter. Then to beginne at the firſt, To prooue that Chriſt ſuffered, and ſo entered into His glorie. Hee ſearches the Scriptures, Hee beginnes at Moſes, and from Moſes hee comes to the Prophets, interpreting vnto them what Moſes and the Prophets had ſpoken concerning CHRIST, interpreting that which concerned His Paſſion, and that vvhich concerned His glorie, after His Paſſion. The matter is ſet downe ſummarilie: Heere no Scriptures are expreſſed, neither ſuch as vvere taken out of MOSES, or the PROPHETS: but ſummarilie it is ſaide, That Hee prooued all out of MOSES and the PROPHETS: There Hee alleadged not a bare teſtimonie: but Hee declared and expounded euerie one of the Teſtimonies to theſe two Diſciples. And then vvhen Hee hath interpreted them, Hee gathered the concluſion, That it behooued himſelfe to ſuffer.
            
            
               Now, Brethren, we ſee in this place, what the preaching of the Goſpell is in effect: it is none other thing, but the declaration of Moſes, & the Prophets: Chriſt preaches here the Goſpell to them, and yet He does nothing, but interpretes Moſes and the Prophets. So the preaching of the Goſpell, is nothing but the exponing of Moſes and the Prophets: and this Euangell is a plaine commentarie of the Text of Moſes: Moſes wrote not one thing, and the Apoſtles another, but Moſes wrote the ſame thing, that the Apoſtles wrote: only this is the difference: Moſes wrote obſcurely, the Apoſtles more clearly: Then marke well this: They that are preachers of the Goſpell ſeparate neuer the interpretation of the Goſpell from the Text of Moſes, and the Prophets. Some fantaſtick braines haue thought the Olde Teſtament not needfull ſince the Goſpell was written: but all is vanitie, Chriſt teached not that way: yee ſee, Chriſt takes His Text out of Moſes, and interpretes Moſes and the Prophetes, and the Apoſtles wrote nothing of Chriſt, but that which they grounded vpon Moſes: and as for vs, wee ſhould ſpeake nothing, but that vvhich vvee ground vpon the writtings of the Apoſtles: and next, wee ground our preachings vpon the Prophets, and thirdly, vpon Moſes, that is a ground, & that is a ſure ground, and all the world cannot caſt it downe, that doctrine which is grounded vpon the Apoſtles, the Prophets, and Moſes, it is good, but if it bee not grounded vpon theſe three, I will not giue thee one pennie for it: Secondly, ye ſee, all the interpretation of Moſes, is concerning Chriſt, and what befell Him, His ſuffering, and His glory after His paſſion, there is the chiefe corner ſtone, whereupon our Faith is builded, and whereupon our Faith is grounded, and whereupon the doctrine of Moſes, the Prophets and the Apoſtles is builded, the corner ſtone, Chriſt, and therefore ſayes the Apoſtle, beeing grounded vpon the foundation of the Prophets, and the loweſt ſtone Chriſt: and in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, Chapter 3. verſe 10. He ſayes, No man can lay another ground, but that which is laide alreadie: Ieſus is the foundation and ground of all true doctrine and veritie, Paul Rom. 10. calles Him the end of the Law, in Him is all the Law fulfilled, and Hee put an end to all theſe types and ſhadowes in the Lawe: So there is the chiefe ground of our doctrine, Ieſus Chriſt the loweſt ſtone, vpon Him is grounded the doctrine of Moſes, the Prophets and the Apoſtles, and we builde our doctrine vpon Him.
            
               I goe forward: This for the firſt head, now followes the ſecond part of the Text, how Hee beginnes to manifeſt Him, for as yet, they thought Him to be but a paſſenger, yet a gracious man, and bleſſed paſſenger, as yee will heare: they were loth to depart from Him: it is ſaide, When they draw neare to Emmaus, in a towne where they thought to lodge all night, the Lord makes, as though He would haue gone further, the wordes are, He faines, as though He were to goe further, that village was not the end of His journey, the words giue occaſion of a queſtion: Thought the LORD one thing, and ſpake He another, to ſpeake one thing, and to thinke another, is a plaine lie: I will not inſiſt in this matter, the purpoſe of the Lord at this time was to enter into the village & towne with them, and ſit at Table with them, vpon this condition, that they ſhould bee earneſt with Him, vrge Him, and in a manner conſtraine Him, but this failing was in them, they not beeing earneſt, Hee purpoſed to leaue them, and to goe further, then when it comes to the doing, and executing of His purpoſe, when He ſaid, Hee vvould goe further, He lied not, for He purpoſed ſo to doe, if they had not beene earneſt with Him, and cauſed Him to abide: Then wherein can it be ſaid, that He vſed ſimulation, except in this, that Hee ſhew not them, that if they were earneſt with Him, He would abide: No, if thou wouldeſt haue Him to ſtay with thee, thou muſt be earneſt to ſeeke Him, and conſtraine Him in a manner) I might let you ſee examples both in God, and godly men, that haue ſhewed a part of their purpoſe, and kept the reſt to themſelues: God ſaid to Moſes, I will ſlay this people, and none of them ſhall eſcape: Hee kept vp this, except thou interceede: And againe Hee ſayes, Yet fourtie dayes and then Niniue ſhall be deſtroyed: Lied the Lord? Not, albeit He kept vp a part of His purpoſe, except they had repented: for if they had not repented, He had deſtroyed them. So the Lord bids Samuel conceale His purpoſe in annoynting Dauid, 1. Sam. 6.16.
            This onely is our leſſon, Bee not curious to ſeeke that which the Lord hath not reueiled to thee, but ſee thou ſtudie to doe that which the Lord hath reueiled: thou haſt no warrand to ſeeke that which Hee hath not reueiled: O Scotland, thou haſt no warrand whether GOD will ſtay with thee, or not, but thou haſt this warrand, to intreat Him earneſtly by prayer, and in a manner to conſtraine Him to ſtay with thee: No, Hee will depart, if thou getteſt not an heart to conſtraine Him, Hee will not ſtay with thee if thou

be not earneſt to bid Him ſtay, thou haſt no warrand that Hee will ſtay vvith thee: And I ſay to thee, if Hee be not better intertained in Scotland than Hee is, He ſhall leaue thee: and woe to thee, Scotland, if Hee leaue thee, this colde entertainement, may juſtly make thee to feare, that the Lord ſhall leaue thee, Scotland Many in this Countrie of higheſt rancke would put Him away, but if euer Hee depart, a heauie judgement ſhall light vpon them. Now vvhen Hee ſeemed, as though Hee would goe further, in a manner they doe Him violence, and they ſticke to Him, taking Him to bee a man, a paſſenger, a gracious paſſenger, and therefore they are lothe to ſunder from Him, and they vſe arguments to mooue Him, they ſay, It is towards night, and the day is farre ſpent, and vvhere canſt thou goe? ſtay vvith vs all night, then the Lord yeelded, and taried with them: Marke this: We vſe to ſay, Prayer will breake hard weard, and it is true, repentance and ſupplication will holde off judgement, that would light vpon vs. The Lord ſayes, in the eleuenth Chapter of Matthew, and the twelfth verſe: The Kingdome of heauen ſuffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. What cauſes Him to tarie? violence is done to Him: and I ſay to thee, if thou entereſt into Heauen, thou muſt doe violence and take it by force: and I ſay more, if thou throngeſt not, & ſeekeſt it not night & day, thou ſhalt neuer enter in it: and if theſe diſciples had not thronged on Him, and conſtrained Him, He had not remained with them: thou ſhouldeſt euer pray to God, and ſaye Lorde, leaue vs not, tarie with vs, vvee may not ſunder, if thou ſtickeſt not to Him, Hee ſhall leaue thee. Then yee ſee, vvhat it is to bee humane, they vvould not let Him walke in the night: but vvhat revvarde got they? in ſteade of man, they receiue God, and man bleſſed for euer: ſo I ſay, humanitie to man, hoſpitalitie to Pilgrimes, hath a great revvard. The Apoſt. Heb. 13.2. ſayes: That ſome receiued Angels into their houſes vnawares, when they thought they had receiued men. Abraham receiued Angels in his houſe, Gen. 16.3. Lot receiued Angels, Gen. 19.8. Now, Brethren, I ſay this to you, as ye would receiue God, haue mind of the poore, and now eſpecially, in this extreame dearth, giue them ſome part of that thou wouldeſt put in thine owne mouth, & that which thou wouldeſt put on thy backe: there is none of you, but yee will ſay, If ye had Chriſt heere, I ſhould feede Him, and if I ſaw Him naked, I ſhould giue Him clothes, the reprobate ſhall ſay the ſame in that day: We ſhould haue cled thee, if we had ſeene thee naked, &c. But

what anſweres the Lord? Whē ye did it not to one of thoſe litle ones, ye did it not to me. Knew Abraham, or Lot, that theſe men that they receiued in their houſes were Angels, and thought theſe two, that He vvas Chriſt: No, they thought Him but a paſſenger. We read, they that haue ſhewed humanitie to men, receiued God, but we neuer reade that any that neuer delt humanely with men, & ſought not to entertaine them, got euer God to lodge with Him. So in a word, as thou wouldſt not manifeſt thy loue to God, be humane, gentle and mercifull to man. He who loues not his brother, whō he ſees dayly, how can hee loue God whom he neuer ſaw? No, thou louedſt Him neuer, ſay what thou wil: fye vpon that man, that hath no humane entertainement in lodging of ſtrangers. Now when He is gone in with them, He ſits down at ſupper (for it was Euening) ſitting down, He takes the bread and giues thanks. Take heed to this: ye with prophane hands will pul, rent & ſwallow vp ye Lords benefites, without knowing of God, but the Lorde of glory nowe ſitting dovvne as man, Hee vvould not breake breade, vntill Hee had ſanctified it by prayer: when Hee hath bleſſed the bread, Hee takes it, and diſtributes it to the diſciples: ſo ye ſee, this is an Holy paſſenger, whilſt He makes Him to be a paſſenger, Hee is Holy. Marke this, ye that are paſſengers, all His communing in the way, is holy: then when He ſits downe, He bleſſed the bread, ere He eate: how euer He makes Him to be a paſſenger, he diſſembles neuer His holineſſe, but alwayes Hee is holie, He is holy in the way, He is holy in the houſe, He is holy at the table, that holy Lord will neuer take on the habite of prophanitie, Marke this: Be what thou wilt, if thou be a Lord, trauelling, albeit thou diſſembleſt thy rancke, behaue thy ſelfe as a commmon paſſenger, or as a marchant, &c. yet with the companie thou art in, behaue thy ſelfe holie, be holie in thy journey, be holie at the table, and in thy eating ſhew that habite. Ye that trauell, either in this Countrey, or to other countreyes ſee, how farre men are from this: if they meete with an euill perſon, they will bee as euill, if they meete with a filthie perſon, they are filthier, they will ſpeake two filthie wordes for one: if one goe to Germanie, he wil be an 
                  Ʋbiquiter, and in Rome a Papiſt, in Scotland a Chriſtian, in as many places as many formes: ſo thou yt is a Paſſēger, as euer yu would look for reſt hereafter, look yt thou be holy: a holy hearted mā in a company, will not only haue great graces in himſelfe, but alſo he will be gracious to yt companie, & communicate theſe graces to them

with whome He is in companie: So diſſemble as thou wilt, be euer holy, and as euer thou wouldeſt dwell with Ieſus, be euer like Him in ſome meaſure in holineſſe: and well is vs, if in word and deede we be holy pilgrimes in this world. This would not be paſſed by, He ſunders not from them in the houſe, He goes not to one houſe, and they to another, but He will goe to one houſe with them, and will ſit at the ſame table with them: then Hee will not ſtay ſtill, till they giue bread to Him, but He beginnes to giue bread to them, and feedes them with His owne hande: So ye ſee, Brethren, what it is, to be earneſt to entreat the Lord, to ſtay with thee: Now certainly, He ſhall be more homely with thee, than thou canſt be with Him: if thou beginneſt to entreat Him, He will remaine with thee, and feede thee with His owne hand, and they that haue found the Lorde, they haue ſeene ſuch an homelineſſe, as they could neuer thinke of. In the 3. of the Reuelation, verſe 20. The Lord Ieſus ſayes, I will ſtande at the doore, and I will knocke, hee that will open to mee, I will come in, and ſuppe with him. Once let me in, I ſhall be ſo homely, as thou neuer wouldeſt haue thought, I ſhall inſinuate mee in thine heart & I ſhall not only ſit at thy table, but I will ſit in thine heart, and ſhall feede thine heart with joy, and food euerlaſting.
            Nowe to goe forwarde: the Lord, who no queſtion bound vp their eyes, before, opens them now: if He cloſe thine eyes, the world cannot open them, He only can oppen them: The meane whereby Hee opens them, apparantly was that forme of prayer Hee vſed before He brake the bread: Next, they vnderſtood, that it vvas Hee by the diſtributing of the bread: for Hee vſed to feede them with His owne hande: and therefore by theſe ſignes they are made to know Him. I ſee here, grace growes: after that once grace begins: none end of grace: after that once He hath inuited them, He ſuppes with them, then He feedes them with His owne hand, and then at the laſt, their eyes were opened: and judge yee, what joy that was to them: No doubt, that was the moſt joyfull ſight, that euer they ſaw. So, hold on, and entertaine the Lord a while, and ſet Him at thy table, and neuer be glad to eat nor drinke, except thou findeſt ſome preſence of thy GOD (for it is a lothſome dinner, if thou wanteſt Him, and if thou entreateſt Him on, thou ſhalt finde in ende, an exceeding joy: Entertaine Him now, as a paſſenger, and in the ende, thou ſhalt ſee Him to thy comfort, thine eyes ſhall bee opened to ſee Him, as He is.
            
               Then it is ſaid, as their eyes were opened, He was lifted from them, yee muſt not thinke, that the Lord made His body inuiſible, it is contrarie to the order of nature, a thicke body to be inuiſible, nor yee muſt not thinke, that He brake out at the houſe ſide, as the Papiſts dreame: this departure was by the holding of their eyes, He was not changed in this forme, or that forme, but the change vvas in their eyes, ſo that, they ſee not howe Hee departes, or in what manner, as before, their eyes were holden, that they could not know Him. To leaue this, yee would maruell, Hee giues them but one blencke: in an inſtant He goes away from them: why ſtayes He not? No, it was not meete for them, that Hee ſhould ſtay, nor yet was it poſſible for Him to ſtay after that manner that they would haue had Him to haue ſtayed, ſeeing nowe ſufficiently they were aſſured that Hee was riſen it was not needfull that Hee ſhould ſtay with them, as of before, as yee ſee, the Apoſtles in the 1. of the Actes, ſpeaking to Him, they ſay, Lord, wilt thou at this time reſtore the Kingdome to Iſrael: That is in effect Lord, wilt thou not remaine with vs here on the earth: No, He would not ſtay with them, but giues them a glance of Him: then ſecondly, Hee could not dwell amongſt them, the earth could not be capable of a glorious body: glorifie a man or a woman, the earth cannot keepe them, glorifie a man or a woman, this earth is too euill for them, & they cannot dwell in the earth: No, that Paradice wherein Adam was ſet, that pleaſant Garden that He was placed in, could not keepe a glorious body, and a glorified man. So the Lorde beeing glorified, could not dwell and abide amongſt men, as of before: ſo then, wouldeſt thou dwell with Chriſt, and dwell in that pleaſant place (and thou ſhalt neuer haue happineſſe nor joy, till thou dwelleſt with Him) Thinke not to bring Him downe to the earth, but if thou wouldeſt dwell vvith Him, flit out of the earth, make thee for flitting. Paul ſayes, I deſire to flit and to dwell with the Lord: Wouldeſt thou deſire to dvvell vvith the Lord, deſire to flit out of thy bodie▪ for if thou haſt not a deſire, but art afraide to flit, it is a token that thou haſt no langour of God, and that thou ſhalt neuer dvvell vvith Him, but that ſoule that deſires to flit, to enjoy that preſence, that ſoule that hath groaned for it (for the ſoule that is godly, groanes, as a man that groanes vnder a burthen) ſhall enjoy the preſence of God, & dvvell with Him, and that ſoule ſhall be glorified: thy body, indeed, ſhall not bee glorified, vntill that time that Hee ſhall appeare, and

then thy bodie and thy ſoule both ſhall bee glorified with Him: and then our eyes ſhall ſee Him, and our bodies ſhall dwell vvith Him in the Heauen, in that euerlaſting Paradiſe.
            Nowe Brethren, hitherto the Lorde hath manifeſted Himſelfe: then ſee what effect followes, and is wrought in their heartes of this manifeſting. Yee woulde thinke that ſo ſoone as the Lorde had bene taken from them, they ſhoulde haue bene ſadde: For who would not bee ſadde to want Him? For if thou ſaweſt Him, for all the world thou wouldeſt not bee content to want His preſence. Yee would maruell, why they make no mone for that ſhort time that Hee abode with them. No doubt, that ſight that they got, left ſuch a comfort in their heartes, as cannot bee ſpoken. And if the Lorde giue His preſence to anie man, his heart will haue ſuch a joye, that it will feede vpon it. Yee reade, in the eight Chapter of the Actes of the Apoſtles, howe the Eunuche, who came from the Queene of Candare, when Philippe came, and baptized him, Philippe was carried awaye from him, yet the Scripture ſayes not that hee mourned when Philippe was taken away: No, it is ſaide, that hee went on his waye rejoycing. From whence comes this joye? No doubt, it was the preſence of Philippe that left this joye behinde it. So in a worde: The preſence of God leaues alwayes joye: and if thou get a blinke of Him in the morning, thou ſhalt bee joyefull of Him all the daye, and that joye ſhall feede thee: and when thou art eating and drinking, that preſence will feede thee. Woe to thee who ſeekeſt not to get a blinke of Him: for if thou getteſt not a blinke of Him, thou ſhalt neuer haue ſolide joye in thine heart.
            But the wordes would bee marked: And they ſaide betweene themſelus, Did not our heartes burne within vs, while hee talked with vs by the waye, and when hee opened to vs the Scriptures? There are the vvordes. When theſe two men hearde Him, the worde was effectuall: but they thinke Him not to bee their Lord, till hee manifeſted Himſelfe vnto them: and then they call to minde by their burning, that they found that it was Hee that ſpake vnto them. This confirmes them that it was Hee. The ſame burning of the heart that one will haue is a ſure token of the preſence of Chriſt: for if the Lorde were not preſent in thine heart, it woulde not burne at the preaching. No, not an Angell hath power to ſet thine heart on fire. So thou that haſt this burning, thou mayeſt ſaye, that the Lorde Ieſus is preſent in thine heart.
            
               But marke this: We ſee in theſe men, that our eyes are ſo blind, that we cannot diſcerne the Lord ſo long as we liue here: we cannot get full ſight, but we are in a ſtrife: if the heart ſhall ſay, The Lord is here, the fleſh will ſay, He is not here: ſo that we hing here betwixt hope and deſpaire. But when Hee once manifeſtes Himſelfe in glorie, then that burning which we felt in this life, that ſenſe which we then felt, ſhall bee brought to our remembrance. Thinke not that thou ſhalt looſe that ſenſe: No, Thou ſhalt take it vp with thee to the Heauen: and we ſhall ſay one to another, Remember yee not what burning wee had, when wee ſpake and hearde of CHRIST in the earth? Then it behooued this LORDE to haue beene then with vs in the earth. So the remembrance of that joye which thou felt in the vvorlde, ſhall bee a part of thy joye which thou ſhalt haue in the Heauens in the life to come: Therefore, get much joye here, and laye it vp in ſtore in thine heart: goe on in feeling, and I promiſe thee, in the Name of GOD, it ſhall neuer depart, but it ſhall euer augment and enlarge thy joye, and glorie in the life to come. No, as the worde of GOD, which is the immortall ſeede of GOD, euaniſhes not: ſo, neither ſhall the effect of the worde euer euaniſh. Then, euer ſtriue to get a ſenſe of the working of this worde in thine heart.
            Nowe a worde, and ſo I ſhall ende. Yee woulde thinke this a ſober concluſion, As wee walked by the waye, when hee ſp
                     ••
                  e to vs, our hearts burned, therefore it was he that ſpake with vs: So they concluded, that it must bee his Spirit onelie which ſettes the heart on fire. May we not in like manner conclude, At the preaching of Paule the Spirite ſettes the heart on fire, therefore Paul is Christ? This is a falſe concluſion. And I anſwere to this, That if theſe men had felt no more, but a common feeling, in an ordinarie meaſure, their argument had not beene good: But they had another feeling, than can be at the preaching of a man: for no doubt, vvith the vvorde Hee ſent His Spirite to vvorke in them extraordinarilie. And I put it out of queſtion, They had ſuch a vvonderfull feeling, as they coulde neuer haue had at the preaching of anie man vvhoſoeuer. So their concluſion is ſure, Seeing as Hee ſpake, Hee breathed His Spirite vpon vs, Hee must bee CHRIST. It is a vvonder of them, vvho haue gotten GODS SPIRITE, howe they vvill diſcerne of GODS SPIRITE in others: And manie are beguiled for fault of this SPIRITE. There is verie much ſpoken of our feeling at the PREACHING: And vvhat ſerues all? They call it a fire:

for the Spirite which raiſes that feeling, is like a fire, and therefore He is compared to a fire, Matth. 3.11. And a fire hath euer an vp-burning: and if thou haue true feeling, thine heart ſhall bee ſet on fire, & that fire is mightie, & will burne vp the droſſe of thy ſaluation, which is in thy foule heart. No, ſpeake not of feeling except thou be regenerate: Thou that art an Harlot, ſpeake not of feeling, except thou feele it burne vp thine harlotrie. And thou that art a murtherer, ſaye not that thou haſt a feeling, and if it burne not vp thy bloodie heart. So I charge thee before God: heare not one worde, except thou findeſt that Spirit to burne vp thy corruption; thou telleſt mee, that thou feeleſt, and yet thou remaineſt an harlot, fye vpon thine harlotrie, let not that word come out of thy mouth. Againe, as the fire of Gods Spirit burnes vp the droſſe of thy corruption, ſo it will inflame thy loue to God, it will inflame thine heart, and all the power of the ſoule to the loue of GOD, and righteouſneſſe, ſo that it vvill binde thine heart to God, as the Apoſtle ſayes, The loue of God conſtraineth me, ſo that thou wouldeſt bee content to die, to liue with Him, and to pleaſure Him, thou wouldeſt not care, to liue, or to die: and what more? as a fire is nouriſhed with ſome matter, that is meete for burning: ſo this fire once kindled in our ſoules is nouriſhed, and fed by the continuall preſence of GOD in IESVS CHRIST, and that precious oyle of the Holy Spirit. Further, a flame tendes alwayes vpward, and it will lift an heauie thing that falles downe vpon it: ye ſee a traine of powder will blow vp an houſe: Wee are heauie by nature, and loadned with ſinne, yet that fire of loue will raiſe thee vp▪ and place thee with the Lord, whom thou loueſt, and thine heart will bee lifted vp to Him. There is neuer one that loues IESVS in the Earth, but they are dwelling with Him in the Heauen, and ſhall enjoy that preſence euerlaſtingly. So yee ſee, what it is to haue the heart ſet on fire, till we meete with our LORD, and then our heartes ſhall haue the full fruition of His preſence for euer. To this IESVS, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be glorie, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XL. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MARKE CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And they went and tolde it to the remnant, neither beleeued they them.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Finally, hee appeared vnto the eleuen as they ſate together, and reproched them for their vnbeliefe and hardneſſe of heart, becauſe they beleeued not them which had ſeene Him, beeing riſen vp againe.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33 And they roſe up the ſame houre, and returned to Ieruſalem, and found the eleuen gathered together, and them that were with them,
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Which ſaide, The Lord is riſen indeede, and hath appeared to Simon.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 Then they tolde what things were done in the way, and how Hee was knowen of them in breaking of bread.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 And as they ſpake theſe things, Ieſus Himſelfe ſtood in the middes of them, and ſaid vnto them, Peace be to you.
               
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 The ſame day then at night, which was the firſt day of the weeke, and when the doores were ſhut where the diſciples were aſſembled for feare of the Iewes, came Ieſus and ſtood in the middes, and ſaid to them, Peace be vnto you.
               
            
            
               
               WEE haue heard (Beloued in Chriſt) theſe dayes paſt, of the conference which was betwixt Chriſt, and theſe two Diſciples, who were going to Emmaus. Chriſt reproued thē ſharplie, becauſe they thought that Chriſt being crucified, all hope of Redemption was paſt. Next, He inſtructed them, affirming, that it behooued Him to ſuffer, and by ſuffering to enter into His glorie. This His doctrine, which Hee prooued by manie Teſtimonies of Scripture; beginning at Moſes, and from Moſes Hee comes to the Prophets, interpreting vnto them, what they had ſpoken concerning Chriſt, concerning His Paſſion, and concerning His glorie after His Paſſion: for the preaching of the Goſpell is nothing elſe, but an expounding of Moſes, and the Prophets, and Ieſus Chriſt is the foundation whereupon the doctrine of Moſes, and the Prophets, is builded: He is the end of the law all tendes to Him. Thereafter, we heard how Chriſt manifeſted Himſelfe to theſe Diſciples: for, when as Hee made Himſelfe as though Hee woulde haue left them, beeing conſtrained by them, Hee went in to tarrie with them: and as He ſate at table with them, in the bleſſing, and breaking, and distributing of the bread, their eyes were opened, and they knowe Him. Laſt, wee hearde vvhat effectes vvere vvrought in them, vvhen they ſawe Hee vvas their Lorde and Maſter: Howbeit Hee left them, yet they vvere not ſadde: but that ſight which they got of Him, left exceeding great joye and comfort in their heartes: and ſo they call to mind that burning which they found in their heartes when He ſpake vnto them, whereby they are more confirmed, that it was the Lorde that ſpake to them: for the burning of the heart which a man will finde in himſelfe, is a ſure token of the preſence of Chriſt. Nowe in the Text which we haue preſently read, we haue ſet down their returning to Hieruſalem, with great expedition, & how they declare to the Apoſtles, & others, who were there aſſembled, all things yt fell out vnto thē by the way: theſe things which they ſaw with their eyes, & which they had heard with their ears. Therafter we haue ſet doun another appearing of Chriſt, which fell out this ſame very time yt theſe two Diſciples are talking together with th'eleuē, of theſe things. Thē to come to the words: It is ſaid, They roſe vp the ſame houre, and returned to Hieruſalem. The circumſtance of the time of their returning vvould be weighed: They make no delay: they ſtay not all night in Emmaus,
               
albeit it was late, and they were before of intention to haue remained there till the morning: but they vſe all poſſible expedition, and they riſe that ſame houre to returne to Hieruſalem, that they might ſhew the Diſciples what they had heard and ſeene, & make them partakers of their joy. Compare this their returning to Hieruſalem, with their comming out of Hieruſalem to Emmaus: ye will find a great difference: Whē they came out of Hieruſalē
                to Emmaus, they went ſlowly with ſad hearts & ſad conference: and when the Lord, whom they ſuppoſed to be a paſſenger, met them, & inquires what conference that was, that they had amongst themſelues? They take leaſure enough to tell Him the ſorrowfull newes that had fallē out in Hieruſalem, of the crucifying of Ieſus of Nazareth. But in their returning to Hieruſalem they make great ſpeede: they goe quickly, they goe with joyefull heartes, haſting to communicate to the diſciples the great joye which they themſelues had conceiued vpon the things which both they ſawe and heard. The leſſon is plaine. When the children of God are caſten downe, when their hearts are grieued, when they haue no joyfull and comfortable newes to tell, but ſadde and heauie tidinges, concerning Chriſt, and His Goſpell, and the eſtate of His Kirke; then they will goe ſlowlie, and with heauie cheare: they will ſpeake ſlowly, and with ſadneſſe, they will haue little pleaſure in any thing that they doe; for the griefe of their hearts takes hand and foote from them: ſo that they can doe nothing willingly, and with chearefulneſſe. But by the contrarie, when their hearts are joyfull, when they haue joyfull and comfortable tidinges, to tell to others of Chriſt and His Kirke; then are they quicke and ſpeedie, and chearefull in al their doings, they will goe with expedition and chearefulnſſe, they will ſpeake with chearfulneſſe, with chearfulnes they will make haſte to communicate their joye to others: for ye joy which they conceiue in their hearts, cheares vp and encourages all the members of their bodies to doe their duetie vvillinglie, vvith chearfulneſſe and pleaſure: Yea, ſuch is the force of the joye in the heart, that it will ſwallow vp & ouercome all troubles, all ſtayes, & impediments, which can be caſtē in to hinder a good purpoſe: and therefore, if thou ſeeſt a man ſlow to a good action, and namelie, to preach the Goſpell of IESVS, thou haſt juſt occaſion to ſuſpect that he hath found little joy in his heart through the Goſpel: as by the contratrie, if thou ſeeſt a man haſten with chearfulnes to preach the Goſpell, it is a ſure token, that he hath his heart filled with the

ſenſe of joye through the Goſpell. Nowe when they came to Hieruſalem, They founde the eleuen Diſciples of the Lorde, and beſide them, they founde ſundrie others gathered together with them. Appearinglie theſe men vvho were gathered together vvith the Diſciples vvere ſuch as had heard the Lord Ieſus teaching when He was conuerſant in the worlde and had founde the power of His Preaching effectuall to their conuerſion: for as euill men delite in the ſocietie of euill men, becauſe conformitie in manners makes men to entertaine ſocietie together: as the harlot with the harlot, the drunkarde with the drunkard, the thiefe with the thiefe, &c. Euē ſo good men take pleaſure in the company of good men, that they may be a mutuall furtherance one to another of the glorie of God, & their own ſaluation. When theſe two Diſciples finde th'eleuen, & the reſt that were with them in Hieruſalem, looke howe they are exerciſed: They are telling one to another, that the Lord Jeſus was riſen indeed. Theſe two Diſciples came to tell thē theſe newes, ſuppoſing they had knowne nothing of them: but they found themſelues preuēted, they found that the Lords diſciples tel them that ſame that they came to haue informed them of, to wit, that the Lord Ieſus was riſen indeed. And this they prooue by the teſtimonie of Simon Peter, who had affirmed to them, that he had ſeene the Lord: for among others to whom the Lord appeared after His Reſurrectiō, He appeared in particular to Simon Peter, as Paul teſtifies, 1. Cor. 15.5. where he telles that He was ſeene of Cephas, before He was ſeene of the reſt of the twelue. So theſe two diſciples that made haſte vpon ſet purpoſe to further, ſtrenthē, and comfort others, they are furthered, ſtrengthened, & comforted by others, and ſo they find their comming to bee profitable to themſelues. The leſſon ſhortly is this: Often times it comes to paſſe, that they who come of ſet purpoſe to declare to others, that joy which they haue found to be wrought in their ſoules by the Holy Spirit, by the preaching of the Goſpell, are preuented by others, & hea
                  •
               e of others theſe ſame glad tidings that they came to ſpeake themſelues, before they can get time or leaſure to vtter them thēſelues, and ſo they finde that ſame joye communicated to them, vvhich they come to communicate to others: or if they be not preuented, then it falles out, that they heare theſe ſame glad tidings of others, that they themſelues declare to others, and ſo receiue mutuall comfort: or if others ſpeake nor to them, at leaſt this fall out, that of their owne meſſage, and of that ſpeach that they vtter of IESVS

CHRIST, they will find their joye to encreaſe more and more, & to abounde: ſo that it falles out, that their preaching is not onelie powerfull and comfortable to the ſoules of others, but euen to themſelues: & when they preach to others, they preach to themſelues. If thou haſt gotten a ſpiritual grace or comfort to thy ſoule, bee carefull to communicate it vnto others: for by ſo doing, thou ſhalt find thy grace and joye to encreaſe: feare not, that by communicating of thy grace, it ſhall bee empaired: for theſe ſpirituall graces, are not like worldlie benefites, whereof the more thou giueſt to others, there is the leſſe behinde: but the more thou giueſt of theſe ſpirituall graces vnto others, the more thou haſt behinde to thy ſelfe, the more ſhall they encreaſe: For to him that hath, it ſhall bee giuen, and hee ſhall haue abundance. Matth. Chap. 25.29. But it vvoulde bee marked: Albeit theſe two Diſciples finde themſelues to bee preuented by the eleuen, who were telling that ſame thing that they came to tell them: yet they are not ſo ſilent, nor conceale not the thinges vvhich they had hearde and ſeene: but it is ſaide, that they alſo tolde what thinges were done in the waye, and howe CHRIST was knowne of them in breaking of bread: and ſo they goe about to confirme the APOSTLES in that which they themſelues were telling of the Reſurrection of CHRIST.
            Nowe a queſtion may bee mooued heere. Howe is it that LVKE ſayes, that vvhen the two Diſciples came of purpoſe to tell the eleuen, what had befallen to them in the waye, and vvhat they had hearde and ſeene concerning IESVS, the eleuen preuentes the two, and telles them, that IESƲS was riſen, and had appeared to Peter; ſeeing MARKE, ſpeaking of this ſame matter, ſayes, that when theſe two went, and tolde Christes appearing to them, to the remnant, that they beleeued? Howe agree theſe two together? To this I anſwere: Firſt, That when LVKE ſayes, that they tolde the two Diſciples, that the Lorde was riſen indeede, and that hee had appeared to Simon Peter, hee meanes, that there was a number among them, who beleeued: and that which was proper to ſome, hee aſcribes it indefinitelie to the whole. And on the other part, when MARKE ſayes, they beleeued not, it is to bee vnderſtoode, that there vvere certaine of them, vvho beleeued not. And ſo both the EVANGELISTES according to the accuſtomed forme of ſpeaking in the Scripture, attribute that indefinitelie to the whole, which was proper to a part. Next, I anſwere: When Marke ſayes they beleeued not, he ſpeakes of a

full and perfect Faith, that was free of all doubting wauering, and vnconſtancie: but Luke ſpeakes of a begunne Faith, which in the meane time wantes not the owne doubting: for wee may perceiue in the Hiſtorie, that ſundrie times after this, they were in doubt, as yee ſee hereafter in the 41
                  •
                
               verſe of this Chapter, where it is ſaid, that after Hee had ſhewed them His hands, and His feete, they beleeued not: their heartes were not conſtantly ſettled with an aſſurance of His reſurrection.
            Novv in the next part of our Text, vve haue ſet dovvne another appearing of Chriſt after His reſurrection, which falles out in this ſame very time, when theſe two diſciples were talking with the eleuen, & this is His firſt apparition: we haue heard of foure alreadie, His firſt appearing was to Marie Magdalene, the ſecond was, to certain other women, the third was, to ye two diſciples, who were going to Emmaus, the fourth was to Peter, which we ſhewed you before: Luke touched in a worde, verſe 34. Now in this His fift appearing He appeares vnto the diſciples, beeing aſſembled together. The three Euangeliſts, Marke, Luke, & Iohn, ſet downe particularly the circumſtances of their aſſembling & meeting together, which circumſtances would be well conſidered, becauſe they ſerue for the clearing of the Hiſtorie, the firſt circumſtance is of the perſons, that were conueened, who, and how many they were: Marke ſayes, that He appeared vnto the eleuen: & yet we muſt vnderſtand by the Hiſtorie yt followes in Iohn, that Thomas was not preſent at this meeting: but here he giues ye name of the whole, to ye moſt part, & after Iudas death they were commonly called the eleuen. Iohn ſayes, generally, & indefinitely, That the diſciples were aſſembled. Of this circumſtance we marke: The diſciples of the Lord for the moſt part euer vſed to meete, and aſſemble together: they aſſembled together before His Paſſion: they aſſembled together, euen in the verie time of His Paſſion, and hanging on the Croſſe (for it is ſaide in the 23. Chapter of Luke, and the 49. verſe: And all His acquaintance ſtood afarre off, and the women that followed Him from Galile, beholding theſe things) and now they aſſembled together after His Paſſion. So yee may ſee: They who are Chriſtes, are euer going about to meet & to holde themſelues together, that they may ſpeake, & conferre of all thinges, that fall out concerning Chriſt, and the eſtate of His Church, whether they be joyfull, and comfortable, or ſad & ſorrowfull, that they may edifie, & further one another, mutually

in the courſe of their ſaluation, that they may be joyned together, and make vp, and compleete one body. And why not? For as there is one GOD the Father, one head the LORD Ieſus, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptiſme, one hope of vocation: ſo there ſhould bee but one body, the members whereof, ſhould endeuoure, to entertaine loue and vnitie amongſt themſelues, Epheſ. Chapter 4 verſes 3 4, 5, 6. This meeting together, of the members of the body of Chriſt, and their mutuall conference, brings with it, an exceeding great conſolation and joy: for the Lord hath promiſed to ſend that Comforter the Holy Spirit, to theſe meetings of the Sainctes: and Chriſt ſayes, in the 18. Chapter of Matthew, and the 20. verſe: Where two or three is gathered together in my Name: there will I be in the middes of them. If thou deſpiſeſt theſe holy meetings, and diſdaineſt thou the holy conference, I denounce to thee in the Name of Chriſt, thou ſhalt neuer finde a ſolide joy, or conſolation: manie there are, who contemne the meetings of the faithfull, and the aſſemblies of the Sainctes, and diſdaine the meanes of grace, godly ſpeeches and conferences: and yet will dreame to themſelues, that the Holy Spirit vvill dvvell in their ſoules, and that they will finde joy, and conſolation: but the end will prooue, that their corrupt and falſe hearts haue deceiued them.
            Nowe I come to the ſecond circumſtance, which is concerning their exerciſe in that meeting. What were they doing? Marke ſayes, They ſate together: Luke ſayes, They were ſpeaking of theſe things that they had heard by the report of ſundrie perſons, concerning the Lords Reſurrection: ſo ye ſee, their exerciſe was holy, their conference was ſpirituall, & this was a very good preparation going before the Lords comming, & appearing to them: yea, no queſtion, it was wrought by the force and power of the Lord Himſelfe, when He was approaching and drawing neare to them: for when the Lord is drawing neare, & approaching to vs, then that Holy Spirit who dwelles in our heartes, beginnes to moue and vtter Himſelfe, He wakens vp joy in our heartes, Hee opens our mouth to ſpeake with freedome and libertie, and to entertaine purpoſe of ſpirituall and heauenlie thinges: for that Spirit in our ſoules hath a forecaſt, and feeling before hand, of the LORDS comming, & this is it that ſhall mooue the godly in that great day, when they ſhall ſee the tokens of the comming of the LORD, to looke vp,

and lift vp their heades, knowing that their redemption dravves neare, Luke 21.28. for except the Lord did ſend before a ligt to ſhine in their ſoules, as a meſſenger going before Him to tell Him, that the Lorde is comming, they would neuer lift vp their heads: and therefore when the Lord commands His diſciples to looke vp, and to lift vp their heades before His comming, it is as much, as if He had ſaide to them, that Hee will furniſh them ſtrength at His comming, to lift vp their heades, and to be waiting for Him.
            Nowe followes the third circumſtance, concerning the time of this meeting: Iohn in ſetting it downe, is more particular, than any of the reſt of the Euangeliſts, He ſayes. It was the ſame day, at night, which was the firſt day of the weeke: That is, it was the ſame day that He roſe, which for that ſame cauſe is called the Lords day, and it was in the Euening, after Sunne-ſetting, when it began to be darke night: for it was after the returning of the diſciples from Emmaus, and they returned not to Ieruſalem, vntill it was very late: for wee heard before, it was towards night, when they deſired the Lorde to ſtay with them, and they returned from Emmaus to Ieruſalem, after the Lord had ſtayed ſome ſpace with them, and had eaten, and manifeſted Himſelfe to them in the breaking of bread, Luke 24.29.30. Iohn telles the cauſe why they aſſembled in the night, rather than in the daye: For feare of the Iewes, who as they were malicious againſt the Lord Himſelfe, ſo would they haue vttered their malice againſt His diſciples, and all them that loued Him: ſo they make a choyſe of a time that was leaſt dangerous: for, Brethren, it is the Lordes will, that His children make a choyſe of the time, that is moſt conuenient, & which may ſerue moſt for their ſafetie in their aſſemblies and meetings: it makes not at what times meetings be kept, whether in the daye, or in the night, if ſo be, that they who aſſemble and meete together, be holy: for all times are ſanctified to the faithfull, and them who are holie themſelues: for it is true that Paul ſayes, To the pure, all things are pure, Tit. 1.15. Likewiſe Chriſt Himſelfe ſhewes His preſence to His own indifferently, at any time when they are met together, whether it be day, or night: it is not theſe outward things, that Chriſt chiefly reſpects, neither the time, nor the place, nor no ſuch outward circumſtāce, but Chriſt lookes chiefly to the perſons, that meete together, & to their diſpoſition whether they be holy or not: the outward things ſanctifie not the perſon, but the perſon ſanctifies the outward things: manie thinke

th
                  •
               t if they come to the Church on the Lordes daye, becauſe both time and place, is holy, that they are holy enough: but if thou haſt no holineſſe in thine heart, all thinges are polluted vnto thee, the time is polluted, the place is polluted, the exerciſe of the word is polluted: For vnto them that are defiled, and vnbeleeuing, nothing is pure, but euen their mindes and conſciences are defiled, Tit. 1.16.
            The laſt circumſtance is of the place: The Euangeliſts make no particular mention of a ſpeciall place, wherein they did meet: only Iohn markes, That the doores were ſhut, and therefore, that they kept themſelues cloſe, and quiet: and in this their meeting & exerciſe they were ſecret, ſo that the Iewes knew not either where they were or what they were doing: Iohn ſayes, it was for feare of the Iewes that the doores were ſhut: As they had holy wiſdome in chooſing of the time: ſo they had holy wiſdome in chooſing of the place. God will haue His children to be wiſe in all things, and when Chriſt ſendes out His Apoſtles, He exhortes them To be wiſe as ſerpents, Matth. 10.16. The faithfull are compaſſed about, with many perills, and dangers on all ſides, which hardly they will eſchew, except they haue holy wiſdome. Now, it was not only the feare of danger, from the Iewes, that made them ſhut the doores, but likewiſe that they might be ſecret: for when the Sainctes are exerciſed in godly conference, and in ſpirituall and heauenly exerciſes, and when they are handling ſecret and hid myſteries of ſaluation, then they ſhould bee ſeparated from the worlde, and from the ſocietie of prophane men: prophane men ſhould be debarred from ſuch holy exerciſes, and from the meetings of the Sainctes, and one day they ſhall be fully debarred, and put out of their companie: for when they ſhall be gathered vnto the Lorde Ieſus, to enjoy His glorious preſence in the Heauens, the wicked ſhall get none entrance there, to trouble them any more with their prophanitie.
            Thus farre, wee haue ſpoken ſhortly of the circumſtances of the diſciples meeting: Now it followes we ſhould ſpeake of the appearing it ſelfe. Whilſt the diſciples thus gathered, were ſpeaking one to another, of the Reſurrection of Chriſt, in the meane time, Ieſus himſelfe comes, & ſtands vp in the mids of them. He preſentes Himſelfe to them, when the doore were ſhut, after an extraordinarie manner, a marueilous manner, and verie ſuddenly: for a glorified bodie hath a very ſwift and ſpeedie motion. Iohn lets vs ſee, that His appearing and comming to the houſe to them, was miraculous, for

hee ſayes, Hee came when the doores were ſhut: but the particular 
                  ••
               nner of His entering in, by what way Hee came into the houſe is not expreſſelie ſet downe by anie of the Euangeliſts: and therefore ſundrie men haue ſundry opinions of the manner of His comming in, euerie one farre different from another: Firſt, The Papistes affirme, That the bodie of our Sauiour pearced thorow the doore, the ſubſtance and bodie of the doore remaining whole, vnbroken, & vnaltered in anie part: ſo that both the bodie of the LORDE, and the bodie of the doore, at one time, vvere in one place. And this they affirme, that they may haue ſome appearance of a grounde to eſtabliſhe that vaine and fooliſhe dreame and fantaſie of the bodily and locall preſence of the bodie of our Lorde in the Sacrament of the Supper. Of the which doctrine of neceſſitie it muſt follow, That one, and that ſelfe ſame bodie may be in manie places at one time: for if it were true, yt two bodies might bee in one place at one time, then it would followe, that one bodie at one time might be in manie places. But both theſe aſſertions are directlie repugnant to the nature of a bodie, whatſoeuer it bee, whether it bee a glorified bodie, or a bodie not glorified. It is but a vaine diſtinction, which the Papiſtes haue inuented, betwixt a bodie glorified, and a bodie not glorified: for a glorified body remaines a true body, the glorifying of it takes not away the nature, nor the natural properties of a bodie: and therefore it cannot bee at one time in manie places, but onelie in one place: neither can it bee in one and the ſelfe ſame place with another bodie.
            Next, others thinke, That when the body of the Lord went in at the doore▪ the body of the doore was rarified, and yeelded, and gaue place to the Lords body, that it might enter in: & when it had gone in, it returned to its own eſtate, & was thickned & made ſolide, as of before: euen as when the Lord was walking on the ſea, the ſea was thickned & made hard & ſolide vnder His feet, yt it might beare Him aboue, & therafter again incontinent it returned to its own nature. This opinion is more tollerable than the former, becauſe it ſtands well enough with the Omnipotent power of God, where as ye former ſentence of the Papiſts cannot ſtand with His omnipotency, becauſe it includes a manifeſt contradiction.
            Thirdly▪ ſome thinke, That whē the Lord was entring in, the dore opened to Him, and after He was come in, the dore incontinent & moſt ſpeedily cloſed again. This opiniō ſemes to be moſt probable:

wee read in ſundrie places the like to haue bene done, as in the 5. Chapter of the Actes, the Angell of the Lorde opens the doores of the Priſon, where the Apoſtles were, and ſhuts them againe. And in the 12. Chapter of the Actes, when the Angell brings Peter out of priſon, the yron gate opened vnto them of the owne accorde. And likewiſe in the 16. Chapter of the Actes: When Paul and Silas beeing in priſon, prayed, and ſung Pſalmes to God, all the doores of the priſon opened, and euery mans bands were looſed: in the which places yee ſee, When the Lord deliuered His ſeruants, whether by the miniſterie of His Angels, or without their miniſterie, the doores were opened: But in no place of Scripture we reade of the rarifying of a bodie, and much leſſe, any thing of that vaine opinion of the Papiſts, That two bodies may be in one place at one time: and therefore this laſt opinion ſeemes to be moſt likely: But in this point wee inſiſt not: Only one thing we marke out of this place, that the LORDS comming is very ſudden, and vnlooked for: how ſo euer it be, that the LORD comes vnto men, vvhether it bee in mercie, as Hee vſes to come to His ovvne: vvhether it be injuſtice to the vvicked, His comming is euer ſudden, and vvithout their expectation: and therefore we ſhould not be ſo carefull, curiouſly to enquire about the particular comming of the LORD, as vve ſhould be carefull to prepare our ſelues, that vvee may bee readie, vvaiting for His glorious appearing, that vvhen euer Hee comes, Hee may finde vs with oyle in our lampes, readie to enter in with Him. Watch (ſayes the LORD) for yee knowe neither the day, nor the houre, when the Sonne of man will come.
            
            Now to end ſhortly: Hauing ſpoken already of the circumſtances of the meeting of the diſciples, as alſo of the marueilous appearing of the Lord to them: it followes laſt, that we ſpeake of His ſaluting of them: when He comes in amongſt the mids of them, He is not ſilent, but He ſalutes them, & ſayes, Peace be vnto you. This was His cōmon ſalutation, which they were acquainted with: & no queſtion, He vttered it with ſuch a homely & familiar voyce, that they might eaſily haue known that it was He, & none other yt appeared & ſpake vnto them: for Hee vvent about by all meanes poſſible, to remooue all doubting out of their heartes, that ſo they might haue a full aſſurance of His Reſurrection: and yet, for all this very hardly could they bee perſwaded, that it was He: and therefore

               Marke ſayes, He reprooued them for their vnbeliefe, & hardneſſe of heart, becauſe they beleeued not them which had ſeene him beeing riſen vp againe. For ſuch is the infidelity, & dulnes of our hearts, that al the meanes that GOD vſes, is litle enough to make vs to beleeue. Now when the LORD ſayes to His diſciples, Peace be vnto you, wee muſt not thinke, that this was a bare and ſimple vviſhing and deſiring of peace vnto them, without any further effect. No, wee muſt not thinke ſo: This word was powerfull, this wiſhing of peace behooued to bee effectuall in their ſoules, becauſe it proceeded from Him, who is the fountaine and author of all peace, and who Himſelfe is our peace, as the Apoſtle ſayes, Epheſ. 2.14.17. And when the Lord, who is peace Himſelfe, comes to preach peace: How can it be poſſible, except the heartes of men be harder than the flint, or adamant: but that preaching of peace, muſt be effectuall in their ſoules. The Lord in this wiſhing of peace is not like man, the moſt that a man can doe, is to wiſh peace, and to deſire peace to others, No man, albeit He were neuer ſo holy, can doe more, hee cannot giue his peace that he wiſhes, he cannot make his peace effectuall: But Chriſt, when Hee wiſhes peace, Hee giues and communicates that ſame peace: He workes that ſame peace in their heartes: and therefore, when Hee is departing out of the world, comforting His diſciples, Hee ſayes, Peace I leaue with you, my peace I giue vnto you, not as the world giues, giue I vnto you, Ioh. 14.27. He ſayes not only, I leaue peace with you, but I giue you my peace, and that, not as men in the world, who can doe no more but wiſh, I make my peace effectuall, by giuing you peace. The Lord make euery one of vs partakers of this peace, that wee may euer haue matter of rejoycing in IESVS. To whome with the Father and Holie Spirit, be all praiſe and honour, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XLI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37 But they were abaſhed and afraide, ſuppoſing that they had ſeene a ſpirit.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 Then hee ſaide vnto them, Why are yee troubled? and wherefore doe doubtes ariſe in your heartes?
                  
                     
                        verse 39 Beholde mine handes and my feete: for it is I my ſelfe: handle mee, and ſee: for a ſpirit hath not fleſh and bones, as yee ſee mee haue.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 And when hee had thus ſpoken, hee ſhewed them his handes and feete.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 And while they yet beleeued not for joye, and wondered, &c.
               
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 And when hee had thus ſaide, hee ſhewed vnto them his handes and his ſide. Then were the Diſciples gladde when they had ſeene the Lord.
               
            
            
               BELOVED in CHRIST IESVS, vvee haue in hand as yet the Hiſtorie of the appearing of Chriſt after His glorious Reſurrection: Firſt Hee appeares to MARIE MAGDALENE at the graue: Next, He appeares to another companie of vvomen as they returned from the graue: Thirdlie, Hee appeared to two of His Diſciples that ſame daye of His Reſurrection, as they went from Hieruſalem to Emmaus Fourthlie, Hee appeared to Simon Peter alone: And now laſt, (and this is His appearing which vvee haue in hand) He appeares to a companie of His Diſciples, to the eleuen, (Thomas being excepted) with others of the common ſort,

where they were gathered together in the night, in a ſecret place of Ieruſalem. The laſt day, as God gaue the grace, we ſpake of this conuention of the diſciples, & of His miraculous and ſudden comming, and ſtanding vp in the middes of them, the doore beeing ſhut. Wee heard, when Hee ſtood vp amongſt them, what He did, He ſalutes them after His olde faſhion, and ſayes, Peace be vnto you, in ſuch ſort, that they might haue vnderſtood that it was the Lord, by the voyce, and that ſalutation, wherewith they were acquainted: but ye ſee, what effect His preſence, His voyce, and His ſalutation workes in them.
            In the beginning of this Text, which wee haue read, when they ſee Him, and heare Him, it is ſaid, That they are abaſhed, & troubled in heart, and terrified with Ieſus. Why? Becauſe they thought, they had ſeene a ſpirit, or an Angell in the ſhape of a man: this His preſence ſhould haue confirmed and ſtrengthened their Faith, which euen they pretended to haue of the Reſurrection of Chriſt, but it falles out otherwiſe. This is an haſtie change, and litle before, they are ſpeaking confidently one to another of Him, and of His Reſurrection: Theſe that were conueened at Ieruſalem before, were ſpeaking of Him, and aſſuring the two diſciples, that He was riſen indeede, then the two aſſuring them, that Hee was riſen: now in an inſtant they are aſtoniſhed, ſo abaſhed, and afraide, that when they ſee Him, they cannot beleeue, that it is He, their Faith almoſt euaniſheth. A litle before, in their minde there was light, there was knowledge, now in ſteade of that light, comes in blindneſſe, and dimneſſe in the eyes of the minde: a litle before, there was Faith in the heart, and joy in the Reſurrection of Chriſt, now there is ſuch infidelitie, that they wil not beleeue their owne ſenſes: in ſtead of joy there is trouble, this is a ſudden change from the better to the worſe: yee ſee, howe ſuddenly the ſoule of man will bee changed: now he will beleeue, now Faith in an inſtant will bee turned in infidelitie, now he will rejoyce, and euen now his joy will bee turned in dolour. This is our eſtate, ſo long as we liue in the world: but Brethren, it would be marked, where begins this change? There are two partes in the ſoule of man: there is the minde, the eye of the ſoule, that giues light to the ſoule, and to all the partes of it, and to the whole man, then there is the heart, and the affections that ſhould be guided by the minde, which is the eye of the ſoule: both are changed in the diſciples in an inſtant: but where

beginnes the change? Not at the heart, nor the affections firſt, No, but it begins at the minde, the minde deceiues it ſelfe, and ſhe beleeues when ſhe ſees Chriſt, ſhe ſees a Spirit: when ſhe ſees one thing, ſhe ſuppoſes ſhee ſees another, ſhee blindes her ſelfe: and when ſhe hath blinded her ſelfe, then followes terrour, and all the affections of the heart are troubled, by reaſon of the falſe imagination of the minde. Brethren, there is not one of vs, but we haue this minde, this heart, theſe affections, and theſe mutations: Why then ſhould wee not knowe them: I marke this, to let you ſee the vanitie of the reaſon of man: the beſt thing in man is his reaſon, but ſhe is full of vanitie: ſhee that ſhould haue guided all the inferiour powers of the ſoule, ſhe is firſt out of order.
            It is a miſerable Commonwealth, where the head is out of order: for then it beeing out of order, all is miſordered: commonly, it is this minde, that puts all the affections out of order, and by her vaine imaginations, reaſonings, and toyes, ſhe will giue in ſuch terrours in the ſoule, as is wonderfull. If there be any power of the ſoule, that hath need to be reformed and renued in IESVS CHRIST: I ſay, the wit and minde of man hath moſt need to be renued, and illuminate by the Spirit of IESVS CHRIST: And therefore the Apoſtle exhortes the Epheſians, To be renued in the ſpirit of their minde, Epheſ. Chapter 4 verſe 23. Plato was a foole, and Ariſtotle, and all the Philoſophers, who were accounted wonders in the world, for their wiſdome in naturall things, who ſaid, the minde of man was perfect, and placed reaſon, as a Queene in the ſoule, to guide and holde all the affections in order.
            The Papiſtes are a litte better than the Philoſophers: for they aſc
                  •
               ibe too much to the minde and reaſon of man: they ſet themſelues to aduance man, and to extenuate grace, and their wiſdome is farre from the wiſdome of God.
            The Spirit of God ſayes, in the Epiſtle to the Romanes, Chapter 8. verſe 7. That the wiſdome of the fleſh, is enimitie against God: for it is not ſubject to the Law of God, neither can it be.
            
            But to goe forwarde: When they ſee CHRIST, They ſuppoſed, that Hee had beene a ſpirit. I doubt not, but He appeared in ſome glorious forme, they may not abide the ſight of Him, without great terrour and feare: they are blinded with the ſight of Him, this eye of the bodie, ſubject to mortalitie (all is mortall, the eye, and all) is ſo infirme and weake, that it may not abide to

ſee a thing immortall, glorious and heauenly: All that vve ſee, is mortall, the Earth & the Heauens are mortall: an heauenly & ſpirituall thing, the eyes of the bodie cannot behold: I ſay more, let be the eyes of the body, and this outvvarde ſenſe, the eye of the ſoule that ſhould be clearer in ſight than the eye of the body, may not abide any immortall and heauenly object, ſo long as we are in this life, it may not beholde an heauenly thing: I ſpeake by naturaull diſpoſition: a man that hath but nature, may not looke to God, and heauenly things: but ſo ſoone as theſe glorious objects are laide before the eye of the minde, there goes a great dimneſſe ouer it, and that exceeding brightneſſe blindfoldes it ſo, that it is not able to beholde it. The fault of this is not ſo much in the glorious object, as it is in thy ſoule (and if it vvere right) heauenly thinges ſhould comfort thee. The fault is in the euill diſpoſition of the eye of thy ſoule, it is but a bleered eye like the eye of the body, looking to the Sunne growes blinde, & is worſe than of before: ſo is it vvith the eye of the ſoule: for the eye of our ſoule, is but bleered: there vvas neuer ſuch a bleered eye in the body as in the ſoule: the fault then is in the canker and vile diſpoſition of the ſoule of man.
            This is their change: at the ſight of Chriſt, they are blinded in minde, and troubled in heart. What does the Lorde? Lets Hee them be? lets Hee them ly in that blindneſſe and terrour? No, He departs not, but trauells to change them ouer againe in mind, heart, and affection: it is the worde of Ieſus onely, that is able to alter and change the heart of man, and that euill diſpoſition and blindneſſe which is there, when all the affections of the heart are out of order, it is the worde of Chriſt onely, that hath povver to change them, all the Angells in Heauen, and all the men in the Earth vvill not bee able to put thine heart in order, if it bee troubled. Therefore he or ſhe that hath blind terrours, let them reſort to the hearing of the word of God: I ſaye to thee, if thou diſdaineſt this worde, and if thou ſeekeſt to this man, or ſeekeſt to that man, or ſeekeſt to Angels, thou ſhalt neuer get reſt nor reliefe in thy trouble. So it is the word of Ieſus Chriſt, that muſt giue light and conſolation.
            But what ſort of word muſt this be? Muſt it be a ſoft, a gentle and calme vvord to the eare? No, vvhen the minde hath blinded it ſelfe, and vvhen the affections are out of order, ſhee muſt bee

tamed, the affections are hammered and throwne downe, becauſe the pride of the ſoule reaches vp to Heauen, to reaſon againſt God, 2. Epiſtle to the Corinthians, Chapter 10. verſe 4, 5. Therefore ſhe muſt be ſubdued by ſharpe threatning and ſad ſpeeches, to hammer her downe. So the Lord ſayes, Why are yee troubled? Why let yee vaine fantaſies ariſe in your heartes? No doubt, theſe words had power to repreſſe and hammer dovvne the miſordered vanities in their heartes: then the diſordered affections muſt be compelled to bee in order, not by faire vvords, but by threatning, and ſaying, away to your order, they muſt bee beaten and ſtrucken downe. Let no man deceiue himſelfe: thinking, that he ſhould alwayes heare ſoft and gentle words: No, that vvill neuer make a change in the ſoule.
            Come to the words: Wherefore doe doubts ariſe in your heartes? In the vvordes the Lord lets you ſee, how the minde blindes her ſelfe, when a ſpirituall object is ſet before it, the vvord Aſcending, that is vſed, lets vs ſee, that firſt of all, a ſmall cogitation enters in, and then it growes to a mountaine: When ſhe ſees an heauenly object, God, or the word, or Chriſt, in the which God, or Chriſt is ſeene: aſſoone as this heauenly object is laid before the eye of the minde, ſhe begins to reaſon, ſhe gets not the blenck ſo ſoone, but aſſoone ſhe reaſones, and the diſcourſe ariſes vp like a mountaine, ſo that the light of the Spirit ſhall bee taken out of her eye, and ſhall make ſuch concluſions, that ſhall riſe vp and ſtand like mountaines, and blinde her, and if ſhee hath any ſight, pull it out of her, as yee ſee ſometimes, when the Sunne vvill be ſhining bright vvithin a ſhort time a cloude vvill ariſe from belovv, and vvill take away the light of the Sunne: Euen ſo, from the reaſon of man ariſe doubtes like a foome (all thy reaſon is but ſtinking foome) and it will ſtand vp like a foule blacke ſmooke, betvvixt thee and God, Rom. 1.21.
            Reade yee not, what the Apoſtle ſayes: The Gentiles and Philoſophers beginning at reaſon, put out the blencke that they had of God, and in their wiſdome they became madde fooles.
            This day, the Papiſts, and their Doctours, haue blinded themſelues vvith vaine Philoſophie, and vvith their thornie queſtions they haue drowned Chriſt, and ſo obſcured Him, that Hee could not bee ſeene to the worlde, and they drowne themſelues in their ovvne dung.
            Let all men then take this leſſon: When the vvorde of the LORD is offered to thee, Bee not too curious: Bevvare of thy

learning, beware of thy reaſoning, leane not too much to it, that it ſtand not vp betweene thee, and GOD, and blinde thee: let not cogitations ariſe: When it comes to the Scripture, reaſon, Why not? but with ſoberneſſe, with a ſoule deſirous to learne, with prayer, with calling on that Spirit: No light in that word, but by that Spirit of light, who dited the Scriptures: If thou getteſt that Spirit, then light ſhall be offered and giuen to thee, but if thou vaniſheſt in thy minde, and followeſt thy wit, except thou caſteſt away thy reaſoning, reade not one worde: I forbid thee to reade one worde of the Scriptures, leſt thou aggreadge thy damnation.
            Now, I goe forward: When thus way by checking, Hee hath beaten downe the imaginations, reaſonings, and cogitations that ſublimely roſe out of the minde, and when by an angrie worde, Hee hath beaten downe the affections which were out of order, nowe in gentleneſſe Hee beginnes to teach and inſtruct them, and He teaches them two things: Firſt, that He is a bodie: Secondly, that He is not a Spirit, and that He is that ſame CHRIST, that ſame man, that ſame bodie, and none other, that before His Paſſion, haunted with them, teached them, and wrought miracles in their preſence, Hee teaches them, by a familiar argument: Firſt, by the ſight: Beholde, ſayes He, mine hands, and my feete: He holdes vp His handes, not His handes onely, but alſo the markes of the wounds of His hands, He lets them ſee His feete, and the print of the nailes.
            Next, Handle Mee, ſayes He, if ye will not ſee, feele: What better argument would yee haue? than to feele fleſh, blood, and bones. Next, Hee prooues, that Hee was no Spirit, but a man, with the body of a man, A ſpirit, or an Angell, hath not body fleſh, and bones: but ſo it is, I haue them, Ergo, I am no ſpirit. This is a ſenſible argument: and ſee, how Hee dimittes that glorious body to their eyes, and to their hands to bee ſeene, to bee touched, that He might make them to beleeue: albeit Faith be a ſpirituall worke in the ſoule, yet it is wrought, and confirmed in the ſoule by the eye, & by ſight, by the hand by touching. This place lets vs ſee how damnable is the doctrine of the Papiſtes who would haue vs to beleeue that in the Supper of IESVS CHRIST, there is a locall and bodily preſence of CHRISTS body, and

that the whole bodie is there, and that the blood is there drunken by thee, and the body is eaten by thee, after a bodily manner with the mouth of thy bodie, and not ſacramentally and ſpiritually. How dare theſe deceiuers of the world, theſe vile knaues affirme, that they eate the body of IESVS CHRIST, and puts it in their vile mouthes. What reaſonable man, can be perſwaded of it. Will they teach me, as CHRIST teached His diſciples, will they let mee ſee viſibly vvith mine eye, and feele ſenſibly vvith mine hand, a body, then ſhall I beleeue, otherwiſe, no Papiſt, will cauſe me beleeue, that I eate CHRIST really and bodily with my mouth, no more than the diſciples would beleeue that CHRIST was a body, till they felt Him, and ſawe Him, I will be of the Faith of the diſciples. Beleeue them who will, I ſhall neuer beleeue them, by the grace of GOD. Let mee ſee a bodie, not the roundneſſe and whiteneſſe of the bread, and let me feele this, that CHRIST let His diſciples feele: if thou vvilt not let mee feele that, I will neuer beleeue thee: holde thee content, and I am not bound to beleeue thee: yea more, if I beleeued thee, I vvere faire in the wrong, I ſhould ſinne againſt the LORD, and againſt the trueth of His body. Why? If I beleeue thee, neither ſeeing, nor feeling ſuch a thing, then I ſhould beleeue, the body of Chriſt to be vnuiſible, and vntractable, and to beleeue that, is to beleeue the body of CHRIST to bee no bodie. That bodie that is not ſeene, nor handled, is not a body, theſe properties beeing taken avvay from a bodie, there remaines no bodie, yea, ſight and feeling are ſuch vnſeparable accidents of the bodie, that the verie glorified bodie cannot be vvithout them.
            The Papiſts caſt vnto vs a friuolous diſtinction betwixt the glorified body of CHRIST, and His vnglorified bodie: No, the verie glorified bodie is as vvell viſible and tractable, as an vnglorified bodie. The godlie in the latter daye ſhall ſee whether it be viſible, or not. Goe thy way with thy bodily preſence, thou debarreſt thy ſelfe from that preſence, that the godlie ſhall ſee, one daye to their conſolation.
            Furthermore, Brethren, There is another thing to be marked: I ſee IESVS CHRIST, after His glorious Reſurrection, to haue kept the markes of the wounds, Hee ſhewes His handes and His wounded hands. Hee ſhewes them His feete, and His wounded feet, & He ſhewed His ſide to Thomas, when he would not beleeue &

made him to put his handes in His ſide. Yee woulde maruell, that Chriſt, riſing vp in glorie, ſhoulde haue kept the markes of infirmitie. When the Lord roſe, it became Him to ſhake off all infirmitie: and the markes of His woundes are a part of infirmitie. See ye not howe it hath pleaſed the Lorde to humble Himſelfe for our cauſe, to the ende, that vvee ſhould beleeue. Not onelie roſe Hee, and appeared vnto them, but alſo after He roſe, Hee keepes the marks of His vvoundes, that no vvayes they ſhoulde doubt, but fullie beleeue, that it vvas Hee, and none other. It is a vvonderfull thing to ſee the humilitie of Chriſt for our cauſe: as all His life vvas but an humbling of Himſelfe: ſo after His Reſurrection, for thine exaltation, vvhen Hee ſhould haue gone to glorie, Hee abides fourtie dayes, to cauſe His Diſciples beleeue. Art not thou, who art duſt and aſhes, bound to humble thy ſelfe for Him, ſeeing that Hee, who is ſo glorious, humbled Himſelfe ſo low for thee? Now whether the Lord keepe theſe markes or no, or vvhether vve ſhall ſee Him come vvith them or no in that great day, I vvill not be curious: but this I knowe, the freſh memorie of the vvoundes, and of the Croſſe, ſhall neuer vaniſhe out of the hearts of the Elect: and in the Heauen thou ſhalt remember a thouſande times better, than in the earth, vvhen thou ſhalt ſee Him as Hee is: when thou ſhalt beholde Him vvhom thou haſt pearced thorowe, thou ſhalt mourne, ſayes the Prophete Zacharie. There is the remembring of the vvoundes. And as that Croſſe ſhall neuer goe out of the eye of the Father, (for it is as preſent now before the eye of the Father, as it was that houre that He was crucified:) So vvhen thou ſhalt come to Heauen, alwayes thou ſhalt haue a memorie of the Croſſe: And in this reſpect He is called an euerlaſting Sacrifice, and an euerlaſting Prieſt. And, as the ſight of that Croſſe pacifies the vvrath of GOD: (vvere it out of the eye of the Father, the flame of His vvrath vvoulde deuoure and conſume thee, for the pacifying of the vvrath ſtandes in the ſight of the Croſſe:) So the joye and peace of thy conſcience in Heauen, ſhall ſtande in an euerlaſting remembrance of the Croſſe and His bloodie vvoundes. There are two groundes of our Eternall joye and peace in Heauen: Firſt, our joye and peace ſtandes in the ſight of that preſent glorie of Chriſt in Heauen. Next after the ſight of that glorie, they ſtand on a remembrance of His by-gone Croſſe: Theſe ſhall bee the two pillars of the euerlaſting joye and happineſſe vvhich the Sainctes ſhall haue in Heauen. So Hee ſhall

ſtand in as good ſtead to thee in the Heauen, as Hee did in the earth. Learne to ſeeke Him, to embrace Him, and to bee homelie with Him: for in Him ſtandes thy joye euerlaſtinglie, and euer thou bee happie, thou muſt bee vvith Him. Now this for Chriſts part. Hitherto hath Hee taught them, by the ſenſes and thinges ſenſible: But looke vvhat this vvorkes in them: It is ſaide, That for joye they coulde not beleeue, and they fell out in a wondring. There is the effect that it vvrought: There is ſomething heere vvrought: to vvit, a joye, and a vvondering. Yet the thing that they ſhoulde haue, is not as yet vvrought, that is, Faith: for joye and wondring by appearance ſtayes their faith. So harde a matter is it to cauſe a man to beleeue. It is an eaſie thing to thee, who knoweſt not what Faith is, to ſaye, I beleeue: but when thou art put to the proofe, thou wilt finde howe harde a thing it is, to cauſe thee to beleeue. There is as great contrarietie betwixt our nature, and faith in Chriſt, as is betwixt water and fire: And if thou beleeueſt, there muſt bee as great chaunge in thy nature, as to change water into fire, and fire into water. Nature muſt bee turned into grace. But howe comes it to paſſe, that joye and wondering ſhoulde ſtaye Faith? Conſider it: That which one would faine haue comming to paſſe, yee knowe hee cannot eaſilie beleeue it, when one telles him, that it is come to paſſe: And that which leaſt wee woulde haue comming to paſſe, we moſt eaſilie beleeue that it hath come to paſſe. A man that feares euill, will credite an euill report readilie: but hee that earneſtlie wiſhes a good thing, will not ſo ſoone credite a good report: hee will thinke it almoſte impoſſible. But yet when a man heares tell of a thing which hee would faine haue comming to paſſe, although hee beleeue it not, yet the heart will leape for joye. This was the diſpoſition of the Apoſtles: The thing that faineſt they would haue cōming to paſſe, was a ſight of IESVS. And if thou were acquainted with Chriſt as theſe men were, if Hee were taken out of thy ſight, thou wouldeſt gette no pleaſure, till that thou ſaweſt Him, as PAVL ſayes, I deſire to be diſſolued, and to bee with CHRIST: Hee had ſuch a thirſt to ſee Chriſt, that hee woulde not care for death, nor for the graue, to ſee Him. Howbeit they cannot beleeue, yet they haue joye, and their ſoules are rauiſhed with admiration. Faith is not ſo much in a rauiſhed and carried heart, as in a ſet
                  •
               ed ſoule. A faithfull heart

is the moſte ſetled heart in the worlde. If there bee vanitie in the heart, faith is ſo ſolide that it will preſſe out vanitie. Faith is a ſolide thing in a ſetled heart. A faithfull man, is a ſetled man: and a man without faith, is as an emptie veſſell, and as a bagge of winde: his joye is light, and proceedes onely from the ſwarfe of the ſoule. But after once faith bee ſetled, there will bee ſolide joy that comes in with pleaſure, and ſearches the leaſt corner of the heart: a joye vnſpeakeable and glorious begunne heere, which will haue none ende, till wee ſee Chriſt. So this their joye goes not farre enough downe in their heartes: for they are rauiſhed with joye, but had not ſolide faith. When I marke this place, I ſee in it what ſhall be the eſtate of the godlie when they ſhall meete with their LORD: The firſt ſight ſhall rauiſhe them ſo, that they ſhall wonder, that euer there coulde haue beene ſuch a glorie. Wilt thou but ſuſpende thy judgement for a while, thou ſhalt ſee that which thou neuer ſaweſt, and that which thou neuer heardeſt tell of, and that which neuer coulde enter into thine heart. When thou ſhalt ſee this, thou ſhalt fall into an admiration: Then after once thou knoweſt Him, then after the admiration ſhall follow a ſolide faith, a ſolide joye, and a ſetled apprehenſion of thinges ſpirituall, and that not for a time, but for euermore. Nowe it laſtes not, ſcarcelie is it preſent when it euaniſhes: But after the full ſight, ſhall followe the ſolide joye that neuer ſhall haue ende. As by the contrarie, This ſhall bee the eſtate of the reprobate: The firſt ſight and ſenſe of that wrath that ſhall ceaze vpon them ſo fearcelie, as neuer before they coulde haue ſuſpected, ſhall aſtoniſhe, confounde, and dammiſhe them. Thou kneweſt neuer what meaſure of wrath is hidden vp in the treaſure of GOD. Thou who art a reprobate, till thou feeleſt it, there ſhall come ſuch a terrour vpon thee, that it ſhall cauſe all the haires of thine head ſtande ouer ende: and it is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſuch an aſtoniſhment as Chriſt ſuffered in the Garden, a little before Hee was taken. Then ſhall followe on them that anguiſhe, and fearefull dreadfulneſſe, preſſing them, when they haue beene aſtoniſhed at the ſight and ſenſe of vvrath vvhich is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vvhich vvas the LORDES ſeconde perturbation, vvhich is a more ſetled feeling of vvrath, and more conſtant apprehenſion of dolour, ſorrowe, and anguiſhe for euermore in the Helles: And it ſhall bee ſo vveightie

vvhen they are ſhotte into Hell, that it ſhall preſſe the ſappe out of them. The LORDE ſaue vs from it, and giue vs grace to bee founde in CHRIST, that wee maye bee ſaued from that vvrath vvhich is to come, in Him: To vvhome vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, for euermore: Amen.
         
         
            THE XLII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 41 Hee ſaide, vnto them, Haue yee heere anie meate?
                  
                     
                        verse 42 And they gaue him a piece of a broyled fiſh, and of an honie combe,
                  
                     
                        verse 43 And hee tooke it, and did eate before them.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 And hee ſaide vnto them, Theſe are the wordes, which I ſpake vnto you while I was yet with you, that all must bee fulfilled which are written of mee in the Lawe of Moſes, and in the Prophets, and in the Pſalmes.
                  
                     
                        verse 45 Then opened hee their vnderſtanding, that they might vnderſtand the Scriptures,
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And ſaide vnto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooued Christ to ſuffer, and to riſe againe from the dead the thirde day.
               
            
            
               WEe continue as yet (beloued Brethren) in the Hiſtory of the appearing of Chriſt after His glorious Reſurrection: His fift appearing was to the eleuē (who were ſo called after the defection of Iudas) and the others: The common ranke of His Diſciples conuened together in the night, in a ſecret pl
                  •
               ce of Hieruſalem: and while they are ſitting together, hauing their conferences one with another, & each one perſwading & certifying another of the Reſurrection of the Lord: in the meane time the doore being

ſhut, the LORD on a ſuddaintie comes in ere they wiſt, and Hee ſtandes in the middes of them, & ſtanding in the middes of them, He wiſhes His peace to them, and He ſayes, Peace be vnto you: they ſeeing Him, and ſuppoſing Hee had bene a Spirit, or an Angell in the likeneſſe of a man, they were abaſhed, and aſtoniſhed: The Lord aftherwards ſettles them with a litle ſharpe rebuke: Hee beginnes to ſhew vnto them, that He was no ſpirit, but a very body: and that ſame very man called Ieſus, vvho before His Paſſion vvas conuerſant with them, that ſame man that ſuffered, and therefore He holdes out His handes and His feete, which were both marked with the print of His wounds on the Croſſe: See (ſayes He) feele (ſayes He) looke if I be not that ſame man which ſuffered, a Spirit hath not fleſh and blood, as I haue, Ergo, I am no Spirit. When He had in this manner, led them by the very ſenſe to know Him, by the eye to beholde Him, by the eare to heare His familiar voyce, & ſalutation, by the hand to handle Him. What effect followed, Yet ſayes the Scripture, they beleeued not, and they could not beleeue, for exceeding joy wherewith they were rauiſhed, for admiration, and wondering they could not beleeue for a piece of time: Faith dwelles in a ſetled heart: and if there be any vanitie, and any emptineſſe in the heart, Faith will preſſe out the vanitie, and will fill vp that emptineſſe in the heart, and the faithfull man is the moſt ſolide and ſettled thing in the world: and hee who is the vnfaithfull man, is a vaine hearted man, his heart is blowne vp with vanitie, albeit he had all the naturall wit in the world. Now the joy that Faith brings with it, is not an admiration and rauiſhing of the heart, but it is a ſolide joy, a ſolide apprehenſion of ſpiritual things in the heart: ſo the heartes of the diſciples at the firſt ſight became rauiſhed in admiration, the vaile of their heartes were not touched with joy, they had not that ſettled joy, that they had afterward.
            Nowe to come to the Text that wee haue read: In it, firſt, the Lord yet continues in aſſuring them that it was He: He ſtriueth on with their infidelitie: then when He hath ſhewed them viſibly the action of a body, in eating in their ſight, then He comes to a ſweete Sermon, wherein Hee inſtructes them in two points: firſt, that all things that befell to Him, as His Paſſion, and Reſurrection behooued to haue befallen to Him: ſecondly againe, that as thoſe things befell to Him of neceſſitie: ſo of neceſſitie thoſe things behooued to be preached to the world. So He inſtructes them in theſe two

neceſſities. Then Hee comes on in the ſecond part of His preaching, and giues direction to them, to be preachers, and witneſſes to the worlde of all theſe thinges, promiſing againe to them that Spirit, which He had promiſed them before His Pasſion, and that they ſhould haue the greater ſecuritie. He giues them commandement, not to depart out of Ieruſalem, vntill they were endued with vertue out of Heauen: this is the effect.
            To come to the firſt part: When they heard Him ſpeake with a voyce familiar, wherewith they had beene acquainted, and that homely ſalutation, Peace bee vnto you: yet they would not knowe Him, when they had ſeene His hands and feete, yet they beleeued not that it was He, when they had handled Him, and felt Him, yet they beleeued Him not for all this, they were rauiſhed with joy, yet they beleeued not. The Lorde will not leaue them in this vnbeliefe, but He will let them vnderſtand that it was He, He teaches them by the ſight of a bodily action. Hee askes if they had a
                     •
                  y me
                     •
                  t: They preſent to Him A piece of roſted fiſh, and that was all the delicate they gaue Him, and with it A piece of hony combe, Hee takes and eates in their ſight, Hee eates the piece of the roſted fiſh, and the hony combe: Not that the Lord after His Reſurrection, had any need to eate any of their meat, Hee who nowe vvas immortall after His Reſurrection, that was glorious, and that vvas full of God, and had all the powers of His ſoule filled with God: What needed He their piece of fiſh, or their hony combe to eate: So it was not for any need He had, that Hee eated, but that He eated in their ſight, that they ſhould beleeue that the Lord was a body: a Spirit eates not, neither drinkes. The Lord therefore ſhewes them that He vvas no Spirit. In doing this, Brethren, no queſtion, He humbled Himſelfe, beeing now immortall and glorious, and full of God: Was not this a humbling of Him, an immortall bodie to take that mortall bread? It is a wonderfull thing, to ſee, how Ieſus Chriſt humbled Himſelfe, ay whilſt He vvas yet ſtill in this vvorld: Beeing ſayes Paul Philip in the forme of God, & thought it no robberie to be equall with God. He made Himſelfe of no reputation, taking on Him the ſhape of a ſeruant, That is, the nature of man & in the nature of man became obedient to the Father for vs to the death, & to a vile death euen to the death of the Croſſe, a foule de
                  •
               th, and a ſore death. Then, vvhen after He vvas once 
                  ••
               ade and riſen againe, 
                  •
               nd ſhould haue entred to His glory, and haue paſſed to Heauen imm
                  •
               diately after

His Reſurrection, to ſit at the right hande of that Majeſtie: Hee would not immediatly doe ſo, but did deferre and delay it the ſpace of fourtie dayes, and all this time humbling Himſelfe, it was a ſmall thing, that when He was mortall to humble Himſelfe: but when He was immortall, that Hee ſhould haue continued ſo long humbling Himſelfe for the cauſe of man, it is a wonder, & amongſt all the partes of His humiliation, this is one part, that He ate this mortall food. And thou, when thou ſhalt be glorified, thou ſhalt not bee ſo farre humbled, as to eate any food of this world: thou ſhalt not be ſo farre humbled, as IESVS CHRIST was humbled. Was this, Brethren, for the Apoſtles cauſe only, Was it for Peters cauſe, Iohn, Iames and the reſts cauſe? No, Paul ſayes, All is yours, ſpeaking to the Church, whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or thinges preſent, or things to come, or life, or death, all is yours, and ye are Chriſtes, and Chriſt is Gods, 1. Epiſt. to the Corinthians, the 3. Chapter, and the 21. and 22. verſes. So all the Apoſtles themſelues, were for the Churches cauſe, I ſpeake to you, Paul, Iohn, Iames, &c. were for your cauſe, and all this homelineſſe of Chriſt, with them was for your cauſe, as they were for your cauſe: ſo ſeeing the LORD hath ſo farre and ſo many wayes humbled Himſelfe, conſider, if wee haue not great cauſe, to meete Him, or not: If any will bowe ſo lowe, as to take thee by the hand, wilt thou not put out thine hande againe, and meete Him: and thinke ye, that this humbling of the LORD of glorie hath taken an ende, it endes not ſo long, as this Miniſterie continues: Know yee, what this Miniſterie, and this preaching is? It is but an humbling of GOD from Heauen, and that for thy cauſe: looke what Paul ſayes, in the 2. Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the 5. Chapter, and the 20. verſe: We are Ambaſſadours for Chriſt, as though GOD did beſeech you through vs, we pray you in Chriſts ſtead, that ye be reconciled to God. There ye ſee, that by this Miniſterie, GOD humbles Himſelfe, to pray thee to be reconciled with Him, is not this an humbling of God? euen that He ſhould pray thee to be reconciled with Him, He becomes a ſuter, and ſoliſter for thy cauſe: ſayes the Apoſtle, We pray you, that y
                     •
                   ſhould be reconciled to Him: & what is it to God to humble Himſelfe, if not this when He beſeeches and requeſts vs by His Meſſengers and Ambaſſadours, that wee bee reconciled to Him.
            This exceeding humbling of the LORD, as it lets vs ſee His loue vnſpeakable towardes vs, ſo it requires a meeting

on our partes, as wee would eſchew fearfull judgements. If the firſt humbling of GOD, when He humbled Himſelfe in our nature, will not mooue thee to make Him a meeting, it ſhall bring on a judgement: If the ſecond, wherein He humbled Himſelfe after His Reſurrection ſo many wayes will not mooue thee, it ſhall double thy judgement: if the third humbling of Him, now in the Miniſterie will not mooue thee: if thou contemneſt the word, and the Miniſterie, it ſhall triple the judgement, albeit thou wereſt the King of the world: O that judgement and wrath! that ſhall bee heaped vpon thee, thou ſhalt be thruſt downe, and plunged in Hel, to be tormented for euermore.
            Can GOD humble Himſelfe for nothing? No, either ſhall it be for paſſing mercie, or els for a paſſing judgement to thee, for euer more.
            Then, Brethren, yee ſhall marke in this place, and I ſhall onely touch it by the way: The Lord after His glorious Reſurrection eated the meate they gaue Him: Hereof it followes: That after His glorious Reſurrection, Hee kept theſe naturall powers, as eating and drinking: if Hee kept them not, how could Hee eate at this time, if there was not a power attractiue in His ſtomacke? how could the meat goe ouer to His ſtomacke. This I ſpeake, to let you ſee, when we ſhall riſe & be glorified, and ſee our Lord▪ & vvhen this humbled bodie ſhall be tranſlated to the likeneſſe of His glorious body: as vvee ſhall keepe the ſame ſoule and body: ſo vvee ſhall keepe all the naturall povvers and faculties of them.
            Nothing ſhall bee loſt in the Reſurrection: We ſhall keepe all, but after another manner: all theſe povvers nowe are infirme and weake: all are vile, vvithout glorie, then all ſhall bee glorified, facultie of eating and drinking ſhall bee glorified and made ſpirituall. Wilt thou then deſire meat, wilt thou hunger, as thou doeſt now: vvill thy ſtomacke deſire meat, as it does now: No, all thy naturall povvers ſhall be filled vvith GOD. 1. Cor. Chapter 15. verſe 28. God ſhall be all in all: Hee ſhall bee meate and drinke, and all thinges to thee. In the 21. Chapter of the Reuelation, and the 22. verſe. Hee ſhall bee the Temple: Thou ſhalt not neede to goe to the Church, Thy God ſhall be a Temple: Thou ſhalt not neede Sunne, nor Moone, or a lanterne, or a candle, Thy God ſhall be all in all to thee: So long as we are here, we hunger, we thirſt, we haue this meat, and that meat, and we muſt haue the Sunne, by day, and the Moone

by night, and a candle, all this neceſsitie importes an imperfection: Eateſt thou, drinkeſt thou, all is an argument of imperfection, and albeit God filles thee in a part (GOD beginnes to fill thee in this world, and thou wilt feele His ſweetneſſe) yet He giues vs heere in this life, but a litle taſte: GOD is not all in all to vs, and therefore, ſo long as vvee are heere, we muſt eat and drinke: but after that once GOD ſhall fully poſſeſſe vs, and repleniſh our ſoules, when vve ſhall ſee our Lord againe, vve ſhall neuer hunger nor thirſt, there ſhall neuer be want againe, there ſhall be fulneſſe, not of periſhing joy, but a fulneſſe of ſuch glory, as no tongue can expreſſe, and all the povvers of thy ſoule ſhall be repleniſhed with an vnſpeakable pleaſure: the vvorlde knovves not vvhat this meanes: and vvhen it is ſpoken to them, they thinke it vanitie. To enter heere curiouſly about this meat, and to diſpute: What became of this meat? vvhether it vvas digeſted, and turned to nutriture, and vvhether it vvas auoided againe, I thinke it needleſſe: But to ſpeake it in a vvorde: It vvas an eaſie matter to the LORD IESVS CHRIST, vvho made all of nothing, vvho made thee of nothing, vvho made thy meate and drinke of nothing, vvho made that piece of fiſh of nothing, and vvho made that honey combe of nothing, to turne it into nothing againe, without a concoction or digeſting in the ſtomacke.
            Novve, to goe forvvarde to the ſecond part of the Text, and to come to His ſvveet Sermon: No queſtion, He deliuered it at great length: but Luke hath ſummed it ſhortely: Heere IESVS CHRIST preaches after His glorious Reſurrection: yee heard many of His preachinges before His ſuffering, in Iohn, heare this now after His Reſurrection: The firſt thing Hee does, He informes His Diſciples of a neceſsitie: It behooued Chriſt to die, & it behooued Him to riſe againe after His buriall the third day, there is a neceſsitie: Hee prooues this: What euer thing, ſayes Hee, vvas vvritten of mee, in Moyſes firſt, in the Prophets next, and in the Pſalmes laſt: all behooued to bee accompliſhed, euery jote of it, of neceſsitie vvould the LORDE ſay, muſt bee accompliſhed, Heauen and Earth muſt paſſe avvay, ere one jote of that vvhich is ſpoken of Mee, paſſe avvay, but all muſt be fulfilled.
            To touch this, Hee takes vp all the vvhole Olde Teſtament into three partes: Firſt, the bookes of Moſes: Secondly, the Prophetes: Thirdly, the Pſalmes of Dauid.
            
            
               Commonly, wee vvill heare the Olde Teſtament diuided in two partes: Firſt, the bookes of Moſes: Next, the Prophetes, novve He makes the Pſalmes the third. In the Pſalmes vve haue continuall prophecies of CHRIST, yet I thinke this is the principall cauſe of it, becauſe the Pſalmes are ſongs, vvhich Dauid ſung vnto GOD, and thereafter put in vvrite, and this is the chiefe purpoſe of the Pſalmes. It is true, that in the Pſalmes there are Prophecies contained concerning CHRIST: and therefore the Pſalmes vvere before rekoned vvith the Prophecies, and Dauid counted amongſt the Prophets, Luke Chapter 24. verſe 15. Yet the chiefe purpoſe of the Pſalmes, is to ſing vnto the LORD, and then hee prophecies, hee ſtandes as a viue and expreſſe type of CHRIST, wherein he differs from other Prophets, vvho in their prophecying vvere no types of CHRIST. But to returne: What euer thing, ſayes CHRIST, is written of Mee, it behooued that to bee accompliſhed: But ſo it is, all theſe thinges haue beene vvritten and foretolde of Mee, my ſuffering and my Reſurrection, Moſes, the Prophets, and Dauid haue foretolde them: Ergo, of neceſsitie I behooued to ſuffer, and to riſe againe the third daye. Yee ſee then, vvhat Hee is doing, Hee is binding the Faith of His Diſciples, to beleeue of Him that Hee vvas riſen, vrging them vvith ſuch a neceſsitie, that they could not eſcape.
            It is not ſo eaſie a thing, (as the vvorlde thinkes it) to beleeve: Aske at a vvanton companion, if Hee beleeues: He vvill anſwere: Why beleeue I not, vvhen in the meane time His ovvne mouth, nor His heart, hath no more ſmell of Faith, than the thing Hee touched neuer: and yet the blaſphemous knaue vvill ſay, He hath Faith: but to get Faith, of all things thou ſhalt finde, that it is the moſte hard and difficill thing, and ere euer thou beleeueſt, thou ſhalt be ſtraitted: The ſoule ſhall be ſo forced and conſtrained to beleeue, that thou canſt not ſay othervviſe.
            Well, Brethren, vvee haue done vvith it, and vvee haue made ſhipvvracke of ſaluation, if vve beleeue not this Goſpell, and this Hiſtorie of the death and Reſurrection of IESVS CHRIST.
            Beleeueſt thou not that IESVS CHRIST hath died, and hath riſen againe for thee, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Ieſus to to thy comfort: But ere euer thou or I beleeue that this is true that is written of CHRISTS ſuffering, and His glorification, ere euer thou beleeueſt the Hiſtorie of the New Teſtament of the Paſsion

and riſing againe of Chriſt done and ended: thou muſt be perſwaded: there is a neceſſitie that all theſe thinges that are ſpoken in the Olde Teſtament behooued to be done: if then thou wouldeſt knovve the neceſſitie of theſe thinges, caſt thine eyes to the Olde Teſtament, and caſt it ouer, Beginne at Moyſes, and then come to the Prophets, and laſtly, to the Pſalmes of Dauid. Reade the Old Teſtament, and that write ſhall ſhewe thee ſuch a neceſſitie of theſe things that more poſſible had it bene, that the world ſhould haue vaniſhed away, than that theſe thinges ſhould not haue come to paſſe: and then vvhen yee take the New Teſtament, and ſees theſe things which are foretolde to bee accompliſhed, yee will not beleeue with how great joy, the heart will reſt vpon Ieſus, and it will ſaye, I vvill beleeue this, that Chriſt hath ſuffered, and is riſen for mee: then thy pleaſure vvill be, to turne ouer the Olde and Newe Teſtament, that thy Faith may be the more confirmed.
            To goe forwarde with the propoſition of the argument, vvhen He ſayes, It behoued all theſe things to come to paſſe: He propones it not ſimply, but whilſt He telles it, He ſecretly rebukes them, Heard ye not of this before? Are not theſe the words, which I ſpake to you while I was yet with you? Why haue ye novv forgote them, ſeeing not long ſince I tolde you them? I finde in the diſciples of Chriſt, a very great ignorance at the firſt: Thinke ye that any of them knew one word of this, notwithſtanding they vvere foretolde in Moſes, in the Prophets, and in the Pſalmes: No, not a worde: then vvith this ignorance, I ſee a great forgetfulneſſe, albeit they knew not, ſhould they not haue remembred, what their Lorde ſaide to them before His Pasſion? and yet when they ſee Him ſuffer, and ſee His Reſurrection, this cannot waken their memorie, to ſay, My Lord tolde me this: & therefore I will beleeue: in them thou mayeſt ſee thy nature, howe ignorant, and forgetfull thou art by nature: let thee ly ſtill, albeit thou wereſt Peter or Paul, or the beſt of them, let thee ſleeepe on, thou ſhalt die ſleeping: if theſe diſciples had not beene wakened, they had died, & this is the great and ſpeciall mercie of God, that He ſhewes to His own: He wil let them fall in a ſlumber, & ly a while in ignorance but incontinently He will come, & giue them a putte, with ſharpneſſe & mercie, & waken them. Thou who refuſeſt ſharpnes, O that ſharpe wakening that ſhall abide thee! Therefore, aſſoone as the Miniſter of God cries vnto thee, O Catiue! ſleepeſt thou? death and damnation abides thee, if thou wakeneſt

not: but if thou wilt waken in time, thou ſhalt finde mercy: pray vnto the Lord, that thou mayeſt be wakened, for if thou wakeneſt not in time, heauie ſhall the judgement be, that ſhall ouertake thee: wofull ſhall thy wakening be, and the dolour that ſhall come on thee, as the paine of a woman in trauell: Our men for all our crying, will not bee wakened, but if they continue ſleeping, they ſhall goe to Hell.
            Nowe to come to the aſſumption: Theſe things are written of mee, that I ſhould die, and riſe againe: and no doubt, when Hee telles this to them, He falles out in a diſcourſe of the Scriptures, alleadging teſtimonies out of Moſes, the Prophets, & the Pſalmes, as the words following, declare. But to proceed: Is the Lord content to alleadge the Scriptures ſimply? Does He no more? Marke it well: as Hee alleadges and opened the Scriptures vnto them: So Hee opens their minde and vnderſtanding, that they might vnderſtand the Scriptures. Would ye haue an effectuall preaching, there is an effectuall preaching: when theſe two goe together: when the Scriptures are opened, and the Lord puts in His hande, and opens the heart, and the dead ſoule that is ſleeping, to vnderſtand that piece of Scripture, which is opened. Would yee haue the difference betweene the preaching of Chriſte, and the preaching of His ſeruants: all their preaching is nothing, in reſpect of His, Moſes, the Prophets, and all the Apoſtles, are nothing to Him: when He preached, that ſame LORD that ſpake, had power in His owne hande, and made His owne Spirite, to open the heart: neuer a preacher had that, that the Lord Ieſus had, He had His owne Spirit to giue vnto His owne, when Hee ſpake His owne word: the preachers haue not that Spirit to giue, but referres it vnto the Lord, 1. Cor. 13.5.6.7. Paul ſayes to the Corinthians, who eſteemed much of Paul: O vaine men, Paul is nothing, he only plants, Apollos is nothing, he wateres, but it is God that giues the increaſe: if he bleſſed not the labour of Paul, or of any other preacher, all were loſt labour: if the Lord giue not His Spirit with the word, man teaches in vaine. In the 16. of the Actes, verſe 14. When Paul is preaching, we read not, that any are conuerted for all his preaching, but only one woman, Lydia, happie Lydia: When Paul preached, it is not ſaid, that Paul opened her heart, but that the Lorde opened her heart: Paul deliuered the doctrine, but the Lorde▪ and not Paul had the Spirite, to giue vvith the preaching: therefore vvhen yee

heare, and come to heare, euer crie, Lorde, open mine heart, No creature, no Miniſter, none Angell: yea, all the Angels of Heauen, will not open the heart of a ſinner. Crie for that Spirite, that He would open thine heart, that thou mayeſt feede vpon that food of life.
            Nowe conſider at what time it is, that the mindes of the diſciples are opened to vnderſtand: It was euen when Hee is exponing the Scriptures, then their mindes are opened, and at none other time, to let you ſee, in deſpite of the worlde, that there is none opening of the heart, none illumination of the Spirit, but by this word, by the hearing, and by the reading of this worde. Away with theſe fantaſticke reuelations of the Anabaptiſtes, awaye with the Pope, and the crue of His ſhauelings, who affirme, that the Spirit will be effectuall at the preaching of his vnwritten verities, at the dreames and fantaſies of men, which is not only not found in the Scripture, but alſo is altogether contrarie and repugnant to the Scripture. I pronounce, let them heare, albeit it were a thouſand yeere, the Spirite of Ieſus ſhall abhorre that traſh and peltrie. Set me vp the Pope, to preach theſe vanities to thee: I denounce, thy minde ſhall not be opened, that Spirit ſhal neuer come to open the mindes, neither of them, who preach, nor yet their mindes who heare them. Goe vnto Rome, ſit and heare, and lend thine eare to a flattering ſocietie of their Clergie, heare them on, thy ſoule ſhall the more be blinded, the more thou heareſt: the Spirit of Chriſt, will only accompanie His owne word. Looke what is our nature in the Diſciples of CHRIST, knoweſt thou it not? their mindes were blinded, & ſound ſleeping, while the Lord opened them. They knew not what Moyſes ſaid, or what the Prophets ſpake of Chriſt, while the Lord opened their vnderſtanding. Nothing in nature, but euill, nothing but blindneſſe in the mind. Away with the Papiſt, and his freewill, fye on thee, that thinkeſt thy ſelfe better than thou art: fye on thee, that knoweſt not thy naturall blindneſſe, and deadneſſe, thou wilt come and ſpeake of thy Free-will, and of the light of thy minde: thou wilt ſaye, that thou haſt a Free-will to encline to heauenly things: be not deceiued with the conceite of this engine, & naturall quickneſſe. Indeede in humane thinges, a man will haue a great quickneſſe and ſharpneſſe, but bring him to the Scriptures of God to Moyſes, to the Prophets, & Apoſtles, he is as blind as a Moldewarpe, & as fond as a foole: the

greater naturall wit and quickneſſe that thou haſt, (a ſore thing) the greater excecation and fooliſhneſſe in ſpirituall things: ſpeake to the naturall man of the Scripture, of all the fooles in this world, he is the greateſt: the more naturall wit thou haſt, if it be not ſanctified, the more fooliſh ſhall the Croſſe of Chriſt, and His Reſurrection to glorie▪ ſeeme to thee: for the wiſdome of the fleſh, is enimitie againſt God. I tell thee, thou muſt not bring thy naturall wit to the Scriptures, Paul telles thee, If thou wouldeſt bee wiſe in God, thou muſt be a foole, that thou mayeſt be wiſe. Art thou wiſe in the world, when thou commeſt to the Church, leaue thy wiſdome behinde thee: art thou a Lawyer, keepe it to the Seſſion-houſe? art thou a Mediciner? Haſt thou any great wiſdome? leaue all behind thee, and come like a ſillie childe that hath no wit, or els, the more thou heareſt, the greater ſhall bee thy blindneſſe and induration.
            Now come to the concluſion of the Argument, Hee concludes, That it behooued Chriſt to ſuffer, and to riſe againe from the dead the thirde day. There is a neceſsitie of Chriſts death and Reſurrection, and ſo a neceſsitie, that they ſhoulde beleeue them: for to the ende that we may beleeue in the Goſpell: there muſt be a neceſsitie laid vpon vs, to wit, that wee be aſſured, that otherwiſe it could not be, but it behooued Chriſt to ſuffer, and riſe againe, as the Euangell recordes. Now this neceſsitie we ſhew you before: We may know by the olde Teſtament, Moſes, the Prophets, & the Pſalmes: for this we muſt lay as an infallible ground, that whatſoeuer was foretold by them, of neceſsitie it behooued to come to paſſe: and ſo wee ſee, that the Olde Teſtament, ſerues greatly to ſtrenthen our Faith, for vvhen vvee ſee the thinges that vvere foretolde to be all fulfilled in Him, all matter of occaſion of doubting is taken away. The Lord worke this Faith in our heartes, for Chriſts ſake: To whome with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all praiſe, honour, and glory, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XLIII. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 47 And that Repentance and Remiſsion of ſinnes ſhould be preached in His Name, among all Nations, beginning at Hieruſalem.
               
            
            
               IN opening vp of the fift appearance of the Lord after His Reſurrection to His Diſciples conueened in Hieruſalem in the night time (well beloued in CHRIST) we haue heard how the LORD hath trauelled by ſundrie meanes to make them to knowe Him, while as He appeared to them, and ſtood vp in the middes of them ſuddenly, He ſpake to them familiarly, and after His owne accuſtomed manner, yet they beleeue not, nor vnderſtandes Him not by His ſpeaking, but thought that He had bene a Spirit, or an Angell in the likeneſſe of a man: Then He comes nearer them, and ſhewing out His handes and His feete, and markes of the nailes wherewith Hee vvas vvounded on the Croſſe: He ſayes to them: See, feele, and touch mine handes and my feete with your hands, ſee, I am euen He, I am not a Spirit, as yee ſuppoſe: I am a verie bodie, a Spirit hath no fleſh, nor bones, therefore I am no Spirit: yet they beleeue not for joy, ſayes the Text, but they ſtoode wondering. Then Hee comes nearer them,

and demandes, whether if they had any meate amongſt them, and they gaue Him a piece of roſted fiſh, and of an hony combe, Hee eates in their preſence, teſtifying to them by His action of eating, Hee was no Spirit, a Spirit cannot eate nor drinke, yet Hee leaues them not, but Hee preaches to them a ſweet Sermon, whereof the laſt day, ye heard, there was two partes. In the firſt, Hee propones to them a neceſsitie of all theſe thinges that befell vnto Him, all behooued to come to paſſe, He behooued to be crucified, He behooued to riſe againe the third day. And why? Becauſe it was written: Firſt, in Moſes: Secondly, in the Prophetes: and laſtly, in the Pſalmes: What euer was written, all behooued to be accompliſhed, not ſo much as one ſillable of it might periſh, becauſe whatſoeuer was written by Moſes, the Prophetes, and Dauid, all was ordained and decreed, all was bound in a faſt decree from all eternitie. This was the firſt neceſsitie.
            Nowe, this day, Brethren, as God will giue the grace, we ſhall come to the other neceſsitie, which is of the preaching, and then we ſhall come to the ſecond part of His Sermon, concerning a direction vnto His Diſciples, to goe out to the world, and teſtifie of theſe thinges, that they heard and ſaw of Him. Then to come to the purpoſe: as it behooued that all theſe thinges that were foretolde of Chriſt ſhould come to paſſe, ſo there was als great a neceſſitie, that all ſhould be preached: That repentance and remiſsion of ſinnes, ſhould be preached in His name among all Nations. Now to ſpeake ſomewhat of this neceſſitie of preaching. Men thinke commonly all this preaching to be for a piece of policie, and for the faſhioun: a man to ſtand vp & preach to the reſt, they thinke it a piece of folie, ueening to the Church to bee but for the faſhion. But I ſhall tell thee, except there be preaching, no ſaluation, no life, ſhall pertaine vnto thee, except there bee preaching, Chriſts comming into the worlde, is in vaine for thee, all His ſuffering is for nothing, His Reſurrection ſhall bee of no value to thee, they will doe thee no good.
            For to ſpeake of the ordinance of God, and of that eternall decree: for as the Lord ordained from all eternitie, Chriſt to come in the world, to ſuffer, & to riſe againe: ſo He ordained preaching to be in His Name. But to leaue that, thinkeſt thou to come to Heauē without faith? No, thou ſhalt neuer ſee it, without faith, thou ſhalt neuer ſee ye face of Chriſt, thinkeſt y• to get Faith without hearing?

If thou contemneſt hearing, thou ſhalt neuer get Faith in Chriſt, But hovve canſt thou heare if there bee no preaching: thou muſt heare a voyce: So vvithout the ſounding of the Goſpell, no life. Chriſt, & His ſuffering, & His riſing is but dead to thee vvithout preaching. That life that flovved from the Reſurrection of Chriſt, is conueyed in the ſoule by hearing, and without hearing thou ſhalt ly deade, and die euerlaſtingly. Therefore, Chriſt, vvhen Hee came into the world, He vvas no dumbe ſufferer, He preached on night and day, Paul ſayes, Epheſ. 2.17. When Hee came, Hee was the peacemaker, and Hee preached peace. And to the Romanes, Chapter 15. verſe 8. Hee is called a Miniſter of Circumciſion: and CHRIST knowing this neceſſitie of preaching, vvhen He goes His vvay to Heauen, leaues Hee the vvorlde vvithout preaching? No, Paul to the Epheſians, Chapter 4. verſe 11. ſayes, Hee gaue ſome to be Apoſtles, ſome to be Prophetes, ſome to be Euangeliſts, ſome to be Paſtours, ſome to bee Doctours: and all to the end, that they might preach the Goſpell of peace to His comming: And Paul ſayes of himſelfe: Woe to mee, if I preach not the Gospell, 1. Cor. Chapter 9. verſe 16. Hee left His Spirit behind Him, as yee ſee, He promiſes in Iohn Chapter 14. verſe 26. But marke, He left His Spirit to be miniſtred by preaching: thou who contemneſt this preaching, I denounce to thee, thou ſhalt neuer taſte of that Spirit: thou vvho vvilt ſtand vp, and ſaye, I haue the Spirit, and then contemneſt the Miniſterie, I ſay, thou lieſt, albeit thou vvereſt the Emperour of the vvorld.
            Now to goe forwarde: there is a great neceſſitie of preaching: But take heede to this preaching: He deſcribes this preaching by ſundrie circumſtances: Firſt, it muſt bee in ſome name and in ſome authoritie: a man that ſtandes vp and preaches to the people: hee muſt preach to the people in ſome name: an Herauld vvill ſtande vp at the market croſſe, and make his proclamation, it muſt bee in ſome name: for if hee ſtande vp and proclame in his owne name, he is but a knaue, & deſerues to be hanged: So, vvhoſoeuer ſtands vp to preach, looke that hee preach neuer a vvorde in his owne name. CHRIST ſayes, there muſt be preaching in my Name: Looke that all preaching be in the Name of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Nowe, vvhat is the name of CHRIST? The Name of CHRIST is His power (O that paſſing power!) His authoritie: What power? Euen that power that Hee ſpeakes of in the laſt Chapter of Matthew: All power in Heauen and Earth is Mine.
            
            
               Then in the ſecond Chapter to the Philippians, and the ninth verſe: Wherefore GOD alſo hath highly exalted Him, and giuen Him a Name, aboue euery name: He is exalted in a wonderfull ſublimeneſſe. O that high ſublimeneſſe! that the Lord hath receiued: Hee hath gotten a Name aboue all names, and a power aboue all powers, and none ſhall haue ſuch a power: then he ſets out this power: All knees muſt bowe at the Name of IESƲS: all powers muſt bow to that power, and all knees muſt bee folded before it: bowe thy knee before that power, or els, thou ſhalt be thruſt in Hell: all knees ſhallbe bowed before that Tribunall: that Name vvill cauſe all the Deuils in Hell, bow, and ſtoupe.
            It is written in the 4. Chapter of the Actes: There is none other Name vnder Heauen able to ſaue men, but the Name of Ieſus Chriſt: thou ſhalt neuer ſee life, but by this power and this Name: Marke it: No life, I vvill tell againe: No ſaluation to man or vvoman in the vvorld, but by the Name of Ieſus, and His power: and therefore how great ſhall the power of this His Name, as yee may well ſee by the word, vvhich ſets it out, euen the Goſpell. The Euangel that ſpeakes of the Name of Ieſus, Paul calles it to the Romanes, Chapter 1. verſe 16. The power of God, vnto ſaluation. Speake of Caeſar, and this Kingdome, or that Kingdome: will it be powerfull vnto life? Will all the ſpeaking of all the creatures in the world bee powerfull vnto life? Speake of the Croſſe of CHRIST, what ſeemes to bee more baſe, yet it is the power of God, and the vviſdome of God vnto ſaluation. So the power muſt be wonderfull, when a word will haue ſuch a power, that it will ſaue a ſoule. The LORD, when Hee was in the worlde, Hee preached in His owne Name, and the Iewes marked, that He preached with authoritie, and Hee ſayes: Amen, Amen, I ſay vnto you, That is in mine owne Name: As for all other teachers, all their preaching muſt be in the Name and authoritie of Ieſus, and not in a creatures name.
            When a man hath this LORD in His eye, without regard of himſelfe, when hee goes to ſet out that Name, ye will not beleeue, how the LORD will be with him, and how He will make his authoritie to be ſeene.
            But by the contrarie, if a man haue no ſinceritie, and haue not the authoritie, and Name of IESVS before him, but ſeeke himſelfe in his preaching, hee will haue no ſpirit, no grace, none authoritie, his language will be vnſauourie, his preaching will be

of litle value. Paul, becauſe He preached Chriſt, and Him crucified, therefore, ſayes Hee, that his preaching was with euidencie and demonſtration of the Spirit: on the other part, becauſe the Corinthian Doctours had themſelues, & not Chriſt before their eyes: therefore hee ſayes, that they preached with oſtentation, and humane eloquence, all their preaching was but winde. The Philoſophers of old, ſpake much of matters of vertue, but becauſe they neuer ſpake one worde in the Name of Chriſt: therefore all their ſpeaking was but babling, neither were they changed themſelues, nor yet changed they others, they might teach men to bee Hypocrites, and to couer their vices: but they could not bee inſtruments of Regeneration, becauſe they ſpake not in that powerfull Name of Ieſus Chriſt. I put the Papiſts in this ſame rancke, that vvill ſpeake in the Popes name: I ſay, all their doctrine, and their ſpeaking of ſaluation, is more in the name of man, nor in the Name of Ieſus Chriſte: and therefore it may well worke errour, and hypocriſie in thee, but no ſaluation: thou mayeſt well thinke that thou haſt ſomething, but in effect thou haſt nothing.
            Then we ſee of neceſſitie there muſt be preaching: but whereof muſt this preaching be: The LORD ſayes, it behooued that preaching bee in my Name, Of repentance and remiſsion of ſinnes: There is the ſumme of the Goſpell. Would yee knowe the effect of all preaching? The whole Goſpell is ſummed vp in thoſe two Heades, Repentance, and Remiſſion of ſinnes. It is not my purpoſe, to inſiſt largely in theſe pointes, but I ſhall ſpeake of them ſhortly. Repentance is none other thing, but a preparation to the ſoule. Whereto? To receiue grace, to receiue remiſſion of ſinnes, ſaluation, and life euerlaſting. It is but a making ſtraight the wayes of the Lord, who is comming with grace and mercie to the ſoule. This Repentance is wrought partly by the Law, and partly by the Goſpell. The Law ſayes: Curſed be he that continueth not in all which is written in the booke of the Law, to doe them: and becauſe the conſcience of all fleſh, accuſes them as guiltie of the tranſgresſion of the Lawe: therefore there ariſes in the ſoule, horrours and terrours vnſpeakable: Then the Goſpell comes in to comfort the caſten downe ſoule, and it ſayes, Whoſoeuer beleeues in Ieſus, he ſhall be ſaued, for this is the ſumme of the Goſpell. When the ſoule heares this, it conceiues an vnſpeakable ſorrowe and ſadneſſe for the offending

of ſo mercifull and louing a Father: and this the Apoſtle calles a godly ſorrow, 2. Cor. Chapter 7. verſes 9. and 10. Now it is this godly ſorrow properly, which workes repentance, and turnes the heart to God, that before was farre away from Him. The other ſorrow that is by the Lawe, properly is not the cauſe of repentance, but it prepares the heart thereunto. Therefore, ſeeing this godly ſorrowe turnes the heart to God, of neceſsitie it muſt be accompanied with faith: for without Faith there is no conuerſion to God.
            The preaching of Iohn Baptiſt, telles vs, how neceſſarie the doctrine of the Goſpell is to worke repentance: for He ſayes, Repent, for the Kingdome of God is at hande, Matth. Chapter 3. verſe 2. The reaſon, why they ſhoulde repent, is heere taken from the approaching and preſence of the Kingdome of God, that is, of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Now as for remiſſion of ſinnes, it is an applying of the wholeſome medicine of repentance, and by order of nature, it followes after Repentance, when the heart is prepared with repentance, then comes in Remiſſion of ſinnes, then comes in that joyfull ſentence vvhich the Lorde makes His Spirit to proclame to thy ſoule: O ſinner, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee, in the blood of Ieſus Chriſt: for Remiſſion of ſinnes is nothing, but the ſentence of the great Iudge, ſaying, O ſinner, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee.
            Nowe, this Remiſſion of ſinnes is wrought by that ſame doctrine that workes Repentance, the Goſpell that workes Repentance, miniſteres likewiſe aſſurance of the Remiſsion of ſinnes: both are wrought by one meane, for Repentance and Remiſsion of ſinnes, are both wrought together, the one goes not in time before the other, but in that ſame moment that we beginne to repent, we get aſſurances in our conſciences, that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, and we heare as it were out of the mouth of God, that joyfull ſentence of abſolution. It is true, that a Miniſter may pronounce Remiſsion of ſinnes to another, a certaine ſpace after he hath repented, Chriſt ſayes, Whoſoeuers ſinnes yee remit, they are remitted vnto them, Ioh. 20.22. But the Lorde, Himſelfe abſolues a man in the ſame very time hee repentes: yet by order of nature, repentance is firſt, and prepares the heart to Remiſsion of ſinnes: Remiſsion of ſins followes, & applies grace to the ſoule prepared

vvith Repentance: Repentance & the preparation vnto grace beginnes vvith a ſadneſſe: thou vvho neuer hadſt a dolour in thine heart, thou neuer repentedſt. Turning vnto God, is with a verie heauineſſe in the ſoule, and a ſadneſſe for ſinne, not ſo much for vvrath and Hell, as that thou ſhouldeſt bee ſo vvicked, that thou ſhouldeſt haue offended ſo mercifull a Father: But the remiſſion of ſinnes, & the applying of grace is with an vnſpeakable joy: there the ſadneſſe of repentance is recompenſed: thou who waſt not ſad firſt, looke not to get that joy: thou vvho art not heauie, thou ſhalt neuer bee lighted: no joy for thee: if thou goeſt on in ſinne, wantonly and merily: thou haſt gotten the joy that thou ſhalt get, thou ſhalt neuer get joye but the joye of ſinne. A true Chriſtian is joyfull, and ſad through Repentance, and joyfull through remiſſion of ſinnes, thou ſhalt weepe ere thou laugheſt, thou ſhalt lament, ere thou rejoyceſt: No joy to a faithfull ſoule, but after ſadneſſe, and all the joye of a ſinner is preſſed out of ſadneſſe, as the wine out of the berrie. So the heart of a ſinner, muſt be firſt preſſed, contrite and broken, and then joy muſt be preſſed out thereof like juice, and then the greater contrition, and the greater ſadneſſe, the greater joye ſhall follow. So long as thou remaineſt in this worlde, all thy joy muſt bee preſſed out of ſorrow: No, thou muſt not ſorrow for one day, or a yeere, but as thou art a continuall ſinner, ſo there muſt be a cōtinuall ſorrow. I giue thee a faithfull counſell: Be euer ſad: away with vaine hearted perſons, that haue no ſadneſſe: euer haue this dolour, and that is the right way to this joy. I doubt not, but ye that haue felt theſe thinges, knowe, them: Firſt, there muſt bee vnſpeakable ſighes, Rom. 8.26. and then vnſpeakable and glorious joye, 1. Pet. 1.8. And when wee come to Heauen, and haue laide off this burthen of ſinne, joy ſhall remaine euerlaſtingly with vs, ſadneſſe ſhall goe awaye, then our joy ſhall riſe no more out of ſadneſſe, but thy joy ſhall be ſincere, no ſigh, no teare then, all teares ſhall bee wiped awaye: Then as thou wouldeſt rejoyce, and finde joye, mourne heere a while, that all mourning may bee taken away: laugheſt thou nowe, haſt thou neuer a teare, then thou ſhalt mourne for euer, no laughing for thee, thou ſhalt be thruſt into Hel, where there is nothing but ſhouting and crying. So, as thou wouldeſt rejoyce ſincerely, without any ſadneſſe one daye, nowe get joy out of teares. Marke theſe things: not one ſillable of this ſhall fall to the ground. Well then,

we haue the neceſſitie of preaching, and in whoſe name we ſhould preach, and what wee ſhould preach: Firſt, Repentance, and then remisſion of ſinnes: beginne with preaching ſadly, but end joyfully, with that joyfull remisſion of ſinnes. Now, the third: to whome muſt this preaching bee? muſt it bee to the Jewes onely: No, it muſt bee more largely extended: To all nations: and what ſhould bee preached to all Nations: Firſt, Repentance: Next, remisſion of ſinnes: if Repentance ſhould bee preached to all Nations, then all Nations are ſinfull: Repentance teached to all, importes, that ſinne hath power ouer all the worlde: that infection hath poyſoned all that are come into the world, as Paul ſayes, All haue ſinned, Iew and Gentile, & all are cloſed vp vnder ſinne, none excepted, Rom. 3.23. and 11.32. What more? The preaching of Repentance to all Nations, importes, the great abundance of ſinne, and the largeneſſe of the dominion of ſinne. Againe the preaching of the Remisſion of ſinnes to all Nations, importes, that the grace of Chriſt is extended to all: As ſinne ſpread it ſelfe ouer all where, ſo grace is ſpread ouer all where. The righteouſneſſe of God by the Faith of Ieſus Chriſt, is vnto all, and vpon all that beleeue, Rom. 3.22. Againe, the preaching of Remisſion of ſinnes to all Nations, importes, that the ſuperabundance of grace before Chriſt came, grace was cloſed within the boundes of Iurie: but after that once CHRIST came and ſuffered, and roſe againe, and went vnto Heauen, then Heauen was opened, and grace was powred downe in ſuch abundance, that Iurie coulde not containe it, but it ſpred through the whole world. As it ſpred, ſo the preaching behooued to be ſpread, grace goes with the preaching: contemneſt thou the preaching, thou ſhalt not get one droppe of it, grace is diſperſed by the diſperſing of the preaching: take away preaching, no ſparke of grace: Woe bee to them, who reſtraine the preaching of ſuch abundant grace in this Lande, within ſo narrow boundes, and all for greedineſſe. Hell ſhall ſwallow vp theſe ſacrilegious perſons, who withholde the goods from the preachers of grace, if they repent not, ſay, this narrownes of the hearts of men, who hinder preachings, is not ſo much, a ſinne done againſt the poore people that periſh in ignorance, as againſt the grace of God: they will laugh at this nowe, but one daye they ſhall houle: O that flood of wrath, that ſhall bee heaped on them: this injurie is done to grace, it is a reſtraint of grace, and an impairing to the glorie of GOD, that is

through grace: woe to thee, woe to thee againe, that holds down the grace of God, and pinches it through thy default, thou ſhalt once curſe the time that euer thou didſt it: if thou reſtraineſt that grace, that ſhould bring poore ſoules to Heauen and ſaluation.
            But to goe forward: We haue heard the neceſsitie of preaching, in whoſe name we ſhould preach, what we ſhould preach, and laſt, to whome it ſhould be preached, to all Nations, euen, to the Gentiles. O! if we Gentiles ſhould not rejoyce, that mercie and grace is preached vnto vs, who were aliants from the grace of GOD. Now albeit this grace bee extended to all, yet there is a difference in order of preaching: for the Lorde ſayes, Beginning at Hieruſalem: As He would ſay: this preaching muſt firſt be preached at Hieruſalem, and beginne there: and before grace bee offered to the Gentiles, grace firſt of all muſt be offered to the Iewes. Grace pertaines firſt to the Iewes, they were the people of God of olde, and therefore they muſt haue their owne right: and then when grace is offered to the Iewes, grace is extended, and runnes abroade ouer all the earth. Paul ſayes to ye 
               Iewes: It was neceſſary, that the word of God ſhould firſt haue beene ſpoken vnto you, Actes 13.46. There is the order: yet the Lorde loues Hieruſalem, & forgets it not: Hieruſalem that crucified the Lord, the Lord forgets it not, the Lord will not caſt it away, but will ſend His Apoſtles to preach there firſt. O how loth was He to caſt away that Nation that He had choſen of olde, from among all Nations: a people that He hath once begunne with: O how loth will He be to caſt away that people: Scotland hath a proofe of this, I dare ſay it: had not bene the patience that the Lord beares vnto this Land, He had not ſpared vs ſo long, becauſe of the great contempt and diſdaining of the Goſpell. But aboue all the reſt, that Nation which the Lorde hath choſen from among the reſt, to be a peculiar people to Himſelfe, He will offer grace to it firſt: & therefore the Iewes got this honour firſt, to haue grace offered to them. And as grace in this life is offered to the Iew, ſo ſhall the Iew, get firſt glorie in Heauen. Paul Rom. 2.10. ſayes: Glorie, and honour, and peace ſhall be to euery man that doeth good, to the Iew firſt, and alſo to the Grecian. And as the glorie ſhall belong vnto the faithfull Iew firſt, ſo by the contrarie, the vnfaithfull Jew, ſhall firſt bee diſhonoured for the Apoſtle ſayes in the words immediatly preceeding: Tribulation and anguiſh ſhall bee vpon the ſoule of euery one that doeth euill, of the Iewe firſt, and next of the Grecian.
            
            
               But to ende heere: I beſeech you to ſtriue vnto vnfained Repentance, and to get an aſſurance of the remiſsion of thy ſinnes here, if thou wilt be honoured in this life by grace, and in the life to come, by glorie in Heauen: for neither grace nor glorie pertaines, vnto impennitent ſinners who lye like ſwine in ſinne, and delite in ſinne: But only to all penitent ſinners, where ſinne aboundes, grace and mercie ſuperaboundes, and that in the blood of Ieſus Chriſt. To whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all honour, and glorie, for euermore. AMEN.
         
         
            THE XLIV. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 48 Now yee are witneſſes of theſe things.
                  
                     
                        verse 49 And behold, I doe ſend the promiſe of the Father vpon you: but tarie yee in the citie of Hieruſalem, vntill yee be endued with power from high.
               
            
            
               AFTER that the Lord (belooued Brethren in Chriſt) in His fift appearing after His Reſurrection, by ſundrie euidences hath gone about to perſwade His Diſciples, that it was Hee, Hee vtters a ſweete Sermon for their inſtruction, wherein firſt Hee inſtructes and informes them in two neceſsities: the firſt is, that all thinges that befell to Him, as His Paſsion and Reſurrection behooued to befell vnto Him: the ſecond is, that as theſe things befell to Him of neceſsitie, ſo of neceſsitie theſe things behoued to be preached

in the world. Next, Hee giues them a direction to goe out, and to preach this Goſpell to the worlde. We haue heard alreadie of the two neceſsities: Firſt, that it behooued Him to ſuffer the death: and to riſe againe from death, becauſe theſe things were foretold of Him, in Moyſes, and the Prophets, and the Pſalmes: therefore of neceſsitie they behooued to come to paſſe. We heard thereafter of the neceſsitie of the preaching of theſe thinges. Profane men thinke preaching is for the faſhion, but they deceiue themſelues, for if there be a neceſsitie, that thou ſhouldeſt beleeue, that thou mayſt be ſaued: there is as great a neceſsitie that there ſhould be preaching of the word: for Faith is by hearing, and without hearing no Faith, no life, no ſaluation.
            In opening vp of this neceſsitie of preaching, we marked vnto you the particular circumſtances, that are ſet downe in the Text: Namely, firſt, in whoſe name this preaching behooued to be: to wit, in the Name of IESVS CHRIST: Next, whereof it behooued this preaching to bee: to wit, of Repentance, and Remiſsion of ſinnes: (for that is the ſumme of the Goſpel) Thirdly, to whome this behooued to be preached, not to the Iewes only, but to all Nations: and laſt, in what order this doctrine ſhould be preached: firſt, to the Iewes, beginning at Ieruſalem, and thereafter to the Gentiles. Now in the Text that we haue preſently read, the Lord comes to the ſecond part of His Sermon, wherein Hee giues direction to the Apoſtles, to bee Preachers, and witneſſes to the world, of all theſe thinges, promiſing againe to them that Spirit, which Hee had promiſed to them before His ſuffering, and that they might haue the greater ſecuritie, Hee giues them a commandement, not to depart from Ieruſalem, vntill they were endued with power and vertue out of Heauen.
            But to come to the wordes: after that Hee hath ſet downe the neceſsitie of preaching, Hee giues them a direction and charge, to bee preachers of theſe thinges vnto the worlde. Now, ſayes Hee, yee are witneſſes of theſe things: that is, Theſe things that yee haue heard and ſeene come to paſſe, according as they vvere foretolde: yee muſt not keepe them cloſe and ſecret with your ſelues, but yee muſt declare, preach and teſtifie them vnto the world.
            Nowe, it is not without great cauſe that the Lord directes, and ſendes them out to preach: for looke how neceſſarie it is, that the

word bee preached, as neceſſarie it is, that ſome bee directed, and ſent out by the Lorde to preach: for, How ſhall they preach, ſayes Paul, except they be ſent, Rom. Chapter 10. verſe 15. A man muſt not runne vnſent, but before hee preach: hee muſt haue a commiſsion from God. If we will enter in a particular conſideration, & marke all things ſet downe in this Sermon, we will finde there is nothing either concerning Chriſt Himſelfe, His ſuffering and riſing againe, or concerning the Goſpell of Chriſt, and preaching of it, or concerning the Miniſters & Preachers of the Goſpell falles out raſhly, or by fortoun & chance, but that all things come to paſſe by the determinate prouidence of God, & in a manner of neceſsitie: ſo that in reſpect of this prouidence they coulde not otherwiſe haue bene. We haue heard before, that there was a neceſsitie of Chriſtes death, & reſurrection, & that there was a neceſsitie of preaching, now here we ſee, that there is a neceſsitie of ſending of Miniſters: to preach the Goſpel, for there is no faithfull Miniſter, but he muſt haue his commiſsion of Him: God muſt make chooſe of him, & ſeparate him frō the common ſort of men, as Paul ſayes of himſelfe, He was called to be an Apoſtle, & put apart to preach the Goſpel of God, Rom. 1.1. So muſt it be with all faithfull Paſtors. It is true indeede, ſome wil preach, whō ye Lord hath not ſent, ſome wil run vnſent, & ſome wil preach to get honor, vantage or preferment to themſelues, but theſe are not faithfull Paſtours, but all faithfull Paſtours muſt of neceſsitie be ſent of ye Lord, & receiue their cōmiſsion frō Him. Now, if this be true, yt nothing concerning Chriſt, or His Goſpel, or the Miniſters yt preach, it falles out without ye determinate prouidence & counſel of God, it is as true, that none heares ye Goſpel preached without ye ſame prouidence. The ſpeciall prouidence of God, is no leſſe extended to the hearer, than to ye Preacher of ye Goſpel: ſo that the hearer as well as the Preacher is bound to glorifie God in His gracious prouidence, & in ye riches of His grace. Many oftentimes thinke that it is by conjecture, yt men come to ye Church, & heares the word preached: but ye faithfull man that hath felt the power of this word, in quickening His ſoule, & raiſing it frō death to life, is aſſured, yt the Lord had a ſpecial prouidence & care in making Him to heare yt word at ſuch a time, to his great comfort. But it would be marked, that albeit all ye Preachers of the Goſpel be ſent by God, yet all are not ſent after one manner: there is a great difference amongſt them, for ſome are ſent immediatly of the Lord Himſelfe,

without the miniſterie of men, as were the Prophets of olde, and here the Apoſtles: None of theſe were ſent by mens miniſterie, but it was only the Lorde Himſelfe, who ſent them, according to the good pleaſure of His will: ſome are ſent mediately by the miniſterie of men, as are the ordinarie Paſtours and Miniſters, in the Church this daye, who albeit they bee ſent by God, yet the Lord vſes the miniſterie of men in ſending of them. Nowe theſe men whom the Lord employes in this piece of ſeruice, to call and ſend others, ſhould not bee raſh, nor lay handes ſuddenly on any man, but they ought to be verie carefull, to take good heede vnto the Lords will, and conſider, and trie narrowly, whether it be the Lords will, to call ſuch and ſuch perſons to the Miniſterie, that ſo they may haue a good conſcience, that they haue ſought to conforme themſelues to Gods will. When Chriſt ſent His Apoſtles, He ſent them according to the will of GOD the Father, 1 Cor. 1.1. So whomſoeuer men call and ſend, they muſt call and ſend them according to the will of God the Father and the Sonne. But yee will ſay: Howe ſhall men knowe theſe men, whome the Lorde thinkes meete to be ſent? How ſhall they know, whether it be the Lordes will, to chooſe ſuch and ſuch men to His Miniſterie? I anſwere: The LORD hath ſet downe ſufficient markes and tokens in the Scripture, whereby wee may know them, whome the Lord would haue vs to ſend, He hath ſtamped them with gifts beyond the common ſort of men. If yee would know what theſe gifts and graces are, wherewith the Lord endues them: read 1. Timoth. 3, &c. & Tit. 1.6. In the which places ye will ſee, what properties the Spirit of God, requires to be in a faithfull Paſtor. Indeed, I grant, there are ſome of the properties rekoned out there, by the Apoſtle, that are common to other true Chriſtians with the Paſtour: As to be temperate, wiſe, holy, righteous, and ſuch other: but there are ſome other, that properly belong to a Paſtour: As, that hee bee apt to teach, that he be able to exhort with wholeſome doctrine, and conuince the gaineſayers, that hee haue skill to guide and rule the Church of God. Let them who haue power to call Miniſters, take heed vnto theſe properties, that they call not men to this High calling, vpon a priuate affection (which vice and corruption hath beene too common in all ages) but that they call them whom the Lord hath ſtamped with theſe graces, and pointed out as meete to vndertake this charge, that they may haue the better conſcience in

their proceeding. Yet before we leaue this, it would be conſidered who theſe were whom the Lord ſendes: were they wiſe men? were they ſuch, who conſtantly auouched Him, & profeſſed His Name? Were they ſuch men as deſerued much at His hand? Were they ſuch as were meete and ſufficient for ſuch a glorious calling? No certainely: For who is ſufficient for theſe things, ſayes the Apoſtle, 2. Cor. 2, 16. Wee are not ſufficient of our ſelues, to thinke any thing as of our ſelues, 2. Cor. 3.5. What manner of men are they then? Euen theſe who before His death and ſuffering were offended in Him, who were aſhamed of Him, and fled away: euen theſe who after His Reſurrection were ſo hard to beleeue, that He was riſen againe from the dead: for all the paines that the Lord tooke vpon them, men altogether vnmeete, and vnſufficient for ſuch an high and glorious calling, men, who by nature were fraughted with ſuch ſtuffe, as was directly repugnant to ſuch a worthie calling: and yet for all this, the Lord caſtes them not off, but ſends them to preach ſaluation to the world. He made them of darkneſſe to be light, to ſhine to the reſt of the world: for ſayes Paul, God who commanded light to ſhine out of darkneſſe, is He that hath ſhined in our heartes, 2. Cor 4 6. Our hearts are darke by nature, yet the Lord by ſhining in them, brings light out of darkneſſe: for as the Lord in the firſt creation, commanded light to come out of darkneſſe: ſo dayly in the new creation and regeneration: and namely, when Hee ſets a man in His Miniſterie, He makes light to ſhine out of darkneſſe. We haue a notable example of this, in the Apoſtle Paul, he had bene before, a blaſphemer, and a perſecuter, an oppreſſour, yet ſuch was the mercy & fauour of God toward Him, that for all this, He not only beautifies him with that common grace, to be a Chriſtian, and to get an aſſurance of the Remiſsion of his owne ſinnes, but alſo countes him faithfull to place him in His Miniſterie, to preach Repentance and Remiſsion of ſinnes to others.
            The world thinkes it an eaſie thing, to make a man a Miniſter, but if wee conſider what ſtuffe is in man, and how farre his nature is repugnant to that calling, wee will thinke that of all things in the world, it is moſt hard, and moſt painefull.
            It is an hard thing indeede, to bring a man out of nature, and make him a Chriſtian, but it is farre harder, to make a man a teacher of Chriſtians, and a diſpoſer of the

treaſures of grace, and of the ſecrets of God. Nowe, when I beginne to conſider what ſhould haue mooued the Lord to haue choſen ſuch perſons, and ſo vnmeete for ſuch an high calling, I thinke this chiefly hath beene it, that when the Apoſtles went out to preach Repentance, and Remiſſion of ſinnes, to others, and to exhort all perſons, howe grieuouſlie ſo euer they had ſinned, to come and to ſeeke mercie in Chriſt, they might propone themſelues, as examples of the ſuperaboundant mercie of God, and that they in their Miniſterie might declare, and make manifeſt the gentleneſſe and long ſuffering of God towardes all men, euen the greateſt ſinners in the worlde, and that by the proofe and experience that they found in their owne perſon, of the mercie of God in calling them, and placing them in that high calling, who before vvere ſo miſerable wretches: and ſo vpon their owne experience, they might the more eaſily perſwade, euen the moſt miſerable ſinners, to ſeeke for mercie and grace in Chriſt. When Paul preaches, Where ſinne aboundes, there grace and mercie ſuperaboundes: if hee had not found this by experience, and had not ſtoode for example hereof, hee would not ſo eaſily haue perſwaded ſinners of the exceeding greatneſſe of the mercie of God.
            But to goe forward: Becauſe this direction that He giues them, and this Miniſterie He calles them to, was very painfull and troubleſome, and ſo they might haue taken hardly with it: therefore in the words following, the Lord goes about, to encourage them, to vndertake it, and to diſcharge it chearfully: the Argument is of great force, Beholde, ſayes He, I will ſend the promiſe of my Father vpon you: that is, I will ſend vnto you the Holy Spirit Himſelfe, & with Him His extraordinarie giftes and graces: as the gift of prophecie, of working of miracles, of tongues, and ſuch other, that ye may bee the more able to diſcharge this calling, and to performe the worke I ſend you for, Hee calles this the promiſe of His Father, becauſe the Father long before by His Prophetes promiſed at the comming of the Meſſias, to ſend His Spirite in great abundance vpon them that beleeue. Yee may read this promiſe in ſundrie places of the Olde Teſtament, but chiefly in the 2. Chapter of the prophecie of Ioel, and the 28. verſe. In the last dayes, I will powre out my Spirit vpon all fleſh, and your ſonnes, and your daughters ſhall prophecie, your olde men ſhall dreame dreames, and your young men ſhall ſee viſions, and alſo vpon the ſeruants, and vpon the maides will I powre my Spirit, &c.
               
And of the accompliſhment of this promiſe, ye may read in the 2. Chapter of the Actes of the Apoſtles. Out of this place wee may marke firſt: That the things which the Father promiſed of olde to His Church, the Sonne in the appointed time accompliſhed them: the Father promiſed of olde the Spirit, and His graces, the Sonne in the fulneſſe of time ſendes the Spirit and His graces, and giues them to His Church: and for this cauſe the Spirit, and His giftes that is giuen to euery faithfull man, is called the meaſure of the gife of Christ, Epheſ. Chapter 4. verſe 7. And thereafter in that ſame Chapter ver. 11. the Apoſtle ſayes: That Chriſt, to the end He might fill all things, Hee gaue ſome to bee Apoſtles, ſome Prophets, and ſome Euangeliſts, and ſome Paſtours and Teachers: that is, He gaue all ſorts of gifts vnto His Church, that He might fulfill the promiſe of His Father: and all theſe giftes and graces, that we ſee are now in the Church, from whome came they, but only from the Lord Ieſus? This leade
                  •
                vs to an higher ground, that the Sonne hath receiued of the Father, all graces, and all the giftes of the Holy Spirit, together with the Holy Spirit Himſelfe: the Father hath giuen all firſt to the Sonne, and not to vs: for the Father loues the Sonne, and hath giuen all thinges into His hand, Ioh. 3.35. And, In Him are hid all the treaſures of wiſdome & knowledge, Coloſſ. Chapter 2. verſe 3. Yet there is an higher cauſe of this, to wit, that the Sonne only hath merited the Holy Spirit, with the fulneſſe of all His graces. No man euer merited any of them: for who can merite them, but hee who firſt receiued them. The Lord Ieſus receiued them firſt: wee haue none, but as He giues vs: Hee merited and purchaſed them to vs, with no leſſe price, than with the ranſome of His owne blood.
            Now wouldeſt thou know, how all theſe graces, that the Lord hath bough
                  •
                with ſuch a deare price, are communicated to thee, and made thine? I will tell thee: Not by any merite of thine own, for thou couldeſt merite nothing at the Lordes handes, but Hell and damnation: but it is of the free grace and liberalitie of the Father and the Sonne, that they are made thine: it is of this grace, that out of His fulneſſe we receiue grace for grace.
            When the Apoſtle, Coloſſ. Chapter 2. verſe 9. hath ſaide: In Him dwelles all the fulneſſe of the Godhead bodily: thereafter he ſubjoynes: And ye are compleete in Him: as if hee had ſaide, All this fulneſſe is made yours, of free grace, whilſt as by Faith yee take holde of Him.
            
               Conſider the wonderfull bountifulneſſe and liberalitie of the Sonne, to thee, who giues thee theſe graces freely, that Hee bought ſo dearely, and purchaſed with ſuch a worthie price: Yee know, ſayes the Apoſtle, the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that He beeing rich, for your ſakes became poore, that ye through His pouertie might be made rich. 2. Cor. 8.9.
            
            Now, ere I go forward, I marke another leſſon, that the Spirit of God pointes out clearely, in theſe words, for our inſtruction: for when the Lord ſayes, I will ſend you the promiſe of my Father vpon you, that is, the Holy Spirit, with His graces, He lets vs ſee, that without His Spirit, His preſence and aſsiſtance, a Miniſter cannot be able to doe any thing well in His calling, but that in the diſcharge of euery part of His calling, hee muſt bee aſsiſted by the Spirit. The Apoſtle Paul, when hee is telling what good ſucceſſe his preaching had among the Gentiles, he takes not the praiſe thereof to himſelfe, but he aſcribes all to the preſence of Chriſt, by His Spirit: I dare not, ſayes he, ſpeake of any thing, which Chriſte hath not wrought by mee, to make the Gentiles obedient in word and deede, Rom. 15.18. It is not with a Miniſter, as it is with a man in the ciuile policie: No, there is a great difference: for in the ciuile policie, a man by his naturall giftes, by his wiſdome, and quickneſſe of his wit, may doe ſome things without the ſpeciall aſsiſtance of the Spirit of Chriſt, but in the Church no man can doe any thing without the preſence of the Spirit, the man that hath not the Spirit, and His graces in ſome meaſure is altogether vnprofitable and vnmeete for the Lordes worke, for this cauſe, the Lorde makes a ſpeciall promiſe of this Spirit, to them whome He places in His ſeruice, becauſe their calling and function, in all reſpects is ſpirituall. Looke to experience, and ye will finde the trueth of this promiſe: There is not a faithfull Miniſter, but in ſome meaſure hee hath the Spirit of God, to bee powerfull with him in his calling, in ſuch ſort, that not himſelfe only, but others alſo, who ſee and heare him, will ſenſiblie perceiue and take it vp. The Apoſtle Paul, found ſenſibly the Spirit of God to be powerfull with him in his labouring in the Miniſterie, when hee ſayes, It was not I that laboured, but the grace of God, which is with me, 1 Cor. Chapter 15. verſe 10. And againe, when he ſayes, That hee laboured and ſtroue, according to His working, which worketh in him mightily, Col. Chapter 1. verſe 29.
            
            And on the other part, when hee ſayes to the Corinthians, Yee ſee

the experience of Chriſt that ſpeakes in me, which toward you is not weake, but is mightie in you, 2 Cor. Chap. 13. verſe 3. he importes, that as he himſelfe found the power of the Spirit within him, ſo they to whome he preached, found it by His Spirit.
            But I inſiſt not to bring in particular places, for if we conſider well the Epiſtles of Paul, vvee will finde many ſentences teſtifying to vs, that not only he himſelfe found the power of the Spirit in his Miniſterie, and the life of Ieſus working mightely in him, in the middes of his infirmities: yea, euen in death it ſelfe 2. Cor. Chapter 4. verſe 8. but alſo that ſame power was manifeſt vnto them that heard him. Naturall men thinke all is but ſcorne that is ſpoken of the Spirit, and of His power in the preaching of the Goſpell, they laugh at it, as if there were no ſuch thing: but the faithfull man findes, that it is not for nought, that Chriſt promiſed His Spirit to them whom Hee ſends, as alſo that vvithout that Spirit, no grace could haue bene wrought in their ſoules.
            Now in the laſt wordes of this Text, to aſſure them the more, that they ſhould receiue this Holy Spirit that was promiſed, the Lord commands them, That they goe not out of Ieruſalem, but that they tarie there, vntill they be endued with power from on high: that is, Vntill they haue receiued this Spirit that He promiſed to ſend vnto them: So in a manner, for their further aſſurance, He preſcribes to them a particular time, within the which they ſhould receiue the Holie Ghoſt. The Lord, commonly, when Hee makes a promiſe of anie thing to His owne, Hee will giue them ſome wa
                  •
               rand, to confirme and aſſure them, vntill Hee fullie performe His promiſe: for becauſe He knowes our weakneſſe and infirmitie. He giues vs as it were an earneſt pennie to ſtrengthen our Faith and Hope, vntill He pay the whole ſumme to vs for ſuch is our weakn
                  •
               ſſe, that albeit vve haue no more, wee cannot bee able long to depend vpon His naked word. It is true indeede, that the Lord ſometime, for the triall of the Faith of His owne, will charge them to reſt vpon His bare and naked word only, to beleeue His promiſe, Hee will giue no fur
                  •
               her aſſurance, as likewiſe for a ſeaſon it may bee, that they depend vpon His bare word: but it is as true, that this cannot continue long: for except as by Faith they depend vpon the worde: ſo alſo they haue ſome feeling and foretaſting of the thing promiſed, and ſome earneſtpennie and ſecuritie to aſſure them of the obtaining of the promiſe, their Faith will faile and

decay. So weake are we in Faith, ſo ready are we to miſtruſt, that we cannot ſtand nor continue, except wee bee vnderpropped and vpholden by ſome ſpeciall warrand from God.
            Now to end: One thing further may be marked in theſe words: The Lorde diſcharges the Apoſtles to goe out of Ieruſalem, vntill they haue gotten t
                  •
               is Holy Spirite, that Hee promiſed them. The leſſon is: A Miniſter ſhould not couet to goe to the worlde, to preach the Goſpell, vntill the time hee bee aſſured that the Holie Spirit accompanies him, and his trauells: for if the Apoſtles themſelues might not goe out to preach, vntill the Spirit were ſent vnto them, it is a fooliſh thing for any man, after them to preſume to doe it. But, alas, it is a thing greatly to be lamented in this age, that there are ſo fewe, that waite vntill they be accompanied with the Holy Spirit in their Miniſterie, and that ſo many goe raſhly to vndertake ſuch an high calling.
            Many vpon a conceite that they haue of their naturall giftes, their wiſdome, their quickneſſe, ingine memorie, eloquence, and ſuch other giftes will ſtart vp to the pulpet, and preach confidently to the people in the Name of Ieſus. But the Lorde in His juſt Iudgement, not only withdrawes all bleſsing from their labours, but alſo heap
                  •
               s ſhame and ignominie vpon them, and makes it manifeſt to the world, that He ſent them not, but they ranne vnſent: But thou who wouldeſt haue a good conſcience, who wouldeſt haue the Lord to bleſſe thy trauells in His Miniſterie, preſume not too farre of thy naturall giftes, how great ſo euer they be, but waite vpon the Lordes leaſure, vntill Hee preuent thee with His Spirit, and endue thee with power from on hie, and in the meane time be crying earneſtly for the preſence of that Spirit, who when Hee comes, will open thine heart, and looſe thy mouth to ſpeake with boldneſſe, and freedome in the Name of Ieſus. To whome with the Father, and that bleſſed Spirit, be all praiſe, and honour, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XLV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Then ſaid Ieſus to them againe, Peace be vnto you: as my Father ſent me, ſo ſend 
                        •
                      you.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And when He had ſaide that, He breathed on them, and ſaide vnto them, Receiue the Holy Ghost.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Whoſoeuer ſinnnes ye remit, they are remitted vnto them: and whoſoeuer ſinnes ye reteine, they are reteined.
               
            
            
               HITHERTO (beloued Brethren in Chriſt) wee haue inſiſted in the opening vp of that Sermon, that the Lorde vttered to His Apoſtles in His fift appearing after His Reſurrection, as it is ſet down by the Euangeliſt Luke, wherein, firſt. He lets them ſee, that it behooued Him to ſuffer, and to riſe againe from the death, becauſe it was ſo foretolde of Him, and that it behooued Repentance & Remiſsion of ſinnes to be preached in His Name, to all Nations, beginning at Jeruſalem. Next, He giues them a direction, to goe out to the world to be witneſſes and preachers of theſe things, albeit they were altogether vnmeet and vnſufficient, and had deſerued no ſuch thing at His hand, becauſe they were aſhamed of Him, and fled away at His Paſsion: yet He honoures them with this high calling then to encourage them the more chearfully to vndertake this calling, He promiſes to ſend vnto them the Holy Spirit, who was before promiſed to them by the Father, to accompanie them, and their trauells. And laſt, that

they might haue the greater ſecuritie, and aſſurance to receiue this Spirit, He giues them a commandement not to depart from Ieruſalem, vntill they finde His promiſe performed vnto them, and vntill they were endued vvith power from on high.
            Thus farre vve haue heard out of Luke of this Sermon: Now in this Text that vve haue read▪ 
               Iohn followes out cheifly ye latter part of the Lord, concerning the ſending out of the Apoſtles, and he inſiſtes therein more largely, and particularly than Luke does, marking eſpecially the things that vvere omitted by Luke: for he vvrote after him: Firſt, in theſe vvordes vve haue ſet downe a preface, to prepare their heartes the better to receiue the vvorde which Hee vvas to ſpeake vnto them: thereafter vvee haue the preaching, wherin firſt, He ſends out the Apoſtles to preach the Goſpel: Next, He confirmes them partly by giuing them the Holy Spirit, partly by arming them with power and authoritie.
            But to come to the words: Iohn ſayes, that before He ſent them out, He ſaid againe to them, Peace be vnto you. Before, at the firſt meeting with them, this was His ſalutation, Peace be vnto you: Now He repeates theſe wordes againe. Wherefore is this? It was to prepare their heartes to receiue the more reuerently and attentiuely, and with the greater comfort theſe things that Hee was to ſpeake to them concerning their charge to preach in His Name to the world. The man that would receiue the word of the Lord, eſpecially, the Goſpell of peace and conſolation, muſt haue His heart prepared with the aſſurance of peace, for the meſſage of peace and conſolation requires: Firſt, that the ſoule be prepared with peace, to the end, it may receiue the word with peace and joy: for except the ſoule haue ſome perſwaſion of peace, it can finde no comfort: and if we receiue the meſſage of peace, with a perſwaſion of peace, and vvith a joy in the ſoule, then the more vvee heare, the greater ſhall our comfort bee, the more ſhall vvee drinke in that joy of the Holy Spirit: The meſſengers of peace ſhould follow this example of the Lord: When they are to preach the Goſpell of peace, they ſhould prepare their heartes, that by foretelling that all their meſſage and the worde that they are to ſpeake tendes to peace, and likewiſe they who come to heare, ſhoulde haue their heartes prepared vvith ſome ſenſe of peace and joye, but ſuch a joye as followes vpon ſorrow for ſinne, and a ſenſe of their owne miſerie, and vvhich euer is accompanied with true Repentance:

for there is no true joye of a Chriſtian man in this life, but that which is conjoyned with Repentance and ſorrow for ſinne.
            Nowe, vvhen the Lorde hath prepared their heartes vvith this preface of peace, Hee comes to the Sermon: and firſt, Hee giues them a direction to goe out to preach the Goſpell: As my Father, ſayes he, ſent me, ſo ſend I you. Wee haue ſpoken ſome thing alreadie of this ſending out of the Apoſtles, in opening vp of the Lordes wordes, as they are ſet downe by Luke: and therefore heere I ſhall be the ſhorter in ſpeaking of it. Yee ſee the Lorde ſets downe this ſending of the Apoſtles, by vvay of compariſon with His owne ſending, I ſent you, euen as the Father ſent mee. This compariſon importes firſt, that the Sonne only vvas ſent immediatly by the Father, the Sonne only hath gotten this honour to be ſent immediatly by the Father. The Apoſtle ſayes, Chriſt tooke not this honour to Himſelfe, to bee High Prieſt, but Hee that ſaide vnto Him, Thou art My Sonne, this day haue I begotten Thee, gaue it Him, Heb. 5.5. And the Father by ſending the Sonne immediatly Himſelfe, gaue Him all power to ſend all others: ſo that all others are ſent by the Sonne, albeit not all after one manner, for ſome are ſent by Him immediatly, as the Prophets, & Apoſtles, ſome mediatly, as the Paſtors & the Teachers. Indeede, I grant, The Prophets and Apoſtles were ſent alſo by the Father, but they were ſent mediatly by the Father, & immediatly by the Sonne: & therefore Paul vſes to call Himſelfe, The Apostle of Jeſus Chriſt, by the will of God the Father: whereby he meanes, that immediatly he was ſent by the Sonne, & mediatly by the Father: the Sonne ſent the Prophets, and Apoſtles immediatly: & therefore it is ſaid, when He aſcended, vp to Heauen, He gaue ſome to be Apoſtles, and ſome to be Prophets, Eph. 4.11. Next, this compariſon importes, that the office of the Apoſtleſhip is not only lawful, but alſo that it is furniſhed with authority: for Chriſt, who ſent His Apoſtles, was firſt ſent by His Father, not only had Hee a lawful calling, but He had it with authority: euen ſo, all true Paſtors & Teachers in the Church, haue not only a lawful calling to preach the Goſpell, but alſo authoritie joyned with their calling, becauſe they are ſent by the Sonne, for it was the Sonne, that gaue ſome to be Paſtors & ſome Teachers, Eph 4.11 for albeit true Paſtors in ye Church be called by ye miniſterie of mē, yet they are ſent by the Son & therfore men haue their authoritie frō Him, for in a maner they repreſent His perſon, as the Son repreſented the perſon of His Father, &

was His ambaſſadour to the worlde: ſo they are ambaſſadours of the Sonne, and muſt repreſent His perſon. Men in this Lande deſpiſe the Miniſters of the Goſpell, and count moſt vilely of them, in reſpect of the baſeneſſe of their perſons: but they ſhoulde conſider, it is not with men, but with God, & Chriſt Himſelfe whoſe ambaſſadours they are, that they haue adoe: the obedience, or diſobedience, and contempt of the Paſtour, redounds directly to the Sonne: and the Father, and the Sonne counts it to be done to Himſelfe, and to the Father: for He ſayes: He that heares you, heares me, and he that despiſes you, despiſes me, and he that despiſes me, despiſes Him that ſent me, Luke 10.15. Thirdly, this compariſon lets vs ſee, who they are, that haue a lawfull calling in the Church, not euery one that hath a pretence and ſhew of outwarde calling, but only they vvho are called by them, vvho vvere ſent themſelues before. And therefore theſe only are lawfull Paſtours, who haue bene called by the Presbyterie, and fellowſhip of the Elders, who themſelues before, had a lawfull calling. The people and flocke haue no power to call a man to the Miniſterie, they may indeede nominate, and preſent a man, and giue their conſent: but the calling and admiſſion of a man to the function of the Miniſterie, belonges only to the Elderſhip and Paſtours, vvho before vvere called themſelues.
            But to goe forward. When He hath charged them to goe out to preach the Goſpell, becauſe it was a very weightie and painfull charge, therefore He encourages, and ſtrengthenes them the more willingly to vndertake it: Firſt, by beſtowing vpon them the Holy Spirit, and His graces: Next, by arming them with power and authoritie. To come to the firſt: it is ſaid, When Hee had ſaide this, Hee breathed on them, and ſaide vnto them: Receiue the Holy Ghost. In giuing to them the Holy Spirit, He vſes an outward and viſible ſigne, Hee breathes vpon them: for this breathing vpon them, was not the ſending and giuing of the Holy Spirit it ſelfe, but it was an outward ſigne and Sacrament, to repreſent, to ſignifie and aſſure them of the giuing of the Holy Spirit, the outward breathing vpon them, was a ſigne of the inward breathing of the Holy Spirit vpon their ſoules, and a ſigne verie fit and conuenient to expreſſe the thing ſignified for the wind ſerues very well to repreſent the Holy Spirit, and is vſed for that ſame purpoſe by the Lorde Himſelfe, Ioh. 3 8. Th
                     •
                   wind bl
                     •
                  wes where it listeth, &c. But it would be marked, that the Lord vſes not only the bare and naked ſigne: No, that could haue

profited them very litle, but to the ſigne He joynes words, telling the meaning of it, He ſayes: Receiue the Holy Ghost. For the Lorde in all Sacraments vſes commonly to joyne the word to the Sacrament: As in Baptiſme, and the Lords Supper: to the end, that not only Hee may declare and open vp the meaning of the ſigne, but alſo to worke, and confirme Faith in mens heartes, that ſo the Sacrament may be powerfull and effectuall in them, for the outward ſigne alone is not able to worke Faith in the ſoule, but it is the word chiefly, that workes Faith, the worde is the life of the Sacrament: and therefore, except the word be joyned with the outward ſigne, it cannot bee a true and effectuall Sacrament: Nowe it is to be conſidered, that this breathing of the Lord vpon His Apoſtles, was not a thing that Hee would haue to bee kept ordinarily in His Church, but it is an extraordinarie ſigne vſed extraordinarily by the Lorde, in the ſending out of extraordinarie men, the Apoſtles, to an extraordinary calling, whereby the Lord at that time endued them with extraordinarie graces neceſſarie for that great calling. And therefore fooliſh and damnable is the practiſe of the Pope, his Cardinalls, and his Biſhops, which they vſe in ſending out their ſhauelings into the world: for when they admit them, with their vile and ſtinking mouths, they breath vpon them, and ſay, Receiue the Holy Ghoſt, filthily abuſing this action of the Lord, as if it lay in their hands, with their breathing to giue the Holy Spirit: whereas the Lord hath reſerued this power to Himſelfe alone, and communicates it not to any man: they are but counterfaiters of ſuch things as the Lord will not haue to bee counterfeited, for this His action in all pointes was extraordinarie: and therefore ought not to be vſed ordinarily: but I leaue them to their owne vanitie.
            A queſtion may bee heere mooued: How agrees this doing of Chriſt, on His Diſciples, and giuing them the Holy Ghoſt, recorded here by Iohn, with the wordes that we heard before out of the Goſpell of Luke▪
                where the Lord ſayes: Beholde I doe ſend the promiſe of my Father vpon you, but tarie in Ieruſalem, vntill ye be endued with power from on high: Which wordes importe, that at this fift appearing to His Diſciples, which is one with this that John recordes, He gaue them not the Holy Ghoſt▪ but only promiſed to ſend H
                  •
               m to them: I anſwere: Both theſe places agree well enough together, for in Luke the Lord promiſed to ſend His Spirit with His graces in a full meaſure vpon them, which promiſe indeed hee performed on

the daye of the Pentecosts, when they beeing gathered together, there appeared vnto them clouen tongues, like fi
                  •
               e, and ſate vpon each one of them, and they were all miraculouſly filled with the Holy Ghoſt, Act. 2.1. But the Lord heere, only giues them the Holy Ghoſt, and His graces in a ſmall meaſure▪ to be as it were a beginning of that full accompliſhment, which they were to receiue in the daye of the Pentecoſte: for wee may not thinke, that the Holie Spirit, and all His graces were giuen fully and compleetely to the Apoſtles at one time: No, but they were giuen piece and piece, & by degrees: for firſt, they got the fruites of the Spirit, when the Lorde was conuerſant with them in the fleſh▪ in the dayes of His infirmitie: Next, after He roſe from the death, they receiued them in a greater meaſure, as we may ſee in this place of Iohn: and laſt, after the Lordes aſcenſion, Hee powred downe in abundance His Spirit, with all His graces, according as He had promiſed to them, Luke 24.49. and was long before foretolde by Ioel, Chap. 2. verſe 28. But why would Hee not giue them the Holy Spirit, and His graces in a full meaſure at the firſt? Becauſe there behooued to be a certaine proportion and correſpondence betweene the Head and the members: the Lord Ieſus was their Head, they were members of His body: ſo long as He was not fully glorified Himſelfe, it was no reaſon, that they ſhould haue receiued the fulneſſe of grace, but when He was fully glorified, He filled them abundantly with grace, Epheſ. 4.10. The Lord now glorified in the Heauens, hath ſtore and abundance of grace to giue to His Church, but our heartes are not prepared to receiue grace: wee offend Him continually with our ſinnes, and grieue His Holy Spirit, for this is the laſt age of the world, wherein ſinne aboundes, and th
                  •
               refore, that vve are not ſo skant of grace, the fault is not in the Lorde▪ there is no ſcarcitie nor want of grace with Him, but the fault is in our ſelues, who entertaine ſinne in our heartes, whereby wee baniſh grace out of them, and makes the Spirit, who ſhould be our Comforter, to be a witneſſe againſt vs in that great day of the Lord. Now after that the Lord hath encouraged His Apoſtles, by giuing them His Holy Spirit, and His graces, in the words following, to make them the more willing, He armes them with power, and au
                  •
               ho
                  •
               itie, before He ſend them out, He ſayes: Whoſoeuer ſi
                     •
                  nes ye remit, th
                     •
                  y are remitted vnto them, and whoſoeuer ſinnes ye retaine, they are reteined: As if Hee had ſaid to them, I will not ſend you out powerleſſe, with a fectleſſe

worde in your mouth, but to the end ye may the better diſcharge your commiſsion, I enarme you with power, I will giue you power to binde and looſe, to forgiue ſinnes, and retaine ſinnes. The Lord ſendes none out to his warfare, till firſt Hee furniſh them with weapons and armour. But what weapons are they? Euen ſpirituall weapons. Paul ſayes, The weapons of our warfare, are not carnall, but mightie through GOD, to caſt downe holdes, &c. 2. Cor. Chapter 10. verſe 4. Hee hath giuen them power, to diſcharge their calling. Yee may reade of this power at great length, Matth. Chapter 16. verſe 19. When the Lord ſpeaking to Peter, in his perſon ſayes to all the Apoſtles: I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, and whatſoeuer thou ſhalt binde vpon earth, ſhall be bound in Heauen, and whatſoeuer thou ſhalt looſe on earth ſhall be looſed in Heauen. And Matth. Chapter 18. verſe 18. the Lord ſayes to all his Apoſtles, Whatſoeuer ye binde on earth, ſhall be bound in Heauen, and whatſoeuer yee looſe on earth, ſhall be looſed in Heauen. So yee ſee, the Lord giues them this power, before His ſuffering, and now after His Reſurrection, He renewes it againe. Nowe, wee muſt not thinke, that this power was giuen only to the Apoſtles, and their Miniſterie, which was then extraordinarie: No, but it is giuen alſo to the ordinarie Paſtors, and their ordinarie Miniſterie, to continue with them to the ende of the world.
            Nowe, Brethren, becauſe this power which the Lord giues to His Miniſterie, is a matter of great importance, and ſerues much for our inſtruction. Wee ſhall inſiſt ſomewhat more largely in ſpeaking of it: Firſt, What are the meanes, whereby this power is practiſed and put in execution. The meanes are two: the firſt is, the preaching of the worde, the preaching of the Law, and the preaching of the Goſpell. The ſecond is, Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline, vvhich ought to be conjoyned with the preaching of the word, & ſhould follow after it. But wherein is this power placed? Standes it in this, that the Paſtor himſelf ſhould reteine or forgiue mens ſins? Is this the proper effect of the Miniſterie? No, the Paſtour himſelfe hath no power, to forgiue or reteine ſinnes, becauſe that belongs only to God Himſelfe, and cannot be communicated to any creature. The Phariſes themſelues acknowledged this: for when CHRIST ſaide to the ſicke of the Palſey: Sonne, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee, they counted Him a blaſphemer: for ſay they: Who can forgiue ſinnes, but GOD oly, Marc. Chapter 2. verſe 5. &c.
               
And the Lord ſayes himſelfe, Eſay 43.25. I, euen I am Hee that puts away thine iniquities for mine owne ſake, and will not remember thy ſinnes. This is ſo proper to the Lord, that He will not giue this power to any fleſh, becauſe it is a part of His glorie: and He ſayes, J will not giue my glorie to another, Eſay 48.11. And good reaſon it is, that this power of forgiuing and reteining of ſinnes belong only to Him: for all ſinne, properly is againſt the Majeſtie of GOD Himſelfe: for Iohn ſayes, Sin is a tranſgreſsion of the Law of God: Therefore Dauid, when He had ſlaine 
                  Ʋriah, & had committed adulterie with Bathſheba his wife, he ſayes to the Lord: Against thee, againſt thee only haue I ſinned, & done euill in thy ſight, Pſal. 51.4. So this ſtands ſure, that properly it is a thing belonging to GOD only to forgiue and reteine ſinnes, to binde and to looſe: that is, to pronounce the ſentence of remitting and reteining of ſinnes. Then wherein ſtands this power that Chriſt hath giuen to His Paſtours and Miniſterie? I anſwere: It ſtands in the promulgation and proclaming in the earth of that ſentence that is alreadie paſt, & giuen out in ye Heauens: for this is manner of ye Lords dealing with men, Hee will not lift them vp to Heauen immediatly, & make them to heare ye ſentence of remitting or reteining of ſinnes pronounced there by Himſelfe: No, but He abaſes & demits Himſelf to vs, & by His Miniſtry, He comes down, as it were out of Heauen to vs, & by His Miniſterie He intimates & proclames to vs, in the earth that ſentence, which alreadie He hath pronounced in the Heauens, and that either to our comfort and conſolation, if it bee the ſentence of remiſſion of ſinnes, or els to our griefe and downecaſting, if it be the ſentence of reteining of ſinnes. And if wee deſpite and contemne this Miniſterie, wherein God abaſes and demits Himſelfe vnto vs, and by the which, as the Apoſtle ſayes, 2. Cor. 5.20. He prayes vs to be reconciled vnto Him, we can haue no warrand, nor aſſurance of the remiſſion of ſinnes, not of ſaluation. Then yee ſee, that this power that the Lord giues to this Miniſterie, ſtands in the proclaming & declaring of that ſentence which is alreadie paſt, and pronounced in the Heauens, and the words that the Lord vſes here, if we marke them w
                  •
               ll, import this ſame meaning: for He ſayes, Whoſoeuer ſinnes ye forgiue, they are forgiuen ſpeaking in the time bypaſt, as if Hee had ſaide, this is a thing alreadie done, the ſentence is alreadie pronounced in the Heauen: as for you who are my Miniſters, ye only intimate & proclame in earth that ſentence, which is alreadie paſt in Heauen: & He ſayes

on the other part: Whoſoeuer ſinnes yee reteine, they are reteined, vſing the time bypaſt, as if He had ſaid, the ſentence of reteining of their ſins is already pronounced in Heauen, & ye only intimate & declare on earth ye ſentence which already is paſt in Heauē. Now hauing conſidered wherein this power conſiſts, we ſhal let you ſee, what ſort of power it is: This power that the Lord hath giuen to His Miniſterie, either extraordinarie, as the Apoſtles had, or ordinarie, which the Paſtours haue, is not a Kingly power, not ſuch a power as is giuen to Kings & Rulers in the world: No, it is only a miniſteriall power. Let a man, ſayes Paul, ſo thinke of vs, as of the Ministers of Chriſt, 1. Cor. 4.1. And againe, He ſayes: We haue not dominion ouer your Faith, but we are helpers of your ioy, 2. Cor. 1.24. yet it is a power, & ſo the Apoſtle calles it, 2. Cor. 13.10. According to the power which God hath giuen me, to edification, and not to deſtruction. And, a glorious Miniſterie, 2. Cor. 3.9. And as the word of God calles it a power, ſo alſo the conſciences of men finde it to bee a power, Therefore, the Apoſtle ſayes, 2 Cor. 13.3 Ye ſeeke experience of Chriſt, that ſpeaketh in me▪ which toward you is not weake, but is mightie in you. And if we will compare it with the ciuile and kingly power, we will finde it in this reſpect to be preferred to the ciuile power: that whereas the ciuile power is extended only ouer the body, the life, and goods temporall, this power of the Miniſterie, is extended to the ſoule, to the ſpirituall graces of the ſoule, and life euerlaſting: and therefore it is called by the Apoſtle, the Miniſterie of the Spirit, and of righteouſneſſe, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9.
            
            Now, to end ſhortly: There may be a queſtion moued: When the Miniſter either remittes ſinnes, or reteines ſinnes, vpon earth, how ſhall he be aſſured, that ye Lord hath not remitted or reteined them in Heauen: for it becomes the Herauld or Meſſenger, to make intimation of nothing, but of that whereof he hath a ſpeciall warrand from the Iudge: otherwiſe hee cannot haue a good conſcience in his intimation: then how ſhall the Paſtour knowe Gods ſentence pronounced in Heauen, that hee may haue a good conſcience in his proceeding? To this I anſwere: It is true indeede, the Paſtour hath none extraordinarie reuelation of that ſentence, vvhich is paſt in Heauen, but all the warrand that the Paſtour hath, is ordinary, wrought by the Spirit, accompanying His own word, vvhich He left in vvrite vnto vs, and the Paſtour gets this vvarrand out of the vvord, by the applying of the generall ſentences of the vvorde, to particular perſons, according as they finde their diſpoſition

and behauiour, and by this meanes, gets ſuch a ſufficient warrand out of the vvorde, as his conſcience may reſt vpon. As for example: to ſpeake firſt, of the ſentence of the Remiſſion of ſinnes: Before the Paſtour abſolue a man, and remit his ſinnes, he lookes firſt to the generall ſentences ſet downe in the worde, that may be his warrand, as namely, that ſentence which the LORD Himſelfe vtters, Ioh. 3.13. Whoſoeuer beleeues in the Sonne of God, ſhall not periſh, but haue euerlasting life.
            
            Nowe, to Faith in Chriſt, joyne Repentance, for the Goſpell joynes Repentance and Remiſsion of ſinnes together, Luke 24.47. and ſayes, Whoſoeuer beleeues and repents▪ ſhall be ſafe. To this generall propoſition, the Paſtour will aſſume particularly: This ſinner repents and beleeues, whereupon he concludes, (declaring the ſentence that is alreadie paſt of Him in the Heauen:) therefore this ſinner hath his ſinnes forgiuen him, and he ſhall be ſaued. Againe, before the Paſtour binde a man, and retaine his ſinnes, hee lookes to this generall ſentence of the worde, Hee that beleeues not, and repents not, is alreadie condemned, Ioh. 3.18. Then he aſſumes particularly: But this ſinner beleeues not, neither repents: whereupon hee concludes, the declaration of the ſentence which is alreadie paſt in Heauen. Therefore this ſinner is condemned, and is bound in Heauen. The Lord worke in our heartes true repentance, and Faith in the Lorde Ieſus, that not only wee may heare the voyce of the Paſtour, abſoluing vs, but likewiſe our owne conſciences may aſſure vs of the Remiſsion of our ſinnes, through the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt. To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, bee all praiſe, and honour, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XLVI. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XX.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 But Thomas one of the twelue, called Didimus, was not with them when Ieſus came.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 The other Diſciples therefore ſaide vnto him, Wee haue ſeene the Lord: but hee ſaide vnto them, Except I ſee in His handes the print of the nayles, and put my finger into the print of the nayles, and put mine hand into His ſide, I will not beleeue it.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 And eight dayes after, againe His Diſciples were within, and Thomas with them. Then came Ieſus, when the doores were ſhut, and ſtood in the middes, and ſaide, Peace be vnto you.
               
            
            
               WEE haue heard hitherto (Welbeloued in Chriſt) of fiue ſundrie appearings of our Lord, after His Reſurrection: The firſt was, to Marie Magdalene: The ſecond was, to other women: The third was, to two Diſciples, as they were going from Jeruſalem, to Emmaus: The fourth was, to Simon Peter: The fift was, to the eleuen, aſſembled together in one place: In this fift appearance, the Lord hath a Sermon to His Diſciples, wherein firſt, He lets them ſee the neceſſitie that He ſhould ſuffer, and riſe againe, and that theſe thinges behooued to be preached to the world, and thereafter giues them a direction to goe out to

preach Repentance and Remiſſion of ſinnes to the worlde, in His Name: and to the end He may encourage them the more willingly, to vndertake this charge▪ Hee promiſes to giue them the Holy Spirit, with His graces, yt was promiſed before, & for their further aſſurance He enters them preſently in ſome meaſure in poſſeſſion of the Spirit: for Iohn ſayes, Hee breathed vpon them, and ſaide vnto them▪ Receiue the Holy Ghoſt, and then Hee enarmes them with authoritie and power to forgiue and retaine ſinnes. And Hee ſayes, Whoſo
                     •
                  uer ſin
                     •
                  es ye remit, they are remitted vnto them, and whoſoeuer ſinnes ye retaine, th
                     •
                  y are retained. Now in the words that we haue preſently read out of the Goſpell of Iohn, wee haue ſet downe a particular H
                  •
               ſtorie concerning Thomas and his incredulitie: this Thomas is he who is alſo called Didymus: we read of him, firſt that he was called and receiued to be one of the twelue Apoſtles, Matth. 10 3. Next, we 
                  •
               ead, that hee was offended, that the Lord purpoſed to returne againe to Iudea, beeing requeſt
                  •
               d by Martha and Marie, to come to Laz
                     •
                  rus their brother, and that he burſt out in words full of anger, a
                  •
               d i
                  •
               d
                  •
               gnation, ſaying, Let vs goe alſo, that we may die with Lazarus, Ioh 11.16. And laſt, wee haue in this place ſet downe the Hiſtorie, not only of his great incredulitie, but alſo of his ſtubburneſſe and wilfulneſſe therein: for neither did hee beleeue, neither had hee a will or purpoſe to beleeue. Of this doing of Thomas we may learne, that by nature there was no difference betweene ye Apoſtles of the Lord Ieſus, & other men, albeit moſte vile & moſt vnworthie: but grace made the difference they were as incredulous, as ſtubburne, as hard hearted as any other by nature, while it pleaſed God of His mercie, to open their he
                  •
               rtes, to make them to b
                  •
               leeue: And therefore, the Lord Ieſus, when He calles them to be Apoſtles, and ordaines them to preach the exceeding g
                  •
               eatneſſe of His mercy to others, He makes them to ſtand for e
                  •
               ſamples of that ſame mercie that they preach to others, that they might ye more eaſily perſwade others, & make them to come to ſeeke mercie in Ieſus. This was the ende why the Apoſtle Paul ſayes. The Lord ſhewed mercy on him who was a m
                  •
               ſerable wreth, and had called him to bee an Apoſt. Ieſus Chriſt, ſaies he ſh
                     •
                  wed on me all long ſuffe
                     •
                  ing, vnto the enſample of them which ſhall in time to come, beleeue in Him vnto eternall life, 1 Tim. 1.16. Thus much concerning the perſon of Thomas, we come next, to the Hiſtorie of his incredulitie, & firſt, to the occaſion of it: the reſt of ye Apoſtles & Diſciples who were aſſembled together

in one, to whom the Lord Ieſus had manifeſted Himſelfe, declares & preaches to Thomas ye Reſurrectiō of Chriſt, ye cauſe of their preaching thereof to him was, becauſe Thomas was abſent, when the Lord appeared to the reſt. What was the cauſe of his abſence it is vncertaine, neither will we curiouſly inquire, what it was. It may be, that after Chriſt His Maſter was apprehended, he kept himſelfe cloſe, & lurked ſecretly for feare of danger through the malice of the Iewes, and durſt not manifeſt himſelfe ſo ſoone, as the reſt: or it may be, that he was entangled with his owne priuate affaires, at that time when the reſt met together, and were ſpeaking of Chriſt, & His Reſurrectiō from the dead. Alwayes, what euer hath bene the cauſe of his abſence, wee may perceiue, that he was depriued of that grace and preſence of the LORD, which the reſt who were met together, found: Whereof we learne this leſſon: That whoſoeuer doe abſent themſelues from the aſſembly of the LORDS Sainctes, from theſe holy meetings, whereinto the LORD hath promiſed His owne bleſſed preſence, they procure no ſmall skaith and damage to themſelues, they depriue themſelues of ſome grace and comfort that the LORD miniſters to them that meet together. What euer be the cauſe of thine abſence, it cānot be but hurtfull to thee, albeit all cauſes of abſence be not alike hurtfull: for if thou be abſent by negligence, the leſſe is thy danger and loſſe but if wilfully, and vpon contempt thou abſenteſt thy ſelfe▪ then not only depriueſt thou thy ſ
                  •
               lfe of grace and comfort, but alſo thou procureſt the wrath of GOD vpon thee, for the contempt of His bleſſed ordinance. Therefore if wee would bee partakers of the grace and bleſsing that the LORD hath promiſed to theſe holy aſſemblies, we ſhould poſtpone our priuate adoes and the cares of the world, vnto theſe Holy exerciſes, and we ſhould embrace that counſell of our Sauiour▪ 
               Seeke firſt the Kingdome of Heauen, and His righteouſneſſe, and all other thinges ſhall bee miniſtred vnto you, Matth. Chapter 6. verſe 33. The man that makes this his firſt and his chiefe care, to ſeeke the Kingdome of God, when he hath gotten it, hee will finde by experience, that there is nothing neceſſarie for the ſuſtaining of this preſent life, that ſhall be inlaking to him. It is a fooliſh thing to be too carefull for theſe worldly things: for if thou ſeekeſt firſt the Kingdome of Heauen, all theſe things will be caſte
                  •
                to thee.
            Nowe to come to the preaching of the reſt of the Diſciples

to Thomas it is ſaid, The other Diſciples ſaid vnto him, We haue ſeene the Lord: They preach to Thomas, the Lordes Reſurrection: for the benefite they had receiued themſelues in Thomas abſence, they willingly communicate to him, they knewe and they ſawe, that the Lord was riſen, they tell this to Thomas: as they beleeued, ſo they wiſhed and deſired, that hee ſhould beleeue alſo. This Example of the Apoſtles we ought all to followe: When the Lorde communicates any ſpirituall benefite to vs, we ſhould not keepe it cloſe to our ſelues, but wee ſhould bee carefull to communicate it to the well of others. And thus doing we need not to feare that the grace ſhall be empaired and grow leſſe: No, by the contrarie, this communicating of the grace, and vſing of the talent, that the LORD hath giuen vs, is the hie, and readie way, to augment the grace, and to reape profite of the talent, that wee haue receiued. Albeit thou haſt taken great paines, and ſpent much time with the loſſe of ſome worldly goods to attaine to grace: yet that ſhould not make thee the more ſparing, in communicating it to others: It is the Lords will, that thou giue it to others freely, chearfully and liberally. Therefore trie and examine, whether thou wilt be willing and carefull to communicate to others the grace that God hath giuen thee: and if thou findeſt this, then thou haſt a good conſcience: and if thou findeſt it not, thou haſt no matter of rejoycing, becauſe thou doeſt not that which the LORD requires at thine hands.
            When the Diſciples haue informed Thomas, of the Lordes Reſurrection, looke howe Thomas takes with it: What is his part? In a word, hee beleeues not their report. His incredulitie was very vvonderfull: for albeit hee vvas compaſſed vvith ſuch a cloud of witneſſes, of faithfull witneſſes, of eye-ſeeing witneſſes, yet he beleeues not. Apparantly, euery one of them who had ſeene the LORD, courſe by courſe, had tolde him of the LORDES Reſurrection: and firſt, Marie Magdalene, who got this honour firſt, to ſee the LORD after His Reſurrection, hath witneſſed to Thomas, that ſhe ſaw the LORD, and ſpake with Him: Next, the other women, who did meete with Him, as they were returning frō the graue, teſtifies the ſame: Thirdly, the two diſciples who were going from Ieruſalem to Emmaus, informed him, that they did meete with Him in the way, & of the conference they had with Him: Fourthly, Peter, to whō alſo ye Lord had appeared, ſtroue

to perſwade him: and laſt, the whole number of the Apoſtles, and the faithfull there aſſembled, teſtified with one voyce, that they had ſeene Him, and ſpoken with Him: yet Thomas is nothing mooued with all theſe ſpeeches, their witneſſing, makes not him to beleeue, he remaines ſtill in incredulity. This example of Thomas, telles vs, that all the outward meanes that can be vſed, all the teſtimonies of the worlde, the teſtimonies of the moſt faithfull, moſt godly, moſt wiſe, of the eye-witneſſes, will not mooue the heart of a man to beleeue, will not perſwade him of any point of doctrine neceſſarie to Saluation, if there bee no more. What then will make a man to beleeue? Nothing but the Spirit of IESVS CHRIST: it muſt be He, that muſt witneſſe vnto our heartes, what is the will of GOD, concerning vs: it muſt be Hee, that muſt take away the vale, and illuminate our darke ſoules: it muſt bee Hee, that muſt open our heartes, as Hee opened the heart of Lydia, and make vs to beleeue. If this Holy Spirit of CHRIST, bee not preſent, a man will not beleeue his owne eyes, his owne ſenſes will not perſwade him. We ſawe the trueth of this before, in the reſt of the Diſciples, when the LORD ſtood in the middes of them, when they ſawe Him with their eyes, when they heard Him ſpeake face to face, they beleeued not: While, as Luke ſayes, the LORD opened their vnderstanding, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures, Luke Chapter 24. verſe 45.
            
            This doctrine would bee well marked, becauſe it ſerues to decide a controuerſie, that this day is betwixt vs and the Papiſts: The controuerſie and queſtion, which is betwixt vs and them, concerning the chiefe and principall witneſſe and judge: Firſt, of authenticke Scripture: Next, of true interpretation of particular places of Scripture: that is, How ſhall a man knowe, that this Scripture that wee haue, and wee reade, and vſe dayly, is the very worde of GOD, and not the worde of any creature: And againe, Howe ſhall a man knowe, what is the true meaning of any particular place of Scripture, and whether this or that ſenſe of the word, is to bee receiued. The Papiſtes affirme, that the chiefe and principall witneſſe & judge both of the one or the other, is the Church: they ſay, yt we could not be aſſured, that ye Scripture is authenticke, & yt it is ye very word of God, except ye church affirme it ſo to be, & likewiſe they ſay, yt we cannot be aſſured of ye right meaning of any place of ye Scripture, except it be by ye teſtimonie of ye ſame Church:

they teach, that we ought to beleeue, that the Scripture is the word of God, and that this or that is the true interpretation thereof, becauſe the Church ſayes ſo, & ſo they make the teſtimonie of the Church, to bee the chiefe, and almoſt the only Argument, that ſhould mooue men, to beleeue, that the Scripture is authenticke, and the word of God, and that this or that is the true and proper interpretation of any place of Scripture: for theſe are their common ſpeeches, The Church is aboue the Scripture, the Church is of greater authority than the Scripture: without the authority of ye Church, no man is obliged to beleeue, that ye Scripture is th
                  •
                word of God: the Church is ye ſupreme Iudge of ye right interpretation of the Scripture, & many ſuch others. But by the contrarie: Wee affirme, that the chiefe and principall Iudge, and witneſſe, both of the Scripture, that is, the worde of God, and alſo of the true interpretation of the Scripture, is the Holy Spirit, becauſe He only is able to perſwade mens heartes, He only is able ſo to teſtifie, that: He can mooue them to beleeue, Hee only is able to open the vnderſtanding of men, to make them to vnderſtand and take vp the right meaning of the Scripture. Then will the Papiſt object, Yee make the Spirit that is giuen to a priuate man, to be the Iudge, and witneſſe of the authentike Scripture, and the interpretation thereof, and it is an abſurde thing, to preferre the Spirit, ſpeaking by the authoritie of any priuate man, to the authoritie of the Church: I anſwere, It followes not, that we make the Spirit of a priuate man, to bee Iudge either of the one, or of the other, becauſe we affirme that the Spirit, who is Iudge ſpeakes in the Scripture, and by the Scripture: and by the Scripture, as by the moſte powerfull and effectuall meane, mooues men to beleeue: and therefore, that this Spirit, who is Iudge, is not the Spirit of a priuate man, but the Spirit of the Scripture it ſelfe: for this Spirit by the Scripture, teaches vs, that the Scripture is au
                  •
               henticke, and that it is the worde of God: and againe, this ſame Spirit by the Scripture, teaches vs, that this or that is the proper meaning of the Scripture, for the principall voyce of the Holy Spirit, whereby He ſpeakes to vs, is the Scripture, which this day is to vs in ſtead of the vine voyce of God Himſelfe, and ought to bee eſteemed, and embraced of vs, as if God Himſelfe ſpake to vs out of Heauen. As for the voyce of the Church (when I ſpeake of the Church, I meane not the Romane Church: for ſhe is but an adulterous Church,

and falſely clames to her ſelfe, the name of a Church, but I ſpeake of the true Church militant) it is not the chiefe meane, whereby the Holy Spirit vſes to perſwade men, but it is an inferiour meane, & of leſſe importance than the Scripture, neither hath it that force, to make men to beleeue, that the Scripture hath. But to leaue this, and to returne to the incredulitie of Thomas: not only, he beleeues not, but hee vtters great ſtubburneſſe in refuſing to beleeue, not only was hee incredulous, but alſo malitious, neither did hee beleeue, neither was he willing to beleeue: for he ſayes, Except I ſee in His handes, the print of the nailes, and put my finger in the print of the nailes, and put mine hande into His ſide, I will not beleeue it: he would not beleeue, except hee ſawe Him, except hee ſaw His hands, and His feete, except hee ſaw the print of the nailes, where with His hands and His feete were pierced, and except he had put his hand in the wound of His ſide, which one of the ſouldiers had pierced with a ſpeare. We may heere ſee his ſtubburneſſe and obſtinacie, that was joyned with his incredulitie: incredulitie is commonly accompanied with obſtinacie, and ſtubburneſſe, in ſuch ſort, that when the way is laide before vs, and the doore opened, whereby vv
                  •
               e may eſcape out of this bondage of ſinne, and thraldome of darkneſſe, wherein wee are kept captiues, yet wee refuſe to goe out of that bondage, and rather ſtriues more and more to thrall our ſelues to ſinne, and to holde our ſelues in the bands of darkneſſe. This contumacie and ſtubburneſſe in ſinne, is that poyſon, and that gall of bitterneſſe, that Sathan hath ſpued into the heartes of all the children of Adam, and this is that band of iniquitie, whereby, as by a ſtrong chaine we are ledde bo
                  •
               nd, as miſerable catiues, vnto eternall condemnation, except we be relieued from it, by the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt. Peter perceiuing the impietie and deuiliſh practiſes of Simon Magus▪
                he takes vp this to be the ground and fountaine of all, when he ſayes, I ſee, that thou art in the gall of bitterneſſe, and in the bands of iniquitie. The Lord ſaue vs, and free vs from this miſerable bondage, wherein we are by nature, yet if we conſider more narrowly the wordes of Thomas, we ſhall finde, that not only was hee incredulous, not only was hee ſtubburne, but alſo proud and arrogant, and contemned and deſpiſed all the reſt, in reſpect of himſelfe, eſteeming himſelfe onely to bee wiſe, and the reſt to be fooles, ſcorning their witneſſing, and report, as a fable, not worthie of credite, and a vaine dreame. An incredulous man,

that beleeueth not the trueth, is not only ſtubburne and obſtinate in his incredulitie, but alſo he ſwelles in pride, and ſeemes in his owne conceite to be only wiſe, contemning others as fooles: hee will count the preaching of the Croſſe of Chriſt, and of His Reſurrection, to bee but plaine follie: hee will count them that beleeue the doctrine of the Croſſe and Reſurrection of Chriſt, to be fantaſticke, and doated fooles: and yet in very deede, of all the fooles of the worlde, they themſelues are the greateſt, although they bee counted wonders in the worlde, for their naturall wiſdome.
            Therefore the Apoſtle ſayes, in the firſt Epistle to the Corinthians, the third Chapter, and the eighteenth verſe: If any man amongſt you ſeeme to bee wiſe in this world, let him bee a foole, that hee may be wiſe: hee ſayes not: if any man among you be wiſe (for he that hath not the wiſdome of God, and is not wiſe in Chriſt, he hath no wiſdome, he is but a very foole) but hee ſayes, If any man ſeeme to bee wiſe, in this worlde, let him bee a foole, that hee may be wiſe: that is, let him renounce, and forſake all carnall and worldly wiſdome, which is enimitie againſt God, Rom. Chapter 8. verſe 7. and can no more ſtand with the wiſdome of GOD, than darkneſſe with light, yet it would be marked, that Thomas ſayes not ſimply and abſolutely, that in no c
                  •
               ce he would beleeue, that Chriſt was riſen againe, but hee ſayes, Except I ſee in His handes the print of the nailes, &c. The wordes are conditionall, importing, that in ſome cace, and vpon ſome conditions hee would beleeue. There are two ſortes of contumacie and ſtubburneſſe in ſinne and vnbeliefe: the one is conditionall, and ſuch vvas the vnbeliefe of Thomas: the other ſort is abſolute, vvithout any condition, vvhen in no caſe, vpon no cauſe nor vvarrand vvill beleeue: and of this ſort vvas the ſinne and vnbeliefe of the Prieſtes and the Phariſes: for vvhen the ſouldiers that vvere appointed to keepe and guarde the ſepulchre came in to the towne, and tolde them, that IESVS CHRIST vvas riſen out of the graue: not only did they not beleeue, but alſo they ſtroue to keepe themſelues in ſuch vnbeliefe and hardnes of heart, that in no cace nor condition, they vvould ſuffer themſelues to bee reformed, & ſo they deteined the vvord of GOD, into vnrighteouſneſſe. There is a great difference betweene theſe two ſortes of vnbeliefe: The firſt ſort may obtaine mercie, Thomas obteined mercie, the LORD pardoned his vnbeliefe: The other ſort, verie

hardly can obtaine mercie, the Prieſtes and the Phariſes found no mercie, their vnbeliefe vvas laide to their charge, the LORD forgaue them not, but as they remained in vnbeliefe, ſo they periſhed in their infidelitie. The LORD ſaue vs from this curſed ſinne of vnbeliefe and infidelitie, and namely, from this abſolute vnbeliefe, that in no cace vvill ſuffer reformation: for through proceſſe of time, it brings on this ſinne againſt ye Holy Ghoſt, which neuer will be forgiuen neither in this world, nor in ye world to come. Now laſt, ere I leaue theſe words of Thomas, we may ſee, what is ye groūd & fountaine of this vnbeliefe, obſtinacie and pride of Thomas: the groūd of all was, he leaned too much to his groſſe & bodily ſenſes, to his ſeeing, feeling & handling, he makes his eyes & his hand to be ye ground of his faith. Thomas, indeede, failed not in this, that he deſired to ſee ye Lord with his eyes, & to handle him with his hands: for ye heard before, how ye Lord, by ye ſight of the eyes, & ye feeling of Him with their hands, perſwaded ye Apoſtles of the certaintie of His Reſurrectiō, Luke 24.39. & likewiſe we ſee, that ye Lord hauing regarde to ye infirmitie of His owne, pitying the weakneſſe of their faith, dayly in ye Sacrament teaches them by ye outward ſenſes, as by the ſeeing & taſting & handling of ye Elements. But herein Thomas ſailed, that he addicted & tied himſelfe ſo to his ſenſes, to his ſight, & to his handling, that he affirmed & profeſſed plainly, except he ſaw him with his eyes, & handled him with his hands, he would neuer beleeue, that ye Lord was riſen againe from the death, notwithſtanding of the witneſſing of ſo many, ſo godly, & ſo faithfull perſons, who euery one after another, teſtified of the Lords Reſurrection. Then marke it, B
                  •
               ethren: It is not vnlawfull for a man, to deſire to ſee the Lorde, euen with his bodily eyes: No, that deſire is lawfull and acceptable to God: for all the Sainctes that euer haue beene ſince the beginning of the world, deſired to ſee our LORD face to face: Manie Kings and Prophets haue deſired to ſee Him, and yet ſawe Him not, Luke Chapter 10. verſes 23.24. Abraham, the father of the faithfull deſi
                  •
               ed to ſee Him: and olde Simeon, who got a reuelation, that hee ſhould not depart, while he ſaw the LORD, earneſtly waited and thirſted for to ſee Him, Luke 2 25. So that it is a lawfull and acceptable thing, to deſire to ſee the Lord.
            But in deſiring to ſee Him, we muſt beware, that our faith be not ſo tied to the outward ſenſes, that we refuſe altogether, to beleeue,

except wee ſee the Lorde with our eyes, and handle Him with our hands: No, I ſay more, thou muſt be ſo farre from tying thy Faith to the outward ſenſes, that thou muſt not tie it to the very inward feeling of the ſoule: thou muſt not ſay, except I ay feele, I will no wiſe beleeue: for albeit, that at all times thou haue not a feeling, & findeſt not grace into thy ſoule, albeit thou findeſt not the Holy Spirite, who is the earneſt pennie of thy ſaluation, to be preſently working within thee, and ſealing vp thine adoption: yet, thou art obliged to relie and depend vpon the bare word, and naked promiſe of God, and ſo to ſeale in thy ſoule, that the Lord is true: for he hath made a verie ſmall progreſſe in Faith, that will not truſt in GOD, and depend vpon His naked worde, except ay hee haue ſome feeling of grace, of joy, of comfort, and of the Holy Ghoſt. The Sainctes of God many times, vvhen they had no feeling, depended vpon the worde of promiſe, and waited vpon the accompliſhment of it. Job, when he felt not the Lords fauour, but conceiued that the Lord was angrie with him, he ſayes▪ 
               Although thou ſlayest me, yet will I trust in thee, Iob 13.15. And Abraham, when hee ſaw none appearance, that the Lords promiſe concerning his ſeed could be performed: yet it is ſaid of him, That aboue Hope, hee beleeued vnder Hope, Rom. 4.18 Likewiſe, Dauid, vvhen he vvas in great danger of his enemies, and ſawe litle appearance of deliuerie, ſtill truſted in God, and depended vpon His promiſe: for he ſayes, I will reioyce in God, becauſe of His word, I truſt in God, and will not feare what fleſh can doe vnto me, Pſal. 56.4. It may be, that the Lord exerciſe thee with the conſcience of ſinne, and with the terrours of His vvrath, in ſuch ſort, that thou findeſt no ſenſe of grace, nor of His fauour: yet in this caſe, deſpare not, but by the example of the Sainctes, learne to depend vpon the worde and promiſe of God, till thou findeſt the performance of it, to the comfort of thy ſoule.
            Now to goe forwarde, and to end ſhortly: After that the Euangeliſt hath ſet downe after this manner, as ye haue heard, the hiſtorie of the incredulitie of Thomas
               ▪ hee comes to another appearing of the Lorde, after His Reſurrection, which is the ſixt in number: for of fiue wee haue heard alreadie, and this appearing, ſeemes chiefly to bee for Thomas cauſe. The time of this appearing is noted: It was eight dayes after: that is, from that day, in the which Thomas had plainely profeſſed, that hee would neuer beleeue, that the Lord was riſen, except that both hee ſawe Him, and felt Him, and

His wounds: and it was the eight day likewiſe after the Lords Reſurrection: for the former fiue appearings of the Lord, whereof we haue alreadie ſpoken, were al vpon the firſt day, in the which the Lord roſe from the dead. So, ye ſee, that Thomas (the ſpace of whole eight dayes interueening) remained in incredulitie & vnbeliefe. This example of Thomas, lets vs ſee, what is the diſpoſition of the ſoule of a man, after he hath committed a ſinne againſt the Majeſtie of God, after he hath once ſinned, he is wrapped vp in a ſenſleſſe ſecuritie, hee ſleepes ſound in his ſinne, there is a vale caſten ouer the eyes of his ſoule, that he cannot ſee ſinne in its own colour, hee cannot conſider the way wherein hee is walking, nor the judgement which he is drawing on his own head. Whereupon it falles out, that he proceedes from ſinne to ſinne, and either hee falles ouer againe in that ſame ſinne, which before hee hath committed, or in ſome other ſinne. Wee haue a proofe of this, in the perſon of Peter: for after that once he had denied his Maſter, hee ſlept in a ſenſleſſe ſecuritie, he made litle account of the great ſinne hee had committed: whereupon it came to paſſe, that ſoone after he falles ouer againe in the ſame ſinne of denying of the Lord: and alitle after being demanded, he denies Him the third time, and if he had bene oftener demanded, no doubt, but he would haue denied Him oftener, if the Lorde had not looked vpon him fauourably. The like alſo wee ſee in Dauid, albeit otherwiſe a man after Gods owne heart, after that he had committed that foule adultery, with Bathſheba, the wife of 
                  Ʋriah, hee is twitched with a griefe or remorſe, but lyes ſtill ſleeping ſecurely in ſinne, and ſo from adulterie with Bathſheba, hee falles in abhominable murther of 
                  Ʋriah, her husband, and after this, hee continued for a long ſeaſon, as it were benummed, and without a ſenſe of his ſinne, or feare of judgement: and as all ſortes of ſinne leaue ſome ſenſleſſeneſſe and induration in the heart, ſo chiefly, ſtubburneſſe and contumacie, in not beleeuing the knowne trueth of God, brings greateſt ſenſeleſſeneſſe and induration. An example of this: Paul lets vs ſee in the Gentiles, who followed not that light, that the Lord had left in nature, and which the Lord ſhew to them in the workes of His creation, that they might glorifie God, but repined againſt it: and therefore ſayes the Apoſtle, As they regarded not to acknowledge God, euen ſo God deliuered them vp vnto a reprobate minde, to doe thoſe thinges which were not conuenient, Rom. 1.28. Becauſe they would not glorifie

God, as became them to doe, there was ſuch a dimneſſe in their eyes, ſuch ſenſleſſeneſſe and blindneſſe ouertooke them, that they regarded not to doe the thinges that were moſt vnnaturall▪ 
               They past all feeling, and gaue themſelues ouer vnto wantonneſſe, to worke all vncleanneſſe euen with greedines, Eph. 4.19. And they had their conſciences burned as it were, with an hote iron, 1. Timoth. 4.2. It is a dangerous thing, once to fall in ſinne: for if the Lord leaue thee to thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt neuer ſtay, while thou r
                  •
               nne headlong to deſtruction. Therefore pray continually, that the Lord would looke fauourably vpon thee, and that He would lay holde on thee, that thou fall not away from Him: and if thou haue fallen, that Hee would put out His hand, and draw thee to Him againe, that thou mayeſt returne, and be ſaued.
            Thus for the time of the ſixt appearing of the Lord: now He appeares after ye ſame maner, that He had appeared to the Diſciples before: For the Diſciples beeing within, and Thomas with them, Ieſus came, the doores beeing ſhut, and ſtood in the middes. Of this manner of appearing, we haue ſpoken at length before: & therefore we will ſpeake no more of it: When He is come in among them, He vſes that ſame forme of ſalutation, which He vſed before: for He ſaid, Peace be vnto you. We paſſe by this ſalutation alſo, becauſe wee haue ſpoken of it already: No queſtion, it was a very effectuall & powerfull ſalutation: becauſe Hee that wiſhed peace vnto them, was the author of peace. Only one thing I ſhall marke, and ſo I ſhall ende: I ſee, there is nothing that is able to waken the ſoule of a ſinner, that is lying ſleeping in ſinne, and wrapped vp in a ſenſl
                  •
               ſſe ſecuritie, but only the gracious preſence of the Lord Ieſus. What was it that wakened Peter, when he had thriſe denied his Maſter? It is ſaid, The Lord turned backe, and looked vpon Peter, whereupon, immediatly his heart ſmote him, and hee went out, and wept bitterly, Luke 22.61▪ 62. How was Dauid wakened, when he had long lien in his ſinne, without any remorſe? How, but by the fauour of Ieſus Chriſt, the Sonne of God, who pitied Him, and ſent His Prophet Nathan vnto him,: for this yee muſt vnderſtand, that all the Prophets, which ſpake of olde to the Fathers, were ſent immediatly by Ieſus Chriſt, and ſpake by His Spirit, 1. Pet. 1.11. and 3.19. And what was it that wakened Thomas out of his ſecuritie? What mooued him that was ſo obſtinate in his incredulitie to beleeue? What, but the gracious preſence of Chriſt? for except that mercie of

God in Ieſus Chriſt, waken vs out of ſecuritie, all the Iudgements of God, that euer He hath powred out vpon any from the beginning, will not mooue vs, the moſt fearfull and terrible examples of His wrath vpō others, will not waken vs. Iudas lets vs ſee the proofe of this in his Epiſtle, when he tells that they who turned the grace of God into wantonnes, were not mooued to abſteine from ſinne, by the example of that fearfull and terrible Iudgement of God, which ouertooke Sodome and Gomorrhe, and the cities about them, but that they likewiſe, notwithſtanding of theſe great Iudgements, continued in the like ſinnes, and defiled the fleſh, Iude 7, 8. Then, ſeeing, we are naturally ſleeping in ſinne, and none outward thing in the worlde, no judgement, neither temporall nor ſpirituall ſeazing on vs, in neuer ſo high a meaſure, can bee able to waken vs. Let vs pray earneſtly, that the LORD would preuent vs with His owne gracious preſence, that wee ſleepe not, while death oppreſſe vs. The Lord make euery one of vs, to finde this preſence of the LORD Ieſus. To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praiſe, and honour, for euermore. AMEN.
         
         
            THE XLVII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     LVKE CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27 After ſaid He to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and ſee Mine hands, and put foorth thine hande, and put it into my ſide, and be not faithleſſe, but faithfull.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Then Thomas ſaide vnto Him, Thou art my Lord and my God.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Ieſus ſaide vnto him, Thomas, becauſe thou hast ſeene me, thou beleeuest: bleſſed are they that haue not ſeene, and haue beleeued.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 30 And many other ſignes alſo did Ieſus in the preſence of His Diſciples, which are not written in this booke.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 But theſe thinges are written, that ye might beleeue, that Ieſus is that Chriſt, that Sonne of God, and that in beleeuing yee might haue life through His Name.
               
            
            
               AFTER that we had ſpoken at length (Well beloued in Chriſt) of the firſt fiue appearings of the Lord after His Reſurrection: wee beganne the laſt day, to ſpeake of this ſixt appearing, the occaſion whereof was premitted by ye Euangeliſt John, to wit, the abſence of Thomas from the reſt of the Apoſtles, when the Lord appeared vnto them, and his great incredulitie when they tolde him, for notwithſtanding that many faithfull witneſſes teſtified vnto him, that the Lord was riſen, and had appeared vnto them, that they ſawe Him with their eyes, heard Him with their eares, and handled Him with their hands: yet ſuch was the incredulitie of Thomas, that he profeſſed plainly, that in no cace he would beleeue, except hee ſaw in His hands the print of the nailes, and put his finger in the print of the nailes, and put his hande into His ſide. To remedie this incredulitie of Thomas, the Lord appeares now the ſixt time, eight dayes after His former appearings, when His diſciples were met together, and Thomas with them, Ieſus came the doores beeing ſhut, and ſtood in the middes of them, and ſaluted them after the accuſtomed manner, ſaying vnto them, Peace be vnto you.
            
            Now in theſe words which we haue preſently read, we haue the Lordes conference with Thomas, firſt: Next, in the laſt wordes of the Chapter, the Euangeliſt meetes mens curioſitie, affirming, albeit all things that Ieſus did, were not written in this Goſpell, yet it was not vnperfect: becauſe all things were written that were neceſſarie to life and ſaluation. In the conference that the Lord hath with Thomas, Hee meetes him not roughly, and rigorouſly, as his incredulitie had juſtly deſerued, but with lenitie and meekeneſſe, Hee endeuoureth to make him to beleeue, by granting him his deſire. Thomas had plainly profeſſed, that except hee ſawe the print of the nailes, and put his hande into His ſide, hee would not beleeue:

therefore the Lord ſayes, nowe, Thomas, Put thy finger heere, and ſee Mine handes, and put foorth thine hande, and put it in My ſide, and bee no more faithleſſe, but faithfull. See the gentleneſſe of the LORD, and howe louingly Hee ſpeakes to him: Thomas was not onely incredulous, but alſo he was ſtubburne, obſtinate, proud and arrogant, hee counted others fooles, that beleeued, hee profeſſed, that in no cace hee would beleeue, without ſeeing and feeling of the LORDES wounds.
            Now the LORD grantes this to Thomas which he deſired, albeit hee was vnworthie of it: yea, the LORD inuites him, and louingly bids him put his hande in the print of the nailes, and in His ſide: for the LORD ſpeakes not this in bitterneſſe and tauntingly to Thomas: for the wordes that He ſubjoynes, Be not faithleſſe, but faithfull, teſtifie, that Hee ſpake of loue, and in lenitie to Thomas, to make him to beleeue.
            It is true, indeede, the wordes containe a ſort of reproofe and rebuking of Thomas for his incredulitie, but this reproofe is ſo tempered, and ſeaſoned vvith ſuch lenitie, and meekneſſe, that ſcarc
                  •
               ly can it bee perceiued and taken vp. This dealing of the LORD with Thomas, lets vs ſee, how great is the mercie, gentleneſſe and long ſuffering of the LORD IESVS towards ſinners, whoſe ſinnes deſerue nothing but wrath & judgement: ſuch is His mercie and meekneſſe towards ſinners, that to the end Hee might pleaſe vs: Paul ſayes, Rom. 15.3. Hee would not pleaſe Himſelfe: He ſuffered ſhame & ignominie for vs, He ſuff
                  •
               red dolour & paines for vs, He died for vs, and after Hee roſe, He ſpared no trauell to make the Apoſtles bel
                  •
               eue: ſundrie times did He appeare to them, & now He appeares for Thomas cauſe, albeit he had runne very far in the courſe of infidelitie, & ſtubburneſſe, yet He ſtriues by granting him his deſi
                  •
               e, to perſwade him, and make him to beleeue. The Lords gentleneſſe and long ſuffering is very great towardes all men▪ euen the verie reprobate themſelues, who refuſe the riches of His bountifulneſſe, and patience, and long ſuffering▪ 
               not knowing that the bount fulneſſe of GOD, leadeth them to repentance▪ Rom Ch
                     •
                  pter 2 verſe 4. For as Paul ſayes, Hee ſuffereth with long patience, the veſſells of wrath prepared for deſtruction, Rom. Chapter 9. verſe 22.
            
            But it is greater towardes his owne, in whome Hee ſees ſome ſponke of grace to bee: for albeit Hee finde it to

be very ſmall, and heauily oppreſſed, and ſmoothered downe by the corruption of our fleſh, and of our cankred nature, yet He endeuoures to cheriſh and intertaine it: for Hee breakes not the bruſed reed, my quench the ſmooking flaxe, Eſay 42.3. Matth. 12.20 But, Brethren, it ſerues for no purpoſe, to ſpeake of this gentleneſſe and bountifulneſſe of the Lord, except wee haue a ſenſe and feeling of it in our owne ſoules, and except we taſte how ſweete and bountifull the Lord is: for no wordes can expreſſe it, no wordes can perſwade a man of it, except he finde the proofe and ſenſe of it in his owne ſoule. The Lorde worke a feeling of it in euery one of our hearts, that we may ſpeake of it with the greater aſſurance & perſwaſion. But there may be a queſtion mooued heere: The deſire of Thomas ſeemes to be vnlawfull and vnreaſonable, why then ſhould the Lord haue granted it to him? How ſtandes this with His Iuſtice? How agrees this with that vnchangeable Nature of GOD in Chriſt? To this I anſwere: That Thomas failed not in this, that he deſired to ſee the Lord: for that is the deſire of all the Sainctes, but in this he failed, as we heard before, that he tied his faith ſo preciſely to his outwarde ſenſes, to ſeeing, and handling, that hee profeſſed that no wiſe he would beleeue, except hee ſaw the Lord, and felt Him: yet no queſtion, he had in the meane time ſome ſpirituall deſire to ſee the Lord, and hee had a true and ſincere loue towards the Lord. This louing dealing of the Lord with Thomas teaches vs this comfortable leſſon: The Lord markes not narrowly the infirmities and wants that are in His owne, Hee lookes not narrowly to the weakneſſe of their Faith, to the imperfections & wants of their prayers and requeſts (for their prayers are full of wants and imperfections) but Hee paſſes by their imperfections, Hee ouerſees their infirmities, and misknowes the corruption wherein their Faith, their prayers and deſires are inuol
                  •
               ed and ouercled, and Hee hath a regard to their Faith, albeit they haue it in neuer ſo ſmall a meaſure: for the Lord knowes the meaning of His owne Spirit, euen then when He is wreſtling into vs againſt an inumerable number of our infirmities, ſinnes and corruptions. Happie is that ſoule that hath a ſponke of true Faith: for the Lord will regarde it, and ouerſee many infirmities and imperfections in him.
            Thus farre of the Lords ſpeech to Thomas: Now followes the anſwere of Thomas vnto the Lord: Thomas meetes Him with a

notable confeſsion: Thou art my Lord, and my God. The Text makes no particular mention, vvhether or not Thomas put his finger in the print of His vvounds, and his hand in His ſide, when the Lord bade him. If ſo hee did, and vvould none otherwiſe beleeue, then ſurely hee hath beene very hard of heart, impudent and obſtinate, vvho vvould not beleeue when he ſaw the Lord with his eyes, and heard Him ſpeaking to him. But it is more probable, and I am of that judgement, that ſo ſoone as Thomas ſawe the Lord, and heard Him ſpeaking, that he was aſhamed of his incredulitie, & he came to himſelfe, & bethought himſelfe, for it is a wonder to ſee, howe ſoone the ſoule of the moſt obſtinate and indured man will be turned, when it pleaſes the Lord to be effectuall in it by His preſence. The reſt of the Apoſtles beleeued not ſo ſoone as they ſawe the Lord, & heard His voyce, albeit their incredulitie was not ſo great as was the incredulitie of Thomas: yet when it pleaſed the Lord to open their eyes, and to illuminate their vnderſtanding, they beleeued. And Thomas vvho by many degrees ſurpaſſed all the reſt in incredulitie, after that once he ſaw the Lord, and heard Him, incontinently he beleeued, and gaue a notable confeſsion of Him. Then marke it, Brethren, Faith dependes not on our ſelues, on the ſtrength of our nature, on the free wil of man, or vpon ſuch & ſuch diſpoſition of the ſoule, but it dependes vpon the free mercie and good pleaſure of God: It is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in GOD that ſheweth mercie, Rom. Chapter 9. verſe 16. Therefore▪ when wee ſee any beliefe in CHRIST, let vs euer giue the praiſe thereof to GOD, and not to the man, as if it were of his naturall ſtrength power, and inclination.
            But let vs conſider this confeſsion of Thomas, and the grounds vvhereupon it ariſes, he ſayes, Thou art my LORD and my GOD. This confeſsion that hee giues of the LORD, proceedes from a cleare light, whereby his minde was ſuddenly illuminated, and that by the powerfull and effectuall preſence of the LORD, his minde was firſt illuminated to ſee CHRIST to be the LORD, as He is man: for CHRIST, as Hee is man, is LORD ouer all, thereafter to ſee Chriſt as He is GOD, for by the vaile of the fleſh, and of the nature of man Hee is led in, and gets acceſſe to ſee the fulneſſe of the Godhead dwelling in Him bodily: Next this confeſsion proceedes frō the apprehenſion of the heart, whereby it felt the Lord, and tooke holde of

Him: for as that cleare light ſhined in his minde, ſo alſo the heart of Thomas was opened to embrace the Lord, and to draw Him in to himſelfe: and therefore hee calles Him not ſimply Lord, but my Lord, he ſtiles Him not ſimply God, but my God. For no queſtion this plaine and cleare confeſſion teſtifies, that there was a cleare illumination in the minde, and a full perſwaſion in the heart of Thomas of that which he confeſſed.
            If wee compare Thomas with the reſt of the Apoſtles, wee will finde, that as he ſurpaſſed them farre in vnbeliefe, ſo he ſurpaſſes them farre in beleeuing and confeſſing of the LORD: for ſuch a confeſſion hath not beene hitherto vttered by any of the Diſciples: ſo that in this example we may ſee verified that common ſaying, The last ſhall be firſt, and the firſt ſhall be last. The reſt of the Apoſtles were before Thomas in Faith, they beleeued before him, but nowe Thomas by a ſuddaine change, runnes out before them, hee hath a clearer ſight, and a greater meaſure of Faith than they had.
            The reſt of the Apoſtles had the Holy Spirit giuen them, and that ſtrengthened their Faith, but Thomas who then was abſent, after that once hee ſee, and heare the Lord, he findes ſuch a cleare and marueilous light in his ſoule, that hee vtters a more glorious and notable confeſſion than any of the reſt had done before: And this likewiſe teaches vs to aſcribe the praiſe of all the benefites and graces that is in man, to the grace and mercie of GOD, who diſtributes to euery man, according to the good pleaſure of His will, that which Hee thinkes meete: for as was ſaid before, It is not in him that runneth, nor in him that willeth, but in God that ſheweth mercie.
            
            This ſudden change and notable confeſſion which Thomas giues of the LORD, teaches vs yet further, that there was ſome ſponkes of grace, and of ſpirituall deſire left into the ſoule of Thomas to ſee the LORD, and to enjoy His preſence: for except there had bene ſome piece of deſire to haue ſeene Him, how could hee vpon a ſuddaintie haue embraced Him ſo willingly, and joyfully, as one long deſired and looked for. For the wordes of Thomas importe, firſt, that hee had great ſorrowe and ſadneſſe in His ſoule, becauſe as hee thought hee had loſt the LORD: Next, that hee had a deſire to finde Him, and to ſee Him againe: And thirdly, that hee had an exceeding great joy when he found Him,

and by his expectation ſaw Him, and enjoyed His preſence. This ſerues for thy comfort, who haſt gotten a meaſure of grace, albeit the corruptions and infirmities of the fleſh ſtriue to drowne, and ſmoother and ſuffocate it, yet neuer ſhall it altogether be aboliſhed and extinguiſhed, but at laſt, it ſhall wreſtle out, and preuaile, and ouercome the corruption.
            Now, to come forward to the LORDES replie, to Thomas: Hee anſweres him, Thomas, becauſe thou haſt ſeene, thou beleeuest, bleſſed are they which haue not ſeene, and haue beleeued. Hee ſayes not, becauſe thou haſt touched Mee, but becauſe thou haſt ſeene Me. So in my judgement Thomas touched not the Lord, but contented himſelfe with the ſeeing of the LORD, and hearing of His voyce. Hee acknowledges the Faith of Thomas, but Hee extetenuates it in compariſon of others, Hee praiſes not Thomas for His Faith, becauſe hee tied his faith to his ſenſes, Hee beleeued becauſe hee ſawe Him, but Hee praiſes and commends the Faith of others, who no counting of the outwarde ſenſe, ſhould beleeue in Him, albeit they ſaw Him not. Albeit Hee acknowledges the Faith of Thomas, Hee calles him not bleſſed for it, but Hee pronounces them to be bleſſed, who haue not ſeene Him, and yet doe beleeue.
            Theſe wordes of the LORD to Thomas, lets vs ſee, that the caſe and condition of them who beleeue without ſeeing, is nothing worſe, nor inferiour to the caſe and condition of them who haue not ſeene the LORD, and vpon ſight haue beleeued. We this day who haue not ſeene the LORD face to face, but only haue heard His worde, and beleeue, are nothing inferiour to them who ſawe Him, and beleeued, and namely to Thomas who would not beleeue, except he ſaw the LORD: and if there were no more, to aſſure thee who haſt not ſeene the LORD IESVS, and yet beleeueſt, that thou art bleſſed this joy that thou ſhalt finde in the middes of thy greateſt ſorrow and affliction, might be a ſufficient argument, to perſwade thee: for Peter ſayes, The Godly in the middes of their affliction, beleeuing in Christ whome they haue not ſeene, reioyce with a ioy vnſpeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. Chapter 1. verſe 8. Indeede in this life, the bleſſed eſtate of them, who beleeue in Chriſt, is neither clearly ſeene by others, neither is it throughly felt by themſelues, for it is not ſeene what wee ſhall be, and heere only haue wee the firſt fruites of the Spirite, and a foretaſting of theſe

things that ſhall bee reueiled, but in that great daye, when our LORD ſhall appeare, then ſhall it bee ſeene, how bleſſed the eſtate of them ſhall be, who beleeued: for then when wee ſee Him as He is, we ſhall be like to Him in glorie. The world countes them who beleeue in Chriſt Ieſus, to be vile and contemptible bodies, but one day they ſhall ſee their happineſſe, & their glorie, to their ſhame and confuſion. But heere it may be asked: What mooues the Lord ſo highly to commend the Faith of them, who beleeue, and yet ſee not? What can be the cauſe of this? I anſwere: The reaſon is, becauſe Faith without ſight is more hardly obtained than Faith by ſight. The man that beleeues without ſight, he muſt ouercome many moe impediments and tentations than the other, who beleeues that which he ſees, and this is commonly true, that which is obtained moſt hardly, and acquired with greateſt difficultie, is moſt precious, moſt excellent, and moſt worthie of praiſe: and ſo this Faith that wants ſight, is farre to be preferred & more praiſe worthie than the other: for it is ſundrie wayes tried and fined, before it appeare, 1. Pet. 1.7.
            
            Now to goe forward: The Euangeliſt in the end of the Chapter, by the way meetes ſome things which curious men might haue objected: Firſt they might haue asked: Whether if all the miracles which the Lord Ieſus wrought, while Hee was in the world were ſet downe in write, and extant in the Goſpell written by him. Iohn anſweres: No, they are not all written: for he ſayes: Many other ſignes alſo did Ieſus in the preſence of His Diſciples, which are not written in this Booke. They might haue ſaide againe to Iohn: then by appearance this Euangell that thou haſt written is not perfect, but vnperfect? To this hee anſweres? My Goſpell is perfect enough, becauſe all things are written that are neceſſarie to Faith and Saluation. Theſe words are caſten in only by the way in this Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection: for albeit hee ſeemes to breake off the Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection of CHRIST, and to conclude in a manner the whole Goſpell, yet he returnes againe to the ſame Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection in the Chapter following, and in the ende thereof hee concludes the whole Goſpell almoſt in theſe ſame words that are ſet downe heere. But to returne and to ſpeake of the miracles, whereof Iohn ſpeakes heere: hee ſayes, Many other ſignes and Miracles wrought the LORD, which are not written in this booke. Then it may be asked? Wherefore are they not written? Were they

vnprofitable? Serues the knowledge of them to no vſe? To this I anſwere: That theſe miracles were profitable and ſteadable to confirme and ſtrengthen the faith of them, who liued in that age, and ſawe them done: yea further, they are alſo ſteadable to the faith of them, who liued in the ages following: for when we read and heare, that there was ſuch a great multitude of miracles wrought by the Lord, albeit wee know not diſtinctly and particularly what they were, that ſerues very much to ſtrengthen and confirme our Faith, ſo that wee ſee theſe miracles which are not written, are not left out of write, as though they were vnprofitable, and as though they ſerued for no vſe, or were vnworthie to be remembred? No, they were profitable and worthie, but they are left out, becauſe the miracles ſet downe in write by Iohn, and the reſt of the Euangeliſts, which indeed are very many, are ſufficient to Faith and Saluation. But becauſe the Euangeliſt ſets downe in this place, the ende of the miracles that the Lorde wrought: therefore we ſhall ſpeake more largely of them.
            CHRIST, when Hee came into the worlde, was many wayes marueilous: and therefore amongſt many other glorious ſtiles, Hee gets this alſo, to bee called wonderfull, Iſaiah Chapter 9. verſe 6. For firſt, if wee looke to His perſon, Hee was wonderfull: for He was GOD and man in one perſon, the like whereof, neuer was, nor neuer ſhall bee. Next, if we looke to the doctrine which Hee brought out of Heauen, and to the worde which Hee preached to the worlde, Hee was wonderfull: for wonderfull was the light of His doctrine: whereby Hee brought a marueilous light to the darke worlde, and this made the officers to ſay to the High Prieſtes: Neuer man ſpake like this man, Ioh. Chapter 7. verſe 46. and in the 7. Chapter of the Euangell of Matth. verſe 29. Hee teached them as one hauing authoritie, and not as the Scribes: Laſt, if we conſider the things that Hee did, and the wonders that Hee wrought in the world: He was wonderful, for they declared plainly, that He was not only a man, a creature, but that He was God, the great Creator, and that Eternall IEHOVAH. And theſe miracles ſerued to confirme His doctrine: for the doctrine and the word of the Goſpell preached by CHRIST, ſerued to worke and beget Faith in the heart, but the miracles ſerued to confirme the doctrine, & the word which He preached: for they were ſteadable either to prepare the hearts of men to receiue

the word and doctrine of the Lord, or els to confirme them in that word which they had reeceiued alreadie. Now both the word and doctrine of Chriſt, and alſo His Miracles are ſet downe and left in regiſter to vs, by the ſpeciall will & direction of Chriſt, to the well of them that were to liue in the ages to come, that they might beleeue, & get life and ſaluation: and therefore this written word & doctrine ſhould be receiued by vs, as the viue voyce of Chriſt Himſelfe, and wee ſhould count no leſſe of it, than if wee heard Chriſt Himſelfe ſpeaking to vs, with His owne mouth, and likewiſe wee ſhoulde count of the miracles written in the Goſpell, as if wee had ſeene the Lord Ieſus working them before our eyes: and therefore nowe in our age, we neede not any new miracles, to confirme of new againe, the doctrine of Chriſt, and His Apoſtles. Indeede miracles were very neceſſarie to them that liued in the Primitiue Church, when the Goſpell was firſt preached, and when it appeared vnto the world to be a new doctrine, & when the Church was in her infancie, then miracles were very needfull: but now, ſeeing the doctrine of Chriſt, and His Apoſtles is ſufficiently confirmed alreadie by all theſe miracles, that were wrought in theſe dayes by Chriſt, & His Apoſtles, we need no miracles. Why ſhould we deſire them, except we thought, that the doctrine is not yet ſufficiently confirmed, and as yet is but a new doctrine. If we thinke, that it is the ſame doctrine, which Chriſt and His Apoſtles taught, it needes no new confirmation. Many vaine and fantaſticke men, but eſpecially the Papistes this daye are not content with the Miracles that haue bene wrought by the Lord Ieſus, & His Apoſtles, to confirme the doctrine of the Goſpell, but they craue new miracles to confirme the doctrine of the Goſpell, as if it were not ſufficiently confirmed alreadie. But, I ſay vnto thee, Vaine man, goe ſeeke miracles as thou wilt, and as long as thou wilt, neuer ſhalt thou get any other true miracle from God, except only this miraculous and wonderfull effect that the Goſpell workes, in bringing foorth in our heartes this true and juſtifying Faith in renewing vs, and in beginning that life eternall in our ſoules: for the faithfull finde by experience, that this Goſpell of Chriſt, is the power of God vnto ſaluation to them that beleeue. If thou be not content with this marueilous, effect, but wilt goe on to ſeeke outwa
                  •
               d ſignes and miracles, thou declareſt plainely to the worlde, that thou neuer didſt finde this powerfull effect of the Goſpell into thy ſoule, and

if thou findeſt not this powerfull effect to bee wrought into thy ſoule by the preaching of the word, and by the miracles that were wrought by the Lord Ieſus, and His Apoſtles, thou wilt neuer beleeue, albeit thou ſaweſt ten thouſand new miracles wrought before thine eyes. Now, we tolde you before, that both the worde and doctrine, and likewiſe the miracles were written by the ſpeciall will, & direction of Chriſt, but there is a difference betweene their writting: for all the doctrine of Chriſt that is neceſſarie to life and ſaluation in ſubſtance, not ſo much as a ſentence excepted, is ſet downe in write, the Holy Spirit He omitted nothing. But all the miracles that the Lord wrought are not ſet downe in write: for it was neceſſarie for our Faith, that ye ſubſtance of the whole doctrine ſhould be ſet down in write, but it was not neceſſary for our Faith, that all ye miracles which He wrought, ſhould be writtē. Our Faith required the one, but our Faith required not the other: for the Lord in writting and regiſtrating of His word, and miracles had not reſpect vnto the curioſitie of vaine man, which is vnſatiable, and can neuer be ſatisfied, but Hee had regarde to the Faith and Saluation of man: and therefore Hee ſet downe theſe things in write, which were ſufficient and neceſſarie for Faith and Saluation. Our Faith and Saluation was the rule and meaſure of the Lords reuelation, and not the curioſitie of vaine man: Now, if all things are written that are neceſſarie to life and Saluation, then thou who is not content with theſe thinges, but ſeekeſt other thinges, and claimes vnto vnwritten verities, which are the fantaſies of mens braine, and cry for new miracles, What can any man thinke that that thou art doing, but ſeeking ſomething aboue and beyond eternall Life and Saluation, thou ſeekeſt but fantaſies, that thine owne head conceiteth▪ Indeede, vaine Papiſt, if thine vnderſtanding were capable, and if thy faith were able to comprehend all theſe thinges, all the doctrine and miracles that are written in the Olde and New Teſtament, thou wouldeſt haue ſome ſhew of reaſon to require more, to clame to vnwritten verities, and to deſire moe miracles, and I would the more willingly giue thee leaue to require them. But, ſeeing ſuch is the weakneſſe and infirmitie of thy Faith, and vnderſtanding, that thou art not able to comprehend theſe ſame things that are written, which farre ſurpaſſes the capacitie and vnderſtanding of man, why ſhouldeſt thou, miſerable wretch, deuiſe other thinges to thy ſelfe? Why goeſt thou about

to clout and clamp to the word of God (which ſo long as we liue in this worlde, we are not able fully to attaine to) the dreames and fantaſies which thou haſt forged in thine owne braine.
            Now to end ſhortly: The Euangeliſt in ſetting downe the ende wherefore theſe miracles were left in write which is, that we might beleeue in Chriſt, and get life through Him, lets vs ſee, what are the things that chiefly we ought to beleeue of Chriſt, Theſe things, ſayes he, are written, that yee might beleeue that Christ is that Sonne of God. Theſe wordes comprehend ſummarily the ſubſtance of all theſe things, that are neceſſarie to be beleeued of Ieſus: we muſt beleeue in Ieſus, euen that Ieſus, who was borne of the Virgine Marie, who walked in Iudea, and was conuerſant among the Jewes. And what muſt we beleeue of Him? Theſe words tell vs, we muſt beleeue two thinges of Him: Firſt, that Hee is, That Chriſt: Next, that Hee is, That Sonne of God. The firſt reſpecteth His office, the next reſpecteth His perſon: By reaſon of His office, Hee is called That Chriſt, becauſe He is annointed of God the Father, to bee our King, Prieſt and Prophet: for theſe three ſortes of perſons, Kings, Prieſtes and Prophets, vſed to bee annointed in the Olde Teſtament: In reſpect of His perſon, wee muſt beleeue that He is That Sonne of God: for as Chriſt is GOD, and the Sonne of GOD, properly Hee is a perſon, euen the ſecond perſon of the Trinitie. The nature of man that Hee aſſumed, makes not vp a part of His perſon, but was only aſſumed to the diuine perſon, and was ſo ſtraitly conjoyned and vnited to the perſon of the Sonne, that whole Chriſt, GOD and man is called but one perſon.
            Now, looke what benefit we receiue by beleeuing theſe things of Ieſus: He ſayes, In beleuing we haue life through His Name: How comes this, that Faith in Ieſus we get life? Firſt, we flie as it were, & mount aboue, while wee come vnto CHRIST and take holde of Him: For where the Carioun is, thither will the Eagles reſort: Next, when wee haue honoured Him ſo, that wee count nothing of our ſelues, while we reſt in Him by Faith, then through our Faith as a conduit He conuoyes life into our ſoules, and that not an euaniſhing life, but Eternall life, and this life is the life of God. So this life th
                  •
               t we liue here by Faith, flowes firſt from the Sonne of God, and from Ieſus, as He is God, then it comes to vs from the Sonne of God, as He is Chriſt, and annointed our King, Prieſt and Prophet, for

firſt, as He was annointed to be our Prieſt by His death and ſacrifice vpon the Croſſe, Hee merited life vnto vs: thereafter, as Hee was annointed to be our King, and Prophet, Hee applies powerfully and effectually vnto vs the benefites, which as our Prieſt Hee merited vnto vs by His death: for as He is our Prophet, He applies them to vs by His teaching, & as He is our King, He appliets them to vs by working powerfully and effectually into vs by His Spirit. Now we ſee, what we ought to beleeue of Ieſus, & what gaine we receiue by this Faith: the gaine is very great, but the meanes to come by it, lyes not in our hands, wee are not able by our owne free will, or by the ſtrength of Nature to beleeue, fleſh and blood cannot teach vs this Faith: for as it is true which Paul ſayes, No man can ſay, that Ieſus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. Chapter 12. verſe 3. So none can beleeue, that Ieſus is that Chriſt and that Sonne of GOD, but by the ſame Holy Ghoſt, as the LORDE Himſelfe tolde Peter, after that Hee had confeſſed that Hee was the CHRIST, the Sonne of the liuing GOD: for Hee ſayes vnto him, Bleſſed art thou, Simon the ſonne of Iona▪ for neither fleſh nor blood hath reueiled that vnto thee, but my Father which is in Heauen, Matth. Chapter 16. verſe 17. And therefore we muſt craue continually of the LORD, that Hee would vouchſafe His Spirite on vs, to worke Faith in our ſoules, that beleeuing in IESVS CHRIST, wee may get life and Saluation through Him: To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour and praiſe, for euermore.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XLVIII. LECTVRE OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XXI.
                  
                  AFter theſe thinges, Jeſus ſhewed Himſelfe againe to His Diſciples at the ſea of Tiberias: and thus ſhewed He Himſelfe:
                  
                     
                        verse 2 There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas, which is called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galile, and the ſonnes of Zebedeus, and two other of His diſciples.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Simon Peter ſaide vnto Him, I goe a fiſhing. They ſaide vnto him, Wee alſo will goe with thee. They went their way, and entred into a ſhippe ſtraightway, and that night caught they nothing.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 But when the morning was nowe come, Ieſus ſtood on the ſhore: neuertheleſſe the Diſciples knew not that it was Jeſus.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Ieſus then ſaide vnto them, Sirs, haue yee any meate? They anſwered Him, No.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Then Hee ſaide vnto them, Caſt out the net on the right ſide of the ſhip, and ye ſhall finde. So they caſt out, and they were not able at all to draw it, for the multitude of fiſhes.
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Therefore ſaide the Diſciple whome Ieſus loued, vnto Peter, It is the Lord. When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, hee girded his coate to him (for he was naked) and caſt himſelfe into the ſea.
               
            
            
               WEE continue as yet, Brethren, Beloued in Chriſt, in the Hiſtorie of Chriſts appearings, after His Reſurrection, whereof, this which we haue ſet downe in the beginning of the 21. Chapter of Iohn, is the ſeuenth, if wee reckone preciſely all the particular

appearings, whereof any mention is made in the Goſpel: But if we count only the appearings vnto His Apoſtles aſſembled together, this is the third in number, as the Euangeliſt himſelfe hereafter telles. In the firſt two appearings He manifeſted Himſelfe vnto the eleuen beeing aſſembled together in an houſe, the doores beeing cloſed, only Thomas was abſent in the firſt appearing, nowe heere Hee appeares only vnto ſeuen, beeing together, not in an houſe, but without at the fiſhing. As concerning the particular time of this appearing, what day it was from the firſt daye of His Reſurrection, or howe many dayes it was from His laſt appearing vnto them, it is not particularly ſet downe: and therefore we will paſſe by it, but the Euangeliſt markes particularly the place of this appearing: for he ſayes, Ieſus ſhewed Himſelfe againe at the ſea of Tiberias, which ſea is otherwiſe called the ſea of Genneſareth, for according to the accuſtomable forme of ſpeaking among the Iewes, a lake is called the Sea. Before wee come to the reſt of the circumſtances of this appearing, it is expedient, that we anſwere to a queſtion that may bee mooued: It may bee asked, What is the cauſe that the Lord appeared ſo oft times vnto His Diſciples, and ſo many wayes? Had it not bene enough that He had appeared to them once or twiſe? What needed there any moe appearings? To this anſwere: There are many great and weightie cauſes, wherefore the Lord ſo oft times appeared, and firſt: becauſe Faith in the Reſurrection from the dead, is a thing very hardly and with great difficultie is obtained: for among all the Articles of Faith there is none more contrarie to Nature, none appeares to be more vncredible: therefore the Lord, that He might aſſure them that He was riſen, and that they who are in Him, one day ſhall riſe againe, Hee appeared ſo oft times after His Reſurrection. Next, Hee appeared ſo of
                  •
                to His Diſciples, becauſe they were to be the firſt witneſſes of His Reſurrection to the worlde: and therefore, they needed oft times to ſee the Lorde, to haue heard, to haue handled Him, and beene conuerſant with Him, they needed all ſortes of helpes to their Faith, that they might haue full aſſurance themſelues, that the Lorde was riſen, to the ende, that with the greater aſſurance, and with a full perſwaſion, as the Apoſtle ſpeakes of himſelfe, 1. Theſſ. 1.5 They might teſtifie of that Reſurrection both by viue voyce, and by writting vnto others, euen to the comming of the Lord Himſelfe, & indeede ſo it came to paſſe: for becauſe

Hee appeared and reueiled Himſelfe ſo oft times to them: therefore they had exceeding great libertie and boldneſſe, both in their ſpeaking, and writting: for the frequent ſeeing of Him, hearing of Him, ſpeaking and conuerſing with Him, made them to haue a full perſwaſion, and this full perſwaſion made them to haue great libertie & freedome: for he that hath not a full perſwaſion in his owne heart, ſhould not take vpon him to be a witneſſe and preacher of the graces and benefites of God to others, neither will he euer be able to ſpeake of them with freedome, to mooue others to beleeue. Thirdly, He appeared ſo oft vnto His Apoſtles, not for their cauſ
                  •
                only, but for our cauſe alſo, who ſhould liue in the ages to come: Hee had reſpect vnto the weakneſſe of our Faith: for euery particular appearing of Chriſt, ſerues to helpe and further ſomething our Faith, our Faith degree by degree is helped by euery one of them, and all His appearings beeing joyned together, are a ſure and ſtedfaſt ground to our Faith to repoſe vpon, they ſerue to conſummate our Faith, and to bring it to a full perfection: for when wee heare or reade, that our Lord appeared at any time to His Diſciples, wee ſhould thinke, and ſettle this in our minde, that when Hee appeared vnto them, Hee appeared vnto vs, when they ſaw Him, we ſaw Him: when vvee reade, that the Lord appeared vnto Peter, I ſhould thinke that He appeared vnto mee: vvhen Iohn and the reſt of the Apoſtles ſawe Him vvith their eyes. I ſhould ſo eſteeme, that I ſawe Him vvith mine eyes, and whenſoeuer they ſawe Him, I ſhould lay my count, that I ſaw Him: for vvhen that Peter ſayes, That with his eyes he ſaw His Maieſtie, 2. Pet. 1.16. hee pointes out Chriſt as it were with his finger, to bee ſeene with mine eyes. When Paul ſayes, That the Lord was ſeene of him after His Reſurrection, 1. Cor. 15.8. hee pointes out the Lord to be ſeene by me. When Iohn ſayes, Wee declare vnto you that which wee haue heard, which we haue ſeene with theſe our eyes, which we haue looked vpon, & theſe handes of ours haue handled of that worde of life, 1. Ioh. 1.1. hee ſets the Lord as it were, before my face, that I may ſee Him with mine eyes▪ I may heare Him with mine eares, and may handle Him vvith mine handes, To the end that my ioy may be full, as he ſpeakes there, verſe 4. And therefore, thou who art a faithfull Chriſtian, haſt cauſe to rejoyce, that the LORD ſo oft times appeared to His Diſciples: for it was for thy cauſe, for the helping and confirming of thy weake Faith, that Hee appeared ſo oft, that ſo thy

joye may bee the more full. Now I goe forward vnto the circumſtance of the perſons to vvhom the Lord appeared: There vvere ſeuen of the Diſciples gathered together, for hee ſayes, There were together, Simon Peter, and Thomas, who was called Didimus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilie, and the two ſonnes of Zebedeus, and two other Diſciples. No queſtion it vvas not by fortune, or chance, or raſhly, that ſo manie of the Diſciples met together at this time: but it vvas by the determinate counſell and prouidence of GOD that they vvere aſſembled together, to the ende that hee might manif
                  •
               ſt and exhibite himſelfe vnto them, beeing aſſembled together.
            When the Lord hath a purpoſe to communicate his graces and benefites in a great meaſure, hee vſes commonlie to call together a number of his owne in one place, that hee may communicate his graces the more liberally vnto them, beeing aſſembled together: for he giues not his great graces, nor vouchſafeth not his glorious preſence ſo much to priuate perſons alone, as hee does to a companie of the Sainctes aſſembled together, it is to them chiefelie that hee manifeſtes himſelfe. When the Lord was purpoſed to beſtowe the holie Spirite, what does hee? hee gathers the whole number of the Apoſtles together in one place, vpon the daye of the Pentecoſte, and then hee ſendes vpon them all, the holie Spirite, in the forme of fierie and clouen tongues (as wee reade in the ſeconde Chapter of the Actes, and the thirde verſe.) Our owne experience may bee a ſufficient proofe vnto vs of this, for when finde we the Spirit of God to worke moſte powerfullie, and the graces of God moſte aboundantlie to bee beſtowed vpon vs? not when wee are our ſelfe alone, but when we are aſſembled together with ye Saincts to exerciſe the meanes of grace, to heare the worde, to offer vp our prayers together vnto God, and to be partakers of the Sacramēts: And therefore, if thou wouldeſt haue the Spirite of GOD preſent with thee, and looke for anie grace, deſpiſe not the fellowſhip, contemne not the aſſemblie of the Lordes Sainctes. Now amongſt the reſt that are here counted out, we ſee Thomas is reckoned to be one: The firſt time that the Lord appeared to his Diſciples, aſſembled together, the doore beeing ſhut, THOMAS was not preſent: but the ſeconde time that the LORD appeared vnto them, hee vvas preſent vvith them. Now in this thirde appearing of the Lord to his Diſciples, he is alſo preſent vvith them. This example of THOMAS letteth vs ſee that a man, vvho is gone aſtraye, and hath

wandred out of the way, after that once the Lord mercifully takes him by the hand, and ſets him in the way of grace, that he will be carefull conſtantly to walke into that way with the reſt of the faithfull, who are walking in that way, he will be loath to ſeparate himſelfe from their ſocietie, after that once the Lord beginnes freely to giue grace, He ceaſes neuer to heape grace vpon grace, while grace be crowned with glorie: for it is true, that the Apoſtle ſayes, That Hee who hath begunne the good worke in vs, will performe it vnto the day of Jeſus Chriſt, Phil. 1.6. And our Sauiour ſayes, To euery man that hath, it ſhall be giuen, and he ſhall haue abundance. So happie is the man in whom the Lord hath once begunne to worke, for He will neuer leaue him, while He performe His worke in him.
            Now, when they are met together, what is their exerciſe: They goe to the fiſhing, the occaſion of this exerciſe comes of Peter, hee purpoſed to ſeparate himſelfe from the reſt: and therefore hee ſayes vnto them, J goe a fiſhing: The reſt cannot bee content to ſunder from him, but they offer their companie to him, and they ſay: We alſo will goe with thee. What made Thomas, and the reſt of the Diſciples ſo vnwillingly to ſunder from Peter, and what made euery one of them ſo deſirous to enjoye the companie of another? Was this by chance or fortoun? No, but it was by the ſpeciall prouidence of GOD, that ſame prouidence that before gathered them together, now keepes and retaines them together, in ſuch ſort, that albeit ſome of them were of purpoſe to haue ſundred themſelues from the reſt, yet the reſt will not ſunder from them. The Lord will keepe them together, that Hee may communicate vnto them ſuch grace as Hee would not beſtowe vpon them beeing ſundered one from another. He ſhewes Himſelfe, & He vouchſafes His preſence in them to their exceeding joy and comfort, beeing now together, whereas if they had bene ſeparated, if Peter had gone one way, & Thomas another, and the reſt the third, it is not likely, that the Lord would haue manifeſted Himſelfe vnto them. But how is this, that the Diſciples of the Lord, who were ordained and appointed by the Lorde Himſelfe to an higher calling, to the Apoſtleſhip, to be witneſſes and preachers to the world of theſe things which they ſaw and heard of Him, goe to the fiſhing. Might they leaue that high calling, and take themſelues to ſo baſe and contemptible an exerciſe: I anſwere, that heerein they doe nothing amiſſe: for albeit they were appointed and deſigned by the Lord to be Apoſtles, yet

in effect they were not as yet Apoſtles, they had not entered to that calling, neither were they meete for it, vntill the time that they were endued with power from on high, and before they had receiued the Holy Spirit in the forme of firie and clouen tongues in the day of the Pentecoſte. And further, what fault was it, albeit they had entred to their office of the Apoſtleſhip, that they ſhould bee exerciſed in an honeſt and lawfull occupation, and ſhould worke with their handes, as we read of the Apoſtle Paul, vvho in ſundrie places profeſſes, that he laboured with his owne hands for his liuing. Read 1. Cor. 4.12. 1. Theſſ. 2.9. 2 Theſſ. 3.8.
            
            Now, when they agree to remaine together, They went their way, and entred into a ſhip ſtraightway, and they goe to take fiſh, and to ſeeke bodily food for themſelues, but the Lord in the meane time, is calling them to a better thing, euen to ſee the Lord, and to enjoy His gracious preſence, which was a great deale better, than all their fiſhing, and all that they could haue gained by that exerciſe: and Peter, after that once he knew that it was the LORD which ſpake to them, counted more of His preſence, than of all the huge and great number of fiſhes, that were incloſed within the nette: for hee leaues them all, after that once he knew that it was the Lord that ſpake, and ſhewed Himſelfe preſent vnto them, yea, he caſtes himſelfe into the Sea, and hazardes his life, to the end he may come ſpeedily and ſoone vnto the Lord. The Lord, who euer hath a regarde of His owne, makes all their actions, and their ſufferings, to tend to their vvell and comfort, yea, to ſerue and further them to eternall life. When thou goeſt to performe any thing, vvhen thou addreſſeſt thy ſelfe to any worke vvhat euer it be, vvhether it be husbandrie, fiſhing, marchandiſe, or any other exerciſe, I giue thee my counſell, endeuoure euer to entertaine in thy ſoule a ſenſe and perſwaſion of the loue of God, and if thou ſo doeſt, thou ſhalt finde, that when the members of thy body are exerciſed in their labour, that thy ſoule likewiſe ſhall make a progreſſe ſtraightway to Heauen. Well, they goe to the fiſhing, but vvhat ſucceſſe haue they at the firſt? Not very great, their ſucceſſe was very ſlender: for it is ſaid, That night they caught nothing. How came this to paſſe? Was it through their vnskilfulnes? No, it was by the ſecret prouidence and direction of God, who often times delayes the ſucceſſe of the labours of His owne, and will not anſwere their expectation at the firſt, to the ende, that in His owne appointed

time He may giue it more aboundantly to their greater cōfort: for this is the Lordes accuſtomed dealing vvith His owne children, Of ſet purpoſe He vvill diſappoint them for a time, to their greater benefit and comfort thereafter. When Paul vvrites to Philemon concerning his ſeruant Oneſimus, vvho had fled away from him, he ſayes, It may be that he hath departed for a ſeaſon, that thou mighteſt receiue him for euer. Next, the Lord vſes to diſappoint the hope of His own for a ſeaſon, becauſe that ſerues more to the glory of God, than if they got it at the firſt time: for vvhen men finde a proſperous ſucceſſe in all their vvayes, and all thinges anſwering to their deſire, ſcarcely doe they conſider and diſcerne Gods bleſſing: yea, manie times it comes to paſſe, that in ſuch caſes men aſcribe the praiſe of all to themſelues, to their owne vviſedome, their trauels and laboures; they flatter themſelues, & ſacrifice to their owne nette: But vvhen they ſee themſelues, notwithſtanding of all their trauels, diſappointed of their hope, and thereafter finde a bleſſing and good ſucceſſe; then they plainly diſcerne, that all things proceed from the bleſſing and fauourable prouidence of God, and therfore giues to the Lord the praiſe and glory of all. Laſt, vvhen He delayes the ſucceſſe vvhich His owne hope for in their laboures, Hee giues them a faire recompence for the vvant of the temporall benefit for a ſeaſon, and He giues them a ſpirituall benefit to their ſoule: for vvhen thereafter He giues them a ſucceſſe, He makes them to ſee His bleſſing, and opens their heartes, and looſes their mouthes, to ſounde His praiſe, vvhich is better than any earthly benefit that can be beſtowed vpon man. When the Diſciples had long laboured without ſucceſſe, at laſt the Lord comes, for th'Euangeliſt ſayes, When the morning was nowe come, Ieſus ſtood on the Sea ſhore. Howbeit the Lord vvill long abſent Himſelfe from His own, and giue them no ſenſible bleſſing in their trauels, yet at the laſt hee vvill come in his owne due time to their great comfort.
            Nowe the time is marked vvhen the Lord comes, to vvit, in the morning: hee tarries away all the night, and comes in the morning. The Scripture compares the time in the vvhich vvee liue vvithout Chriſt, vnto the darke night: for as in the night no man can vvalke, nor be exerciſed in the vvorke of his calling, no more can any man vvithout Chriſt vvalke in the vvay of ſaluation, nor doe anie thing acceptable to God. Againe, his preſence and comming is compared to the morning; for as in the morning, vvhen the Sunne riſes,

men may ſee the way, and walke in the way, and bee exerciſed in the workes of their calling. So when CHRIST, that Daye-ſtarre beginnes to ariſe, that Sunne of Righteouſneſſe beginnes to ſhine v
                  •
               to the ſoules of His owne, then they ſee the way of ſaluation, and they haue courage and pleaſure to walke therein, and to doe the workes of light, which are acceptable vnto GOD: when Hee is abſent, there is nothing but night and darkneſſe, when He returnes againe, there is light. DAVID ſeemes to allude vnto this pr
                  •
               ſence of Chriſt, by His Spirite in the ſoule, when hee ſayes in the xxx. PSALME, verſ. v. Weeping may abide at euening, but 
                     •
                  oye commeth in the morning.
            
            Nowe howbeit the Lord ſtood before them on the ſhore, Neuertheleſſe the Diſciples knewe not that it was IESƲS. Howe this comes to paſſe, that they knawe Him not, it is vncertaine, for the cauſe is not ſet downe, neither will wee curiouſlie inquire for it: it may bee, and it is likelie, that their eyes were cloſed that they could not diſcerne and knowe Him, whome otherwiſe they ſawe preſent before them. The example of theſe Diſciples lets vs ſee what is the naturall diſpoſition of the children of God: They ſought not the Lord fi
                  •
               ſt, yea, when H
                  •
               e offers Himſelfe vnto them, they know Him not. So it is with vs all by nature, neither can we ſeeke God, neither can wee ſo much as once thinke of the ſeeking of Him, neither when Hee offers Himſelfe vnto vs vnſought, can we d
                  •
               ſcerne Him and knowe Him by nature: Except God by His Spirite preuent vs, and illuminate the eyes of our mindes, & open our hearts, and make vs to knowe Him, wee will neuer ſeeke Him, nor knowe Him, but wee ſhall euer remaine in darkneſſe.
            Yet albeit they knowe not the Lord, Hee beginnes to ſhew Himſelfe vnto them, and Hee breakes off conference vnto them, Sirs, have yee anie meate? And by this ſpeach Hee p
                  •
               epares them to that good ſucceſſe and bleſſing which He was to giue to their trauels: And this Hee does, by bringi
                  •
               g them to a confeſſion of their want and needfulneſſe: for when hee inquires at them, if they had anie meate, they anſwered him, No. They confeſſe their want: for marke, Brethren, how the Lord will haue thy ſoule to bee prepared before Hee communicate His bleſſing. Thy skant, thy neede, and thy pouertie, though it were neuer ſo great, will not doe the turne; it will not mooue the Lord to bleſſe thy trauels, if there be no more: No, Hee requires further of thee, Hee will haue thee to acknowledge,

to feele, and to confeſſe thy pouertie. The Lord pitties not, but abhorres proude and ſturdie beggers. Hee does to His owne as a louing father does to his ſonne: Albeit the father ſee his ſonne in great pouertie and neede, lacking foode and rayment; yet if hee come proudly and ſtubburnly by the doore & preſence of his father, hee will not know him, nor helpe him, howbeit hee haue ſubſtance & wealth enough; vnto ſuch time as he is humbled and come to himſelfe. Euen ſo the Lord, when wee are in miſerie, in great want and neede, and will not acknowledge nor confeſſe it vnto Him: He will not know vs, nor beſtowe His bleſſinges vpon vs till we be humbled. Now whē the Lord has prepared them with the confeſſion of their owne want, thereafter He giues them the bleſſing, Caſt out the net on the right ſide of the ſh
                     •
                  p: and thē He promiſes them a good ſucceſſe, for He ſayes, Ye ſhall find. But what needed y• Lord to bid thē 
               caſt out the nets, that they might get fiſhes? Might not the Lord haue giuen them fiſh enough without their trauell & labour? Might He not by His omnipotent power haue cōmanded the fiſh to haue incloſed thēſelues within the nets? Yes no doubt, without their trauell & labour He might haue filled the ſhip aboū
               dantly with fiſh: yet it was His pleaſure & good will yt they ſhould worke & labour, & take paines vpon thē, firſt before He g
                  •
               ue them any bleſſing: He would not bleſſe thē with a good ſucceſſe, except they laboured. Further ye may ſee here, how great pleaſure and liking the Lord has to ſee men painful in their calling: for albeit they had bin moleſted & troubled all the night with labouring, yet the Lord will haue thē 
               to caſt out their net again in the morning, to the end yt He might giue a bleſſing to their trauels. Indeed it is true that Hee deſires not our labour, as if it could ſtād Him in any ſtead: He giues not a ſucceſſe to it as if it merited any thing at His hands: for Hee giues ſucceſſe & increaſe only for His own names ſake, and for His Chriſts ſake, without any merit of ours: for if He had not reſpect to Himſelfe & His Chriſt, if we tooke neuer ſo great paines, we would find but a ſober ſucceſſe. Many find by experience, yt without Him, if they would paine themſelues from morning till euening, they can find no ſucceſſe. Yea, when the Lord withdrawes His bleſſing, the children of God themſelues finde the proofe of this Peter and the reſt of the Diſciples who were with him, toyled and pained themſelues all the night without anie ſucceſſe or profite. Then the cauſe chiefely why the Lord requires our trauell and labour, is becauſe it

is an ordinarie meane appointed by Him, whereby we ſhould finde and receiue His bleſſing, and it is a part of our ſeruice and duety that the Lord has appointed to vs. For when with a ſimple and vpright heart, wee are labouring in our calling, wee are ſeruing the Lord. Therefore Paul charges the ſeruants, to bee obedient to their masters with ſingleneſſe of heart, as vnto Christ: meaning that in their ſeruice done to their maſters, they ſerue not ſo much men, as Chriſt, Epheſ. 6.5. Now the Diſciples obeyed this commandement of the Lord, for they cast out the net, and they were not able to draw it for the multitude of 
                     •
                  iſhes. This their obedience is very commendable: albeit they had bene troubled and wearied all the night, and had caught nothing: yet at the requeſt of a ſtranger, a man whom they knew not, whom they ſuppoſed to be no more but a common man, readilie they yeeld obedience, & cast out the net. And this their readineſſe teſtifies, that they had exceeding great patience & conſtācie in enduring of trauell, notwithſtanding of all their labour & paines preceeding. What was the cauſe of this their patience? Euen partlie becauſe their long labouring and paines that they had taken without any ſucceſſe, had humbled and tamed them: if they got no fiſh, they got a better benefite, they were ſomewhat mortified, and learned patience, partly becauſe they had an hope of a good ſucceſſe, & that the Lord ſhould bleſſe them at the laſt, therefore patientlie they endure in labouring: for we ſee commonly, that hope of vantage will ſuſtaine a man, and cauſe him to endure much trouble & labour. And this hope, if it bee in the Lord, who neuer leaues His owne, makes the patience and enduring of labour to gette a good ſucceſſe. So long as thou liueſt, caſt hope neuer off, if it vvere no more, but becauſe by it thou glo
                  •
               ifieſt God: for by faith and hope to obtain all good things which are neceſſary either to ſoule or bodie from the handes of the Father of lightes, from whome all good things deſcend, we glorifie Him in the multitude of His mercy. By the example of the Diſciples let vs learne, that when we haue troubled and pained our ſelues very long and find but ſober ſucceſſe of our trauels, at leaſt to be humbled and mortified, and to continue conſtantly in labouring waiting patiently for ye Lords bleſſing: for as ye 
               d
                     •
                  ſciples in the end found a better ſucceſſe than they could haue looked for: (They founde the net to bee filled with ſuch a multitude of fiſhes, yt 
               they were not able to draw it) ſo ſhall we find in th'end, yt our patient waiting for ye Lords bleſſing ſhal not be frui
                  •
               leſſe and without ſucceſſe.
            
               Nowe to goe forwarde. They knewe not the Lord when at His command they caſt the nette into the Sea: but nowe, when they ſee ſuch a marue
                  •
               lous draught of fiſhes incloſed within their nets, they beginne to conceiue that it was the Lord that ſpake to them. The firſt man who diſcernes Him, is IOHN, who deſcribes himſelfe heere to bee the Diſciple whome the Lord loued: and commonlie he deſcribes himſelfe in the Goſpell by this ſtile, and that becauſe hee found the loue of God ſpred abroade in his heart by His Holy Spirit in an exceeding great meaſure. IOHN ſaide vnto PETER, It is the LORD. The thing that makes IOHN to knowe that it was the Lord that ſpake, was the extraordinarie and marueilous ſucceſſe that they found in their trauels: for in that ſucceſſe hee ſawe and conſidered not onelie an exceeding great power, but alſo a wonderfull bountifulneſſe and liberalitie, whereupon hee gathers, that it was the Lord that ſpake vnto them, and commanded them to caſt out the nette, and directed them in their labour, and made them to gette ſuch ſucceſſe. Learne then heere by IOHNS example, when the Lorde beſtowes His benefites and graces on thee, and when thou ſeeſt His workes, by His workes and benefites to aſcende to God the giuer of them, and in them to acknowledge Him and His eſſentiall properties, His power, His bountifulneſſe, His mercie, His prouidence, &c. For if wee weigh rightlie, and deepelie conſider the benefites and workes of God in them, wee will finde as it were a ſeale of the majeſtie of God, of His power, of His mercie, of His liberalitie and bountifulneſſe, which ſhould mooue vs to lift vp our eyes to Heauen, to beholde the Lord, who is the worker and giuer of all, that ſo with chearefulneſſe and pleaſure wee may glorifie Him: for this is our greateſt happineſſe and felicitie to glorifie the majeſtie of our God in all thinges. There are manie, who when as they ſee the wonderous workes of God, and daylie receiue benefites of Him, they ſo reſt vpon the outwarde workes and benefites, that they neuer aſcende to God, the author and giuer of them, to ſee Him, and to glorifie Him. But miſerable are they who ſo does, what euer they bee: for by ſo doing, they not onelie depriue themſelues of happineſſe, but alſo they turne the bleſſinges of God into a curſe to them.
            When IOHN hath informed PETER that it was the Lord, vvhat does PETER? It is ſaide, When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, hee girded his coat to him (for hee was naked) and cast himſelfe into the

Sea. He ſhewes a great zeale and forwardneſſe: for in my judgement this doing of PETER proceeded not from fooliſh hardineſſe, and inconſiderate raſhneſſe, but from a true zeale and feruent deſire to meete with the Lord. Nowe, will yee compare IOHN and PETER together, ye will find great diuerſitie of giftes: IOHN knewe the Lord firſt, and that by ſight: PETER knew the Lord next, but by hearing, for IOHN informed him. IOHN was before PETER in faith & knowledge: but PETER, who comes behinde, paſſes IOHN, who was his teacher, & had inſtructed him, for he is more zealous than IOHN was: IOHN exceeded in knowledge, but PETER exceeded in zeale. This lets vs ſee the trueth of that ſentence of PAVL, One and the ſelfe ſame Spirit worketh all gifts, distributing to euery mā ſeuerally as he willeth, 1. Corinth. 12.11. Euen in the Apoſtles themſelues: for euen among them ſome excelled in one gift, and ſome in another: IOHN excelled in knowledge, and had knowledge of the glorious perſon of Ieſus Chriſt, and namelie, of His diuinitie, as his Euangell declares (for it is full of high myſteries & ſublime doctrine of Chriſt) aboue the reſt of the Apoſtles. PETER excelled in zeale and forwardneſſe, and was more ardent in zeale than the reſt, as wee may reade in the Goſpell: PAVL excelled in labouring, and painfulneſſe in preaching of the Goſpell: for hee ſayes himſelfe, I laboured more aboundantlie than all the Apostles, 1. Corinth. Chap. 15. verſ. 10. The LORD gaue not all graces to anie one of them, but to euerie one ſuch a meaſure of grace as Hee pleaſed: neither had it beene expedient to themſelues, nor ſo profitable to others: It had not beene expedient to themſelues, becauſe it might haue beene that they would haue comtemned and deſpiſed others in reſpect of themſelues. It had not beene ſo profitable to others, becauſe others would haue enuied them for their great perfection of graces. And ſo by this meanes, the bodie of IESVS (euen His Church, which ſhould bee compact and ſtraitlie joyned together) would haue beene miſerablie rent aſunder.
            On the other part, this inequalitie and diuerſitie of giftes that the Lord giues to men, is a ſpeciall meane to joyne and knitte together the members of the miſticall bodie of CHRIST: for as in the bodie of man the inequalitie and diuerſitie of functions & giftes that are giuen to ſeueral members, joynes and holds together ye mēbers of ye body: euē ſo yt inequality & diuerſity of ſpiritual graces giuen to euery mēber of ye body of Chriſt, euery one hauing

neede of the helpe of another, joynes and holdes together the members, to make vp one compact bodie. Rea
                  •
               e of this in the firſt Epistle of Sainct Paul to the Corinthians, Chap. 12. verſ. 24.25.
            
            Nowe I ſhall onelie marke one thing, and ſo I ſhall ende: All the night preceeding, when the Lord Ieſus was abſent, Johns faith and Peters zeale were languiſhing and dwining: but in the morning when Chriſt returnes, both Johns faith and Peters zeale beginne to reuiue, and to gette newe ſtrength and vigour. Whereof we may learne, that this grace of faith, knowledge, and zeale, is wakened and raiſed vp by Chriſt, who is the onelie matter and object of them: for our faith and knowledge proceedes of His gracious light, which ſhines in our darke ſoules: Our zeale proceedes from the Spirite of Chriſt, who by His comming kindleth a burning fire in our heartes, and makes vs to burne with zeale, who before were colde in the ſeruice of God. PAVL ſayes, God that commanded light to ſhine out of darkneſſe, is Hee, who hath ſhined in our heartes, to giue the light of the knowledge of the glorie of God in the face of Ieſus Christ. 2. Cor. Chap. 4. verſ. 6. The wordes import, that all faith and knowledge of God that wee haue, is by looking vnto the face of Ieſus: For when wee looke vnto His face, the beames of that glorie which ſhines in it, is conueyed into our ſoules, and lighteneth them, and ſo workes faith and knowledge in them. And when wee ſhall gette a full ſight, and ſee Him as Hee is clearelie face to face, then wee ſhall bee like to Him in glorie: for His glorie ſhall transforme vs into this ſame image from glorie to glorie, 2. Cor. cap. 3. verſ. 18.
            
            Then ſeeing that no grace can either bee wrought or entertained in the ſoule, without the preſence of the Lord Ieſus, and the beholding of His countenance, wee ſhould bee carefull conſtantlie to looke to His face, and beholde His glorie in the mirrour of the worde, ſo long as wee are in this pilgrimage, that ſo hereafter wee may ſee Him face to face, and ſo bee made partakers of His glorie, which Hee hath purchaſed to all them that loue Him by the ſhedding of His owne blood. To Him, therefore, with the Father and the Holie Spirite, bee all praiſe and glorie:
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE XLIX. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XXI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 But the other Diſciples came by ſhippe, (for they were not farre from land, but about two hundreth cubites) and they dr
                        •
                     we the nette with fiſhes.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 As ſoone then as they were come to land, they ſawe hote coales, and fiſh layed thereon, and bread.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Ieſus ſaide vnto them, Bring of the fiſhes, which yee haue nowe caught.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Simon Peter ſtepped foorth, and drewe the nette to lande, full of great fiſhes, an hundreth, fiftie and three: and albeit there were ſo manie, yet was not the nette broken.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Ieſus ſaide vnto them, Come, and dine. And none of the Diſciples durst aske him, Who art thou, ſeeing they knewe that hee was the Lord.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Ieſus then came, and tooke bread, and gaue them, and fiſh likewiſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 This is now the third time that Ieſus ſhewed himſelfe to his Diſciples▪ after that hee was riſen againe from the dead.
               
            
            
               IN this ſeuenth appearing of Chriſt (Beloued Brethren in the Lord) wee haue ſpoken alreadie of the place of His appearing, to vvit, at the Sea of Tiberias: and vve haue ſpoken of the perſons to vvhome Hee appeared, vvho vve
                  •
               e ſeuen in number: the Lord by His ſecret prouidence gathered them together, and kept them together, (albeit ſome vv
                  •
               uld haue ſu
                  •
               dered from the r
                  •
               ſt) to the ende the Lord might ſhew Himſelfe v
                  •
               to them being aſſembled together in one place. W
                  •
               e hau
                  •
                ſpoken of their exerciſe, how they vvere fiſhi
                  •
               g but got little ſucceſſe howbeit they had laboured all the night. We told you alſo of the Lords appearing

to them, He ſhewes Himſelfe to them in the morning, and finding yt they had caught nothing, Hee biddes them caſt out the net on the right ſide of the ſhippe: we ſhew you their obedience, albeit they knew Him not, & thought that He had bene a ſtranger, yet vpon hope of a good ſucceſſe, they caſt out the net. We haue heard what ſucceſſe the Lord gaue to this their obedience, the net was ſo filled with fiſhes, that they were not able to drawe it: And laſt, we haue heard, how Iohn knew Him firſt, and tolde Peter, and how Peter vpon a feruent zeale to meete with the Lord, caſts Himſelfe into the Sea, and hazardes his life. Nowe this day, by Gods grace, we ſhall follow out the reſt of the Hiſtorie of this appearing of Chriſt, as namely, how the Diſciples did meete vvith the Lord, and how when they came to the land, miraculouſly they ſaw fiſhes laide on hote coales, and what was the Lords conference and dealing with them, and vvhat vvas the behauiour of Peter, and the reſt of the Diſciples. But to come to the wordes: when Peter had caſt himſelfe into the Sea, and came to the Lord, what doe the reſt of the Diſciples? Are they altogether careleſſe? Haue they not alſo a deſire to meete vvith the Lord? Yes, they haue a deſire, and they came to the Lord, albeit not ſo ſoone as Peter, For they came by ſhip, for they were not far from land, but about two hundreth cubits. Albeit they came not all ſo ſoone as Peter, yet at the laſt, they al come to ye Lord as vvell as Peter, for they vvere not deſtitute of grace no more than Peter: as zeale caried Peter to ye Lord, ſo Faith & knowledge brings and leades the reſt to the Lord: Peters zeale mooued him to come more ſpeedily, ſuddenly & haſtily to the Lord, but their Faith and knowledge, brought Iohn & the reſt alſo to the Lord, for ſuch is the force of Faith, that albeit it haue not ay ſuch feruent zeale accompanying it, as vvas the zeale of Peter, yet at laſt it will leade & conuey a man vnto Chriſt. Striue aboue all thinges to haue Faith, and ſeeke it dayly of the Lord: for if thou haue Faith in Chriſt, not only ſhalt thou get a comfortable ſight of Him, heere in thy ſoule, but alſo thou ſhalt ſee Him hereafter face to face: & by the contrarie, if thou want Faith▪ if thou haue it not in ſome meaſure, thou ſhalt neuer get a ſight of God to thy comfort: for as the Apoſtle ſayes, Without holineſſ
                     •
                   no man ſhall ſee the Lord, Heb. 12.14 (If thou be not holy, thou ſh
                  •
               lt never ſee Heaven) ſo ſay I, Without Faith, thou ſhalt neuer ſ
                  •
               e God, if thou haue not Faith, thou ſhal
                  •
                neuer come to Heauen, Mocke Faith and holineſſ
                  •
               , as ye pleaſe the Lord ſh
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ſie

this one day, vvithout Faith & holineſſe the gates of Heauen ſhalbe cloſed vpon thee, thou ſhalt neuer get no portion of life nor glory.
            Nowe vvhile the Diſciples are comming to the Lord, They are drawing the net with the fiſhes: Compare this doing of theirs vvith the doing of Peter, & ye vvill ſee, both doe vvell, albeit the manner be diuerſe: Peter left the net, & all ye fiſhes behind, & ſwimmed out haſtily & ſpeedily to meet ye Lord, Iohn & the reſt drawing after them the net full of fiſhes, come to ye Lord, both doe vvell, both their doings are commendable: for zeale ſo caried Peter yt not only he cared not for ye net & the fiſhes, but alſo he hazarded his life, that hee might come to ye Lord: Iohn & the reſt of ye Diſciples, as they knew ye Lord Himſelfe, ſo they eſteeme highly of that benefite vvhich the Lord powerfully & louingly had beſtowed vpō them, as a pledge of His fauour: & therfore they were not careleſſe of the benefite, they miſregarded it not, but they thought it meet, to carrie it with them▪ for His cauſe who had vouchſafed it on them, & ſo both ye one & the other are worthy of praiſe: & hereof we may learne this leſſon: The actions of ye Children of God, wherein they are exerciſed according to ye gift that ye Lord hath diſtributed to euery one, albeit they be very farre different one from another, yet they are all in ſome ſort good & worthy of their owne praiſe, becauſe euery one of them helpes another: for as it is with the giftes & faculties, ſo it is with the actions & operations proceeding from them. Now the gifts & faculties are diuerſe, & yet all are for the well of the body, & euery one of them ſupplies the want of another yea euen ye meaneſt gifts helpe the greateſt, the gift of the foot helpes the gift of the hand▪ and of the eye: Euen ſo, the actions and operations ſlowing from the gifts, ſerue for the well and commoditie of the whole body, & euery one of them ſupplies the want and inlake that is in another, the leaſt may helpe the greateſt in ſome thing that it wants. Ye ſee a proofe of this heere, in the actions & doings of the Apoſtles. Peter left the net, the fiſhes, and all behinde him▪ that hee might cor
                  •
               e haſtily vnto the Lord, the thing that in
                  •
               a
                  •
               ed in him, the reſt ſupplied, they bring the b
                  •
               nefite with them, the fiſhes that the Lord had ſent them. Again, albeit that Iohn & ye reſt brought y• fiſhes with them that ye Lo
                  •
               d gaue th
                  •
               m as a pledge of 
                  •
               is loue, yet they were ſomewhat ſlo
                  •
               e▪ they 
                  •
               a
                  •
               e
                  •
                not, as Peter did to come to the 
                  •
               ord: now Pet
                     •
                  r helpe
                  •
                them in this wa
                  ••
               , for by hi
                  •
                zeale and forwardneſſe, he ſtirred them v
                  •••
                & prouoked them to a godly e
                  •
               ulat on.
            
               Wee muſt not incontinently deſpiſe and reject the particular actions of euery one of the children of God, becauſe they are not perfect in all reſpects: for the Lord will not beſtow all gifts at once to euery faithfull man, but wee ſhould conſider all the actions of all the children of GOD gathered together, as it were in a maſſe, and one heape, and ſo, becauſe euery one helpes and ſupplies the want of another, to the well of the whole, we ſhall finde a perfection.
            Now, when by ſhip drawing the net with the fiſhes after them, they come to land: What falles out? What finde they? They find a miraculous worke: for it is ſaid, As ſoone then as they were come to land, they ſaw hoat coales, and fiſh laide thereon, and bread. Where euer they came, they ſawe miracles: when they were on the Sea, they found a miraculous multitude of fiſhes incloſed in the net: when they come to the lande, they found another miracle, a fire, and all furniture for their dinner, extraordinarily prepared without the hand of man. No queſtion, theſe things were done by the extraordinarie working and diſpenſation of GOD, to the end, that not only they might aſſuredly know, that the Lord was riſen againe, but likewiſe, that when they conſidered His marueilous and extraordinarie power, they might be perſwaded, that He who roſe from the dead, was not only man, but alſo God: for theſe His vvonderous workes bare witneſſe, that the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily, Iohn ſayes, We ſaw His glorie, as the glory of the only begotten Sonne of God, Ioh. 1.14. How ſaw we this glorie? How diſcerned he it: Euen by theſe & many other ſuch wondrous works: & indeed, it had done them litle good to haue knowen, that Chriſt was riſen againe, except they had beene aſſured, that He who roſe vvas God, the Sonne of God, if they had not knowen this, the knowledge of His Reſurrection had not bene ſteadable to Saluation.
            Nowe it vvould bee marked, that he ſayes, when they come to land, They ſaw fiſh laide on the coales, and bread. This was for their ſuſtentation: So the Lord manifeſted not only His power in the miracle, but likewiſe His loue in feeding of them, to the end, that they ſhould not reſt & cōtent themſelues with marueiling at His power, but that vpon th
                  •
                conſideration of His g
                  •
               eat loue▪ they ſhould be mooued to loue Him againe intierely, & to put their truſt in Him. Indeede, vve ought to vvonder at the gloriouſneſſe of the perſon the Lord, and at His extraordinarie and maruellous power, for He

is, as the Prophet Eſay 9.6 calles Him Wonderfull, but vve ſhould ſo maruell at His power, that in ye meane time vve end
                  •
               uoure to haue a ſenſe of His loue, that vve may loue Him againe, & put our truſt in Him: for without the ſenſe of His loue, our maruelling & vvondering at Him, vvill doe vs litle good.
            Now, let vs come to the Lords conference vvith the Diſciples, Ieſus ſaide vnto them, Bring of the fiſhes, which yee haue nowe caught. The Lord breakes off firſt the conference: for they carried ſuch a reuerence to the Lord, that they vvould not preſume once to ſpeake: for as the preſence of the Lord vvorketh Faith, and loue in the ſoule, ſo it vvorkes feare and reuerence of His Majeſtie, if thou vvanteſt feare and reuerence to His Majeſtie, thou neuer foundeſt His preſence in thy ſoule. Now vvhen Hee bids them, Bring of the fiſhes which they had caught, He demands an accompt of the benefite vvhich He had beſtowed on them, and ſo Hee ſhewes, that it vvas not His vvill that raſhly & vnaduiſedly they ſhould haue caſt away the benefite vvherewith He had bleſſed them, albeit it vvas but an earthly bleſsing: and hereby vve may ſee, that the fact of Iohn, and the other Diſciples vvas vvorthie of praiſe, vvho left not the fiſhes behind them, but drew the net full of fiſhes to the land.
            Againe, it is worthie to be marked, that he aſcribeth the taking of the fiſhes which Hee had encloſed in the net, and freely giuen them to their trauels & labours: for He ſayes, Bring of the f
                     •
                  ſhes which ye haue now caught. This forme of ſpeaking, lets vs ſee, how well the Lord likes, & how highly He counts of the labours which His own Children vndertake at His cōmandement: for albeit we be altogether vnprofitable ſeruants, when we haue done all that we can do, Luke 17.10. and all our labours be not ſteadable to Him, nor profitable in thē
               
                  •
               elues, yet ſuch is His loue & fauour towards His own, that both He commends them as profitable ſeruants, & allowes of their workes as ſteadable, and this He does, to the end He may encourage vs as His children, not to wearie, but to goe forward in well doing: for it is neceſſarie that we be exerciſed in well doing, & go forward in good works: for God hath ordained that we ſhould walke in them, Epheſ. 2.10 that without them it is vnpoſsible to attaine vnto eternal
                  •
                life In like maner, when freely He crownes His grace into vs, Hee calles that crowne, a reward, as if we had d
                  •
               ſerued it by our labours: for the Lorde vſes to deale with vs, as a louing father deales vvith His Children, the father will make

much of his ſonne, & allure him, & promiſe him an hyre, to moue him to do that thing that he is obliged to do of duty: ſo the Lord dates and allures vs, and calles the thing which Hee giues vs freelie, an hyre and rewarde, to the ende, that Hee may encourage vs to goe forwardes in vvell-doing. Likewiſe, in that perfect forme of prayer vvhich the Lord hath taught vs, Hee calles that bread which Hee biddes vs craue from GOD, our bread: as though GOD vvere indebted to giue it vnto vs, and as if vve had a right vnto it: vvhich neuertheleſſe vve craue from God as appertaining to Him & not to vs: yet He teaches vs to call it our bread, albeit vve haue no right to it, to teſtifie His fatherly loue & fauour towardes vs. When the Papiſts heare any thing aſcribed to our laboures, & vvhen they heare a rewarde named in the Scriptures; then incontinent they conclude, That vvee merite it at GODS hand. But they deceaue themſelues: for as the Lord aſcribes heere the taking of the fiſhe, vvhich vvas His benefite, and bleſſing vnto their laboures, vvhich they vndertooke at His commandement. So after this ſame manner, and no otherwiſe, Hee vſes to call that a rewarde vvhich Hee giues vs freelie, to the ende Hee may encourage vs vvith the greater pleaſure to doe His vvill.
            Nowe let vs come to the obedience to this cōmandement of the Lord. As ſoone as Peter heares the Lord bidding them bring of the fiſhes which they had caught, incontinent hee ſtepped foorth, and drewe the nette to land, full of great fiſhes, an hundreth, fift
                     •
                  e and three. Hee is verie readie to obeye. Before, vvhen firſt hee vnderſtoode that it vvas the LORDE, hee vvas carried vvith ſuch a feruent zeale to meete vvith the LORDE, that hee left the nette, fiſhes, and all behinde him. Nowe vvhen hee heares the LORD commanding to bring the fiſhes, there is none of them ſo bent and readie to obeye. Which lettes vs ſee, that vvhen PETER left all, and caſt himſelfe into the Sea, to meete the LORDE, hee deſpiſed not, neither miſregarded the benefite of the fiſhes, vvhich the LORDE gaue the DISCIPLES. So learne in this example of PETER vvhat is the diſpoſition and behauiour of a ſanctified and holie perſon: for a ſeaſon hee vvill bee rauiſhed and (as it vvere) tranſported, aboue all the pleaſures and outwarde comfortes of the vvorlde: and he vvill bee ſo ſette vpon the meditation and thinking of thoſe thinges vvhich are ſpirituall, and to enjoye the preſence of the LORD, that ſcarcelie vvill hee once ſo much

as haue any thought of them, becauſe he countes himſelfe to be a Citizen of the Kingdome of Heauen. Againe, when hee knowes that it is the Lords will, that he ſhould be exerciſed the time of his pilgrimage heere in ſome earthly calling, hee is content to returne backe againe, and to put his hand to worke, exerciſing him in his owne calling, yet in the meane time, when his hande is working, his heart is in Heauen where his treaſure is, when he is exerciſed in his calling, his conuerſation is aboue: and as Paul ſpeakes of him: Hee vſes the world, as though hee vſed it not, 1. Cor. 7.31. That is, When he is exerciſed in worldly things, he hath not his heart fixed on the world: for that is the right vſing of the world: for that man that hath his heart fixed on the world, when he is occupied in a worldly calling, he abuſes the world. If euer in all thine actions thine heart bee glewed to the vvorlde, and thine affections teddered to the earth, if thou haue no pleaſure to thinke of Heauen and heauenly thinges, thou mayeſt take that for a ſure token, that as yet thou art not called to the participation of grace.
            Nowe, when Peter drawes the net with an hundreth, fiftie and three great fiſhes in it, the Euangeliſt markes, that Albeit they were ſo many, yet was not the nette broken. No queſtion, as the taking of ſo many fiſhes, the hote coales, & fiſh laide thereon, with bread, was effectuate, as ye heard by the ſecret, extraordinarie & miraculous prouidence of God, ſo was this alſo: and all was to this end, that the Diſciples might ſee, that the Godhead dwelt in Him bodily, and that the Godhead, which before the Paſsion, was obſcured, and kept the ſelfe cloſe, did nowe vtter the ſelfe gloriouſly. When Peter hath drawen the net vvith the fiſh, to the land, The Lord ſaide vnto them, Come and dine. In the former doings, ye haue heard, Hee vttered His Godhead, now heere by His familiar and accuſtomed forme of doing, He makes it manifeſt, that Hee vvas man alſo. Yee haue heard before, that by the actions of eating and drinking, He prooued, that Hee was not a Spirit, but a man, Luke 24.39. And as Hee is carefull to enforme their mindes, and by theſe actions to perſwade them, that He is both God and man: ſo likewiſe He hath a care of their bodies, and of the ſuſtentation of this temporall life. He knew that by their long & painfull trauell, they were both wearied and hungrie, and had great need of refreſhment, the Lord had a care of this, and Hee feedes them as it were with His owne hand: ſo that at one time, both their ſoules and their bodies are

fedde by Him: and this ſhould be thy care, that when thou findeſt that the Lord feedes thy body, and hath a care of this temporall life, that thou alſo ſtriue to finde, that the Lord feedes thy ſoule, & hath a care to bring thee vnto eternall life. And, indeede, if thou receiueſt theſe temporall benefites which ſerue for the ſuſtentation of thy body with thankeſgiuing and prayer, thou wilt finde, that when the Lord feedes thy body, He feedes alſo thy ſoule.
            Now, the Euangeliſt markes by the way, interrupting the Hiſtorie, That none of the Diſciples durſt aske Him, Who art thou, ſeeing they knew that H
                     •
                  e was the Lord. No queſtion, the Euangeliſts ſets downe theſe wordes, partly to let vs ſee, what great reuerence they caried to the Lord, while they ſate at table with Him, and partly, to let vs ſee, how full and ſure perſwaſion they had, that it was the Lord, for he telles the cauſe, why they durſt not aske Him, who He was, becauſe They knewe that He was the Lord, and it had bene too great boldneſſe and impudencie in them, to haue asked that at the Lord which they knewe well enough, and the Lord had reueiled Himſelfe to them ſufficiently before, and now alſo. By this behauiour of the Diſciples, wee may marke what is the nature of Faith, and the force and effect of it in the regenerate man: it is not vnreuerent, but thinkes reuerently of the Lord, whome it apprehends: it is not impudent and ſhameleſſe, but humble and ſhamefaſt: it is not immoderate, it paſſes not meaſure, but it is moderate, and conteines the ſelfe within bounds and meaſure: that is, it is not euermore curiouſly ſeeking many and new reuelations, but it is content with that meaſure, that the Lord hath reueiled: By the contrarie, looke to the nature of infidelitie: it is euer vnreuerent toward GOD, impudent and immoderate: it is neuer content with that meaſure of reuelations, which the Lord hath giuen, but it is euer curiouſly out of meaſure, ſeeking new reuelations: and what if it were for any good end, what if it were, to learne and grow better, then it were ſomewhat more excuſable, but it is all to this ende, that either it may tempt the Majeſtie of God, or els to ſatisfie the immoderate and vnſatiable curioſitie: wee may ſee the example of theſe fruites of infidelitie in ſundrie perſons: as in the Iewes, who as Dauid ſayes, oft times tempted the Lord in the Wilderneſſe by their infidelitie, but chiefly in the Scribes and Phariſes, they euer tempted the LORD: for albeit both by His Word and doctrine, and alſo by His diuine workes

and miracles, Hee had ſufficiently reueiled Himſelfe vnto them, and albeit alſo, they had beene conuicted in their conſcience, that Hee was the Meſsias, yet notwithſtanding of all this, they continue ſtill in tempting of Him, and they ſay, Maſter, we deſire to ſee a ſigne of thee, Matth. Chapter 12. verſe 38. But the LORD anſwered them, An euill and adulierous generation ſeekes a ſigne, but no ſigne ſhall be giuen to it, but the ſigne of the Prophet Ionah. The Papists this day, are very like the Scribes and Phariſes, they cannot be content with that meaſure of reuelation which the LORD hath giuen vs in the Scriptures, and namely, in the Newe Teſtament, wherein the Myſterie of CHRIST, and the doctrine of Saluation is fully and clearly ſet downe (a clearer reuelation than is there ſet downe ſhall we neuer finde, vntill the LORD come in the cloudes, to judge the world) they cannot be content with all the Miracles, which wee reade wrought in the Olde and Newe Teſtaments, by the Prophets, by the Lord Himſelfe and the Apoſtles, but they are euer ſeeking for new and extraordinarie reuelations, they are ſeeking vnwritten verities (which may be cal
                  •
               ed vanities, they are euer ſeeking newe miracles and ſuch other toyes and dreames, they can neuer bee content: But wee may anſwere them, as the LORD anſwered the Phariſes: They ſhall get no moe ſignes nor reuelations than they haue gotten, alreadie: they are too bold and impudent, after that the LORD hath ſufficiently reueiled Himſelfe, to ſ
                  •
               eke for new reuelations. This their doing teſtifies ſufficiently, that they haue no Faith: for faith is reuerent▪ ſhamefaſt and moderate, keeping the ſelfe within the bounds of Gods reueiled will: but by the contrarie, it beares witneſſe of their infidelitie: for this impudencie and immoderate ſeeking of newe miracles and reuelations are fruites of infidelitie.
            But a queſtion may bee mooued vpon theſe wordes: When hee ſayes: And none of the Diſciples durſt aske Him, Who art thou, ſeeing they knew that Hee was the LORD. Is it vnlawfull for vs to ſeeke increaſe and growth of knowledge? Yea, are we not commanded to ſeeke it dayly? Sayes not the LORD, Seeke, and ye ſhall finde: aske, and it ſhall bee giuen you: knocke, and it ſhall bee opened vnto you? Luke Chapter 11. verſe 9. Yea, is it not ſaide, The violent take the Kingdome of Heauen by force, Matth. Chap. 11. verſ. 12.
               
And doth not the Lord recommend importunitie and earneſtneſſe in crauing, by the Parable of the widowe, who importunated the vnrighteous Iudge? To this I anſwere: It is lawfull, indeede, to ſeeke continually the increaſe and growth of knowledge, as well as of all other ſpirituall graces: yea, it is a thing that the Lord recommends vnto vs & commands. But of what knowledge ſhould we ſeeke the increaſe? Only the knowledge of theſe thinges that are reueiled and ſet downe in the Olde and New Teſtament: it is the Lords will, that wee euer grow in knowledge of theſe thinges, and that we goe from knowledge to knowledge. But this increaſe of knowledge is farre different from curioſitie in ſeeking new reuelations, beſides the thinges that are reueiled in the writes of the Prophets and the Apoſtles. The Lord likes well growth of knowledge, but Hee miſlikes curioſitie: yea, I ſay to thee, if thou ſeekeſt a clearer and more ample reuelation, than that which is alreadie ſet downe in the Olde and New Teſtament, thou offendeſt highly the Majeſtie of God: for by ſo doing thou denieſt that Chriſt when Hee came into the world, brought with Him a full and perfect reuelation of all things neceſſarie. Read what the Apoſtle Paul ſayes, Rom. 10.6.
            
            Now, to end ſhortly: In the laſt wordes of our Text, wee haue ſet downe the Concluſion of this appearing of Chriſt, whereof we haue ſpoken, wherein hee telles, that it was the third in number: for hee ſayes, This nowe is the third time, that Ieſus ſhewed Himſelfe vnto His Diſciples, after He was raiſed againe from the dead. I thinke he calles it the third in number, not abſolutely, but in reſpect of the Diſciples, and ſo the words import: for it is ſaid, This is the third time that He ſhewed Himſelfe vnto His Diſciples: for if we number preciſely the particular appearing of Chriſt after His Reſurrection vnto this time, whereof wee haue any mention made in the Scripture, we will finde that this is the eight in number, He ſhewed Himſelfe firſt to Marie Magdalene: Next, to other certaine women: Thirdly, to the two Apoſtles, who were going to Emmaus: Fourthly, to Simon Peter: Fifthly, to lames, as we may read, 1. Cor. 15.6. Sixtly, to the Diſciples aſſembled together in Ieruſalem, Thomas only being abſent: Seuenthly, to the ſame Diſciples aſſembled together, Thomas beeing preſent with them: Eightly, He appeared vnto theſe ſ
                  •
               uen, at this time when they were fiſhing. Nowe it was not without cauſe, that the Lord reueiled Himſelfe ſo oft after Hee roſe againe.

No queſtion Hee did it not onely to confirme the Diſciples of the trueth of His Reſurrection, but alſo for our cauſe, that wee might haue ſtedfaſt faith, and full aſſurance, that Hee is riſen againe for our comfort, And it is the Lords will, that when wee reade, that there were ſo many that ſaw Him with their eyes, heard Him, ſpake with Him, handeled Him, and haunted with Him, wee ſhould bee fully perſwaded and aſſured of His Reſurrection. But I will not inſiſt in this matter, becauſe I haue ſpoken of it alreadie. Nowe ſeeing the Lord has had ſuch a great care of our faith, that by beleeuing we might haue comfort, ſeeing ſo oft times, and to ſo manie Hee appeared, the LORD make theſe meanes effectuall, to worke and to encreaſe faith in vs, that both in our life, and eſpeciallie in the houre of death, wee may haue matter of rejoycing in Him: To vvhome, vvith the Father, and the Holie Spirit, bee all praiſe and honour, AMEN.
         
         
            THE L. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XXI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 So when they had dined, Ieſus ſaid to Simon Peter, Simon the ſonne of Iona, louest thou me more than theſe? He ſaid vnto him, Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I loue thee. He ſaid vnto him, Feede my lambes.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 He ſaid to him againe the ſecond time, Simon the ſonne of Iona, louest thou me? He ſaid vnto him, Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I loue thee. He ſaid vnto him, Feede my ſheepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 He ſaid vnto him the third time, Simon the ſonne of Iona, louest thou me? Peter was ſorie becauſe hee ſaid to him the third time, Louest thou mee? and ſaid vnto him, Lord, thou knowest all thinges: thou knowest that I loue thee. Ieſus ſaid to him, Feede my ſheepe.
               
            
            
               
               WEE haue hearde theſe dayes paſt (Beloued in the Lord Ieſus) of the third generall appearance of the Lord Ieſus after His glorious Reſurrection. The place we heard was by the Sea of Tiberias. The perſons to whom He appeared we heard were ſeuen in number. The manner how He appeared, was by miracle by wonderfull working. He ſhewes a miracle in the Sea, by taking of many great fiſhes there: Then by land, by the extraordinary preparation of meat & fire to His diſciples, comming off the ſea to the land. To this He joyned ye third miracle, in keeping whole the net, ſo that there was not a threed broken, notwithſtanding of the great number of fiſhes taken therein. Thereafter as He manifeſted Himſelfe in His Godhead & diuine power in working of miracles; ſo He comes on more familiarly, & manifeſtes Himſelfe in His humane nature, & lets thē ſee, yt He was a mā, & ate & drunk with thē, as other men: therfore He ſits down, & dines with them, Hee eates Himſelf, & giues them to eat alſo: Then hauing dined, He enters in conference with Peter: which conference we haue to entreat of this day, as God wil giue vs grace. The end of His conference with Peter was not to make him an 
                  Ʋniuerſall Biſhop, His Vicar here on ye earth, as the Papiſts ſpeake: that is to ſay, To make vp a Popedome: for the Papiſts make theſe words relatiue to that promiſe, which they ſaye He made to Peter before. Matth. 16.18. I ſay vnto thee, Thou art Peter, & vpon this Rocke I will build my Kirke. That was not the end: but ye end of it was to reſtore him again to his own rowm of th'Apoſtleſhip, from the which he fell: for Peter had made a foule defection frō his Lord, he denied Him thriſe, & ſo by this defection & threefold denial, he depriued himſelfe of his rowm of th'Apoſtleſhip, wherunto he was called. Looke how verily Judas fell by his traitorie, as verilie did Peter fall: for he that denies the Lord Ieſus, vnto the time he bee reſtored againe, he cannot be a Chriſtian man (let bee an Apoſtle or Miniſter.) So in a word, the ende of this conference was to reſtore Peter again, by taking out of his own mouth a threefold confeſſion of his loue to the Lord & of the hatred of that foule ſin which hee committed, by denying of the Lord. Indeed it is true, at Chriſts firſt meeting with His diſciples at Hieruſalē
                in a māner he was reſtored, becauſe he got a d
                  •
               rection with the reſt, to go foorth & preach the Goſpel, where Chriſt ſayes, As my Father ſends me, ſo ſend J you, Joh. 20.31. Yet becauſe this was generall, therfore now to take all grudges

and doubts out of the heart of Peter, & the reſt of th'Apoſtles, he has a particular dealing with him here in this place: & this he does in preſence of ſo many diſciples, for the greater confi
                  •
               mation of his reſtoring: and herein the Lord vrges him thriſe, that He might draw out of him a threefold confeſſion, anſwerable to his thr
                  •
               efold deniall. It may bee likewiſe, that in this conference the Lord had a great reſpect to recommend the ca
                  •
               e of His Kirke, which He was to leaue behind Him, to Peter, & to the reſt of th'Apoſtles: for in the perſon of Peter, Hee ſpeakes to all the reſt. Vpon this conference marke this generally: Firſt, that the Lord will not refuſe repentance and pardon to him who has denied Him, if his deniall come of infirmitie: Next, That it is the Lord only, who prouokes and allures a man to repentance, and who preuents him if he be careles of his ſinne. We ſaw before, that the Lord looked vpon Peter, after he had denied Him in the Hall of Caiaphas & made him to weepe. Now He accompliſhes & brings to perfection yt worke which He began, & He vrges a threefold cōfeſſion. But to come to ye matter: The Lord begins to commune with him, & theſe are the words, Simon, the ſonne of Iona, loueſt thou me better than theſe? (pointing out the reſt of th'apoſtles) that is, more than the reſt loues me? This the Lord demands of Peter, not that He was ignorant of the loue of Peter towarde Him: for Peter teſtifies this in his anſwere, when hee ſayes to the Lord, Thou knoweſt that I loue thee. The Lord knew th'inward affection of Peter, as well as himſelfe did: So as for Himſelfe He ned not this confeſſion, nor to ſpeak one word, for He knew his heart: yet He vrges the confeſſion of the mouth, that that loue which he ba
                  •
               e in his heart, hee ſhould profeſſe with his mouth: wherefore, in demanding, He calles firſt of all, Peter to remembrance of his bragging, that he vſed a little before His Paſsion, when Pe
                     •
                  er ſtood vp & ſaide, Though all ſhould be offended by thee, yet will I neuer be offended. Matth. 26.33. As though he ſhould ſay, Though all ſhould leaue thee, I ſhall not leaue thee, I ſhall bee readie to goe to priſon, and to death, with thee. Therefore the Lord ſayes, Louest thou me more than theſe? Thē with this he calles to remēbrance that foule defection, for all his craking: as if Hee vvould ſaye, For all thy boaſting, PETER, remember thee of thy deni
                  •
               ll. So in one vvorde, Hee prickes his conſcience, Hee rebuk
                  •
               s him both for his arrogant vanting & alſo for his foule defectiō. This He does in effect: but if ye mark ye words, ye ſhal ſee ye pricking of him to be joyned wt ſuch ſweetnes in ſpeaking, as is wōderful, to be ſo ſeaſoned wt 
               
loue as is marueilous: for Hee ſayes in effect as much as this, Howbeit Peter thou haſt fallen in thy bragging & vanting, and alſo haſt made foule defection from me: yet if thou repent thee, and turne to me, and if thou loue me, there is place of pardon & forgiueneſſe. So ye ſee two contrary thinges joyned together, aſperitie and lenitie, ſoureneſſe and ſweetneſſe, rebuke and conſolation, caſting downe and raiſing vp, wounding and healing in one ſentence. The Lord in one ſentence, in one demaunde, at one time, yea, at a poinct of time, He could wound a man, and heale him. Some might thinke, ſeeing that this was the firſt conference that Chriſt had with Peter after his denyall, and that there ſhould haue beene another kind of meeting, and more ſharpe beginning with a run-a-gate, who had denyed his Maiſter thriſe: ye may thinke Hee ſhould haue vpbraided him, and ſaid, Run-a-gate, why deniedſt thou mee ſo miſchieuouſlie? Why againſt thy conſcience ſinnedſt thou ſo hainouſly? But He ſayes not ſo: but theſe are all the words, Simon the ſonne of Jona, louest thou me. The Lord was not a flyter, a chyder, an vpbraider, a cryer, &c. Therfore it was prophecied of him, My ſeruant ſhall not crie, nor make his voyce to be heard in the ſtreete, nor quench the ſmoaking flaxe, nor breake the bruiſed reed, Eſay. 42.2. Matth. 12.19.20. The ground was, That exceeding loue to Simon Peter, the paſſing loue to ſinners, eſpecially, to the ſecret ones, whom He had choſen: that loue hid all their ſinnes, as Peter ſpeakes, in his firſt Epiſt. and 4. chap. So that if He ſpake an angry word to any, His anger was ſo tempered with loue, that ſcarcely did it appeare. So learne this leſſon: Rebukers ſhould be louers: if thou rebuke a man, loue him, otherwiſe ſpeake not to him, but cloſe thy mouth: for if thou ſeaſon not thy rebuke with loue, then that which ſhould haue bene a medicine, wil be turned into poyſon. They that ſhould be inſtructers and admoniſhers, ſhould be louers. Wherfore, whatſoeuer thou doeſt, doe it in lenity & meekneſſe, and not in bitterneſſe. A bitter teacher is not vvorth a pennie. And this is it that Paul requires, 2. Timoth. 2.24. where he ſayes, The ſeruant of the Lord muſt not ſtriue, but muſt be gentle towards all men. All ſhould be in lenitie, teaching in lenitie, admonitiō in lenity. Wherfore? Becauſe if lenitie be lacking, there will be no edificatiō, no cōforting, no inſtruction If that which thou ſpeakeſt be ſmoothed ouer, and mixed with a gall of bitterneſſe, it will poyſon the man: Therefore, whatſoeuer thou be, whether Miniſter or other, looke that thou haſt loue, and it will make thee to diſcharge all the

pointes of thy duetie with lenitie. Now the Lord is not contented to demand this once onelie, Simon, the ſonne of Iona, louest thou me: but once, twiſe, thriſe. What needed this, yee will aske? was it not ſufficient to aske this once? What behoued this doubling & trepling? Brethren, this was not only yt he might make a threefold cōfeſſion anſwerable to his threefolde deniall, that ſo he might be reſtored: but alſo becauſe his threefolde deniall procured that he ſhould not be ſo ſoone and eaſilie credited: They that haue made a foule defection, as Peter did, certainlie they would be tried, ere they bee truſted. And Chriſt this day would learne vs, that Apoſtates would be well tried, and their hearts would be ſounded, and ripped vp from the ground. A ſlender anſwere ſhould not content vs: wee may not ſettle vpon the ſwarfe of the heart, but the heart muſt bee pricked with manie interrogations, it muſt be lanced deepely, that if there be a ſpunke of ſinceritie & loue, it may be raiſed vp, & appeare: for ye wil not thinke what deepnes of deceitfulnes lies in the heart of man, as Ierem. 17.9. ſayes, The heart is deceitfull & wicked aboue al things, who can know it? It is hard to thee to get thine owne heart ſoūded & tried: go thy way, & aſſay it, & thou ſhalt find it to be true, thou ſhalt bee beguiled with it, as well as another. And as for the ſinceritie of the heart, it is not in the vtmoſt ſwarfe, but it is downe lowe in the ground. Therefore thine heart muſt be touched, pricked, and lanced: partlie by thy ſelfe, and partlie by others, till that pure fountaine of ſinceritie and loue breake foorth and appeare. There is the ſpeciall cauſe of this doubling. All this ſerues for the weale of PETER, howbeit hee tooke euill vvith it for euerie demand vvas a confirmation of PETER, in that grace of Apoſtleſhip. Now to come to PETERS anſwere: Peter ſaid vnto him, Yea, Lord, thou knoweſt that I loue thee. Behold the meeting, Chriſt ſayes, Louest thou me? Hee anſweres, Lord, thou knoweſt that I loue thee. There is a ſweet meeting. When the Lord requires loue of thee, then meete thou Him vvith loue. This anſwere imports, yt His demand has bene very louing, vttered with a ſweet voyce and behauiour, and that Hee ſaide as much as this, I loue thee Peter, louest thou mee? So in this demande Hee has touched the heart of PETER with the ſenſe of that loue which Hee bore to PETER. Now this ſenſe opened the heart of PETER to loue the Lord againe. 1. Ioh. 4.4. There will neuer man loue the Lord firſt. It vvill paſſe thy power to loue Him firſt: therefore of neede force the loue of Chriſt behoued to be ſhed abroad in the heart of PETER,

and hee behooued to bee touched with the loue of the Lord, before hee could anſwere, Lord, I loue thee. Therefore, if the Lord ſaye vnto thee Loueſt thou mee? Saye, Lord, loue mee, that I may loue thee. And if euer thou wouldeſt diſcharge a duetie in this l
                  •
               fe, ſtriue euer to finde that Ieſus loues thee, for elſe all His commaundementes will bee for nothing. But marke the vvordes: P
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  r ſvvould ſeeme not to anſwere the Lord as Hee propones: the Lord propones by way of compariſon, Louest thou mee bett
                     •
                  r than th
                     •
                  ſe? Peter anſweres ſimplie, Lord, I loue thee: Hee ſayes not, better than theſe. I ſee heere a piece of modeſtie, more than hee had before: for before hee fell, he was ouer loftie and jollie, and thought little of the 
                  •
               eſt: But nowe I ſee after his fall, hee vvill not compare with the reſt, but ſimplie hee ſayes, Lord, I loue thee.
            
            Brethren, I ſee, that although his fall vvas euill, yet it has done him good: it has tamed him: he was ouer arrogant before. The defection of the godlie is verie euill: yet this is a ſure thing, that the fallings and the ſinnes, yea, the fouleſt defections of the godlie doe euer better them, and worke alwayes to their good. A vvonderfull thing: The Lord, who brings light out of darkneſſe, makes the defection of His owne to turne to their vveale. Has hee beene a proude man, an ignorant man, &c. the Lord vvill giue him a fall, Hee vvill caſt him downe vpon his backe, and vvith that Hee vvill tame him, & make him to ſtink in his own noſtrils, as He did to Peter: for now vvhen he is fallen, & ſees his own vveakneſſe, he ſpeakes ſoberly, & makes no matching with the reſt▪ Lord, if th'Elect be much beholdē to God, for He makes all things to further them for their ſaluatiō. So in a vvord, No euill can come to the godly man. Yet the wordes vvould be conſidered: he ſayes not ſimply, I loue thee: but, Lord, thou knoweſt that I loue thee: he takes the Lord to be vvitneſſe to his cōfeſſion: as if he vvould ſay, It ſtands not in my words, but Lord, thou knoweſt, that I loue thee. And ſo here he both acknowledges Ieſus to be God, (for He is only judge to the heart) & alſo approues the ſinceritie of his loue to Him: for God is ſaid to bee witneſſe not ſo much to the confeſſion of the mouth, as to the ſinceritie of the heart. If thou loueſt the Lord, call Him to be vvitneſſe of thy loue: and therfore beware of your confeſſion of faith and loue to the Lord: looke yt it be with ſinceritie of the heart & not from the teeth forward & neb of the tongue only: but looke yt it riſe from the loue which is rooted in the heart, for the Lord is witneſſe and judge of the heart, Hee vvill

paſſe from thy wordes, and vvill looke in vvith a pearcing eye into thine heart, & rip it open, to ſee if there bee any ſinceritie of loue there. So looke euer to ye heart, vvhē thou takeſt the Lord to be witneſſe to thee. Men cōmonly take no heed to this, they ſay, The Lord knowes, when they vvill ſpeake falſly. Ye ſhall find this cōmonly, that he who is the greateſt ſwearer & falſeſt man, is euer readieſt to take God to be his vvitnes: but vvhen he ſpeakes ſo, vvhat is he doing? euē crauing that God vvould ſend a vēgeance & judgemēt on him. Yet to vveigh the vvords more narrowly: he ſayes not ſimplie, Thou knoweſt: but vvhē he profeſſes his loue to Him, he giues Him a reuerend ſtile again, & calles Him, Lord. No, th'Apoſtles carried to their Lord a vvonderfull reuerence. This learnes thee, vvhen thou makeſt a cōfeſſion, a profeſſiō, a proteſtatiō, vvherin thou nameſt ye Lord as it ſhould be in modeſty & ſincerity of heart; ſo ſhould it be in fear & reuerēce. That God who is full of glory & majeſtie, ſhould neuer be named, but with honor & reuerence, when thou ſpeakeſt to Him, ſpeake in reuerence: yea, thinke neuer of Him, but with reuerence. Well, theſe ſpeaches & proteſtations of men, wherin they name the majeſty of God, yt are ſo vnreuerend, raſh, & inſolent, teſtifies & ſais plainly, That in their hearts there is no reuerence to God: yea, they vtter, yt in their hearts they haue ſaid, There is not a God in heauē. But, O miſerable catiue, thou ſhalt find yt there is a God one day to thy euerlaſting dānation, I giue thee no leſſe doome. Cōſider further: when Peter anſweres ye Lord the third time, it is ſaid by John, yt Peter was ſad in heart, & giues a ſad & ſorrowfull cōfeſſiō, becauſe he thought the Lord, by ſo many interrogatiōs, credited him not, but d
                     •
                  ſtruſted him. Thē learne hereby what ſhould be ye properties of a true cōfeſſiō: as cōfeſſiō ſhould be in modeſty, ſincerity & reuerēce; ſo it ſhould be in ſadnes: ye cōfeſſiō of a ſinner muſt be in grief & ſadnes: there is no queſtion, but in his confeſſion he ſaw matter of ſadnes, & ſaw ye Lord by His vrging of him ſo many times would haue him to be ſad. This he perceiues, & therfore he is ſad, whē he confeſſes. So the cōfeſſiō of a ſinner muſt be with ſadnes of heart. Wilt thou come to the Lord with a wāton confeſſion, after thine accuſtomed mirrineſſe? No, no, for the Lord by pricking of Peter ſo oft, declares yt He has no pleaſure in a cōfeſſion, except it be in ſadnes. Therfore, when thou confeſſeſt, ſay, Alas Lord, th
                     •
                  t I cānot loue thee ſo well as I ſhould doe, & would doe. Well▪ if the Lord ſeeke a confeſſion of thee, He will pricke thee, till He get a ſad confeſſion of thee. Now it may be asked, What ned this confeſſion

once, twiſe, thriſe to be repeated? What needed Peter thriſe to ſay, I loue thee? I anſwere: what needed P
                     •
                  ter to denie Him thriſe? Now certainly, that threefold deniall requires this threefold confeſsion: if hee had denied Him but once, it might haue bene, Hee would haue asked but once: if thou goeſt downe to Hell by degrees, wilt thou leape vp to Heauen without any degrees at an inſtant? No, no, looke by how many degrees thou haſt gone down from God, toward Hell, by as many degrees muſt thou approach to Him againe: for when thou haſt committed a great ſinne, thou canſt not repent enough for it: albeit thou ſhouldeſt weepe and mourne many dayes and yeeres, all is too litle. Many a time muſt thou cōfeſſe thy ſinne, which if thou doeſt, thou ſhalt both thereby glorifie God▪ and alſo obtaine a fuller aſſurance of the remiſsion of thy ſinnes: for the more thou repenteſt, & the more thou cōfeſſeſt thy ſinnes, thou wilt get the fuller perſwaſion & greater aſſurance that thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee.
            Now I go forward: The Lord meetes Peter againe, when he hath profeſſed that he loued Him, Hee ſayes, F
                     •
                  ede my Lambes: & againe, Feede my ſheepe & the third time, Feed my ſheepe. Peter, ſeeing thou haſt confeſſed, that thou loueſt me, here I abſolute thee: the Lord ſayes in effect, I reſtore thee to thine office againe, be thou an Apoſtle, be thou a feeder of my ſheepe, be a Paſtor to me, this is the principall purpoſe: ſo that ye loue of Ieſus reſtores a ſinner: it is this loue that reſtores thee to the roome thou haſt beene in. But I inſiſt not heere: in this anſwere to Peter, ye ſee, how the Lord will haue thy faith & thy loue to be manifeſted: No, ye cōfeſsion of faith & of loue muſt be manifeſted in actiō, according to the calling the Lord hath placed euery one into: hath the Lord called thee to be a king, Hee wil ſay vnto thee, feed my people, as thou wouldeſt loue me, & the Lord grant, ye Kings may take heed to this, & eſpecially, our King, yt as he profeſſes a loue to Chriſt, ſo he wold feed His people: the Lord giue him this cōſideration: art thou a Miniſter, & ſayeſt, thou loueſt the Lord: well, the Lord will ſay to thee againe, feede my lambes, I neede none of thy feeding, thy loue and well doing cannot extend the ſelfe to me, but do good to others who carie my Image for my cauſe. A profane mā or womā wt a ſhameles face wil ſay▪ I loue God: the greateſt knaue of them all wil ſay ſo: but if it manifeſt not in an actiō, thou art but a lyar, thou loueſt Him not: faith & loue muſt euer vtter thēſelues in good actiōs: haſt yu gottē a heart, hands & feet do

ſome good, otherwiſe if yu doſt neuer a good deed, thy profeſsion of faith & loue is but vain. Look 1. Ioh. 2.4. He that ſayes, I know God, & keepes not His commandements, he is a lyar, & the trueth is not in him. If a mā ſayes, I loue God, & hates his neighbour, he is a lyar, ſo yt he ſhal be puniſhed, not only becauſe he did no good, but becauſe he was a lyar: there are many lying Proteſtants in this Land: they will proteſt they loue God: but when it comes to the trial, the world ſees, yt they haue only a ſhew of religiō, & not ye power therof: there is anot
                  •
               er thing here yet to be marked: vntil Peter had profeſſed he loued Chriſt, He bids him not feed His lambs: but looke how the one followes the other: therefore it muſt follow, yt feeding of the lambes of the Lord, muſt come of the loue of ye Lord. If Peter had ſaid, I loue thee not, Chriſt could not thē haue ſaid to him, feed my lambes: thē the leſſō is cleare: a mā cānot be a Paſtor, a feeder of the ſheepe of Chriſt, except he loue Chriſt: No, there is none in any calling, yt can do any good deed, except ye welſpring of loue be in his heart, if yt be not, he ſhall neuer do any good deed, all ſhalbe ſinne: thou mayeſt well flatter thy ſ
                  •
               lfe, & others may flatter thee, & ſay all is well: but if loue be not, how faire & glanſing ſo euer thy worke be, God coūnts not of it. No King in his calling ſhall euer doe a good deed, except he do it for loue he beares to ye Lord: therefore, ſeeing a Paſtor ſhould learne all other folke to do their dutie: yea, ye King himſelfe, how much more is that loue required to be in him, if hee would do rightly, ſincerely, & earneſtly: as for his feeding, it is more poyſoning than f
                  •
               eding, if he haue not loue to Chriſt: the Paſtor is not worth a penny, yt ſtriues not to get a ſenſe of yt loue of Chriſt in his heart. The
                  •
               e are ſo many difficulties & impediments caſt in to a Paſtor whē he is about to diſcharge his duty, which he can neuer be able to ouercome, except he both loue ye Lord, & be ſenſible of the Lords loue towards him: the life of a Paſtor is a thornie l
                  •
               fe, and the more faithfull ye man be▪ ye moe vexatiōs & troubles will he vnderly: what is his life, but a cōtinuall t
                  •
               ouble? with whō hath he to do? with a flock: for a Paſtor & a flock are relatiue: & what a flock? ſome are ſo dull, that teach he neuer ſo much & careful
                  •
               y, they remaine rude and vncapable (many of this towne are guiltie of this) and if there bee any capable, they are ſo vaine, ſo wanton, & light headed▪ yt they vaniſh away in their own cogitatiōs: & againe, ſome are ſo infirm, yt euery thing almoſt is a ſtūbling block, ſuppoſe yt mē giue no offēce, yet wil they tak offēce: ſome ſo malicious & indured,

that the more the Paſtor cry, the more endure they their heartes, and rejects all wholeſome admonition: ſome will be ſitting vp before the Paſtor, and mocking him when hee is preaching, and when the Paſtor hath done all the pointes of his calling faithfully, he needes not to looke for any thing, but vnthankfull meeting in the end: No, the more faithfull a man be in his calling, the moe tentations ſhall hee bee ſubject to, to make him the more weake and feeble. If ye would have the proofe of this: looke 1. Cor. 4.9. What are we, ſayes Paul, God hath ſet vs vp to be a mocking ſtocke, a 
                     •
                  azing to the world, to the Angels, and to men: what are we? the ofscouring of the world, that is ſweeped out, to be caſt to the backe-ſide. Then what held him vp? and what held vp Peter? and the reſt of the Apoſtles and Martyres? What? but the loue of Ieſus: if they had not loued Ieſus, and that exceedingly, they would ſoone haue fainted (we want the tenth part of that loue to Ieſus that they had, alas, all is vaniſhed away.) Would Peter or Paul, or any of them haue borne out theſe things, if they had wanted the loue of Chriſt, if it had not conſtrained them No, 2 Cor. 5 14. he ſayes, We are fooles, but for Chriſts ſake: for that loue of Chriſt conſtraineth me: that is, the loue of Ieſus occcupies ſo all my ſenſes, that it beares mee out: thereafter he reſolues that loue which he caried to Chriſt, into the owne cauſe, where he ſubjoynes: B
                     •
                  cauſe we know, that if 
                     •
                  ne be dead for all, then were we all dead: the ground of His loue was: becauſe Chriſt loued him: and this loue is the cauſe, that makes His owne to doe all, to ſuffer all for Chriſts ſake, to liue to Him, to die to Him: looke if thou findeſt, that Chriſt loues thee, & then thou wilt loue Him: ſo that thou wilt not refuſe, if it were a thouſand deaths for His cauſe. O the loue of Chriſt is a great gulfe! No, it will drowne greater perſecutions, than the Sea will: Pray therefore that the loue of the Lord Ieſus may be in thine heart, that thou mayeſt loue Him againe. Now againe, if the faithful diſcha
                  •
               ge of the dutie of a Paſtor muſt proceede of neceſsitie from the loue of Chriſt, as the effect frō the cauſe. Then marke, how ye ſhall know, whether a man loue Chriſt or not: a King▪ a Miniſter, euery Profeſſor whoſoeuer. Would ye haue a token? looke if he be faithfull in his calling: if this be a neceſſ
                  •
               ry effect, then marke their works: by their works thou ſhalt know them: the loue cannot be ſeene with the eye, it is vttered by a marke by the life, whē thou ſeeſt a man well occupied in his own calling: the King miniſtring Iuſtice, the Paſtor feeding his people,

certainly, thou mayeſt ſay, Yone man loues Chriſt, but if the action be inlacking▪ what warrand haue I, that a man loues God, I haue none. The Apoſtle Paul, by the confuſions and perturbations which he ſaw to be in the Church of Corinthus, gathers, that the falſe teachers, theſe deceiuers loue not ye Lord Ieſus: & therefore he denounces a judgment againſt them, ſaying, If any man loue not the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, let him be had in execratiō yea, excōmunicated to death, 1. Cor. 16.22. I ſay, an vnfaithful Paſtor, who feedes his own b
                  •
               lly, & not Chriſts ſheepe, is accu
                  •
               ſed, not only becauſe he ſpoiles ye Church of Chriſt, but alſo▪ becauſe he loues not ye Lord Ieſus Woe ſhall be to him one day: & by ye contrarie: a faithfull Paſtor, ô what honour & glory ſhal he be exalted vnto! Yet againe, theſe words would be conſidered: the word of feeding would be looked to: it is a borrowed word: to ſpeake properly, a Miniſter feedes not: it is an Heard, that feedes neat and ſheepe: the Scripture applies not this word only to Miniſters, but to Kings: for looke how buſie as an Heard is going about feeding his flock, as buſie ſhould a King be in his calling: a King is but an Heard ſet ouer to feed ye people of God: but the Scripture commonly in the New Teſtament applies it to Miniſters, becauſe in a Miniſter there ſhould be as great diligence, painfulnes & carefulnes toward ye people, as in ye Heard toward ye flocke: & if there were no more to teach this, this threefold & ſo earneſt cōmendation to Peter & the reſt were ſufficient. It is true, that ye Lord Ieſus Himſelf is the Prince of ye Paſtors: yea, properly He is only Paſtor, He is the Heard: & therefore He clam
                  •
               s this ſtile to Him, Job. 10 1. For why? the flock is His, & not ye Miniſters: therfore He ſayes, Feed my lambes, then ye are his flocke, & He is your Paſtor properly. Againe, it is His food, that ye flock is fed with: all ye ſtore of ye fodder of grace is out of His barne. If a Miniſter miniſter to you ye ſmalleſt portion of food which is not taken out of ye barneyard of Ieſus, it is poyſon he giues you. Knaues haue deceiued ye world long: the Pope & his ſhauelings haue propined poyſon to ye people, & haue made many thouſands goe to Hell: giue Chriſts flocke Chriſts food. But notwithſtanding that Chriſt properly is ye only true Paſtor, yet louingly he cōmuninicates this His ſtile to them whō He employes in His ſeruice of ye Miniſterie. Thou yt art a Miniſter, He cals thee a Paſtor: but thou art but as a ſeruant laid vnder ye chiefe ſheph
                  •
               ard: they are not Lords of ye flock: No, not the beſt of them: No, not Lords, but diſpenſators: ſo they are not prope
                  •
               ly Paſtors. Seeing then, ſuch is the mercy of

the Lord, that He ſo honours them, that Hee cōmunicates His ſtile to ye Miniſters: therfore they ſhould ſtriue to ſhew thēſelues worthy of that ſtile, by ye faithfull diſcharge of their calling, in feeding of ye flock. But who are they that ſhould be fed? Chriſt ſayes firſt, Feed my lambes: & then He ſayes twiſe, Feed my ſheepe: all is one, for ye Kirke is compared to a folde full of ſheepe. He ſayes not, Goe feed tygres, lions, wolues, but lambes, ſheepe. Who are theſe then? By theſe lambes & ſheep, the Lord vnderſtands His Choſen, (Bleſſed is hee that is choſen in Chriſt, for great is the number of them that periſhes, a very hādfull ſhall be ſaued) they muſt be more tame ones, ſillie ſimple ones, like ſheep. Ye ſee ye ſheep euer receiuing hurt, & neuer noyſom nor hurtfull to any other. Any beaſt will ouercome a ſheep, but it wil ouercome none: ſo it is ſilly ſimple ones yt are Chriſts ſheep. Now I mean not, yt all th'Elect are at ye firſt hand as ſilly as ſheepe: no, but yt they who were before like wolues, lions, tygres; by ye Spirit, through the preaching of ye word, by proceſſe of time, are tamed, and made like ſheep. No, no, whē 
               Peter went out to feed thē, they were like tygres, raging in their luſts. No, the choſen by nature, before they be tamed & called, they are nothing differēt frō ye reprobate: they rampe and roare like liōs, albeit in ye ſecret coūſel of God, & His decree of predeſtinatiō, & by His grace, there be a great differēce betwixt ye one & ye other: for God only makes a differēce betwixt His El
                  •
               ct, & the reprobate. What was Paul himſelfe, or any other, before they were called, but wolues & tygres? Thē ye Paſtor, albeit he find men as wolues & tygers, yet he ſhould not ſtay frō feeding of thē: no, he muſt preach ye Goſpel, yt therby he may make of wolues & tygres, lambes and ſheepe: for many of them that were like tygres, after they had once hearde the voyce of the Apoſtles, became ſimple as ſheepe. Nowe it may bee asked here, Seeing the Lord recommends vnto Peter only His choſen to bee fed & inſtructed by him, ſhould th'Apoſtles haue care of any other, to feed and inſtruct, except of th'Elect onelie? Let it bee that theſe Elect at the firſt hand bee like wolues and tygers; yet the care of them onelie in this place is recommended vnto Peter, and the reſt, by the Lorde. I anſwere, Albeit the Lorde recommende chiefelie the care of th'Elect, yet He excludes not the reprobate: for it is the Lordes vvill, that foode ſhould bee offered to them alſo: for the Paſtor cannot know who are Elect or Reprobate: & therfore, it is his duety to compt all to be elected, & to feed all: he muſt not be raſh in judgemēt. No man ſhould be ſo bold, as to preſume to giue

out ſentence, who are choſen, or who are reprobate: for the LORD knoweth who are His, 2. Timoth. 2.19. Therefore, let him ſtay, vntill the Lord diſcerne who are elect: let the Paſtor count all to be Lambes, and endeauoure to feede all, yet his labours ſhall only be fruitfull in the Elect: for there is neuer one that is not choſen, that ſhall bee tamed by the word: all the preachings in the world will not tame a reprobate, but he ſhall euer be a Wolfe: indeede, a reprobate may for a ſeaſon take on a ſheepe skinne: that is, hee may play the hyprocrite, and may ſeeme outwardly to ſome to be godly, but truely and in effect, he will neuer haue true Faith nor godlineſſe. Now laſt, this would not be paſſed by, that the Lord bids Peter feed His, not another mans ſheepe, but His owne ſheepe: that is, them whome He hath redeemed and ranſomed with His owne blood. This word containes an argument, wherefore the ſheepe ſhould be fed: to wit, becauſe they are the Lords, ranſomed with His owne blood. And more than that, this vvord admoniſhes the Paſtor, that hee count not the ſlocke to be his owne, but the Lords, and that hee feede it not to himſelfe, to vſe the ſlocke for his owne gaine and aduantage. Iohn Baptiſt ſayes, Hee that hath the bride, is the bridegroome, but the friend of the bridegroome reioyces greatly, becauſe of the bridegroomes voyce, Ioh. 3.29. By theſe words Iohn ſignifies, that he wooed not the Church to himſelfe, but to the Lord, who is the bridegroome: And Paul ſayes to the Co
                     •
                  inthians, I am iealous ouer you with godly iealouſie: for I haue prepared you for one husband, to preſent you, as a pure virgine to Christ, 2. Cor. 11.2. For it is the moſt abhominable and deteſtable ſacriledge that can bee, to ſpoyle Chriſt the bridegroome of the Church His bride, & to take from Him His flocke, which Hee hath redeemed with ſuch a precious and glorious ranſome, euen the blood of God, Acts 20.28. Seeing then, that the Lord hath committed to Paſtors the Church, which is His owne Spouſe, and His Flocke, which He hath redeemed with no leſſe price, than His own blood, the LORD giue Paſtours grace to be carefull in feeding of them, with that food of life, furniſhed vnto them by the LORD Ieſ
                  •
               s: To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, bee all praiſe, and honour, for euer.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE LI. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IOHN, CHAP. XXI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Verely, verely I ſay vnto thee, When thou waſt yong, thou girdedſt thy ſelfe, and walkeſt whither thou wouldeſt: but when thou ſhalt be olde, thou ſhalt ſtretch out thine hands, and another ſhall gird thee, and leade thee whither thou wouldest not.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 And this ſpake Hee, ſignifying by what death hee ſhould glorifie God. And when He had ſaid thus, He ſaid to him, Follow Me.
               
            
            
               THE laſt day (beloued Brethren) we heard, how the Lord in this third appearing, vnto His Diſciples after His Reſurrection, when He dined with them, fedde them, and giuing them meat out of His owne hande, hee entered in conference with Peter: eſpecially, the ende of the conference Hee had with Peter, was to reſtore Peter to that dignitie of the Apoſtleſhip, from which h
                  •
               e had fallen, and whereof hee had made himſelfe vnworthie through his apoſtaſie and threefolde deniall of his Lord and Maſter, Hee askes him one thing thriſe: Simon, the ſonne of Iona, loueſt thou Me? Peter anſweres and giues a threefold confeſsion: Lord, thou knowest that I loue thee. The LORD anſweres againe, and giues a threefold abſolution, and pronounces the ſentence of his reſtoring againe three times: F
                     ••
                  de, then ſayes the Lord, My Lambes, feede My ſheepe. This Hee does, to confirme him the better in his reſtoring: for when a man hath made a foule defection frō God, his heart is not eaſily perſwaded of grace againe, it will not be at one or two ſentences, it will not be a promiſe at one time, that will giue him an aſſurance of the fauour of God againe: therefore, to giue Peter the greater aſſurance of grace,

Hee triples ouer the ſentence, and giues him three times that commiſsion, to feede His lambes and ſheepe. The laſt day, Brethren, as the Lord gaue the grace, we opened the meaning of theſe words, and laſt, of theſe words, My Lambes, my ſheepe: now only thus farre I adde for your conſolation: ye ſee all this loue that Peter confeſſes toward the Lord Himſelfe, Hee turnes it ouer vpon His Lambes, His Sheepe, and flocke, in a word, vpon His Church. Marke it: The Paſtor or Miniſter will no ſooner profeſſe loue to his Lord that placed him in that roome, but as ſoone the Lord will ſend him to the flocke & people: if thou loue me, the Lord will ſay, loue my people, the Lord will place His people in His own roome: looke what loue any will beare to Him, He will haue it declared and vttered to His Saints, & more, He does it three times: ſo oft as Peter profeſſes loue, ſo oft He ſends him to ye people: look how oft the Paſtor profeſſes loue to Chriſt, as oft He will ſend him to ye people: if he ſay, I loue thee, then He will anſwere, feede my Lambes: if He will ſay a thouſand times, He wil anſwere, feede my flocke, manifeſt it vpon them that carie mine Image. This ſhewes the wonderfull loue that God beares to His Elect: He will haue all that dutie that is due to Him, to be tranſlated vpon His Church: ſo that whoſoeuer doe not their dutie to ye Church, I 
                  •
               ffirme & I ſay, profeſſe as they will, they haue no loue to Chriſt, thou mayeſt ſtand vp, and bable, & vaunt of thy loue to Chriſt: but I ſay, there is no ſuch loue in thine heart, as thou profeſſeſt with thy mouth. If thou ſ
                     •
                  yeſt, thou loueſt God & doeſt not thy dutie to man, thou art a lyar, 1. Joh. 4.18.
            
            To goe forward to this Text: When He hath reſtored him to the office of Apoſtleſhip, which by his deniall juſtly he had loſt, Hee giues him the office with a knot, as we ſpeak, & He forewarnes him in the entrie, that hee ſhall get no reſt in it and when he hath done all, what ſhall be his reward in the world: He telles him, Thou ſhalt be girded with cordes, in ſtead of a girdle, and then thou ſhalt be ledde away, whither thou wouldeſt not: that is, to a violent death, whereby thou ſhalt ſeale vp the Goſpell that thou haſt preached: then the Lord giues him, and he receiues the office of Apoſtleſhip with this p
                  •
               emonition▪ that in the end of it he ſhall die the death. The Lord fore
                  •
               arnes him to this end, that hee ſhould be on his preparation, to mak
                  •
                him readie to d
                  •
               e, & to enarme him againſt the death: for death comming vnawares is terrible, & will te
                  •
               tifie ye proudeſt fleſh that liues: 
                  〈◊〉
                this forewarning ſ
                  •
               rues for ye enarming of him, forewarned,

halfe armed, as the Prouerbe is: Preparation for death, meditation of that death, and of the life to come, is better and more ſteadable armour againſt death, than a jacke, or all the ſtrengths and caſtles in the earth. It is a terrible thing when death lights vpon a creature ſuddenly, it dammiſhes the creature.
            But to the purpoſe: In the perſon of Peter, I perceiue, That there is no man the Lord receiues to bee a Paſtor, a feeder of His flocke, or a Miniſter, but Hee takes him with this pr
                  •
               monition: Make thee for death: that is a hard beginning: Prepare thee to ſhed thy blood for my ſheepe, and to ſeale that Goſpell, which thou haſt preached with thy blood: for why? a man that enters to feede the flocke of the Lord, hath not adoe with lambes only, ſillie and ſimple ſheepe, but hee muſt fight with Wolues: as hee muſt feede the lambes, ſo hee muſt fight with Wolues, Tygres, Beares, &c. that would deuoure the Lambes? Yea, ſometimes, it will fall out, that theſe whome they thinke to be Lambes, will manifeſt themſelues to be Wolues: yea, beſide this, it may be, that one of His owne flocke, ſhall ſtand vp and deuoure him in the end: and beſide this, what is the Deuill euer doing with him? Is he not euer going about the Folde, like a roaring Lyon, with the mouth of him euer wide open, ſeeking to ſwallow and deuoure not only the flocke, but alſo the Paſtor? ſo that he ſhould make him for death. It is true, Brethren, euery Paſtor in the ende dies not a violent death, all are not hanged? beheaded or burnt: Some, yea, many die their owne naturall death, and in peace: the Lord honoures not euery man with the gift of ſuffering for the Name of Chriſt? (it is an honour, get it who will) as He honoured Peter, and He requires not, that euery man ſeale this doctrine with his blood in the end: but yet it is the Lordes will, that neuer a man enter ſo ſoone to the Miniſterie, but as ſoone hee make him for ſuffering, and that he preach ſo, that he be readie to ſeale vp euery preaching with his blood. Away with the man, who when he enters, thinkes with himſelfe, that hee ſhall haue eaſe, and a quiet and a pleaſant life. It is true, againe: the Lord will not ſpeake now to euery man face to face, forewarning him, and giuing to him a reuelation from Heauen now, as then Hee did to Peter, yet there is nothing more certaine than this: it is His will, that euery man bee re
                  ••
               ie euery houre to ſeale vp the Goſpell with his blood, if it ple
                  •
               ſe the Lord to call him. Paul (Actes 21.) when hee was going 
                  •
               p to Ieruſalem,
               
he got a fore-warning, That he ſhould be bound hand and foote, and ſo it fell out: but it was not fore-tolde him that hee ſhould die: yet hee ſayes, when the godly are ſtanding, weeping & lamenting, ſeeking to diſſwade him to goe vp, What doe ye weeping & grieuing mine heart? Why trouble ye me? I am ready, ſayes he, not only to be bound, but I am prepared to die for the Name of the Lord Ieſus. So howbeit hee got not the warning, yet he had this reſolution ſetled, to ſuffer. Now appertaines this nothing to you, who are the people? I ſaye to thee, Thou who wilt call thy ſelfe a Chriſtian man, & who haſt giuen vp thy name to Ieſus Chriſt, thou art as far indebted to ſeale vp thy profeſſiō with thy blood, if thou be charged, as the Paſtor is; otherwayes I will not giue thee a pennie for thy profeſſion: It had b
                  •
               ene better thou had neuer taken that name, if thou bee not readie to ſeale it vp vvith thy blood. It is true, euerie one is not in verie deede marty
                  •
               ed: but I ſaye to thee, There is a neceſſitie layed vpon thee, that in ſome meaſure thou prepare thee to ſuffer the croſſe and death it ſelfe for Chriſtes ſake, and ſo that thou be a Martyre in thine owne mind and reſolution: And albeit thou eſchew death, yet of this bee aſſured, That thou ſhalt beare the burthen of affliction, either inwardlie or outwardlie: for vvhoſoeuer vvould liue godlie in Chriſt Ieſus, muſt ſuffer affliction. 2. Timoth. chap. 3. verſ. 11. and Act. chap. 14. verſ. 22. it is ſaide, Thorowe manie afflictions, wee must enter into the kingdome of God. This neceſſity is layd vpō vs. It is the duetie (as we vſe to ſpeake) of euery Chriſtiā man & woman, to ſuffer. Ther
                  •
               fore Brethren, ſeeing this neceſſity is layed on vs, That wee muſt ſuffer ſome affliction, we ſhould be prepared for it, yea, if it were to dy the death for the name of Ieſus. Let euerie one bee preparing themſelues, both Paſtor and people: for it may bee, that all eſtates bee ſooner put to try all than yee looke for, and that the Lord ſaye to the Paſtor, Thou hast beene preaching theſe manie yeeres, nowe ſeale it vp w
                     •
                  th thy blo
                     •
                  de: And to the people, Yee haue beene proſiſſing long, nowe ſuffer for it. There is my counſell, Suppoſe thou ſhedde not thy blood, yet looke that in the reſolution of thine heart thou bee a Martyr, thou bee headed, hanged, and that ſuffer all ſort of torment that euer any ſuffered, and ſtriue to get contentment to die at the pleaſure of the Lord. Hee knowes not vvhat a Chriſtian man meanes, who has not this reſolution. A foole thinkes that this hie calling is to get pleaſure eaſe, & delicacie: No, no, as CHRIST went out of the ports of Hieruſalem, bearing His owne croſſe to the place

of execution, ſo He calles thee to goe foorth with Him, out of this world, bearing His reproach, Hebr. 13.13. Otherwiſe looke not to haue participation of His glorie. Yet let vs marke the vvordes more narrowly. Now certainly will ye looke in to them, yee will ſee that Peters calling to th'Apoſtleſhip was wondrous ſtraite. Peter might haue thought, and ſaide with himſelfe, Seeing I am entring to be an apoſtle, I am entring to a glorious calling, I wil get honor enough, I was before a poore Fiſher, nowe I will get honour, eaſe, peace and reſt. The Lord anſweres, No Peter, it ſhall not be ſo. And this Hee declares by comparing his condition to come in his age, with his by-paſt condition in his youth: As if Hee had ſaide, The order of nature ſhall bee inuerted in thee, for vvhen thou vvaſt young, ere thou ſaweſt mee, thou gotteſt leaue to girde thy girdle about thee, to dreſſe thy ſelfe, and to walke where thou wouldeſt: That is, When thou waſt moſt able and ſtrong to beare the Croſſe, thou waſt ſpared, and thou diddeſt all thinges pleaſantly, & according to thy deſire; & when thou addreſſed thy ſelfe to the journey, thou girded thy ſelfe as thou pleaſedſt. Here He alludes to ye oriental people, who vſed to weare lōg ſide clothes: & therfore whē they wēt to any journey, behoued to truſſe thē vp, & to gird thē to thē. But after this it ſhal not be ſo: but whē thou ſhalt be old, & thorow age more vnable to ſuffer affliction, and to beare ye croſſe, then thou ſhalt be afflicted another ſhal gird thee: That is, Bind thee wt cords: & as thou went before where thou would, ſo now thou ſhalt be led whither thou wouldeſt not. Now Peter might haue ſaid, Suppoſe I ſuſtaine trouble in my age, yet thou wilt giue me a peaceable death in ye end. (There is no mā almoſt, whē he has ſpent his time in ye cō
               mō weale, but in his age he wil get leaue to be at reſt, & to dy peaceably) No, ſayes ye Lord, when thou art an old man, thou ſhalt be hurried out, & die a violent death. And it would ſeeme, yt Chriſt diſſwaded Peter to be an Apoſtle, & to enter into ſuch a hard calling, where in his olde age, which requires to be freed frō trauell, & trouble, ſhuld be moſt afflicted, wheras in his youth he was freed frō afflictiō. There is an hard meeting, & calling of Peter to be an Apoſtle. I think many now would run aback frō the miniſtery, if they wiſt of ſo hard a meeting. Well, the day of trial is cōming. Marke ye leſſō. Whē the Lord calles a Paſtor, He will tell him ye worſt of it: Hee vſes no flattery in His calling: In ye firſt entry He wil lay before thee great croſſes & terrours: It may be thou get eaſe, reſt & cōmodity: but I aſſure thee, yt this wil

be the cōferēce the Lord will haue with thee whē thou entreſt. Whē thou haſt ſerued me, looke for the croſſe for thy ſtipend, when thou haſt done all, make thee for death. Therfore ſay not, I will enter, becauſe I will get a good fat Benefice, & faire liuing, I will get peace & eaſe. It may be yt the Lord caſt theſe thinges to thee, & yt thou find thē, but propone not yt to thy ſelf, as a cauſe of thine entry: but ſay, I am entring to labour, to trouble, 
                  •
               o paine, & it may be, in ye end, whē I haue done al, I ſhall lay down my life: let ye be thy reſolutiō. In this there is great differēce betwixt God & ye Deuill: When ye Deuill calles one, in the beginning he promiſes thē riches, wealth, honour, & prefermēt: the villane will promiſe felicity & happines in this life: but in ye end, miſerably he deceiues thē, who truſted his flattery. Th'experiēce of the wretched catiues proues this: for neuer got they ſuch things as were promiſed, but miſery, terrour and horrour in the ende. But Chriſt calles men otherwayes, and ſayes, Aime not at mee, but by the croſſe, ſo long as ye are in this world, ye ſhall haue oppoſition, oppreſſion, and ſorrow: they ſhall bruiſe you, they ſhall treade you vnder foot. But in the meane time He promiſes, That in the middeſt of all their griefs, yea, in death it ſelfe, they ſhall finde comfort: for when Hee has ſaide to His Apoſtles, In the world yee ſhall haue ſorrowe. Hee ſubjoynes incontenent, But bee of good comfort, for I haue ouercome the worlde, Ioh. chap. 16. verſ. 33. The world ſhall not bee victorious ouer thee, thou ſhalt get a faire aduantage and outgate at the laſt, thou ſhalt get the victory. And in ye middeſt of their troubles, not only promiſes He, but alſo He will giue them a ſweeter taſte & ſenſe of inward joy, than all ye worldlings cā haue. When they are ſitting in the middeſt of all their glory, riches, and outward pleaſures, yea, in the very death, Hee furniſhes life, as Paul ſayes, 2. Cor 6 9. As dying but behold, we liue: yea, ſuch a ſweet life, as the naturall man neuer could thinke of. In thy death, the life of Ieſus Chriſt ſhall be moſt liuely. Thou needeſt not then to feare to ſuffer any extremity for Ieſus, ſeeing euer Hee has promiſed thee ſuch a vantage. Yet further I ſee heere this, not onlie out of this place, but alſo thorow the whole Scripture, & experience teaches it, That the prerogatiues & vantages of this life, liberty & preferment, ſtandes not well with Ieſus Chriſt: at the leaſt a Paſtor ſhoulde not laye his count to brooke thē both together. Peter, when he was a free man, and a Fiſher, going out and in at his pleaſure, hee knewe not vvhat Chriſt meaned. As ſoone as he comes to Chriſt, farewell vvith his freedome: hee put his girdle about him ere hee knewe Chriſt, but

knowing Chriſt, he muſt be boūd with a corde, & hurled in bands: if any take this calling vpon him, to enjoy the outward comforts & prerogatiues of this world, he deceiues himſelfe. Likewiſe Paul, Philip. 3.7. Ere he knew Chriſt, a Gentle-man (folke thinke, a Miniſter cannot be a Gentle-man) a citizen of Rome, an Hebrew, a Phariſe according to his ſect, & in his zeale going beyond all men, and in his righteouſneſſe he was vnrebukable, according to the Iuſtice of the Law: but when he comes to Chriſt, what became of all theſe? he leaues all, renounces & quites them, he counts them for Chriſts ſake to be damage & doung. So, I ſay againe: I ſee not, how the aduantages, liberties, & theſe outward prerogatiues, can ſtand well with the Lord Ieſus. Indeed ye Lord ſome times caſts theſe things in great abundance & affluence to His owne: and then if it pleaſe God▪ why mayeſt thou not brooke them: for the Miniſter hath as good right to theſe earthly things, as another: for the Lord ſanctifies them to their vſe: but in the meane time take the counſell of the Apoſtle, 1 Cor. 7.31. Vſe them, as though thou vſed them not: Settle neuer thine heart on them, let them neuer be thy chiefe reſpect, in paine of thy life, & if they come in compariſon with Chriſt, take Pauls counſell and experience alſo: count them all damage and loſſe, and count them hurtfull to thee: yet a degree further, count them but doung, loath them, ſpit at them, as at dirt: if they ſeeme to ſeparate thee from Chriſt, ſhake them off thee, denude thine hand of them: I ſay, albeit it were thy life, if it hinder thee from Chriſt, away with thy life, giue it to any Tyrant, Perſecuter, if it hinder thee, that thou cāſt not brooke Chriſt wt it: for if thou giueſt thy life for Chriſt indeede, He ſhall be aduantage to thee, not only in the time of thy life, but chiefly, in the houre of death, as Paul ſayes of himſelfe, Philip. 1.21. Now, Brethren, take heede, all theſe earthly things, as liberties, riches, nobilitie, kinred, glory, honour of the worlde, and fauour of men, theſe thinges can ſtand thee in ſtead only, ſo long as thou leaueſt thy riches, thy nobilitie, albeit thou wert come of Kings, can be ſteadable no longer: but if thou bee laide on thy backe, on thy death bed, at the houre of thy death, what will they helpe thee then? Nothing, but thou wilt diſdain them al: No, they ſhal not hold thy life one houre: thē all theſe aduantages in earth cānot be aduātage in ye houre of death: in heauē or earth no aduātage to any in ye hour of death, but Ieſus, who has ouercome death: if yu haue Ieſus, ô yt joy yu ſhalt find in

death: & by the contrarie, How terrible a departure will they find, that haue not Chriſt Ieſus. This miſerable generatiō will not know this, vntill they feele it by ſad experience. There were two thieues hanged with Chriſt, but both got Him not to bee aduantage in death: therefore let men, whē they are liuing, & wholeſt, haue Chriſt before their eyes, & ſeeke to be acquainted wt Him in their life, that they may haue Him to be aduantage in their death. Yet one thing further, ere I leaue theſe things, I thinke all yōg men yt haue health, habilitie & ſtrength of body, to run & ride, raſh here & there, that haue libertie to paſſe & repaſſe at their pleaſure, may learne a leſſō at Peter. Peter, when hee was young, hee might haue done what hee pleaſed: he thought hee was a happie man: for the word importes, when hee makes mention of his former condition which hee had before he knew Chriſt: for when he was young, and had libertie, he was free from Chriſt: for he knew not Chriſt, before Chriſt knew him: ſo Peter in his youth a free man, a young ſtrong man, he was alſo free from Chriſt: fooliſh, vaine young men, eſteeme themſelues to be happie, if they haue health, ſtrength, habilitie & freedome to liue as they pleaſe, albeit they bee without God and free of Ieſus Chriſt: alas, that is a miſerable freedome, when thou art free heere in earth, if thou be free from Chriſt alſo, that is miſerable: for if thou be not a bond-ſeruant to Chriſt, albeit thou wert a King, a Ceſar, thou art but a ſeruant to ſinne, & a ſlaue to the deuill. Paul Rom. 6.20. ſayes, When ye were the ſeruants of ſinne, ye were freed from righteouſneſſe: if thou be not the ſeruant of Chriſt, thou art a ſlaue to the Deuill, and ſinne: for of need force, thou ſhalt either be the ſeruant of Chriſt, or els, thou ſhalt be a greater ſlaue than a horſerubber. Let neuer a man glorie in a libertie, that he may runne, or ride, doe this or that, except that, with that freedome he find himſelfe bound as a ſeruant to Chriſt, & except he can ſay in his heart: albeit I be free, yet, Lord Ieſus, I am thy bond-ſeruant: for Peters condition, when hee was in the chaines and bands, led out to die the death for Chriſt, was better than when he was a yong man, following his owne luſt & pleaſure: there is no happineſſe but in Ieſus Chriſt, all theſe earthly liberties will not make thee happy, if thou be not boūd to Chriſt in his ſeruice: they only are truely free, whō the Sonne makes free, Ioh. 8.36. And the Apoſtle ſayes: Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is libertie, 2. Cor. 3.17. But I goe forwarde: Hee ſayes, Thou ſhalt bee ledde whither thou wouldeſt not. This is a

marueilous thing. Theſe wordes would import, that hee died not willingly for the Lord; but he vvas drawne contrary his will to the tormēt. How can this be? The vvords may import a compariſon, to vvit, That one ſhall leade thee, not ſo much where thou wilt, as where he will, for thy will ſhalbe ſubject to the will of the perſecuter & tormēter. I anſwere. Indeed it is true, when Peter ſuffered for his Lords ſake, he ſuffered not ſo vvilingly, but in the meane time for there was a battell vvithin him, & he found ſomthing that made reſiſtance to yt obediēce: firſt there vvas nature, vvhich naturally abhors death: there is nothing more terrible to nature, than this diſſolution & parting & ſeuering of the ſoule & body: & therfore Chriſt Himſelf, who ſet Himſelfe in all reſpects to be obedient to ye Father, hauing our nature, abhorred death, & prayed, ſaying, Take this cup frō me. So I ſay, it was no maruel yt nature in Peter abhorred frō death & vvold haue declined yt death in ſome meaſure. There vvas another cauſe more in Peter than was in Chriſt: Chriſt had nature, but it was holy: Peter beſide this common nature, had ſome remaining corruption: And whoſoeuer has it (as all men ſauing Chriſt Ieſus has it) they will find, that whē they are bent to giue obedience to God in any thing, it vvill rebell▪ and make ſome reſiſtance: & when thou faineſt vvould obey Him, & lay downe thy necke to die for Chriſt, it will draw thee aback. Againe, the beſt yt liues, vvill vtter the vvords of th'Apoſtle, I doe not the good thing which I would: but the euill, which I would not, that I doe. Rom. 7.19. Therefore, Brethren, learne this leſſon at Peter, All the godly from the beginning, & all the Holy Martyres, what euer they haue bene, that haue died for the Name of the Lord Ieſus, their obedience has not beene altogether perfect: No, it is a vanitie to thinke, that the Martyres died vvithout all feare: I ſay, The beſt of them in their death found ſome horrour and infirmitie: And I ſaye, The victorie that they got vvas by an inwarde battell in their ſoule: and as they vvere victorious, by yeelding themſelues outwardly to the death; ſo they vvere victorious in their ſoules. This is comfortable. When thou ſeeſt that the Saincts feared & abhorred death, if thou findeſt the like feare in thee, yet bee not ouer much caſten downe: Thou wilt ſay, Shall I ſuffer death in the fire? ſhall I bee burnt quicke, and bee dammed, as the Martyres haue beene vvith ſundry ſortes of tortures? Alas, I am not able to abide it. And no queſtion, there will be an horrour in thine heart, when thou thinkeſt of this, but eſpecially when thou commeſt to the act of ſuffering, then all ſuch infirmitie,

ſuch feare & dread ſhall riſe, and get vp in thy ſoule: But let this be thy comfort in the Lord, vvhē thou findeſt this, that this feare ſhall not hinder thine obedience, and ſay, There is nothing that befalles to me, but that which befalles to the beſt ſeruants of God, I am not alone, ſuch infirmitie, ſuch dread and feare as I haue, Peter had, and the beſt Saincts of God had: and howbeit they had them, yet their obedience was not hindered thereby. And ſo as Peter and the reſt got the victory, notwithſtanding of feare and dread, thou wilt giue mee the victory vvith Peter. This aduertiſes vs thus farre. Neuer man ſuffered martyrdome by his owne ſtrength. And if Peter had beene giuen ouer to his owne ſtrength, hee vvoulde not haue ſuffered more than Judas: And if Steuen had not bene ſuſtained with the ſight of Heauen, to haue holden vp his heart▪ hee vvoulde not haue ſuffered the death. Paul teaches vs, Philip. chap. 1. verſ. 29. As faith is the gift of God, ſo it is the gift of God to ſuffer affliction. It is giuen to you, ſaies he, to ſuffer. And therfore he ſaies to Timothie, (2. Epiſt. chap. 1. verſ. 8.) Be partaker of the afflictions of the Goſpel. But howe? By your owne ſtrength? No: but by the power of God. And therfore, whoſoeuer would haue this ſtrength, let him beg it of the Lord. Whenſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe God to ſay, Goe to the ſtake: then euer ſay, Lord giue me ſtrength, & I ſhall ſuffer. Therefore, as night & day we ſhould be vpon this reſolution, to ſuffer for Chriſt; ſo ſhould we night & day be earneſt in prayer: and if thou findeſt the power of God by prayer to bee conueyed to thine heart, thou needeſt not to feare: for that power will prop it vp, & vphold it in th'extremity of death & martyrdome. So euer be in prayer, ſaying, Lord giue me ſtrenth: and if thou get once a piece of this power, thou ſhalt wonder at it.
            Now Iohn in the next verſe he joynes ye meaning of theſe words of the Lords to Peter, leſt any mā reading or hearing, ſhould doubt of the meaning, This ſpake hee, ſayes Iohn, ſignifying by what death hee ſhould glorifie God. Hee meanes, that hee ſhoulde die a violent death, hee ſhould not get leaue to die his owne naturall death in peace: but that hee ſhould die violently vpon the ſcaffolde. The Papiſtes vpon theſe wordes, gather, That Peter was crucified, & that ye Lord meant, yt he ſhould be hanged: but the words beare no ſuch thing. Thou ſhalt ſtretch out thine hands. What neceſſity is there here to import crucifying, or hanging, more than heading? or any one death more than another? What death it was, it is not certaine: it is farre better not to meddle with it, than to beleeue mens fables. Only the

words of ye Lord import, yt he died violently. But what death ſoeuer it was, it is not much to edification. Yet this is not to bee paſſed by, but wel to be marked, That whē He is ſpeaking of his death, He ſayes not after this māner, He ſignified what death he ſhould die: no, but by what death he ſhould glorify God: a thing more worthy of marking, He ſtiles & defines ye death & martyrdome of Peter to be a glorifying of his God. Brethren, the death of all the godlie and Saincts, whatſoeuer kinde of death it bee, whether it bee in peace, their owne naturall death, or a violent death, whatſoeuer kind of death it bee, it may bee defined after this manner, to bee a glorifying of God. And bleſſed are they that die in the LORD, Bleſſed are they that die in faith in the LORD IESƲS: that is, as PAVL ſayes, ſleepes in Him, 1. Theſſal. chap. 4. verſ. 14. So I ſaye, The death of euerie godlie man and woman, glorifies their God. Yet we muſt vnderſtand, That the death of theſe who ſuffer martyrdome, and ſeales vp the trueth of Chriſt with their blood, that death eſpeciallie gettes this praiſe, and this ſtile, That it glorifies GOD after a ſpeciall manner. Marke it well▪ Martyrdome properly is called, The glorifying of God, becauſe in it eſpecially is the matter of the glorie of God. Aboue all other deathes of men in the worlde, in the death of the Sonne of God Ieſus Chriſt, was greateſt matter of the glorifying of His Father: and therefore, aboue all other deathes, the death and croſſe of Chriſt gettes this ſtile of the glorifying of GOD, Joh. Chap. 12. verſ. 28. When the LORDE has ſtriuen vvith the feare of death, looke howe Hee conſiders vvith Himſelfe, Lord glorifie thine owne Name: that is, Bee thou glorified in my death. Next, after Chriſts death, the death of the Martyres ſerues moſt for the glorie of God: and therefore, next after Chriſtes death, the death of the Martyres brookes this ſtile. Therefore ye ſee in this place, Iohn ſpeaking of the martyrdome of Peter, calles it, The glorifying of GOD. And Paul to the Philippians, ſpeaking of his death, ſayes, that the Lord ſhould be magnified in his death, Philip. chap. 1. verſ. 20. And all to this end, To encourage vs chearefullie to go to death for Chriſts ſake What knowes anie of vs, but wee may bee charged with martyrdome, whether it be Miniſter, or anie of the flocke? And I affirme to you, that if the Lord call any of you to die for the Goſpell, if ye denie Him, Hee will denie you. Theſe are His owne wordes, Matth. 10.33. Therefore, ſeeing euerie one of vs, if wee bee Chriſtians, are bound to ſuffer: No, not a Miniſter onelie, but the ſobereſt of you all, lad

and laſſe. Wee haue this encouragement to ſuffer Martyrdome, that our death ſhall glorifie God after a ſingular manner. It is no matter vvhat become of thee, if thou getteſt that honour to glorifie God: for bee aſſured, if thou doe ſo, thou ſhalt be partaker of His glorie. When the conference is done, the Lord appearantly riſes vp, for the time of this conference they were ſitting together, And the Lord ſayes to Peter, Followe thou mee. The meaning is this, as though He would ſay, Well Peter, I haue forewarned and enarmed thee againſt this death: in tokē of this, follow thou me: for he giues him this as an vndoubted ſigne of his croſſe & death yt was to come. No, Brethrē, they that will follow the Lord, muſt take vp his croſſe, and followe Him. And therefore bids Hee Peter follow Him. Well, theſe wordes are hard to fleſh and blood. But here is the great comfort, We haue Chriſt to follow, He goes before vs, When we goe to the croſſe to martyrdome, Hee goes before vs. To goe to death, vvithout Chriſt going before vs, of all thinges it is moſt terrible and fearefull: But to goe to death, following Chriſt, there is great matter of conſolation: for vvhen Hee is before vs, and if vvee followe vvith His croſſe vpon our backes, vvee ſhall finde, that the death of Chriſt has taken away the bitterneſſe of death. Whoſoeuer ſhall followe Chriſt, ſhall neuer taſte the bitterneſſe of death. But if thou beareſt thine owne croſſe, thou dieſt for thine owne ſinne, as a Malefactor, a Thiefe, a Murtherer, &c. Woe is thee, for the ende of that death is th'extremitie of Hell. It ſtands not onely in a ſhamefull, ignominious, and comfortleſſe departure, and in the ſundring of the ſoule from the bodie, it ends not there, but thereafter ye ſoule muſt be thruſt into Hel, to be tormēted for euer. But whē we haue Chriſt going before vs, bearing our croſſe, ſuffering for our ſins, & thē we following Him, bearing His croſſe, Hee dying firſt, takes away the bitterneſſe of death, and makes our death an entrie to life euerlaſting. There is a comfort that Peter gettes in death: ſo that death is made ſweet to him, and a port to life euerlaſting. Brethren, ye muſt vnderſtand, That Chriſt goes before vs, not onelie in His death, but in His Reſurrection and life: for at this time Hee vvas riſen. So PETER followes Him in His Reſurrection. There is a double comfort, Wee followe IESVS CHRIST not onelie in His death, but alſo in His Reſurrection, to raiſe vs to life againe: for it is by vertue of that life of IESVS CHRIST, that vvee riſe to life, after our death. Whereto intendes all this? Euen to

encourage vs to ſuffer Martyredome, and ſeale the Goſpell with our blood, if it ſhall pleaſe the Lord to call vs: and happie art thou if the Lord ſhall honour thee, ſo that Hee will haue thee to beare His Croſſe, & to ſuffer as an innocent, who for a thouſand of thine own ſinnes art worthy of an ignominious death, & deſperate departure: for if He goe before thee, if He beare thy Croſſe, the bitterneſſe of death is taken from thee, becauſe the guiltineſſe of thy ſinne is forgiuen. Now, the Lord furniſh vs ſtrength & courage, that we ſhame not His cauſe, if it ſhall pleaſe Him to call vs to ſuffer for the Name of Ieſus, To whome with the Father, and Holie Spirit, be all praiſe and glorie, for euer. AMEN.
         
         
            THE LII. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     IHON, CHAP. XXI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Then Peter turned about, and ſaw the Diſciple whom Ieſus loued, following, which had alſo leaned on His breſt at ſupper, and had ſaide, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?
                  
                     
                        verse 21 When Peter therefore ſaw him, he ſaid to Ieſus, Lord, what ſhall this man doe?
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Ieſus ſaid vnto Him, If I will that he tarie till J come, what is it to thee? follow thou Me.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Then went this word abroad among the brethren, that this diſciple ſhould not die: Yet Ieſus ſaide to him, he ſhall not die: but if I will that he tarie till J come, what is it to thee?
                  
                     
                        verse 24 This is that diſciple, which testifieth of theſe things, and wrote thoſe things, and we know that his testimonie is true.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Now there are alſo many other things, which Jeſus did, the which if they ſhould be written euery one, I ſuppoſe the world could not containe the bookes that ſhould be written, Amen.
               
            
            
               
               WEE haue heard, Brethren, that after the Lord had reſtored Peter to the dignitie of the Apoſtle ſhippe, from the which hee had fallen by his threefold deniall of his Maſter, in the Hall of the High Prieſt, he addes to his abſolution & reſtitution, a premonition, and forewarning, forewarning him, that in the end of his Apoſtleſhip, when he ſhould become an old man, he ſhould cloſe vp and ſeale his Apoſtleſhip with his blood When thou waſt young, ſayes the Lord to Peter, thou girdedſt thy ſelfe: thou knittedſt, thy clothes, when thou waſt wont to goe any way, and wentedſt, whither thou pleaſedſt: but when thou ſhalt be olde, thou ſhalt not get credence to gird thy ſelfe, to put thy girdle about thee: but thou ſhalt ſtretch out thine hands, and another ſhall gi
                  •
               d thee with cordes and chaines, and ſhall lead thee away, not where it ſhall pleaſe thee, but where it ſhall pleaſe him, he ſhall lead thee to the death. We heard, Iohn opened vp the meaning of theſe words and told vs, that Chriſt thereby ſignified, that Peter ſhould glorifie God by a violent death: and thereafter, to encourage him, the Lord goes before him, & bids Peter follow Him, ſignifying thereby, that His death had taken away the bitterneſſe of death, and that by vertue of His Reſurrection, he ſhould liue againe.
            Now in the wordes that we haue read, in the firſt place we haue ſet downe a new conference betweene the Lord and Peter: for while they are in the waye, the Lorde going before, and Peter, following, there they fall againe in a new conference, and Peter, as he was ay too raſh, albeit very zealous: ſo here raſhly he demandes a curious queſtion, and it is about Iohn the writter of this Goſpell: the queſtion is, What ſhould Iohn doe? What ſhall this man doe? Shall he not follow the Lord? The Lord had not bidden him follow Him: it might haue contented Peter well enough, that the Lord had kept ſilence of Iohn, and he to haue done the thing that the Lord bade him. Nowe, Brethren, ere I come to the queſtion, yee muſt marke the occaſions of this curioſitie of Peter: I perceiue, the firſt occaſion that brings Peter to this queſtion, is this: When they are going together, Peter lookes ouer his ſhoulder, and turnes him about, and turnes his eye from the Lord, and looked to Iohn, that apparantly followed a far
                  •
               e off: vpon which followes this curioſitie, and this learnes vs this leſſon: If the Lord bid thee, followe Him in any calling what euer it be, as Hee bade Peter followe

Him to the death (that was his calling, for a man followes God in his calling, all lawfull callings are but a following of the LORD) learne here to be wiſer than Peter: hold thine eye conſtantly vpon Him, thine heart vpon Him: in thy calling followe Him foot for foot: tread thou in the ſame footſteps, ſo farre as He ſhall giue the grace, decline not, neither to the right hand, nor to the left: & as to thine eye, looke that it be neuer drawne frō Him, looke not ouer thy ſhoulder to ſee what is behind thee, but look conſtantly on the Lord: for if thou doe this, thou loſes ye ſight of Him, & that of need force ſhall make thee to ſettle backe in thy calling: Peter but once turning, goes one foot backward, & falles back frō yt courſe wherin he ſhould haue walked, Paul Philip. 3.14. conſidered this well, & in that race he ranne to be partaker of Reſurrectiō, & life euerlaſting, he ſayes, I neuer looke behind me, I neuer looke ouer my ſhoulder, to ſee what is behind, but mine eye is euer vpon the marke, to get the price of the high calling of God. Seeing then we haue taken vp a courſe to walke in to that life, Ieſus Chriſt beeing the forerunner, and breaking vp the Heauen: holde thine eye continually vpon the forerunner: follow Him in thine own calling▪ and ſee that thine eye goe neuer off Him▪ It is the felicitie of the creature to follow Him, and thou muſt follow the Lord in thine owne calling: there is the firſt occaſiō. Vpō this followes another: for piece & piece he comes to his curioſity, turning himſelfe about, & looking to John, Whom the Lord loued, who was very familiar with the Lord, & apparantly hath vſed the Lord more homely, than any of the reſt▪ for he was the man which leaned on Ieſus breſt at ſupper: for whē ye Lord forewarned them, that one of them ſhould betray Him, Peter winkes vpō 
               Iohn, & beckenes vnto him, as hee leaned on ye Lords breſt, to aske who it was: John ſaid, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Now Peter remēbring this loue of ye Lord towards John, & this great familiaritie, he marueiles why that Diſciple ſhould haue bene left behind, & ſhould not haue beene required to follow Him, as well as he, and ſo he falles out in this curious queſtion, & forgets in a manner his own calling: there is the ground: Peter looking to Iohn, he ſees him not ſo ſoone, but hee findes in him the matter of his curioſitie: wilt thou leaue off thine own calling, & take leaſure to looke about thee here or there, to this man or that man, whē ye Lord hath bidden thee ſtrictly follow Him, & forbidden yt thou ſhouldſt looke about thee: thou ſhalt not ſo ſoone do this, but as ſoone thou ſhalt find matter of curioſitie:

No, if thou take thee yt leaſure to looke to another, thou ſhalt get a ſtūbling block to ſtay thee frō thy calling: therfore, if thou be called by God to any calling, looke yt thine eye be neuer off ye Lord, as thou wilt be anſwerable to Him, hold thine eye vpon Him, take thee not ſo much leaſure frō thine own calling, as to looke once to another man: ô yt ſtrict life yt is required of a Chriſtian: men thinke yt they may liue looſely as they pleaſe: No, but thou muſt walke circumſpectly, & preciſely in thy calling, holding thy eye vpō ye Lord: Another thing I marke: Peter, whē he ſees Iohn following after, wonders yt the Lord bids not him alſo follow, he thinkes that ye Lords homelines with Iohn is failed. It wil be at times, yt theſe men yt haue found in greateſt experience ye loue of Chriſt, & familiaritie wt Him (& bleſſed are they yt haue found His loue, & is homely with Him: if thy acquaintance begin not here, yu ſhalt neuer be acquainted wt Him hereafter, let no mā be guile himſelfe) it will be yt mē wil think ye Lord has forgot them, has left them, & caſt them off, & they themſelues wil begin to doubt of ye Lords fauour, the ſmalleſt thing yt can be, wil make vs to dout: but there is no cauſe why either yu ſhouldſt doubt, or other men ſhould think ſo: for whom He loues, He loues to ye end. The anſwere which ye Lord giues here to Peter, teſtifies His loue was as great now as euer it was before: if thou getteſt once His loue, it ſhall not faile thee, it wil appeare, indeed, to thy ſenſe, yt it failes, but meaſure thou not ye fauour of God by theſe things that are outward yu muſt not judge raſhly, either of thy ſelfe, or of others by theſe outward things. Now come to ye queſtion: vpon theſe occaſions followes this queſtion, What ſhall this man doe? Shal not Iohn thy beloued diſciple follow thee? Wilt thou leaue him behind thee? If thou giueſt mee this honour to die for thee, wilt thou not giue him the like. Ye ſee here, an example of curioſitie, not only ſuperfluous, but hurtfull: he hurt himſelfe, and did no good to Iohn? What was the ground of it? he tooke him leaſure from his vocation, which was to looke to Ieſus, and to follow Him, to ſcanſe vpon John. Vpō this, hee falles in this inconuen
                  •
               ent, Paul 2. Theſſ. 3.11. ſpeaking of them who liued inordinately, he joynes theſe together, They worke nothing themſelues: again, They are curious about other mens affaires: Meaning, yt all this curioſitie about other mens affaires comes frō idlenes in their own calling. Vpō this it comes to paſſe, yt thou ſets thy mind on other folk: if thou wert buſie in thy own calling yu wouldſt not be curious in other folks affaires, & this ye ſhal find, yt theſe mē
               
that buſie their heades about other mens adoes, finding fault with this man, and that man, they are moſt idle, and careleſſe of their owne adoes: fye vpon this curioſitie, fleeting and flowing hither and thither. Then ſet thy minde on thine owne calling, & ſo thou ſhalt not get time to trouble and vexe thy minde with other mens adoes. This is the curious queſtion: folke would thinke that this is but a light worde which Peter ſpeakes, but it is not ſo: for beſide this curioſitie, there is another fault in him, hee hath a ſiniſtrous judgement of the Lords doing, he thinkes all men ſhould be called to one calling: hee is called to die for Him, and ſo hee thinkes ſhould Iohn alſo: but the LORD lets him ſee, that hee is beguiled. There are many in this warfare, but all this hath not one ſtation & calling, he hath one, & he hath another, he hath this, he hath that, The Lord will ſay to one, Doe thou this: to another, Doe thou that: to Peter, Follow me: to John, tarie thou ſtill there: for example: There will be ten men in this warfare, & he will take one of the ten, and ſay, Come thou out, and goe, & be burnt for my Names ſake, and he will let the reſt ſtand ſtill, and will exerciſe them with croces: ſome more gently, ſome more ſharply, as pleaſes Him: ſo diuerſly Hee will croſſe them: no Chriſtian without ſome croſſe: be patient in it, & thou ſhalt get a faire outgate: He will exerciſe one in the minde, and another in the body, the third in his goods and geare: He hath many wayes to exerciſe His owne: if there were a thouſand of them, Hee will get as many croſſes, ſo that none ſhall eſcape his croſſe. It is a vaine thing, to thinke, that all men ſhoulde be called to that, whereunto thou are called: No, leaue others to the Lord, to doe with them as He pleaſes: goe thou to the ſcaffold, if the Lord command thee, and leaue thy neighbour.
            Thus farre, for the curious queſtion: Now come to the rebuke: He meetes Peter in anger, and with ſharpe words, If I will that hee tarie till I come, what is it to thee? Doe that which thou art commanded to doe: Follow thou me: As He would ſay, Let John be: thou art too curious, looke to thy ſelfe: turne thine eye from Iohn, and follow me in thy calling, which I haue placed thee into. Yee ſhall perceiue in this reproofe three things that He findes fault with: Firſt, that he ſhould haue left off his calling: the ſecond that he was curious about Johns calling: the third the greateſt of all, hee enters into the calling of the Lord: a great vſurpation: it pertained to the Lord, to call Iohn, and euery man, as pleaſes Him. O! but hee

would be the caller of John: this is no ſmall thing: No, no, thou muſt not ſcoffe with the Lord, as though Hee had no diſcretion to call others: ſo in this doing, he does injurie to the Lord. Brethren, behold in Peter, how many euills falles on curioſitie: Firſt, hee forgets his owne calling: Secondly, hee is too curious in his brothers calling: Laſtly, hee does an injurie to Chriſt, makes an eruption vpon Chriſtes office, to ſpoyle Him of His authoritie and power, to call all: and thinke ye not, albeit the Lord now adayes, as Hee did Peter then, but He lookes with an angrie eye vpon curious men. This rebuke is regiſtrated, to rebuke thee, if thou be giuen to curioſitie: But it would bee marked, that albeit the Lord be angrie with Peter, yet neuertheleſſe He forgets not His mercie. When He found him to linger in his courſe, the Lord leaues him not, but He puts out His hand, and takes holde of him: therefore He ſayes, Follow thou me. This is the mercie of the Lord towards His owne, that when He rebukes them, He leaues them not there, but He will put out His hand, and pull them in againe to Him: No, neuer one of vs would goe forward, except by a new grace pulled vs forward except the Lord led vs by the hand, there could not be ſuch a thing, as a man could be ſaued. There is ſuch a stumbling and wauering in our nature: therefore Paul ſaide, I ſtriue by all meanes to attaine to the Reſurrection of the dead: Yea rather, ſayes he, I am comprehended of Chriſt Jeſus, Phil. 3.11, 12. Therefore, ay cry for grace after grace, otherwiſe, thou canſt not goe one foot right forwarde, much leſſe perſeuere to the end. Ye will aske a queſtion: Should neuer one of vs be carefull of our brother in his calling? Humanitie required, that Peter ſhould bee carefull of John: is this the thing the Lord reprooues and forbids? I anſwere: there is a great difference betweene carefulneſſe and curioſitie: it is not carefulneſſe Hee findes fault with: Woe to him that cares for himſelfe only: for why ſhould not euery one of vs be helping one another, & be carefull to bring forward the ſtragling body? But it is curioſitie that the Lord reprooues. Then the leſſon is this ſhortly: Take heede, that by thy doing (men ſhould be very wiſe) thou hindereſt not thy ſelfe more by thy curioſitie, when thou entereſt into the affaires of thy brother, than thou profiteſt him by thy care: when thou beginneſt to care for him: beware thou fall not in curioſitie: paſſe neuer the bounds of thy calling: for there is none that hath a calling, but it is joyned with care of his brother, & the higher calling the greater

care. The Kings calling requires a great care of others in the Policie: Such like, the Miniſters calling is joyned vvith a care for the people, not to feed himſelf, but to feed the people. It is joyned with a ſpeciall and wonderfull care, ſo that night and day his eye ſhould not bee off his flocke: Yet men ſhould beware, that their care turne not to curioſitie. Curioſitie is very dangerous. A curious man has no loue to thee, for he takes pleaſure in the hurt & euill that falles to thee, and it is his meat & drinke, hee feedes vpon the euill report of others. Iohn ſubjoynes, that when the Diſciples hearde of theſe words of Chriſt, they giue them a ſtrange gloſſe. They ſay, Iohn ſhould not die. A faire gloſſe, a faire commentarie. Iohn ſayes, This was not the meaning of the Lord, He ſpake not ſuch a thing, He ſaide not to him, hee ſhould not die, and that was not His minde, Hee tolde not whether hee ſhould liue or die. But Hee ſaide, If I will, hee tarrie till I come, what is that to thee? Yee ſee howe readie men are to miſconſtrue and peruert the one-folde meaning of the LORD. If the Diſciples, vvho heard His owne liuelie voyce, vvere ſo readie to giue a falſe and a lying gloſſe to His vvorde, vvhich they hearde Him ſpeake; I pray you, vvhat maruell is it, albeit men daylie miſconſtrue the vvritten vvorde of GOD, and neuer leaue off to father lies vpon the Scriptures? Yee vvonder at the Papiſtes: I vvonder not. Looke the whole Scriptures: theſe Traitors conclude euer a lye vpon the trueth. Looke the Rhemiſh newe Teſtament, and the reſt of their vvrittes, I vvonder not at them, but I vvonder at this, Conſidering this groſſeneſſe of ignorance, and the propenſion of men naturallie to miſconſtrue GODS Worde, and Will, that there is ſo much as one to open the trueth, and to vnderſtand the right meaning of the vvorde. The cauſe of this miſconſtruing is not of the Scripture, as if it vvere doubtſome, harde, obſcure, or as a noſe of vvaxe, as they blaſpheme: but the fault is partlie in the blindneſſe of the minde of man, and partlie in the peruerſitie and frowardneſſe of the vvill, and malice of the heart: for it falles out, that either (ſuch is the blindneſſe of man by nature,) they knowe not the minde of the LORDE, or elſe, if they knowe His minde, yet vvillinglie they deſire not to knowe it, but to remaine ignorant: for it is true that the Apoſtle PETER ſayes, They that are vnlearned and vnſtable wreast the SCRIPTVRES to their owne deſtruction, 2 Pet. Chap. 3. verſ. 16. And PAVL ſayes, Jf our GOSPELL bee hidden, it is hidden to them who periſhes, whoſe

eyes the god of this world hath blinded, 2. Cor. 4.34. Againe we may perceiue, that a lye ran ſpeedily abroad, and was eaſily receiued, & got ſoone place in the hearts of th'Apoſtles, wherof we may learn, that the multitude commonly drinkes in lyes, vanities, fables, and Hereſies very ſuddenly, becauſe naturally they are very bent thereunto. Yet this errour remained not long vvith th'Apoſtles: for after that, according to the Lordes promiſe, extraordinarily in the day of the PENTECOSTE, they vvere illuminated, and after the Holie Spirite vvas giuen them, vvho called all thinges to remembrance which the Lord had ſpoken vnto them, when Hee was preſent with them, and gaue them the true meaning and vnderſtanding of all theſe thinges (as CHRIST ſayes, Joh. chap. 14. verſ. 26.) This lye concerning IOHN euaniſhed, then all the Diſciples knewe the LORDES meaning, when Hee ſpake theſe wordes to Peter, of Iohn, If I will that hee tarrie till I come, what is that to thee? But the Papiſhe Kirke, and that Antichriſtian Kingdome this day, makes it plaine enough vnto vs, howe bent men are by nature to receiue, maintaine, and entertaine lyes, and vanities: for in that Kingdome not onelie is this fable of IOHN retained, but alſo an hudge multitude of lyes, and of the vanities and fantaſies of the braine of man, which were deuiſed by the GENTILES, are allowed and receiued: for almoſte all the Religion of the Papiſtes, like a Beggers cloake, is clouted and patched together, partlie of the fables and ſuperſtitions of the GENTILES, and partlie of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Iewes, vvhich vvere aboliſhed by the comming of CHRIST. If anie vvould knowe what fables they maintaine, and giue out, concerning Iohn, let them reade their golden Legende.
            Nowe in the laſt two verſes of this Euangell, the Apoſtle concludes his GOSPELL, and in the concluſion hee telles vs vvho this vvas of vvhome Chriſt and PETER vvere ſpeaking of in the vvordes preceeding, Euen that ſame Diſciple which testifies of theſe thinges and wrote theſe thinges. And ſo telling that it vv
                  •
               s hee, that vvitneſſed, and wrote theſe things, he cloſes vp his Euangel, and puts his ſeale to it. But the vvordes are to bee marked: IOHN ſayes, hee testifies theſe thinges, meaning by worde: and then againe, hee wrote the ſame thinges: So hee bore vvitneſſe of the Goſpell of Chriſt, both by worde and writing. Whereof wee haue to l
                  •
               arne. That wee ſhould ſtriue all manner of vvayes to beare vvitneſſe vnto the trueth of the GOSPELL of CHRIST, by vvorde, by vvrit, by confeſſion of

our mouthes, & if need require, by the ſhedding of our blood alſo: for the moe teſtimonies be giuen to the trueth, the greater glorie redounds to God: Againe, we ſee, Iohn, when he hath ended the Hiſtorie of the Goſpell, hee affixes and puts to his ſeale to it. We ſhuld follow this exāple: for after we haue preached Chriſt, we ſhould be readie to ſeale it, if it were with our blood Looke to Paul, after he had preached Chriſt to the Philippians, and had laboured to make them to beleeue, he ſayes to them, he would rejoyce and be glad with them, although hee were offered vp vpon the ſacrifice and ſeruice of their Faith: that is, hee would bee content to ſeale vp the Goſpel which he had preached to them, by his death, that their Faith might be the more confirmed.
            Now, in the wordes following hee ſets downe the cauſe which mooued him to put to his ſeale to his Goſpel: for ſayes he, We know that his teſtimonie is true: So the cauſe of his ſealing of his Goſpell, is the full perſwaſion and aſſurance which hee had of the trueth: And, indeede, hee only who hath full aſſurance in his heart of the trueth of theſe thinges, that hee teaches, can confidently put his ſeale to his preaching: and therefore a Miniſter ſhould endeuoure to haue full perſwaſion in his heart, that he may ſpeake with libertie and great aſſurance, as Paul ſpeakes of himſelfe, 1. Theſſ. 1.5. and that if neede require, hee may ſeale the Goſpell with his owne blood.
            Now to come to the laſt verſe, and to end ſhortly: The Apoſtle meetes a queſtion, that ſome curious men might haue demanded: they might haue asked: Are all the thinges which Chriſt did, and the wonders which Hee wrought, ſet downe in write by thee? To this he anſweres: That all things which Ieſus did, are not written: for ſayes hee: There are many other things which Ieſus did, the which if they were written euery one, I ſuppoſe the world could not containe the bookes that ſhould be written: And ſo hee wrote not all things, which Chriſt did, neither was he of purpoſe to write them, neither was he able to write them all: for if hee had written them all, the whole world could not haue contained the bookes that ſhould haue bene written. Vpon this queſtion we may perceiue, how curious the braine of man is, and how immoderate his ingine and appetite is: there is nothing can content it: it cannot be contented with all things vvhich are vvritten in the Olde and Newe Teſtament, with all thinges which are written by the Prophets, the Euangeliſts and

Apoſtles, but it is euer ſeeking for more, ſeeking for new reuelations, new miracles, and ſuch other thinges. The Deuill knowes well enough this to bee our nature: and therefore he propines to the world an huge multitude of lies, vanities & fables, & eſpecially, to the Kingdome of the Antichriſt, to the Pope and his ſhauelings, who cānot content themſelues with the written word of God, the Olde & New Teſtament, but gripes greedily to vnwritten verities, as they call them, to traditions, which falſely they call, diuine Apoſtolicke, Eccleſiaſticke: ſo that, all men may perceiue, that the Popiſh religion ſerues not ſo much to worke Faith, and bring Saluation to men, as to ſatisfie their curioſitie and immoderate appetite. Let men take pleaſure in that religion, as they will, they may wel get their fooliſh appetit pleaſed & ſatisfied, but they wil neuer get true Faith nor Saluation by it. Then marke of Johns anſwere to this queſtion: That men ſhould keepe a meaſure in ſpeaking and writting theſe thinges which appertaine to religion and the worſhip of God: this did they, whome the Lord of olde employed to be penne-men of the Olde and New Teſtament: this did the Prophets, this did the Apoſtles, this did the Euangeliſts,: for in their writting they reſpected two things: Firſt, the infinite and incomprehenſible Majeſtie of God, and the vnmeaſurable and vnſpeakable greatneſſe and multitude of thoſe thinges that might haue bene written of that infinite and moſt glorious Majeſtie of God, and of Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne: Next, they reſpected the meane meaſure of mans vnderſtanding, and likewiſe of his Faith, which is not capable of all theſe things which may be written: therefore, by the Lords directiō in their writting, they applied themſelues to our capacity, & endeuoured to ſet down theſe things which ye Spirit of God thought might ſufficiently ſerue for our Faith & Saluatiō: for if all things had bene written concerning that infinite & incomprehenſible Majeſtie, our memories had bene ouerwhelmed, our vnderſtandings confounded, & our Faith ouerthrowne. Lamentable experience lets vs ſee this day, that the Papiſt by their vnwritten verities, & infinite traditions ouerwhelme the world, & ſubuert the Faith of men. Now laſt, the forme of ſpeech which the Euangeliſt vſes, would be conſidered, when he ſayes, If all things were written, the world could not containe the bookes that ſhould be written. Men vvould thinke, that this ſpeech were hyperbolicke, & that the ſpeech farre exceeds the matter it ſelfe, but indeed, it is not ſo, but rather in this

forme of ſpeech the Holy Spirit ſubmits Himſelfe to our infirmitie, & applies Himſelfe to our weake capacitie, & ſets down an infinite & incomprehenſible matter, in a forme of ſpeaking, which we may eaſily vnderſtand: for when John ſpake this, he conſidered & beheld that incomprehenſible & infinite deepeneſſe of that glorious Majeſtie which dwelt in Chriſt bodily, and which manifeſted it ſelfe in His works & miracles, which was able not only to ſwallow vp all the ſenſes and cogitations of all men, but alſo the Heauen & the earth and when He endeuoureth in ſome meaſure to expreſſe that incomprehenſible Highnes, after ſuch a ſpeech, & in ſuch tearmes as wee might vnderſtand, hee ſayes, The world could not containe the bookes that ſhould be written of Chriſt & His works, if they were all written: which ſpeech imports, that no liuing creature is able ſufficiētly to ſet out & by wordes to expreſſe that glorious Majeſtie, and His glorious wotks, and miracles that He wrought, according as their dignitie and excellencie required: for the whole world is not able to comprehend that infinite Majeſtie: for this wee ſhould not bee ignorant of, that this whole Scripture of the Olde and New Teſtament written by the Prophets & Apoſtles, which ſets out vnto vs the glorious Majeſtie of God, and His properties, His power, His mercie, His Iuſtice, His wiſdome, &c. is by infinite degrees inferior to the Majeſtie which it deſcribes vnto vs, & that the Spirit of God paintes Him not throughly & fully in His eſſence & nature, and in His owne perfection, as He is: No, but in painting Him out, Hee attempers His ſtile to our infirmitie & weakneſſe, that we may vnderſtand & beleeue: for there can be no words ſo high, ſo ſublime, ſo glorious inuented or deuiſed by any, that can bee ſufficient to expreſſe that Majeſtie which is incōprehenſible & infinite. Alwayes, ſeeing the Holy Spirit hath ſet down ſo much in the Scripture concerning that glorious & incomprehenſible Majeſtie of God, & His worſhip, as is ſufficient for our Saluation: let vs therewith be content, and not curiouſly ſeeke for any more, and while we read, or heare the Scriptures, let vs earneſtly craue at God, that He would worke faith in our ſoules, that we may beleeue, that Ieſus is that Chriſt the Sonne of God, & that in beleeuing we may haue life & Saluation through Him. To whome with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all praiſe, honour and glory for euermore. AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE LIII. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Then the eleuen diſciples went into Galile, into a mountaine, where Jeſus had appointed them.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And when they ſawe Him, they worſhipped Him, but ſome doubted.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And Jeſus came, and ſpake vnto them, ſaying, All power is giuen vnto Me, in heauen and in earth.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Goe therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt,
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And Hee ſaide vnto them, Goe yee into all the world, and preach the Gospell to euery creature.
               
            
            
               WELBELOVED Brethren, theſe dayes bypaſt, we followed out the Hiſtorie of the Reſurrection of the Lord, and of His manifolde appearings vnto ſundrie, but eſpecially, vnto His Diſciples, as they are ſet down by the Euangeliſt John, who inſiſts more largely in deſcribing His appearings to His Diſciples, than any of ye reſt, & as God gaue the grace the laſt day wee ended his Goſpell, & ſpake laſt of the concluſion thereof: now it reſts, that we follow out ſo much as remaines of the Hiſtorie of the reſurrectiō, as it is ſet down by ye reſt of ye Euangeliſts: for Iohn wrote his Euāgel after all ye reſt, & omitted purpoſely ſuch things as were written by ye reſt, willing vs to addreſſe our ſelues to ye reſt of ye Euangeliſts, that there we might read & follow out ye reſt of ye Hiſtorie

of CHRIST, vvhich hee left off: And ſo vvee are this day to enter into the deſcription of another appearing of CHRIST, after His Reſurrection, as it is ſet downe by Matthew & Marke. This appearing of the Lord ſeemes to be the ninth in number: for the firſt was to Marie Magdalene, The ſecond to other women, The thirde to two diſciples, as they wēt to Emmaus, The fourth was to Simō Peter, The fift to Iames: Then three ſeuerall times Hee appeared to His diſciples, being gathered together, as ye heard out of Iohn. So this is ye ninth appearing, wherin it is likely, that He ſhewes Himſelfe not only to the eleuen diſciples, being met together, but alſo to a great number of brethren, being together with them: For this ſeemes to be yt appearing wherof th'Apoſtle Paul makes mention, 1. Cor. 15 6. where he ſays, Hee was ſeene of more than fiue hundreth brethren at once. In this appearing there are ſundry thinges to bee conſidered, As the circumſtances of time and place, the diſciples worſhipping of Him, when they ſawe Him, the doubting of ſome of them, His communicatiō with the diſciples, & ſending them out, with a commiſſion, to preach to all Nations. Appearantly this is that meeting which the Lord in His appearing to the women, enjoyned to the Apoſtles: for by the women Hee gaue th'Apoſtles a direction, to meete Him in Galilie, Matth. chap. 28. verſ. 10. According to this direction, it is ſaid, The eleuen diſciples went into Galilie, vnto a Mountaine, where Ieſus had appointed them. So the place vvas in that Mountaine of Galilie, wherein the Lord had appointed them to meete. The time is not particularly mentioned: yet it is likelie, that as the Lord gaue a direction concerning the place; ſo did Hee alſo concerning the time of their meeting. Then this whole meeting, the time, the place, and all, is according to the direction and appointment of the Lord. Now as they keep this meeting vpō hope to ſee the Lord, according to His promiſe; ſo they are not diſappointed of their hope: The Lord is as good as His promiſe, He ſhewes Himſelfe preſent vnto thē. Marke the leſſon: The Lord who has appointed & ordained ye meetings & aſſemblies of His owne, & has promiſed to be amongst them when they are gathered together: He diſappoints thē not of His promiſe, but ſhewes Himſelfe to be preſent with thē. This ye diſciples foūd by experience, whē they met together by His appointment, ye Lord ſhewes Himſelfe preſent vnto thē. This ſame haue al ye godly foūd in al ages & ye faithful find it this day in their meetings: for albeit He ſhew not Himſelfe preſent after a bodilie manner, as

here He did to His diſciples; yet He is preſent, yea, no leſſe preſent with His owne now, than He was then; but He is now preſent after a ſpirituall manner: and the faithfull find His preſence to be no leſſe powerfull, & effectuall now, than it was then: for frō whence comes this vnſpeakeable joy, comfort, and peace of conſcience, which the faithfull find in their meetings, but from the preſence of Ieſus? for except the Lord Ieſus were preſent in our ſoules by His Spirite, it were not poſſible that wee could finde ſuch a powerfull working, and ſuch ſweete motions, and alterations in them. Vaine and fooliſh men, who are touched with no ſenſe of ſin, diſdaines & ſcornes the meetings of the Saincts, they thinke them all to be but fectleſſe & for ye feſhiō, they think they feed vpō fantaſies: But ye faithful find by experience, that the preſence of Chriſt in their meetinges is ſo powerfull, & comfortable, as no tongue can vtter, nor the heart of man is able to conceiue. And thou yt contemneſt and ſcorneſt theſe meetings, thou ſhalt find one day, by ſorrowful experiēce, of how great comforts thou haſt depriued thy ſelfe: And if thy conſcience were once wakened with the ſenſe of ſinne, thou wouldeſt finde, that there were no joy, nor comfort to thy ſoule, but by theſe meetings: Then thou wouldeſt haue greater pleaſure to frequēt theſe meetings, thā euer thou hadſt to eat or drink when thou wereſt hungry and drie. Now when ye Lord appeares to them, what doe they? what is their behauiour? It is ſaide, When they ſaw Him, they worſhipped Him. What made them to fall downe, and worſhip Him? What ſawe they into Him? No queſtion they ſawe in Him a glorious Majeſtie. By all appearance at this time He has ſhewed himſelfe in greater glory than Hee did of before. So beholding His glorie on the one part, and their owne vnworthineſſe on the other, as Hee approaches vnto them, they humblie fall downne, and worſhip Him. This their behauiour teaches vs, that whereſoeuer the Lord of Glorie is preſent, there He ſhould be worſhipped and adored: His preſence requires adoration. Seeſt thou the Lord preſent with thee? Then in humilitie fall downe, and worſhippe Him. But thou wilt ſaye, I cannot ſee Him, how then can I adore Him? Th'Apoſtles ſaw His glorious preſence with their eyes, therefore they ought to haue worſhipped Him: but as for vs, who liue in theſe dayes, after His aſcenſion to Heauen, we ſee Him not, and therefore how can wee worſhip Him? But I anſwere thee, It is true, thou ſeeſt Him not nowe vvith the eyes of thy bodie, but thou ſeeſt Him with the eyes of thy ſoule,

thou ſeeſt Him with the eyes of faith, thou ſeeſt Him in the vvorde and Sacraments; firſt crucified, and then glorified. And if thou wilt not worſhip Him when thou ſeeſt Him here preſent in the worde and Sacraments, thou wouldeſt not haue worſhipped Him if thou haddeſt ſeene Him with the eyes of thy body face to face. Theſe profane bodies, vvho vvill not vvorſhip Him nowe vvhen they ſee Him preſent in the mirrour of the Goſpell, they vvill neuer gette leaue to worſhip Him in the Kingdome of Heauen. Thinkeſt thou not that the Lord is ſeene preſent in His word? What meanes Paul then, vvhen he ſayes, that an vnlearned man comming into the meetinges of the faithfull, where manie are prophecying, finding himſelfe rebuked and judged of all, and the ſecrets of his heart made man
                     •
                  fest, that hee will fall downe on his face, and worſhippe GOD, and ſaye plainlie, That GOD is among them indeede. 1. Corinth. Chap. 14. verſ. 24. and 25. What ſees the vnlearned man among them, that makes him to fall down and giue ſuch a confeſſion? No queſtion, but the glorious light of the GOSPELL ſhines into his ſoule, and Chriſt offers Himſelfe preſent to bee ſeene by the eye of faith. The faithfull this daye by experience finde in their meetings, this ſame preſence of the Lord: And therefore it becomes vs, in all our meetinges, euer to vvorſhippe the Lord, and to ſit vvith feare and reuerence, to heare the worde, and to prepare our heartes to receiue the Holie Spirite, whome the Lord promiſes, and offers, with the preaching of the worde to all His Choſen. Againe, this their behauiour teaches vs, what force and power there is in the glorious preſence of Chriſt Ieſus. His preſence is powerfull to humble and bowe both the bodie and ſoule of the creature. This made Paul to ſaye, that at the Name of IESƲS euerie knee ſhould bowe, both of thinges in Heauen and thinges in earth, and thinges vnder the earth, Philipp. chap. 2. verſ. 20. For that ſublimitie and highneſſe vvhereunto the Father hath exalted Him, is ſo effectuall and powerfull in all creatures, and of all ſortes, that either ſweetlie & willinglie it mooues them to worſhip Him in all humilitie; or elſe it breakes & bruiſes them with fearceneſſe and violence, and compels out perforce obedience of them. The ſight and ſenſe of this ſublimitie and highneſſe▪ makes the bleſſed Angels in Heauen, in all reuerence to worſhippe Him. The ſenſe of this ſublimitie, makes the Sainctes on earth, when either they ſpeake or heare of Him, reuerentlie and in humilitie to bow both their bodies and their ſoules vnto Him. And by the contrarie, The

ſight and ſenſe of this ſame ſublimitie, raiſes vp in the Deuill and his angelles, ſuch horroures and dread, as cannot bee expreſſed. The ſenſe of this ſublimitie, makes the wicked, howe proude and jollie ſoeuer they bee in their owne conceite, oft times, when they heare of Him, to quake and tremble.
            The Euangeliſt Matthew notes, That notwithſtanding of their worſhipping of Him, yet ſome of them doubted. But who were theſe that doubted? Euen ſome of theſe who before worſhipped Him. And what mooued them to doubt? Apparantly that ſame that before moued them to worſhip Him, moues them alſo now to doubt: to wit, that extraordinary & vnaccuſtomed majeſty and glory wherein Ieſus appeared to them, which ſcarcely they could haue deemed to bee ſo great & wonderfull. And certainly, the glory of the Lord, ſitting this day in the Heauēs, at the right hand of the Father, is ſo exceeding great & wōderfull, that if it were permitted to vs to behold it, as it is with our bodily eyes (ſuch is ye corruption of our nature) we could not but doubt whether He were ye Chriſt, who vvas ſo far humbled & abaſed in ye earth, & of whom we heard before in ye Goſpel. Beſide this cauſe, ye difficulty to belieue this article of the Reſurrectiō of ye dead ſeemes likewiſe to haue furthered their doubting: for indeed amōg al ye articles of our belief, there is none more cōtrary to nature, nor harder to belieue, thā this article of ye Reſurrectiō of our bodies frō ye dead. Nature can neuer be perſwaded, yt a dead body, yt has bin a prey to worms, & is reſolued in duſt & aſhes, can riſe vp againe to life. But, as of all articles there is none harder to be belieued, ſo there is none more neceſſary to ſaluatiō, nor none that brings greater conſolation. And therefore the Lord (that vve might haue the more full aſſurance and perſwaſion thereof) tooke great paines vpon Himſelfe, and for the ſpace of fourtie dayes Hee remained vpon the earth, after His Reſurrection▪ and ſundry times ſhewed Himſelfe to His Diſciples, and manie other of the Faithfull, that all occaſion of doubting might bee remooued, and ſo their joye and comfort might bee the greater.
            Nowe this doubting of the Diſciples lets vs ſee vvhat is the diſpoſition of the heartes of the Godlie, euen in their beſt exerciſes. For euen their beſt exerciſes are euer accompanied vvith a piece of doubting, of vvant, of infirmitie, &c. their vvorſhipping of GOD is vvith doubting, their prayer is vvith infirmitie, and vvauering of the minde, their meditation falles from GOD, and

ſpirituall things to carnall and earthly things, their hearing of the word, is euer with ſome piece of loathing, their Faith is mixed with infidelitie: ſo that, before they can come to any great meaſure of grace, they muſt ſtriue and wreſtle through many infirmities, and ouercome many difficulties and tentations: ſo that the beſt man, euen in his beſt workes, hath no matter of rejoycing, if the Lord would enter in judgement with him. Yee haue heard the diſciples behauiour, now look how the Lord meetes them: Firſt, He drawes nearer to them, and then He enters in communing with them: for it is ſaid, Ieſus came and ſpake vnto them: He approached to them, partly, that Hee might take away all occaſion of doubting from them, partly, that with the greater profite and commoditie He might inſtruct them, and that His teaching might be the more powerfull and fruitfull: for no queſtion, while He drawes nearer to them with His body, & offers Himſelfe to be ſeene more clearly with ye bodily eyes, in ye meane time He drawes nearer to them inwardly, & joynes Himſelfe by His Spirit more powerfully and familiarly to their ſoules: for this is the accuſtomed dealing of the Lord, when by the word He is purpoſed to be effectuall and powerfull in the ſoule of any man, He drawes neare them by His Spirit: whereas by the contrarie, when Hee is not of purpoſe to be effectuall by his word, in the heart, He approaches not inwardly to the ſoule, but He holds Himſelfe a farre off, and giues them only a ſhew of His power and glory outwardly a farre off.
            Now followes the Lords cōmuning with His Diſciples: wherein He giues them a commiſsion, to goe out and preach to the world, baptizing them that beleeue. But before He giues them this commiſsion, by way of preface, He ſets down the ground of this commiſsion: to wit, that power and authoritie which He had: for ſayes He, All power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth: for it was neceſſary that the Apoſtles ſhould be enformed of this His power and authoritie, which He had giuen Him, to the end, that knowing that infinite power, whereupon their commiſsion and Apoſtleſhip was grounded, they might the more chearefully and willingly with free heartes, and open mouthes diſcharge their commiſsion & meſſage, beeing aſſured, that they had Him, who was Lord of Heauen and Earth, to be their protectour & maintainer. Marke this, Brethren, This Miniſterie of the Goſpell, albeit it be but a ſort of ſeruice in the Church of God (it is no Lordſhip) and albeit men count very

baſely of it, and eſteeme it of all callings in the world, to be the moſt vile and contemptible: yet it is grounded vpon ſuch a power as farre ſurpaſſes all the power of all the Kings and Monarches of the earth: and it is the Lordes will, that both the Miniſters themſelues, and likewiſe the people that heares them, haue their eyes fixed, and be exerciſed continually in the contemplation and conſideration of that incomprehenſible and infinite power, whereupon this Miniſtrie is grounded: to the end, that both the Miniſters may the more chearfully and couragiouſly diſcharge their calling, and alſo the people that heare them be not offended, nor ſtumble at the baſeneſſe of this outward forme of the miniſterie, not meaſuring the Majeſtie and glory of the Goſpell, preached vnto them by the outward ſhew and forme which they ſee, but by the infinite and incomprehenſible power of the Lord, whereupon it is grounded. Next, it is to bee marked that Hee ſayes, All power is giuen me, not in heauen only, but alſo in earth: He joynes them both together, and that for the comfort of His Apoſtles, whom Hee was to ſend out, and of the Miniſters who were to follow them to the end of the world: for when He ſayes, that all power was giuen to Him in the earth, it ſerues to encourage the Apoſtles, and all Miniſters in the Church faithfully and chearefully to diſcharge their calling, ſo long as they remaine heere in the earth, and grounding and anchoring themſelues vpon that infinite power which the Lord Ieſus hath vpon the earth, to ſtriue and fight couragiouſly and boldly againſt the aſſaults of Sathan, againſt the allurements of ſinne, againſt the feare and terrour of trouble and perſecution, & againſt the manners and behauiour of this vnthankfull world, as aſſured, that His almightie power in the earth, ſhall guarde & defend them in their calling, ſo long as the Lord hath a worke adoe with them. Againe, when Hee ſayes, that all power was giuen to Him in Heauen, it ſerues to comfort the Apoſtles & Miniſters vpon the hope of a reward, that after they haue diſcharged their dutie in their calling, & after they haue ſtriuen againſt all difficulties, & hath ouercome all tentations, at laſt they ſhould waite for the Kingdome of Heauen, where they ſhall reſt from their labours, & enjoy the preſence of their Lord & King for euer, 1 Cor. 15.19. Jf in this life only we haue hope in Chriſt, of all men we are the moſt miſerable: By the which words, He meanes, if the power of Ieſus Chriſt, whereupon wee repoſe & anchore our ſelues, extended no further, than within the

bounds of this preſent life, then our eſtate & condition of all men were moſt miſerable: yet ere we leaue theſe words, it is to be conſidered, what maner of power this is, whereof he ſpeakes, & whereupon their Apoſtleſhip is groūded: that ye may vnderſtand this the better, ye muſt conſider, that there is a twofold power in the Lord Ieſus the Sonne of God: the firſt is heritably, the other purchaſed: The firſt He hath as the Sonne of God, equall with the Father, before the foundations of the world were laide, & of this He ſpeakes in His Prayer to His Father before His Paſsion: Father, glorifie me with thine owne ſelfe, with that glory which I had with thee, before the world was, Ioh. 17.5. The other, the Sonne of God, Ieſus Chriſt purchaſed to Himſelfe for our cauſe, when Hee made Himſelfe of no reputation, and tooke on Him the forme of a ſeruant, humbled Himſelfe, and became obedient to the death, euen to the death of the Croſſe: for the Lord then exalted Him highly, and gaue Him a Name aboue euery Name, that at the Name of Ieſus euery knee ſhould bow, both of things in heauen, and things in earth, and things vnder the earth, Philip. 2.6. Heere the Apoſtle ſpeakes of that power, which Hee as a Mediatour, acquired by His perfect obedience in all things, and of this acquired power it is which the Lord ſpeakes in this place: for frō this power which He purchaſed to Himſelfe, by His obedience in our fleſh, proceedes the Goſpel: from this power proceedes the Miniſterie in the Church: from this power proceedes Saluation to the world: for that heritāble power which the Sonne of God, had with the Father from all eternitie, without the manhead of Chriſt, and His acquired power by His obedience, would neuer ſerue to bring life & Saluation to ſinners.
            Nowe to come to the ſending out of the Apoſtles: Hee ſayes, Goe therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them: In theſe wordes Hee giues them their commiſsion, and committes vnto them the Miniſterie, and office of the Apoſtleſhip, commanding them to goe foorth to all Nations, to teach and baptize them: for the Lord ſets downe here diſtinctly three points of their calling: Firſt, yt they ſhould goe foorth to all Nations of the world not holding themſelues within ye narrow boūds of ye land of Iudea, as they did before: Next yt they ſhould preach ye Goſpel: thirdly, yt they ſhould baptize, that is, yt by baptiſme they ſhould ſeale vp yt Goſpel which they had teached before, But to whō ſhould they go out? to whō ſhould they preach? Whome ſhould they baptize? Not the Jewes only, but all

Nations: & Marke ſayes, Goe yee into all the world, and preach the Goſpell to euery creature: As if He had ſaid, My power is extended to all Nations, to euery creature: and therefore this my Goſpell, & your Miniſterie, whereby my power is manifeſted and declared to all, muſt likewiſe bee extended to all creatures in the world. Theſe words of the Lord furniſhes vs ſundrie leſſons for our inſtruction: Firſt, we may learne heere, that this office of the Apoſtleſhip, which the Lord committes to His Diſciples, is not a bare ſtile of honour, No, but it is a laborious and painefull charge and calling: they are commanded to goe out into the worlde, to preach diligently the Goſpell to euery creature. The Pope, his Cardinalles and Biſhops, vaunt & bragge, that they are the ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles: they clame this as a ſtile of honour to themſelues: but in the meane time they refuſe to vndertake any paines and trauell for mans ſaluation, as the Apoſtles did: theſe idle bellies liue in carnall ſecuritie and ſenſualitie, taking their pleaſure and paſtime, and deceitfully gather in to themſelues the ſubſtance of the world, and commit the charge of Preaching to Vicares and Curates, as if the Goſpell were too baſe an exerciſe for them, and a thing whereof they had juſt occaſion to be aſhamed: and therefore let them clame what ſtiles they liſt to themſelues, they are nothing leſſe than ſucceſſours to the Apoſtles: Next, theſe wordes lets vs ſee, that there are two points of ye Miniſterie: for ye Lord giues His Apoſtles commiſsion to preach the Goſpell, & to baptize: ſo the Miniſters haue theſe two things enjoyned vnto them: to preach the word, & to miniſter the Sacraments: we heare nothing ſpoken here of offering of a Sacrifice, either bloody, or vnbloody, or of a Prieſthood: and no queſtion, if there had bene ſuch a thing, or at leaſt, if it had bene a matter of ſuch importance, & ſo neceſſarie, as the Pope & his ſhauelings ſay, the Lord would altogether haue misknowne it, & paſſed it ouer with ſilence, but He would haue ſpoken ſomething of it to His Apoſtles: ſo it is but a follie & vanitie, to thinke, that ſince Chriſt hath once offered Himſelf a propitiatory Sacrifice for ye Redemption of the world, that now there remaines any propitiatory Sacrifice in the Church. The Lord hath put an end to them all by His death & Sacrifice: there is no Prieſthood cōmitted either to the Apoſtles before, or to the Miniſters now, but that, whereby ye preaching of ye word they offer the ſoules of men & womē in a Sacrifice to ye Lord: Away with that deuiliſh ſacrifice of ye Maſſe, whereby the

Pope and his Clergy deceiues the world, making men beleeue, that daylie they offer vp Chriſt againe, as a propitiatorie ſacrifice to the Father, for the ſinnes of the quicke and the dead. No, there is no propitiatorie ſacrifice nowe left to the Kirke. That ſacrifice which the Lord once offered vpon ye croſſe, is ſufficient & perfect enough, to take away the ſinnes of ye world. Thirdly, theſe words teach vs, ye theſe two poincts of the calling of the Miniſtery, Teaching & Baptizing, were not cōmitted to diuerſe & ſundry perſons; but both were cōmitted to one & ye ſelfe ſame perſon. So that he who is ordained to preach, is ordained to baptize: and he who cānot preach, has no power nor libertie granted him of the Lord, to baptize: and if hee baptize, he does it without the Lords commandement, he has no warrant of Him: and therfore his doing is but a profanation of that Holie Sacramēt of Baptiſme. This baptizing of infants, which is miniſtred by priuate men, has no warrant nor allowāce of God, much leſſe that which is done by women. Fourthly, out of theſe words we may learne, what order ought to be kept in the miniſtring of Baptiſme to wit, the word muſt be firſt preached, the couenant of grace and the glad tidings of ſaluation muſt be firſt opened vp vnto vs: and then Baptiſme ſhould be miniſtred, to ſeale vp that ſame word and couenant, which before was preached. Wherefore ſerues Baptiſme, except firſt the word be preached? Baptiſme is a ſeale. And what ſerues ye ſeale for, if there be nothing to be ſealed? Wherefore can it ſerue, if the charter of the word preceed not. Therfore, except the preaching of the couenant of grace preceede, Baptiſme is nothing, but an vnprofitable ceremony, and a dead element. Nowe in whoſe name ſhould this Sacrament of Baptiſme be miniſtred? The Lord ſayes, IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, AND OF THE SONNE, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST: That is, Yee ſhall baptize, by the authoritie & power of the Father, the Sonne, & of the Holy Ghost. Whereof we haue to learne, That the power & efficacie of Baptiſme depends neither vpon the power of the Miniſter, who baptizes, nor vpon the force nor power of the words pronounced by the Miniſter in Baptiſme, as if there were any ſuch power or operation in the wordes, as the Papiſts falſely attribute vnto them: but all the force & efficacie of Baptiſme depends vpon the power of God only. And therefore, it is the duety of him who is baptized, to lift vp his eyes & his heart to Heauen, and to craue the bleſſing & efficacy thereof from God only. Next, it would be noeed, yt He ſayes not in a generall tearme,

               Baptiſe in the name of God: but Hee ſayes diſtinctly, Baptiſe in the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. Therefore it is the duety of him who is baptized, not to content himſelfe with a confuſed knowledge and conſideration of God, but hee ought to behold that glorious Majeſty, & yt incomprehenſible eſſence diſtinctly in the Trinitie of the perſons: that is, three diſtinct perſons in one Godhead: for faith is a diſtinct & a cleare knowledge & apprehenſion of the Majeſty of God: for whoſoeuer truely and ſincerely beleeues, & puts his confidēce in God, he finds ſenſibly by experiēce, that all good things flowe firſt from the Father, as the fountaine of all grace and goodneſſe, through the Sonne, as Mediator, by whom all grace is conueyed and cōmunicated vnto men: and by the Holie Ghoſt, who powerfully & effectually works all grace in ye heart. Laſt, we ſee here a cleare and a plaine naming of the three diſtinct perſons of the Godhead, the Lord names diſtinctly, The Father, the Sonne, & the holy Ghoſt. In all the Old Teſtament, we will not reade ſo plaine & cleare a diſtinction of ye three perſons of ye Godhead. Then learne here, that Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of God brought firſt of all into the world a diſtinct knowledge of God: and that He firſt of all diſtinctly named, The Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Spirit. Indeed it is true, that God was knowne in the Trinitie of perſons in ſome ſorte by the Fathers, who liued vnder the Old Teſtament, before Chriſts manifeſtation in the fleſhe: but the knowledge which they had was obſcure and confuſed, in reſpect of that knowledge which IESVS brought into the worlde at His comming: but chiefely this diſtinct knowledge of the three perſons of the Godhead, was manifeſted after Chriſtes Reſurrection from the dead, and His Glorification: for Chriſt glorified, is chiefely the image of the vnuiſible God, and the brightneſſe of His glorie, and the engrauen forme of His perſon. And from Chriſt glorified, eſpecially proceedes th'effectuall operation of the Holy Spirit, in the ſoules of His Elect. All tendes to this, To let you ſee, that the cleare and diſtinct knowledge of the Godhead, in the Trinitie of the perſons, proceeded chiefely from the Kingdome of Chriſt, and from His glory. Nowe to this God, one in eſſence, in three perſons, The Father, the Sonne, and the Holie Spirit, be all praiſe, honour and glorie for euermore, Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE LIV. LECTVRE, OF THE RESVRRECTION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MATTH. CHAP. XXVIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Teaching them to obſerue all things, whatſoeuer I haue commanded you: and loe, I am with you alway, vntill the ende of the world, Amen.
               
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 He that ſhall beleeue, and bee baptized, ſhall bee ſaued: but hee that will not beleeue, ſhall bee damned.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And theſe tokens ſhall follow them that beleeue: In my Name they ſhall caſt out deuils, and ſhall ſpeake with new tongues,
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And ſhall take away ſerpentes: and if they ſhall drinke anie deadlie thing, it ſhall not hurt them: they ſhall lay their handes on the ſicke, and they ſhall recouer.
               
            
            
               THE laſt daye (Welbeloued Brethren in Chriſt) we began to ſpeake of the nine appearings of the Lord to the Diſciples, as it is ſet downe by Matthew and Marke. Hee appeared to them in a Mountaine of Galilie, vvhere Hee had appointed them to meete Him. Wee hearde vvhat vvas the Diſciples behauiour: The ſight of that glorious Majeſtie made them to fall downe and worſhip Him: yet in the meane time ſome of them doubted: and therefore the LORDE, to confirme them, drawes neare vnto them, and enters into communication with them: and in His communing, firſt Hee telles what power and authoritie was giuen Him, both in Heauen and earth: to the ende Hee might mooue them the more willinglie and chearefullie to vndertake the office of the Apoſtleſhip. Then

when Hee has layed downe this power, as a ground of their office and Miniſterie, Hee ſendes them out in the worlde, charging them firſt to goe to all Nations: Next, to preach to euery creature: And thirdly, To baptize, in the Name and authority of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Spirit. Nowe in theſe wordes, firſt Hee telles them what doctrine they ſhoulde teach to the worlde, then hee makes them a threefolde promiſe: The firſt is of life and ſaluation to then that beleeue and are baptiſed: The ſeconde is a promiſe of th'extraordinarie and miraculous giftes of the Holie Spirite: The thirde is a promiſe of His owne glorious and powerfull preſence with them in diſcharging of their calling, & that not for a ſeaſon, but to continue to th'ende of the vvorlde. Then in the firſt wordes which vve haue read, He telles them what they ſhould teach: not al things, not euery thing that they pleaſed themſelues: but He ſayes, Teach them to obſerue all thinges whatſoeuer J haue commanded you. So Hee reſtraines the doctrine that they ſhould teach vnto the world, vnto that doctrine which Hee Himſelfe firſt had taught them. In the 14. Chapter of John, verſ. 26. after Hee has firſt promiſed the Holie Spirit, to teach His Apoſtles all thinges, then Hee telles vvhat Hee meanes by All theſe thinges, which His Spirite ſhould teach: and Hee boundes them, and reſtraines them, to that doctrine, which Hee Himſelfe had taught them before: For, ſayes Hee, hee ſhall bring all thinges to your remembrance, which I haue tolde you. Euen ſo here Hee reſtraines the preaching of th'Apoſtles, to theſe thinges vvhich Hee Himſelfe had taught them. So marke this leſſon: The doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, which Hee deliuered the time that Hee liued in the vvorlde, and had His conuerſation among men, is the grounde, the rule, and the meaſure of all true doctrine. The Spirit of the Lord Ieſus, vvhome Hee left behinde Him, to bee His vicegerent in th'earth, kept preciſelie this rule: Hee taught not ſo much as one ſentence in ſubſtance, but that vvhich CHRIST had taught before. Th'Apoſtles, vvhome Hee ſent out into the worlde, declined not one jote from this rule: for they taught the vvorlde nothing but that vvhich the Holie Spirite had furniſhed and ſuggeſted vnto them before: and that Spirite taught them nothing, but that vvhich IESVS had taught them before. So that the doctrine of the H. Spirit, & th'Apoſtles, come all wholly from Ieſus, as th'only doctor & teacher of His Kirke, of whom the Father ſaid in His baptiſme & trāsfiguratiō, Heare him. So it ſhould be wt miniſters

and Teachers of the Church to the end of the world, they ſhould make Chriſtes doctrine to bee the rule of all their doctrine, they ſhould teach nothing but that which Chriſt teached before them: the faithfull Miniſters of Chriſt in all ages haue ſtriuen to doe ſo: they confirmed all their doctrine, ſo farre as they could, to the doctrine of Chriſt. Indeede it is true, through proceſſe of time, corrupt men entred in the Church, who reſpected not God, nor His glory, nor the well and ſaluation of men, but their owne honour, their owne luſts, and their bellie, who taught the world, not the doctrine of Chriſt, the way of life, but their own fantaſies, dreames, and traditions. Wee may ſee this lamentable experience this day in the kingdome of the Antichriſt: What teaches the Pope and his Clergie to the world? Not the word of God: Not the doctrine of Chriſt: Not that doctrine which the Holy Spirit furniſhed to the Apoſtles: not that vvhich the Apoſtles haue left in regiſter this day: they make not that to be the rule of their preaching, but they teach their owne vanities, deuiſed by themſelues: they teach mens traditions: they teach vnwritten verities, as they call them, vvhich are for the moſte parte altogether repugnant to the doctrine of Chriſt. The Lord ſaue vs from their doctrine, vvherewith they poyſon the world, and bring men to perdition. Now, as the Paſtors are obliged to teach nothing but the doctrine of Chriſt, ſo are the people bound to heare, and receiue none other doctrine, but the doctrine of Chriſt: and for this cauſe, they ſhoulde pray earneſtly, for the Holy Spirit, who is promiſed to His owne, to illuminate their mindes, and to giue them the gift of diſcretion, to diſcerne ſpirits, as alſo, they ſhould be diligently exerciſed in reading, and conſidering the Olde and New Teſtament, the writtings of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, vvhich containe exactly the doctrine of Chriſt neceſſarie to ſaluation.
            Nowe, let vs conſider in order, the promiſes vvhich the Lord joynes vvith this commiſsion that He giues to His Apoſtles: the firſt two are ſet downe in Marke, the third in Matthew: the firſt promiſe is of euerlaſting life and ſaluation, to all that beleeue by their Miniſterie, and are baptized by them: Hee that ſhall beleeue, and be baptized, ſhall be ſaued. This promiſe of life and ſaluation that Hee ſubjoynes to the preaching and baptizing of the Apoſtles, was, no doubt, to mooue and allure men vpon the conſideration of ſo faire and great benefi
                  •
               es, that they ſhould receiue

them the more willingly, to beleeue in the Lord Ieſus: With this promiſe to them that beleeue, He joynes a denunciation of judgement againſt all thoſe who would not beleeue by their Miniſterie, He denounces eternall death, and damnation againſt them: Hee that will not beleeue, ſayes Hee, ſhall be condemned. So that, as on the one part, He promiſes a faire reward, to mooue men to beleeue: ſo on the other part, Hee threatens a fearfull judgement againſt them that beleeue not, but deſpiſes the Apoſtles doctrine, to make men to abhorre and deteſt that abhominable ſinne of infidelitie. Vpon this promiſe of reward, and threatning of judgement: firſt, we learne this leſſon: The Miniſterie of the Goſpell is euer effectuall and powerfull in men, either one way or other: for ſeeing, this Miniſterie of the Goſpell, which from the Apoſtles dayes continues, and ſhall continue to the ende of the world, is grounded vpon that incomprehenſible power that filles both heauen and earth, howe is it poſsible, but it muſt bee mightie and powerfull? It muſt be powerfull, either to life and ſaluation: or els, to death and damnation: to life to them that beleeue: to death to them that beleeue not. Therefore Paul ſayes, that alwayes they triumphed, and were victorious in Chriſt, and that they were a fauour to God, both in them that are ſaued, and in them who periſh: In them who are ſaued, they vvere the ſauour of life vnto life: but in them who periſh, they were the ſauour of death vnto death, 2. Cor. 2.14. The Apoſtle in theſe wordes, lets vs ſee, that the preaching of the Goſpell is euer powerfull and effectuall in all ſorts of men. Alas, men count too lightly: yea, deſpiſe, contemne and ſcorne this preaching, as if it were a matter of none effect, and the worde of man and not of God: but take heede, how thou heareſt the Goſpell: for thou ſhalt finde it to be the moſt powerfull thing that euer was, and if it bee not powerfull to worke life and ſaluation, it ſhall worke death and damnation in thee: Next, we learne out of theſe wordes, that Faith, Righteouſneſſe, Saluation, and all ſpirituall graces, are ſo tied and bound to this Miniſterie of the Goſpell, that whoſoeuer ſubmits himſelfe to this Miniſterie, and conformes himſelfe to the Goſpell, hee ſhall attaine to Faith, Righteouſneſſe, Life and Saluation: and by the contrarie: whoſoeuer contemnes this Miniſterie, hee ſhall neuer get any ſpirituall grace: no Faith, no Righteouſneſſe, no Life, no Saluation but by this Goſpell. But yee will ſay, We ſhould not tie nor binde

the grace of God to thoſe externall things? Wee ſhould not reſtraine Gods working to the outward Miniſterie. Indeede, I grant, the grace of GOD, is not ſo tied to theſe ordinarie meanes, and outward helpes, which are dayly vſed in the Church, but that yee may worke without them, and that ye may worke immediatly by His owne Spirit, in whome, and when He pleaſes: but it is as true, that whoſoeuer contemnes thoſe outwarde ordinarie meanes, which the LORD hath ordained to bee vſed: he ſhall be depriued of all ſpirituall grace, of Faith, of Righteouſneſſe, of Saluation: For Faith, ſayes Paul, is by hearing, and hearing by the worde of God preached, Rom. Chapter 10. verſe 17. Many fooliſh men with-draw themſelues from the outwarde Miniſterie, from the meanes of grace, and are exerciſed in paſtime, in drinking, in harlotrie, and yet they will ſay: they will come to Heauen as ſoone as the beſt of them, but they deceiue themſelues: for if thou contemneſt theſe outwarde meanes, which the LORD hath ordained, thou ſhalt neuer get no grace, the gates of Heauen ſhall be cloſed on thee, thy portion ſhall bee with the Deuill and His Angels: Thirdly, we may marke out of this promiſe, an excellent and worthie effect of Faith: to wit, Saluation and eternall life: for Hee ſayes, Hee that beleeueth, ſhall be ſaued. But we may not thinke, that this effect proceedes from the force, power, worthineſſe and merites of Faith: No, but this effect of life and Saluation proceedes only from the vertue, power and merite of Chriſt, which the ſoule apprehendes: for this Life and Saluation ſtayes and abides ſo plenteouſly, and in ſuch abundance in Chriſt, that as ſoone as wee put out the hand of Faith, and takes holde of Him, ſo ſoone will we finde that life of CHRIST conueyed into our ſoules. His life is made ours by Faith: In Chriſt there dwelles ſuch a marueilous and glorious light, that when wee approach to Him by Faith, by the beames of His brightneſſe, He ſhines in our hearts, that we may get the light of the knowledge of the glorie of God, in the face of Ieſus, 2. Cor. Chapter 4. verſe 6. By Faith His light is made ours: in Chriſt there is ſuch a wonderfull and incomprehenſible glorie, that as ſoone as with open face with the eye of Faith we beholde Him in the mirrour of the Goſpell, as ſoone are we transformed in the ſame Image from glorie to glorie, 2 Cor. 3.18. by Faith His glorie is made ours, & when wee ſhall ſee Him face to face, & whē Faith ſhall be turned into ſight, He ſhall perfect

our glorie, Hee ſhall change our vile bodies, that they may bee faſhioned like vnto his glorious bodie, according to the working, whereby hee is able to ſubdue all things to himſelfe. Philip. chap. 3. verſ. 21. Seeing then ſo excellent and worthie are th'effectes of faith, wee ought both carefullie to vſe th'ordinarie meanes vvhereby faith is vvrought: and alſo pray earneſtlie, that the Lord vvould giue a bleſſing to them, and by them vvorke faith in our heartes: that ſo vvee may enjoye all theſe graces and benefites. Fourthlie, vvee ſee in this promiſe of life and ſaluation, that the Lord joynes Baptiſme with faith in Chriſt: For, ſayes Hee, hee that ſhall beleeue, and bee baptized, ſhall bee ſaued. Wee may not vnderſtand this ſo, as if Baptiſme vvere eyther ſimplie a cauſe, or an halfe cauſe of ſaluation: No, it has no reſpect of a cauſe in the ſaluation of man: but it is joyned to Faith, as a ſigne, and an outwarde marke, to teſtifie and beare vvitneſſe of the cauſe, to wit, Faith in Ieſus Chriſt: and in ſuch ſorte it muſt followe vpon Faith, and bee conjoyned vvith it, that hee vvho beleeues vvould vviſhe to bee baptized, it is not poſſible that hee can contemne Baptiſme: And, if a man contemne Baptiſme, let him boaſt of his faith as hee pleaſes, that contempt is a ſure token, that he had neuer faith, neither ſhall he get eternall life. So Baptiſme in ſome reſpect is neceſſarie to ſaluation: that is, it muſt not be contemned, or neglected: for if a man contemne or neglect it, he cannot get ſaluation: but it is not ſimplie and abſolutelie neceſſary to ſaluation: that is, incaſe a man contemne it not, nor neglect it, he may be ſaued without it. It is the contempt, and not the want of it that hurtes man, for a man may bee ingraffed in Chriſt by Faith, and may bee ſaued by Chriſt, vvithout the ſeale of Baptiſme: for the grace of God is not ſo bound and tyed to th'ordinarie meanes and outwarde helpes, but that the Lord may vvorke without them when and where Hee pleaſes. And the Lord Ieſus as apparantly importes no leſſe in theſe vvordes, than that Baptiſme is not abſolutelie neceſſarie to ſaluation: for vvhen after the promiſe He ſettes downe the cauſe of damnation, Hee ſpeakes not a vvorde of Baptiſme, for Hee ſayes onelie, Hee that beleeues not ſhall bee damned: of ſette purpoſe He leaues out Baptiſme. And if it had beene abſolutelie neceſſarie to ſaluation, no queſtion Hee vvoulde not haue misknowne it, and paſſed it by. Now laſt, marke the meaning of theſe wordes, Hee that beleeues not. This negation and vvant of faith comprehendes firſt, all ſinne vvhatſoeuer againſt the

morall Law, whether it be originall ſinne, wherein we are conceiued and borne, or actuall ſinne, proceeding from originall ſinne: for if we haue not Faith in the Lord Ieſus, all theſe ſinnes whatſoeuer will be laid to our charge, & will bring vs to damnation. Next, this negation and want of Faith, comprehends that infidelitie, rebellion, & ſtubburneſſe, whereby men diſdainfully refuſe & reject that grace which the Lord offers freely in Ieſus Chriſt to ſinners, & this ſinne of infidelitie, of all ſinnes is the greateſt, & moſt deteſtable: and therefore procures moſt ſpeedie, fearfull & heauie judgement, and therefore Chriſt ſayes, He that beleeues not, is condemned alreadie, Joh. 3 18. Theſe wordes importr that there is no delay of judgement to him, who diſdainfully rejects grace, but the judgement is preſent and alreadie paſt againſt him: and hee giues a reaſon, taken from that rebellion and repining againſt the Majeſtie of the only begotten Sonne of God, hee is condemned alreadie, ſayes he, Becauſe hee hath not beleeued in the Name of that only begotten Sonne of God. The Lord ſaue vs from this curſed ſinne of infidelitie: for where it is, all other ſinnes are laid to mens charge, it & drawes out moſt ſpeedily moſt fearfull judgements.
            Now, it followes, that we ſpeake of the ſecond promiſe to them that beleeue: Theſe tokens ſhall follow them that beleeue in my Name, they ſhall caſt out deuills, and ſhall ſpeake with new tongues, and ſhall take away ſerpents, and if they ſhall drinke any deadly thing, it ſhall not hurt them, they ſhall lay their hands on the ſicke, and they ſhall recouer. The former promiſe, was, of life eternall to them who beleeue, this promiſe is of the gift of working miracles, He promiſes that the Holy Spirit ſhould giue to them that beleeue, a power & gift to worke miracles. We may not thinke, that this power is common to all, & that euery particular Chriſtian who beleeues, ſhould haue this gift, neither muſt we thinke, that it ſhould be extended to all times, and ages. But this promiſe is to be reſtrained to a certaine number of particular perſons, on whome it ſhall pleaſe the Lord, to beſtowe this gift of working of miracles, and it is to be reſtrained & bounded within a certaine time: it muſt bee reſtrained to that firſt age and infancie of the Church, to the firſt time that the Goſpell beganne to be preached, for then it was expedient and neceſſarie that the Goſpell which was vnknowne, and not heard of before to the world, ſhould be confirmed by miracles: and therefore we ought not to looke for new miracles in this age wherein we liue, becauſe

the Goſpell is alreadie ſufficiently confirmed by the miracles wrought in that firſt age of the Church, by Chriſt and His Apoſtles, and them that immediatly ſucceeded. The Papiſtes, indeede, bragge much of miracles that are dayly wrought in their Church, but their miracles are ſuch as Chriſt foretold: that falſe Chriſts, and falſe Apoſtles ſhould worke, and that the Antichriſt ſhould worke at his comming, Matth. 24.24. And they are theſe, which Paul calles lying ſignes and wonders, which notwithſtanding hee ſayes, are effectuall in them who periſh, becauſe they receiued not the loue of the trueth. Now, yee ſee here, there is a promiſe of ſundrie great and excellent things to be wrought by ſome of the faithfull in the firſt age of the Church: as namely, caſting out of Deuils, of ſpeaking with newe tongues, taking away ſerpents, the drinking of deadly and poyſonable things, without harme, the healing of ſicke folkes, by laying on of their hands, wherein, I purpoſe not particularly, to inſiſt, but onely to marke ſome thinges generally for our edification. Conſider firſt, the order of theſe promiſes which the Lord makes to them which beleeue: Firſt, Hee promiſes life & Saluation: thereafter, He promiſes working of miracles: the promiſe of life, is a promiſe of the greateſt miracle, that euer was wrought in the world: as for other miracles, they are but workes, ſignes and tokens of that life & Saluation that was to be wrought, which farre ſurpaſſes all other miracles. The Lord Himſelfe teſtifies vnto vs, that all the miracles which were wrought in the firſt age of the Church, were counted but like as many fignes and tokens of life and Saluation to be wrought by Him. When He ſayes, Matth. 9.6. That ye may know, that the Sonne of man, hath authoritie on earth to forgiue ſinnes, I will reſtore to health this man that is ſicke of the Palſey: then He ſayes to the ſicke man, Ariſe, take vp thy bed, and goe to thine houſe. Where He lets vs ſee, that the miracle of bodily health, was a ſigne & token of a greater grace & miracle, euē, of Remiſſiō of ſins, & life euerlaſting. Whereupō we marke this leſſon: That Faith is neuer vvithout ſome miracle: it hath euer one miracle or other following vpon it. Indeede, it hath not alwayes with it ſuch miracles as were wrought in the firſt age of the Church: as caſting out of deuils, healing of diſeaſes: yet it neuer vvants that greateſt miracle of all, the miracle of Regeneration, of life and Saluation, vvhich Chriſt Himſelfe lets vs ſee, is more to be marueiled at, than all the miracles heere promiſed: for vvhen the ſeuentie diſciples,

who were ſent out with power to worke miracles, returned rejoycing that they had wrought ſuch great things, that they had caſt out deuils, and healed diſeaſes, He ſaid vnto them: Albeit I haue giuen you power to caſt out deuils, to tread on ſerpents, and ſcorpions, and that nothing ſhall hurt you, Neuertheleſſe, in this reioyce not, but rather reioyce that your names are written in Heauen, Luke 10.17. There He willes them, to count life and Saluation to bee a greater miracle than all others. Peter teſtifies likewiſe, that whē the Gentiles in that firſt age of the Church, ſawe them that were conuerted to the Lord Ieſus, not walking after their olde manner, in wantonneſſe, luſtes, drunkenneſſe, &c. it ſeemed ſtrange to them, they marueiled much, that they ranne not with them vnto the ſame exceſſe of riot, as they were wount to doe, 1. Epiſt. 4.4. Where hee telles vs, that the conuerſion of ſinners was a wonder to the Gentiles: and indeede, it was no maruell, that they counted ſo of it: for a man truely renued by the Spirit of grace, and conuerted vnto Chriſt, is a wonder of the world: and thou who art renued by the Spirite of Ieſus, and haue gotten an aſſurance of the Remiſſion of thy ſinnes, of life and ſaluation, thou wilt neuer ſeeke any new outward miracles, to confirme to thee the trueth of the Goſpell: for thine owne ſaluation will confirme thee more, than all the miracles in the world can doe. Againe, conſider here, that this gift of working of miracles, followes not euer, nor abſolutely that juſtifying Faith, but this gift of working of miracles requires further, another ſort of Faith, which wee call the Faith of miracles, which is nothing els, but a ſpeciall and extraordinarie gift of the Holy Ghoſt, whereby ſome of the faithfull in that firſt age of the Church, were able to worke miracles and wonders: and this Faith of miracles is grounded vpon ſome particular promiſes and ſenſible perſwaſions in their heartes, who get that extraordinarie gift, that God by them at ſuch times, and vpon ſuch perſons, and ſuch occaſions would worke miracles. This would be marked againſt the Papiſtes, who confound this Faith of miracles with juſtifying Faith: for they ſay: to worke miracles, none other Faith is required, but this true Faith, which wee call juſtifying Faith, whereas, indeede, they are two different Faiths, of diuers kinds & natures.
            Thus ſhortly of the ſecond promiſe: Now it reſts, that we ſpeake of the third promiſe, which wee haue ſet downe by Matthew in the laſt words of his Goſpell: there he ſayes, Loe, I am with alway vnto

the ende of the world. This promiſe the Lord makes vnto His Apoſtles, to whome Hee had giuen commiſsion to goe into the world, to preach the Goſpell, and to baptize, & with this ſweet & comfortable promiſe He ends His cōmuning, that at this time He had with them: as in the beginning of His cōmuning, to the end Hee might encourage them the more chearfully, and couragiouſly to vndertake and diſcharge that high and painfull calling of the Apoſtleſhip, Hee ſhewed and declared vnto them His great and incomprehenſible power which He had giuen Him, both in Heauen and in earth: ſo heere Hee cloſes vp His communing with them with a promiſe of the preſence of that ſame incomprehenſible power: for, ſayes Hee, I am with you alway vnto the end of the world: A promiſe moſte excellent, and full of heauenly conſolation, as if Hee had ſaid, I, euen I, who haue all power giuen me, both in Heauen & & in earth, I ſhalbe with you, not to remaine with you for a ſeaſon, but for euer, vnto the end of the world, & not at certaine diets, and with any intermiſsion, but alway, euery day, & at all times.
            Marke well the degrees of this promiſe: Firſt, there is a promiſe of an infinite and incomprehenſible power: Next, there is a promiſe of the preſence of this His power with them: Thirdly, Hee promiſes that this power ſhall not be preſent with them for a certaine time onely, but euen to the ende of the world: Fourthly, Hee promiſes it ſhall be preſent vnto the end of the world, not by ſet diets and dayes, but without any intermiſsion.
            But is this promiſe made vnto the Diſciples abſolutely, without any condition? No, it is not abſolute, but conditionall: and what is the condition? Euen that ſame which Hee ſet downe in the words immediatly preceeding: if the Apoſtles teached men to obſerue all things whatſoeuer Hee commanded them: that is, That they teached theſe thinges which He had taught them before, all theſe things, and no other thing.
            This promiſe which here He makes to His Apoſtles, is extended vnto the Miniſterie in all ages: yea, euen to the Miniſterie, at this preſent time: for the LORD ſayes, I ſhall be with you vnto the ende of the world: But ſo it is, that the Apoſtles are nowe dead, they are no more in the worlde: therefore this promiſe is made vnto the Miniſters of the CHVRCH, to the ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles, vvho ſhould remaine in the Church vntill CHRISTES comming to judgement. Then all Miniſters

who faithfully diſcharges their duetie in their calling, and ſincerelie teaches all theſe thinges, and onelie theſe thinges vvhich CHRIST taught, and commanded them to preach, haue in this promiſe great matter of comfort and rejoycing. The Lord requires faithfulneſſe and painfulneſſe in the Paſtor, in diſcharging of his calling: and if hee labour faithfullie and painfullie in his Miniſterie, let him commit the iſſue and ſucceſſe vnto Him, who has promiſed, neuer to leaue His owne, but continuallie to bleſſe their trauels vvith His preſence.
            Now as it is required of the Paſtor, that he ſhould bee painefull and carefull in his calling, to the ende that hee may enjoye this preſence: So it is the duetie of the people, to haue a care, that the Paſtor bee not abſtracted and vvithdrawne from his charge by vvordlie affaires: For, ſayes PAVL, no man that warreth, entangleth himſelfe with the affaires of this life, 2. Timoth. 2.4. And if ſo they doe, they ſhall bee partakers of this ſame preſence which the LORDE promiſes here to His Diſciples: for the preſence which the Lord has promiſed and giues to the Paſtor, is not for himſelfe onelie, but it redoundes to the vveale and commoditie of the people alſo: The Paſtors bleſſing, is the peoples bleſſing: And by the contrarie, the curſe that the Lord layes vpon the Paſtor, is for a curſe to the people, vpon whome the Lorde will bee auenged for the contempt of the Miniſterie.
            The Papiſtes bragge much of this promiſe, and they gather vpon it, That the Kirke cannot erre: for, ſaye they, ſeeing the LORDE hath promiſed to bee with His owne vnto the ende of the worlde, howe can it bee poſſible, that Hee can leaue His Kirke, that it can erre? But if they weigh aright the condition whereupon the promiſe is grounded, they may ſee, that they haue no matter of bragging: For, as vvee ſhewed you before, this promiſe, That the Lorde will bee with them, is not made abſolutelie, and in all caſes, howſoeuer they behaue themſelues: but vpon this condition. Hee promiſes His preſence, That they teach men theſe thinges, which Hee hath taught them before, that they teach all theſe thinges, onelie theſe thinges, and none other thinges. So that if they teach not theſe thinges, but their owne dreames and fantaſies, they haue nothing adoe vvith this promiſe: for if they keepe not the condition, vvhat vvarrant can they haue to looke for the promiſe.
            Nowe howe farre the Papiſtes are from keeping this condition,

from teaching the doctrine of Chriſt onelie, it is more than manifeſt, and they are blind that ſees it not: for in ſtead of the doctrine of the Goſpell, they teach their owne traditions, dreames, and fantaſies: They haue baniſhed the Spirite of Trueth, and haue bewitched the vvorlde vvith their lyes and vanities. Therefore, ſeeing the felicitie and happineſſe both of Paſtor and people ſtandes in this, To finde the Lordes preſence with them in this pilgrimage, the Lord grant, that both Paſtor and people may ſtriue carefullie to holde faſt the doctrine of the Goſpell: and that they may conforme their liues thereunto, that ſo vvith confidence they may claime to this promiſe of the preſence of Chriſt: To whome with the Father, and the Holie Spirit, bee all praiſe and honour, for euermore: AMEN.
         
         
            THE LV. LECTVRE, OF THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XXVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 So after the Lord had ſpoken vnto them, hee was receiued into heauen, and ſate at the right hand of God.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 50 Afterward hee led them out into Bethania, and lift vp his handes, and bleſſed them.
                  
                     
                        verse 51 And it came to paſſe, that as hee bleſſed them, hee departed from them, and was carried vp into heauen.
                  
                     
                        verse 52 And they worſhipped him, and returned to Hieruſalem with great ioye.
               
               
                  
                     ACTS, CHAP. I.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, ſaying, Lord, wilt thou at this time reſtore the Kingdome to Iſrael?
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 7 And hee ſaide vnto them, It is for you to knowe the times, or the ſeaſons, which the Father hath put in his owne power.
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Bu yee ſhall receiue power of the holie Ghost, when hee ſhall come on you: and ye ſhall bee witneſſes vnto mee both in Hieruſalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and vnto the vttermost partes of the earth.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 And when he had ſpoken theſe things, while they beheld, he was taken vp: for a cloude tooke him vp out of their ſight.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 And while they looked ſtedfaſtlie toward heauen, as hee went, behold, two men ſtood by them in white apparell,
               
            
            
               BELOVED BRETHREN IN CHRIST, vvee haue alreadie inſiſted at length in the Hiſtorie of the LORDES Reſurrection: vvherein vvee ſhewed you, how often Hee appeared to His owne, and eſpeciallie to His Apoſtles: to the ende, that not onelie they themſelues might bee more fullie perſwaded of His Reſurrection: but alſo vvith the greater confidence and libertie they might ſpeake therof to others. In His laſt appearing to His Apoſtles, vvee ſawe Hee gaue them a commiſſion and charge, To goe out to the vvorlde, to preach the Goſpell, and to baptize, In the Name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghoſt: but He willes them to teach nothing elſe, but onelie theſe things, & all theſe things which He had taught them before. And to th'end He might the more eaſily moue them willingly and chearfully to vndertake & diſcharge this calling; firſt He ſets down His vnſpeakable & incomprehenſible power wherupō is is grounded, ſhewing them, that al power in heauē & in earth was giuen vnto him: Next, He ſubjoynes a threefold promiſe of bleſſing to them in the diſcharging of their Miniſtery. The firſt is a promiſe of life & ſaluation to them who beleeue, & are baptized. The ſecond is a promiſe of th'extraordinary & miraculous gifts of the H. Spirite. The third is a promiſe of His own powerfull preſence to continue with them vnto th'end of the world: vpon condition, That they faithfully diſcharge their calling, & teach theſe things, all theſe things, & onlie theſe things, which the Lord had taught, & no other. Now it reſts, that we ſpeak of the Hiſtory of His Aſcenſion to Heauen, which we haue briefelie, and in fewe vvordes, in th'Euangeliſtes: for Matthew and Iohn makes no mention of it: Marke touches it ſhortlie

in his Goſpell. Luke alſo ſpeakes ſomething of it in his Goſpell, but hee inſiſtes in it more largely, in ſetting downe the Circumſtances of it in the firſt Chapter of the Actes of the Apoſtles: In the words which wee haue preſently read, we will ſee, how the LORD leades His Diſciples out to Bethania, we will ſee what conference & communication is betwixt the Lord and them, we will ſhew how He bleſſed them, we will ſee the manner of His Aſcenſion, & what was the behauiour of the Apoſtles, while Hee was aſcending to Heauen, and looked ſtedfaſtly to the Heauen, as He went vp.
            Then to come to the words, Luke ſayes, He led them out into Bethania. This was the place from the which the Lord aſcended vp to the Heauen: and therefore of ſet purpoſe He leades them out of Ieruſalem to this place. They come not to this place by fortune or chance, they come not there of their owne accorde, or vpon any foreſight that they themſelues had: No, but they were ledde out of Jeruſalem, to ſee that glorious Aſcenſion of Chriſt, and to be partakers of His grace. But who led them out? It is ſaide, The Lord ledde them out: none comes to grace by aime, none comes to the place vvhere grace is in dealing by fortune or chance: No, it is the Lord which leades them, as then the Lord ledde His Apoſtles, as it were by the hande, to Bethania, to ſee His glorie, and to be made partakers of grace: ſo it is alwayes by the LORDS ſecret and powerfull prouidence, that any man comes to the place vvhere the LORD diſtributes His grace: for ſayes CHRIST, No man can come to mee, except that Father who hath ſent mee, draw him, Ioh. Chapter 6. verſe 44. Therefore, if thou findeſt at any time by this Miniſterie, grace to bee communicated into thy ſoule in His Church, aſcribe neuer the praiſe of it to thy ſelfe, or to thy trauell, but giue the praiſe and honour of all to the LORD IESVS, vvho had a care of thee, and by His gracious prouidence b
                  •
               ought thee there. But vvho are theſe vvhom the Lord leades out? Not all they vvho heard Him, vvho knew Him, vvho had conuerſed vvith Him, but it is only His Diſciples vvhome the Lord ledde out, theſe only vvhome He vſed moſt familiarly, vvhom Hee loued moſt tenderly, and vvho in a manner vvere His domeſtiques. The number of them vvhome the LORD chooſes and leades out to grace at any time is not great, they are but few in reſpect of the multitude vvhome the Lord paſſes by, but eſpecially at this time it was the LORDES pleaſure to chooſe but

a few to be eye-witneſſes of His glorious Aſcēſiō: for it was ye Lords will, that His Aſcenſiō ſhould rather be manifeſted & made known to the world by hearing, than by ſeeing: for ye Lord prefers, & likes better of that faith yt coms by hearing, thō of that faith yt proceeds of ſeeing: for He ſayes to Thomas, Becauſe thou haſt ſeene mee, thou beleeueſt: but bleſſed are theſe that haue not ſeene, and haue beleeued. Joh. 20.29. Marke a manifeſt difference betwixt ye ſuffering & crucifying of the Lord, & His Reſurrection & Aſcenſion: When ye Lord was crucified al ſort of people beheld Him: there were gathered a great multitude not of the Iewes only, but alſo of the Gētiles, out of many natiōs (for it was a ſolemne time, the time of ye 
               Paſſ
                     •
                  ouer,) but there were not ſo many yt beheld His Reſurrection, nor Aſcenſion: for it was His pleaſure to manifeſt Himſelf after His Reſurrection to a ſmall number of His own familiars, namely, His diſciples & Apoſtles: & likewiſe it was His pleaſure, to make choiſe but of a few of that ſame ſort to be eye-witneſſes of His glorious Aſcēſion: for He wold haue His glory to be made manifeſt to ye world rather by the preaching of ye Goſpel, than by the ſight of the eyes. Of this difference we learne this leſſon for our inſtruction, That the ſhame & ignominy of Chriſt is offred to be ſeene of all ſorts of mē: but His glory is manifeſted only to a ſmall number, euen to thoſe who are ſaued by His bloode. The ſhame & ignominy of Chriſt in His mēbers, is laid to th'eyes of all ſorts of men: there are none who ſees not how vile & contemptible the faithfull are vnder the croſſe: but the glory of the faithfull is ſeene but of a few, euē only of thoſe who are ordained to be partakers of that ſame glory: For albeit, ſaies Iohn, that now we are the ſons of God, yet it is not made manifeſt what we ſhall be. 1. Epiſt. 3.2. And as th'Apoſtle Paul ſaies of y• 
               Iewes, Jf they had known the Lord of glory, they would not haue crucified him. 1. Cor. 2.8. So ſay we of the wicked of the world, If they knew that glory of the children of God, they would not ſo contemne them, deſpiſe, & perſecute thē The place yt He leades thē to, is ſaid to be Bethania: and Act. 1.12. it is ſaid, They returned to Jeruſalē, from the mount that is called the mount of Oliues, neare vnto which moūt was Bethania: both were neare to Ieruſalem, about 15. furlonges, or a Sabbath dayes journey, about 2. miles, Ioh. 11.18. The Lord of ſet purpoſe choſe this place to manifeſt His glory, wherin before He ſuffred ignominy. It was in this place that He wraſtled with the feare of death, finding the terrours of the wrath of God ceazing on His ſoule, when He ſaid his ſoule was heauie vnto the death. It was in this place that the

bande of men of warre came and tooke him. It was in this place that they bound him, and led him away to that ſhamefull death of the croſſe. Therefore in this place the Lord makes a ſhew of His glory: in this ſame place He addreſſes Himſelf to triumph: from this ſame place aſcends He to His Heauenly Throne. Marke the leſſon in a worde. The Lord of neceſſitie muſt be glorified in that ſame place, where before He was diſhonored: He muſt be honoured either in mercy by ye conuerſion of a ſinner, who has deſpiſed Him, or els by the executing of judgemēt, & pouring forth of vengeance vpon th'obſtinate & ſtubborne contemners. But to goe forward to the cōference & cōmunication that was betwixt the Lord & His Apoſtles alittle before He aſcēded to Heauē. This cōferēce is ſet down, Act. 1.6. For after the diſciples were come together to the mount of Oliues, they asked him, Lord, wilt thou at this time reſtore the kingdome of Iſrael? Th'occaſion of this their queſtion is not ſet down here: but it is likely, that the Lord at this time has bin ſpeaking ſomething of that Heauenly Kingdome: & that vpon His ſpeach they haue taken occaſion to aske this queſtion of th'earthly kingdome. In demanding of this queſtion they faile many wayes: Firſt they faile in curioſity, being too curious, as the Lordes anſwere imports: Next, they faile in this, that as yet they thinke yt He ſhould haue bene an earthly king & that His kingdome ſhould bee of this world. Thirdly they faile in this, that they deſired to reign & triūph before they had foughten ſufficiently, & ended their warfare. This might ſeeme ſtrange, that they profited ſo litle in ſo long time, hauing ſuch faire occaſion. Their ignorance cannot be excuſed for by the ſpace of 3. yeeres & more they were cōuerſant with the Lord, hearing Him preach, & ſaw Him worke miracles: & after His reſurrectiō ſundry times He appeared to them, & ſpake to thē: & in this ſame time they ſaw in Him a majeſty, they ſaw Him clad & inueſted with Heauēly glory: & yet for all this they are earthly minded, and think of nothing but of an earthly kingdome. In this example of ye diſciples, we may perceiue how dull we are by nature & vncapable of ſpirituall & Heauēly things. All th'outward meanes of ye worlde will not profit vs, if there be no more; albeit we heard al Heauēly & ſpirituall things neuer ſo lōg, albeit we ſaw all things neuer ſo lōg, we will neuer be a haire the better, except yt wee be taught of God, & except our minds be illuminate, & our hearts be opened by the H. Spirit. Therfore when we vſe th'outward meanes, we ſhould pray cōtinually, yt the Lord wold ſend His H. Spirit to inſtruct vs inwardly,

and to joyne His bleſſing with them. Now to come to the Lords anſwere: firſt He reproues them for their curioſity, he ſaid vnto them, Jt is not for you to know the times & the ſeaſons: & He giues them a good reaſon, becauſe the Father has put them in his owne power. Men in all ages haue bin too curious to inquire the things which belong not vnto them. Th'Apoſtles here began curiouſly to inquire of the time of the reſtoring of the kingdome to Iſrael, & euer ſince men haue cōtinued curiouſly to inquire the times & ſeaſons, & namely, the particular time of the Lordes cōming to judgement. But the Lord here ſnibs & repreſſes this curioſity in th'apoſtles: for what had they adoe to ſearch out the things yt the Lord kept ſecret to Himſelfe? It is not ye Lords will, that men at any time ſhould be curious to inquire the particular times, which He keepes cloſe to Himſelf, & namely, the particular diet & period of Chriſts cōming to judgement, for of that day & houre knowes no mā, no not th'Angels which are in heauē, Mark 13.32. Next in the anſwere, He calles them to remembrance of yt promiſe which He made to thē before of ye ſending of ye H. Spirit, & induing them with power frō an high. But, ſaies He, yee ſhall receiue power of the holie Ghoſt, when he ſhall come on you. This putting them in remēbrance of ye ſending of ye H. Ghoſt, imports, yt although it was not lōg time before made vnto thē yet they thought not of it, nor remēbred it not as it became thē. So yt in thē we may ſee what is our naturall diſpoſition concerning ſpirituall things: we are very careles to thinke of thē, yea, for ye moſt part, we are altogether forgetfull of thē. If a promiſe were made to vs of great earthly benefits (ſo carnall & earthly are our hearts) we wold think on it day & night: but albeit the promiſes of Heauēly things be oftē renewed to vs, hardly cā we think of thē, or remēber thē. Thirdly, in this anſwere He puts thē in mind of their office & calling to ye Apoſtleſhip, Ye ſhalbe witneſſes, ſaies He, to me both in Ieruſalē, & in all Iudea, & in Samaria, & vnto the vttermoſt parts of the earth: as if He had ſaid vnto them, Inquire not curiouſly of the things which belong not to you, but looke to your calling, & the office which I haue choſen you to. And He ſets down what is their calling, Ye muſt be witneſſes. And to whom? Both to Iew & Gentile. And in what order? Firſt begin at Ieruſalē, & Iudea, & then goe to Samaria, & to the reſt of the world. It is the Lords wil, that mē ſo carefully attēd firſt vpon ye calling that ye Lord has ſet them into this life, to bee faithfull & painfull in it, yt in it they may honour their Lord, & next vpon ye promiſe of grace & ſaluation yt is promiſed in the life to come, that they take no leaſure,

nor ſpare no time vpon th'inquiring of curious queſtions. Of this anſwere of the Lords we may learn this leſſon: the Lord deals very meekly & gently with his own: their curioſity & wilfull ignorance deſerued a more ſharp & rough meeting, but the Lord meets thē not as they deſerued; for albeit that euē now he was to leaue ye world & aſcend to his Father, & to enter into glory; yet he ſtaies a while with thē, & with the Spi
                  •
               it of meeknes & wonderful patiēce he teaches & inſtructs thē, who were ſo groſſe & carnal minded. That which the Lord did at this time to his Apoſtles, that ſame thing does he dayly to his owne, in whom he has once begun to worke, he wil not breake the bruiſed reed, nor quēch the ſmoaking flax, he wil not put out grace, if it were neuer in ſo ſmal a meaſure, but he wil cheriſh & nouriſh it, that it may come to perfectiō & that ye litle ſparke may grow to a fire & flame. Albeit we be rude & earthly minded, and take no pleaſure in ſpiritual things, yet the Lord continues with great lenitie and wonderful patience by his Miniſtery, to teach & inſtruct vs. Now to go forward to His Aſcenſion: Before He aſcends, He bleſſes His diſciples: Luke ſaies, He lifted vp his hāds, & bleſſed thē. What meanes this, that the Lord lifted vp His hands to Heauen? Euen this, that he conueyed & drew grace powerfully out of heauē to his diſciples: Before He aſcended to Heauē, He drewe downe grace out of Heauen, to remaine with His Apoſtles, whom Hee left behinde Him in the earth, vvhen Hee aſcended, according to that which before His Paſſion He ſaide to them, Peace J leaue you, my peace I giue you. Ioh. Chap. 14. verſ. 27. Nowe vvhen Hee liftes vp His handes, vvhat ſorte of bleſſing giues He them? Was it a common ſorte of bleſſing? Was it ſuch a bleſſing as one giues to another? No, but He giues them the bleſſing of God He giues thē an effectuall bleſſing. And if vvee conſider vvho this vvas that bleſſed them, vvee may ſee, that of neceſſitie it behooued this bleſſing to bee effectuall: for Hee vvas not onelie a Prieſt, but a King alſo: Indeede as a Prieſt Hee bleſſed them, for it vvas the Prieſtes office publickelie to bleſſe the people: as a Prieſt likewiſe lifted Hee vp His handes in 
                  •
               leſſing of them: (for this vvas a Rite and Ceremonie vvhich the Prieſtes vvere accuſtomed to vſe in their bleſſing) but as a King Hee giues them effectuallie that bleſſing vvhich as a Prieſt Hee vviſhed vnto them: for Hee vvas nowe to ſit downe in the Throne of His Kingdome: and therefore that bleſſing vvhich as a Prieſt Hee vviſhed vnto them, Hee vvorkes it effectually in them by His infinite power, as Hee is a king. Men may vviſh vvell one to another: men may vviſhe peace and bleſſing ſincerely, and from their heartes to others: but it lyes not in their

hands to effectuate & to bring to paſſe that thing which they wiſh, but it is proper to God only, & to Ieſus His Sonne, to make the bleſſing effectual. One thing here wold be marked wel for our comfort: to wit, that Chriſt hath left a ſingular bleſsing to the Miniſtery of the Goſpel: for as before we heard, that the Lord made a ſweet and comfortable promiſe to this Miniſtery, euē, that He would be alway with them vnto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. Euē ſo, now we ſee here, that ye Lord at His departure out of ye world, leaues a ſpecial bleſsing to ye ſame Miniſtry: yea, ſuch a bleſsing as is not left to any other calling in the world, no, not to the calling of a King: for ye calling of a King, & al other callings whatſoeuer, receiues their bleſsing only in this bleſsing, which Chriſt giues to His Miniſterie: for except men in all callings by this Miniſterie be brought to th'obedience of Chriſt, & to ſanctification, they are accurſed: & if we looke to th'experience which ye faithful find in their ſoules, we wil find, that yt bleſsing which the Lord left to His Miniſtery at that time is effectuall this day: for they finde it to be effectuall to worke faith, repentance, joy & tranquillitie of conſcience, & they find it to be, as th'Apoſtl. calles it, The miniſterie of the Spirit, & the miniſterie of righteouſnes, 2. Cor. 3.8, 9: & if there were no more to teſtifie vnto vs the effectualnes of this bleſsing, this were ſufficiēt, that we ſee it hath continued ſo long in the world, notwithſtanding of all aduerſarie power, & oppoſition made thereto: for ſeeing this Miniſtery is ſo weak, baſe, & cōtemptible in it ſelfe, how had it bin poſsible, yt it could haue cō
               tinued & endured ſo lōg in the world, againſt the fury, craft, & aſſaults of Sathan, againſt the malice, hatred & perſecution of men, againſt the oppoſitiō & practiſes of the mightie, great & wiſe men of the world, except that this bleſsing, which at His departure He left with it, had bin effectual; if it had not bin effectuall, it had ſoone euaniſhed, & had bin rooted out. Now come to the Aſcenſiō it ſelfe it is ſet down partly by Marke, & partly by Luke in his Euāgel, & in the Hiſtory of th' Acts of th'Apoſtles in theſe circumſtāces: firſt, Luke ſayes, As He bleſſed them, He departed frō them, He went alitle frō them: Next, He was taken vp: Tdirdly, He was receiued in a cloud: Fourthly, being receiued in yt cloud, His Apoſtles beholding Him, the cloud to
                     •
                  ke Him out of their ſight: Fiftly, being taken out of their ſight by the cloud, He was caried vp into heauen. If we weigh & cōſider wel all theſe circumſtāces, we wil ſee, that th'Aſcenſiō of our Lord, was not only exceeding glorious, but alſo very ſenſible & viſible: for while He ſtood in the mids of them, He depa
                  •
               ted & ſeparated Himſelfe a ſpace from them, to the end, that they all might the

better ſee Him aſcending: thereafter He was taken vp piece & piece, degree by degree, ſo that ſenſibly, piece & piece they might haue followed Him with their eyes: then as they are thus beholding, a cloude interueenes, & takes Him out of their ſight. After this, they ſee His perſon no more, but they ſee yt cloud wherein He was receiued to be caried vp into heauē: al theſe circumſtāces, were very ſenſiible: for now He goes not frō them on a ſuddainty, He conueyes not Himſelfe out of their ſight in a momēt, as He did wt the two Diſciples wt whom He ſate at table in Emmaus▪
                & no queſtion, the Lord of ſet purpoſe would haue His Aſcenſiō to be ſo ſenſible, to the end yt the diſciples who ſaw it, & the whole form of it ſo clearly, might haue a ſetled aſſurāce & ful perſwaſion in their hearts, to the end. yt wt the greater euidency, liberty & freedom they might preach & proclaime it to the world (for the ful perſwaſion of the heart made thē bold & confidēt in preaching, as Paul ſaies Seeing we haue ſuch truſt, we vſe great boldnes of ſpeech: yt ſo ye world hearing thē ſpeak wt ſuch euidency, freedome & boldnes of the Lords Aſcēſion, & ſeeing thē paint out ſo vinely & ſenſibly the whole forme & proceſſe yt therein was vſed, might without any doubt fully beleeue, yt the Lord was aſcended to heauē
               ▪ ſo the Lord had a regard & reſpect vnto His Kirk, & in all the faithful yt ſhuld liue in th'ages to come, yea, euen of vs, who liue this day, whē ſo ſenſibly & viſibly in the preſēce of His Apoſtles, He aſcēded into heauē. The Lord made not His Apoſtles eye witneſſes of His Aſcenſion ſo much for their own cauſe, as for the Kirkes cauſe, which by their Miniſtery was to be gathered together, & to be broght to th'obedience of Ieſus: ſo when yu cōſider
                  •
               ſt yt ſenſible forme & progreſſe yt the Lord vſed in His Aſcenſion for thy cauſe, it is thy duty to praiſe & glorifie His Majeſty for it. Now after the Lord is caried vp to heauen, what followes? was there no higher degree of glory? Yes, for Marke ſayes, After He was receiued into heauen, He ſate at the right hand of God. After He had paſt throgh al the viſible Heauēs, He was ſet at the right hand of His Father in the higheſt Heauens, farre aboue all principalitie and power, and might, and domination, and euery name that is named, not in this world only, but alſo in that which is to come: ſo that all things were made ſubiect vnder His feete, Epheſ. 1.20, 21. & this the Father had ſpoken of Him before, when He ſaid, Sit thou at my right hand, vntill I make thine enemies thy footſtoole, Pſal. 110.1. To ſit at the right hand of God, is to obtaine yt higheſt degree of glory in the heauens: as Mediator, to haue equal power & glory wt the Father, to haue power ouer all creatures, to doe wt them as He pleaſes, to haue all things vnder His

feete, to be declared to be ye head of ye Kirk, & that perſon by whō the Father immediatly guides & gouernes all things: for as He is ye Sonne of God, equall with ye Father, He was glorified with that glory, which Hee had with the Father, before the foundations of the world were laid, according as He prayed before His Paſsion, Joh. 17.5. & as He is man, He is exalted aboue euery creature, in ſuch ſort, that by ye hand of Chriſt the man, God gouernes all things in heauen & in earth: ſo we ſee, that ye Lord by degrees paſſed frō glory to glory, & now He is in ſuch incomprehenſibl
                  •
                glory, as this mortal eye of man cānot be able to pierce into. Indeed, the diſciples ſaw His glorious Aſcenſiō, but they could not be able to ſee that highnes & ſublimity of glory, whereunto He was exalted, whē He ſate at the right hand of ye Father. Steuē ſaw the heauē, opened, & the Sonne of man ſtanding at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55. but how ſober & meane a portiō of His glory was yt which He ſaw, in reſp
                  •
               ct of ye fulnes of glory, yt He had thē in ye heauēs? but albeit we be not able wt our bodily eyes to pierce & behold ye greatnes of yt glory, whereinto He is exalted: yet this is our cōfort, yt we find ſenſibly by experience in our own ſoules yt Ieſus is ſitting in his Kingdome wt exceeding glory & power, by theſe comfortable effects & motions yt He workes within vs. Th'Apoſtles, albeit they ſaw Him not ſitting at ye right hand of God in glory: yet in yt ſame momēt yt He ſate down in His throne of glory, they found in their own hearts, his kingly power & that dominiō yt He hath ouer al creatures: for what meaned yt exceeding joy yt they had, after that He was taken out of their ſight, whē they were returning to Jeruſalem? euē this, that Chriſt was entred in His kingdome, & that His kingdome & power was effectuall into their ſoules: & what meanes theſe ſpiritual motions, which are raiſed vp in the hearts of the godly? this ſadnes for ſinne? this vnſpeakable joy, this peace & trāquillity of cōſcience, this loue to God, & deſire to ſee Him? euen this, yt the Lord Ieſus is come into His Kingdome, & is now reigning in ye heauēs & yt He hath eſtabliſhed this Kingdome in our ſoules: For the Kingdome of God, ſayes Paul, is righteouſnes, & peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt, Rom. 14.17. therefore whē yu findeſt any ſpiritual motiō in thy ſoule, take it for a ſure argument of Chriſts ſitting at the right hand of God in His kingdome. Now hauing ſpokē of Chriſts Aſcenſion, let vs ſee what was the Apoſtles behauiour: whē they ſaw the Lord thus aſcēd, wh
                  •
               t did they? It is ſaid, that they worſhipped Him: next, that they looked ſtedfaſtly toward heauen: what moued thē to worſhip Him? no queſtion, the ſight of a wonderfull glory & Majeſtie in Ieſus: & becauſe at this time they ſaw

Him in an higher glory & majeſty, than euer they did before: therfore of neceſſity their worſhipping of Him at this time behoued to be in a greater humility, wt greater reuerēce, & wt greater feruency thā euer it was before. Indeed they worſhipped Him before, knowing Him to be the Meſſias, but their knowledge was but very mean & ſober: but now they ſee & know perfectly that He is the Lord of glory, & the glorious judge of the world: & therefore the worſhipping of Him at this time behoued to be in greater reuerēce, with greater perſwaſion & boldnes than euer it was before. The ſight of that glorious majeſty makes euer the creature in reuerēce to worſhip God, & the greater ſight, the greater reuerence. The faithfull while they liue here in th'earth, becauſe by th'eye of faith, in the mirrour of the Goſpel, they ſee the glory of the Lord, therfore in humility they worſhip His majeſty: but becauſe they ſee Him not clearly as He is, but darkly and obſcurely, therfore their worſhipping here is not like that worſhipping yt ſhalbe when they ſhal ſee Him face to face: for when we ſhal ſee him as he is, we ſhal worſhip Him with greater reuerence, confidēce, boldnes & liberty, than euer we did before: for then vve ſhall be made like vnto Him: that is, vve ſhall bee made conformable to the image of His glory, and vve ſhall ſhake off all this mortality & corruption, vvherewith th'Apoſtles vvere clad at this time vvhē they worſhipped Him aſcending to Heauē: So that that vvorſhipping & adoring of the Lord, which the faithful ſhal giue Him in that great day whē He deſcēds from the Heauēs to judge the world ſhall ſurpaſſe exceedingly & by many degrees that worſhip which the Apoſtle
                  •
                gaue Him, whē they ſaw Him aſcēd into Heauē: for thē there ſhalbe nothing to hinder them. Now in the meane time while the Lord is aſcending to Heauen, as they worſhip Him, ſo likewiſe they followe Him vvith their eyes, and looked ſtedfaſtly toward heauen, vvhere they ſaw Him aſcending▪ vvhich teſtifies plainly, that their hearts were lifted vp to the Heauens, together vvith Chriſt: & as Chriſt aſcended, ſo their hearts aſcended, & vvere lifted vp to Heauen, by the power & ve
                  •
               tue of that ſame Aſcention & glorie of Chriſt, in vvhome they beleeued: for they that beleeue in Chriſt, and are conjoyned to Him by faith, of neceſſity muſt by that b
                  •
               nd of faith be lifted vp, together vvith Him to the Heauens: for that ſoule that is linked to Him by faith, cānot be ſeuered from Him, but it muſt follow Him vvherſoeuer He goes Mark this leſſon: whē ye heart is lifted vp to Heauen, it vvill lift ye eye of ye bodie to Heauen alſo, & ye ſight & ſenſe of ye Aſcenſion of Chriſt liftes vp the heart to Heauen: for where there is in ye heart a ſenſe & feeling of ye
               
power of Chriſts Aſcenſiō, of neceſſity both the ſoule & th'eyes of the body muſt be lifted vp to Heauen. And this lifting vp of th'eyes of the body, proceeding frō the lifting vp of ye heart to Heauen: & this lifting vp of ye heart proceeding frō ye feeling of ye power of th'Aſcēſiō of Ieſus, which now ye faithfull find, is a ſure argumēt & vndoubted warrā
               
                  •
                to ye faithful, yt one day th'eye, ye heart ye ſoule, ye body, yea, ye whole man ſhalbe lifted vp to heauē: both ſoule & body in yt great day, whē ye Lord appeares to judgemēt, & ſhal enjoy His glorious preſēce: & therfore ye godly haue great cauſe continually to be waiting & looking for yt glorious apppearing of Chriſt (& happy art thou, who art euer waiting for it) for at yt glorious appearing thou ſh
                  •
               lt be partaker of glory wt him: to whō with ye Father, & H. Spirit, be all praiſe, honor, & glory, Amen.
            
         
         
            THE LVI. LECTVRE, OF THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST.
            
               
                  
                     MARKE, CHAP. XVI.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 And they went foorth, and preached euerie where. And the Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with ſignes that followed, Amen.
               
               
                  
                     LVKE, CHAP. XXIIII.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 52 And they Worſhipped him, & returned to Hieruſalē with great ioye.
                  
                     
                        verse 53 And were continuallie in the Temple, praiſing and lauding GOD, Amen.
               
               
                  
                     ACTS, CHAP. I.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 And while they looked ſtedfaſtly toward heauen, as hee went, beholde, two men ſtood by them in white apparell,
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Which alſo ſaid Yee men of Galile, why ſtand yee gazing into heauen? This Ieſus, which is taken vp from you into heauen, ſhall ſo come, as yee haue ſeene him goe into heauen.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Then returned they vnto Hieruſalem, from the mount that is called, the mount of Oliues, which is neare to Hieruſalem, beeing from it a Sabbath dayes journey.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And when they were come in, they went vp into an vpper chamber, where abode both Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartlemew, and Matthew, James the ſonne of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Iudas Iames brother.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Theſe all continued with one accord in prayer and ſupplications with the women, and Marie the mother of Ieſus, and with his brethren.
               
            
            
               THE laſt day, welbeloued Brethrē in Chriſt, we entred into the hiſtory of Chriſts aſcenſion to heauen. We heard of the circūſtāces of it. The Lord led them out to Bethania, to the mount of Oliues, from the which place He aſcēded vnto heauē: we heard of the cōmuning yt was betwixt Chriſt & his diſciples, who asked of him, Lord, wilt thou at this time reſtore the kingdome to Jſrael? The Lord reproues this their curioſity, It is not for you to know the times & the ſeaſons, which the Father has put in his owne power. And then he tels what they ought to doe: Firſt they ſhuld be mindfull of the promiſe of ye 
               H. Spirit: Next, they ſhuld look to their own calling, to beare witneſſe of him to the world. Wee heard how before his Aſcenſion he bleſſed them: we heard of the manner of his Aſcenſion, it was very ſenſible and viſible, He went a little ſpace from them, and was taken vp, and receiued in a cloude, hee was taken out of their ſight, and carried vp to heauen: This was done, the 
                  •
               oth th'Apoſtle themſelues might be perſwaded, and alſo with greater boldneſſe & aſſurance perſwade others of His Aſcenſion. We heard, that whē He was taken out of their ſight, He was placed at the right hand of God, and exalted to that ſublimitie of glory, that all the creatures in heauen and earth are ſubdued to him. And laſt wee hearde what was the behauiour of th'Apoſtles, In the meane time they worſhipped him, and looked ſtedfastly to 
                     •
                  he heauens. This day by Gods grace wee ſhall follow out & put an end to this hiſtory. In the words which wee haue read, we wil ſ
                  •
               e what falles out, While the diſciples are looking vp to the heauens, two Angels are ſent to them by Chriſt, who partly reproues them, and partlie comforts them We will ſee likewiſe what the diſciples doe after this, They retu
                     •
                  ne to Hieruſalem with great joy: when they come there, they goe vp to an vpper chamber: but they ſtay not there, but they goe to the Temple, & remain there continually praiſing & lauding God: and laſt they went out & preached the Goſpel euery where, and the Lord gaue them a good ſucceſſe, for He wrought with them, and confirmed the word with ſignes that followed. Luke, in th' Acts, telles vs, that while they looked ſtedfaſtly toward heauen, as he went, behold, two men ſtood by them in white apparell. As they were worſhipping Him, the Lord ſent incontinent from His Heauenlie Throne Legates & Ambaſſadours: And who were they? euē Angels: two in number, and in forme & outward ſhape like to men, & therefore they are ſaid to be two men, and were clothed in white and glorious apparell. Marke the leſſon in a word. Chriſt ſits no ſoone
                  •
                down at the right hand of the Father, but He makes His diſciples (whom Hee left in the earth behind Him) not only to know yt He had a kingly power, whereby He commands the very Angels themſelues; but alſo to know, that

ſingular care & affection that Hee caried to them, which He teſtifies, by ſending theſe Angels from heauen, for their cauſe & for their conſolation. This kingly power of Chriſt, & this care that He hath of His own, continues euē this day in the Kirk, & euery of ye faithful find the proofe & experience of it to their great joy & comfort. Now, let vs ſee, what theſe Angels ſay to ye Apoſtles: in their ſpeech to them: Firſt, they reprooue: then they comfort them: firſt, they ſaid, Ye men of Galile, why ſtand ye gazing vnto Heauen: they reprooue them, becauſe they ſtood idly gazing & looking to the heauē, whereas the Lord had cōmanded them to returne to Jeruſalem, that there they might wait for the Spirit, that was promiſed them, that hauing gotten the Spirit, they might goe out to the world▪ & preach the Gosp
                     •
                  l to euery creature, as the Lord had commanded them. This reproofe of th'Angels imports, that they contented themſelues too much wt idle looking & g
                  ••
               ing, & that they were too vnmindfull of that great & high calling whereunto the Lord had ordained them. Of this reproofe we learn this leſſō: it is not the Lords wil, that any mā ſhould be idle in the world, nor that he content himſelfe wt a bare & idle contemplatiō of ye creatures of God: No, not of ye beſt of them: it is not the Lords will, yt we ſtand idly gazing vpon the very heauens whereunto the Lord hath aſcended, & now is in glory: No, it is His will, that all men all their dayes be painfully exerciſed in ſome calling, wherein they may both glorifie God, & doe good vnto men. Indeed, it is true: it is the Lords wil, that men ſhould alwaies haue their affectiōs ſet aboue, & their hearts lifted vp to heauē, & that they haue their eyes ſet vpon God, vpon Chriſt, vpon that glory which is to be reuealed: but in the meane time, while men are thus exerciſed, they ſhould be exerciſed likewiſe in ſome honeſt & lawful calling. Th'Apoſtle Paul by his practiſe lets vs ſee, what ſhould be the behauiour of a Chriſtian: While hee looked not to the things that are ſeene, but to the things that are not ſeene, 2. Cor. 4.18. While he chooſed to remoue out of the body, & to go & dwell with Chriſt, 2. Cor. 5.8. While he minded not earthly things, but had his conuerſation in heauen, from whence he looked for his Sauiour, euen the Lord Ieſus, Philip. 3.20. contented hee himſelfe, thinke ye, with this ſpeculation? Was he in the meane time idle? had he not another calling? Yes, hee was very diligently exerciſed in the Miniſtry: For, ſayes he, we couet, that both dwelling at home, & remoouing from home, we may be acceptable to Him: for we muſt all appeare before the Iudgement ſeat of Christ, that euery man may receiue the things which are done in his body, according to that he hath done whether it be good or euill: & therefore knowing that terrour of the Lord, we perſwade men, & bring them vnto the faith, 2. Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. So Paul, whē he was looking

to heauenly things, he was in the meane time diligētly exerciſed in his Apoſtleſhip, in bringing men to Chriſt: euē ſo it becomes euery faithfull man, ſo to haue his heart & his affections ſet vpō heauen, & heauenly things, yt in ye ſame meane time, in ſome honeſt & lawful calling, he may be doing ſome good in y• earth: & on the other part, whē he is buſie labouring & exerciſed in his calling, he ſhuld haue his eyes lifted vp to God, & ſhould haue his heart, his affections & conuerſatiō in ye heauens: for except that in all things which we do, we haue ye Lord & His glory before our eyes, it is not poſsible, yt we can do any thing well & vprightly. Then in a word, ye ſee here ye Lord by theſe Angels, cōdemnes idle ſpeculatiō & cōtemplatiō, without any exerciſe in any lawfull calling. This ſerues to cōdemne theſe idle bellies, ye Monks of ye 
               Romane Kirk, who cōtent thēſelues wt bare & idle ſpeculatiō, hauing no regard in ye meane time, yt they may be exerciſed in any lawful calling, wherin they may either glorify God, or do good to mē: yea, they are ſo far frō doing good, yt by ye cōtrary they hurt ye Kirk of God exceedingly by bringing in their dreames & fātaſies yt they haue deuiſed in their idle braines, to corrupt & peruert mens minds: ye Lord neuer allowed nor bleſſed ſuch a life: ye Lord abhors ſuch idlenes: & if ye Angels reproue ye Apoſtles for gazing to heauē, where they ſaw wt their eyes ye Lord Ieſus to aſcend, which by appearāce to mās judgment, was a very good exerciſe, to haue their hearts fixed on Chriſt, & their eyes vpō ye place whither He aſcended; what wold ye Angels ſay to theſe idle belly gods, who withdraw thēſelues frō all honeſt callings, & liue vpō ye ſweat of other mēs browes, vnder ye pretēce of ſpiritual exerciſe? now after ye Angels haue reprooued ye Apoſtles: next, in ye 2. part of their ſpeech, they raiſe thē vp, & cōforts thē, while they ſay, This Ieſus which is taken vp frō you into heauen, ſhall ſo come, as ye haue ſeene Him goe into heauen. They comfort them, by putting them in hope, that Hee ſhal returne: yea, returne in glorie: and ſuch a glorie, as they ſaw Him aſcend vvith: and ſo vpon hope of His glorious returning in that great daye: they wil th'Apoſtles to comfort themſelues againſt all trouble & diſtreſſes, that they might be ſubject vnto ye time of their remaining in ye earth: Whereupon we may perceiue what is the ground whereupon the ſolide conſolation of a Chriſtian ſoule ariſes. It ariſes euen from the hope of the glorious returning of the Lord Ieſus againe to Iudge the world. There is nothing that furniſhes ſuch joy to the faithfull ſoule, as this hope does. Indeed, it is true, the Lord giues vs other grounds of conſolation while we are heere: & namely, He giues vs His Spirit,

to counſel & guide vs through al the difficulties of our pilgrimage: & the joy that the faithfull finde in His preſence is very great: He giues vs Faith alſo to cōfort vs, whereby in ſome meaſure preſently we feele the preſence of Chriſt, & His ſpirituall graces in our ſoules: but except with ye Spirit & Faith, we had a hope, yt the Lord Ieſus ſhould returne againe in His own time in glory, we could not haue ſolide joy & conſolatiō: for if in this life only we hoped in Chriſt, & had no hope yt He would returne againe in glory, & raiſe our mortall bodies frō ye dead: thē, as ye Apoſtle ſaies, of all men we were moſt miſerable, 1. Cor. 15.19. & why ſhuld not ye hope of this returning cōfort our ſoules, & make them to rejoyce? for at His returning, we look & hope for ye glorifying of theſe our bodies, & for eternall life. Paul ſayes, That frō the heauens we look for the Sauiour, euen, the Lord Ieſus, who ſhall change our vile body, that it may be faſhioned like vnto His glorious body, Philip. 3.20.21. And when it ſhalbe made manifeſt, we ſhalbe made like Him, for we ſhall ſee Him as He is, 1 Joh. 3.2 Yea, we haue greater cauſe of joy & comfort of the hope of His returning againe, thā all ye Apoſtles had of ye ſight of His aſcending to heauen in their preſēce: for ye aſcenſion of ye Lord, albeit it was very glorious & cōfortable to thē, yet it chāged not their bodies, nor made thē like His glorious body, but His glorious returning again frō the heauens, ſhall change both their bodies, & our vile & corruptible bodies, and make them conformable to His glorious body. Now happie is ye man, who earneſtly lookes & waits for the bleſſed & glorious cōming againe of the Lord to judgement: for yt hope ſhall comfort & vphold him in all his troubles & diſtreſſes. Now, come to yt diſciples part: we haue ſūdry things expreſſed what they doe: & ye firſt is, after ye Angels reproued them for their ſtanding & gazing to ye heauens, it is ſaid, They returned to Jeruſalem with great ioy. They take well with the reproofe they ſtay no longer gazing there, but according to ye Lords directiō they go to Jeruſalem, to waite for yt Spirit which He promiſed to them: they obey ye Lords cōmandemēt, & they obey with great joy. But what made them ſo to rejoyce? This joy proceeded partly from ye ſight of His glorious aſcenſiō into heauē, which they ſaw with their eyes: partly, frō yt which they heard by ye Angels of His glorious returning, & deſcending again out of ye heauens, yet all this which both they ſaw & heard, would not haue wroght ſo great a joy in thē, except ye Lord Ieſus who was ſitting in ye heauens, at ye right hand of ye Father, had bin effectuall in them, & had powerfully wroght this joy in their ſoules: for this joy that ye holy Spirit works in ye hearts of ye Lords Elect, is a ſure argumēt, & infallible

demōſtratiō, yt ye Lord Ieſus is reigning in ye heauēs: for the Kingdome of God is righteouſnes, & ioy, & peace in the holy Gh
                     •
                  ſt, Rom. 14.17. Now, if ye will cōpare this joy, which at this time they had, with all the joy yt euer they had before: yea, euen when ye Lord Ieſus was walking with them in the fleſh, & they enjoyed His bodily preſence, ye ſhal find yt this joy ſurpaſſed, by many degrees all their preceeding joy: whereby we may learne this leſſon, that neither ye bodily preſence of ye Lord Ieſus augments or perfectes ye joy of ye ſoule, neither His bodily abſēce ſtayes or hinders any wiſe yt joy, but yt all this joy which ye faithfull find, proceedes from the effectual preſēce & powerful operatiō of ye holy Spirit in the ſoule. The groſſe & carnal Papiſts think, they cānot haue mater of rejoycing, except in ye Lords Supper they haue ye body of Chriſt bodily, & locally preſent: that is, except yt with ye mouth of the body they eat, deuoure & ſwallow vp the very body & fleſh of Ieſus Chriſt, & except that after that ſame manner they drinke His blood: but vaine Papiſt, thou deceiueſt thy ſelfe: for neither does the bodily preſence furniſh joy, neither does the bodily abſēce hinder joy, but all true joy that the ſoule finds, proceedes from the effectuall preſence & operatiō of the Spirit. Yet to ſpeak ſomething further of this purpoſe. It would be narrowly conſidered, what could be the cauſe & ground of this joy of the Diſciples: for if we looke to it by the outward appearance, they had litle matter or cauſe of rejoycing at this time when the Lord is gone frō them. Indeede, when the Lord Ieſus was with them, when He led them out into Bethania, any man might thinke they had matter of rejoycing, to follow ſuch a gracious guide: but now, when He hath left the earth, & aſcended to heauen, & left them behind Him, what matter could they haue of ſo great joy in their returning to Jeruſalem? I anſwere: notwithſtanding they wanted now the bodily preſence of Chriſt, yet they wanted not matter of great joy: for in ſtead of His bodily preſence, the Lord gaue them Faith & Hope, Faith apprehending & taking holde of the Lord Ieſus, ſitting in the heauens, in glorie at the right hand of the Father: Hope waiting conſtantly for His bleſſed & glorious returning againe in the appointed time to Iudgement. This Faith & Hope that the Lord giues vs in this pilgrimage, recompenſes ſufficiently the bodily abſence of the Lord Ieſus from vs: if wee haue Faith & Hope, we haue euermore matter of rejoycing: where Faith & Hope is, they bring euer with them patience & joy, euen in the mids of all afflictiōs. The Apoſtle Paul declares this by his own experience, For the Gospels ſake, ſayes he, I ſuffer theſe things, but I am not aſhamed: for I

know whom I haue beleeued, and I am perſwaded, that hee is able to keepe that which I haue cōmitted to him againſt that day. 2. Tim. 1.12. There he lets vs ſee what made him to bee ſo patient vnder afflictions, to wit, the ſenſe of the power of Chriſt, which hee founde in his ſoule by faith, by the which power hee was perſwaded, that Chriſt was able to keepe in the heauens that life which hee had committed vnto him, and the hope that hee had of His glorious returning in that great day, wherin the Lord ſhould render him that which before he had committed vnto him to be kept. The ſoule yt has this faith & hope, has no cauſe to complaine of His bodily abſence, for they recompenſe it abundātlie: but if thou wanteſt this faith, apprehending thy Sauiour wt all His graces, & this hope waiting patiētly for His returning, thou cāſt haue no true matter of rejoycing, albeit thou hadſt al y• outward benefits of ye world heaped abundantly vpō thee. Now come to ye next thing that the diſciples doe vvhen they are returned to Hieruſalem: it it ſaide, that they went vp into an vpper chamber (then is reckoned out particularly who they were) where abode both Peter, & Iames, & Iohn, & Andrew, Philip, & Thomas, Bartlemew, & Matthew, James the ſon of Alpheus, & Simon Zelotes, & Iudas Iames brother: & after he ſubjoynes in a general word, The women, & particularly, Mary the mother of Ieſus, & his brethren. Theſe were they who moſt familiarly conuerſed wt Ieſus, & whom he kept together while he was in the world: & now when he is gone out of ye world, & aſcended to heauen, they abide together. And what was their exerciſe? They all continued with one accord in prayer & ſupplicatiō. This was an holy exerciſe: they ſeuered thēſelues frō ye reſt of ye world, & withdrue thēſelues from worldly impedimēts, & kept thēſelues alone together, to th'end they might entertain & nouriſh yt joy which they foūd of the beholding of yt glorious Aſcēſion of Chriſt, & through ye hope yt they had of his glorious returning again to judgemēt, whereof th'Angels had inſtructed thē. Then mark the leſſon, they yt rejoyce together in Ieſus, deſire to be ſeuered from the cōmon ſociety of mē, & frō outward diſtractions & impediments, & deſire to remain & liue together. The childrē of God delite & take pleaſure in the ſociety one of another: and good reaſon they ſo doe, for whē this life is ended, they ſhal remain & liue together in heauen without any ſeuering. Yea, further, al ſpiritual graces are acquired & entertained only in the ſociety of the Saints▪ & without this ſociety no faith, hope, joy, nor grace of Chriſt cā be gotten or intertained (al grace yt is giuē a mā, is giuen to him as a mēber of yt body, as to one of the Saints. Therfore whē 
               Paul ſpeakes of any grace or benefite yt the Lord is to beſtow on any faithful mā, cōmonly he vſes to ſay, th
                     •
                  t that grace is withall the Saints: as when he wiſhes to th'Epheſians, the ſenſe

of the breadth, the lēgth, the depth, & the height of that loue of God in Chriſt, he wiſhes they might be able to cōprehend it with al the Saints, Eph. 3.18. Likewiſe whē he prayes yt ye 
               Theſſalonians, might haue their hearts eſtabliſhed in holines before God, he craues that this establiſhmēt might be with all the Saints, 1 Theſſ. 3.13. & ſpeaking of ye riches of ye glory of ye inheritāce, he ſayes, yu ſhalt neuer get it but amōg ye Saints, Eph. 1.18. for as one member being cut off frō ye body, can receiue no ſappe nor life frō it: euen ſo if thou be cut off frō ye ſocitie of ye Saints, frō ye Kirk of God, yu ſhalt neuer get any grace of Chriſt: & to conclude, our joy & bleſſednes will be perfected in the kingdome of heauē in ye ſociety & fellowſhip of the Saints. Many mē deſpiſe & diſdaine ye ſociety of ye Lords Saints here on earth, they count them vile, contemptible & the offſcourings of the world: they ſcarcely will giue them a countenāce: yet in the meane time they flatter thēſelues fooliſhly, that they ſhalbe in heauen, as ſoone as they: but if thou haue no pleaſure in their ſocietie here in earth, thou ſhalt finde, thou ſhalt neuer get that priuiledge, to enjoy any grace or bleſſing with them in the heauen: I giue thee this doome, & the Lord ſhall ratify it one day. Now whē the diſciples are met together in the vpper chamber, they ſtay not there, but Luke, in the laſt words of his goſpel ſayes, that They were continually in the Temple praiſing, and lauding God. And this is the third thing that ye diſciples doe, after they haue ſtayed for a ſpace in ye vpper chamber, occupied in holy exerciſes, in prayer and ſupplication: they beginne to be more bold, and they take greater courage vnto them, and they goe out into a publike place, to the Temple, to vſe theſe ſame ſpirituall exerciſes, which they vſed in the vpper chamber: for the Apoſtles, with the Lordes brethren, with Marie his mother, and other holy women aſſembled publikely in the Temple, and there praiſed and glorified God. We ſee heere, what are theſe meanes wherby ſpiritual graces are intertained & increaſed in ye ſocietie of ye Saints: to wit, the preaching of the Goſpel, prayers & ſupplications, praiſing & bleſsing of God in Pſalmes, Hymnes & ſpirituall ſongs, & holy communication: without theſe holy exerciſes, no faith, no hope, no joy, no grace of Chriſt, can either be obtained or entertained & increaſed: if thou contemneſt & deſpiſeſt theſe exerciſes, thou needeſt neuer to looke for grace. Againe, we ſee here, yt they aſſemble as frequētly, in as great number as they may or can in ye moſt publike & ſolemne place they could find: for they came together with one accord in ye Tēple: & this they do, to ye intent, yt both greater glory might redoūd to ye Lord, & greater joy & cōfort to thēſelues: the more frequent that ye aſſemblies of ye Saints be, the more publike & ſolemne

the place of their meeting be, the greater & the more effectuall is the Lords preſence among them, the greater is their joy, the greater glory redounds to God: for if the Lord has promiſed, That where two or three are gathered together in his name, there he wil be in the middes of thē
                  ▪ Mat. 18.20. Much more where the Saincts are frequently & in great number gathered together in a publicke & ſolemne place for ſpirituall exerciſes, will the Lord manifeſt His powerful preſence amōg them. The fourth and laſt thing that th'Apoſtles doe is ſet downe by Marke in the laſt verſe of his Goſpel, where we haue two things expreſſely mentioned: Firſt, the going out of the diſciples to preach to the worlde: Next, the ſucceſſe that the Lord gaue to their preaching: Theſe two points comprehend the ſumme and ſubſtance of al the hiſtory of th'Acts of th'Apoſtles. Then firſt he ſaies, They went foorth and preached euery where. That grace yt they got thēſelues, they are careful to cōmunicate it to others. But when was this that they went out into the worlde? Was it immediatly after the Lords Aſcenſion? Was it before they receiued the holy Spirit, & were ſufficiently furniſhed with grace thēſelues? No, but they ſtayed ſtill in Hieruſalem, according to the Lords cōmandemēt, til they got that promiſed Spirit, with His graces: Then aſſoone a
                  •
                they haue receiued the H. Spirit with His graces, and were ſufficienly furniſh
                  •
               d thēſelues, they goe out to cōmunicate that gr
                  •
               ce to the world, wherewith they themſelues were repleniſhed, beginning at Hieruſa
                     •
                  ē then going throughout all Judea, then to Samaria, & laſt, to the vtmoſt parts of th'earth. This doing of the diſciples ſerues to teach theſe who intende to ent
                  •
               r into that holy calling of the miniſtery, how they ought to behaue thēſ
                  •
               lues. They muſt not ſuddēly & raſhly goe out to preach the Goſpel, before they bee well furniſhed themſelues: but they ſhould keepe themſelues cloſe vſing holy meanes and exerciſes, till they find themſelues to be furniſhed with grace in ſome meaſure: but being once furniſhed with grace, it is the Lordes will that they keepe themſelues no more cloſe, but that they goe out and communicate that ſame grace vnto others: for the Lord giues them no ſpirituall graces to keepe to themſelues: but to th'end that they may employ them to the weale & edification of others. Men ſhould beware of theſe two extremities: firſt, that they preſume not to goe out to preach to others, till they bee firſt well furniſhed themſelues: next, when they are furniſhed with grace, that they let not Gods graces reſt within themſelues, but that they vſe them chearfully for the benefite of the Kirke. But if we conſider more narrowly this going out of the diſciples, we wil find it to be extraordinarie and miraculous: it fell out altogether vnexſpected of the Iewes no,

the Iewes neuer thought that thinges ſhould haue fallen out ſo, either concerning Chriſt Himſelfe, or His diſciples: for as cōcerning Chriſt, they thought they ſhould neuer haue heard any more of Him except curſed and deteſtable ſpeaches of Him: for they had nowe handeled Him ſhamefully, they had railed on Him, and crucified Him, putting Him to an ignominious death: and after Hee was buried and riſen, they perſwaded the guarde, yt watched the ſepulchre, to noiſe abroad, that his diſciple
                     •
                   had come by night, & ſtollen him away: ſo they thought there ſhould haue bene no more of Him: But beholde, vpon a ſuddaine, the Lord (vnexſpected of them) by His powerfull prouidence, makes His glory to be ſounded throughout the whole world: and whereas they thought He ſhould haue bene buried for euer in ſhame, Hee is exalted to a wonderfull glory. And as concerning the diſciples, The Iewes thought they durſt neuer haue preſumed to haue opened their mouthes againe to ſpeake of the Name of Chriſt: for they thought they were all but ſillie baſed bodies, who ſled away when their Maſter was taken, and were offended at His ignominious death, and terrified and aſtoniſhed with that ſorrowfull ſpectacle that they ſaw, when He hung vpon the croſſe, neither durſt they preſume to meete together againe openly for feare of their liues. But while the Iewes are thus thinking, and beleeue that there ſhall neuer be any mo
                  •
               e worde of Chriſt, behold, vpon a ſuddain, when they thinke nothing leſſe, His diſciples come out publickly in their preſence, and before the whole world, holding out, & bearing before them yt crucifi
                  •
               d man, boldly charging the worlde to beleeue in Him. From whence comes this, that they vvho before vvere ſo d
                  •
               ſhed and baſed, that ſledde away before, durſt nowe meet together ſo openly, and preach with ſuch boldneſſe and libertie Him of vvhome before they vvere aſhamed? Euen from that incomprehenſible & vvonderfull power of Chriſt their King, who was now ſitting in the Heauens in glory, & vvho according to His promiſe ſent vpon them His holy Spirit, and indued them vvith power frō an hight. Now the laſt thing is the ſucceſſe that the Lord giues vnto their preaching: He ſaies, The Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the worde with ſignes that followed. If ye reade th'Acts of th'Apoſtles, ye vvill ſee the ſucceſſe has bene marueilous: for within a ſhort ſpace, by their Miniſtery, they brought g
                  •
               eat multitudes, not onely of the Jewes, but alſo of the Gentiles, to th'obedience of Chriſt, and by them ſuddenly the face of the world was changed. The cauſe of this great ſucceſſe th'Euangeliſt marks to be the Lords vvorking vvith them, & confirming the vvord

that they preached vvith ſignes and vvonders. When it is ſaid, that the Lord wrought with them, we may not thinke, that they vvere the chiefe workers, and the Lord but an helper to them: No, the Lord is euer the chiefe worker, and His faithfull ſeruantes but worke together with Him, in the building of that ſpirituall houſe vnto the Lord, He being the chiefe builder, and His ſeruantes but worke with Him: So Paul calles them, workers together with God, 2. Cor. 6.1. All the ſucceſſe of the Goſpel is His, His ſeruantes are only inſtruments, vſing the meanes: Paul plants, Apollo waters, but God giues th'increaſe, 1. Cor. 3.6.9. Now as we ſaw in their going out to the worlde, & in their preaching with boldneſſe, that Chriſtes power was wonderfully manifeſted: euen ſo in this great and glorious ſucceſſe that they haue in their preaching, that ſame power of Chriſt is as wondefully manifeſted. If we compare this ſucceſſe which the Goſpel had in that firſt age of the Kirke of Chriſt, with that ſucceſſe which it hath now adayes, we will find a great difference: Many more were called then, than there are nowe, for then at one preaching thouſandes were conuerted: but nowe, at many preachings ſcarcely will one be conuerted. And what meanes this, ſeeing the Goſpel is taught nowe in that ſame ſinceritie that it was then? Euen this, that by all appearance the Lord hath gathered in alreadie the moſt part of them who are to bee ſaued, and the number of theſe that reſt to be called and ſaued, is few in theſe dayes, in reſpect of that great multitude of them who were called and ſaued in the dayes of th'Apoſtles: The great harueſt is gathered in already, onely glaininges now remaine. And on the other part, it importes, that there is a great number ordained to wrath and deſtruction, and therfore they are not conuerted by the preaching of the Goſpel. If our Goſpel, ſaith Paul, bee hidden, it is hidden to them that periſh, 2. Cor. 4.3. Now to end here: Seeing all the ſucceſſe of the Goſpel proceedes from the powerfull preſence of Chriſt by His Spirit, the Lord grant, that ſo long as He giues vs liberty to vſe theſe outward meanes, He would make vs find the powerfull working of the Spirit, concurring with the meanes; that wee may turne to Chriſt, and ſo bee aſſured, that wee ſhall bee ſaued from that wrath which is to come in that great day of the appearing of the LORD IESVS: To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit bee all praiſe, Honour, and Glorie for euer and euer: AMEN.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   