
      
         
            
            
               AN
EXPOSITION
VPON SOME SElect
Pſalmes of David, conteining
great ſtore of moſt excellent and
comfortable doctrine, and inſtruction for
all thoſe, that▪ vnder the burthen
of ſinne) thirſt for Comfort in
Chriſt Ieſus.
            
            Written by that faithfull ſervant of God▪
               M. ROBERT ROLLOK, ſometime
Paſtour in the Church of Edinburgh:
And tranſlated out of Latine into Engliſh.
by C. L. Miniſter of the Goſpell
of Chriſt at Dudingſtoun.
            
            The number of the Pſalmes are ſet downe
in the Page following.
            
            EDINBVRGH
PRINTED BY ROBERT
Walde graue Printer to the Kings
Majeſtie. 1600.
Cum Privilegio Regio.
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the Pſalmes
expounded in this Booke.
            
               Pſalme
               Third Fol. 1.
               Sixt Fol. 35.
               Sixteenth Fol. 80.
               Twentie three Fol. 113.
               Thirtie two Fol. 135.
               Thirtie nine Fol. 202.
               Fourtie two Fol. 229.
               Fourtie nine Fol. 261.
               Fiftie one Fol, 283.
               Sixtie two Fol. 351.
               Sixtie fiue Fol. 375.
               Eightie foure Fol. 387.
               Hundreth Sixeetnth Fol. 410.
               Hundreth Thirtie Fol. 447
               Hundreth thirty ſeventh, 489.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE, GRAVE
and Godlie Matrone,
LILIAS GILBERT, Spouſe
to M. IOHN PRESTOVN, of
Fentoun-Barnes; One of the Senatours
of the Colledge of juſtice, and Collectour generall
of Scotland. C. L. wiſheth grace mercy, and everlaſting
peace, paſſing all knowledge, from God the
Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt for ever. Amen.
            
               HAVing long conſiddered and
adviſed with my ſelfe (becauſe I
was never yet accuſtomed to ſuch
matters) to whom I ſhould dedicate
this tranſlation of the Expoſition,
(of that worthie ſeruante of GOD, of
bleſſed memorie, M. ROBERT ROLLOK,
who now reſteth from his labour) vpponſome
ſelect Pſalmes; Yee, right honorable,

and dearely beloved in Chriſt, came
firſt into my minde. The chiefe thing that
mooved me thus to doe, was the diſcharge
of my promiſe, wherein I was bound vnto
you, ever ſince the booke came home (which
was in Sommer laſt) At which time, I
happening to reade vnto you a little of the
Expoſition vppon the 42. Pſalme: Ye deſired
me very earneſtly to tranſlate the whole
booke; which thing I granted-to, and promiſed
to performe. Behold therefore, my
promiſe is now in the mercy and aſsiſtance
of God fulfilled to you. And next, I being
ever deſirous to teſtifie my duetifull and
thankfull minde vnto you (as one to whome
I was, and is much beholden to in many reſpectes)
I thought that there could be no better
meane, then the dedication of this preſent
worke, vvhich conteineth great ſtore
of moſt comfortable doctrines, as I truſte ye
ſhall confeſſe, when ye haue well peruſed
the ſame, ſo that the onely reading thereof,
may iuſtly commend it many waies, even to
ſuch as are of great learning, godlineſſe,

and vertue. For if we reſpect the Author,
it is God himſelfe, who vſed DAVID and
others, the penners of the ſaid Pſalmes, to
be his inſtruments, that his owne in the
day of their owne particular trouble and
affliction ſhould not lack ſtore of Spirituall
and heavenly comfort. And ſo it is the
word of Conſolation, the lampe of light, to
leade the heauie harted, and caſten-downe
Chriſtian, by reaſon of the troubled conſcience,
by the burthen of ſinne, through
the darke night and thick clowde of afflictions,
to the throne of Gods mercy and
grace. More-over, there are verie fewe
heades of our Chriſtian faith and religion,
(as Faith, Repentance, Iuſtification, Sanctification,
the Reſurrection of his fleſh, Eternall
life, the nature, cauſes, and effects of
Sinne Originall and Actuall, comfort
for the heavie and ſorrowfull ſoule, and
ſundrie ſuch other poyntes) But they are
moſt pithily, ſolidelie, and with great evidencie
of the Spirite ſet downe here. Againe,
if wee haue an eie to the partie, by

whoſe miniſterie and labours, this Expoſition
was written: He was a man, as I may
be hold to teſtifie (being converſant with
him, both in Sanct-Andrewes, and in
this ciitie, neere hand this twentie yeares
by gane) to whom the Church of GOD
within this countrey, is as much beholden,
as to any one inſtrument that ever GOD
thruſt out into his harueſt, in this Church
of Scotland, being a man indewed with
excellent and manifolde giftes of GOD;
moſt diligent, earneſt, and painefull in imploying
of the ſame; for bringing vp of the
youth in godlineſſe, information and inſtruction
in the Lord, beating downe of the
adverſaries, winning of people vnto God,
edifying of the flocke of Chriſt, and ſhewing
good example to other in his vpright converſation.
And wee haue all iuſte cauſe
to feare, that the taking away of ſuch a
worthie light, is a fore-runner of Gods
ſevere iudgement to come vppon this ſinfull
Lande, which I am afrayde is nearer
then we ſuppoſe. Hee vvas in in his life

time a notable learned Doctour, and
a moſte pithie Preacher of Chriſte crucifyed;
Indued vvith as great humilitie,
as ever I knewe man of our Nation; which
is a rare gift in the more learned ſorte,
(For knowledge puffeth vppe, ſayeth
the Apoſtle) and one vvhome I maye
bleſſe the Lorde for his mercie in Chriſt
Ieſus towarde mee, that ever I knewe, as
being the eſpeciall inſtrument of GOD,
that planted the knowledge of my Saviour
in my hearte, vvhome I may call
vvorthelie my Father and inſtructer, in
the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. And vvoulde to
GOD, that vve that are lefte behinde
him, in this miſerable valley of teares,
could learne to haue our delight as little
ſet vppon this life, and thinges belonging
thereto (vvhere our cittie and place of reſidence
is not) as he had, vvhoſe onely care
vvas hovv to enlarge the Kingdome of
Chriſte, ever vvayting for the Cittie,
vvhich is not buylded vvith the handes,
But is everlaſting in the Heavens, as

many a time, I haue heard him ſpeake. I
ſay no more of him, for his workes alreadie
ſet out, and the ſeminarie which he hath
planted (I meane the Colledge of Edinburgh)
will continue his happie remembrance
to the poſteritie to come. As concerning
the tranſlation of the worke itſelf,
I haue dealt as ſimplie and faithfully, in
turning it into Engliſh, as was poſsible,
being content to expreſſe the authors meaning,
in moſt eaſie and ſimple tearmes, keeping
his owne phraſe of ſpeach, ſo far as I
could attayne to. And ſo I humblie ſubmit
the iudgement thereof, to your favorable
acceptation, the obteining thereof, ſhall
greatly increaſe my gladneſſe, in that I haue
done any thing, whereby the Church of
God, or any particular member thereof, is,
or may be any whit edified. Receiue it therfore
with as charitable a minde, as I doe
willingly offer it, as a token of my Chriſtian
duetie toward you; Whom I recommende
to the Lord, and his grace in Ieſus Chriſt,
beſeeching his holy and ſacred maieſtie, to

continue his favour with you, your Huſband
(my Lor) dand your poſteritie, to your
everlaſting comfort in Chriſt, Amen.
            From Edinburgh the third day of December
1599.
            
            
               By yours to be commanded in
Ieſus Chriſt,
C. L. Miniſter of the Goſpel
of Chriſt at Dudingſtoun.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               ANE EXPOSITION vpon the third Pſalme.
               
                  THE ARGVMENT.
                  A Pſalme of Prayer. Now the maker thereof, and the
occaſion of the writing of it, is evident out of the
Inſcription. A Pſalme of David (ſaith he) when
bee fledde through feare of his ſonne Abſchalom.
Looke the occaſion in the 2. booke of Sam. 15.
Chapter, to the twenty Chap. at length opened
vp. Then to returne to the matter, the Pſalme is
compoſed of three partes. The firſt is ane heauie
complaint, from the 2. verſe to the 4. Then is a
glorying of Faith, through a feeling of the mercie
and deliverance of God, which he appeareth to
haue felt and taſted, while he made his complaint
vnto the 8. verſe. Thirdly, there is a two-ſold petition,
The firſt for him ſelfe: The other for the
whole people, vnto the end of the Pſalme.
               
               
                  THE III. PSALME.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of DAVID when he fledde
through feare of his ſonne Abſchalom.
                           2 O Iehova, how many are mine adverſaries,
many they are that riſe vp againſt
me!
                           3 Many there are that ſay of my ſoule,
there is no ſalvation for this man in
God! Selah.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        The firſt part of the Pſalme.
                     O Iehova, how many] The firſt
part of the Pſalme, is the complaint
which aryſeth, as it appeareth
clearely, from a heart, partely
oppreſſed by the grieuouſneſſe of
afflictions; partly aſtoniſhed through
the multitude of enemies. For hee
cannot ſufficiently wonder at ſuch a
multitude ſo ſuddenly ſeduced by
his ſonne Abſchalom: And therefore
wondring and aſtoniſhed at once, he
repeateth this thriſe, How many are
they!
                        The grievouſnes of the affliction. Now the heauines of the affliction
appeareth fullie of the degrees
of the complaint: for he complaineth
not only of many enemies, but
of many enemies riſing vp againſt
him: And not that onely, but of many
enemies, both blaſphemous againſt
God, and ſpiteful againſt himſelfe;The commō church
of whome they ſpake, as of one
forſaken of God. Of this third and
higheſt degree, this thing is to be
perceived in Davids example, that
God, even after ſuch a maner vſes to

exerciſe his owne, and thoſe that are
beloved of him, that they appeare to
the world to be among the number
of the reprobat, and of thoſe that are
forſaken of God. And this is not done
without a cauſe, for the defections,
yea,Cau
                              •
                           
                         of every one that is moſt good,
are many, and ſinne appeareth many
times to be ſweete vnto the Electe.
Therefore, God ſuffers them againe
to taſte how bitter the fruit of ſinne
is: Yet notwithſtanding in the mean
time, hee ſo mitigateth this ſenſe of
the fruit of ſinne, that he ſuffereth
them not to feele at one time, and together,
the whole ſharpnes thereof:
And he changeth ſo that part of that
ſenſe and bitternes, which he giveth
to them to be taſted, that out of bitternes,
he maketh ſweetnes to come;
out of that which is, by the owne nature
the fruit and puniſhment of ſin,
he maketh a way as it were, of amendment
of life, yea, vnto the very heauens
themſelues. This way to ſome

man may appeare backward, that any
by the Helles, ſhould paſſe vnto
the heauens: Notwithſtanding God
bringeth it to paſſe, which brought
light out of darknes. Then mark next
in this complaint, and in this example
of DAVID, that every one of the
godly vſes in their afflictiones to
turne them ſelues at length vnto
God. And that is a plaine proofe, if
there were no more onely, that this
puniſhment which is otherwiſe inflicted
vpon ſinne, changeth the own
nature: For at no time, the turning
vnto GOD followeth the puniſhment,
in ſo far as it is the puniſhment
of ſin, whatſoever the Papiſts prattle
of temporall puniſhments and ſatisfactions
(as they ſpeake:) But after
what maner now at laſt doth DAVID
convert himſelfe vnto God? For the
godly man afflicted many waies vſeth
to turne himſelfe vnto God; for
either by confeſſion of his ſinnes, or
by ſeeking deliverance from the preſent

affliction, or finally, by complayning
and quarrelling with God, he
turneth himſelfe vnto him. Now
DAVID in this Pſalme turneth himſelfe
vnto God by complayning and
lamenting, not indeede that he acknowledgeth
not his ſinne together
with his deſerving, to wit, that he is
juſtlie through his owne procurement
afflicted after that maner. For
we reade not that DAVID thus complaineth
in any other place, that hee
vndeſervedly ſuffered any thing of
his God. In ſome other place I grant
he complaineth, that he ſuffered many
things of men and of his enemies,
but in no place he maketh moane
that hee ſuffered any thing vndeſervedly
at Gods hands. Moreover, it is
manifeſt ynough by his own wordes
in this place, of what thing he complayneth:
For he complayneth not
only of the multitude of his enemies
but alſo of the over grieuouſneſſe of
the affliction:
                           David
                                 •
                              
                            complayne what on it is. As if any childe chaſtened

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
of the father complaining that he
is over rigourouſly handled: Albeit
in the meane time that is true, that
GOD never tempteth his owne aboue
that they are able to ſuſteine:
For hee will not ſuffer you to bee tempted
aboue that you bee able, but will
even giue the iſſue with the temptation,
that yee may bee able to bear it. 1.
Cor. 10. 13. I grant he burdeneth the
reprobat aboue, that they are able to
beare: and therefore CAINE. Geneſ.
4. 13. complayneth: That his puniſhment
is greater, hen that he is of ſtrength
to beare. But God tempteth not his
owne ſo; albeit ſometimes it appeareth
ſo vnto them, becauſe of the infirmitie
of our nature. I praye you,
what meneth that,The tentation of the godly. that a man euen in
the middeſt of his tentations (I ſpeak
of the godlie) while hee hes his recourſe
vnto God, feeleth, that in ſome
part he is eaſed of his burthen; & that
he feeleth with ſighes that cannot be
expreſſed a joy invtterable? What

other thing I pray you, is meant by
that matter, but that while the godly
hes their refuge vnto God, their tentation
is aſſwaged, and that after a
ſort they ſlide and eſcape out of the
midſt of tentation (to ſpeake ſo with
the Apoſtle.)The tentation of the wicked.) The vngodly whiles
they are puniſhed of God, they feele
not indeede that, neither is there a
way made open to them vnto God:
Therefore the burthen of the wrath
is heavier then they are able to beare.
Of which thing alſo, CAIN. Geneſ.
4. 14. complayneth, who beſide that
he was condemned to baniſhment,
& caſten out of the Church, hee was
alſo caſten out from the face of God.
But this complaynt of DAVID is yet
a little more diligently to be examined
of vs, and finally, it muſt be taken
heede to, from what mind it proceeded.
The beginning of this complaint,
clearely manifeſteth the ſelfe
of this familiar maner of doing with
God, which is eaſilie perceived in

DAVIDS complaint. For ſuch a familiar
faſhion of dealing with God,
ſheweth that this complaynte came
not from the Spirit of man. For the
Spirite of man durſt never yet compeir
before God and his judgement
ſeate: For howſoever otherwaies it
appeare to be fearce, notwithſtanding,
it trembleth and ſhaketh at the
ſight of God. Wherefore of neceſſitie,
this ſo familiar a complaint muſte
proceed from the Spirit of God himſelfe.
They call this Spirite, the Spirite
of adoption, which as PAVL
                           •
                        
ſpeaketh, Rom. 5. 5. powring out into
our harts that fatherlie loue of God.
teſtifieing therewithal, that we ar the
ſons of God: & therfor it openeth our
mouth that we cry Abba, father, & that
in our affliction we complaine vnto
God. For this is it which the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh. Rom. 8. 26. The Spirite
it ſelfe maketh requeſte for vs, with
ſighes that cannot bee expreſſed. From
this Spirit therefore this ſo familiar

a complaynt of afflicted DAVID
commeth: For except this ſpirit, and
ſome ſenſe of the fatherly loue of
God be preſent; as in the meane
time I grant vnto you that it may be,
that ſome man will ſhout and howle
in afflictiones, and roare according to
the cuſtome of Lyons & wildbeaſtes,
as DAVID ſpeaketh of himſelfe,
Pſal. 32. at which time in troubles, he
is not ſo tuitched with this feeling of
the fatherly loue of God: Nevertheleſſe,
that a man may familiarly turne
himſelfe vnto God, and complaine
vnto him as vnto a father, of the grievouſneſſe
of the affliction: no maner
of way can it come to paſſe, except
this Spirit be preſent, and that there
be ſome ſenſe of the fatherly loue of
God.Servile 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſo
                              ••
                           y 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         A ſervant that onely feareth his
maiſter becauſe of wrath, and therewith
loveth him not alſo; neither yet
on the other ſide feeleth that he is
beloved of his maiſter, while he is
beaten by his angrie maiſter, hee turneth

not vnto him, hee quarrelleth
not with him familiarlie: but as his
maiſter handleth him inhumanelie;
ſo he complayneth, not ſo much according
to the maner of men; as hee
roareth and howleth like vnto wilde
beaſtes, without all ſenſe of the loue
of his maiſter. But the ſonne, who is
touched with a ſenſe of his fathers
loue, in the midſt of the chaſtening,
he turneth him vnto his father, and
quarrelleth with him familiarly. So
the afflicted childe of God, quarrelleth
with God his father; of whome
he feeleth himſelfe much more loued
yea, euen then while he is afflicted
be Gods hand then any naturall
ſonne whoſoeuer can be beloved of
his father. Hee feeleth alſo God the
father to ſuffer together with him, &
to be commoved by the ſelf ſame afflictions
of his, which otherwiſe hee
him ſelfe ſendeth vpon him: euen as
a father is touched with a compaſſion
in the very meane time, while he

is chaſtiſing his ſonne; notwithſtanding
that of neceſſitie he is compelled
to chaſtiſe his ſonne; ſpecially, to
the ende he ſhould not grow worſe
by libertie and impunitie. And ſo to
this place wee haue ſpoken of DAVIDS
complaynt, which we ought to
follow in our afflictiones: in which
certainlie, we ſhould endeuour, that
ther be ever preſent with vs, a ſenſe of
the loue of God, in Chriſt Ieſus. But
ſo far as concernes the perſon of DAVIDS
enemies; you haue in them,
not onely an example of blaſphemie
againſt God, but of extreame malice
againſt men, who ſpare not ſo much
indeede the ſoule, or the other life, in
ſo far, as they indevour altogether, to
cut away the hope of Gods helpe. In
which thing alſo, yet ſee their wonderfull
blindneſſe, who thinke that
the godly are altogether left by God
in the meane time when they are afflicted
of him, yea, and alſo that they
themſelues are ſtirred vp by God to

deſtroy and vtterlie to overthrowe
them: like as that blaſphemous lowne
Rabſchake gloried againſt the people
of God. 1. King. 18. 25. Am I nowe
come vp without Iehova vnto this
place to deſtroy it? Iehova hes ſaide
vnto me, Go vp againſt this land and
deſtroy it. And thus much haue wee
ſpoken of the firſt part of this Pſalme.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           4 But thou Iehoua art a buckler about
me, my glorie, & he who lifteth vp mine
head.
                           5 I crying vnto Iehova with my voice
he anſwered me out of the mountaine
of his holines, Selah.
                           
                           6 I Layd me downe and ſlept, I awakened,
becauſe Iehoua ſuſteined me.
                           7 I will not be affrayd for ten thouſands
of the people, which ſtanding round about
mee, haue pitched their tentes againſt
mee.
                        
                     
                     The other part of the Pſalme.
                     
                        BVt thou Iehova] The ſecond parte
of the Pſalme, in which, through
the ſenſe of the preſence and help of
God, albeit hee was not yet in effect

delivered, notwithſtanding he glorieth,
as if hee were euen now delivered;
For he had ſcarſe complayned
vnto God, when hee felt ſome preſence
and protection of his before
hand. For ſurely no man wil haue his
recourſe vnto God in Ieſus Chriſt,
before he firſt in ſome meaſure feele
his helpe: Come vnto mee (ſaithe hee
Matth. 11 28.) all yee who are wearie
and burdened, and I will make you to
reſt. But what are theſe helpes, to the
ende we may come to the particular,
which DAVID felt to come from
God, in the time he had his refuge to
him. DAVID being diſarmed, fledde
from his ſonne Abſchalom; now he
felt God as a buckler to cover and
protect him whollie over.
                           David miſerie 
                              〈◊〉
                            glorie. Hee was in
ſhame, hee felt God to be vnto him
Glorie. He lay proſtrate; he felt God
lifting vp his head. And to ſpeake it
in a word; hee felt God to ſupplie all
that wanted in him. The matter is ſo
then, ſurely thou ſhalt want nothing,

which that onely one God ſhall not
furniſh, if thou haue thy refuge to
him: yea, thou ſhalt alſo feele him
only to be all vnto thee. Deſireſt thou
wiſedome? he ſhall be wiſedome vnthee:
deſireſt thou glorie? He ſhal be
glorie vnto thee: Deſireſt thou riches?
hee ſhall be riches vnto thee.
Finally, he ſhalbe vnto thee al things
that thou deſireſt. Moreover, DAVID
whiles he felt the ſethings, he holdeth
them not within himſelfe, but the
things he feeleth, he ſpeaketh out, &
profeſſeth them firſt before GOD.
This ſenſe of the mercie of God,The ſeeling of the mercy of God. it
cannot be altogether ſuppreſſed and
reſtrayned, but it will burſt foorth in
an open confeſſion. For ſo both God
himſelfe is glorified, and he who hes
that ſenſe, receiueth the greater conſolation;
eſpecially, the ſenſe of the
mercy of God, being inlarged by the
confeſſion. For how much the more
we vtter foorth that ſenſe of Gods
mercy in our harts; ſo much more it

groweth and is enlarged. But hee
who never at any time ſpeaketh a
word, either with God, or men of the
mercy of God in Chriſt Ieſus: this
man by his ſilence declareth plainely
ynough, that he is not touched as
yet with that ſenſe of the mercy of
God, with which it became him to
be touched.The acknowledging of the mercy gotion. 
                        I crying out] Hee goeth
forward in his glorying; and as firſt
hee had profeſſed before God himſelfe,
that feeling of his mercy: ſo turning
himſelfe vnto men, hee commendeth
the ſame vnto them, beginning
firſt from the manner and faſhion,
whereby hee had apprehended
the mercy of God. Then in following
out every particular parte of the
mercy. For ſo it commeth to paſſe,
that both God is more glorified, and
men are alſo more edified through
that example of the mercy of God
toward him: for no notable mercy of
God is beſtowed vppon anie for his
own cauſe only, but alſo for the cauſe

of others, that others alſo by his example
may be turned vnto God, and
may purchaſe mercie. Wherefore
(ſaith PAVLE 1. Tim. 1. 16.) For this
cauſe hee receiued mee to mercie, that
Ieſus Chriſte ſhould firſt ſhew on mee
all long ſuffering, vnto the example
of them, which ſhall in time to come
beleeue in him, vnto eternall lyfe.
Therefore the Prophet beginneth
from that reaſon, whereby he had apprehended
mercy. Now it is perceived
in conuerſion vnto God & prayer;
to the ende, that no man ſhould
thinke that God giveth grace to that
man that ſeeketh it not, or that hee openeth
the heavens to the man that
knocketh not, let be, to the contemner
or refuſer of the grace offered:
For God will haue our faith exerciſed
after that faſhion: albeit otherwaies
he giveth vs not, yea, the leaſte
thing that can bee, becauſe of our
prayers, as for any deſerving cauſe.
He aunſwered] To vvit, out of his

heavenly ſanctuarie, yea, and out of
the earthly alſo, vnto which his viſible
preſence was then tyed. This is
ſubjoyned, that all may know that
they ſeeke no ſooner any thing from
God, according to his will, but hee
wil ſurely therwith anſwere them in
ſome meaſure: and ſo they may bee
incouraged from the verie ſucceſſe
of the prayer, to conceiue prayers
thereafter. Alſo, wee ſhall ſee that it
cannot be otherwiſe, but God ſhall
preſently anſwere to our petition, if
we conſider from whence the ſame
is: now it commeth from Gods own
ſpirit it ſelfe; and ſo it is not poſſible
but God will heare his owne Spirit.
Wherefore PAVLE. Rom. 8. 27. 28.
after he had ſaid that the Spirit maketh
requeſt for vs, with ſighes that cannot be
expreſſed, preſently he ſubjoynes, that
God knoweth the meaning of his owne
Spirit: As if he ſhould ſay, God muſt
of neceſſitie heare the interceſſion
of his owne Spirite, and anſwere to

the deſire thereof. From whence I
pray you is that, that with ſighes that
cannot be vttered, of which the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh, we feele therewith, that
invtterable ioy, and ſo wee come
from God as if we were ſatisfied: yea
euen then, when that ſelf ſame thing
is not as yet gotten, which hes bene
ſought of him: Surely, none otherwiſe,
but from thence that God hes
aunſwered our petition. For ſo God
vſeth, ſtirring vp in our harts, a certaine
vnſpeakable joy, to aunſwere vs
when we call. And this ſenſe is more
then all thoſe earthly thinges, more
then this preſent life, yea & al things
belonging thereto: Wherefore hee
hath purchaſed more at Gods hands,
who hath felt this joy, then he who
hath gotten this preſent life from
God, and all things neceſſarie to the
ſame. But now we haue in the end of
the next verſe, what God anſwered
to DAVID, when he ſayeth. Iehova ſuſteineth
me] Therefore God aunſwered

not ſo much by word as by deed,
then when he vpheld David: Which
thing he ſpake before in more words.
[Thou art my buckler about mee, my
glorie, and he that lifteth vp mine head,]
He comprehendeth the ſame thing
in one worde hereafter.The effect of Gods mercy. 
                        [He ſuſteined
me] ſaith he, whereby hee meaneth
that ſenſe of Gods protection, in the
midſt of perſecution. I layd me downe]
Now hee commendeth the effecte
which followed ſo gentle an anſwer
of God, of the which he ſpake immediatlie
before. And it is indeede, ane
certaine ſecuritie of the mind, which
he leaveth to be perceiued be the effects.
Now there are in it, that he laie
downe, that he ſleeped, and that hee
awakened out of ſleepe. For as when
the minde of any man is troubled
through any preſent daunger, either
he goeth not to bed, or if he goe to
bed, he ſleepeth not quietly, neither
yet wakeneth he ſoftly, if peradventure
he ſleepe: So when the minde is
quiet, then indeed a man goeth to

bed, he ſleepeth ſecurely, hee awakeneth
ſoftly: Wherefore ſome deepe
ſecuritie of minde, is manifeſted by
thoſe effectes, yea, and that a ſpirituall
reſt. The thing therefore that maketh
a minde ſecure in troubles, you
ſee it to be Gods preſence, and a feeling
of his helpe. Therefore the Apoſtle
hath theſe wordes. Rom. 8. 31.
If God be on our ſide, who ſhall be againſt
vs? For he felt that quietnes of mind
through Gods preſence, which made
him thereafter, to provoke whatſoever
enemies of his ſalvation. Alſo
that is worthie of conſideration, in
what meaning the Apoſtle in that
place vnderſtandes God to be preſent
with him. After that he had fullie
rehearſed all Gods benefites, having
begunne at the firſt to the laſt in
theſe wordes. Rom. 8. 29. 30. Thoſe
which he knew before he alſo predeſtinate,
whom he predeſtinate, them alſa he called,
whome hee called, thoſe hee iuſtifyed,
whom he iuſtified, thoſe he gloryfied: then
he ſubjoyned, verſ. 13. What ſhall we

ſay to thoſe things? To the which interrogation,
he anſwereth, If God be
on our ſide, who ſhall be againſt vs? In
which words, ſurely he hath brought
in one ſumme, all the benefits before
ſpoken of; all which eaſilie may bee
brought to this:How God is with vs. That God is with vs.
Therefore Gods preſence is perceived
by his powerfulnes in calling,
juſtifying, and glorifying of vs: So
that if any man would know whether
God be preſent with him or not, hee
muſt ſee, whether if he be called, whether
if he be juſtified, and by theſe, as
by the meanes, he muſt aſcend to the
Predeſtination, and fore-knowledge
of God, which were from everlaſting.
Then leaſt any ſhould doubt of
theſe benefites, by which he declareth
the Lord himſelfe to be preſent
with vs, he bringeth vs to that gift of
his ſon Chriſt, of al gifts the chiefeſt,
and by an argument taken from the
thing that is more, to that which is
les, he concludeth thus, He who ſpared
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        not his onely ſonne, but gaue him for vs to
death, how ſhall he not with him giue vs
all things alſo? Therefore, you ſee that
the Apoſtle reaſoneth, from Chriſt
given, to all the reſte of the giftes: to
the ende wee ſhould learne from
thence, howe oft ſoeuer wee would
know, whither God be preſent with
vs by his benefites, ſo oft wee muſte
haue our recourſe vnto Chriſt, & we
muſt ſee, whither if wee be participant
of Chriſt of his death, of his reſurrection,
without the which, ſurely
wee haue no preſence of God with
vs, no effectual power of God in vs.
But to the end wee may returne hyther,
from whence wee began: That
is moſt certaine indeed,The effect of the gracious preſence of God. that the preſence
of God, and that indeede by
the ſelfe alone, maketh a man ſecure:
which thing is ſo true, as if thou take
away his preſence, man hath nothing
in him but feare and horror, ſpecially
when any grieuous affliction ſeazeth
vpon him: Or if there be any ſorte of

quietneſſe of minde, that is none other
thinge, but a fleſhlie ſecuritie,
which is a token of the ſuddaine deſtruction
to come. PAVLL ſayeth. 1.
Theſſ. 5. 3. When they ſhall ſay peace and
ſafetie: then ſhall come vppon them ſuddaine
deſtruction, as the trauel vpon a woman
with childe, and they ſhall not eſcape.
Therefore, to the ende there
may be a deepe ſleepe, and a ſofte
wakening out of ſleepe, that is, that
there be a true ſecuritie of minde, every
man muſt take heede, that hee
feele God preſent with him, preſent
I ſay, when he goeth to bed, when he
awaketh in the night: for our ſleepe
ſhould bee no ſooner interrupted in
the night, but we ſhould haue our recourſe
vnto God: Albeit men commonly
are chiefely diſtracted in the
night, with the cares of this worlde,
yea, with lighter and vayner tryfles.
More-over, nothing hath more
ſtrength, either to ſettle the minde in
the night time, or to call it backe againe

to ſleepe, and to refreſh the bodie
with reſt, then that ſweete meditation
vpon God. Finally, when the
time of awaking commeth in the
morning, everie man muſt take head
that he finde God preſent with him,
when he goeth foorth of the houſe,
when hee commeth in againe, while
he eateth, while he drinketh, while he
is doing any thing, continually that
preſence of God is to be ſought. Alſo
wee haue God preſent at all times, if
with our voyce we cry vnto Iehova,
as DAVID did, or if alſo, when
there is not place for the voyce, wee
call vpon him with our hearte, which
thing yerely may be done, without
hindring the moſt ſerious buſineſſe
we haue ado, to leaue alſo that vnſpoken
of, that this way ſpecially, all the
honeſt adoes of this life, may be handled
with a certain inutterable delight.
Now the grounde of this preſence is
Chriſt, without whoſe croce and ſacrifice,
ſet before our eies, no entrie

is patent vnto God.An other effect of Gods preſence. 
                        I will feare none euill]
In this verſe, he enlargeth that ſecuritie
which he felt through Gods
preſence, while hee ſayeth, that hee
hath no cauſe to feare hereafter, no,
not indeed ten thouſands of his enemies.
The amplifying therefore is
partly from the time to come, partly,
from the multitude of the enemies:
As if he ſhould ſay; Not onely was I
ſecure, but alſo hereafter I will be ſo
ſecure,David
                              •
                            cōfidence exhorteth vs to invincible conſtanci
                              •
                           . that if ten thouſandes of the
people would pitch their tents about
me, notwithſtanding I will not bee
ſhaken with fear. Of the which thing
you learne, that this is the force of
the quietneſſe of the minde in God,
that there is nothing which it is not
able to over-come. From thence
Paule, after he had numbred out many
things, which are contrarie to vs
in this life, ſuch as were anguiſhes,
oppreſſion, and the reſt; finally, hee
ſubjoyned. Rom. 8. 36. 37. Yea, in all
thoſe things we are more then conquerours

through him who hath loved vs:
Behold, you may ſee the grounde of
this ſecuritie and victorie: To wit,
the loue of God in Chriſt. For when
there is that ſenſe of the loue of God
in Chriſt, and conſequently, any taiſt
of that life to come (for this laſt followeth
alway of that former) then in
deede the childe of God is ſo caryed
aboue al thoſe thinges inferiour, that
from on high he deſpiſeth and contemneth
them.The cauſe brought out of the Apoſtle. Nowe the Apoſtle in
the ſame place, bringeth in the cauſe
why we are more then conquerours
through the loue of God. For I am
perſwaded (ſaith he) that neither death
nor life, &c. is able to ſeparate vs from the
loue of God. For if thoſe things, which
are reckoned out in that Chapter,
might ſeparate vs from the loue of
GOD, then certainely, wee ſhoulde
eaſilie fall vnder the burden through
them. But ſeeing they are not able
to bring that to paſſe that GOD
in Chriſt ſhould not loue vs, and

wee alſo feele that loue in Chriſte,
and out of that loue, life: ſurely it
will never come to paſſe, that thoſe
things fall vtterlie oppreſſe vs: But
on the other, it falleth out directlie
to the contrarie, that wee over come
them all, DAVID therefore, to returne
to him agayne, was ſo caryed
away through the ſenſe of Gods
preſence and loue, in the middeſt
of perſecution; that hee ſecurelie
deſpiſed all the contrarie power, as
one, who had perſwaded himſelfe
of that, that it was not able to ſeparate
him from that loue of God in
Chriſte, the ſenſe whereof indeede
he had at that time. For it is not to
bee thought that this voyce of DAVID,
and his glorying, aroſe chiefelie
of that ſecuritie, which hee had
then perhaps of the certainty of the
keeping of this life preſente: But
much more of that ſecuritie, which
he had of the certainty of that life to
come, yea & that through the feeling

of the loue which is in Chriſt Ieſus:
For that is the differance betuixt the
godly and others which ſtretch not
their hope farther nor this life: Thoſe
are never at eaſe, neither yet can they
glorie, except they be firſt ſure of this
life: yea, but the godly being vncertaine
of this life, and certaine of that
that is to come, through the feeling
of the loue of God in Chriſt, they
are in quiet reſt,The difference be
                           
                              •
                           uixt the godly and vngodly, concerning this life. & do glorie, Sadrach,
Meſach, and Abeanego Dan. 3. 16.
aunſwered ſo to Nebuchad-netzar
threatning them with all extreame
torments whatſoeuer, We are not carefull
(ſay they) concerning this matter.
And thus much haue we ſpoken concerning
the ſeconde parte of the
Pſalme. The glorying and commendation
of the benefites of GOD,The ſūme of the ſecond part
whereof the firſt was the ſenſe of the
help of God: the ſecond, of the ſecuritie
p
                           •
                        ſt & to come, proceeding frō
that ſenſe of Gods help: Now followeth
the third part of the Pſalme.
                     
                        
8 Aryſe Iehova, ſaue me, my God, who
hath ſtricken all mine enemies vpon the
cheeke bone, thou haſt broken the teeth of
the wicked.
                     9 Saluation it ſelfe is to be aſcribed
to Iehova: let thy bleſsing be vppon thy
people. Selali.
                     
                     
                        ARyſe Iehova] The laſt part of the
Pſalme,The third part of the Pſalme. as wee haue ſpoken, in
which DAVID, turning himſelfe againe
vnto God; Firſt prayeth for
himſelfe, that hee may be delivered
from the preſent danger: Then for
the people. Now he praieth for himſelfe
in theſe words.The combat of faith 
                        Aryſe (ſaith he)
Iehova, ſaue me] For ſo long as we feel
not a full deliverance, we remember
God ſo, as if he were vn-mindfull of
vs, and did ſir idle in the heauens, caſting
away all care of his owne vpon
the earth. Saue me (ſaith he) my God]
Embracing GOD as it were in his
heart, he craveth that he would ſaue
him: For when hee ſayeth [my God]
he embraceth God, and by faith, applyeth

him to himſelf: now he doth,
and ſpeaketh this through the right
of the covenant, in which God promiſed
to be a God to Abraham,
                        Why David ſure of eternal life, appeareth to be carefull of the preſent. and
to his ſeede. Geneſ. 17. 1. But if thou
aske in this place, ſeeing now before
he had gloryed in God, and in his
preſence, which alſo hee felt in his
minde, in the middeſte of afflictions:
He gloryed, I ſay, againſt all his
enemies, againſt life, againſt death:
how commeth it to paſſe, that nowe
he is ſo carefull of this life, and craveth
ſo earneſtly at God, that hee
would deliver him out of the preſent
danger? I anſwer, that this great ſecuritie
of the godlie, and the contempt
of this preſent life, fighteth not among
themſelues. And the petitiones
of this ſorte, whereby they
craue alſo the preſervation of this
life, alwaies with that condition, if
it pleaſe God ſo, that he would grant
the ſame to his owne glorie: for neither
the godlie, while they haue a

fore-taiſt of that other life, and leaning
thereto, they glory againſte
all thinges; caſte not in the meane
time vtterly awaye the care of this
life, and raſhly powre out the ſame.
For this preſent life, among the reſte
of Gods giftes is not the baſeſt. Thou
haſt ſtriken] Hee mooveth GOD
to his preſervation in time to come,
from the by gane experience, in deſtroying
of the enemies and wicked
and therewith alſo filling them with
ſhame; For it is thought to bee a
ſhamefull thinge to bee ſtriken vpon
the cheeke bone, and to ſuffer
the breaking of the teethe, that is,
ſtrokes vppon the face, and in the
mouth. Obſerue in this place tw
                           •
                        
linkes, as it were, of that fine Golden
Chaine. which PAVLE linketh
together, to witte, Experience and
Hope. Experience (ſayeth hee, Rom.
cap. 5. 3.) bringeth out Hope. This petition
of DAVID, from bygane experience,
leaneth to the Hope of the

preſent and temporall deliverance to
be purchaſed. Albeit indeed I confeſſe
that this is not a ſure hope, even
that, to wit, which maketh not aſhamed,
vnleſſe it be that hope of that
everlaſting promiſed deliverance:
For that is properly that hope which
followes the experience of Gods deliverance,
eſpecially, if there be a feeling,
with that experience of deliverance
of the loue of God in Chriſt
Ieſus: Therefore the Apoſtle ſubjoyned
in that place: For the loue of God is
powred out in our hearts by the holy Spirit:
As if he ſhould ſay, of neceſſitie
this hope maketh not aſhamed, and it
is ſure, ſeeing that experience, from
which hope proceedeth, is eſpecially
of the loue of God in Chriſt Ieſus.
Salvation it ſelfe] Thereafter he prayeth
for the people, yea, for that parte
of the people which followed after
Abſchalom, and was ſeduced of him.
One would marvell, that DAVID in
ſuch a great daunger of his life, is ſo

mindfull in his prayer of the people,
& ſalvation of others: For this would
appeare to bee of a man that is ſet a
part from all perill and daunger, not
onely to reſpect himſelfe, or his own
life, but alſo others, and the ſalvation
of others. But it is to be knowne, that
this is the diſpoſition of every member
of that vniverſall body of Chriſt,
that it is not onely touched with a
ſenſe of the owne miſerie, but alſo it
is commoved with a compaſſion of
the reſte of the members of the ſame
body: And looke how much the
more it is touched with a ſenſe of the
owne miſerie, ſo much the more it
ſuffereth with the reſt, whom it ſeeeth
to be miſerable. For he who never
yet felt any miſerie, ſurely that
man is vnmeet to pitie others, whom
he ſeeth to be oppreſſed with miſery.
Alſo, the reaſon of this petition is taken
from the nature of God him ſelf.
To Iehova (ſaith he) is ſalvation to bee
aſcribed] as if he ſhould ſay:The reaſ
                              •
                            of the laſt petition. The nature

of Iehova, is to ſaue and to bee
mercifull: So he declareth vnto God
what his nature is: For there is none
other reaſon more effectuall to moue
God, then if you bring foorth vnto
him his owne nature, eſpecially, that
whereby he is mercifull: For God
delighteth chiefely in mercy, and aboue
all thinges, in his owne nature
he is moſt mercifull. God is loue. Ioh. 4

                           •
                        . Now it is not poſſible that this can
be done of vs, to wit, that we be able
to bring out this his nature before
him, eſpeciallie that hee is mercifull,
vnleſſe wee travel diligently, firſt to
ſee by the eyes of our ſoule, yea, and
feele alſo ſurelie in our heart in ſome
meaſure, that infinite Eſſence, Wiſedome,
Iuſtice, Power, and mercie of
God, &c: Except wee holde vs content
to prattle of an vnknowen thing,
which wee haue never yet, neither
ſeene nor felt. Wherefore, the knowledge
of the nature of God, is chieflie
moſt neceſſarie to conceiue earneſt

prayer, and not onely the knowledge,
but the ſenſe and feeling of
the ſame. And wee muſt indevour all
our life long, ſo much as is poſſible
we may conceive in this finite that &
narrow minde, that infinite majeſtie:
To him therefore be all honour and
glory, Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT. Of the VI. PSALME.
                  This is a Pſalme of Prayer, and it is manifeſt out
of the inſcription, that it was written by David. The
partes thereof are two. The firſt is a petition, by which
David being ſick, prayeth to God that he would remoove
his anger and ſcourge, hee craveth earneſtly
his mercie, & ſeeketh after ſalvation, from the ſeconde
verſe, to the ninth. Then through a ſure faith, feeling
the things that he ſought, he gloryeth againſt his enemies,
of Gods taking heede vnto him, and of his
bountifulneſſe vnlooked for, from the ninth verſe,
to the end of the Pſalme.
               
               
                  THE VI. PSALMI.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of DAVID (committed) to the
Maiſter of muſick vpon the Violes
(to be ſong) to a graue tune.
                           2 O Iehova rebuke me not in thine anger,

neither chaſtiſe mee in thy burning
wrath.
                           3 Iehova, be gratious vnto mee, becauſe
I am become feeble, heal me, Iehova,
becauſe my bones ar altogether troubled.
                           4 And my ſoule is greatly troubled,
thou therefore, Iehova, how long!
                           5 Returne, ô Iehova, deliver my ſoule,
ſaue me for thy mercies ſake.
                           6 For in death the ſelfe, there is no
remembrance of thee, who ſhall prayſe
thee in the graue?
                           7 I faynt in my mourning, I cauſe my
bedde to ſwimme, all the night I make
my bedde ſide to melt with my teares.
                           8 My eie through indignation, is
conſumed, it groweth olde, becauſe of all
my foes.
                        
                     
                     The firſt part conteineth the petition, the cauſe whereof hee adjoyneth.
                     O Iehova] The firſte parte of the
Pſalme, as we haue ſpoken. The
petition: firſt he prayeth that affliction
may be remooved, Then he prayeth
for proſperitie, as for deliverance
and ſalvation. Alſo, with the petitiones,
hee intermingleth the cauſes.

Firſt, therefore hee prayeth, that the
wrath of God may be remooved. O
Iehova (ſaith he) rebuke me not in thine
anger, &c.] DAVID, as it appeareth by
his own words, being holden down
with a grieuous ſicknes, hee conceived
in his minde that God was angrie
againſt him, of the which it came
to paſſe, that being now ſicke, hee is
more troubled in mind, through the
feeling of Gods wrath, then in the
body, through the feeling of the ſickneſſe.
For, that we ſpeake ſomewhat
of the wrath of God, it is intollerable,
for it is not poſſible that hee can
be ſatisfied, vnleſſe it be with the everlaſting
puniſhment of that man
who is out of Chriſt. It is not the ſickneſſe
of one, two, or mo yeares, not
of a thouſand yeares, that can ſatiſfie
the angrie God, if you be found out
of Chriſt, but thou muſt be puniſhed
for evermore.The common place of Gods anger. And even as the wrath
of God in the ſelfe is intollerable, ſo
the ſenſe of the fleſh, and of this corrupt

nature conceiveth it to be vnappeaſeable,
& to be mixed with no
kinde of mercy; of which thing Cain
complayneth. Gen. 4. 13. My puniſhment
is more (ſaith hee) then that I am
able to beare. But certainely, prophane
Cain, lyeth againſt God, and againſt
his nature. For where ſinne aboundeth,
grace aboundeth much more, If the
minde could be brought on earneſtly
to ſeeke the ſame:How Spiritual Davids fee
                           
                              ••
                           ng was. For then it ſhall
feele the wrath of God in Chriſt pacified,
which the fleſh & corrupt nature
feeleth vn-appeaſeable. DAVID
therefote, to returne vnto him, having
once felt this wrath of God, was
more troubled through the ſenſe of
the wrath, then through the ſenſe of
the moſt grievous ſickneſſe: hee craveth
then, that not ſo much the ſickneſſe
be remooved from him, as the
feeling of the wrath; and he doubleth
that petition, as one who was deeply
touched, with the ſenſe of that wrath
O Lord (ſaith he) rebuke me not in thine

anger, neither chaſtiſeme in thy burning
wrath. For hee apprehendeth not only
the anger,What doctrine the afflictions of the godly is. but the burning wrath:
Therefore, in the example and perſone
of DAVID, this is to bee learned
of vs: The afflictions of the godlie,
are not indeede ſo many ſatisfactiones
for their ſinnes, neither doth
God lay them on vpon his owne, to
that ende, that hee may ſatisfie his
wrath and juſtice: For Chriſt hath ſatisfied
once the wrath of his father,
for the ſinnes of al the beleevers, yea,
and that indeede moſt perfitely. For
the Papiſtes lie,The Papiſts 
                              〈◊〉
                            concerning ſatisfaction. in that they ſay, that
the afflictiones of the godlie, are ſo
many temporall puniſhments inflicted,
becauſe of their ſinnes, which of
neceſſitie they muſt ſuffer, either in
this world, or in the other, That is,
in Purgatorie. For they ſaye, that
Chriſthes onely taken away by his
death that everlaſting puniſhment.
By which lie, who is he not that ſeeeth,
how much is derogated frō that

only one & perfit ſacrifice of Chriſt.
Therefore I affirme, that theſe are
not ſatisfactiones for ſinnes, or the
puniſhments of ſinnes, but fatherlie
chaſtiſements, by which God of his
mercie exerciſeth his owne in this
life, that they be not vtterly caſten vp
in a deepe ſleepe of fleſhlie ſecuritie,
& ſo periſh with the reſt of the world.
Which thing, albeit it be true, yet
notwithſtanding, afflictiones manie
times darkeneth ſo in our ſight, that
mercy and loue of God in Chriſt,
that the very Godly are afrayde alſo
when they are chaſtiſed, leaſt together,
& at one time, the whole wrath
of God bee poured out vpon them.
Now this feare aryſeth not ſo much
of the renevved part of the minde, as
it doth of the fleſh and vnregenerate
part of the ſoule: For loue caſteth out
feare. 1. Ioh. 4. 18. Therefore it proceeded
of the fleſh, that DAVID feared
ſo much the wrath of God, and
his prayers ſome thing ſavoring of

the fleſh,What the prayers of the godly are. and of the corrupt nature
mixt with them. For the prayers, yea,
of the moſt holy men, contract a certaine
ſpot on ſome one ſide or other,
of the remanent vncleaneſse of this
nature. Nevertheleſſe, in the meanetime,
he turneth himſelfe vnto God,
and prayeth that he would turne away
his wrath from him: which is againe
a ſure evidence, that he, even at
that time had apprehended ſome
certain portion of that grace of God
in Chriſt Ieſus: for vtherwaies ſurely
he durſt not haue bene ſo bold to
come vnto God, or to common with
him ſo familiarly, vnleſſe he had bene
allured by ſome feeling of that mercie
in Chriſ
                           •
                        . Then the godly, in the
midde clowde of afflictiones, ſurelie
haue ſome ſight (howſoever at ſome
time it be ſomewhat obſcure) of the
mercie and grace of God, by which
they being allured, come vnto God,
& earneſtly craue his mercy. For they
are not able, who are not at leaſt touched

with ſome ſenſe of his mercy,
earneſtly to craue that mercy. But
we will make the matter manifeſt by
this ſimilitude▪ When a mid cloude
is caſt in betuixt our ſight & the Sun,
the cloude indeede in the matter it
ſelfe, diminiſheth nothing of the
bright ſhining of the ſame, which by
nature is in the Sunne, albeit the Sun
be not ſeen of vs, in the cleare brightneſſe
thereof, be reaſon of the cloude
that is caſt betuixte: Even ſo it is, of
that cloude of affliction; that is caſten
in betuixte our ſight, and that
ſunne of the countenance and mercy
of God:The expoſition and applying of the ſimilitude▪
                         in effect ſurely it taketh
nothing away from the loue of God
(howſoever indeede it appeare vnto
vs) wherby God loveth vs in Chriſt,
which, as God himſelfe is vnchangeable,
ſo he remayneth the ſelfe ſame
for evermore, and is ever like to the
ſelfe, yea, and remayneth even then
when he chiefelie afflicteth vs. For
even then when hee looveth vs in

that his Welbeloved, how-ſo-ever it
appeare not ſo vnto vs, becauſe of
the affliction, which is caſt in betuixt
vs and his countenance. And againe,
as the cloude caſt betuixt, darkeneth
not the Sun ſo vnto vs, that nothing
of the ſunne vtterly is ſeene, and wee
thinke that the day is ſuddenly changed
into the night; nevertheles ſurely
ſome portion of the light ſhineth vnto
vs, through the middeſt of that
darke thickneſſe of the cloude: even
ſo, neither doth that cloude of af
                           •
                        liction
caſt in, darken that Sunne of the
loue of GOD in Chriſt, but ſome
beames thereof will clearely ſtrike vpon
our mindes and hearts. Theſe
thinges are ſomewhat more largelie
ſpoken of me, that we ſuffer not our
ſelues to be ſo oppreſſed in the darkneſſe
of afflictiones, ſo that al beames
of the favour of God in Chriſt, bee
vtterly taken away out of our ſight▪
but ſo much cōtinually of that light
which is in his face, ſhould be ſeene

of vs, as may ſhew vs the way earneſtly
to craue mercy and deliverance.
Iehova, be gracious vnto me] Hitherto,
once and againe, hee hath prayed,
that the wrath might be remooved.
Now hee earneſtly prayeth for the
grace and mercie of God.Wrath by prayer being removed, wee ſhould earneſtly ſeek grace after the example of David. 
                        Be gracious
vnto me, ó Iehova, ſayth he] Hee had
ſeene the wrath of God, he had ſene
alſo his grace, hee had apprehended
grace, and after hee had commed by
it, he cryed, be gracius vnto me, 
                              •
                            Iehova
For burſting out into theſe words,
no doubt hee had, with a ſweete feeling,
apprehended grace. For wee
ſhould not be mooved to crie for the
grace of GOD, for the faſhion, and
ſome light affection, but with the cry
that is in the mouth, there ſhould bee
a deepe feeling thereof in the heart.
For the godlie, no ſooner ſeeke earneſtly
grace, but they get it as ſoone,
their heartes being ſpred over, yea,
with a moſte ſweete feeling thereof.
Becauſe I am become feeble] He ſubjoyneth

an argument of grace,The 
                              •
                           auſes of grace 
                              •
                           ough
                              •
                           
                           ▪
                         earneſtly
fought for frō his languiſhing & ſikneſſe,
as if hee ſhould ſaye, O God,
thou ſeeſt howe grieuouſlie I am afflicted
with ſicknes, therfore be gracious
vnto me. Heale me ô Iehova] Again,
he earneſtly craueth mercy. This
his frequent praier ſheweth that hee
had mightely wraſtled with the ſenſe
of Gods wrath: for wee would not
nakedly,A paſſiona
                              ••
                            repetition. and for a faſhion (ſo as men
vſe to do) call for the grace and mercy
of God, if we were touched with
ane earneſt ſenſe of Gods wrath, but
with a loude & doubled voyce, calling
vpon God, we would diligently
endevour to eſcape out of that feeling:
For it cannot be, that any man
being oppreſſed with the wrath of
God, can flie awaie, except God him
ſelfe, as it were, ſtretching out his
hande from the heauens, eaſe vs of
that burthen of his wrath. Becauſe my
bones are altogether troubled] Hee repeateth
the argument, taken from his

languiſhing and ſickneſſe,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            parts of the argument taken frō the languiſhing. but being
layde open in his owne partes. Now
the partes thereof are theſe; the trouble
of the bodie, & of the moſt firme
and ſolide partes thereof: to wit, of
the bones: then a troubling of the
ſoule, be reaſon of the wrath of God
ſeazing thereon: As if he ſhould ſay,
both is mine hole bodie troubled, &
likewiſe is my ſoule troubled. Finally,
nothing is whole in me. Men indeed
ar then in a good caſe, when the
bodie being ſick, the ſoule is touched
& pricked with a conſcience of ſin.
For this cauſe the bodie is outwardlie
humbled by God, that the ſoule
alſo may be inwardly humbled. For
vnleſſe in minde, wee roſe vp againſt
the heauens and God himſelfe, what
need were there of the caſting down
of the bodie? Therefore DAVIDS bodie
was humbled, that his ſoul might
be humbled: For theſe things agree
verie evil among themſelues, a proud
hart, & an humble body. And that is

thought to be the moſt grieuous judgment
of God, when the bodie being
humbled,The moſt grieuous iudgement of God. God boweth not therewith
& moveth by his Spirit the Soule vnto
repentance: and the very ſickneſſe
itſelfe is moſt deſperate, when in the
moſt grievous feeling of the bodie,
the heart of any man remayneth inſenſible,
without the feling of wrath,
without the feeling of ſinne, without
the feeling of grace. But if there be any
ſenſe of the wrath of God in any
man, that is, the high-way to recover
converſion & health; but when there
is not a feeling of the anger, neither
a conſcience of the ſinne, then the afflicted
man roareth indeed like a Lyon,
as DAVID teſtifieth of himſelf. Pſa.
32. 3. And he is no more able to turne
himſelf vnto God, then a wilde beaſt
vnto the man that ſtriketh him. The
comfortes that commonly are miniſtred
to the ſick, tend almoſt al to this
end; that in ſickneſſe they be quiet,
as concerning God, they be ſecure in

reſpect of ſin, they be at eaſe in conſideration
of heaven and hell: Bee of
good courage,The ſtupiditie of the wis
                           
                              ••
                           . ſay they, remember
not vppon death, but remember of
the recovering of the health of the
bodie. Then they commend the patience
and ſtrength of the minde: but
commend they that ſtrength which
proceedeth from confidence in Ieſus
Chriſt? Noe waies at all, but patience
is vnto them a fearce minde,
proude and wraſtling with that hand
of God, which ſeazeth vpon the ſick.
Alſo, if in the meane time, any man
make mention of God, & of his mercy
in Chriſt, of ſinne, of life & death
to come, preſently they receiue this
ſpeache, as a moſt heauie tale; and
they cal it a melancholick cōmouing
which ſerveth rather for the increaſe
of the ſickneſſe, then for the diminiſhing
thereof. But men ſhould deale
far better with any ſicke man, if ane
humbled, contrite, & dejected minde
were recommended vnto him. For

the minde being once caſte downe,
there is ſome place for repentance, &
for the earneſt craving of the grace
of God.Our miſerie, the object of Gods mercie Obſerue this againe: DAVID
in this place, to the ende hee might
moue God vnto mercy, he ſetteth
downe as it were to be ſeene before
his eies, and amplifieth his miſerie, ſo
that in a maner it may be altogether
ſeene of God. Mercie preſupponeth
miſerie: Nowe to the ende that God
may be mercifull, of neceſſitie wee
muſt be firſt miſerable. Wherefore,
if any man would earneſtly craue the
mercy of God, of force he muſt profeſſe
before God that he is miſerable.
For every man may truly ſpeake that
of himſelfe, to wit, that he is miſerable
of his owne natur; and that confeſſion
is aboue al things moſt acceptable
vnto God, in whoſe ſight it becommeth
vs not to compeare with
an oftentation of our (I cannot tell
what) Free will: even as if it were in
the power of our nature, and it were

but once to thinke of any thing that
were pleaſant and acceptable vnto
God:The impi
                           
                              •••
                            of the Pelagians. for that were to detract from
the grace of God in Chriſt Ieſus, of
which onely wee haue what-ſo-ever
power wee haue to thinke well,
will well, worke well. Neither yet again,
ſhould we come forth in Gods
preſence, with the opinion of our
merites and ſatisfactions: For they
that ſeek righteouſnes in theſe things
they finde it not.The example of the Phariſee The Phariſee boaſted
of theſe things, but he returneth
home vnjuſtified. Luk. 18. 10. Wee
muſt come forth rather in Gods preſence,
with that miſerable Publicane,
who having layde out his miſerie
before God, and founde mercie.
Notwithſtanding, the Papiſtes cannot
ſee, nor will not ſee the miſery of
our nature, to the ende, that they
might obtaine the mercie of God.
Therefore, out of theſe thinges that
haue bene ſpoken, it appeareth, that
wee ſhould lay our miſerie open before

God. But how can it bee, that any
man can ſet before him the mercy
of God,The deuty of the god lie in obteining the mer
                              ••
                            of God. vnleſſe he himſelfe firſt
know that he is miſerable? Now to
know that he is miſerable, and that he
may acknowledge his owne miſery;
it is not for the faſhion, to profeſſe
that he is mortall, that he is a ſinner,
that hee is ſubject to many inconveniences,
when in the meane time, he
feeleth nothing of theſe deeply in his
minde, ſuch are the confeſſiones of
men commonly of themſelues: But
to acknowledge our miſerie, is to
feele at the very heart-roote, howe
miſerable thou art; it is to knowe in
conſcience thine owne ſinne, with a
ſerious dolour of thy mind. They are
two-folde miſerable, that ſee not
their miſerie.The two folde miſerie of hipocrit
                              ••
                           
                         It is a miſerable thing
in the ſelfe, to bee a ſinner, as a
man-ſlayer, as an adulterer, &c. But
not to ſee what great evill is in ſinne,
nor to be touched with no remorſe
of man-ſlaughter, and adulterie, &c.

that is, to be miſerable over againe.
For ſuch is the nature of that fleſhly
ſecuritie, with which, as with a ſtrong
Apoplexy, men ar caſt vp into a dead
ſleepe, ſo that they neither ſee nor
feele any thing, while at length they
be ſo wakened vp by ſome ſuddaine
judgemente, that they never from
that time foorth be at reſt. Hitherto
the argument taken from his miſery
hath bene amplified. Thou therefore, I
Ichova, &c.!]
                        The concluſion of the deprecation of the wrath. Now he concludeth the
prayer, for avoyding of Gods wrath:
But the concluſion is turned into a
cōplaynt, for he cōplayneth that the
Lorde hath remayned a good ſpace
turned away from him, as it manifeſtly
appeareth of the petition following,
in which he ſayeth: Returne Ichova]
So then through the effect of the
vehement ſorrow, the whole ſentēce
is cut off, and it is a certaine holding
vp of ſpeech [Apoſiopeſis] But the
complaynt is to be conſidered. DAVID,
as it appeareth, being deſtitute

for a ſhorte ſpace onely, of the preſence
of his GOD, notwithſtanding,
hee complayneth ſo, as if
hee were deprived for a long time
and ſpace of that ſweete countenance
of his GOD.The quiek feeling of the godly. 
                        How long] ſayeth
hee: Thoſe with whome God vſeth
to be preſent, they are ſcarſeable
to ſuffer his abſence, yea, but for a
moment: to them one houre is a
yeare. In deede it appeareth ſo vnto
them, eſpecially if in the meane time
they feele God to be angrie againſte
them. For of thoſe ſecure men, I
ſpeake nothing, who never willingly
looke vnto God, or at any time meditate
vppon him. For how many are
there in every place, who if they get
libertie to enjoy this life, with a reaſonable
ſufficiente plentie of theſe
things, which belong to the ſuſtentation
of this life, ſurely they woulde
never deſire to ſee neither another
life, nor heaven, nor God. Oh howe
deceivable is this fleſhly ſecurity? for

it perſwadeth vs that there is in this
life ſome happineſſe, true quietneſſe
& peace with God, without Chriſt.
Hitherto he hath concluded, the deprecation
of wrath. Returne, Ichova]
Now againe he earneſtly craveth for
grace.There newed, ſee king of grace. 
                        Returne (ſayth he) O Ichova, deliver
my ſoule] To wit, ſaue me out of
this preſent death, not indeed for my
deſert, but for thine own mere mercy
and grace. Therfore he acknowledgeth
the preſence of God and his
Favour, that it proceedeth not indeede
from any merite of his, but of
the meere grace of God. And from
thence it appeareth in that complaynt,
in which he quarrelled with
God, concerning his long abſence,
that hee complayned not of anye
wronge, as though GOD had
dealt vnrighteouſly with him, otherwiſe
then hee had deſerved at Gods
hand. For if Gods preſence proceede
of grace, ſurely Gods abſence is not
of any vnrighteouſnes in God. And

that is the difference, betuixt the cō
                        plaints
of the faithfull, and of the infidels.The complaints of the godly, and what they are.
The faithfull complaine not
that there is any wronge done vnto
them by God, any otherwaies then
they deſerue at his hands: But whiles
they complaine, they acknowledge
that whatſoever thing is done vnto
them, according to the will of God,
is ever righteouſlie done, and that
they haue juſtlie deſerved the ſame.
More-over, they complaine & quarrell
with God, of a certaine ſonne-slike
feare, & of an vnvtterable deſire
of his preſence:The complaints of the infidels. But the vnfaithful in
cōplayning, they burſt furth inaccuſationes
& blaſphemies, they accuſe
of vnrighteouſnes, in the mean God
time they bring out their own righteouſnes;
alſo, their cōplaint is made
through the hatred of God, and deteſtation
of his preſence, at which
they tremble, and from the which,
they altogether vttetly abhor. There
fore it is to be conſidered diligentlie

it perſwadeth vs that there is in this
life ſome happineſſe, true quietneſſe
& peace with God, without Chriſt.
Hitherto he hath concluded, the deprecation
of wrath. Returne, Iehova]
Now againe he earneſtly craveth for
grace. Returne (ſayth he) O Iehova, deliver
my ſoule] To wit,There newed▪ ſee king of grace ſaue me out of
this preſent death, not indeed for my
deſert, but for thine own mere mercy
and grace. Therfore he acknowledgeth
the preſence of God and his
favour, that it proceedeth not indeede
from any merite of his, but of
the meere grace of God. And from
thence it appeareth in that complaynt,
in which he quarrelled with
God, concerning his long abſence,
that hee complayned not of anye
wronge, as though GOD had
dealt vnrighteouſly with him, otherwiſe
then hee had deſerved at Gods
hand. For if Gods preſence proceede
of grace, ſurely Gods abſence is not
of any vnrighteouſnes in God. And

that is the difference, betuixt the cō
                        plaints
of the faithfull, and of the infidels.The complaints of the godly, and what they are.
The faithfull complaine not
that there is any wronge done vnto
them by God, any otherwaies then
they deſerue at his hands: But whiles
they complaine, they acknowledge
that whatſoever thing is done vnto
them, according to the will of God,
is ever righteouſlie done, and that
they haue juſtlie deſerved the ſame.
More-over, they complaine & quarrell
with God, of a certaine ſonne-like
feare, & of an vnvtterable deſire
of his preſence:The complaints o
                              •
                            the infidels. But the vnfaithful in
cōplayning, they burſt furth inaccuſationes
& blaſphemies, they accuſe
of vnrighteouſnes, in the mean God
time they bring out their own righteouſnes;
alſo, their cōplaint is made
through the hatred of God, and deteſtation
of his preſence, at which
they tremble, and from the which,
they altogether vtte
                           •
                        ly abhor. Therefore
it is to be conſidered diligentlie

of vs, that in the meane while, wee
make our complaint, we put a bridle
to our affections, leaſt through their
diſtemperature, they carrie vs ſo far
forwarde, that wee ſprinkle not that
holy & inviolable majeſty, with any,
and it were, yea, but with the leaſt
ſpot that can be. Which thing is the
rather more diligently to be done of
vs for that cauſe, becauſe we are al inclined
thereto by nature, and it is a
thing verie hard to repreſſe & bring
vnder commandement, our boyling
affectiones, and filthie thoughtes.
Wherefore we muſt labour continually,
that we ſpeake and think of our
GOD, with paſſing greate reverence
and holineſſe. For in death there
is no remembrance of thee.] This is the
other reaſon of the petition,The other reaſon of the petition from Gods glorie. from the
glorie of God himſelfe: For as that
former reaſon was from our owne
miſerie, in the third and fourth verſes,
ſo this latter is from the glorie of
God, which through this preſent eſtate

of DAVID, appeareth to be called
in queſtion. Lord (ſaith hee) in
death there is no remembrance of thee]
Therefore keepe me aliue.The cauſe wherefore the godly liue awhile vpon the earth, before they 
                              •
                           lit hence to the lord For this
cauſe, God will haue vs to liue in the
land of the living, and as it were, to
liue as ſtrangers abſente from the
Lorde, that firſt through faith wee
might worſhip him, in his ſonne Ieſus
Chriſt, in this life, before wee fullie
enjoyed that his preſence, in that
other. Every one of the godly, knowing
this, they deſire to bee preſerved
for a time, yea, euen in this life, for
this end in ſpeciall, which the Lorde
himſelfe hath appoynted, and as the
Apoſtle ſpeaketh of the creatures.
Rom. 8. 20. not ſo much after their
will, as after his owne will, who will
haue them for a time to be pilgrimes
abſent from their Lord. Therefore ſo
oft as we ſee the Saintes ſo earneſtlie
to deſire this life, and the preſervation
thereof at Gods hands, we muſt
not thinke that this is done by them,

for this cauſe that they even delight
ſo much in this life,The cauſe why the godly deſire to remaine in this life. or that they abhor
this bodely death, but rather that
they earneſtly deſire to glorifie their
God among the living, and to exalte
his militant Church & kingdom
vpon the earth, & they deſire not to

                           •
                        itte from thence, while they haue
wonne ſome vnto Chriſt, and as it
were, by ſtretching out their hande,
they carie them vp with themſelues
into the heavens. For this preſent life
is chiefely to be conſecrat to God, &
Gods affayres: Yea, and this is the
cauſe why Ezechias tooke death in ſo
evill a part, denunced vnto him. Eſa.

                           ••
                        . And this alſo is the cauſe, wherefore
Paule, when otherwiſe he chooſed
rather to ſ
                           •
                        it out of the body, nevertheles,
hee chooſed rather to remaine
in the body, to the ende, that
hee might propagat the Church of
Chriſt, & might bring men vnto the

                           •
                        aith. Phil. 1. 23. 24. Finally, this was
the cauſe, wherefore ſo earneſtly DAVID

ſought in ſo many Pſalmes, the
prolonging of his life. Pſa. 30. & 88. &
118. Notwithſtanding David in this
Pſalme, appeareth not ſo much to be
oppreſſed with the ſicknes of his body,
as with the ſicknes of his ſoule, &
ſenſe of the wrath of God. And therfore
he is not ſo affraid of this bodely
death, as of that ſpirituall caſting off,
yea, & that through the ſenſe of the
fleſh, & part not renewed. Wherfore
we may conſider with our ſelues, that
he ſpak of that eternal death, & of the
burial of the hell, in which, no man
will prayſe God. Therefore you ſee
that the godlie alſo, abhorre, and are
affrayd for the bell; and againe, you
ſee, that they deſire life and ſalvation,
not ſo much for their owne cauſe,
as for Gods glories ſake. For neither
DAVID in this place, ſomuch
reſpecteth his owne life, and ſalvation,
as the prayſe of GOD, yea,
and that ſpecially troubled him, that
being once caſt out from the face of

God, he ſhould not at any time there
after be a Preacher of Gods prayſes.
And this is a moſt ſure evident of the
ſalvation of the godlie, if they feele
in themſelues a deſire and careful indevour
of gloryfiing God. For it
is not poſſible, that that ſoule can bee
deteined in Hell, which aſpyreth to
God, and to his glorie. I faynt in my
mourning] Hytherto haue bene declared,The three reaſons of the petition from a moſt grie
                           
                              •
                           ous ſen
                              •
                           e of miſery.
the two reaſones of the earneſt
ſeeking of mercy. The firſte, in
the third and fourth verſes: The ſecond,
in the ſixt verſe. Now followeth
the third, in the ſevent and eight
verſes, from the dolour and feeling
of a moſt grieuous miſerie. Hee expreſſeth
this ſorrow diverſe manner
of waies: For firſt (he ſayeth). I faynt
in my mourning] Then, I make my bed
(ſaith hee) all the night to ſwimme]
Thirdly (ſaith he) I make my bed ſide to
melt with my teares] I grant that theſe
ſpeaches are very exceſſiue: For in
truth, neither made DAVID ſo much

as his bedde to ſwimme, neither yet
melted hee his bedde-ſide with his
teares: notwithſtanding, the inward
dolour of his mind was no les, then
are thoſe externall thinges which are
here ſpoken of. For out of all queſtion,
if it could haue bene poſſible, that
DAVIDS eies had bene capable of ſo
many teares, as had bene ſufficient to
haue made his bed to ſwimme, or to
melt his bed-ſide: ſurely there was
ſuch a great ſorrow in DAVIDS hart,
as had bene ſufficient to lowſe them,
and to powre them out: and certainlie
DAVIDS bodie in verie deede, was
almoſt conſumed, and as it were melted
with that ſorrow. For to ſpeake
this once, of this griefe of DAVID,
this is firſt manifeſt, that it was not ſo
much contracted, by reaſon of the
bodely ſicknes, with which, notwithſtanding,
hee was moſt heavily oppreſſed,
as it was indeede, by reaſon
of the feeling of the wrath of God, &
thoſe terrours of hel, the which grief

indeed is the greateſt that can 
                           〈◊〉
                         imagined,
& none is to be compared
vnto it. Then DAVID was ſuch a
one, who now before had oft taſted
how gracious the Lorde was, as
PETER 
                           •
                        peaketh. Yea, and hee himſelfe
at this ſame verie time, was not
altogether voyde of all feeling of his
mercy. And therefore it came to
paſſe, that he tooke this wrath of the
angrie GOD, in ſo evill a parte.
For it is ſure, that howe much the
more greater the experience of the
mercie of God be, ſo much the more
doth any man take in evill parte, the
wrath of God, and he is the more in
that reſpect troubled through the
offence of ſo mercifull a Father.
And for theſe cauſes,From whence proceeded the greate fear of the Saintes, who other waies wer indued with a ſingular courage of minde. the aunciente
holy men, otherwiſe indewed with
excellente courage and ſtrength of
minde, when they came before God,
they vtter a moſt effeminat ſoftneſſe
and dejection of minde. There was
no man of greater courage of mind

then David, notwithſtanding at this
time, he was altogether powred out
as it were in teares, for that invincible
ſtrength of mind is not otherwiſe
to be vttered, when wee haue to doe
with God, and with his wrath, for
what other thing els would this bee,
then to harden our heart againſt the
hand of God, humbling vs? And that
we haue not experience of this grief
in our ſelues, which David, as he hath
vttered in this Pſalme, ſayeth was in
himſelf, the cauſe is this ſtupiditie of
our hart, & this fleſhly ſecurity, with
the which wee are alſo caſt vppe into
dead ſleepe, that we feele nothing at
all: But if wee were lightly touched
with thoſe terroures of everlaſting
death, then indeed we ſhould be earneſtly
grieved, & it would appeare no
marvell vnto vs, that ſuch a bold man
vtherwaies of courage, was of ſo dejected
a mind at this time. Wherfore
we muſt continually tak pains to caſt
off the deadly ſo pour, which crepeth

vpon vs day and night, perſwading
our ſelues, finally ever of that, if wee
judge not our ſelues, we ſhalbe puniſhed
of the Lord, & ſome one judgement
or other, being ſent out vpō vs,
we ſhall be wakened out of ſo deadly
a ſleepe. Mine eie through indignation.]
Hee perſiſteth yet in the amplifying
of his grief.The amplifying of the griefe. 
                        Mine eie (ſaith he) through
indignation is conſumed] That is, according
to my judgemente, through
the wrath, whereby he is cōmoved againſt
his enemies, as the wordes following
appeare to make manifeſte.
Mine eie (ſaith he) waxeth old, becauſe
of all mine enemies] To wit, for al thoſe
that in the minde of an enemie, obſerue
me, they inſult vpon me, being
caſt downe to the earth, and triumph
as it were over mee: for the wicked
vſe to rejoice at the calamities of the
godlie, and to inſult vpon them, being
throwen downe, for that end inſpeciall,
that if it bee poſſible, they
may driue them to deſperation,

while they perceiue that their hope
is mocked at: For this is a moſt grievous
ſort of perſecution, when this
is caſt vp in their teeth, that they haue
in vaine hoped in God, and that they
haue beene, as it were, beguyled of
God, to whome, notwithſtanding
they haue ſo much truſted. Out of all
queſtion, DAVID ſuffered this kinde
of tentation at this time. DAVIDS ſiknes
of his body was grieuous, the
feeling of the wrath of God was heavier:
but this mocking of his enemies
in his miſeries, increaſed exceeding
greatly, that griefe which proceeded
from both.The wicked haue no matter of reioycing, ſpecially in the afflictiones of the godly▪
                         The wicked therefore rejoyce
at the afflictiones of the godly,
when in the meane time, they haue
no cauſe to glorie. But the godly indeed
haue matter to rejoice in, when
they ſee the wicked humbled; for
with the caſting downe of the wicked,
the deliverie of the godly is conjoyned:
But contrariwiſe, there is no
ſolide and true deliverance of the

vngodly, when the children of God
are afflicted. The wicked indeede appeare
in their own ſight to be happy,
and to liue more at liberty, when the
godly are dejected: But to ſpeake ſo,
there ſhall not be a final deliverance.
Wherfore if we wil ſpeak truly, there
is no cauſe of rejoycing to the wicked
out of the aflictions of the godly,
neither ſhal ſo many victories gotten
over the profeſſours of the Goſpell,
profit the Papiſts one haire, which a
                           •
                        
daily brought to our eares by mens
ſpeeches, out of thoſe nations, whom
the Lorde, for the cauſe of religion,
exerciſeth this day. For there ſhall remaine
a Church to God vppon the
earth, even vntil the ſecond cōming
of Chriſt, albeit al the Kinges of the
earth conſpire againſt the ſame. For
it is by the mighty power of God,
that that ſmall flock, is wonderfully
preſerved, in the midſt of ſo manie
Wolues, cirkling them round about.
But ſuppoſe that the Church of God

were altogether at one time taken
out of the earth (which the vngodly
would wiſh with all their heartes)
would the wicked be for that cauſe
the more happy?The 
                              •••
                           
                           
                           
                              ••
                           eame greate m
                              •
                           
                           ſery of the vngodly. Doeth this worlde
ſtand becauſe of the wicked? is this interchanging
of daies and nightes, by
reaſon of the vngodly? Doeth the
earth bring foorth her fruits for the
wickeds ſake? No verely: for al thoſe
thinges come to paſſe, becauſe of the
godly,An example. & Church of God. But if there
were an final accompliſhment of the
Electe, there ſhould not bee a place
found, for any of the wicked vppon
the whole earth. What cauſe therefore
haue they of rejoycing & glorying
at the afflictiones of Gods children.
The Lande of Paleſtina, which
was ever an enemie to the people of
the Iewes, rejoyced ſometime at the
afflictions of the Iewes: but what ſaieth
God vnto them? Reioyce not, O
thou whole Paleſtina, becauſe his rodd
                              •
                           
that ſtroke thee, is broken. Eſai. 14. 21.

that is, becauſe the power of the kingdome
of the Iewes is diminiſhed and
broken: As if the Lorde ſhould ſaye,
Thou haſt no cauſe to rejoyce, O Paleſtina,
concerning that matter.
Which thinges, ſeeing they are ſo,
ſurely ſo oft as wee daily ſee thoſe
men that are glad at the afflictions of
the Churches of France, and rejoyce
at the comming of the Spaniardes
into this Ile, to overthrow this purity
of the Goſpell which we profeſſe, &
who laugh, as it were, in their ſleeue
at thoſe things: While we ſee, I ſaye,
thoſe fine-ones, wee haue no great
cauſe ſo much, neither to envie their
proſperitie, nor theirs whom they favour,
as we haue cauſe to pittie their
miſerie, and to be glad for the happineſſe,
that ſhall one daye come vnto
the Church. Chriſt 
                           •
                        ayth, Ioh. 16. 20.
Verely, verely, I ſay vnto you, yee ſhall lament
and mourne, but the world ſhall reioyce:
ye ſhall bee heavie, but your ſorrow
ſhall be turned into ioye. Againe, Matt.

5. 4, Bleſſed are they that mourne, for they
ſhall receiue comfort. And againe, Luk.
6. 25: Woe be vnto you (ſayeth he) that
laugh, becauſe ye ſhall mourne and weepe.
Out of which words wee obſerue,
that this is a neceſſare interchanging,
that thoſe that now mourne with the
Church of God, ſhal laugh with her
for ever, after this life: But thoſe who
nowe laugh in the miſeries of the
Church, ſhal mourne and weepe for
ever after this life.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           9 Departe from mee all ye workers of
iniquitie, for Iehova heareth the voyce of
my weeping.
                           10 Iehoua heareth my deprecation: Iehova
receiveth my prayer.
                           11 Let all mine enemies be aſhamed
and ſore troubled, let them turne backe,
let them be ſuddenly aſhamed.
                        
                     
                     The other part of the Pſalme.the heavineſſe of the godly is turned into joy, they caſting down into confidence.
                     
                     
                        DEpart from me] Hitherto the firſt
part of the Pſalme hes bin conſumed
in petitiones, now followeth
the other, in which DAVID in an inſtant,

having fe
                           •
                        t that grace and favorable
good will of God, which hee
craved by a turned ſpeech, he gloryeth
againſt his enemies. That thing is
worthie of conſideration, to ſee how
haſtely the alteratiō is made from the
ſenſe of the feling of Gods anger, into
the feeling of his vnſpeakable mercy
even when he was wraſtling with the
wrath of God. But now hee is lifted
vppe, through the confidence of his
mercy. Any godly man being oppreſſed
with Gods anger, and caſten
down as it were to the low hells,
ſooner nor one can ſpeak the worde,
is lifted vp vnto the heavens? This is
to bee attributed to God, and to his
mightie power, who with one blenk
of his eie, is able wounderfully to deliver
his owne. DAVID in an other
place. Pſal. 30. 6. hath expreſſed this
ſuddaine change thus; When he hes
bin but a moment in his wrath, of his
gracious good wil, life is preſent: he
maketh mourning to lodge in the

                        
                           •
                        vening, but in the morning commeth
ſinging. Then it is worthie of
the conſideration, to ſee after what
maner in that ſame Pſalme, he declareth
this ſudden alteration, by his
owne experience. O Iehova▪ through
thine owne gracious good will, thou haſte
placed ſtrength vppon my Mountaine,
therefore, I ſai
                              •
                           e in my reſt, I ſhall not bee
mooved for ever, but when thou hid thy
face, then I was troubled. Then he ſubjoyneth:
O Iehova, I cryed vnto thee,
and therewith I prayed vnto Iehova.
And hee addeth a little thereafter,
Thou haſt chaunged my mourning into
a daunce, thou haſt lowſed my ſackcloath,
and girded mee with reioycing.
There is none of all the Godlie
truelie, who ſhall not ſuddainelie,
and beſides their expectation, feele
ſome comforte, if they in their miſery,
earneſtly ſeeke for the mercye
of God. For God ſendeth away with
rejoycing, thoſe that come vnto him
with confidence & heavines, which

whoſoever hath but once felte, they
prefer it before all the kingdomes of
this worlde. Wherefore, whoſoever
complayneth that hee is deſtitute of
true cōſolation, let him lay the wight
vppon himſelfe, and not vpon God,
becauſe he commeth not vnto God
with true faith, & let him ſeeke mercy,
which if he had ſought, ſurely he
had felt it ſuddainlie, and vnlooked
for. But to returne to DAVID againe,
he being ſtrengthned beſide his expectation,
he turneth himſelfe to his
enemies, and hee gloryeth after this
maner againſt them. Depart from mee
(ſaith he) all ye workers of iniquitie] He
calleth the hypocrites, as appeareth,
the workers of iniquity, which when
they beare a deadly hatred within,
notwithſtanding, in outward ſhewe
they pretende friendſhip, whome
DAVID, Pſal 41. 6. and thereafter at
length deſcribed. So by workes of
iniquitie, hee vnderſtandeth hypocrites:
As if after this faſhion he had

ſpoken vnto them: yee come not to
viſite me with any wel-willing mind,
but with a deadly hating heart, that
ye may take pleaſure in mine afflictiones,
and may tryumph over me, being
caſt downe to the ground▪ but ye
ar deluded in your hope: Therefore
departe from mee.
                        The gro
                              ••
                            of holie glorying Then hee layeth
downe the ground of this glorying
confidence of grace ſought and obtayned,
& he vttereth out this thriſe.
Iehova (ſayeth hee) hath heard the
voice of my weeping] Then: Iehova hath
heard my deprecation] The third, Iehova
hath receiued my prayer.] This-three
fold repetition proceedeth ou
                           •
                        
of queſtion, from that firme apprehenſion
of grace, which he had ſpoken
of: For in the heart aryſeth gladneſſe
of the feeling of the grace. And
the heart being nowe ſprinkled over
with joy, no man is able to reſtrayne
himſelfe, but he will burſt forth into
a commendation of the grace, which
he is not able alſo to commend overmuch.

For wee would not ſpeake ſo
rawlie & ſo coldly of grace, as we vſe,
if that grace of God which is in Ieſus
Chriſt, were firmely apprehended of
vs. Alſo, this is worthie to be marked
in this place: DAVID a little before,
while he wraſtled with the wrath of
God, he wraſtled alſo with the tentationes
of his enemies, and hee was
not a little trobled therwith: but now
being lifted vp through the confidēce
of grace, he is ſo far away from that
that hee is troubled with the injurie
of his enemies, as that he alſo ſecurelie
gloryeth againſt them. A man being
once placed out with the grace
of God in Chriſt, and being troubled
by the wrath of God, hee is therewith
laid open to a thouſand tentations,
he is croſſed with all things, yea,
the moſt meane, he invieth, hee freteth,
he feareth, yea, he is not far awaie
at ſome time from that eſtate, to bee
driuen into deſperation: But returning
againe into favour with God,

and getting confidence, hee obtayneth
therewith alſo, that ſecurity of
minde, whereby he gloryeth againſt
all thinges. Wherefore, there is nothing
more bleſſed then that peace
and reconciliation with God, which
is by faith in Chriſt Ieſus, who only
is the maker of all our happineſſe and
peace, whoſe ſacrifice being once
looked vppon, the wrath of God againſt
vs is pacified, and therewith
alſo the conſciences of the beleevers
are quieted. Let them he aſhamed, and
greatly troubled.] Hitherto the groūde
of the glorying hes ben layde down,
to wit, the confidence of Gods mercy
in Chriſte; now hee returneth to
that begun glorying. Let mine enemies
be aſhamed (ſaith he) & let them be gretly
troubled] The meaning is,The accompliſhing of holy glorying as if hee
ſhould ſay: thoſe men looked for my
deſtruction, now they ar fruſtrate of
their hope, therefore let thē be aſhamed:
for ſhame & cōfuſiō of face, ariſeth
to ſpeak ſo of a diſapointed hope

                        Hope maketh not aſhamed. Rom. 5. 5.
Then being aſhamed, ſayeth hee, let
them be greatly troubled: as if hee
ſhould ſay; being fruſtrate of their
hope, and aſhamed, let them feele ſo
much trouble in minde, of their diſappoynted
expectation, as they haue
received rejoycing of my deſtruction,
which they hoped for. For ſorrow
and vexation of minde, followeth
vppon ſhame, as ſhame followed
vpon diſappointed hope. Then he adjoyneth:The ſuddaine rejoycing of the godly, & ſorrow of the wicked.
                        Let them returne aſhamed ſuddenlie]
As if I ſhould ſay, they came
for this ende vnto me, that with an enemies
minde, they might narrowly
marke mine afflictions, and that they
might tryumph over me: But nowe
let them returne, let them returne, I
ſay aſhamed, becauſe of their fruſtra
                           •
                        
hope, yea, and that ſuddenly: and as I
indeede in a moment, beſide expectation
haue felt grace & deliverance,
ſo let them likewiſe in a moment be aſhamed.
Marke therefore, as the godlie

are ſuddenly, and beſide expectation,
lifted vp through the feeling of
Gods grace & deliverance: ſo ſhame
taketh hold ſuddenly vpon the vngodly,
and after ſhame ſorrow, and
of that chiefely conſiſteth ſhame and
dolour, in that they ſee the godly beſide
their expectation, lifted vp and
delivered: For this will be the chiefe
part of the confuſion and ſorrowe of
the reprobat, in that day of the comming
of the Lord, that theſe, whom
they ſome-time ſought to deſtroy vpon
the earth, and had perſwaded
themſelues, that they were vtterlie
deſtroyed out of the worlde, ſo that
there-after, there ſhould bee no remembrance
of them, at any time vpon
the earth; That then, I ſay, they
ſhall finde them in a momente, and
ſuddenly glorified, beſide their hope
and expectation, they themſelues, &
the whole worlde looking on. One
objection reſteth to be lowſed: what▪
is not this the part of fooliſh and ambitious

men, ſo to glorie againſt their
enemies? I anſwere; The godly glorie,
and the wicked do glorie, but after
a diverſe manner. The wicked
glory, truſting to their own ſtrength,
to their counſelles, to their riches;
finallie, to the arme of men: But the
godly reioyce, leaning onely to the
preſence and grace of GOD. And
this is none other thing then to glorifie
God, which, what other thing is
it, then to vtter out that inward confidence
in God, yea, and that in the
face of the enemies & mockers themſelues,
who moſte earneſtly travell to
this ende, that they may ſeparate vs
from that loue in Chriſte▪ that they
may together at one time, extinguiſh
all that feeling of his grace, Of which
PAVLE ſpeaketh, Rom. 8. 38. Who
ſhal ſeparate vs from the loue of God
in Chriſt? It is true indeede, that the
vngodly alſo vſes to vaunte of the
favour & grace of God. So the Papiſts
this day vaunt of Chriſt, when in the

mean time they perſecute chriſt in his
mēbers: even as Paul ſpak, of the Iews
Rom. 2. 17. that they gloryed in the
law of God, yea, even when they 
                           •
                        āſgreſſed
the Law. So we read that blaſphemous
Rabſchake, vaunted alſo againſt
Hieruſalem, that he came none
otherwaies to deſtroy it, then leaning
to the commandement of God himſelfe.
2. King. 18. 25. The vngodlie
dreame that the grace and favour of
God belongeth vnto them, when notwithſtāding,
in the meane time, the
wrath of God continually perſueth
thē: but at length it ſhal appear, that
this glorying of theſe men was vaine,
howſoever for a time al things appear
to proſper according to their hart
                           •
                        
deſire. At length alſo it ſhal appeare,
that the glorying of the children of
God was not in vayne, how-ſo ever
it appeare vnto the wicked in this
worlde to bee vayne. For our hope,
(as PAVLE ſayeth,) ſhall never make
vs aſhamed, but at length it ſhall

be crowned with glorie and immortalitie,
in that glorious comming of
our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, To whome
with the Father and the holy Spirit,
be all honour and glorie, Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT Of the XVI. PSALME.
                  A Pſalme it is of a mixt kinde, partly a Prayer,
partly a Thankſ giving. And it appeareth by the inſcription
that it is Davids. Now it is made firſt of a
Petition, vnto the fourth verſe. Then of a certaine
glorying in God, vnto the ſeventh verſe. Thirdly, of a
bleſſing of GOD, from thence to the ende of the
Pſalme.
               
               
                  THE XVI. PSALME.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 An excellent ſong of DAVID,
Preſerue me, ô ſtrong God, becauſe I haue
my refuge vnto thee.
                           2 O my ſoule, thou ſayeſt vnto Iehoua,
Thou art my Lorde, good commeth not
from me vnto thee.
                           3 To the holy ones which are vpon the
earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all
my delight.
                        
                     
                     
                        The firſt part of the Pſalme a petition of preſeruing
                     
                        PReſerue me] The firſt parte of the
Pſalme is a petition: alſo hee ſeeketh
his own preſervation, whereby
indeede he would ſignifie, that hee
was come into ſome daunger, & that
he was layd open to ſome perill, either
through Idolatrie, or through
ſome other cauſe. For, for this cauſe
he hes his recourſe vnto God, being
a ſuppliant,From his confidēce leaning vnto Chriſt. and hee craved that hee
would ſaue him. Preſerue me] The
reaſon of the petition is from his confidence
in God, whereby ſurelie hee
embraced God, in this preſent danger
in his heart, in Chriſt Ieſus. DAVID
therefore being about to preſent
himſelfe before that judgement ſeate
of God, and being about to ſeek his
ſalvation and preſerving, he dare not
be ſo bold as to come forth in Gods
ſight, vnleſſe firſt hee be cledde over
with Chriſt, and with his righteouſneſſe:
For this is to beleeue in God,
or that he had his recourſe vnto God.
For there was none other way at any

time to compeare before God, no
not to the beſt Kings themſelues, except
by faith in Ieſus Chriſt, without
the which, no entrie was every yet
made open vnto GOD. By whome,
ſayeth the Apoſtle, We haue entrance
by faith in God. Rom. 5. 2. O my ſoule
thou ſayeſt] By a converted ſpeech, he
turneth him to his owne ſoule, and
bringeth her in teſtifying with him
of that faith, which hee himſelfe before
profeſſed, and ſeeking therewith
his owne preſervation. Thou ſayeſt to
Iehova] ſaith he; As if he ſhould ſay,
Thou, O my ſoule and conſcience,
teſtifies with me, that I truly and ſincerely
profeſſe that, in that I ſay, I beleeue
in God: For if the ſoule beare
not witneſſe with vs within, and ſay
as it were, Thou art my GOD, our
mouth in vayne profeſſeth outwardly
faith in God; it ſayeth in vayne
I haue my recourſe vnto God: Except
wee beleeue with the heart to
righteouſneſſe, the confeſſion of the

mouth profiteth nothing to ſalvation:
Therefore DAVID bringeth in
his ſoule beleeving, & teſtifying with
him before God, that thing which
hee before himſelfe had confeſſed in
mouth: but what ſaith DAVIDS ſoule?
Thou art my God] He acknowledgeth
the Lord Iehova: But he ſeeth him
not as it were then a far off, but drawing
neere vnto him, hee ſweetly embraceth
him: which thing is proper
vnto faith, and to that particular applying,
which we ſay to bee in faith.
He embraceth him, I ſay, when hee
ſayeth. Thou art my Lord] And from
thence followes that, that DAVID
himſelfe nowe before had ſought.
Preſerue me] For the ſoule of DAVID
ſought the ſame thing, which hee
himſelfe had ſought before it. But
this petition of DAVIDS ſoule, is not
expreſſed in this place. Good commeth]
Ane preventing of an objection
of that vnderſtoode and ſuppreſſed
petition of DAVIDS ſoule; for

God might haue objected;The preuenting of an obiectiō & the grā
                           ting of the godly ſoul humblie looking vpon the maieſtie of God. To what
ende ſhould I preſerue thee? What
good thing can come vnto mee
from thee? DAVIDS ſoule anſwereth
firſt by a graunting, Good commeth not
from me vnto thee] As if hee ſhould
ſay: I grant that, that my life can no
wayes be profitable vnto thee. For it
is neceſſary, that our faith, to the end
it may quiete the ſelfe, in the alone
mercy of God through Chriſt, very
humbly and ſoberlie eſteeme of the
ſelfe: and it behooveth every faithful
man ſo to leane to the alone grace
of God, & merit of Chriſt, that in the
meane time, he be vtterly eſtranged
from all opinion of his deſerving, &
that he acknowledge, after that hee
hes done all things that he is able to
do, to the glory of God, that he is no
other thing, but an vnprofitable ſervant.
But the truth of this ſentence is
to be weighed of vs, leaſt there be any
who would think that DAVID hes
not ſpoken earneſtly, and from his

heart,A more d
                              •
                           
                           ligent conſideration of Davids cōfesſion. but for the faſhion and diſſembledly.
God therefore (according to
the perfection and exceeding greate
felicitie which he is in himſelf) is not
helped nether on th'one ſide or other
by our wel-doing: neither yet is hee
hurt any way by our evil doing: man
himſelf, is either helped by his owne
well-doing, or his hurte, by his evill
doing. For in that conſiſteth our felicitie,
that wee glorifie God. Againe,
in that we ar miſerable, whē we giue
not vnto God his owne glorie, yea,
or then when wee diſhonour him, ſo
far as lyeth in vs: which thing, this
rejoycing which wee feele through
the conſcience of obedience; and againe
that griefe, which wee feele
through the conſcience of diſobedience
and rebellion,Rom 7. 
                              〈◊〉
                            The correction of the granting. is able ynough to
teſtifie. O miſerable man that I am (ſaith
PAVLE) Who ſhall deliver mee from the
bodie of this death! To the holy ones.]
The other parte of the aunſwere by
way of correction: as if he ſhould ſay;

albeit no good thing can come vnto
me from thee: Nevertheles, O God,
preſerue me with the Saints that are
vpon the Earth, that is, in favour of
the Church fighting in the worlde,
that I may at leaſt be profitable vnto
her: Therefore, albeit nothing can
come vnto God by our doing well,
notwithſtanding, we muſt not think
that our good workes are vnprofitable:
For a man may be profitable to a
man, & the moſt contemptible may
ſerue for ſome vſe to any the moſte
honorable; as in mans bodie the foot
may bee profitable vnto the head.
More-over, among men, Kings may
be moſt profitable to others, of which
ſort DAVID was, in reſpect they are
armed by God with power and authoritie:
they are bound alſo by their
office to bee profitable vnto others;
but eſpecially, vnto the Church of
God: of which thing we reade, that
Nebuchadne
                              •
                           zar,
                        Dan. 2. 30. (otherwiſe an Heathen
King) was admoniſhed by Daniell:
                        
that chriſtian Princes might vnderſtande,
that this is ſo much the
more to be required of them. To the
excellent] Thoſe whom he called holie
ones before, now he calleth excellent:
Conſider therefore how greatly
DAVID eſteemed of this Church
of God, that is now ſo much lightlied
and contemned, not onely by the
Princes, but by the baſeſt ſort of men.
Not-with-ſtanding the holye ones,
whatſoever the world think of them,
remayne excellent glorious.Dan. 7. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        Daniel,
in the ſame ſignification, calleth it
the Church of the high Saincts, that
is, of thoſe that are Predeſtinate and
ordained, to all moſte excellent high
things, & to life everlaſting. In whom]
This is the fountaine of that good
thinge, whereby hee is to indue the
Saints, to wit, the delighting in them,
as loue and favour. For wee profite in
vayne, either the Church, or anie
member thereof, except we loue.1 Cor. 
                              〈…〉
                           
                         
                        If I
ſhuld ſpend al my goodes (ſay
                           •
                         PAVL)

                        in feeding of the poore, and had not loue, I
were nothing. Wee may be indeede
ſteidable vnto others, but without
loue we cannot bee ſteidable to our
ſelues, neither doe we any thing that
is acceptable vnto God, in reſpect it
commeth not from a ſincere & ſanctified
heart.Why the godly deſire to abide in this life. Moreover, mark here alſo
the cauſe wherefore godly men deſire
to abide for a while vppon this
earth: and verely it is the pleaſure
that they tak in the fellowſhip of the
holy ones; for whoſe cauſe they
would liue ſome-what longer, that
they might promooue them to the
knowledge of their ſalvation, and
might preſerue ſome of them, before
they depart out of this worlde. For
they ſhall haue a farre more greater
delight in their God, in that other
life. It is good for me (ſaieth Paule) if I
depart hence,
                        Phil. 1. 23. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                        but it is not ſo for you. If
therefore chiefelie the loue of this
world, or of thoſe things which wee
ſee therein, tyeth vs al-to-gether, ſo

much to this worlde, ſurely we are
more then miſerable, yea, in the
greateſt abundance of all thinges of
this world.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           4 They multiplie their ſorrowes, which
giue in dowrie to ane ſtranger: I will not
offer their drinke offerings of bloud, neither
yet will I take vp their names in my
lippes.
                           5 Iehova is the portion of my ſteeding
and of my propertie, thou mayntayneſt my
l
                                 •
                              tte.
                           6 The lines are fallen out to me in pleaſant
places, yea my poſſeſsion is faire for
mee.
                        
                     
                     The other part of the Pſalme an holy glorying.
                     
                        THey multiply their ſorrows] The other
parte of the Pſalme: The
glorying; having received ſome comfort
of the preceeding rejoycing. For
never man yet at any time came in
vayne to God in Chriſt. And having
as it were compared that his happie
eſtaite, with the eſtaite of Idolaters,
hee pronounceth and exclaymeth,
that in reſpect of him, they are as it

were but miſerable caitifes. They multiplie
their ſorrowes (ſayeth hee) who
giue in dowrie to a ſtranger] That is,
who giue in dowrie any thing to a
ſtrange God and Idole, that is, who
joyne them ſelues in mariage with it,
having complcitlie payed a greate
dowrie.The fruits of idolaters. For it can ſcarcelie bee vttered,
how many things Idolaters raſhly
laviſh out vpon their Idols: And
what commoditie get they thereby?
Surely, no ſolide and true joye, ſuch
as David felt of that his mariage with
the true God, but ſorrow onely, and
all kinde of miſerie. For ſuperſtition
is ever conjoyned with a trembling
of the ſoule. For what thing is able to
eſtabliſh the ſoule of man, but God
onely? The Papiſtes promiſe peace
and ſecuritie to others, which notwithſtanding
they themſelues enjoy
it not. Obſerue then in this place,
how ſoone ſoever any man hath felt
that joy, which proceedeth from the
true God, then all thoſe appeare miſerable

vnto him, who having le
                           •
                        t the
true God, haue their refuge to idols;
For then he perceiveth wel ynough,
what the miſerie of Idolaters is, after
that the eie is enlightned with that
light, which proceedeth from the
face of God. And ſurely that is hee,
who may onely judge aright of the
miſery of man. The Idolaters themſelues
are blinde in their owne miſerie.
There are alſo other men, who otherwiſe
profes God in their mouth,
nevertheleſſe, they feele not in their
heart that ſolide joye, which proceedeth
from Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe judgment
many times concerning Idolaters,
is corrupted. Of theſe I ſpeake,
whom you may ſee everie where, to
admit into their companie, without
any kinde of difference, whatſoever
ſort of men, whether they bee true
Profeſſoures, or the enemies of the
Croce of Chriſte, ſuch as are the Papiſtes
this day: Then to ſpeak it once
in a word; ther is no man a right judg

of the miſerie of Idolaters, but hee
who hath himſelfe felt in times bygane,
that happineſſe which is in the
true and onely God.The drink offerings of idolaters. 
                        I will not offer
them drinke offrings] As he had before
pronounced Idolaters to be miſerable,
through the ſenſe of that joye
which he had felt of the true God, ſo
now he profeſſeth, that he will haue
no ſocietie, either with the Idolaters
themſelues, or with their Idols: and
he ſheweth that from the heart he abhorreth
that ſort of falſe worſhip and
religion. I will not] That is, I will not
ſacrifice with them,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . after the cuſtome
of the profane Gentiles, which ſacrificed,
even with the bloud of man
not only againſt the law of God, yea,
but againſt humanity it ſelfe. I wil not
tak vp their names] This is ſomewhat
more, then that which he ſaide even
now: as if he ſhould ſay, I will not indeed
ſo much as name their Idols, &
ſtrange gods. Concerning this there
is a for bidding commandement extant.

Remember not vpon the name
of ſtrange gods, neither let it be heard
in thy mouth,Exod. 
                              〈…〉
                           . whether it bee in ane
oath, or in familiar commoning. Of
this you haue an example, in this
place, & a promiſe in the Prophet Oſe.
2. 17. Therfore there is an vtter deteſtation
that DAVID profeſſeth, yea, againſt
their very nams. But if any man
will moſt intirely conſidder, that miſerable
eſtate of idolaters, & then will
be touched therewith, with ſome
ſenſe of the true God in Ieſus Chriſt,
ſurely that man will al-to-gether, abhorre
with DAVID Idolaters, and Idolatrie,
yea, and their very names
will be abhominable in his 
                           •
                        ares:2. Co. 
                              〈…〉
                           
                         
                        For
what fellowſhip is there betuixt light &
darkneſſe? Nor yet ſurely, would ther
be ſo many founde amongſt vs, who
woulde receiue ſo willingly theſe
Peſtes & meſſengers, ſent out by the
Anti-chriſt, which are ſente over to
this country, to overthrow that puritie
of the Goſpell, which we profes.

                        Iehova is the portion] After that he hes
declared the miſerie of Idolaters,The happines of the godly oppoſed to the miſerie of idolaters. and
had therewith profeſſed, how far diſagreeing
hee was from them: Nowe
hee ſheweth his owne happineſſe,
which he obſcurely ſetteth againſte
the miſerie of Idolaters. There is mater
ynough furniſhed vnto vs, of glorying
of our happineſſe, who worſhippe
the true GOD, according
to his Lawe, when-ſo-ever we looke
vppon thoſe miſerable men, who
followe a ſtrange worſhippe: and
ſurely this would haue the owne
vſe this day, if any man would carefully,
look vpon that miſerie; but verie
few there ar which do this thing:
whereby it commeth to paſſe, that
they are neither mooved with their
owne miſerie, nor with their owne
happineſſe.God the heritage of the godly. But let vs conſider more
diligently the wordes. Iehova (ſayeth
he) is the portion of my ſteeding] Firſt,
he gloryeth of his heritage: and hee
calleth Iehova himſelfe his heritage.

For it is neceſſarie, that wee be firſte
participant of God himſelfe, according
to the promiſe in the covenant,
I will bee thy GOD: Then that all his
benefits in Chriſt Ieſus may be communicated
vnto vs, as ar remiſſion of
ſinnes, righteouſneſſe and life everlaſting.
Then ſecondly he gloryeth in
the aſſurance of that his heritage, yea
& that by a turned ſpeech vnto God.
By which thing indeed wee are warned,
that when we glorie, we ſhould
turne our eies oft to GOD, that the
confidence which proceedeth from
the ſight and preſence of God alone,
might be the more. Thirdly, hee gloryeth
in the pleaſantneſſe of his heritage.
The lines (ſayth hee) are fallen
out to me in pleaſant places] That is, the
heritage, which is divided and aſſigned
vnto mee, as it were by lines, hee
fallen vnto mee in pleaſant places.
Cōcerning lines, look Moſes. Fourthlie
and laſt,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         he gloryeth, in the fairnes
agreeable with his heretage, & (that

I ſhould ſo ſpeake) proportionable
thereto. My poſſeſſion (ſayth he) is faire
for me] That is, the fairneſſe thereof,
aunſwereth to mee in proportion:
Then to ſpeak of this matter ſūmarily:
DAVID glorieth in his inheritāce,
and in the thing conjoyned with
his inheritance.The vſe of the doctrine and of the ſpirituall joy. All theſe wordes of
DAVID, are greate and weightie, and
they manifeſt a very great feeling of
God in Chriſt, and of that everlaſting
life, which being covered vnder
theſe words, was in DAVIDS ſoule,
yea, ſurely they manifeſte a greater
ſenſe, then ar conteined in the words
themſelues. For that joye of faith, as
Peter thinketh,
                           
                              •
                            Pet. 1. 18 is vnutterable & glorious:
Then their greater was the feeling,
then the wordes, but the matter
it ſelfe, and the ſubſtance of the rejoycing,
is greater then all ſenſe,
whereof we al ar not capable. Wherfore,
thoſe ſo weightie words of David
they manifeſtly declare that joye
which wee ſhall feele in the life to

come, and which indeede ſhall bee
wounderfull. Therefore wee muſt
travell diligently, that when we read
thoſe things, which are vttered forth
here by DAVID in this Pſalme, that
we therewith feele ſome like ſenſe of
joye in our ſelues, and let vs reaſon
with our ſelues, out of thoſe ſame
words, that that joy ſhalbe incomprehenſible,
which we one day ſhall
fullie attayne vnto, when our Lorde
Ieſus. Chriſt ſhall be made manifeſt
vnto vs in that his ſecond comming,
and when we ſhall ſee him, how glorious
he is in himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           7 I will bleſſe Iehova, who counſelleth
me, yea, my reines inſtructing me in the

                                 •
                              ightes.
                           8 I ſet Iehova continually before mee,
becauſe he is at my right hand, I ſhall not
be mooved out of my place.
                           
                           9 Wherefore my minde reioyceth,
and my glorie is very glad, yea, my fleſh
                                 •
                              
ſhall dwell ſecurely.
                           
                              
10 Becauſe thou wilt not leaue my ſoule
in the graue, neither yet wilt thou ſuffer
him to whom thou art gracious, to ſee corruption.
                           11 Thou wilt cauſe me to finde in experience
the path of life, the ſacietie of
ioyes before thy face, the pleaſantneſſe at
thy right hand for evermore.
                        
                     
                     The laſt part of the pſalme.
                     I Will bleſſe Iehova] The third parte
of the Pſalme, The bleſſing. Having
now felt that his happineſſe in Iehova,
DAVID burſteth foorth into a
bleſſing, that exceeding great joy, to
wit, which proceeded from God, redounding
to God againe, the author
thereof: For the prayſe and bleſſing
of Gods name, preſently followeth
that felt joy, proceeding from God:
and of what meaſure the joy is, in the
ſame meaſure is the bleſſing. If there
be no joy, there is no bleſſing, if there
be ſome joye, whether it be more or
leſſe, there is alſo ſome bleſſing, whether
it be more or leſſe, to wit, according
to the meaſure and quantitie of

the joye. But in the heavens, where
there ſhall be a perfite rejoycing, the
bleſſing ſhall be perfite and continuall,
both day & night, & without intermiſſion,Apoc. 4
                              •
                           
                        
we ſhal ſay, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God almightie. Who counſelleth]
Here followe the argumentes of the
bleſſing, from the benefites of God
toward him. For after that once the
rejoycing of the heart, hath lowſed
the tongue to prayſe God, then there
ſhall lacke no matter of prayſe. The
benefites of God are of two ſortes,
partly, they belong to this preſente
life, as the counſell of God, in ſeeking
the weill of his owne, and a certaine
vnmoueable ſtedfaſtnes, in this verſe,
and in the verſe following: partely,
they belong to the life to come, as
the reſurrection, as everlaſling life,
from the ninthverſe to the end of the
Pſalme. Then this is the firſt argument
of bleſſing, in that he hath God
to be his counſellor. Who councelleth
me (ſaith he) that is, which thing

hee hath not once ſpoken in the 2
                           •
                        .
Pſalme nor elſewhere. Who teacheth
me his waies.] Now hee taught DAVID
his waies, whileſt he enlightned
his minde to this purpoſe; that hee
might ſee thoſe things, which were
acceptable and pleaſant vnto God.
Hee taught him alſo his waies, when
he directed his hearte to follow out
thoſe things, which were acceptable
to God. For ſuch is the blindneſſe of
our mind, as concerning good things
and that are pleaſant in Gods ſight;
alſo, ſuch is the frowardneſſe of our
heart, that vnleſſe the Lord put to his
owne hand to enlighten, reforme, &
make vs new over againe, we cannot
ſo much truely as thinke one good
thing. Wherefore, whoſoever wil do
any thing aright, and with commendation,
of neceſſitie hee muſt haue
God to be his counſellour: Moreover,
Kings ar warned to do this chiefly,
by the example of King DAVID
who vſed not to come out into the

coūcel, with the nobilitie of the kingdome
except hee had firſt conſulted
with his GOD. In the nights] Hee
ſheweth the time inſpeciall, when
God gaue him his counſell: as if hee
ſhould ſay, Not onely in the day, but
alſo in the night hee gaue me his adviſe:
That is, there is no time in which
he doth not coūſel me. Of the which,
it appeareth that David, being a man
otherwiſe diſtracted in the nights,
with diverſe cares & tentations (as he
was indeed that man who was a type
of Chriſt; & his afflictiōs & tentations
wer figurs in ſpecial of the afflictions
& tentations of Chriſt that were to
come) it appeareth, I ſay, that hee being
ſo diſtracted, was accuſtomed in
the night by prayer, to haue his recourſe
vnto God, and to vſe him as it
were in his hard affayres, to bee his
counſeller, whereby alſo it came to
paſſe, that as he teſtifyeth of himſelfe
in an other place, when being overwhelmed
altogether in anxietie and

trouble oft, he went to bedde in the
evening tyde, yet in the morning he
aroſe out of bed joyfull, & as it were
altogether ſprinkled over with gladneſſe.
Nowe this was not done for any
other cauſe, then that he had God
to bee his counſellour, even in the
night. It is a grieuous & heavy thing
indeed, if any man be deprived in the
night, of this bodielie eaſe, & bodely
ſenſes, which are wearied nowe the
whol day long, by hearing much, ſeeing
much, & handling much, &c. But
that is farre more grievous, if any bee
not onely deprived of that reſt of the
bodie, but alſo in the meane time be
diſtracted with diverſe cares and
thoughtes of the minde. This is for
the moſt parte the cauſe of thoſe faſheries
in the night, that ſo fewe in
their troubles, haue their refuge vnto
God, and laye them not downe as it
were in his boſome; but they had far
rather without God, fight & wraſtle
with their faſheries and cares, where

by it commeth to paſſe, that they are
more and more diſturbed with the
ſelfe ſame cares. Yea my reines inſtructing
me] He ſheweth the manner
whereby God gaue him counſell: &
it is by the holy ſpirite, which hee vnderſtandeth
by the name of reines.
Alſo, the reynes are put metonymicallie
for the thoughts, whoſe ſeate
the ſcripture maketh the reines. Then
David ſheweth the way,Pſal. 7. 1
                              •
                           
                           ▪
                         not any extraordinary
wayc, ſuch as was that,
which was, by viſion, by dreames;
but the ordinary, which was by the
word of God, vpon the which, Dauid
out of all queſtion oft meditated,Pſal. 1. 
                              •
                           
                         &
that through the holy ſpirit, working
by the word. Then the caus wherefore
we waite not for God to be preſente
with vs extraordinarily; and that he
ſpeaketh not with vs face to face, either
by day or night, let vs not think
therefore, that it cannot be poſſible,
that we vſe him as our counſellor, becauſe
this ordinary waye of dealing

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
with God by the worde, and by his
holy Spirite, is the over-farre beſt, as
for examples ſake, if any man being
oppreſſed night and daye, with trouble
of minde, wil meditate vpon that
ſaying of the Apoſtle.Phil. 4. 6. 
                        Be not carefull
in any thing, but in all things let your requeſts
be ſhewed vnto God, in prayer and
ſupplication, with giuing of thanks. If any,
I ſaye, will meditate vppon this,
ſurely that man ſhall no leſſe familiarlie
deale with God, neither ſhall be
receive ſmaller comforte, then if hee
ſpake with him face to face. I ſet
Iehova alway before me] The ſeconde
argumente of Gods bleſſing,The ſecōd argument of Gods blisſing. from
that benefite, whereby hee ſtandeth
immoveable and firme, yea even in
this preſent life. I ſhall not be mooved]
(ſaith he) For Dauid felt himſelfe to
be firme and ſtable in God, yea, in
the middeſt of thoſe commotions &
troubles, whereby then hee was ſhaken.
The ſelf ſame thing feel the other
godlie, when they haue their recours

vnto God. So ſayth Paule. Who ſhal ſeparate
vs from the loue of Chriſt? For he
felt himſelf to be grounded & rooted
in that loue of God,Rom. 8. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         as he ſpeaketh
of himſelfe in another place.Eph. 
                              •
                           . 18. Notwithſtanding,
the ſame Apoſtle in other
places, felt himſelfe grieuouſly
exerciſed, even according to the outward
man, as hee ſpeaketh. But what
ſpeaketh he in the meane time of the
inward man? We are afflicted on every
ſide, yet are we not in diſtreſſe, in poverty,
but not overcome in povertie:
                        
                           
                              •
                            Cor. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 9. 
                        We are perſecuted,
but not forſaken, caſt downe, but
we periſh not. But the wicked when
they are oppreſſed with adverſitie, as
they haue not their refuge vnto God,
ſo they feele no ſtabilitie for themſelues
in God. I grant indeed, at ſome
time, that they appeare to themſelues
to be placed without the danger of al
trouble, yet are they ſhaken altogether,
yea, with the leaſt motion of affliction,
how ſone ſoever theſe helps
faile, to the which they truſted. But

let vs conſidder the groundes of this
ſtabilitie. The firſt is this of which he
ſpeaketh, Iehova is at my right hand]
As if he ſhould ſaye, Iehova ſuſteineth
me, as he ſpeaketh in another Pſalme.
But of this ſtabilitie, there is an higher
foundation. I ſet Iehova (ſayeth
he) alway before me] This is that continuall
confidence in GOD,Pſal. 3. 9. which
maketh him to be preſent with vs at
all times. Wherefore whoſoever will
ſtand firmly in afflictions ſpecially, let
him ſeek for Gods preſēce, & he who
would haue the preſence of God, let
him apprehend him by ſaith: neither
ſuffer him, ſo far as is poſſible, ever to
departe out of his eies.The third argument of Gods blisſing. 
                        Wherefore my
minde reioyceth] Here followeth other
argumentes of bleſſing, taken
from the benefites belonging to that
other life, the reſurrection from the
dead, and everlaſting life. For it is
not ſufficient, if wee looke onely vppon
the bleſſing of this preſent life,
except alſo we direct the ſight of our

eyes to the conſideration of that other
life, and as it were, behold a far
off thoſe benefites moſte excellent,
which ſhall bee beſtowed vpon vs in
that other life. But of the whol graces
of God in Ieſus Chriſt, were tied only
to this life, ſurely all thoſe thinges
would be nothing, which be fall vnto
vs in this life. If our faith & hope we
                           •
                        
bounded in Chriſt, only for this life,
we were miſerable. If onely in this life,
(ſayeth the Apoſtle) wee had hope in
Chriſt,
                        1. Cor. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 19. 
                        of al mortal creatures, we were the
moſt miſerable. But if the form of ſpech
is not to bee pretermitted, which he
vſeth in propounding vnto vs thoſe
two benefites of the life to come. For
he maketh his preface in the ninthe
verſe, that he is glad & feeleth an exceeding
great joye to aryſe from thē.
Hee expounded not vnto vs after
that manner, thoſe former benefites
of this life, neither vſed hee ſuch a
preface being about to ſpeak of them
ſo that thereof it manifeſtlie appeareth

that there was a greater joy of
the ſoule,Two benefites of the bliſſed life to come hope of the glory of God & of our owne reſurrection. yea, of the hope of the benefites,
which ſhall be beſtowed vpon
vs in that other life, then of the preſent
injoying of the benefites, which
be fall vs in this life preſent. We glorie
(ſayeth PAVLE, writing the Epiſtle
to the Romanes, and fifth Chapter,
verſe ſecond,) vnder the hope of the
glory of GOD. Behold, the gloryiing
vnder the hope, of the benefites
of that everlaſting life to come.
The Apoſtle alſo warneth vs, that
there is ane exceeding greate comforte,
yea, of the ſpeeches which are
vttered in conference, concerning
that glorious reſurrection that is to
come.Theſ. 4. 18▪
                         But we muſt a little more diligently
marke this example of DAVID:
He ſaw not but a far off, & after
many yeares▪ the reſurrection of his
bodie to be. For how many yeares ar
now paſſed bye, ſince he ſpake thoſe
thinges, and ſince hee departed this
life? And yet notwithſtanding, hee

hath not riſen agayne, neither yet alſo
ſhall hee ariſe before that ſeconde
comming of Chriſte, and yet nevertheles,
through the very hope of the
reſurrection, which was to come to
paſſe a long time thereafter; hee rejoyceth
exceeding greatly! What is
therefore to bee done of vs, who are
fallen in into the poynt of time, of
the comming of Chriſt, & to whom
being once departed this preſēt life,
there ſhall be ſo ſhorte a buriall of
our bodies? But we muſt conſidder
more diligently the Prophets words,
hee attributeth to the hart, joy, and
exceeding gladnes to glorie, that is,
to the tongue, which is the inſtrument
of holy glorying in the Lorde.
Finally, he attributeth a ſecure habitation
vnto his fleſhe, that is, to his
owne groſſer part, which we call the
bodie. For of neceſſitie, this parte of
man, after his owne manner, taketh
death chiefly moſt grieuouſly, in reſpect
it is to be layd vppon the graue,

when in the meane time the
ſoule, the other part of man, flitteth away
into the heauens. Notwithſtanding
this ſelf ſame fleſh is ſecure,Gen. 49. 6. vnder
the hope of riſing again,Pſal. 30. 31 & rejoyceth
after the owne maner. Behold,
here joy ſpread abroad through-out
the whole man, and all his parts; and
that indeed through the hope of the
reſurrection to come, and of life eternall:
Which thing ſurely, ſeeing it
is ſo great vnder hope and faith, how
great ſhall it be vnder ſight? Of this
rejoycing vnder hope, (which is as
it were the earneſt penny, which alſo
is ſaide to be enutterable) wee may
eaſely geſſe that that joye ſhall be incomprehenſible,
which ſhall be after
this life, through the preſent ſight of
God in Chriſt Ieſus,1. Pet. 1. 7. 
                              •
                           . 
                        Peter reaſoneth
this waye; for after hee had ſpoken
of joy, glory & honor, which ſhalbe
when Chriſt ſhall be made manifeſt,
then he layeth downe the argument
of that ſo great a glory from our faith

and loue towarde Chriſt abſent, and
from that joy vnſpeakable and glorious,
which wee now feele, yea, and it
were no more but through faith in
him abſent. Becauſe thou wilt not leaue]
Peter in the ſecond Chap. of the Acts
25. verſe,The reſurrection of the head of the Church is the cauſe of the reſurrection of the members. 
                        &c. interpreteth this place,
from the 8. verſe forth, to the end of
the Pſalme, to be ſpoken properly of
chriſt: which David in this place ſpak
as a Prophet, yea, & that not only as a
Prophet, but alſo as a figure of Chriſt
Ieſus, who was to come. For David
in him ſelfe alſo felt all thoſe things
in experiēce in ſome meaſure, which
he fore-telleth, were to come vnto
Chriſt. Then thoſe things which are
here ſpoken of, are chiefely to be vnderſtood,
concerning the reſurrection
of Chriſt, and of his glorious life:
which thing, Peter prooveth manifeſtly
in the ſame place, verſe 29. And
thereafter, yea, even out of theſe
words, in which it was ſaid, That the
holy one of the Lorde ſhould not ſee cor-
                        
Corruption, I meane the rotting of
the buried fleſh, and reſolution into
duſt: For out of theſe words, Peter aſſumeth,
that David ſaw corruption,
He dyed (ſayeth he) and was buried, &
his ſepulchre is with vs vnto this daye.
Wherefore, ſayth Peter, thoſe thinges
cannot be properly ſpoken of David
but of Chriſt his ſeede, whom David
ſaw to come in the promi
                           •
                        e made to
himſelfe. Notwithſtanding, David
in the meane while ſaw, in that riſing
againe of his ſeede Chriſt, his owne
reſurrection alſo, which was to bee
accompliſhed through the power of
Chriſts riſing again who was made the
firſt fruites of them that ſleep.
                        
                           
                              •
                           
                           ▪ Cor. 13. 
                              •
                           0. And ſo we
al likewiſe whē we look vpon Chriſt,
we may ſee the fulneſſe of that grace
which is in him, to redound vnto vs
as it were againe. But namely, if now
drawing neere to death, and to the
graue, if then we looke vppon him,
we ſhall feele in him, and his glorious
reſurrection, our own riſing againe:

                        For the Lord ſhall bring thoſe who ſleepe
in Ieſus Chriſt together with him.
                        1. Thſ. 4. 14. Finally,
that is to be marked which he ſayeth:
That God wil not ſuffer him to whom
he is gratious, to ſee corruption.] By this
defyning and deſcription of himſelf,
he ſheweth the ground both of the
glorious reſurrection of Chriſt, and
alſo of all the godly in him: To, wit,
that fatherlie loue of God, whereby
both he loveth Chriſt, and likewiſe
all the godly, howbeit it bee after a
great difference, For he loveth vs, in
that his beloved.
                        Eph. 1. 6. The difference betuixt
the riſing againe of the godly
and of the wicked, which ſhal be, is
no waies obſcure out of this ground
of our reſurrection. The loue of God
in Chriſt ſhall ſweetely rayſe vp the
godly out of the graue. But the warth
and juſtice of God being judge, ſhall
rayſe the wicked, yea, againſt their
wil, drawing them out of their graues
at that laſt day to everlaſting and juſt
puniſhment. Thou wilt cauſe me] This

is the other benefite, which he is to
attayne vnto after this life, to witte,
that everlaſting life, vnto the which,
after the reſurrection, he ſhal ſtraight
go. As if he ſhould ſay; after that I am
awakened vp againe, and rayſed out
of the graue, he wil make me to know
that path-way, which leadeth to eternall
life: And having knowen it, I
ſhall walke therein: By theſe wordes
therefore he vnderſtandeth, that the
waye to life, and to the heavens, is to
be clearely ſhewed vnto him, after
that he ſal be rayſed out of the graue.
Now in the words following, he ſignifieth
the life it ſelfe, which after he
hath walked through in that waye, to
an end, which leadeth to life & to the
heauens, he ſhall attayne vnto. The ſacietie
of ioyes.] He expreſſeth that life
firſt by joy, and by the ſaciety of joy,
then by pleaſantneſſe. He maketh the
beginning and fountaine of the joy,
the countenance of God. Gods right
hand, he maketh the cauſe of the pleaſantneſſe,

and he boundeth both the
joy and the pleaſantneſſe, with eternitie
of time. Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
bring vs to this life: To whom with
the Father, and with the holy Spirit,
be all honour and glorie, Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT Of the XXIII. PSALME.
                  A Pſalme it is of doctrine, in which David glorying,
openeth vp his confidence and ſecuritie. Alſo this
ſecuritie which is to continue for all time to come,
proceedeth from the confidence and preſent fruition
of the mercy of God toward him, and of his Paſtoral
care over him. Two things therfore ar propoſed in
this Pſalme. This firſt, a confidence and apprehenſion
of the preſent favour of God. The other, is a ſecurity
in time to come, aryſing of the confidence, that God
will with the ſame gracious favour in all poſterities
to come, follow him. Both theſe things are ſhortly ſee
downe in the firſt verſe. Then they are opened vp in
the verſes following: Confidence ſpecially vnto the
ſixt verſe, and Security in the ſixt verſe.
               
               
                  THE XXIII. PSALME.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of DAVID. Iehova i
                              •
                           
my ſheepheard, I cannot lacke.
                        2 He maketh mee to reſt in foldes repleniſhed

with graſſe, he leadeth me by the
ſoft running waters.
                        3 He maketh my ſoule to be quiet, hee
leadeth me in the waies of righteouſneſſe,
for his owne names ſake.
                        4 Although I walked through the
valley of the deadly ſhaddow, I would not
feare evill, becauſe thou art with mee, thy
rodde and ſhepheardes crooke, they comfort
mee.
                        5 Thou furniſheſt a table before me,
ouer againſt mine enemies, thou plentifullie
anoyntes mine head with oyntment:
my cup is very full.
                        6 Surely, goodneſſe and mercie ſhall
follow me all the dayes of my life, and I ſhal
be at reſt in the houſe of Iehova, ſo long as
times ſhall indure.
                     
                  
                  
                     IEhova is my ſheapheard] This is the
propoſition of a glorying,The propoſition of the firſt part. firſt of
confidence, and as it were, the Paſtorall
care of God toward him: Then
of ſecuritie in time to come. In the
firſt parte of the propoſition, hee expreſſeth

Gods care, borrowing the
words from a ſheapheard & a flock;
comparing God with a Sheapheard,
and himſelfe vnto a ſheepe. Iehova
(ſaith he) is my Sheepheard] That is,The other part of the prepoſitiō
                        ▪
                      as
the ſhepheard feedeth his ſheepe, ſo
Iehova feedeth mee. I cannot lacke]
The other part of the propoſition, in
which is ſet downe the ſecuritie in
time to come: Alſo, this ſecuritie in
time to come, is gathered & brought
in from the preſent confidence & apprehenſion
of the care of GOD toward
him, as if he ſhould ſay, GOD
feedeth me for the time preſent, and
by all meanes taketh care of mee:
Therefore I ſhal never want his help
in time to come; neither ſhall it ever
come to paſſe, that I in any time cō
                     ming,
ſhall lacke any thing. The like
glor
                        •
                     ing we haue of Paule:
                     Rom. 8. 10. 
                     God is on
our ſide, who is againſt vs? So much hitherto
then wee haue ſpoken of the
propoſition, ſet downe by waye of
glorying, wherby we ſee confidence

in God preſent (for confidence is the
apprehenſion of a thing preſente) to
bring out ſecuritie, wherby any godly
man promiſeth vnto himſelfe, that
God will be preſent with him for all
time to come. There is no other thing
vnleſſe we will except God, which
by the owne preſence thereof, can
make vs ſo ſecure: I ſpeak of that
true & ſpirituall ſecuritie. For I grant
that the trāſitory things of this world
ingender in mens mindes a certaine
ſecuritie, which we call carnall, ſuch
as was that of that rich man, which
after that his barnes were enlarged
and repleniſhed ſaide to his ſoule.Luk. 12. 19.
                     Soule, thou haſt much goodes, layd vp for
many yeares: liue at eaſe, drink and take
thy paſtime. But what heard hee from
God? O foole (ſayeth he) they will take
thy ſoule from thee this ſame very night.
And Paule ſheweth, what followeth
vpon this fleſhlie ſecuritie.1 Theſ. 5. 3. 
                     When they
ſhall ſay peace, and all thinges quiet, then
ſhall come vpon them ſuddaint deſtruction,

as the ſorrow of a woman like to travell,
and they ſhall not eſcape. Therefore
this carnall ſecuritie is deceavable,
but that ſpirituall quietnes ſhall never
deceive vs, neither yet can wee
glorie ſufficientlie of ſpiritual ſecuritie,
neither yet can we at any time to
come, promiſe things great ynough
to our ſelues, of God, and of his mercy
to all poſterities, of that ſpirituall
quietneſſe. He maketh me] He openeth
vp the firſt part of the propoſition,
firſt by allegorical ſpeeches, vnto
the fifth verſe, then in proper ſpeeches,
in the fifth verſe. Then to the
end hee might declare that Iehova is
his ſhepheard, he maketh an induction,
firſt of the partes of a good Paſtour.
Now there are fiue parts of the
office of a ſheepheard reackoned out;Fiue parts of a paſ
                           •••
                        
                        rll duty.
whereof the firſt two pertaine to the
bodie of the ſheepe; the third to the
ſoule, the fourth & fifth to the waies
in which it walketh. Then the firſt
part of the duty of a good ſheepheard

is conteined in theſe words. In foldes
repleniſhed with graſſe] In which two
things are comprehended: The firſt
is,1 Nuriſhmēt the office that he maketh the ſheep
to bee ſatiſfied in foldes abunding
with graſſe: The other is, that the
ſheepe now being filled, hee maketh
them to lie downe and reſt, that is, he
maketh to enjoye an exceeding ſoft
quietneſſe. For in this latter, that former
is to be vnderſtood; for the ſheep
vſeth not to lye downe & reſt while
it be filled firſt. DAVID applyeth this
part of the dutie of the Paſtor to him
ſelfe; as if he ſhould ſay: None otherwaies
then the ſhepheard maketh the
ſheepe, to fill the ſelfe in the foldes abounding
with graſſe, and then to lie
down & reſt, ſo none other waies, ſay
I, doth GOD refreſh my bodie, with
meate and moſt ſweete reſt.2 Refreſhment. 
                     He leadeth
by the ſoft running waters] The ſecond
part of the duty of a ſhepheard,
bêlonging alſo to the bodie of the
ſheepe. Now it is ſeene in that, that

the Paſtor careth to quench the thirſt
of the ſheepe, by giving vnto it the
commoditie of drinke and refreſhment.
Even ſo, ſayeth DAVID, Iehova
quencheth my thirſt, and refreſheth
my bodie. Then this much hitherto
DAVID hath commended the care of
God, as of a ſheephearde toward his
bodie. Learne therefore what the
care of GOD is towarde our body:
None there is of all the godly whom
he ſatisfieth not with meate & drink:
alſo this ſatisfaction is not ſomuch to
be defined by a full bellie, as by a full
heart, or contented with thinges in
modeſtie.1. Tim. 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     Godlineſſe is great gaine, with
a heart content of the own lot. By which
ſaying, the Apoſtle would ſignifie,
that thoſe two things are conjoyned
together; Godlines, and a contented
heart within the ſelfe, or a mind content
of the owne portion. Whoſoever
then is godly, is content of mean
thinges, hee is oft content with one
hungrie bellie, I haue learned (ſayeth

the Apoſtle) In what ſoeuer eſtate I am,
therewith to be content. And I can be abaſed,
and I can abound: every where in
all things,
                     Phil. 4. 
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                     I am inſtructed both to be full,
& to be hungrie, & to abound & to haue
wante I am able to do all things through
the helpe of Chriſt, which ſtrengtheneth
me. Then he in whome Chriſt dwelleth
by faith, hath all ſufficiencie
within himſelfe, and a ſoule which is
content not onely of ſmall thinges,
but of ſuch as are al-to-gether no
things. But he who hath not Chriſt,
he hath not ſufficiencie within himſelfe,
yea, or a minde content with
the greateſt thinges. For the more
that the vngodly man poſſeſſeth, ſo
much the more hee doth ſeeke after.
We muſt not in this place pas by in
ſilence, with what mind DAVID recommendeth
this liberalitie of God,
in nuriſhing of his body. For there is
no godly man able to hold his peace
concerning the bountifulnes of God;
for he eſteemeth more of any meane

and common faire received at Gods
handes, then the vngodly man doth
of the moſt daintie diſhes: For it cō
                     meth
to paſſe (I cannot tel how) that
while the godly man eateth or drinketh,
he doth it al to the glory of his
God & while he hungreth & thirſteth
for thoſe earthly things, in the meane
time that hee is eating and drinking,
he taſteth therewith thoſe heauenly
and ſpirituall things: It commeth to
paſſe, I ſaye, that whileſt his minde is
eating and drinking in that grace,
which vſeth to ſeaſon with a wounderfull
ſweetneſſe, yea, the very bodelie
and common meate, ſo that any
common meat ſavoreth better in the
mouth of the godly man, then the
moſt daintie meate,The third part of a paſtor
                           ••
                         duty. otherwaies ſavoreth
in the mouth of the wicked man.
He maketh my ſoule] This is the thirde
parte of the office of a ſhephearde,
which concerneth the life or ſoule
of the ſheepe. For that beaſt is of nature
fearefull, and vſeth to bee troubled

and diſturbed in ſpirit, with the
moſt light thing that can bee. Therefore
it is the dutie of a good Paſtour,
not onely to haue a conſideration of
the bodie, but alſo of the ſoule or life
of his ſheepe, that hee make it to be
at reſt and quietneſſe: Even ſo ſayeth
DAVID, God doth, that I may be of a
quiet and ſetled minde. For to what
purpoſe ſhal man haue his body to be
wel taken care of, whileſt in the mean
time, the ſoule is neglected, which is
the preciouſer part of man, & which
is not in a good caſe?What the true life & peace of the ſoule 
                           〈◊〉
                        . ſurely, it cannot
be well then with the body. For
what delight can the body take of
meate, drinke, & the reſt of that ſorte,
when the ſoule is in ſome exceeding
grieuous feare, eſpecially when it is
tormented with thoſe horroures of
hell. Therefore DAVID ſayeth, that
GOD taketh thought of his ſoule,
and that it is quieted of him. Everie
godly man alſo feeleth the ſame care
of God, and feeleth that quietneſſe

and peace of the minde, which ſurpaſſeth
all vnderſtanding. I ſpeak of
the peace of God, not of the peace of
the world: For this peace and fleſhly
ſecuritie of the world, which creepeth
vppon men, is not to be accounted
among the benefites of God, but
directlie contrarie, it is to bee reckoned
among Gods curſes. I ſpeak then
of that peace of God, which aryſeth
from a good conſcience, that is, a
conſcience perſwaded of the forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes. For looke how ſoone
God doth juſtifie vs, our ſoules then
begin to be at reſt, and to be ſtrengthned
with the peace of GOD, as by a
certaine fortreſſe. For ſo ſpeaketh the
Apoſtle of this peace,Phil. 4
                           •
                        . 
                     And the peace
of God (ſaith he) which ſurepaſſeth al vnderſtanding,
ſhall be a preſervation vnto
your hearts. But conſider, how much
DAVID maketh of this peace, & how
he commendeth the ſame. For it is
not poſſible, that any godly man can
conteine this peace of minde, within

his ſoule, but he will preaſe the ſame
to the glory of God in Chriſt: Alſo
the wicked man, commendeth his
owne peace,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 5. 3. 
                     Peace (ſayeth he) and all
things at quiet. But in the meane time
neuer one word ſpeaketh he of God,
But every godly man while hee is
glorying, hee aſcribeth that whole
peace and tranquillitie vnto GOD,
which thing, when the wicked man
heareth, he conceiveth it not to be of
that peace, which rejoyceth in the
Lord. For that it is a peace, which over-commeth
the whole vnderſtanding
of the natural and carnal mind.
He leadeth me in the waies] The fourth
part of the duty of a good ſhepheard
which belongeth vnto the wayes in
which the ſheepe walketh.The fourth paſtorall duty. For the
ſheepe is a beaſt, by nature wandring
(ſuch is the ſimplicitie of it) ſubjecte
to many by-waies, therefore it is the
duty of a good Paſtour, to take heed
leaſt it wander away from the place
and ſtraight way: even ſo, ſayeth DAVID

Iehova leadeth me by the path
                        •
                     
of righteouſneſſe, that is, by righte
waies.The fifth qaſtorall duty. 
                     Although I walked] This is the
fifth part of the duty of a good ſheipheard.
But if it fall out, that the ſheep
wander frō the waye, & lay the ſelfe
open to danger, let him haue a rod in
readineſſe, whereby he may cal back,
and a ſheepe-crooke, whereby hee
may draw it backe againe. So DAVID
confeſſeth, that hee was called and
drawen backe, with the rod & ſheep-crook
of Gods holy Spirit, by his God
as by a faithfull Paſtor, after the ſame
maner, doth God take heed to every
way whatſoever, of every godly man
that loveth him, not only by a generall
providence, whereby all men
without difference, liue by him, are
and mooue: But much more, by that
particular providence of his, wherby
he ruleth them by his holy Spirite,
whereby, as by a hand they are guided
in all their waies, and if it fall out
ſo, that they goeaſtray from the way,

they are brought again into the way
by that ſelfe ſame Spirite. You ſee
how much DAVID commendeth the
providēce & preſēce of God: the ſame
thing doe all the godly, while they
feele they do nothing without God,
and while they feele alſo after what
manner they attaine vnto the Butt,
that they themſelues ar taken hold
on by God, and that they are led on
vnto that ſelfe ſame Butt: while they
feele alſo GOD to be preſent with
them in all their waies moſte dangerous
whatſoever, whereby they muſt
of neceſſitie paſſe vnto the heauens.
For there is no ſolide ioy in doing of
any thing, vnleſſe wee feele the holy
Spirite of God to be the directer and
the moover. Moreover, it is to bee
marked in this place, that no daungers,
no afflictiones, no, not death it
ſelfe can ſeparate vs from God.The ſure confidēce of the godly. For
he ſaieth: Although I walk through the
valley of the deadly ſhaddow, I would not
feare, becauſe thou art with me] Commonlie

it is thought, that God is abſent
from that man, who is brought
to ſome extreame danger, who hath
his abiding in the middeſt of death.
For they perceiue not howe thoſe
thinges can ſtande with the providence
of God: even as though God
were not able to hold vs vp, vnleſſe
he vpheld this body and this preſent
life. Alſo, this is the moſt ſure ſigne
of Gods preſence in perils, that the
godly are voyde of all feare, and that
they are of a bold & couragious ſpirit.
For, for this he ſayeth. I would not
feare, becauſe thou art with mee] Thou
ſeeſt then, to ſpeake it in one ſumme,
how particular the care of GOD is
toward his owne: For ſeeing in man,
three things are to be conſidered; the
bodie, the ſoule, the actiones; God
leaveth none of thoſe deſtitute of his
preſence; to the bodie he furniſheth
nuriſhment and governement, hee
maketh the ſoule to be at reſt, he directeth
the actions of the body: Neither

yet onely hath he this particular
care of his owne: But (which thing I
haue ever reckoned amongſte the
chiefeſt of Gods benefites) he perpetually
cauſeth them to feele ſome
ſenſe of his providence and care towarde
them, ſo that they are able to
declare particularlie the ſortes of
Gods providence, and to attribute
fullie to God, the whole glory of the
ſame. Thou furniſheſt] Hee openeth
vp in proper wordes, the former allegorie,
borrowed from the cuſtome
of a good ſheepheard, and hee comprehendeth
that whole care of God
toward him, in thoſe three parts, as it
were. The firſt is: That he furniſheth a
table before him] The ſecond, That
he annoynteth his head with oyle. The
third,2. Sam. 12▪ 20. 
                     That he maketh his cup very full]
The firſt and the third parte,Mat. 6. 17. belong
to the neceſſary nuriſhment:2. Sam. 13. 12. The ſecond,
to the decorement; for the auncientes
for the moſt parte, were annoynted
with oyles and oyntments

for braverie and ſeemelineſſe cauſe,
and not for any neceſſity. Wherefore
thoſe who were in the mourning eſtate,
abſteyned from annoyntings.
That which he ſayeth in the firſt part
is to be marked. Thou furniſheſt a table
before mee, over againſt mine enemies]
Wherby he ſignifieth, that in deſpite
of his enemies, he was fed & nuriſhed
of God, by the which great honour
redounded vnto him, and the greater
was the confuſion of his enemies,
while in the meane time that they
are looking on, he is ſo honoured of
GOD. Then wee are to note in the
third part, that which he ſayeth, That
God maketh his cup to abound] For hee
vnderſtandeth the aboundance and
increaſe of thinges neceſſarie to this
life, as of drink. Conſidder therefore
of the care of God toward his owne,
and howe liberallie he dealeth with
them: he beſtoweth vpon them, not
only thoſe things which belong vnto
neceſſitie, but thoſe things which

are for decorement: againe, he furniſheth
not the thinges niggardlye,
which belong vnto neceſſitie, but aboundantly
and liberally. And all
thoſe thinges ſurely he doth for their
cauſe, their enemies in the meane
time, looking on, and ſore againſte
their willes, whereby the greater glorie
may redound vnto them, and that
the confuſion of their enemies may
be the greater, while they ſee thoſe
to be honoured of God, whom they
earneſtly deſired to be deſtroyed. So
God honoureth euery waye thoſe,
who honour him. Surely goodneſſe and
mercy] An expoſition of the ſeconde
part of the propoſition, that is, of the
ſecuritie for the time to come: For
he gloryeth of the ſecuritie, and hee
promiſeth vnto himſelfe, both all
good things in this life, and alſo the
everlaſting kingdome in the life to
come. Concerning this ſecuritie, we
haue obſerved ſome thing vpon the
firſt verſe before; now this one thing

I adde to this only, And I ſeeke the
cauſe from whence it commeth to
paſſe, that anye man gloryeth ſo ſecurely,
of the feeling of the preſente
favour of God, & promiſeth ſo ſurely
to himſelfe, that he ſhall never be deſtitute
of that favor in time to come?
The cauſe is, not any thing in vs, nor
that loue whereby we loue God: for
there is nothing in vs that can make
vs to be at reſt, ſuch is our inconſtācy
by very naturall diſpoſition: but the
cauſe is that free favour of God, who
loveth him, whom he hath begun to
loue forever, in that his welbeloved
ſonne Ieſus Chriſt. PAVLE gloryeth
ſecurely, not indeede of the ſenſe of
that loue, whereby he himſelf loved
God, but of the Feeling of that loue,
whereby God in Chriſt had embraced
him.Rom. 
                           •
                        . 
                     Who ſhall ſeparate vs (ſayeth
he) from the loue of God? For this is that
ground of all glorying and ſecurity,
the loue of God toward vs, from the
which, by no kinde of force, wee are

able to be pulled away. The glorie
therefore of al ſecuritie, be vnto God
in Chriſt for ever. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT. Of the XXXII, PSALME.
                  It is manifeſt out of the inſcription, that it is a
Pſalme of Doctrine, and that it was written by David.
In it is handled the bleſſed neſſe of man, and it
conteineth the doctrine of happineſſe Firſt therefore
is ſet downe the generall doctrine, vnto the 8 verſe.
Then the applying of the generall doctrine, vnto the
laſt verſe, and finally, a concluſion of exhortation in
the laſt verſe it ſelfe.
               
               
                  The XXXII. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 DAVIDS Pſalme of doctrine.
Bleſſed is he which is eaſed of defection,
whoſe ſinne is covered.
                           2 Bleſſed is the man vnto whom Iehova
imputeth not iniquitie, and in whoſe
Spirite there is no guiſe.
                           3 When I keept ſilence, my bones waxed
old, in my roaring all the day.
                           4 For thine hand was heavy vppon
me, day and night my moſt excellent iuioice,

was turned into ſummer droughts.
Selah.
                           
                           5 I will make my ſinne knowen vnto
thee, neither will I hide mine iniquitie, I
ſaid, I will confeſſe my defectiones vnto
Iehova, and thou tooke away the puniſhment
of my ſinne, Selah.
                           
                           6 For this thing ſhall every one to
whome thou art gracious pray vnto thee,
what time it ſhall fall out (in the overflowing
of many waters, they ſhall not ſomuch
as touch him) Saying,
                           7 Thou art a lurking place to me, preſerue
me from trouble, compaſſeme about
with ſongs of deliverance. Selah.
                           
                        
                     
                     The firſt propoſitiō
                     
                     
                        BLeſſed is he which is eaſed] The propoſition
of the bleſſednes of man
in the generall doctrine, commeth
firſt in hand: Then a confirmation of
the propoſitiō, from experience: laſt
the effecte of that experience of the
mercy of God toward DAVID, in others
of the faithful. Then to the end
we may ſpeake of the propoſition:

DAVID firſt is tormented with the
conſcience of ſinne, and becauſe of
ſin, with the feeling of Gods wrath.
Then his minde is quieted by a confidence
of the forgiuenes of his ſins:
Therefore he appeareth to himſelfe
to be bleſſed, after that torment and
horrours of death, through the conſcience
of the remiſſion of his ſinnes,
his minde being now ſetled in eaſe:
hee ſheweth pl
                           •
                        inely, once and over
again, what great good is in the forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes, in this Pſalme of
doctrine, and there through hee becommeth
an excellent learned Teacher,
of the bleſſedneſſe of man. For
every man is bounde, after that firſte
he hath felt his own miſerie, then his
free deliverance in Chriſt, according
to his calling, to deliver over vnto others,
as it were, the doctrine of the
miſerie and bleſſedneſſe of man. DAVLD
nowe then becommeth ſuch a
one, and hee teacheth that true and
ſolide felicitie, conſiſteth not in the

riches of this worlde, not in honor &
glorie, not in pleaſures, not in the
workes and merites of men: but in
the grace of God alone, & in the free
remiſſion of ſinnes. Alſo, thoſe whom
he taketh in hand to teach, are miſerable
men, miſerable, I ſay & it were
no more but by reaſon of the conſcience
and of death, yea, or rather, becauſe
of that fleſhly ſecurity, whereby
many are caſten vp ſo in a deepe
ſleepe, that neither are they touched
with a ſenſe of ſinne, nor of miſerie:
which eſtate, ſurely is of all eſtates
far moſt perilous. Then thoſe ar they
whom he teacheth this true happineſſe,
& to whom, by viue voyce he
poynteth out, as it were, with the
finger, that onely cauſe, which pacifieth
and bleſſeth the conſciences
of miſerable men, to wit, the free remiſſion
of ſinne in Chriſt. Moreover
there are three ſorts of ſpeeches concerning
remiſſion of ſinnes, in the
two firſt verſes, which notwithſtanding

all fall into one. The firſt is,The firſt.
                        Bleſſed is he which is eaſed] (ſayth he:)
DAVID feeling himſelfe as it were
firſte oppreſſed with the burden of
ſinne: Then that he was eaſed of that
but then, through the mercy of God,
and his conſcience now being pacified
to him, drawing his breath, as it
were, he cryeth out and declareth,
that that man is bleſſed, whoſoever
he bee, that is disburthened of the
heavie burthen of his defectiō. Now
the cauſe wherefore wee feele not
in our ſelues ſuch a bleſſedneſſe, neither
are able to prayſe the ſame with
DAVID; is this ſecuritie, whereby it
commeth to paſſe, that either ſin is
not felt at all, or if it be felt, it is eſteemed
as a thing of little weight: But if
the deadly ſopour, were ſhaken off
from vs, and if there were any feeling
of ſinne, together with a ſenſe of the
wrath of God, drawing out ſin to the
light, and making the burthen of ſin
to appeare intollerable, as that way it

appeareth vnto DAVID, when he ſaieth
and complayneth, that the burthen
of his iniquities are heavie,Pſal. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              •
                           . &
that they are heavier, then he is able
of ſtrength to beare: For he felt conjoyned
with his iniquities, the wrath
of God, from which proceedeth that
ſo great a weight of ſin. If therefore
we feele that burthen of ſinne, with
the anger of God lying on vs, then
ſurely we would in good earneſt acknowledge
that that man were bleſſed,
who were disburdened of his
defection. Whoſe ſinne is covered] The
ſeconde forme of ſpeech followeth,
whereby he publiſheth the remiſſion
of ſinnes. Bleſſed is he (ſayeth he)
whoſe ſinne is hid.] DAVID, when hee
had felt this ſinne, and all this deformitie
of nature to be layd open before
the eies of that wrathfull God:
Then alſo, he had felt that his ſinne
was covered with the obedience &
righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, his minde
being nowe quieted and ſetled, hee

pronounceth that man to be bleſſed,
whoſe ſinne was covered. Now the
cauſe wherefore wee feele not this
bleſſedneſſe in our ſelues by experience,
is, that he is bleſſed, whoſe ſinne
is covered, is the ſelfe-ſame ſtupiditie
of our nature, and fleſhlie ſecuritie,
wherewith wee are ſo blinded, that
we neither ſee our ſinne, neither the
angrie face of God, looking vpon vs
from the heauen: For the which
blindnes ſake againe, we do oft come
to that ſhameleſneſſe, that not being
cōtent in ſecreet, to offend thoſe eies
of God, we alſo do openly come out,
and in Gods ſight, before the Sun &
the Moone, yea, and as it were the
whole world looking on; ſometimes
wee commit man-ſlaughter, otherwhiles
adulteries. nowe thieftes and
riefes, and then other ſortes of moſte
filthie ſinnes; and provoke, as Eſay ſaieth.
3. 
                           •
                        . the eies of the glorie of God:
Like as we read of that Zimri,
                        Num 9
                              •
                            25. a moſt
impudent man, who came foorth &

brought out his filthineſſe, with that
his exceeding filthie whoore the Midianitiſh
woman, in the ſight of God,
in the ſight of Moſes, in the preſence
of all the people, yea, in the publicke
ſorrow of al the cōgregatiō: Wherefore
Phinees, being vehemently ſtirred
vp, with the zeale of God, taking
a ſpeare in his hande, ſtriketh them
both through. But if ſurely there
were any Magiſtrates among vs, indewed
with ſuch a zeale, thoſe moſt
wicked men, ſhould not eſcape vnpuniſhed,
for ſo many man-ſlaughters,
ſo many adulteries: Finally, for
ſo many ſortes of moſt haynous ſins.
Nevertheles, this thing in the meane
time ſhould comfort vs, that the ſelfe
ſame God yet remaineth, and that ever
like to himſelfe, who becauſe of
his righteouſnes, is not able to ſuffer
for ever, that theſe moſt wickedman
ſhall eſcape vn-puniſhed, for thoſe
ſinnes. This is then the blindneſſe
which proceedeth from our ſecuritie

and againe, a wounderful ſhameleſneſſe,
proceeding from that blindneſſe.
But ſurely, if once at length we
were wakened vp, out of this deadly
ſopour, and ſaw our ſinnes viuely, together
with the angrie countenance
of God, beholding vs from the heaven,
and burning vp our ſoules as it
were, with his hoat wrath (for the angrie
countenance of God doth none
otherwaies burne the vncleane ſouls
of men, then the fyre any mater meet
for burning, as tymber ſtuble or hey,
according to that ſaying of the Prophet:
Thou ſhalt appoynt them, For
to be burnt, as a furnace of fyre in the
time of thine angrie countenance: &
then declaring that more clearely, he
ſubjoyneth, Iehova ſhall ſup them vp in
his wrath, (as if the fyre had cōſumed
them) But if, I ſay, there were any feeling
of thoſe things, then ſurely wee
would with DAVID commend much
that man to be bleſſed, whoſe ſinne
were ſo covered, that it ſhould not be

ſeene of an angrie God. Bleſſed is the
man to whome Iehova imputeth none iniquitie]
The thirde forme of ſpeech,The third forme of ſpeache.
whereby hee expreſſeth vnto vs the
remiſſion of ſinnes. Hee felt out of all
queſtion, firſt a judgement ſeate, ſet
vp, as it were, in his owne ſoule, and
an accuſing conſcience, that his ſin
was imputed vnto him, by God the
judge. Then this whole judgement
being remooved out of his ſoule by
Chriſt, that his ſinne was not layde
to his charge. Of this it commeth to
paſſe, that being refreſhed; he cryed
out, & commendeth him to be greatly
bleſſed, to whom God imputeth
not ſinne. But if we, after the ſame
maner, rayſing vp a judgement ſeate
in our hearts, would firſt ſee & feele
our conſcience accuſing vs, God ſitting
in judgement, and ſin to be laide
to our charge by GOD the judge,
ſurely, wee would call that man bleſſed
with DAVID, to whom God imputeth
not ſin. But ſuch is our greate

ſluggiſhneſſe, that albeit, we be other
wile ſinners, notwithſtanding, except
it be very hardly, ar we touched
with any ſenſe of ſin, yea, even then
when the wrath of GOD exerciſeth
vs, wee are not drawen on to the acknowledging
of our ſinne, but verie
hardly. Out of this laſte forme of
ſpeech, whereby DAVID publiſhed
the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, we learne
alſo from DAVIDS example himſelf,
we learne I ſay, firſt, what is the eſtate
of the ſoule of a ſinner, which is touched
deepely with a conſcience of
his owne ſinne, and thereby is prepared
vnto grace. He feeleth, that there
is a judgment ſeat ſet vp in his ſoule,
and that God himſelfe the judge, ſitteth
therein: Then the conſcience of
ſinne accuſeth, and God the judge
layeth ſinne to the charge, and looketh
vppon the filthineſſe thereof, as
with a terrible eie, From thence followeth
a deepe ſenſe of ſinne, and a
burden that is not able to be borne,

of ſinne, I ſay, which appeared a little
before, to be of no weight and moment:
Of this alſo aryſes horrours &
terrours of hell, which if they continued
any longer, they would driue
a man vnto deſperation. Wee haue
againe alſo in the example of DAVID,
the conſtitution of the ſoule of
the ſinner, after that ſinnes are forgiven:
Hee feeleth within himſelfe,
that all that judgement ceaſeth, that
his conſcience as a witneſſe accuſeth
him no more of ſinne, and that ſin is
not layde vnto his charge by God
the judge: he feeleth alſo, that what-ſo-ever
remanent of ſinne, is in the
corrupte nature, that it is whollie
covered ſo, with the righteouſneſſe
& perfite obedience of Ieſus Chriſt,
that the angrie face of GOD, is no
more directed againſt the ſame: finallie,
he feeleth now, that his ſin is not
imputed vnto him, and ſo, as I ſaid, it
being covered, he feeleth it to bee a
burden vnto him no more. And in

deede, when any is disburdened of
the burden of ſinne, ſinne appeareth
vnto him to bee a light thing, not by
reaſon of that fleſhlie ſecuritie, but
for the mercy of God in Chriſt his
ſake it is made light & of little weight
Vppon theſe follow an in
                           •
                        credible
peace and quietneſſe of conſcience,
which is none other thing then that
bleſſednes, which DAVID commendeth.
For when he had once intirely
felt it in his ſoule, he reteineth it not
within his owne minde: But hee is
compelled to common thereof with
others, that, if it be poſſible, other miſerable
men alſo (ſuch as we are all by
nature) may be touched with ſome
ſenſe and ſweetneſſe thereof, in ſome
meaſure, that ſo they may become
bleſſed. More-ouer, wee haue alſo to
learne out of DAVIDS words, that
which PAVLE alſo gathered out of
the recommendation of this bleſſedneſſe
of DAVID,Rom. 4. 6. to wit, that that man
is bleſſed, to whom the Lord imputeth

righteouſneſſe without workes,
that is, that a man is made righteous,
not by any inherent righteouſneſſe,
which proceedeth from his workes,
but by righteouſnes imputed onely.
For if juſtification and bleſſednes, be
by forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, of neceſſity
it muſt follow, that juſtification is by
righteouſneſſe, not ſurely inherent,
but imputed. For forgiueneſſe is alſo
of ſinne inherent: Nowe ſinne being
inherence, that righteouſneſſe is not
inherēt but imputed. This neceſſary
conſecution of imputed righteouſneſſe,
from the forgiuenes of ſinnes,
cauſed PAVLE to interpret that place
that DAVID ſpak expreſſely of the
remiſſion of ſinnes, even as if he had
ſpoken of imputed righteouſnes. But
this matter, ſhall become more evident
by ſome example, taken from
judgement ſeats, and from the common
cuſtomes among men. For the
matter is none otherwiſe to be conſidered
of, in this head of juſtification,

then if any King of free grace would
forgiue the ſinne to any guylty man.
As for example, to a man-ſlayer, even
now condemned for his ſinne: Now
this man, his ſinne being forgiven, is
ſaid to be juſtified. But by what righteouſneſſe,
I praye you? not by that
which is inherent: For in him ſelfe in
very deede, hee is a man-ſlayer. By
what righteouſneſſe then? ſurely by
none other, then by that, which was
freelie imputed by the King, to wit,
by that whereby hee thinketh him
righteous, who is not righteous in
himſelfe. The ſame in all reſpectes, is
the manner of our juſtification, before
the judgement ſeate of God the
judge. Wee are not indeede juſte
through our owne works, but vnjuſt,
Neither yet doth God pronounce
vs to be righteous for our works. But
the juſtification of GOD, that is, the
publiſhing of the juſt, is that wherby
he vttereth that man is vnjuſt, to bee
juſt, of his only mercy in Chriſt. Now

to the end that the whole matter may
the more clearely appeare;The thr
                              •
                           
                           fold maner of iuſtit fiing wee muſt
know, that a man may be ſaide to be
juſtified before GOD, three waies
ſumma
                           •
                        lie:
                           
                              •
                            By the worker of the lawe. Firſt, by the works of the
law; ſecondly, by the puniſhment of
the law broken; Thirdly, by remiſſion
of ſinnes, or by not imputing of
ſinnes, for thoſe things ar one. Moreover,
as concerning the firſt manner
of juſtifying, which is by the workes
of the Law, after the fall of ADAM &
of vs al in ADAM never was there any
yet, that was juſtifyed by the workes
of the Law, except one man Chriſt.
For ſeeing the lawe requireth two
things, the one, either that we fulfil,
or that wee die, all fulfilling of that
which the lawe commandeth, is vtterlie
loſt in ADAM.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            By puniſhmentes for tranſgreſſion. Now, as concerning
that ſecond maner of juſtifying;
Chriſt is juſtifyed onely that waye,
yea, and that for our cauſe, for that
cure denunced in the law, perteined
vnto vs, & we behoved to ſatiſfie the

righteouſneſſe of God, by our everlaſting
death, but Chriſt came as a
mid man betuixt, through his own,
and his fathers mercy, and transferred
our ſinne, together with the puniſhment
due to our ſinne vpon himſelfe.
The third manner of juſtifying,
which is by the free remiſſion of ſins,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            By the remiſſion of 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
reſteth alone for vs, whoſoever wee
be, that will be juſtified & ſaved before
God, to wit, whereby we freelie
receiue remiſſion of all our ſins, beleeving
that Chriſt hath ſatisfied the
law for vs, & for our cauſe hath ſuffered
that curſe of the lawe, and having
recived that forgiuenes, we are
counted juſt in that righteouſnes &
ſatisfaction of Chriſt, apprehended
by faith. Of theſe three ſorts of juſtification,The difference of theſe maner
                              •
                           .
the two former differ from
this third, that ſeeing in the two former
the cauſe of the ſentēce of juſtification,
is in him that is juſtified, in
this third ſorte, the cauſe of the ſentēce
of juſtifying is without him that

is juſtified, to make it clearer, in that
firſt maner of juſtificatiō, the cauſe of
juſtifying is in the works of the man
juſtified. So ADAM had bin juſtifyed,
if he had ſtoode in the obedience of
God, ſo Chriſt was juſtified for our
cauſe, by his own righteous works,
& by the perfite loue vpon all ſides
of GOD, and of his Neighbour.
In the ſeconde ſorte of juſtification
which is by puniſhment, the payne
it ſelfe, which is ſuffered by the juſtified
man, is the ſubject and the
cauſe, why he is juſtified of GOD.
So Chriſt alone is juſtifyed for our
cauſe, and hee is made for vs the
curſe of the law; alſo, he hes fully ſatisfied
the law by his death. Laſte, in
the thirde manner of juſtification,
the cauſe is, that ſelfe ſame ſatisfaction,
which is in Chriſte him ſelfe,
with-out vs, as in ane ſubject, but
after ſome ſorte made aires, to wit,
by faith. So then by this third manner,
al the faithful are juſtified, by the

cauſe of juſtificatiō, that is, Chriſts ſatisfactiō,
which is with out vs. DAVID
therfore, that we may returne to him
again, ſpeaketh not of the firſt juſtification,
nor of the ſecond, but of the
third; & he attributeth the juſtificatiō
& bleſſednes of man, not to the works
of man himſelf, nor to the puniſhmēt
taken according to the threatning of
the law vpon man himſelfe, but only
to the free remiſſion of ſins. Which
ſorte of juſtification, is accompliſhed
after this order. Firſt, the ſinfull man
being called of God, beleeveth in Ieſus
Chriſt, to whoſe ſacrifice, the
wrath of God purſuing him, hee is
compelled after ſome ſort, one or vther
to flie, as vnto a certaine Girth.
Then taking holde vppon that ſacrifice,
the wrath of God is now pacified:
The wrath being aſſwaged, there
is place for grace and mercy, and
therefore of grace, he forgiveth him
his ſinne, and therewith imputeth to
the ſinner, that righteouſneſſe and ſatisfaction

of Chriſt, which by faith
before he had apprehended. And ſo
in theſe two things, is ſituat that ſentence
of juſtificatiō, the cauſe wherof,
wee ſee to be Chriſts ſatisfaction,
with-out man himſelf, except in this
reſpect you ſay it to be in man, in ſo
far as it is apprehended by faith. And
this faſhion of juſtification, is no leſſe
effectual, yea, it is much more forcible
and full, then if God had juſtified
vs for any cauſe, which can be in vs.
For the peace and quietnes of conſcience
is no leſſe, neither yet is that
rejoycing, which is through juſtification
by faith in Chriſt, & by his ſatisfaction
any whitles, then if we ourſelues
were by our workes juſtifyed.
Being iuſtified (ſayeth the Apoſtle)
through faith,
                        Rom. 
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           . 
                        wee haue peace towards
God. Then a little thereafter, We glory
(ſayeth he) vnder hope. The Apoſtle
alſo himſelfe,Rom. 
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           . in this juſtification of
God by faith, gloryeth ſecurely againſt
that man, whoſoever he bee

that would lay a crime to his charge a
ye, experiēce it ſelf hath ever teached
ſince the beginning, that this way of
juſtification is more ſure, then that
which is by workes, and by a cauſe
inherent in vs. For ſeeing that inherent
righteouſneſſe, both of Angels
and alſo of men is loſt, this righteouſnes
of Chriſt, apprehended by
true faith, ſhal never be loſt. In which
alone ſurely (to the end we may mak
one concluſiō of this diſcourſe) who
ſoever hee be, that quieteth not himſelfe,
there ſhall no part be left him in
that bleſſedneſſe, which DAVID ſayeth
is placed in the forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes. In whoſe Spirit, there is no guyle]
Hitherto hath DAVID publiſhed,
man to be bleſſed, through the forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes; now he ſheweth
him to be bleſſed through ſanctification
alſo, eſpecially, for ſimplicitie
and ſincerity of the hart, which is the
effect of the remiſſion of ſins: AS if he
ſhuld ſay: I publiſh him to be bleſſed

to whom ſins ar forgivē, yet not with
ſtanding, ſo that I ſeparat not ſanctification,
frō the forgiuenes of ſins, & juſtification.
So Paul, after he had ſhewed,Rom. 
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           .
                        that there is no condemnation for him
that is in Chriſt Ieſus, preſently he ſubjoyneth,
who walketh not after the fleſh,
but after the Spirit. DAVID therefore,
conjoyneth with the remiſſiō of ſins,
ſanctification: for the bleſſednes or
happineſſe of man, is no other thing
then his bleſſed eſtate in Chriſt Ieſus
and it is the effect, of all the ſpirituall
bleſſings in Chriſt Ieſus, of thoſe, to
wit; which ar reckoned out,Rom. 
                              •
                           . 29. & there
after, and ar brought in,Eph. 1. 
                              •
                           
                         & therafter.
Moreover, they are the fore knowledge
of Gods Predeſtination vnto life, calling,
iuſtifying, gloryfiing. Then there is no
cauſe why any ſhould gather out of
this place, that a man is alſo juſtified
through holineſſe of life, and good
works, becauſe the prophet ſaith, bleſſed
is he in whoſe hart ther is no guyle: ſeing
that by the word of bleſſednes is

meant juſtification; but the common
effect of all the reſte of the bleſſings,
of which hesbene even now ſpoken,
and among the which, ſanctification
is reckoned out as one. Then we may
define the bleſſed man, from his
owne cauſes going before, that it is
he, who is called, juſtified and glorified,
of the fore-knowledge and Predeſtination
of GOD. Out of thoſe
thinges you perceiue, that ſanctification,
ſynceritie and cleaneſſe of the
heart, are required to bleſſedneſſe,
which in this life, is no other thing,
but a begunne glorifying, and that
bleſſedneſſe is the common effect of
all. Neither yet alſo ſhall it appeare, if
the ſentence of the Apoſtle be taken
good head to in that place, and if his
words be conſiddered, that the bleſſed
& the juſt man, or juſtified man,
as they thinke commonly, is taken
for one thing. For, bleſſed, alſo with
the Apoſtle is none other thing, then
the bleſſed eſtate of the juſtified mā,

and the effect of juſtification, or of
imputed righteouſneſſe with-out
workes. From whence alſo it is, that
our Prophete in an other place, in
plaine words, publiſheth a man to be
bleſſed, through the works of ſanctification.
For I would not expound
the worde bleſſed in that place,Pſalme. 
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           
                         juſtified:
as if the Prophete, of the
conſequent effectes, deſcribed the
juſtified man: But I would vnderſtand
by the name of, bleſſed, a man
conſtitute in that eſtate of life, which
is the eſtect of juſtification, ſanctification,
and finally, of all ſpirituall
bleſſings in Chriſt. See thoſe things
which we haue obſerved vppon that
place concerning bleſſednes. When I
held my peace] Hitherto was ſet down
the propoſition of the bleſſedneſſe
of man: Here followeth the confirmation
thereof, from his owne experience.
Alſo, that experience is
two fold: The firſt is of the miſerie, at
what time, to wit, he held his tongue

and confeſſed not his ſinne. The ſecond
is, of deliverance and forgiuenes
of ſin, that is, to wit, at that time
when he confeſſed his ſin. Then hee
ſayeth firſt: When I held my tongue, my
bones waxed old] That is, when I conteined
my ſinne within mee, when I
diſſembled the ſame, and confeſſed
not, My bones waxed olde] That is,
mine whole bodie was conſumed, &
there was nothing ſo firme in me, no
not indeede ſo much as my bones,
which was not worne away with the
hand of God. Marke the Prophetes
words: for he ſpeaketh not ſo, becaus
I haue ſinned, my bones conſumed awaye.
But he ſayeth thus; When I helde my
peace] Or when I confeſſed not my
ſin,Why the godly are afflicted of God. 
                        My bones wore away] Of the which
we learne, that the godly are not for
that cauſe afflicted of God, that they
are puniſhed becauſe of their ſinnes,
which are all forgiven, in that alone
ſatisfaction of Chriſte, but to the
ende they may be rayſed vppe out

of that ſluggiſhneſſe, and extreame
deadlie ſecuritie, and may be broght
to repentance. I obſerue this, becauſe
of the enemies, who defende
that afflictions, yea, even of the godlie,
are ſo manie temporall puniſhmentes,
and ſatisfactiones for ſinne,
when there is but one ſatisfaction of
Chriſt, yea, and that all ſufficiente,
and puniſhmente, which he ſuffered
for all our ſinnes, ſo that, whoſoever
would conjoyne any other ſatisfaction
whatſoever, with this ſatisfaction
of Chriſt, of force he muſt take away
ſome thing, from that moſt perfect
ſatisfying. Much rather therefore
we muſt hold and learne out of this
experience of DAVID, that whatſoever
afflictiones of the godly, are not
ay by reaſō of their ſinnes, to wit, that
any puniſhment ſhould bee taken of
them, albeit otherwiſe, the originall
and efficient cauſe of them be ſinne,
For the wages of ſinne is death (the ſame
judgmēt is to be taken of al temporal

afflictiones whatſoever.) But GOD
who out of light, bringeth foorth
darkneſſe, hee ſo changeth theſe afflictiones,
which are of the owne nature
the fruites and effectes of ſinne,
that nowe they become certaine exerciſes
of the godly for their weill.
Then, as I haue ſaid, afflictions come
not for ſinne, as the ende that it may
be puniſhed, but that repentance,
mortification, and converſion may
be wrought. Secondly, marke in this
place, how deepe the deadly ſopour,
yea, of the godly is at ſome time, that
thoſe, who now and then, ſleep ſo in
ſinne, that they cannot be wakened,
vnleſſe it bee with moſt grieuous afflictiones,
& as DAVID ſpeaketh, yea,
except their bones be conſumed, &
that alſo (which is a wounderfull
thinge) falleth out, after that they
haue now oft had experience of the
mercy of GOD in Chriſt, & are touched
with that ſenſe of the paſſing
ſweete loue of GOD, which ſurely

ought to haue eaſilie, without anie
trouble, alured their mind vnto God.
For he who once hath felt how gracious
the Lord is, he muſt of neceſſitie,
continually ſeeke the preſence of
God. Notwithſtanding, they are ſo
obdured whiles, and caſt vp into a
deepe ſleepe, that they would never
turne themſelues vnto God, vnleſſe
it were, they were drawen with the
violence of afflictiones. This ſecurity
is wounderful, this ſleepe is marveylous,
which now and then even creepeth-on
vpon the godly, and ſhaketh
off ſo from them, the taiſt of that loue
of God in Chriſt for a time, in which
otherwaies it became them to be allured
continually to ſeeke God, that
except they were judged of GOD
they ſhuld periſh miſerably with the
reſt of the world. Moreover, we haue
here to mark out of the word, Of keeping
ſilence] whereby indeede ſomewhat
obſcurely is meant ſome conſcience
of ſinne, and that oppreſſed

with ſilence, and vnrighteouſly with
holden, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. For
there is no man ſo voyde of conſcience,
which is not ſome time, as it
were, rounded with into the eare, &
admoniſhed of his ſinne. And from
thence it proceedeth, that men being
warned by their conſcience, of
ſinne (whereof, in the meane time
they delight very greatly, and they
indevour to nouriſh the ſame in their
boſome as it were) they travel by all
meanes, to diſſemble and cover their
ſinne, ſo that if it were poſſible,
it ſhould not be marked with Gods
eies, to that end eſpecially, that they
might enjoy ſin, without the brode
of conſcience, and diſquietting of
the minde, which thing indeed, they
cannot attayne vnto, if they knowe
that their ſinne is before the ſight
and eies of God. Of which it commeth
to paſſe, that ſome pretend one
excuſe, ſome another; yea, ſome pretending
religion, and externall worſhip

for their ſins. But al thoſe things
are done in vayne: For it is not poſſible,
that ſinnes can be covered (as it
was ſaid before) vnleſſe they be hid
with the onely obedience of Chriſt.
In my roaring] As if he ſhould ſay, I in
the meane time, not acknowledging
my ſinne, was touched indeed with a
preſent ſenſe of my afflictions, all the
daye, I roared like a Lyon, I vttered
very beaſtly noyſes. Of the which we
learne, yea, that the very Hecte and
godly, at what time being delivered
over into their owne hande, they begunne
to waxe beaſtlie, and to ſleepe
in ſinne, while by afflictions, they be
awakened out of that ſleep, they vſe
to vtter voyces, as of beaſtes, rather
then of men; yea, many times they
murmure and fret againſt God. For
if you will conſidder common nature,
there is no difference betuixte
the Elect and the Reprobat, the godly
and the vngodly. Which ſurely, if
there bee any, it is from God alone,

who only puts the difference betuixt
vs, who at laſt allureth the godly vnto
himſelfe, by ſome ſenſe of his loue,
yea, and by his holy Spirite, boweth
their harts: But he leaveth the vngodly
for ever; & being left, it is ſo far a
way, that they are ſoftned by afflictions
and calamities, that contrariwiſe
they are judged and become worſe
and worſe. For day and] Hitherto
hath the moſt grievous affliction bin
ſet downe; here followeth the cauſe
thereof, as if he ſhould ſaye, no man
hath cauſe to woūder, that my bones
are worne awaye, and that I in the
meane time, haue roared like a Lion;
For the hand of God, day and night
oppreſſed me. Thy hand was heavy vpon
me (ſaith he) day & night] That is,
continually & without intermiſſion,
and from thence it commeth to pas,
that, My moſt excellent iuyce, was turned
into the ſommers droughts] That is, that
juyce, whereby the body was freſh,
did dry-vp, yea, and the whole body

was dryed vp, & became withered.
For it is the amplifying of ſo grievous
an oppreſſion, from the owne
effect, becauſe the hand of God oppreſſing
him, it wrong out all the ſap
of the bodie. Marke here the principall
cauſe of DAVIDS afflictions, not
onely did the afflictiones ſo much
mooue him, as God afflicting, whom
in the meane while, he felt to be his
judge. Thine hand (ſaith he) was heavie
vpon me] Wherefore chiefely he
reſpecteth the perſon of the afflicter:

                           •
                        or the afflictions themſelues mooue
men not ſomuch, as the conſcience
of God the judge. For if there bee
ſome feeling of the loue of God, in
the middeſt of afflictiones, they appeare
now to be lighter, becauſe then
we feele, that thoſe afflictions are not
inflicted by God, as a juſt judge now,
but as by a moſt gratious father. But
if in afflictions, there be no feeling of
the mercy of GOD, otherwiſe, the
moſt light now appear to be the moſt

grievous vnto vs, not ſo much, becauſe
of the afflictions themſelues, as
in reſpecte of the conſcience of the
Iudge. For it is a terrible thing to fall in
to the hands of the living God: And of

                           •
                        l enemies the terribleſt, is the wrathfull
God chiefely. Many there are, I
confeſſe, who being manie waies miſerably
afflicted, notwithſtanding, in
the meane time, are either nothing,
or at leaſt very little commoved: For
no other cauſe then that they ſee not
that their afflictions are of God; and
from thence it is, that no regarde being
had of GOD, they turne themſelues
vnto the ſeconde cauſes, and
they powre out their wrath vppon
them, thinking with themſelues, that
then at length they ſhall be bleſſed, if
they can be rigorous againſt them.
But if they vnderſtoode, that GOD
were the author of all thoſe thinges
which ſhall vppon them, and in the
mean time, wil not be touched with any
ſenſe of his loue & mercy in chriſt

ſurely they would bee more viuilie
touched with thoſe calamities, and
they would meditat with themſelues
one time or other, concerning the aſſwaging
of the wrath and juſtice of
God, and they would not be altogither
violentlie, with their whole
force, carried awaye againſt the ſecond
cauſes, as they call them. Surely
ſuch blindnes & be nummednes of
men is miſerable,The he
                              •
                           
                           uineſſe of gods 
                              〈◊〉
                           . whom when God
exerciſeth with his own hand, never
theles, they neither ſee nor feele the
ſame. Then we haue to marke that
which he ſaith, that that hand of 
                           •
                        od
was grievous vppon him continually.
Firſt, there is the heavines of the
hand and wrath of God, Thereafter,
ther is a heavines without i
                           •
                        termiſſiō
when the ſinner remayneth obſtinat
againſt faith and repentance, then as
it were, God is hardned in his wrath.
Alſo, afflictions and calamities make
manifeſt verie oft vnto the worlde,
that perpetuall anger, which God ſo

continueth, that as one waue followeth
vppon an other, ſo one affliction
commeth vpon the neck of another,
and the greater continually, followeth
vpon the ſmaller. So the Apoſtle
ſpeaking of the obſtinate Iewes, The
wrath of God (ſaieth he) is come vppon
them to the full.
                        The Iewes an 
                              •
                           xample. If at any time wee ſee
the wicked to ſwimme out of afflictiones,1. Theſ. 2. 16.
wee ſhould not thinke for this
cauſe, that this deliverance ſhall bee
perpetuall,All the wicked. but that they are thus prepared,
for ſome more grieuous trouble.
I grant, God giveth vnto them a
breathing time, and ſome well long
diſtance of time, between afflictions
which hee layeth on (ſuch is his
long ſuffering) but theſe, as the Apoſtle
ſayeth, According to their hardnes,
and heart that cannot repent, make that
thoſe diſtances of time,Rom. 2. 5. which are otherwiſe
granted vnto them for repentance,
to bee no other thing, but
ſo manie preparations, to the more
grievous wrath. But to ſpeake of the

godlie, this they by experience feele
in themſelues, that while their faith
in Chriſt languiſheth, and they ſome
times turne themſelues awaie from
God; incontinent ſurelie they feele
in experience, ſome ſignes of the
wrathfull God. And if they alſo perſever
in their back-ſliding, they feele
that God continueth in his anger, to
the ende, to wit, that it may appear
to be moſt manifeſt vnto them, that
there is nothing without Chriſt but
wrath. And if there were no other evident
of this matter extante, then
thoſe horrours, which otherwaies
the faithful feele in themſelues, while
they either neglecte Chriſte or his
blood, or apprehend it not firmelie
ynough in their ſoule; ſurely, by that
and it were no more, it is ſufficiently
declared, that men are not in ſafetie
without Chriſt: that there is no true
peace and quietneſſe of mind, without
Chriſt, ſeeing that in him alone,
the wrath of God himſelf doth quiet

the ſelfe. I will make my ſinne] Hitherto
hath bene declared DAVIDS firſt
experience, to wit of his miſery: now
followeth the ſeconde, that is, of his
deliverance. The ſumme is, When I
confeſſed my ſin, thou forgaveſt me,
both the ſinne, and the puniſhment
of the ſin: But wee muſt take heed to
the wordes. I ſaid] that is, I purpoſed
and deliberat in my mind to confeſſe
my ſinne: Now he vttereth this,
three manner of waies. Firſt, (ſayeth
he) I will make my ſinne knowen vnto
thee] Then, I will not cover mine iniquitie]
Laſt, I will confeſſe my defections
vnto Iehova] Theſe three ſpeeches
fall all into one. And this threefold
repetition of one thing▪ either
ſheweth how earneſtlie he had confeſſed
his ſinne, or ſurelie manifeſteth
that in the adviſement taking, there
was ſome wraſtling or combat with
the fleſh, drawing the man back from
afree and good confeſſion He wraſtleth
out therefore, & hee multiplieth

the confeſſion of his ſinne. And
thou tooke away] That is, thou forgaveſt
me my ſinne. For then is the forgiueneſſe
of ſin, when the guiltineſſe
I ſaie, and whole paine, and not ſome
part onelie of the paine, whether the
ſame be more or leſſe, Is taken away.
For Chriſts ſatisfaction for ſin is perfite,
from the which verelie, ſo much
is taken awaie,1. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . as wee giue vnto our
ſatisfactiones: But concerning this
matter, looke before. Obſerue here
firſt, that DAVID confeſſeth not firſte
his ſin, before the ſame be forgiven,
neither tooke he ſooner a purpoſe to
confeſſe his ſinne, but the puniſhmēt
of ſinne, was as ſoone taken awaie,
which certainelie is ane evidente token,
that ſin is not ſo much the cauſe
of the guyltines and puniſhment, as
hardneſſe, and (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh)
the heart that cannot repente. I
grant indeed, that ſin procureth the
wrath of God, but obſtinacie in ſin
continueth and hoordeth vppe that

wrath. For if any man would confes
his ſinne, he ſhould haue GOD no
more angrie againſt him. But by reaſon
of his hardnes, he confeſſeth not
ſinne, therefore the wrath remaineth
and not only it remayneth, but it increaſeth.
Therefore PAVLE ſpeaketh,
But thou ô man,
                        Rom. 2. 5. 
                        after thine hardnes and
hearte that cannot repente, heapeſt vnto
thy ſelfe, wrath againſt the day of wrath,
and of the declaration of the iuſte iudgement
of God. For what ſhall we thinke
to be the cauſe, why that anger that
is to come in that daye, ſhall be ſo
grievous? The cauſe of ſo greate a
wrath, ſurely ſhall not bee ſo much
ſinne it ſelfe, as an obdured heart in
ſinne, and the contempt of grace. For
that which is ſaide by the Apoſtle, is
not to be thought light, to neglect ſuch
a great ſalvation,
                        Heb. 2. 3. is vtterlie to refuſe
the Son of God, in whom whoſoever beleeueth
not, as is ſpoken in IOHN 3. 18.
Is already condemned, becauſe he beleeveth
not in the only begotten ſon of God.
                        
Marke next,2. leſſon that bold liberty, which
the ſinner, being nowe turned vnto
God, vſeth in this confeſſion of DAVID.
I will confeſſe my ſinne vnto thee]
(ſaieth DAVID) And this liberty,
manifeſteth the feeling of Gods loue
toward him, and the confidence of
grace and of remiſſion of ſinnes in
Chriſt: For it is not poſſible, that a
ſinner turne him ſelfe vnto GOD,
confeſſe his ſin, and earneſtly craue
for the forgiuenes of his ſinne, vnles
there be already firſt after ſome ſort,
ſome ſenſe of grace and pardon purchaſed.
The conſcience threw out a
confeſſion out of IVDAS, but he durſt
not be ſo bolde as to confeſſe his ſin
before GOD, neither yet to deale
with God after this manner that DAVID
doeth in this place. I will make
my ſinne knowen (ſayeth he) vnto thee]
But going aſide, & turning his back
as it were vnto God (ſayeth he) I haue
ſinned, hauing betrayed the Innocente
bloud. Wherefore, to ſpeake it ſummarly,

the confeſſion of ſinne before
God, & the craving of pardon, that is,
this libertie wherby any man dareth
be bolde to appeare before him, and
to preſent himſelfe before his judgement
ſeate ſufficiently doth manifeſt
ſome feeling of grace, and that ſelfe
ſame remiſſion of ſinnes, which wee
ſeeke, being purchaſed already in
ſome ſort. For this cauſe ſhall everie
one] He commendeth this his experience,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           .
which was of Gods mercie
immediatly preceeding, from the
own effect, in every one of the faithful,
that were to come thereafter. For
this cauſe] (ſayeth he) That is, for this
experience of thy mercy toward me.
Shal he pray vnto thee] That is, he ſhall
confeſſe his ſinnes, or he ſhall craue
pardon. He to whom thou art fauorable]
That is, not by putting any kinde
of difference, but hee onely whome
God loveth. Of this loue and favour,
there muſt of neceſſity be ſome ſenſe,
as we haue already even now ſpoken

before any man be ſo bolde, either to
confeſſe his ſinne to God, or earneſtly
to craue pardon for ſinne. But at
what time ſhall he, whom God favoreth
pray? at times, (ſayeth) When it
ſhall happen] To wit, In the over flowing
of many waters] That is, in the
ſtormes and waues of extreame vehement
afflictions (as before Pſal. 18.
17. and every where in the Pſal. 69.)
They ſhall not ſo much as touch him] that
is, they ſhall not ſo much as touch
him lightly, ſo firme ſhal be the loue
of God in Ieſus Chriſt.Rom. 8. 
                              •
                           
                         And if they
happen to touch him, they ſhall bee
ſo farre away, from being of abilitie
to hurt the man, as contrariwiſe they
ſhall be for his profite.Rom. 8. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        For all thinges
worke together for the beſt, to them that
loue God. Wherefore the Apoſtle,
when he felt himſelfe ſo grounded in
that loue, he ſecurely gloryed againſt
the adverſarie, creatures of whatſoever
ſort, as oppreſſion, nakednes, hunger,
the ſworde, death, life, powers &

dominions. And this ſurely hee did,
not indeede, for that ende that hee
thought, that it was not poſſible that
this life preſente, might be taken out
of the world by thoſe things (for hee
himſelfe thereafter felt the contrary
in experience) but for this cauſe, that
he looked for, & certainly hoped for
that other life of God,
                           
                              •
                            Leſſon. which ſhould
never die with this life. This is not to
be pretermitted, that DAVID confirmeth
this man, that is, to praye, whoſoever
finallie he bee, with a promiſe
of that thing which he ſhall craue, &
ſo encourageth him to pray. For by
this example wee learne, whoſoever
wil pray with confidence, of neceſſitie
he muſt haue while he is praying,
continvally before his eies, the promiſes
of God in Chriſt, yea, and hee
muſt remember of them, ſo far as it
is poſſible. For if there be no meditation
vpon the promiſes of GOD,
what confidence, what zeale I praye
you can there be in praying? ſeeing

that without Gods own word, there
cannot be faith, and in vayne ſhall any
man promiſe to himſelf any good
thing, or grace from GOD, whereof
he hath not ſome aſſurance, out of
Gods owne word & promiſe. Faith
is by hearing,
                        Rom. 10. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        and hearing by the worde of
God. Indeed, that is true, that there is
no man to be found, which is not at
ſome time touched with ſome feling
of this want, and ſo is provoked, and
it were no more, very neceſſity it ſelf
compelling him to conceiue praiers.
But if there be no promiſe of God
before the eyes, no worde of GOD
concerning that thing which they
ſeek with what face; or of what mind
dare they be ſo bolde to come vnto
God? I marke this the more carefullie
for that cauſe, that all may knowe
how neceſſary it were to ſearch
and learne out of the word of GOD
himſelfe and Scriptures, all the promiſes
of GOD, whither they be of
things temporall, or of things everlaſting.

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
In which verely, whoſoever at
paſſing-well verſed, thoſe men doe
pray very well. When wee ſpeake of
promiſes, Chriſt is not to bee paſſed
by in ſilence, in whom all the promiſes of
God are, yea, & Amen, that is, they both
haue their owne ground, & alſo their
accompliſhment, without whom, in
vayne ſurely thou lookeſt vppon the
promiſes, either temporal, or eternal.
Wherefore, whoſoever beholdeth
the promiſes of God, if hee will look
vpon them with profite, it is requiſite
that firſt of al, he look vpon their
beginning and end, Ieſus Chriſt, and
never ſuffer him to depart out of his
eies. Thou art a lurking place vnto me]
Hitherto by the waye, the promiſe
was inſerted; Nowe followeth the
forme of prayer, which that man,
which is beloved of GOD ſhal vſe,
whoſoever he bee, yea, and that leaning
to DAVIDS example & experience.
In this little prayer, not ſo much
at the words to be numbred, as they

are to bee weighed; Before the promiſe,
he maketh his preface, that God
is his lurking place, and he profeſſeth
his aſſurance in God alone, which in
deede is principally the ſolid ground
of the petition, and a vehementargumēt
to purchaſe to himſelf the grace
of GOD: For ſeeing thou makeſt a
ſemblance & profeſſeſt that thy confidence
in prayer, is placed not in
men, nor in our merites, in which the
Papiſtes truſt; neither yet in anie other
thing, but in God alone, through
Ieſus Chriſt; ſurely nowe thou bringeſt
with thee ſomewhat, then which
no thing is more pleaſant and acceptable
to God. Alſo the petition is in
thoſe words, Keepe me from trouble]
Then nexte, according to the ſame
meaning: compas me about with ſongs of
deliverance] as if he ſhuld ſay: deliver
me, that I may haue mater to ſing thy
prayſes. Hee ſeeketh then a deliverance,
for the glorie of God, wherof
out of all queſtion, he had a great reſpect

thereof himſelfe. For we ought
al principally to haue before our eies
in our praiers,The 
                              〈◊〉
                            of prayers is the glory of God in Chriſt. the glorie of GOD in
Chriſt. And when that which wee
haue ſought, is alreadie gotten, we ar
bound ſo to vſe that benefite, that it
may redound to the glorie of GOD,
that is, in vſing thereof, wee ſhould
continually looke vnto God: For otherwaies,
it cannot be a true feeling
and injoying of the benefites received.1. 
                              〈◊〉
                            10.
PAVLE ſayeth,Rom. 14. 
                              •
                           . 
                        Whether ye eate,
whether ye drinke, whatſoeuer thing ye
do, do all to the glorie of God. For there
is no true injoying, no not ſo much in
deed, as of the meate that we eate, no
true pleaſure thereof, vnleſſe we eate
vnto the Lord, that is, vnleſſe we eate
it to the glorie of God. For it may be,
that we devoure meate, which thing
ſundrie men do, with a certain beaſtlie
ſenſe and pleaſure; but to the end
that we may enjoy it with that pleaſure
and true ſweetneſſe, it cannot
be done, vnleſſe we conſidder in the

vſe thereof, God and his glory. We
ſhal obſerue one thing here of this effect
of DAVIDS experience,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         before
we proceede to the reſt; he ſayeth indeede
that ſome will follow his example.
But who? even thoſe, to wit,
that like as hee had confeſſed his ſin,
ſo ſhall they confeſſe their ſinne; and
like as he himſelf had praied to God,
ſo ſhall they alſo pray vnto God. So
PAVLE ſaith, that other men ſhall follow
his example.1. Tim. 
                              •
                           . 1
                              •
                           
                         But what are they?
even thoſe, to wit, that ſhall beleeue,
as hee had beleeved: That I might be
(ſaieth he) an exemple to them that ſhall
beleeue vnto eternall life: Learne therefore,
howe manye ſo ever examples
there haue bin of the mercie of God,
yea, ſince the world was created, that
they ar ſo many cōſolations & documēts,
to the poſterity of the mercy of
God toward them; but finally, vnder
this condition, that they enter in into
that way of mercy, which other godlie
men before them haue entred into,

who haue walked on befor them,
that is, if they beleue in Ieſus Chriſt,
if they repente, if they be converted
vnto God, if they pray: We thought
this meet to be marked for this cauſe,
by reaſon we ſee that not a few abuſe
the examples of godly men, thinking
that if they haue them onely in their
mouth, it ſhall come to paſſe preſently,
they be entertained after the ſame
maner with them, and alſo, that they
ſhall likewiſe attaine vnto mercie,
when in the meane time, they indevour
not to tred into the foot-ſteps
of godlie men, ſeeing they are without
faith, without Chriſt, without
God in the world: But they are farre
deceived, for to grant that vnto thē,
that they haue in ſure regiſter, all the
examples that ever wer extant of the
mercie of God; nevertheleſſe wee aff
                           ••
                        m,
except they ſet before thēſelues
the ſelfe-ſame purpoſe of life, which
thoſe godlie men before them haue
followed (whoſe exāples they vaunt

of) they belong nothing vnto them.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           8 I wil inſtruct thee and teach thee the
way that thou ſhalt walk in, I will giue
counſell, mine eye taking attendance vpon
thee.
                           9 Be ye not like an horſe, like an mule,
wanting vnderſtanding, whoſe mouth
is to be bound vpwith bridle and bit, leaſt
they come neere thee.
                           10 Great ſorrowes are for the wicked,
But he which hath his confidence in Iehova,
mercy compaſſeth him.
                        
                     
                     The second part of the pſalme.
                     HItherto hath bene opened vp the
firſt parte of the Pſalme, concerning
the happineſſe of man, made
cleare by the experience of the Prophet
himſelfe. Nowe followeth the
ſecond parte, in which, by a turned
ſpeech, he turneth himſelfe to everie
one of the godly whoſoever, hee applyeth
that former doctrine in particular
vnto him, and inſtructeth him
in that true waye of happineſſe, and
therewith alſo rayſeth him out of

that miſerable ſecuritie of the fleſh:
Before the application there is a preface,The preface.
in which offering true inſtruction
and learning, he ſtirreth vp that
man whom he purpoſeth to teach to
attendance; for the ſecure man, and
hee that ſleepeth in ſin, hath neede of
moſte ſharpe argumentes of taking
heed, whereby he may be pricked &
awakened out of ſleepe. The preface
is thus. I will inſtructe thee and teach
thee the way thou ſhalt wa
                              •
                           kin, I wil giue
counſell, mine eie taking attendance vpon
thee] That is, with moſt diligent care
and travell, I will watch over thee.
Some thinges are to be marked of vs
in this place. Firſt, DAVID had ſaide
before, that that man whom God favoured,
would pray vnto God by his
exemple, eſpecially, to that end, that
hee might attaine to the like mercie.
But now; not being content of that,
that of their owne accorde, others
ſhould pray vnto God, by his example,
he turneth himſelf about to every

one of the faithful, & teacheth him
by his owne voyce. Although the example
of Gods mercy towarde thee
be excellēt of the ſelf,The duty of the ſincere godly man. yea, that others
without thee, bee their teacher, are
able to ſee and follow the ſame, notwithſtanding,
thou ſhalt not be ſayd
to haue done thy parte, except thou
turning thy ſelfe vnto thy brethren,
thou thy ſelf declare openly the mercie
of God toward thee, & fulfill the
parte of a teacher among them. For
who is able with more dexteritie, &
with greater profite, to preach of the
grace and mercy of God, then hee
who hath found it in experience him
ſelfe? For he who hath not any time
taſted how gracious the Lord is, cānot
be a ſufficient Preacher of his mercy.
Wherefore it is neceſſarie, that he, in
whom hath bin kythed the example
of mercy, cōmunicat his experience
with others. For no man getteth the
grace of God onelie to himſelfe, but
vnto others, that others may become

ter by that grace. So Chriſt ſaith vnto
PETER, When thou art converted,
ſtrengthen thy brethren.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              •
                           2. 32 And this is the
nature of faith, that it ſtretcheth out
the hand to ill men, for this end, that
if it be poſſible, al may be ſaved. Paule
when hee pleaded his cauſe before
King Agrippa, after that he had rehearſed
the ſtorie of his life, having
forgotten himſelf, vn-mindful of his
bands, and turning vnto King Agrippa,
hee was altogether occupyed in
this, that hee might bring the man
vnto the faith: Beleeueſt thou not the
Prophets (ſaieth hee) King Agrippa?
I know (ſaieth hee) that thou beleeueſt.
Then Agrippa anſwered, almoſt thou
perſwadeſt mee to become a Chriſtian.
PAVLE replyeth again, I would to God,
that not onely thou, but alſo all that heare
mee to daye, were both almoſt, and altogether,
ſuch as I am, except thoſe bandes.
What then? Thought alſo PAVLE
himſelf to be bleſſed, far beyond that
King? Surely thoſe who hath once

taſted the ſweetneſſe of the grace of
God which is in Ieſus Chriſt, thoſe
alſo eſteeme the Kings of this world,
whom they ſee to be out of chriſt, to
be vnhappy, in reſpect of themſelues
although they themſelues appeare to
be moſt miſerable, not only to kings,
but alſo to the whole worlde. When
therefore PAVLE deſired Agrippa to
be like vnto himſelfe; who, ſeeing he
was without Chriſt, out of all doubt
he thought ſo great a King, in regard
of himſelfe, to be vnhappie and miſerable,
which thinge, whiles hee
thought vpon, pittying him, ſtretching
out his hande as it were, would
haue led the man vnto Chriſt, he willeth
that, I ſaye, pittying him. For the
faithfull and godlie alone, who them
ſelues haue felte in experience, the
mercie of God, are vnfainedly mercifull.
For Agrippa pyttied not ſo
PAVLE, whom notwithſtanding hee
judged at that time to be miſerable,
whom he ſaw bound and layd open

to all the injuries of his enemies.
Therefore to ſpeake at once, that is
ſeene to bee true, yea, and it were no
more, but this one example, that every
one of the godlye, ſeeketh nothing
ſo much, as the ſalvation and
converſion of miſerable men. For
what? Thou which ſtandeth in grace
thinkeſt thou not but that it may be,
that ſome of thy grace may be diminiſhed,
if thou communicate not the
ſame liberally with others? Feele
wee not that in experience, that this
communicating ſerveth chiefely for
this, to increaſe faith & grace? Wherof
it came to paſſe,Rom. 1. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         that PAVLE deſired
to viſite the Romaines, That hee
might be comforted together with them,
through their mutuall faith, both theirs
and his. Secondly, that DAVID turneth
not himſelfe to manye, but to
ſome one man. I will inſtruct thee, &
teach the] (ſaith he) By this thing he
recommendeth to everie man the
doctrine of bleſſednes, and he willeth

that everie man a part apply it to him
ſelfe. For doctrine propoſed & conceived
in generall, it is leſſe forcible,
but being applyed to everie man in
particular, it pearceth more into the
hearte, and without particular applying
the promiſes of God in the ſcriptures,
will never kindle vp faith nor
hope nor being kindled vp, will not
feed them on ſtil: and therfore the Apoſtle
applieth the ſcripture, brought
out for the purpoſe, vnto the Romanes,
with this admonition, What
ſoever things are written,
                        Rom. 1
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           . 
                        are written for
our inſtruction, that through patience &
conſolation of the Scriptures, wee might
haue hope. By the which wordes, indeed
he ſignifyeth, that we haue not
true comfort and hope, without application.
Wherefore it is to be taken
heede, how we either reade or heare
the Scriptures, which otherwiſe are
ſet before all men in generall, & travell
muſt diligently by taken, that everie
one drawe in particular to him

ſelfe the things that are ſpoken in generall.
Let this be for examples ſake,
when this ſentence is propoſed,1. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 16. 
                        Ieſus
Chriſt came into the world to ſaue ſinners.
Wee ſhould everie one of vs, even as
the Apoſtle PAVLE doth in the ſame
place, reſtraine the ſame to ourſelues,
making as it were the ſub-ſumption:
But ſo it is that I am a ſinner, & a cōcluſion:
Therfore chriſt came into the world
to ſaue me, which particular concluſion
indeede, as ſoone as the ſoule apprehendeth,
it quieteth the ſelf therin,
and as it were feedeth and nouriſheth
thereon, with a very ſtrong
conſolation. Thirdly obſerue, DAVID
while he promiſeth vnto him,
                           
                              •
                           eb. 6. 
                              •
                           .
whom hee will inſtruct doctrine and
learning, hee prepareth him therewith
to heare and greedelie to receiue
that which hee is to ſaye. Hee
who prepareth himſelfe to inſtructe
in others, nexte vnder Gods glorie,
hee ſhould haue ſet before him not
his owne profite, not vaine glory, or

any ſuch thing, but the commoditie
of him whome hee receiveth to inſtruct,
yea, and hee ſhould ſhe we the
ſame in outward behaviour in word
and in his whole life. For ſo it ſhall
come to paſſe, that he whome lie inſtructeth,
while hee ſeeth that his teacher
next after GOD, hee ſetteth his
ſalvation before them, with the greater
courage of minde, hee will take
heede vnto the thinges which are
ſpoken. For one of the two is neceſſarie,
that either the doctrine
ſhould bee effectuall to the life, or
vnto the death of the ſinner, which
proceedeth from him who cōmeth
out to teach with this ſimplicity and
ſincerity of mind, Paul the Apoſtle after
that he had ſaid, That he was vnto
God, the ſweet ſauour of Chriſt, in thē th
                              ••
                           
ar ſaued, & in thē which periſh, to the one
we ar the ſauor of death vnto death,
                        2. Co
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           . 1
                              •
                           . 16. 
                        & to
the other, the ſauour of life vnto life, then
he ſubjoyneth, we ar not as manie which
make merchandice of the word of GOD:

but as of ſinceritie, but as of God in the
ſight of God ſpeake we in Chriſt. Therefore
ſinceritie in teaching, ſhal either
effectuat life or death. Then to ſpeak
it in one word, that vprightneſſe and
ſimplicitie of heart, which hath principallie
the glorie of God ſet before
it, is required before all things in the
Teacher and Miniſter: I ſave, principallie
the glorie of God, yea, becauſe
it muſt be preferred before the ſalvation
of man, which is to be ſought in
deede, as the proper ende of the doctrine
and miniſtrie. For the Miniſter
ſhould not firſt and properly reſpect
that his Preaching be not the ſavour
of death vnto death: Notwithſtanding,
if the glorie of God cannot be
obtayned no other manner of waie,
vnles it be with the hardning of ſome
men, the glorie of GOD is to bee
ſought, yea, and it wer with the overthrow
of all mortall creatures.Rom. 4. 4. 
                        Let
God be true,
                        
                           
                              •
                           an. 
                              〈…〉
                           . 
                        and every man a lyar. Shame
of face, and contempt belong vnto vs, but

with the Lord our God, are compaſsiones.
Bee not like ane horſe] Hitherto hath
the preface for attention continued;
now we ſhall abſolue the doctrine in
few words. Be not (ſayeth he) as the
horſe, as the Mule] He ſpeaketh eſpeciallie
to thoſe that are benummed,
and waxe brutiſh vnder the afflictions
and chaſtiſements of the Lorde.
For hee ſpeaketh by experience; for
hee himſelfe had ſometime by-paſte
waxed brutiſh; And therefore hee
ſpeaketh vnto ſuch, in theſe wordes,
as hee was in time paſt himſelfe, as if
he ſhould ſaye. O miſerable men, be
not like beaſtes vnder Gods chaſtiſements;
as the horſe, the mule, & other
beaſtes that are voyde of reaſon and
vnderſtanding. Whoſe mouth] Here
followeth nowe a greeuous threatning,
to the end that they may be awakned
as it were out of ſo deepe a
ſleep, as if he ſhould ſay, as the horſe
or mule can no otherwaies be dantoned,
but by caſting the bridle into

their mouth; Even ſo God, except at
length ye awaken out of this deadly
ſo pour, hee will caſte in into your
mouth, the bridle of his power, to
dantone this wildeneſſe. Great ſorrowes
are for the wicked] Then by
cleare and proper wordes, expreſſing
the matter which before hee
had ſet down, with improper words,
and by an figuratiue ſpeech, and
weighing in his owne minde, aſwell
the miſerable eſtate of the obſtinate,
as the happinſſe of the faithfull,
he cryeth out after this manner.
Great ſorrowes are for the wicked] That
is, to the obſtinate man in his wickedneſſe.
But contrariwiſe, they that
put their confidence in Iehova, mercie
compaſſeth him] That is, defendeth
and ſtrengtheneth him vpon all ſide,
that hee may be ſure on everie ſide,
from the aſſaultes and tentationes of
the enemie. So then he terrifieth the
ſenſeleſſ
                           •
                        , by denunciation of miſerie,
& he confirmeth the faithfull by

the preaching of happines. He ſetteth
then before the minds of the ſenſeles
men, the eſtate both of the faithful &
of the vnfaithfull: yea, & with ſuch a
weight of words, that if it be poſſible
he may once ſhake off from them that
ſenſleſnes. Marke here firſt, DAVID
himſelf being delivered from this be
nummednes, & fleſhlie ſecurity, hee
preſētly beholdeth thoſe which ſleep
ſoundly as it were in ſin, having looked
vpon them, hee eſteemeth them
miſerable, yea, hee thinketh no more
of them nor of horſes & mules. The
godlie fra once they haue awakened
out of ſinne, and their eyes are opened,
then looking vppon them,
whome you may ſee everie-where
to be caſt vp in a deep ſleep, yea, that
they are not able to bee awakened
by anie afflictions out of that deepe
ſleepe of ſecuritie, they eſteeme no
more of them, then of vn-dantoned
beaſts, being voyd of al reaſon & vnderſtanding.
And ſurely in very deed

except they repent, they are in worſe
caſe, then the beaſts themſelues, who
ſoever finallie they be. Men that are
Princes, think themſelues to be bleſſed,
when they leape on vpon their
horſes & Mules, & they driue thē hither
& thither, but if they do that not
taking care of God, & of his mercy, in
Ieſus chriſt, then verelie they ar more
miſerable, then their horſes & mules.
It may be indeed, that they may oppreſſe
and overthrow all for a ſhorte
time, according to their pleaſure.
But, except in time they be awakened
out of ſo deadly ſopor, it wil come to
paſſe, that God will caſt a bridle into
their mouth, & while they ſay Peace,
and all thinges are at reſte, a ſuddaine deſtruction
ſhall come vppon them,
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Theſ. 5. 3. 
                        as the
paines vpon a travelling woman. It was
not ſaid in vaine by Chriſt, Watch &
pray,
                        Math. 26. 40. For there is no ſurer token of a
moſt greevous judgement to come,
then carnall ſecuritie: Obſerue alſo:
DAVID having felt in experience the

miſerie of ſenſeleſſe men, & the happineſſe
of the godly; hee weigheth
them both earneſtlye in his owne
minde, and of them both he ſpeaketh
paſſing grauely. For thoſe who once
felt in experience, and taſted both of
miſerie and felicitie, theſe ſurely are
they who ar both able to ſpeak moſt
weightlie of the miſerie & happines
of men; and alſo who beſt may ponder
in their mind, the miſery of man,
and his felicitie. I ſay, they are ableſt
to ſpeake, from the ſoule and feeling
of the heart, of hel, of heauen, of the
paines of hell, and of the joy of heaven.
For it is not to be thought, that
everie man indifferently can ſpeake
of thoſe thinges as it becommeth, or
that every man without difference,
can be capable of them, whē hee heareth
any godlie man, and experienced
in them, to talke thereof. Wherefore
I propoſe to everie ſecure man,
and to him that is oppreſſed with
that deadly ſopour, but this one ſentence

to be weighed all his life long,
to witte, this which is to bee had in
this place: Great ſorrowes are for the
wicked man, But he which hath his confidence
in the Lorde, mercie ſhall compaſſe
him] For this cauſe I obſerue theſe
things the more carefully, that we endevoure
our ſelues to thoſe thinges,
that wee feele our ſoules as it were
burdened & oppreſſed firſt with the
weight and burthen of miſery, then
with the weight of that excellentlie
excellent weight of happines & glory,
to ſpeak ſo with the Apoſtle. For
ſo it ſhal come to paſſe, that we ſhalbe
able moſte grauely, yea, & with ſome
weight, to preach of that miſerie and
happines of man, & once to touch, if
it be poſſible, this benummed world
with ſome ſēſe of thoſe things, which
verely if it be not in time commoved
in ſome ſort with the weight of thoſe
things, it wil ſurely come to pas, that
it ſalbe oppreſſed in hel, with that intolerable
burthē of the wrath of 
                           •
                        od▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           11 Be glad ye righteous and reioyce in
Iehoua, & ſing all yee that be vpright in
mind.
                        
                     
                     The concluſion of the pſalme
                     
                        BE glad) Hitherto hath bin expoū
                        ded
the ſecōd part of the pſalme,
to wit, the application; here followeth
now the laſt part, the concluſion,
in which he exhorteth them, whom
immediatly before hee had declared
to be bleſſed & acceptable to Iehova
to gladnes, and to ſome certaine
ſignes of joy, ſuch as ar ſongs. Be glad
(ſaieth he) ye righteous, & reioyce in Iehova]
Be glad (ſaith he) not in your
ſelues, but in Iehova, from whence
alone, is al that bleſſedneſſe of yours
in Ieſus Chriſt: For ſo ſpeaketh the
Apoſtle,1. Cor. 1. 50 Yee are of him in Chriſte
Ieſus, whereby he ſignifyeth, that all
that excellencie and bleſſedneſſe of
ours, is from GOD in Chriſt Ieſus,
that is, through that our moſt ſtrait
conjunction with Chriſte, which is
made vnto vs wiſedome, juſtification,
ſanctification, and redemptions

Then he ſubjoyneth the end thereafter
in the 31. verſe, why we ar of God
in Chriſt, that (ſaieth he) as it is written,
Hee that gloryeth, let him glorie
in the Lord, to wit, fra time he be in
Chriſt. In which place appeareth the
wounderful wiſdome of God, wherby
he provideth & is carefull for his
owne glorie, which otherwiſe men,
ambitious by nature and blaſphemous,
aſcribe to themſelues. He hath
not choſen indeed many wiſe men,
not many mightie, not many noble;
but he hath choſen the fooliſh, weak,
and ignoble things, which he wil indew
in Chriſt, with the gifts of his
grace, for that ende eſpeciallie, that
fleſh ſhould not glorie in the ſelf, but
ſhould acknowledge what ſo ever
thing it hath, is received of the Lord,
and therefore ſhould rejoyce in him
through Chriſt Ieſus: But who are
thoſe whom he exhorteth vnto gladnes?
Be glad (ſaieth he) yee righteous
and reioyce, ye that are vpright in heart]
                        
By theſe names of juſtice & vprightnes,
from whence is that bleſſednes▪
(For it was ſaide before, yea, even of
holineſſe and ſinceritie of the hearte
is bleſſedneſſe) by theſe names, I ſay,
he ſheweth them to be holie, & thoſe
whome in the verſe immediatly before
he ſaid was cōpaſſed with Gods
mercy. In which place, firſt note, that
none rejoyce at anie time, the ſolide
and true joy, but the bleſſed, & thoſe
(as he calleth them) who are righteous
and vpright in hart. For I would
not call this gladneſſe of the worlde,
which is of vnrighteous & miſerable
men,Eſay, 48. 22. &. 
                              •
                           7. 21. by the name of joye. For there is
no peace to the wicked (ſayth the Lord)
Marke againe, that the joy once conceived
in minde, cannot conteine
the ſelfe, but it will burſt out, either
in ſinging or in ſome glorying. And
therefore DAVID biddeth the righteous
man ſing: and this glorying is
not only then, when things are proſperous
and in happie caſe, yea, but even

then when they are troubleſome.
For they that are ſpredde over
with that true joy, & injoy that peace
which over commeth all vnderſtanding,Phil. 4. 7.
as PAVLE ſayeth, They glorie
in afflictiones,Rom. 5. 
                              •
                           . vnder the hope of the
glorie of God To whome be all glorie
for ever, Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT OF
the XXXIX. Pſalme.
                  It is a Pſalme, calling the Prophete to remembrance
of his adviſe, that hee had once taken before
this time, concerning his owne governement. Out
of the inſcription, it ſeemeth to bee Davids. And
it appeareth out of the thr
                        •
                     ede of the text & purpoſe
thereof, to bee written at that time when hee was
caſt in extreame great ſtraites, by the conſpiracie of
Abſchelom. The argument and ſumme of the Pſalme
is this. David acknowledgeth firſt, that, hee wente a
ſtray from his purpoſed ſilence and patience, and
correcting himſelfe thereafter, he prayeth vnto God.
Firſt then in this Pſalme, there is a Narration vnto
the 8. verſe, then there is a prayer vnto the ende of
the Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  Pſalme. XXXIX.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of DAVID, committed
to be ſong, to the Maiſter of Muſicke,
of Ieduthun.
                           
                           2 I had ſaide, I will take heede to my
waies, leaſt I ſinne with my tongue, I will
keepe a bridle in my mouth, ſo long as the
wicked man ſhall be in my ſight.
                           3 I had bene dumme, ſpeaking nothing,
yea, I had keeped ſilence from good, when
my ſorrowe be-gouthe to waxe freſhe againe.
                           4 And my minde growing hoate
within mee, the fyre burning vppe in my
meditation, I ſpake with my tongue, ſaying.
                           5 Cauſe me, ô Iehova, to prooue in experience
mine ende: for what is the meaſure
of my dayes? I will aſſaie howe durable
I am.
                           6 Beholde, thou haſte appoynted my
daies as hand breadths, and my time is as
nothing before thee: ſurelie all men is everie
waie vanitie, although hee bee
never ſo well eſtabliſhed. Selah.
                           
                           
                              
7 Doubtleſſe man paſſeth away by a
ſhaddow, ſurely in vaine they make a noiſe:
ſome man gathereth together, but he knoweth
not who ſhall receiue thoſe things.
                        
                     
                     I Had ſaid] Of the narration,Three parts of the narration. there
are three partes: For firſt he ſetteth
downe the adviſe that hee had taken
to driue over his life in ſuffering, in
the 2. verſe. Then he ſubjoyneth, that
as hee had taken purpoſe, ſo hee begouth
to liue at the beginning, in the
3. verſe. Thirdly hee addeth, that hee
fell away from his begunne adviſe,
from the latter part of the third verſe
to the 8. Then to returne; Firſt de declareth,The firſt part.
that he took purpoſe to driue
over his life patiently. And in this
meaning, he ſpeaketh firſt ingeneral.
I will take heede to my waies] That is, to
my whole life: Then in ſpeciall. Leaſt
I ſin with my tongue] whereby he ſignifieth,
hee wil take diligent heede,
leaſt he go aſtray in tongue or ſpech;
for in ruling of the tongue & ſpeach,

a good part of our life is ſeene: Now
to the end he may the better governe
his tongue (he ſayth:) He will keep in
his mouth a bridle] To witte, to brydle
his tongue; the borrowed ſpeach
beeing taken from vn-rulie Horſes.
Then hee noteth the time of his ſilence,
and dantoning of his tongue.
So long (ſaieth hee) as the wicked man
ſhall be in my ſight] That is, howe oft
ſoever it ſhall pleaſe God to exerciſe
me,The ſecōd part. Through wicked mens doing. I
had bene dome, ſpeaking nothing] The
ſecond part of the narration, wherby
he openeth vp the begun execution
by himſelfe of his counſell taken. I
had bene dome] (ſayeth he) Then followeth
the amplification, from the
thing that is more: As if hee ſhould
ſaye; yea, I remembred not ſo much
indeed before them of mine honeſte
and juſt defence, but I leftall, and I
patiently ſuffered. Of this, ſee the example
in DAVIDS hiſtorie of Simei.
                        2. Sa
                              •
                           . 1
                              •
                           . 5.
He met DAVID ſlying from Abſchalom,
                        
and not only he invaded him by
wordes, but by ſtones. But DAVID,
with a wounderfull patience, ſuſteined
the mans opprobrie & wronge.
When my ſorrow] In the third roome,The third part.
DAVID declareth and ſheweth, that
he had gone aſtray from his purpoſe;
And the ſumme of the going aſtraie,
is ſet downe in the wordes that follow
in the fourth verſe. I ſpak with my)
That is, I murmured againſt God. Alſo
the three cauſes of going aſtray go
before. The firſt is in this place, as if
he ſhould ſay, When there was none
end of afflictiones, my ſorrowe as a
wound waxed greene: The ſecond is
in the beginning of the next verſe. My
minde growing hoate within mee] The
third is the ſeconde parte of the verſe
following, as if he ſhould ſaye, With
often meditation and thought, mine
affection was kindled vppe, and was
as it were, altogether ſo vehementlie
in flamed. DAVID manyfeſteth
this extreame greate perturbation

of minde, When TZIBA approching,
hee accuſed his maiſter
MAPHIBOSHETH, as one aſpyring
to the kingdome falſelie. 2. Samuel.
16. 1. Marke, of all theſe thinges,
Firſt, DAVID tooke purpoſe to bee
patiente, and hee begouth to put in
practiſe his purpoſed adviſe, but hee
wente backe from execution. It proceedeth
of the grace, that wee take
purpoſe to doe the thinge that is
good: It commeth from the grace
of GOD, that wee beginne to follow
out, the good thinge that wee
haue decreed: But ſcarſe haue wee
begunne, but if wee be left of GOD
(ſuch is the weakneſſe of our nature)
we preſentlie fall awaie. Where
fore wee haue neede of the continuall
grace of GOD all our lifelong
and in all the actiones of our life, otherwiſe,
it is not poſſible that wee
can perſever to the ende. Secondlie,
that is to bee marked, that DAVID
entred not in raſhlie into thie

this way of ſilence and patience, but
he did this adviſedly, that is, having
firſt taken counſel there anent. Who
ſoever therefore will patiently driue
over this life, and liue wel every way,
he ought to obliſh himſelfe as it were
to doe this thing, by a ſure determination
of his mind, and haueing had
deliberation thereof before. For this
thing ſerveth eſpecially againſt thoſe
ſuddaine motions of the minde: For
you may ſee, many caried violently
hither and thither in an inſtant with
their owne affectiones. The cauſe is,
that they never yet decreed with
themſelues, to driue over their life
patiently: From whence it came to
paſſe, that if they bee mooved, yea,
with the leaſt trifling thing, preſently
their tongue is lowſed to reproches,
and their hande is enarmed to commit
ſum haynous wicked fact. Men
commonlie thinke that it is not the
parte of a couragious mind, to ſuffer
wrong, neither yet thinke they, that

they are men of Spirite, vnleſſe they
be tranſformed into beaſts. Surely I
judge, that none of thoſe men were
ſtronger in Spirit then DAVID, or
greater in heart, which notwithſtanding
decreed with his owne mind to
ſuffer all kinde of injuries. This is the
verie beaſtlie fearcenes of our country
men, & not any courage of mind.
Thirdly, it is to be obſerved, that DAVIDs
affection at laſt boyled-vp, and
that he himſelfe ſpake at length: For
ſuch is the force of our affectiones,
that violently they draw the regenerate
hither and thither. Of which it is
that you yet perceiue, ſome remanēts
of ſinne ſtill to remaine in every one
of the beſt men: and that this perfect
regeneration of the Papiſtes, is but a
dreame. Surely I beleeue, that theſe
men never yet ſufficiētly went down
into themſelues, and haue never ſeen
that vyle corruption, that lyeth far
ben in the heart. I know (ſayeth the
Apoſtle) being now regenerate, that

in me,
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 7. 18. 
                        that is in my fleſh, no good dwelleth
He indeed felt that bitterneſſe of ſin
cleauing faſt to the ribbes, and that
law, which he calleth, The law of the
members, rebelling againſt the law of the
Spirite: which indeed thoſe men haue
never yet felte nor would not feele.
Fourthly, it is to bee noted, that DAVID
gaue not place incontinēt vnto
his affection: for you ſee here that he
burſted foorth into theſe voyces, by
certaine degrees. For afflictions cō
                        ming
vppon vs dailie, firſt of all, ſorrow
like a wounde waxeth greene,
then the hart groweth hoate: thirdly,
the fyre kindleth vp, and then indeede
the tongue is lowſed. Learne
therefore, that the affectiones of the
renewed man burſt not foorth, without
ſome wraſtling, whereby indeed
the regenerat man differeth from the
vnrenewed, which eaſilie, yea with
any light motion, is brought on to
commit any thing, and from hence
proceedeth alſo another difference

betuixt the renewed man, & the vnregenerate.
The regenerate man indeede
ſuffereth greatly, & for a long
time, wronges and afflictiones: IOB
took in patience the los of his goods,
he ſuffereth alſo patiently, the tinſell
of his children, but when it came to
boyles in his owne bodie, hee ſuffered
not thoſe with ſo patient a mind.
Notwithſtanding, that mans wounderfull
patience, is recommended to
the whole poſteritie, But he which is
not renewed, ſuffereth nothing with
a willing minde, if he be not able to
revenge wronges when hee woulde,
notwithſtāding he reteineth with in
himſelfe an intention of vengeance.
Fiftly, it is to be marked, DAVID kindled
vp firſt, then he ſpake:Iame. 3. 
                              •
                           . 
                        Iames in his
Epiſtle, He calleth the tongue a fyre: alſo
the ſame chap. 3. 6. Apoſtle calleth it a
fyre inflamed of Hell. Beholde in this
place that hel which is no other thing
then the fyre of malice, burning vp
in the hearte as it were, and blowen

vp and fed by Sathan. Se therefore,
vnleſſe there be firſt a flamme in the
hart, ther is no flamme in the tongue:
That thing which defyleth the man (ſayeth
the Lord) commeth out from within
the man: Then as oft as thou heareſt
thoſe blaſphemies, reproches, and
rotten filthie ſpeaches, impute not
thoſe ſo much to the wickedneſſe of
the tongue, as to the vncleaneſſe of
the heart: For of the abundance of the
hart, the mouth ſpeaketh] We deteſt the
mens tongues, but if wee were able
once to ſee thoſe fowle and filthie
hearts of men, which God alone beholdeth,
howe greatly I praye you,
would we altogether abhorre them?
For there is nothing more deteſtable
to the godlie man, then is the ſoule
and hearte of a man, not regenerate
by the holie Spirite: Hitherto hath
bene declared, the firſt parte of the
Pſalme, Cauſe me, ô Iehova to prooue
in] He maketh mention of the prayer
which he vſed in the falling backe.

whereof againe there are two parts:
Firſte, hee earneſtly craveth death:
then he deſireth a deliverance from
ſinne,two parts of the petition. and from the puniſhment of
ſinne. To the ende this doctrine may
be the eaſier; theſe two thinges are to
be diſtinguiſhed in the firſt petition:
Firſt, the petition it ſelfe, in the firſte
part of the fift verſe:The firſt part. The ſecond, the
reaſon of the petition in the nexte
parte of the ſame verſe. The third is,
an amplification, in the laſte parte of
the ſame verſe, and in the beginning
of the next verſe: The fourth is an
                           •
                        
certaine acclamation, in the ſeconde
parte of the ſixt verſe, & the whole 7.
verſe through out. Nowe as concerning
the petition. Cauſe me to proove
in experience (ſayeth he) mine ende:] He
might haue comprehended this in
one word; make me to die, but he vſed
a circumlocution, becauſe of his
paſſionat affection, to ſhew the loathſomnes
he had of life; as if he ſhould
ſaye: I haue long ſinſine ſought the

end of life, make me to feele it in experience
at laſt: Then the reaſon is
adjoyned, from the ſhortnes of this
life. What is the meaſure of my dayes
(ſayeth he?] As if he ſhould ſay, it is
nothing. Then cōtinuing in the purpoſe,
and willing as it were to define
more exactlie the time of his life:
Firſt, he maketh a preface, that he wil
diligentlie endevour, that he may ſee
and know how durable he is: There
after hee preſcribeth the time of his
life, then clearelie hee ſheweth, as it
were to God the author thereof, the
meaſure of his life. Behold (ſaith he)
thou haſte appoynted my daies as handebreadths]
that is, no longer then is the
meaſure of an hand-breadth. Then
he proceedeth, in the extenuating of
his daies. My time (ſayeth he) is nothing
before thee] This much cōcerning the
enlarging of the Argument. Laſt followeth,
the publiſhing of a graue &
weightie ſentence or acclamation.
Surly al men (ſaith he) is everie way vanitie,

although he bee never ſo well eſtabliſhed]
That is, firme and fixed in this
life: like as DAVID appeared to be in
a noble & puſſant kingdome, the enemies
vppon all ſides, being overcome,
when this conſpiracie aroſe:
Now hee repeateth this parte of the
acclamation: For in the ſame meaning
he ſayth: Doubtleſſe man paſſeth
away by a ſhaddow] That is, by a certaine
vaniſhing faſhion,1. Cor. 
                              〈◊〉
                            31. as PAVLL
ſpeaketh, by a faſhion or figure, by
which wordes it ſignifyeth: not anie
ſubſtantiall thinge, but a certaine vaniſhing
faſhiō of a thing. The ſame is
the judgmēt of the Prophet, of every
wicked mā,Pſal. 7
                              •
                           . 60. although he appear to be
never ſo well eſtabliſhed, The ſame
alſo is the Apoſtles judgement, concerning
this whole preſente whorlde.
The faſhion of this worlde (ſayeth hee)
goeth away.
                        1. Cor. 
                              〈◊〉
                            31. And this much indeede
hath bene ſpoken of both the partes
of the acclamation. Surely in vayne
they make a noyſe] He ſheweth the ſelfe

ſame vanity to be of mens careful indevours,
which is of the men themſelues:
as if hee ſhould ſaye: They labour,
runne & ſweat in vaine, which
thing he himſelfe had before founde
in experience, who after he had purchaſed
with ſo great travell, the kingdome,
and ſo great riches, he ſaw Abſchalom
his ſonne to rage, and he beleeveth
that Mephiboſheth would interpriſe
ſome thing againſt the kingdome,
and therefore hee was vncertain,
whether he ſhould haue his ſon
to be his ſucceſſor, or any other whoſoever.
Mark firſt: DAVID, his tongue
being now lowſed, he inveighed not
preſently againſt Abſchalom, nor againſt
Mephiboſheth, nor againſt any
man whoſoever: But turning vnto
God, he murmureth againſt him. For
we are al of that diſpoſition, and that
is the nature of our affectiones, that
aſſoone as they are lowſed, then they
begin firſt to be caried head long againſt
God: which thing, theſe Tragedies,

written by the Gentiles, ſufficiently
declare, where yee perceiue ſo
many blaſphemies of miſerable men;
ſo many paſſionat out cryings & exclamations,
not ſo much againſt man
as thoſe gods, whom they fayned to
themſelues. There ſurely it is a certaine
vive repreſentation of the corrupt
nature of all men; in the meane
time, they ſuffer all ſortes of extreamities:
For wee all by nature, impute
the afflictions which befall vs, & our
miſeries to God, & not to our ſelues,
or to our ſinnes. Notwithſtanding,
this murmuring of DAVID, neither
that impatience of IOB, is altogether
deſperate, ſuch as vſeth to be of profane
men, and whom God leaveth altogether
by his Spirite. Marke next,
The argument of the petition, from
the ſhortnes of the life, he gathereth
that we muſt die. It is profitable indeede,
continually to thinke of the
ſhortneſſe of this life, and not to harden
our heart againſte afflictiones,

whereby we are exerciſed in this life,
according to the will of God. So IACOB
complayneth before PHARAOH,
through the ſenſe of the nuſerie of
this life,Gen. 47▪ 9. 
                        That his daies were ſhort and evill:
But we muſt not alway gather of
this, that wee muſt die, neither yet
through impatience, is death to bee
thirſted after: which thing DAVID did
at ſome times, through the weaknes
of the fleſh. But PAVLE ſheweth a far
diverſe vſe of oppreſſion. Affliction
bringeth not out impatience,
                        Rom. 5. 4. 
                              •
                           . 
                        but patience,
patience experience, experience hope.
Thou ſeeſt therefore, that impatience
& deſperation follow not vppon the
the ſenſe of afflictiones, but patience
and hope. Of the which againe, you
gather, after what maner the corrupt
nature of man, abuſeth good arguments,
for evill concluſiones & petitiones.
Alſo, there is ſome meaſure of
impatience here: to wit, the holy Spirit
of God drawing back the mā again
For ſurely, even a very Cato being ſet

in that eſtate which DAVID then was
in, had gone further on, & not onely
would hee haue earneſtlie deſired
death at Gods hand, but he himſelfe
had put hand in himſelfe: yet God
leaveth not his own altogether. Thirdlie
note, that the corrupt nature of
man, abuſeth the beſt ſentences what
ſoever, ſuch as is this, That al men is everie
way vanitie] For we cannot ſufficiently
weigh our own mind, how
vaine we are by nature, whereof we
haue an example, yea, in Dauid a renewed
man; We abuſe this ſentence
to a verie bad concluſion, to impatience,
to deſperatiō, & to murmuring
againſt God. The ſame David, or who
ſoever he was that writ the 73. Pſalme
gathereth a farr better concluſion of
ſuch a like ſentence, of the vanitie of
vngodly men:Pſal. 
                              •
                           2. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         This to wit, I ſhal be alway
with thee (ſayeth hee) Fourthly,
Dauid being afflicted, hee feeleth in
experience his owne vanitie and miſerie,
according to his owne miſerie

and confeſſion: As if hee ſhoulde
againe, hee meaſureth the common
miſerie of men. Of which thinge
learne, what is the vſe of afflictiones,
from afflictions proceedeth not onlye
the knowledge of our owne
ſelues, but commonlie of the miſerie
of all men, which is ſo neceſſarie alwaye,
that without it, there is no feeling
of deliverance and happineſſe.
For except miſerie be knowen, there
is no deſire of happines and felicitie:
And if there ſhall be no deſire at any
time, in the life of this deliverance,
ſurelie no deliverance ſhall ever bee.
For the gate is not opened, but to
thoſe that knocke, neither yet is anie
thing given, but to thoſe that ſeeke.

                           •
                        his eſtate of men is moſt dangerous
who are continually dronken, with
the proſperous ſucceſſe of all things,
neither yet haue they experience at
any time, of thoſe imperfectiones,
and miſeries, which follow our nature.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           8 But nowe, ô Lord, what waite I for?
mine hope is in thee.
                           9 Deliver mee from all my back-ſlyding,
laye mee not out for a reproch to the
fooliſh.
                           10 I am dumme, I open not my mouth
becauſe thou haſt done it.
                           11 Remooue thy plague from me, I faile
at the ſtroke of thine hand.
                           12 If thou with rebukes for iniquitie
wouldeſt chaſtiſe any man, thou wouldeſt
diſſolue the thing that is to bee deſired in
him, as a moth, ſurely all men is vanitie.
Selah.
                           
                           13 Heare my prayer, O Iehova, & my
cry, turne thine eare vnto my teares, play
not the part of a deafe man: becauſe I am
a ſtranger before thee, a ſoiourner as all
mine aunceſters.
                           14 Ceaſe off from mee, that I may referſh
my ſelfe, when I goe not, as yet awaie,
ſo that I be preſent no more.
                        
                     
                     
                        BVt now] The ſeconde part of the
Pſalme, in which he draweth courage
to himſelfe, and correcteth that

wandring a ſtraye, which was in himſelf
ſome time before, as if he ſhould
ſaye. Hither to I haue haue ſpoken
theſe things of my going aſtray. But
now ô Lord, what waite 
                              •
                            for? that is,
what is mine hope? Then he anſwereth
himſelfe: Mine hope is in thee]
Having layde downe his hope, hee
conceiveth new prayers farre diverſe
from thoſe, which he made mention
of that, he vſed before. He is very zealous
in prayers, for he repeateth one
thing thriſe. Now ther ar three arguments
of the petition, thriſe repeated
over: Then is ſubjoyned the concluſion.The argumentes of the petitiō.
He craveth firſt in theſe words.
Deliver me from all my defectiones, laye
mee not out for a reproch to the fooliſh]
That is, to thoſe that abuſe reaſon to
fooliſhnes and infamie; which thing
al men do: while they be called back
by the holie Spirite of God. I waxe
dumme] The argumente of the firſte
petition, from his owne repentance

ſay; I acknowledge that thou art the
righteous author of this my chaſtiſement,
and I quiet my ſelfe in thy
judgementes. Remooue thy plague
from mee] Hee repeareth this petition,The repetition & expo
                              •
                           ng of the petitiō
                        
eſpeciallie the latter parte thereof.
For that reproche whereof hee
ſpake, hee interpreteth and calleth
it a plague. At the ſtroke] The other
argument of the repeated petion,
from his own wickednes. If thou
with rebukes] The amplifying of the
argumente, from the common eſtate
of all men, of whom, none haue
that ſtrength, whereby hee is able to
beare oute, if hee compare himſelfe,
with the weightineſſe of Gods
judgemente: But contrariwiſe, hee
is extreame weake. Nowe concerning
this argumente, looke manie
thinges, in the booke of IOB. For
iniquitie wouldeſt chaſtiſe] That is, if
thou wouldeſt chaſtice anie man according
to his deſerving, thou wouldeſt
diſſolue him into Aſhes, as a

moth, which is deſtroyed with the
touching onely. Then conſiddering
this common eſtate and weakeneſſe
of men, whereby they are not
able indeed to ſuffer ſo much as the
leaſt of Gods judgements, he cryeth
out as before, in the ſixt verſe, Surely
all men is vanitie] Here my prayer]
Thirdly, he rehearſeth the ſame petition,
with a greate vehemencie of
minde, And firſt he recommendeth
vnto God, the prayers themſelues:
Then the crying out in powring out
of the prayers. Thirdly, the teares cō
                        joyned
with the crying: For ſuch
circumſtances are not adjoyned vnto
praiers in vaine, as crying & teares.
Yea, they are cared for by God, who
putteth vp into his bottle, every teare
of his own, & hes them all in his regiſter
as it were, as DAVID ſpeaketh in
another place. Becauſe I am a ſtranger]
The thirde reaſon of the petition repeated
in the third place, frō the ſhortneſſe
of this life: as if he ſhould ſaye:

Becauſe I am not able to continue
long in this preſent life, & be a ſtranger
from the Lord; ſuch is the common
eſtate of all mortall men, therefore
there is an occaſion offered vnto
thee, to excuſe thy mercy towarde
me, a miſerable Pilgrime. So doe the
faithfull ſpeake in other places. Ceaſe
off from me] This is the concluſion,
as if he ſhould ſaye: Therefore leaue
off from afflicting mee longer and
more grieuouſlie, that I may refreſhe
my ſelfe before I die, not being to returne
againe vnto this life. So doth
IOB diſpute, 10. 21. &c. and as a humble
ſuppliant is turned to God. When
I goe not away] Theſe words declare
the ſhortneſſe of this preſent life, as
if he ſhould ſay, ſo long as the ſhorte
light continueth, or, ſo long as I enjoy
this ſhorte light. And this is the
ſelfe-ſame argument in effect with
that, which was in the ende of the
verſe preceding. Out of thoſe things
which we haue ſpoken, marke firſt in

DAVID a certain memorable change
and prayers, greatly diſagreeing among
themſelues. Before indeed he
had prayed with a troubled minde,
but nowe hee prayeth with a more
quiet and ſetled hart. For ſometimes
the fleſhe hath more the rule in the
prayers of the faithful, then the Spirit
oft-times. And ſome times again, the
rule of the Spirit, is more then of the
fleſh. Thou haſt alſo in this change,
an inſtruction of the finall victory of
the holy Spirite. For although in this
preſent life, the victorie appeareth to
be oft vpō the fleſhes ſide; nevertheles
by that ſame thinge, that after the
motiō of the fleſh, the holy Spirit raiſeth
vp in vs that operation, which
ſuppeth vp, as it were the motion of
the Spirite; we are put in minde that
once the victorie, ſhal be perfect and
full vpon the Spirites ſides. More over
conſidder, how diverſe▪ yea, how
contrary to the ſelfe, the effect of afflictions
is in DAVID. For ſeeing before,

when affliction draue him forward
to mourning, now the feeling
of the ſame, provoketh him to the acknowledging
of ſin, and to the deprecation
of the puniſhment therof.
For what is all our nature, if at anie
time wee be oppreſſed with adverſitie,
then wee are wearied of this preſent
life, and wee crie for death. But
wee are admoniſhed rather, to ſeeke
the forgiuenes of ſinnes, and reconciliation
with GOD, through Ieſus
Chriſt, then death, ſeeing that indeede
the affliction is not to bee ended
with death; but it ſhal be encreaſed
manie waies, if through Ieſus
Chriſt there bee not reconciliation.
Finally obſerue, how diverſelie hee
doth conclude from the ſame argument,
taken from the ſhortneſſe of
this life. For before, becauſe the life
is ſhorte, hee earneſtlie ſought for
death. Now, becauſe the life is ſhort,
he prayeth that the plague may bee
remooved. He vſeth the argument of

the Spirite aright, which the fleſh abuſeth;
and he draweth out holy petitiones
and concluſiones out of the
ſame principles, out of the which, the
fleſh draweth out venime. The regenerate
men foeleth in thēſelues this
contrarie maner of reaſoning & concluding
out of the ſame principles.
Yea, and they are happie in that reſpect,
that thereafter they haue concluded
out of good principles, evill
thinges; out of the ſame againe they
haue gathered good things, the Spirit,
to witte, overcomming the fleſh:
when the vngodly and vnrenewed,
continuallie, if at any time it happen
them to ſee good grounds, draw out
of them falſe and vngodly concluſions:
For it is ſaide, That the vngodlie
knowing God, notwithſtanding they glorified
him not as GOD, but they became
vaine in their thoughts.
                        Rom. 1. 21 To GOD, in
Chriſt Ieſus be all glorie, Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THE ARGVMENT Of the XLII. PSALME.
                  A Pſalme it is of doctrine, as it is evident out of the

                        •
                     nſcription. And it conteineth Davids complaynt, that
he was baniſhed from the viſible preſence of GOD,
which was in Ieruſalem. Of the Pſalme, there are
foure partes. 1 The firſt a complaynt vnto the 6.
verſe. The ſeconde, is a comforte in the 6. verſe, to the
latter parte of the 7. verſe. The third, is a certaine
glorying againſt all the inconvenients of his baniſhment,
and finally, againſt all afflictions, vnto the laſte
verſe. In the fourth and laſt parte of the Pſalme, hee
returneth to the comforting of his caſten downe
ſoule.
               
               
                  Pſalme XLII.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of doctrine, committed
to the maiſter of the Muſicke, among
the poſteritie of KORACH, to be ſong.
                           
                           2 AS the hart brayeth for the riuers
of waters, ſo my ſoule brayeth vnto thee, 
                                 •
                              
God.
                           3 My ſoule is thirſtie for God▪ for the
ſtrong living God, ſaying, When ſhall I
come neere, that I may appeare in the ſight
of God.
                           4 My teares are meate vnto mee day
and night, while it is ſaid vnto me daily;

where is thy God?
                           5 Remembring theſe things, I powre out
my ſoule vpon my ſelfe: that I was woonte
to paſſe by in the multitude, that I walked
with them vnto the houſe of God, with the
voice of ſinging and prayſe, The congregation,
in the meane time, keeping a
feaſt.
                        
                     
                     The firſt part of the pſalme.
                     As the hart] In this firſt part of the
Pſalme, and his complaint, DAVID
vttereth out two moſt grieuous
paſſiones: The firſt indeede, a vehement
deſire of the viſible preſence of
God, which at that time was in Ieruſalem.
The other, an exceeding great
ſorrow of hearte, conjoyned with an
earneſt deſire. The deſire is firſt ſet
downe by waye of compariſon, the
ſimilitude being made with an hart
braying. The heart (ſayeth he) brayeth
no more for the channels of waters, then I
bray vnto thee, ô God) The heart is then
ſaid to fly at al times vnto the waters,The nature of the heart.
when painefully he draweth breath,

which is chiefely, when the harveſt
quarter beginneth, at what time, in
reſpect of the burning heate, hee is
moſt impatient of thirſt: So are wee
all by nature thirſtie and drîe, and
when there is a feeling of that thirſte
and drough, then with no leſſe deſire
are we caried forwarde vnto Chriſt,
in whom only wee haue our refreſhment,
then the heart brayeth, that is,
crying out, he runneth vnto the waters,
wherby he quencheth his thirſt,
Then is ſet down a ſimple propounding
of that deſire: My ſoule is thirſty
for God] (ſayeth he) By nature al men
as wee haue ſaide, are drie and withered,
burnt vp, to witte, with that fyre
of ſinne, and of the wrath of GOD.
But fewe feele their drough, where
by it commeth to paſſe, yea, that few
are mooved with the thirſt of grace,
for no man is throughly touched
with the thirſte of the grace of God,
except God firſt by his Spirite hath
provoked him, eſpeciallie by the

preaching of the law. But now, when
once it is provoked, except newgrace
follow on, whereby the thirſty are
continually led forward, to that pure
fountaine of the water of life, Ieſus
Chriſt, preſently they wil ſeek vnto
themſelues fowle puddles; and for
cleane and living water, they will
drink in filthie & ſtinking waters: for
the only merite of Ieſus Chriſt and
his bloud, they wil drinke vp the merites
of men: & ſuch poyſons, which
the Papiſtes this day, offer to miſerable
men. Wherefore Chriſt in IOHN,
at what time he remained vppon the
earth with the Iewes, with a loude
voyce and crie, he called al that were
thirſtie vnto himſelf. And this whole
Preaching of the Goſpell this day, it
belongeth to no other end, then that,
as with the finger, that only fountain
of life Ieſus Chriſt, be pointed clearlye
out. Nowe after that men are
brought vnto Chriſt, they drink, yea,
they drink for evermore, they drink

in that grace which is in him, & they
all receiue of his fulneſſe: for that
fountaine of life, is never drawen
drye, neither yet doth ever the blood
of Chriſt drie vp: But not without
ſome difference, drinke wee in this
life, and in the life to come: For in
this life (that I ſpake ſo) we taiſt but a
little, but in the other life, wee ſhall
drinke that water of life abundantly.
Wee ſhal drinke then for evermore,
and we ſhall drinke without loathſomneſſe,
and preaſe of vomiting:
For like as that water, can never at any
time be drawen drie, ſuch is the
plentie and abundance thereof; ſo it
is of that dulceneſſe and ſweetneſſe,
that it allureth and provoketh the
drinkers to drink continually. There
is no pleaſure in this life, which by
continuall vſe thereof, breedeth not
a loathſomeneſſe of the ſelfe. Wee
loath at ſometimes, I grant, thoſe exerciſes
of godlines; as the preaching
and hearing of the worde, prayers, &

ſuch other of like ſort. But this is not
to bee imputed to this water, but to
our corruption: For there lurketh as
yet in everie one of our hearts, ſome
gall of bitternes, whereby our mind
is ſo infected, and the taſte in the
mouth is ſo corrupt, that thoſe things
which are by nature moſt ſweete, at
ſometime they ſeeme to bee bitter:
Which thing is manifeſt, yea, out of
that, that in that other life, when wee
ſhall haue layde downe, this corruption
of nature, there ſhall bee no loathing
at all. Beſide this difference,
whereof wee haue ſpoken, there is another,
wherby we drink in this life,
and ſhal drink in that other to come.
In that other life we ſhall drinke immediatlie,
that is, no midde inſtrumēt
comming betweene, either of the
preached word, or of the ſacraments
adminiſtred, we ſhal ſee God even as
he is. But in this life, ſurely wee haue
need of meanes, as it were of ſpowts,
whereby may bee convoyed out of

Chriſt vnto vs, that water of grace.
And this is it which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh:1. Cor. 
                              〈◊〉
                            12.
                        Now we ſee through a glaſſe darkelie,
but then ſhall we ſee face to face. And
of this it commeth to paſſe, that as
long as we liue here; like as there is a
deſire of the water of life it ſelfe, ſo
there is a deſire of the meanes
whereby we draw that water: I ſaye,
there is a deſire of this outwarde miniſtrie:
And this was that longing of
DAVID, which he openeth vp in this
Pſalme: But thou wilt ſpeare; Had
not DAVID God preſent with him,
in whatſoever place it happened him
to be, without that externall miniſtery,
had he him not with him, I ſaye?
I anſwere, that he had in every place
God, in ſome meaſure preſente: but
he felt not ſo abounding an fruition
of his preſence, when he was farre away
from the Temple of 
                           •
                        od, which
hee was woont to feele in the viſible
Church of God, and in that Temple
which at that time had eſpeciallie a

promiſe of Gods preſence: The ſelfe
ſame thing alſo, all the Godlie feele
in themſelues, that they feele not ſo
plentifull an enjoying of God, whether
by the word Preached, or by the
Sacraments adminiſtred, which they
are accuſtomed to feele otherwiſe
with thoſe meanes. For thoſe ordinarie
meanes are not appoynted by
GOD in vaine. For the ſtrong God]
Theſe are the groundes and cauſes
of ſuch a great deſire. DAVID had felt
of that viſible preſence of GOD, his
mightie power through Chriſt, hee
had felte alſo by experience in him,
through the ſame Chriſt, everlaſting
life. From this aroſe, that deſire of enjoying
of him. From God preſent &
in ſome ſure manner, viſible in his
Church: of feeling, I ſaye, that accuſtomed
power, goodnes: finallie, the
life of God in Chriſt Ieſus. For hee
that hath once taſted thoſe thinges
which are in God, and (that I ſhould
ſpeake ſo with PETER) Hes taſted,
                        1. Pet. 
                              〈…〉
                           
                         
                        how

gracious the Lord is, hee deſireth him
continuallie to be preſent with him,
and earneſtlie, hee craueth that ſincere
milk of the word, which thing alſo PETER
himſelf hath left manifeſt by his
own example, who long before that
anſwered to the Lord, that he would
not depart frō his ſide. Lord to whom
ſhall we goe (ſayeth hee) Thou haſt the
wordes of eternall life. Saying when]
Here DAVIDS ſoule declareth his
owne thirſte. And it is brought in
the ſelfe ſpeaking, by taking on the
perſon of one that ſpeaketh, and talketh
vnto God, for while wee complaine
and lamente, not onely the
mouth of the bodie is to be brought
out, but the ſoule is to bee brought
out into Gods preſence. The meaning
is, as if he ſhould ſaye, will this
never come to paſſe, that I ſhal come
to GOD, and appeare in his ſight?
Thoſe who ar deſtitut of Gods woū
                        ted
preſence, and of that life which
proceedeth from his preſence, and

then feele nothing but the terrours
of death, they appeare to themſelues
indeede, that they ſhall never ſwim
out of that death. This is the feeling,
I ſaye, that nature furniſheth. And
thoſe, which otherwiſe are godlie,
when they ſeeme to themſelues to be
deſtitute of God, at ſome times they
are governed by the inſtinct of nature.
Looke the Pſalme. 13. verſe. 2.
Wilt thou forget me forever? My teares
are] Hitherto hath bene the paſſion
of his deſire, now hee publiſheth the
vehement paſſion of his griefe. For
twiſe he bringeth it out, once in this
verſe, again in that that followeth. In
this verſe then, (he ſayth) My teares
are] That thing which we chiefelie
take pleaſure in,Iohn. 6. 
                              •
                           5. the ſcriptures calleth
meate, from whence it commeth to
paſſe, that Chriſt ſayeth, My meat is to
doe the will of him that ſente me] this is
the thing which chiefly I delight in:
So the teares are ſaide to be meate in
this place, becauſe hee who is in the

eſtate of heauineſſe, delighteth in
teares, and drinketh them in greedelie,
as any moſt ſweete liquor. For
there is ſome naturall pleaſure in everie
affection, when the affection is
left to the ſelfe. Yea, in the paſſion of
ſorrowe, there is a delight, although
there be not in it a ſolide joye. But if
the Spirit of God ſtir vp thoſe ſighes,
& thoſe teares, now there is another
joy, yea, and that ſolide indeed, conjoyned
with the teares themſelues,
& together with inutterable ſighes,
of which the Apoſtle PAVLI ſpeaketh.
Rom. 8. It is that gladnes which
PETER calleth in his firſt Epiſtle, vnſpeakable
and glorious, and together
with thoſe teares the water of grace
and life is drunken-in. Neither yet in
this life, to ſpeake the thing which I
thinke, is there any ſolide joye of the
Chriſtian man, vnleſſe it bee then▪
while he reioyceth, he powreth out
teares, ſighes, & is heavie. But in that
other life, All teares ſhall bee 
                              •
                           iped 
                              •
                           
                           waie

from the eies,
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . 4. as IOHN ſpeaketh
While it is ſaide] Hee adjoyneth the
cauſe of his ſorrow, that bitter mocking
of the enemies, which daylie in
ſteede of a reproche they caſt vppe in
his teeth. Where is thy God?] There
was indeede ſufficient matter of diſpleaſure
in that, that he was deſtitute
of that viſible preſenſe of God in his
Church, but for this cauſe ſorrowe
was heaped vpon ſorrow, in reſpect,
it was objected by his enemies, by
way of mockage, that he himſelf was
left of GOD. This is no new thinge
with the perſecutors of the Church,
throwen downe and humbled, yea,
this waie to vp-brayde any particular
member thereof. Looke Pſal. 137.
In which it is ſaide of the Church:
When we ſate weeping at the rivers of Rabell.
But what did the Babylonians
then in that mourning: They required
of vs, ſaye they, in skorne, ioyful ſongs:
ſuch as wee had ſunge in Ieruſalem.
This ſame thinge alſo ſhall wee feele

in experience, if ever it come to paſſe,
through the righteous judgement of
God, that wee be ſpoyled of this preſence
of God in his Goſpel; the meditation
of which evill, now appeareth
to be ſome-what light: But after that
it commeth to paſſe, through the righteous
judgement of God, then in very
deede, wee ſhall finde in experience,
how grievous it is: I ſpeake of thoſe eſpecially,
who ſometime delighteth in
the preſence of God in his word. Remembring
theſe things] Again he ſetteth
downe his griefe, and hee conjoyneth
therewith a new argument of ſorrow.
I powre out my ſoule vpon my ſelfe] As if
he ſhould ſaye, Not onelie I powre
out teares, but I powre out the verie
ſoule, which with diſpleaſure melteth
within me. The inward louſing of the
ſoule, and of the affection thereof, is
the cauſe that the bodie and the eies,
are reſolved into teares: And manie
times, yea, our eies are not indeed ſufficiently
of power to furniſh teares to

our heavineſſe, after that till all the
teares are powred out, and the bodie
as it were dryed vp. Then the paſſion
of ſorrow vſeth to be vehement, when
it is left to the owne libertie. He adjoyneth
the cauſe of ſo great a ſorrow.
Remembring theſe things] (ſayeth he) to
witte, which follow. That I was woont
(ſayeth hee) to paſſe by in the multitude]
As the remembrance of the former
miſerie, after a deliverance, is conjoyned
with gladneſſe (for that man never
rejoyced ſolidely at any time, which
was not firſt before diſpleaſed in earneſt)
ſo the remembrance of the bypaſte
felicitie, after that anye happie
man is made miſerable, is conjoyned
with a great dolor of mind. Thus,
ſeeing it is cuſtomable in any other
thing what ſoever, it hath chiefelie
place in matters Spiritual and heavenly.
For to him it ſeemeth to be intollerable,
who at ſome times had GOD
preſent with him in Chriſt; if he be at
any time left deſtitute of his preſēce, epecially,

if any externall affliction for
the preſēt lie over his head: but if in the
meane time, with the remembrance of
the former preſence, together with the
dolor, there be a deſire of that preſēce,
ſurely there is ſome gladneſſe conjoyned
with that ſorrow: Bleſſed are they
who hunger and thirſt for righteouſneſſe,
for they ſhall be filled, and Gods ancient
mercie ſhall come vpon them, whereof
they remember an argumente of
the aſſurance of Gods preſence to bee
reſtored in time to come. Moreover,
it is to be marked in this place, that fra
once the preſence of GOD is withdrawen,
all ſorrow and adverſe things
meete vs in the waye, as are the skornings
of the enemies, and the remembrance
of felicitie paſt.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           6 Why caſteſt thou downe thy ſelfe, ô my
ſoule? and makeſt a noyſe within me? Hope
in God, for I will yet prayſe him, and the
ſalvation of his face, that is of all ſortes.
                           7 My God, my ſoule caſteth downe the

ſelfe in me.
                        
                     
                     The other part of the Pſalme.
                     
                        WHy caſteſt thou down] In this ſecond
parte of the Pſalme, he waltereth
as it were ſuddainelie, out of the
middeſt of ſorrow, and draweth courage
to himſelfe: And firſt by a turned
ſpeech he ſpeaketh to his owne ſoule:
Then next to God, the fountaine of al
comforte. Alſo, hee calleth backe as it
were again, his ſoule out of the helles:
For it was very greatly caſt downe, as
the words themſelues ſhew. For this is
the cuſtom of the godlie, that after for
a time they haue given liberty vnto diſpleaſure,
and haue ſaid to their ſoule
as it were: Receiue not comforte, but
drinke in ſorrow as water (for in dolour
and heavineſſe for a time, is the
rejoycing of the godlie) After they
haue ſufficientlie and aboundantlie
given place to ſorrow, and are now altogether
caſte downe, and aſtoniſhed,
preſently they ryſe vp, and encourage
themſelues, by the grace of God, and
ſome certaine motion of the holy Spirit,

which leaveth them not vtterly for
ever. Moreover, they doe it after this
ordour: Firſt, they rebuke and correct
their owne ſoule and affection, which
thing, Dauid doth here, no otherwaies
then a mother doth her childe, which
hath not yet the vſe of reaſon, at which
time, it is whollie powred out into
teares: Then after rebuke, they comfort
their ſoule, and exhorteth it to
hope in God, altogether after the ſame
faſhion, whereby mothers, after they
haue ſharpely rebuked their children
comfort them. It is to be marked, that
David lifteth vp his ſoule vnto hope:
For to hope in God, it is the onely remedie
againſt deſperation. For hope is
contrary to deſperation, and whoſoever
they bee, that are of a caſt-downe
minde, if in the meane time they be
not lifted vppe by hope, they will fall
into deſperation, and will periſh at
length. From whence proceeded that
deſperat ſorrow of the Gentiles, which
was without faith, without hope, without

Chriſt: And the ſame day alſo, how
many ſoever they be, that are in the eſtate
of death, without Chriſt, of neceſſitie
they muſt dye in deſperation.
For I will yet] He maketh ſome place to
hope in his ſoule from thence, that he
ſhall not be diſappoynted of the thing
hoped for, but even as he hath hoped,
ſo ſhall it fall out vnto him. I wil prayſe
him (ſayeth hee) and the ſaluation of his
face, that is of all ſortes] That is, his face,
in which is the ſ
                           •
                        cietie of joyes, or that
manifold ſalvation, which is in his face
and preſence; & ſo to prayſe, is to publiſh.
David therefore promiſeth, that
he will praiſe both God himſelfe, and
alſo, that ſo great a benefite of his life
received from him: or finally, to praiſe
the ſalvation of his face, is to prayſe &
publiſh the ſalvation which ſhall bee
before him, from whence, in the laſte
verſe (he ſayth) that hee will prayſe the
ſalvation of his face, that is, the ſalvation
which ſhall bee ſeene before him.
My God] As he had firſt turned himſelfe

vnto his ſoule, now hee turneth
himſelfe vnto his God, and hee lifteth
vp his eies, & ſigheth, (as it were) vnto
him, opening vp vnto him the ſorrow
of his ſoule, and hee powreth out his
carefulneſſe and ſolicitude vppon his
boſome. Whoſoever is indued with
Gods holie Spirite; This man ſigheth
vnto God in his affliction and ſorrow:
But he who is indued with mans ſpirit
onely, that man wil never ſigh vnto
God: for he ſuppoſeth God to be angrie
with him, eſpecially then, when
there lyeth any affliction vppon him:
For he thinketh that that his whole miſerie
proceedeth from the wrath of
God. But hee who hath the Spirite of
God, that ſpirit (I ſay) of adoption, by
whome wee crie, Abba, Father: This
man commeth without feare vnto
God, becauſe indeed that Spirite is alwaie
with ſome feeling of Gods mercie
and fatherlie loue. Wherefore, as a
ſonne, who hath his Father well-willing
vnto him, in his ſorrow, he taketh

his way ſtraight to his father: Even ſo
the childe of GOD, hee paſſeth in his
ſorrow and miſerie to God his father,
and maketh his complaint vnto him.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           7 Therefore I remember of thee, out of
the Land of Iorden, and of the Chermonites,
out of the little hill.
                           8 Howſoeuer a deepe calleth vppon a
deepe, at the ſound of thoſe that are ſent out
by thee, let al the breaking-in ſurges, and
thy vallies paſſe by me.
                           9 In the day time, Iehova will ſende away
his louing kindnes, and in the night
his ſong vnto me: I wil continue in my praier
vnto the ſtrong God of my life.
                           10 Saying vnto the ſtrong God of my
rocke, why forgetteſt thou mee? Wherefore
go I in mourning apparrell, becauſe of the
oppreſsion of the enemies?
                           11 They aſſaile my bones with a ſhorte
ſword, my enemies reproching mee, while
they ſay vnto me daylie, where is thy God?
                        
                     
                     
                        THerefore] He glorieth thereafter verie
ſuddenly, firſt againſt the places

of his baniſhment whatſoever, then againſt
everie one of his moſt grievous
afflictions. This particle, [Therefore]
appeareth not to giue a reaſon of anie
ſentence going before in the texte.
Then hee begouth this ſentence (as it
ſeemeth to me) from ſome cutted off
and ſudden feeling of joye, and of the
preſence of God: as if he had ſaid, becauſe
of that joy, and that rejoycing of
the ſoule, which I cōceiue of my God,
I remember of thee, &c. Of which thou
learneſt this, how ſoone a man vſeth to
be changed, that turneth himſelfe vnto
God: for the preſence of GOD is
forcible to giue life vnto the creature;
that his face ſhineth no ſooner, but the
creature beginneth to reviue againe,
although it bee never ſo dead. When
the Pſalme ſpeaketh of theſe groſſe &
bruitiſh creatures. Pſalme. 104. 29. 30.
When thou hideſt thy face, they are troubled
if thou take away their breath, they returne
to their duſt. Againe, if thou ſende foorth
thy Spirite, they are refreſhed, finally, thou

reneweſt the face of the earth. How much
more the reaſonable creatures, as wee
call them, and not onely the reaſonable,
but the ſpirituall, that is, the creatures
that are renewed by the Spirite
of GOD, which haue once felt howe
mercifull the Lord is, thoſe creatures, I
ſaye, depend vppon their God; for it is
neceſſary, yea much more, that their
life and death depende from his face,
preſent & abſent;Pſal. 4, 7. 8 
                        Lift vp (ſayth David)
Iehouah the light of thy coūtenance vpō vs,
and put more ioy in mine heart, then at the
time, in which their cornes and wines were
increaſed. Of theſe therefore chiefely
do I ſpeake, which are already accuſtomed
with the countenance of God, &
that vſe to take ſome pleaſure of his
face. For to ſpeake of others, they are
not able earneſtly to ſeeke that countenance
of GOD in Chriſt Ieſus. For
there is no deſire of that thinge wee
know not. Alſo, theſe haue not yet taſted,
how ſweet that ſight of God is in
Ieſus Chriſt. I remember of thee] as if he

ſhuld ſay, In every place where it happeneth
me to be baniſhed, from all the
bordours and coaſtes of Iſraell. From
the Eaſt, where is the riuer of Iorden:
from the North, where it is bounded
by the mountaine of Chermon and Libanus,
& frō the South, where the hilly
coūtry boūdeth Iudaea. He calleth theſe
hillie countries, by the name of a little
Hill, becauſe they being compared
with the Mountaine of Libanus, and
with Chermon, which are ſituate vppon
the North, they are reckoned out onely
among little Hilles. Of this place
thou perceiveſt, that there is no place
either of baniſhment or of impriſonment,
ſo vnpleaſant and ougly of the
ſelfe, which is able to ſeparat the children
of God, from the countenance of
their God? yea, they glory in that preſence
of GOD: which they poſſeſſe againſt
any place whatſoever: For this,
in which we driue over our life, what
ever it be, it is nothing indeede, But
Gods preſence is all things. The word

                        Of remembrance] which he vſeth, is to
bee marked. For ſurely that remembrance,
was rather of Gods preſence,
then the preſence of God it ſelf, which
was then without the Citie o
                           •
                         Ieruſalem,
in which at that time, was that viſible
preſence of God. The matter is
ſo then, when wee are baniſhed from
this outward miniſterie of God in his
Church; yea, in which wee chiefelie
haue our God preſent: Then ſurely we
that ar the faithful, are not ſaid indeed
ſo much to haue our GOD preſente;
as to remember vppon his preſence,
which was ſome-time with vs. Alſo,
this remembrance I graunt is joyfull,
ſweete and acceptable, notwithſtanding,
it lacketh not ſome certaine diſpleaſure
& heavines of the own, yea, &
in it, there is a certaine matter of ſorrow,
as we ſaw before in the fift verſe.
Remembring theſe thinges (ſayth hee) I
power out my ſoule vppon my ſelfe] I will
ſaye ſome-what more: This preſence
of GOD alſo, which is in the miniſterie

of his worde, it hath the owne
dolour conioyned therewith, becauſe
it is vnder hope. Hope I grant, is with
joy and glorying, from whence the Apoſtle
remembreth of the glorying of
hope. And in another place. We glorie
vnder the hope of the glory of God.
                        Heb. 3. 6. Notwithſtanding
that hope is conioyned
with ſorrowe and ſighes, We ſigh (ſayth
he) waiting for our adoption, that is the redemption
of our bodie.
                        Rom, 5, 2, 
                        Howſoeuer a deepe]
As before he had gloried againſt every
one of the places of his baniſhmente
whatſoeuer,Rom. 8. 13 ſo he glorieth now againſt
afflictions, although they be moſt grievous.
[Howſoeuer a deepe calleth vpon a,
&c.] That is, how grieuous ſoeuer the
afflictions be, as they wer waters breaking
in violently vppon me: notwithſtanding
[Iehoua will ſend away his louing
kindeneſſe in the day time, &c.] You ſee
there is no affliction although it bee
neuer ſo grieuous, which is able to ſeparate
the the faithfull from the preſence
of their God, or from a feling

of his mercie: yea contrarywiſe, they
glorie in the moſt heauie calamities
whatſoeuer.Rom. 8. 35 
                        Who ſhal ſeparate vs (ſayeth
Paule) from the loue of God, ſhal oppresſion
ſhall anguiſh? It is next to be noted, that
he ſayeth thoſe floodes and waues violently
breaking in: alſo thoſe thinges
that are ſent out to bee Gods; as if all
theſe things were from God. Therefore
hee acknowledgeth that all his afflictiones
proceeded, from God as the
author: But from whence promiſeth
he that comfort ſhal come vnto him in
his afflictiones? ſayeth he not in the 9.
verſe [Iehoua will ſend away his louing
kindneſſe.] Therefore affliction & comfort
in affliction proceedeth both together
from God,1. Cor. 10. 23. together with the
trouble he ſendeth comfort, with the
tentation, hee ſendeth deliverie out
of tentation. Neuertheleſſe, there is
ſome difference in the order, for firſt in
deede he afflicteth ere he comforteth:
Firſt is the ſenſe of trouble, then the
feeling of comfort, to what purpoſe is

that? To witt, becauſe we are ſo dull of
nature, and ſenſeleſſe in this life, that
we cannot eſteem of the grace of God
in Chriſt, howe great it is, neither yet
can we judge how ſweete it is, vnleſſe
wee feele firſt, how miſerable wee ourſelues
are by nature, and ſigh vnder the
burden of ſinne. Now in miſerie the
feeling of grace & of that preſence of
God in Chriſt is ſweete. But after this
life the joy of the Godly ſhal be ſolide
wāting altogether al feling of ſorrow;
to wit, when all teares ſhall be wiped
away from our eies: for then wee ſhall
bee able to comprehend that pure and
ſincere ioy, which we cannot compas
in this life. [I will continue in my prayer]
This is the effect of the thinges preceeding:
For in reſpect that God wil ſend
away his louing kindeneſſe in the day,
and his ſong in the night vnto DAVID:
Therefore he wil continue in his prayers
to GOD. For there is no man that
is able to conceiue prayers, vnles God
furniſh the matter of them, and indue

vs with a feeling of his mercie. Lord
(ſayeth he) in the 51. Pſalme 17. verſe
[Thou ſhalt open my lippes, and my mouth
ſhall ſhew foorth thy praiſe] Hee calleth
God the Fountaine of his life] by which
name, he ſheweth manifeſtlie, that hee
hath apprehended that power of God
which is in Chriſt, which ſerueth vnto
life. But let vs conſider the forme of
the prayer it ſelfe. I ſay vnto the ſtrong, of
my rocke] that is of my refuge, &c. This
praier of DAVID is a lamentation, and
a certaine complainte. Obſerue then
what ſort of ſongs God vſeth to furniſh
in afflictiones, to wit, a complaining
kinde and ſorrowfull. And ſurelie
of neceſſitie it muſt bee thus. For to
what purpoſe ſerue ioyfull ſonges in
miſeries? looke Pſalme. 137. In which
the Church of God abhorreth thoſe
ioyful ſonges, ſuch as ſhee ſong ſometime
in Ieruſalem, being now in her
baniſhment. Notwithſtanding the heauines
and lamentation is alwaye tempered
with a certaine ſweetneſſe, and

ioy in God, and the lowder the ſighes
are, the deeper vſeth the reioycing to
be. But let vs conſider the words. Why
forgetteſt thou me?] (ſayeth he) Firſt he
complaineth that God forgetteth him:
Then he complaineth of his miſerie
This latter indeede is the effect of the
former. For when God forgetteth vs,
then at that time we are miſerable, we
walke as in mourning apparell, and we
quarrell with God. Alſo in the meane
time that DAVID complaineth that
the Lord had forgotten him, he calleth
him, The ſtrong GOD of his rocke]
Whereby is ſignified, that yet he cleaueth
vnto God verie grippingly. The
faithfull ſo in loue imbrace their God,
that although hee ſeeme ſome-time to
be forgetful of them, nevertheles they
leaue not off to ſtick vnto him: Howbeit
(ſayeth IOB) thou wouldeſt ſlay me, ſhould
I not hope in thee? Which thing ſurely
is an evident, that God in very deede
forgetteth them not, although for a
time he appeare ſo vnto them. For if

God once forget vs, and ſhould leaue
vs altogether,Example in Iob▪ Chap. 13. 15. ſurely wee alſo ſhould
forſake him. For if hee firſt tooke not
hold vpon vs, verely, we were not able
with our hand, as it were, to take holde
of him. Notwithſtanding, it appeareth
ſo vnto vs, while wee are afflicted, that
we are left of him, and that hee taketh
no further thought of vs. Wherefore goe
I in mourning] Hee complayneth of
his miſerie, which he ſignifieth by the
adjunct clothing of his bodie: Becauſe
of the oppreſsion] He ſheweth the cauſe
of his miſerie, and of that dooleful habite
of clothing: To witte, the oppreſſion
of the enemie. They invade my
bones] In theſe wordes, hee expreſſeth
more particularly this oppreſſion. They
aſſayle my bones] Then opening vp that
figuratiue ſpeech: Mine enemies reproching
mee] (ſayeth hee:) The reaſon
wherefore then next hee rendreth,
from their contumelious and blaſphemous
wordes, While they ſay (ſayth he)
vnto me daylie, Where is thy God?] This

indeed was a blaſphemie againſt God,
which was a contumelie & a reproch
againſt Dauid. For blaſphemie againſt
God, is the reproch of the neighbour,
& they are no otherwaies commoved
therewith, then if they were ſtricken
through with a ſworde: for ſuch is
the mutuall conjunction of God, and
of his owne; ſuch is the compaſſion, &
mutual feeling, that if they ſee God to
be touched with any ignominie, and
his name to be blaſphemed, the godly
are no otherwaies commooved, then
if they were woūded with ſome deadlie
wound: Even ſo on the other ſide,
God is ſo mooved with the perſecution
of his owne, that he eſteemeth the
ſame, as if it were done to himſelfe,
Saul, Saul,
                        Act. 9. 4. (ſayeth hee) why perſecuteſt
thou me?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           12 Why caſteſt thou downe thy ſelfe my
ſoule? and why makeſt thou a noyſe within
me? Hope in GOD, for I will yet prayſe the
ſaluation of al ſortes of my face, & my God.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        WHy caſteſt] Laſt of all, turneth to
that verſe, which wee opened vp
before, as it were, the overword of the
Pſalme, cōcerning which, look before
in the 6. verſe; Therefore, as touching
it, only we make mention of this: how
oft ſoever the godlie for a time giue
place vnto their ſorrow; ſo oft manie
times they returne to themſelues, and
comforte themſelues, correcting their
paſſion, and exhorting their ſoules vnto
hope, which is contrary to deſperation,
vnto which, their affection other
waies caryeth them head-long.
                  
               
               And thus much haue wee ſpoken vpon the 42. Pſalme.
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the XLIX. Pſalme.
                  Nothing doe I reaſon concerning the maker of
this Pſalme. The partes of the Pſalme are foure: The
firſt, a graue preface, in which he laboureth to purchaſe
all mens attention vnto the 6. verſe. The ſecond, is a propoſition
of confidence into God, in the 6. verſe. The
third, is the argument of the confidence propounded,
from that benefite of the Reſurrection, and of eternal
life, vnto the 17 verſe. The fourth, is a concluſion of
exhortation to all the godly, from thence to the ende of
the Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  The XLIX. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme (committed) to the maiſter
of muſick (to be ſong) among the poſteritie
of Korach.
                           
                           2 Heare this all people, all in dwellers
of the Worlde, vnderſtand with the
cares.
                           3 Both borne of the baſe man, and likewiſe
borne of the Noble man, both the rich
and the needie.
                           4 My mouth ſhall ſpeake wiſdome of diverſe
ſortes, and the meditation of my mind
manifold prudence.
                           5 Inclyning mine eare to a parable, I wil
vtter vpon the Harpe, mine harde matter.
                        
                     
                     The firſt part of the pſalme.
                     
                        HEare this] The firſt parte of the
Pſalme, the Preface, in which hee
craveth the attention: Firſt in general
of all people, of all the in-dwellers of
the world. Then in particular, making
as it were a certaine diſtribution, hee
ſeeketh for attendance. 1. Of ignoblemen.
2. Of Nobles. 3. Of rich. 4. Of
poore: all whome he mooveth to take
heed; from the weightines of the matter,

he is to ſpeake of wiſedome of all
ſortes, and manifold prudence: This
in the 5. verſe, thereafter in one word,
he calleth it a Parable, becauſe, to wit,
he ſetteth it down in his own example.
He calleth it alſo a harde matter, that is,
a notable figuratiue ſentence: For the
Hebrewes call the allegorie, that is either
cleare or obſcure, a darke matter.
Againe, to the ende hee may the more
mooue them to attendance, hee declareth,
that he wil beearneſtly occupyed
in entreating of this matter. My mouth,
(ſayeth hee) ſhall ſpeake, and my minde
ſhall meditate, my eare ſhall inclyne the ſelf,
and my harpe ſhall be played vpon.] See
here, firſt, he requireth attendance vppon
the parte of other men, in the
meane time, hee declareth that he diligentlie
and earneſtly entreates of the
matter. Firſt, then obſerue when there
is any graue matter propounded to be
handled, both he that heareth, and hee
that ſpeaketh, ſhould be very earneſtly
occupyed therein. Note againe, the argument

of the Pſalme is of wiſedome,
as wee haue in the Preface it ſelfe.
Now that is that Wiſedome, the doctrine
of confidence, as it followeth
there-after. Then beeing about to
ſpeake of confidence, hee exhorteth
that all men take diligent heede,
and giue attendance to the ſame. The
doctrine of Confidence; when-ſoever
it is propounded, it ſhould not
bee layde out to the deafe, but it rerequireth
the taking heede of all Noble,
ignoble, rich, & poor: Of the great
men (I ſay) and rich, leaſt they ſhould
put their confidence in their nobilitie
and riches: and of the ignoble and
poore, leaſt being deſtitute of thoſe
things, they caſte away their courage,
yea, or commend them over-much in
others. For ſuch is the inclination of
our nature. The poore commonlie
place happineſſe in riches, Ignoble &
baſe men, in honours, whereof they
themſelues are deſtiture. Thirdly, hee
profeſſeth, that he will be all waies occupyed

in handling of this matter. For
what is it chiefely, that ſtirreth vp attention
in men, that are of contrary opinions?
Even the ſerious diligence of
the teacher. And when is the hearer
chiefely edified? Even then, to witte,
when hee diligentlye marketh thee
ſpeaker, And profiteth alſo by him,
that hee ſpeaketh nothing but that
wherevpon he hath meditated before,
and inclyneth his eare as it were to his
own voyce: For although, he pronunceth
not other things with his mouth,
thē thoſe which he hath before thoght
vpon in his minde: Notwithſtanding,
the ſelfe ſame thinges being firſt vttered
in the mouth, & then vnderſtoode
by the eare, and finally, returning vnto
the minde from whome they proceeded,
they confirme the faith & knowledge
of the ſpeaker himſelfe. And thus
much haue we ſpoken, concerning the
Preface.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           6 Wherefore ſhould I bee affrayde in the
times of afflictione, that the iniquitie of

my foote ſteps ſhould compaſſe mee about?
                        
                     
                     
                        WHerefore ſhould] Followeth, the propoſitiō
is, in the 6. v. The ſum of the
propoſition is, confidence in GOD againſt
all evils, aſwell of this life, as of
that, that is to come: He propoundeth
not this ſimplie, but having wraſtled
as it were a little, with the infirmitie of
his fleſh, he vttereth it out with an interrogation:
Why ſhuld I feare (ſaith he)
in the times of evil, that the iniquitie, &c]
That is, that through the infirmitie of
this my life, in which I walke as it were
with my feet, I be circumveened with
calamities, and ſo I be in an evill caſe.
This ſpeech appeareth to be of a man,
reaſoning with another, and rebuking,
and ſo it commeth to paſſe indeed in
the very matter it ſelf. For Dauid ſpeaketh
theſe thinges out, not without a
certaine reaſoning and wraſtling with
the weakneſſe of the fleſh: For wee get
not libertie, through the fleſh, without
a certaine wraſtling, to put our confidence
in God. And our confidence in

God is perpetually hindred by the infirmities
of the fleſhe. Whoſoever
therefore will put his confidence in
God, of neceſſitie, hee muſte prepare
himſelfe for a combat.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           7 Of thoſe men that truſt in their riches,
and glorie in the multitude of their goodes.
                           8 None is able any waies to redeeme his
brother, to giue his ranſome to God.
                           9 (For the redemption of their life is
deare, yea. it ceaſeth for ever)
                           10 That hee may liue yet for ever, that
he haue not experience of corruption.
                           11 Although he ſee wiſe men die, the
fooliſh and the brutiſh periſh together, &
leaue their wealth to others.
                           12 Their minde is, to call after their
owne names, through the earth, their houſes
for ever, & their habitiones for euery
generation.
                           13 Neither ſhall the man who is in honour
continue ſtill, hee is like to beaſts that
die.
                           14 Seeing this is the way of thoſe men,
they haue an expectation, and their poſteriritie

approveth their ſpeech, Selah.
                           
                           15 Like ſheepe, fra once they be placed
in order in the graue, death ſhall eate them
downe, while the righteous rule over them
in that morning, and ſhall conſume their
beautie, receiued out of the habitation there
of.
                           16 Verely, God ſhall redeeme my ſoule
from the graue: for he will receiue mee.
Selah.
                           
                        
                     
                     The third part of the pſalme.
                     
                        OF thoſe men] Here followeth the
argument of confidence, from the
riſing againe of the fleſh, and life everlaſting.
For, (ſayeth he) he will redeeme
my ſoule foom the graue] Hee thinketh it
not ſufficient to lay this argument nakedly
downe, but hee premitteth the
amplifying thereof, from the contrary,
which, to wit, falleth out to them,
who place their confidence in riches,
and honoures. For there is none of
them who is able to redeeme his ſoule
from death. This amplification and
declaration, to the ende wee may the
more clearely vnderſtande it, ſhall bee

deduced into thoſe partes. Firſt, in the
ſeaventh verſe, and thereafter vnto the
eleventh verſe, he ſheweth, that he that
putteth his confidence in riches, is not
able to deliuer a ſoule from death.
Then next he ſheweth, that he which
putteth his truſt in honour, cannot redeeme
a ſoule from death, from the
11. verſe, to the 14. verſ. Thirdly, while
he conſidereth theſe things earneſtly,
hee aggregeth the fooliſhnes of thoſe
men, as alſo he rebuketh the fooliſhnes
of the poſteritie, in the 14. and 15. verſes:
I returne to the firſt parte. Of theſe
(ſayth he) who truſt in their wealth. &c.]
None there is, who is able to deliver
with all his riches, not ſo much indeed
as his brothers life, let bee his owne
life: (for a man will redeeme his owne
life with a greater price, then his brothers)
So that he may liue for euer, and not
find in experience corruption] And in the
ninth verſe, the reaſon is inſerte: For
(ſayeth hee) the redemption of their life
is deare] Yea, certainly the price of life

can at no time bee payed by them to
GOD. And this is the thing which
he ſubjoyneth, Yea, it ceaſeth for ever]
The ſumme of all tendeth to this: as if
he ſhould ſay, he who placeth his confidence
in riches, hee cannot indeede
by his wealth ſo much as redeeme
the life of his brother, let bee his owne
life. Mark: Dauid ſpeaketh not after this
maner: He who putteth his truſt in his
welth, knoweth not what the inconſtā
                        cy
of the world is, how long he is to inioy
that wealth; but giuing that he had
ſufficient portiō of riches in this whol
life, notwithſtanding he affirmeth that
hee is not able beyonde that moment
appoynted for death to protract this
life, or to giue immortalitie to anye
mortall man. DAVID then for this
cauſe eſtemeth verie litle of riches, becauſe
they cannot make a man immortal,
he regardeth immorality ſo much.
It cannot be ſaid, how farre the judgement
of the men of this worlde differeth
from this ſentence of Dauid, Theſe

men knowe indeed, that neither riches
nor honoures are able to giue immortalitie:
Notwithſtanding, taking
no thought of immortalitie, they place
their whole truſt in thoſe things. And
ſome are ſo prophane, that they are not
aſhamed to ſay, If they be in a good eſtate
in this life, they little regarde that
life to come. But others, if they dare
not be ſo bold to caſt out ſo prophane
a ſpeach, neuertheleſſe they ſufficiētly
ſhew in their life & manners, that they
thinke the ſame thinge in their hearts.
Man in the firſt creation was made for
immortality,2. Cor. 3. 5. yea, & there is in him by
nature it ſelfe ſome feeling and deſire
of immortalitie. Then I reckon this amonge
the extreeme greateſte curſes,
that any man ſhall become ſo brutiſh,
that all his life long he ſhall thinke nothing
of immortalitie. Notwithſtanding
you ſhall ſee euerie where many
ſuch, not ſo much men, as wild beaſtes,
hauing nothing of mans nature in thē
except the outward ſhew, yea, who are

worſe then the verie wild beaſtes. For
the wilde beaſtes reteine their owne
nature, but thoſe degende from their
owne naturall. But, what will you ſay,
ar riches ſo great enemies and contrarie
to that life to come? Are not rather
all thoſe temporal goods, as many earneſt
pennies of that life and felicitie to
come? I anſwer. I ſay that riches ſcattered
abroad, rather then gathered together
by hook & crooke are more profitable
to eternal life. For where a mans
treaſure is gathered together, there is
his heart. But the riches ſcattered abroade,
are that true The ſaurie which
ſhall be profitable to eternall life. Calleſt
thou that a treaſure (would any
man ſay) which is ſcattered abroade?
Yea,1. Tim. 6. 10. 19. ſurely, the Apoſtle calleth diſperſed
riches, a treaſure: For if (ſayeth he)
we be ready to giue, wee ſhall lay vp for our
ſelues a good foundation for the time to
come, that we may take hold of eternall life.
You ſee, therefore that we lay vp that,
which notwithſtanding wee giue out

and gather that, which nevertheles we
diſperſe. Although he ſee] The ſecond
part of the amplification, whereby hee
ſheweth him, who putteth his truſt in
honour, is notable with glory and honour
to redeeme his owne life. Then
he teacheth, what they get of that to
thēſelues; they ar notable to redeeme
their ſoules although (ſayeth he) they
ſee the wiſemen of this world, none otherwiſe
to periſh, then the vn-wiſe,
fooliſh and brutiſh: And that they
leaue all their riches and magnificence
to others, yea, perhaps to men vnknowen
and ſtrangers: Notwithſtanding,
their minde is to ſeeke glorie to
themſelues, yea, and that of woorkes
builded vp here, and there gloriouſly.
Which it pleaſeth them to call after their
owne names] Then hee ſubioyneth in
the thirteenth verſe, which befalleth
thoſe ambitious men: The man who is
in honour, he ſhal receiue no further profite
of his honours, then the rich-men of their
riches] Yea ſurely, all the honours ſhal

not bee able to giue him the delaye of
one night: hee becommeth at laſt, like
vnto beaſtes that periſh. For even as in
his life, hee was like vnto theſe verie
beaſts, to wit, vnderſtanding nothing,
as it is ſet downe in the laſt verſe, ſo alſo
in his death hee ſhall bee like vnto
them.Eccleſ. 1
                              •
                           . 18. 19. For it is good reaſon, that hee
which liveth like a beaſt, ſhall alſo die
lik a beaſt. Mark here he ſaith, firſt that
he who putteth his confidence in honour,
that is, the ambitious man ſeeth
and vnderſtandeth: Then next he ſayeth,
that nevertheles, his minde is to
ſeeke glorie. It profiteth nothing atall,
to ſee the thing that is good, and to be
followed, and the thing that is evill, &
to be eſchewed; vnleſſe God therwith
open the heart to this ende, that the
thing which we ſee and vnderſtande,
we feele it intirely in our heart. You
will ſee every where wicked, ambitious,
covetuous, yea, and cruell men,
when they haue a thouſand ſuch moſt
dolefull experiences before their eies,

notwithſtanding, they are not commoved
with any of thoſe thinges, neither
yet chaunge they their mind and
purpoſe into better. And what is the
cauſe? Thoſe menne ſee well-ynough
with their minde, and do vnderſtande,
but they feele nothing in their heart.
Therefore, God is earneſtly to be praied
vnto, that as there wants not examples
as well good as evill of all ſorts; ſo
he would graunt vnto vs, that we may
feele intirely in our heart, & that there
may bee with the knowledge of the
minde a conſcience, and a feeling of
the heart. Seeing this is] The third part
of the amplification, in the which indeede,
while he conſidereth more diligently
this iſſue (for none of them,
neither the rich man, nor the ambitious
man, is able to redeeme his ſoule)
Hee aggregeth the fooliſh aſſurance
and confidence of thoſe men; yea, and
not onely of thoſe, but of the poſteritie.
Seeing (ſayeth he) this is their way]
And ſeeing none of them is able to redeeme

his own ſoule, neither this man
by his honour, nor that man by his
wealth: notwithſtanding they waxe
ſo beaſtly, that they put their aſſurance
in thoſe things: & not only do thoſe go
mad, but their poſteritie alſo approues
them as wiſe men, & haue thē in admiration,
& follow their example. Thou
ſeeſt therefore the wicked, that not only
they hurt other men while they are
aliue, but alſo they are an offence vnto
them when they are departed this life.
Theſe vayne-glorious and ambitious
men, craue this thing moſt earneſtlie,
that the deeds atchieved by them, be
liade vp in remembrance. But conſidder
with mee, how much they profite
by this thing: what other thing I pray
you do they, then increaſe their owne
righteous condemnation? how many
mo in that reſpect, follow their wicked
example, ſo much the more grieuous
ſurely ſhal be their judgement. Therefore
we muſt endeavour ſo to liue, that
not onely wee be not an offence to others

while wee are aliue, but alſo that
we leaue not to our poſterity after our
death, an example of an evill led-life.
This is ſpecially to bee done of them,
which are in any account or place, and
whoſe deedes done, are layde vp in
memorie to the poſteritie. Like ſheepe]
The concluſion of the amplification,
whereby hee ſheweth the miſerie of
thoſe men: That are not able to redeeme
their ſoule, either by wealth or
by honour: But even like ſheepe, fra
once they bee layde downe into the
graue, death ſhall eate them vppe.
And how long? To witte, while the
righteous rule over them, that is, in
Chriſt Ieſus, of whoſe kingdome the
righteous ſhall be participant. At what
time ſhall they rule? in that morning
(ſayeth he) in which, to wit, the godly
ſhall ryſe againe, as it were out of the
night, and darknes of the graue, when
the Sunne of righteouſneſſe, that is,
Chriſt Ieſus ſhall aryſe in that his ſecond
comming. And Hell conſume

their beautie] Againe,What he is. hee preſcribeth
that time, in which death ſhall eate
them vp, to witte, while their beautie,
that is, this earthlie & viſible ſubſtance
received, a new vnited body wholie
with their owne ſoule, Hell conſume
them. The Scriptur vnderſtandeth by
the name of Hell generally, whatſoever
eſtate of the dead, and therefore
this worde, according to the circumſtance
of the place, it is whiles to bee
applyed to the Graue, whiles to the, Hel
putting a part for the Hell, or contrariwiſe,
ſome time to both together.
Bot we in this place, take this word ſo,
as we judge it beſte to agree, with the
purpoſe & ordour of the judgemēts of
God; and the oppoſition following, to
witte, for that place, in which the reprobate
ar to bee tormented with puniſhmentes,
and with the righteous
judgement of God. Obſerue a continuall
progreſſe, as it were, from miſery
to miſerie. Of the which, the laſte is ever
more grieuous then the firſte, and

the laſt of all is moſt grieuous. For firſt
the reprobate, when once they haue
departed this life, they are laide vp in
the graue, which indeed is accu
                           •
                        ſed vnto
them: being laid in the graue, death
eateth them down vnto the latter day;
and vnto that morning, as hee calleth it,
in which the elect and righteous ſhall
rule ouer them. Which dominiō ſurely
ſhal be vnto them as it were a heauie
yoke, and ſome part of that everlaſting
puniſhment. Not-with-ſtanding the
moſt heauie puniſhment wherby they
ſhall be tormented evermore, aſwel in
bodie as in ſoule, is reſting yet. Then
let them conſider & beware, (who put
their confidence more in the riches, &
honours of this world, more then in
the Lord) what ende abideth that ſort
of men. And thus haue wee ſpoken
of the amplification. Now followeth
the ſixteenth verſe. The argument of
his confidence which hee ſet downe
in the ſixt verſe. Which is indeede
ſubioyned vnto the preceeding amplification

by a diſſimilitude: As if he
ſhoulde ſaye: They are not able neither
with their riches nor honour to
redeeme their ſoule. But God will redeem
my ſoule from the graue, that is,
he wil giue vnto me the reſurrectiō of
the fleſh, & eternal life in Chriſt Ieſus,
who is my deliuerer frō the corruptiō
of the graue, & damnation of hel. You
ſee here then a cleare difference of thē
who put their truſt in the tranſitorie
thinges of this world, & of thoſe, that
put their confidēce in the liuing God.
All the thinges of this worlde, ſurelie,
is not able to preſerue the ſeruantes
thereof in this life. But GOD is
of power to call backe againe them
that are alreadie deade, and that beleue
in him, & at his own time alſo wil
call them back againe. Then there is a
very great choiſe, what thing or whom
we haue for God, this world, to witte,
or the things of this world: Or rather,
the God of heauen and earth, the father
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           17 Be not thou affrayde, when any man
becommeth rich, when the glory of his
houſe is increaſed.
                           18 (For he ſhall take nothing vp thereof
in his death, his glorie ſhal not go downe
after him.)
                           19 Seeing hee hath bleſſed his ſoule in
his life, and they wil prayſe thee if thou doſt
well to thy ſelfe.
                           20 That hee may come vnto the age of
his fathers, yet they ſhal not enioy the light
for ever.
                           21 The man which is in acount, neither
is one that vnderſtandeth, hee is like vnto
beaſte, which periſh.
                        
                     
                     The fourth & laſt part, of the Pſalme.
                     
                        BE not thou afraid] The laſte part of
the Pſalme, in which he concludeth
exhorting all the godlie that
they be not commoved, either by the
example or ſpeech of ſuch like men by
their ſpeech, I ſay, whereby they either
flatter themſelues, or flatter the godly
alſo. He bringeth in two reaſons of the
exhortation, the one indeed from the
mutabilitie of riches & honours. When

it commrth to paſſe that he muſt goe to the
graue (ſayth he) thoſe things ouer throw
their own worſhippers.] But he bringeth
out the other reaſon, frō the inſtability
and laſt deſtruction of the men themſelues.
Although (ſayth he) it falleth out
to them to come vnto the age of their fathers,
neuertheles, they ſhall not enioy that
light of eternall life: But they ſhal abide in
the thickneſſe and black darkneſſe of the ſecond
death] Mark; There vſeth to come
vppon the rich and ambitious men of
this world an extream great perril, for
they will haue all men to be involved
and folden in the ſelfe ſame damnation
with them: But it is to bee remembred,
that thoſe men in their temptationes,
ſhall at length haue an ende with
their riches & honours, yea, they ſhal
remaine without ende, in the darknes
of the ſecond death, except they repent.
I recommend for this cauſe the
more carefullie, the remembrance and
meditation of this thing, becauſe I ſee
everie where, very many bewitched

with theſe vanitſes, before they judge
them to be vaine thinges. For the vnderſtanding
of this fleſh is ſo groſſe,
that it cannot but bee wiſe onely in
groſſe thinges. For the Spirit of man is
not able at anye time to comprehend
thoſe celeſtial & ſpiritual things. Therefore
God muſt be prayed vnto, that he
would be preſent with vs, (who are in
the middeſt as it were, of thoſe thinges
with which the world is bewitched,)
by his Spirit, & that he would lift vs vp
aboue this world, to behold, not thoſe
things which ar ſene, but thoſe things
which are not ſeene: For the thinges
which are ſeene, are all tranſitorious;
but the things which are not ſeene, are
immortall, and are able to make vs immortal,
by Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde: To
him be al glory and honour, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE ARGVMENT,
Of the LI. Pſalme.
                  David hauing renewed battle againſt the Hummanites,
ſitting idle at home, ſeeing the faire wife of Vriah
waſhing herſelfe, hee ſendeth for her, and having
had to do with her, he ſendeth her away againe. Hearing
therafter, that ſhe had conceived by him, he calleth
her husband out of the hoſte, that the birth might be
thought to be his. Which thing, becauſe it tooke no effect,
having ſent Vriah back againe to the campe with
letters, he commandeth Ioab to put him out to be ſlain
by the enemies: Which being done, hee marieth his
Widdow. Thereafter, vppon this occaſion, Nathan is
ſent by God, who hauing propoſed a Parable, & ſought
out narrowlie what was the Lawe, He bringeth him
to a conſcience of his fact, and denunceth parden to
him, repenting of the ſinne. Looke 2. Sam. 11. and 12.
Chapters. Thi
                        •
                      is then the Pſalme, in which Dauid repenting
earneſtlie, craveth the remiſſion of ſinnes. And
it is compoſed of two ſortes of petitiones. Firſt, of a
particular kinde of petition, in which he craveth the
pardon of his ſinnes, from the third verſe to the twentie
verſe, Then, of a generall, whereby hee craveth the
weal of the whole Church, in the twentie and twenty
one verſes. The firſt ſorte of petition is mixed with the
owne cauſes: For hee prayeth firſt, and he adjoyneth
the cauſe to the prayer, from a ſimple and playne confeſſion,
Secondly, he prayeth, and to the prayer he ſubjoyneth,
the ſecond cauſe, from the edifying of others
At laſte, thirdly, he prayeth, and to the prayer, hee ſubjoyneth
the third cauſe, from Gods owne glorie. But let
vs conſidder the thred of the Text.
               
               
                  
                  The LI. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of Dauid (committed) to
the maiſter of the Muſick (to be ſong.)
                           
                           2 When the Prophet NATHAN
came vnto him, after that he had had
to do with BATHSCHEBA.
                           
                              
3 Haue mercy, vppon me, ô God, according
to thy louing kindneſſe, according to
the largeneſſe of thy compaſsiones, blot out
my defections.
                           4 Waſh me much from mine iniquitie,
and clenſe me from my ſinne.
                           5 For I acknowledge my defections, &
my ſinne is continually layde open before
mine eies.
                           6 Againſt thee, againſt thee alone, haue
I ſinned, and the thing which is thought
evil in thy ſight haue I done, I acknowledge
that thou maiſt be iuſtified in thy ſpeeches,
that thou mayſt bee pure when thou iudgeſt.
                           7 Behold in iniquitie was I formed, &
my mother nuriſhed me in ſinne.
                           8 Behold, in the reines thou delighteſt
in the trueth, and in the hid place haſt thou
made wiſedome knowen vnto me.
                           9 Purge me with Hyſſope, that I may be
cleane, waſh me that I may wax whiter then
the ſnow.
                           10 Make me to heare ioy and gladnes,
let the bones which thou haſt bruſed reioyce.
                           
                              
11 Hide thine angry face away from my
ſins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
                           12 Create in me a cleane mind, ô God, &
renew a firme Spirit within me.
                           13 Caſt me not away from thy face, and
receiue not thine holy Spirite from me.
                           14 Reſtore to me the ioy of thy ſalvation,
and vp-holde mee with the Spirite of freedome.
                           15 I ſhall teache back-ſlyders thy waies,
that ſinners may be converted vnto thee.
                           16 Deliver me from bloud, ô God, the
God of my ſaluation, let my tongue ſing thy
reghteouſnes.
                           17 Thou wilt open my lippes, ô Lord,
that my mouth may ſhewe foorth thy praiſe.
                           18 For thou delighteſt not in ſacrifice
that I may giue, thou wilt not haue a burnt
offring.
                           19 The ſacrifices of God are ane broken
ſpirite, Thou deſpiſeſt not, ô God, a broken
and contri
                                 •
                              e ſoule.
                        
                     
                     
                        HAue mercy] Having heard Nathans
rebuke. there is preſently ſet vp in
Davids ſoule, the judgement ſeate of

God, as it were, the judge, and the conſcience
which before was caſt vp in a
dead ſleepe, being now awakened, intendeth
the accuſation, before that tribunall.
Firſt, it objecteth that moſt filthie
crime of adulterie. Then, a moſte
cruel man-ſlaughter; from hence ariſe
horrors and terrours in the hart of the
miſerable man, wherewith being troubled
in deed, he pretendeth not this or
that excuſe to his ſinne, as ſome vſe to
doe, and hideth his ſinne, but giving
place to his conſcience, and confeſſing
the crime, he turneth himſelfe an humble
ſuppliant vnto God: Haue mercy
vpon me (ſayth he) ô God] Surely there
is no other ſorrow ſo grieuous, as
this ſorrowe of ane evill conſcience,
which thing, while the wicked feele,
firſte, they diligently travel to beware,
leaſt the conſcience, once being caſte
vp into a dead ſleepe, bee awakened againe.
They very carefullie flie all admonitiones,
rebukes and threatnings
out of the worde of God. Then next,

if perhaps, yea againſt their will, the
conſcience be at laſt wakened vp, then
indeed they prepare not themſelues
preſently to remoove the ſinne, as the
matter of the troubled conſcience:
But by all meanes they aſſay, to mitigate
that dolour of the conſcience,
and to deceiue their owne conſcience
as it were, by playing, boording, and
finally, giving libertie to all ſorte of
pleaſure. Indeede it may be, that for a
time they aſſwage their diſpleaſure, by
vſing theſe deceitfull remedies, and
blunte the edge of their conſcience:
But that peace is deceivable, and the
wounde bounde vppe ſo, will at the
length waxe greene, and vnleſſe ſinne
bee taken awaie in this preſente life,
which they aboue all things deſire to
be covered, it wil come to paſſe at laſt,
that the con
                           •
                        erence ſhaking, off that
deadly ſopour, ſhall awaken, ſo that in
time to come, it ſhal never injoy again
any kind of reſt. There is but only this
one way of quieting & aſſwaging that

dolour of an evill conſcience: To wit,
if thou confeſſe thy ſinne, if thou flie
to that throne of grace and mercy of
God in Chriſt Ieſus.Pſal. 32. 1. 
                              •
                           . And this is it
which wee learne by Davids example
in this Pſalme: For vpon this ſhall follow
a certain vnſpeakable peace in the
minde, yea, paſſing all vnderſtanding,
which being felt through the remiſſiof
ſinnes: David in another place publiſheth
him to be bleſſed, whoſe ſinnes
are forgiuen. According to thy louing
kindneſſe] This is the cauſe, why Dauid
although a ſinner, notwithſtanding
dare be ſo bold to come vnto GOD,
that is, to his judge, to wit, the loving
fauour and mercy of GOD in Ieſus
Chriſt,Eph. 3. 12. leaning to which, hee hath libertie
and entrie, With confidence vnto
God, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, and
craveth grace at him. What time, the
conſcience intendeth againſt vs any
crime, at the ſame time, God as a juſte
judge, paſſeth vp vpon his judgement
ſeate, and with majeſtie ſitteth therevpon,

and with ſuch an awfulnes, that
everie ſinner is eaſily affrayd to come
before his face; for the vngodly are not
able to ſuſtaine that angrie countenance
of GOD, who haue not as yet
felt that mercie of GOD in Chriſte
Neither yet are they able from the
hearte, to call him Father; yea,
they woulde rather goe out of the
worlde, that they might flye awaye
from that his ſo fearefull preſence.
Wherefore a ſinner, except hee feele
together with the ſenſe of ſin God alſo
to be mercifull, he dare not be ſo bold
as to compeire before him. But now
hauing felt his mercie, and that loue
by the holy Spirit powred forth into
our harts, he is no waies skarred away,
neither by the weightines of ſinne,
nor yet by the maieſtie of the iudge,
but that with confidence he wil draw
neere vnto him. For the feeling of the
mercie of GOD in Chriſt, hath ſo
great a force of alluring: If thou wouldeſt
ſlay me (ſayeth IOB) ſhould I not truſt

in thee? Blot out my defectiones] The
ſame petition is repeated from the exceeding
greate deſire of deliverance.
Blot out (ſayth he) my defectiones] That
is, forgiue me my ſinnes, whereby it is
come to paſſe, that filthily I haue made
defection from thee: It can ſcarſely be
ſpoken, how grievouſly Dauid had ſinned;
Firſt having committed adultery,
then man-ſlaughter; Thirdly, having
contracted mariage, with the woman
defiled in adultery: Fourthly, the people
of God being layde out to an open
daunger, and with all theſe finally was
conjoyned obſtinacie in ſinne. For hee
had ſleeped ſecurely many monethes,
as it were in the ſinne. DAVID therefore
being guiltie of ſo many ſinnes,
ſurely he durſt not haue bene ſo bold,
vnleſſe hee had leaned to the infinite
mercie of GOD, to haue commed into
his ſight: And from hence proceedeth
that thing which hee cryed out,
Blot out my defectiones] That is, ſo many
and ſo greate, and that, O God, according

to thy ſuperabundant mercy;
Every ſin whatſoever is the offending
of that infinite Majeſtie. Of this it commeth
to paſſe, that the burthen of ſin-after
ſome ſorte is infinite: if the ſinner
himſelfe be not disburdened thereof,
in Ieſus Chriſt. Wherefore there is
neede, yea, of an infinit mercy, that any
ſinne whatſoever may be forgiven:
how much more is it neceſſary, that infinite
mercy & ſuperabundant be had,
to the end, that many & grieuous ſins
may be forgiven? For ſeeing ſinne aboundeth,
of neceſſitie grace muſt ſuperabound.
Which thing, experience
it ſelfe teacheth: For any man oppreſſed
with ſome more haynous ſinne, he
findeth not firſt reſte to his ſoule, before
he conceiue in his mind, the mercie
of God, which as ſoone as hee hath
felt & taken holde of, there is no ſin of
never ſo great momente,Ephe. 3. 8
                              •
                           
                         of the pardon
wherof, he may not now perſwad him
ſelf: therfore we ſhuld trauel al our life
according to the ſaying of the Apoſtl,

                        We may be able to comprehend what is the
breadth and length, and depth and height:
and to know that loue of Chriſt,
                        Epheſ. 3. 18. 19. 
                        which paſſeth
all knowledge: For out of all queſtion,
the mercy of GOD in Ieſus
Chriſt is infinite: But wee (ſuch is our
ſtupidity) are not able to comprehend
ſcarſe the thouſand part thereof. Of
which, it commeth to paſſe, that in
our owne default, we are ſpoyled of a
ſufficient cōfort. For there is no place
for comfort in the ſoule without faith,
which, what other thing is it, then a
feeling of the mercy of God in Chriſt?
Waſh me much] Thirdly, hee repeateth
the ſame thing, as if hee ſhould ſaye,
Ceaſe not to waſh, before thou haue
fully purged me from my ſinne. For
it is an alluſion, to the clenſings of the
Lawe. But it is to be marked, that not
being content with a light and common
waſhing, he ſayth, Waſh me much]
He felt, to wit, that ſinne had ſette the
rootes thereof deepely in him, and
that more toughlie it had cleaved to

him; and therefore he craveth of God
that he would multiplie the waſhings,
which, vnleſſe it be done, he thinketh
that it cannot come to paſſe, that hee
can be clenſed from the filthineſſe of
ſinne. Note then, that ſinne is not a ſuperficiall
thinge, but that it occupyes
wholie all the deapths of the heart.
But who knoweth this? Surely not
theſe ſecure men and Libertines, who
either feele not ſinne at all, or if they
feele it, they feele it lightlie; and no otherwaies,
then in the vtter part of the
skin. Who then feeles it? Verely they
who repente earneſtly, and from the
hart. Thoſe men very wel know within
themſelues, how filthie a thing ſin is, &
how deepe partes of the ſoule it occupyeth,
and from hence it is, that in this
life, they think they cannot bee ſufficiently
purged from their ſinnes, and
that thoſe panſe vpon this, that there
is nothing wherby they may be clēged
except that alone blood of Chriſt to
whō only, the holy Spirit leadeth thē
                        
when there is an earneſt feeling of ſin,
and a deſire of waſhing: For that is not
the Spirite of Chriſt, which carryeth a
waye elſe where the ſoule of a ſinner
from Chriſt: and to other waſhings &
ſatisfactions whatſoever, which the Papiſtes
dreame to themſelues. Of al theſe
things which haue bene ſpoken, marke
this: David vttereth the exceeding
greate dolour of his heart, in theſe his
petitions; and the cauſe of the dolours
may be ſufficiently knowen out of the
petitions themſelues. Alſo, the ſin is,
whereby hee himſelfe had grieuonſly
offended his God: For he ſayeth, Blot
out my defections &c.] From whence is
manifeſtly ſene, the difference betuixt
the ſorrow of the godly; & of the wicked:
Theſe laſt indeed, are ſorrowfull,
not ſo much for the ſinne,Gen. 4. 1
                              •
                           . and the offending
of God,The examples of Iudas and Cain.
                         as for the puniſhment
of ſinne, and the torment. So Cain ſorrowed.
Mine iniquitie, is more (ſayeth
he) then that I am able to beare. So alſo
Iudas, the betraier of Chriſt ſorrowed.

But the godly, although indeede they
abhor the paine; notwithſtanding, for
this cauſe they are chiefly diſpleaſed,
that they haue offended their gratious
God: & they deteſt ſinne, not ſo much
becauſe of the puniſhment, as for the
evil it ſelf, which is in ſin: and ſuch was
Davids ſorrow at this time. For I acknowledge
my defections] Hitherto hee
hath ſought one thing thriſe, now hee
adjoyneth the cauſe of the petition frō
a ſimple & plaine confeſſion of ſin, as if
he ſhould ſay, O God, I confeſſe that I
haue made defectiō from thee al thoſe
waies, which thou haſt manifeſted to
me by Nathan thy Prophet: I confeſſe,
(I ſay) before thy Prophet: Finally, before
thy whole Church, not only that
which is preſent, but which ſhall bee
in times comming, to the ende of the
Worlde: That is, by writing of this
Pſalme, and declared to the whole
poſteritie and ages to come. Vppon
this followeth the Petition. Therefore,
bee mercifull vnto mee, O GOD]
                        
Of this appeareth, that ther is no place
for grace and mercy, except a ſimple
and plaine confeſſion goe before, proceeding
from the earneſt repentance
of the mind. Which is the ſame thing
which David teſtifieth, Pſal. 32. 3. and
thereafter, that which hee alſo learned
by his owne experience: When I helde
my tongue (ſayeth he) and confeſſed not
my ſinne, my bones conſumed, &c. And
then he addeth,Pſal. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                        I will make my ſin knowen
vnto thee, I will not hide my back-ſlydings,
I will confeſſe mine iniquitie to Iehova.
This indeede is the confeſſion: But
what followeth vpon it: Thou haſt taken
away (ſayeth hee) the puniſhment of my
ſinne, that is, ſin, and the puniſhment.
The ſumme of thoſe thinges tende to
this, where there is not a confeſſion,
there no grace is, where confeſſion is,
there is grace. And my ſinne] This is
the efficient cauſe of the repentance &
confeſſion, an evill conſcience, without
the conſcience of ſinne, as if hee
ſhould ſaye; The conſcience of my ſin

vrgeth me day and night, and continually
layeth murther, adultery, & other
hainous ſinnes, conjoyned with theſe,
before mine eies. Wee are prepared
therefore, to faith and repentance, by a
conſcience accuſing vs, and ſtriking a
terrour into our hearts. From thence it
is that wee haue our recourſe vnto the
grace of Chriſt, and embraceth the
ſame by faith; from faith againe, and
the feling of grace, the dolour aryſeth,
which is according to God, that is, becauſe
God is offended, of that dolour,
againe proceedeth that chaunge of
the minde, which wee call the turning
of the mind, or repentance. For as the
Apoſtle witneſſeth:2. Co. 
                              •
                           . 
                        The ſorrow which is
after God, cauſeth repentance vnto ſaluation.]
Finally, from repentance & changing
of the mind, a ryſeth the confeſſiof
the mouth. This thing is clearelie
ſeene of the preparation to grace,
that no man attayneth to that grace,
which is in chriſt Ieſus, by ſluggiſhnes
and ſleeping. But by horrours of the

conſcience, they paſſe to that heavenly
joy. For although life in Chriſt be frely
given vnto vs, notwithſtanding, we
muſt ſuffer ſome notable alteration, &
wee muſt be caſt downe, yer we be lifted
vp, befor life be gotten. Moreover,
we learne that thing of this example of
David, how graciouſly they are handled,
who haue a conſcience ſomewhat
more watchfull: for firſt they are bridled,
that they commit not many haynous
ſins, which otherwaies they wold
cōmit: Then the ſelf ſame conſcience
if there be any evil thing done by thē,
they are admoniſhed thereof; & thereafter,
they ar thruſt forward to repentance.
But contrariwiſe, their eſtate is
moſt miſerable, whoſe conſciencelyeth
in a dead ſleepe: For of neceſſitie,
they muſt ruſh forwarde, nothing hindring
them into all kinde of ſinne. And
then, after any grieuous ſin is cōmitted
of neceſſitie they muſt ſecurely ſleep
therein, nothing calling them back to
repentāce: wherfore the eſtate of that

man is happie, which is touched with
a conſcience of his deeds, & although
it ſeeme very oft vnpleaſant vnto vs,
that the conſcience either holdeth vs
back from the cōmitting of ſin, or that
we ar called back to a confeſſion of ſin
committed. Againſt thee, againſt] He aggregeth
his ſin, from that, firſt that it is
againſt God, then that it is againſt God
only. As cōcerning the firſt. Againſt thee
only (ſaith he) I haue ſinned. Then for the
greater ſurety of the mater, Againſt thee
againſt thee, I haue ſinned] the ſame word
being doubled, Dauid ſeeketh not any
ſtarting-hole, neither denieth he that
he hath offended againſt God, which
thing we here, the reprobat ſhal do at
the latter day, who being acuſed of ſin
yea, even cōmitted againſt God himſelf,Math. 2
                              •
                           . 44.
ſhal anſwer: when ſaw we thee a ſtranger,
naked, or an hungred, thirſtie, caſte in
priſon, &c. But Chriſt ſhall then aunſwere
them preſentlie in their owne
wordes, and ſhall take this excuſe awaie
from them, ſaying: Verely, verely,

I ſay vnto you, in ſo far as ye haue not done
it to one of thoſe little ones, ye haue not done
it to me. David. (I ſay) goeth not about
this way to excuſe the matter, by leſſening
of his ſinne, as if it were not committed
againſt God: For hee cannot
more expreſſely ſpeake, that that ſinne
was committed againſt God himſelf:
Againſt thee, againſt thee] (ſayeth hee)
I haue ſinned: Then hee aggregeth his
ſinne, when he ſayeth, That he hath ſinned
againſt God alone] If wee will ſpeake
properly, whatſoever ſorte of ſinne,
which is committed againſt God, and
reſpecteth him, either immediatly, as
when men ſinne againſt the firſt Table
of the lawe
                           •
                         or immediatly, as when
they ſinne againſt the ſeconde Table.
For ſin is the tranſgreſſion of the lawe
of GOD, and the perſon offended is
God properly. For except Gods commandement
interveened not firſt, either
forbidding or commanding any
thing, ſurely there ſhuld be no offence
againſt any creature, except God had

ſaid, thou ſhalt not commit adulttrie, there
ſhould be none offence, neither of VRIAH,
neither of any other in committing
Adulterie, Except God had ſaide,
Thou ſhalt not ſlay: There ſhould bee no
offenſe in ſlaying, neither againſt VRIAH,
nor againſt any other: Wherefore,
if wee will ſpeake properly, all ſinne is
committed againſt God alone. Of this,
two things do follow, the priviledge of
forgiving of ſinne, or remiſſion of ſin,
perteineth to GOD alone, for God alone,
if wee will ſpeake properlie, forgiveth
our ſins. The other, the revenging
of ſin, belongeth to God alone.
Vengeance is mine (ſayth the Lord) and I
will repay:
                        Rom. 12▪ 19. Wherfore, when any wrong
is done to any man, the injury is not ſo
much to be thoght to be done againſt
man, as it is done againſt GOD, and to
him it ſhould be left freelie. God, if we
will ſpeak properlie, is the perſon hurt,
and offended, for ſo much as his commandement
is broken, which verely,
if it were not broken, the creature

ſhould haue no cauſe to complaine of
the injurie: wherefore vengeance firſt
is to be committed vnto GOD, then
next, to that perſon to whom he hath
committed his place vppon the earth.
Notwithſtanding, men ſo handle their
own cauſe, ſo they revenge the wrongs
done vnto them, as if ſin were committed
againſt them ſelues alone, and that
the wrong, nothing perteined vnto
God. Of which, it cōmeth to paſſe divers
times, that while they wil revenge
the wrong done againſt themſelues,
God revengeth himſelf vpon them, &
maketh thē to incur the ſecond s
                           •
                        aith,
to ſpeak ſo: and this much concerning
ſin, in ſo far as it belongeth to this place
For David leſſeneth not ſo his ſin, as if
in a part only it touched God, but hee
aggregeth the ſame, as if it were cōmitted
againſt God alone, as if he ſhould
ſay, I haue nothing to do (to ſpeak truly)
with Vriah, or with any mortall
man, But with thee, O God, I haue to
doe, although all without difficultie,

ſhould forgiue mee the offence committed
againſt thē: Notwithſtanding,
by that thing I could not be ſatisfied,
my God; Becauſe, againſt thee, againſt
thee alone haue I ſinned, and except
thou, according to thy goodneſſe, for
giue me my ſinne, I accoūt nothing, of
al the remiſſion, of all the men in the
world, or the pardon of ſinne purchaſed
of all men. VVe are warned therefore,
by Davids example, that while
our cōſcience accuſeth vs, it accuſeth
vs not indeede ſo much of any man
that is offended, as of that infinite majeſtie
of God, which is offended. Davids
conſcience accuſeth him, not ſo
much of any fact committed againſte
Vriah, as againſt God himſelfe, & from
hence aryſeth, that earneſt feeling of
ſinne. From hence alſo ariſe thoſe horrours
of hell, while men ſee that they
haue to doe, not ſo much with men,
as with GOD himſelfe. For of all enemies,
God is the moſt terrible enemie,
from whoſe wrath, there is but this

onely refuge to vs, that wee flie vnto
himſelfe, and with him be reconciled
in Chriſt: VVherefore we will get this
commoditie, out of the example of
David, that after we haue now ſinned,
wee ſhould not flie elſe where, but to
God himſelfe. For Dauids mind is not
at reſt, before that firſt hee enter in favour
againe with his God. And the
thinge that is thought] As if hee ſhould
ſay,A cleare confeſſiō of ſinne. I thought that I had done it ſecretlie,
whatſoever thing I did, when, notwithſtanding,
the whole matter was
done as it were before thine eies, and
as it were, thou looking on, whether it
be Adultery or man-ſlaughter, or vnrighteous
and vnlawfull mariage, contracted
with the adultereſſe, either finallie,
there bee a perſeverance in all
thoſe ſinnes. David therefore nowe at
laſt ſayeth, that hee hath done al thoſe
evils in Gods owne eies, and openlie.
Men indeede thinke, that whatſoever
evill thing they doe, they do it vnwitting
of GOD, but in the owne time

they ſhall ſee, that God hath bene as it
were, an eie-witnes of all thoſe things.
It were beſt indeed, that they ſaw this
in time, while there is ſome place for
grace, leaſt if it bee done laiter out of
time, there bee no place left for grace.
I acknowledge that thou maiſt bee iuſtified]
He ſubjoyneth the principall ende of
the confeſſion, the glory of God: As
if he ſhould ſay, I confes this, O God,
not ſo much for mine owne cauſe, to
the end that thou ſhouldeſt haue mercy
vppon mee, as for thy glories ſake.
That thou maiſt be iuſtified in thy ſpeeches]
That is, That thou mayſt be ſeene to be
faithfull.Rmo. 3. 4. For Paule attributeth to the
trueth of God, and (to ſpeake ſo) his
faithfulneſſe, this juſtifying. Therfore
bee (ſayeth he) to the end thou maieſt
ſemee to be faithfull, in this thy threatning
denunced by the Prophet Nathan,
& that thou mayeſt be ſeene to be
pure, that is, righteous when thou
judgeſt, that is, when thou putteſt thy
judgement in execution, which nowe

before thou had threatned. Thou ſeeſt
then, by Davids example, that confeſſion
of ſinnes, eſpecially ſerveth for the
glory of God. For ſinne committed,
doth no more redound to the diſhonour
of God, then the ſincere and free
confeſſion of ſinne, redoundeth to his
glorie. And contrariwiſe, they who
cannot repent, with their hardneſſe &
obſtinacie of minde, they diſhonour
God more, yea, then having committed
the moſt grievous ſinne, they had
diſhonoured him before. For to harden
the heart againſt grace & calling,
againſt the threatnings of God, what
other thing, I pray you is it, then to accuſe
GOD of a lie, in the meane time,
that he is calling vs vnto himſelfe, and
denuncing his judgements againſt vs?
ſurely ther can be no ſin grievoſer nor
this, which I would to God this world
would at laſte acknowledge, which
cannot repent, in reſpecte of the hardneſſe
thereof. Behold, I was formed in iniquitie]
Hitherto hath bene the propoſition

of the cōfeſſion; now followeth
the amplification thereof, or, which is
the ſame thing, the aggravating of the
ſin: and he aggravateth the ſin by three
arguments: The firſt is, from Orginall
ſinne: The ſecond, from the nature of
God: The third, from his owne knowledge
wherewith GOD had indued
him. Firſt then he ſayeth. Behold I was
formed in iniquitie] thi is the firſt argument,
from that original corruption, in
which he was conceived and nuriſhed
in his mothers bellie, while he became
a perfite and rype birth, as if he ſhould
ſay: What neede I to tarrie long in demonſtrating
vnto thee this actual ſin,
as they cal it: Behold the fountain manifeſt
before thee, moſt corrupt and
filthy, the whol nature, how much ſoever
it be, is made vp of ſin, for the poynteth
out as it were with the finger vnto
GOD, the corruption of his nature,
which was in him, even from the
verie birth. I was formed in iniquitie]
that is, I was conceived in original ſin

in which, after that I was conceived, in
the belly of my mother, I am alone in
the ſame, ever vnto ſuch time, as I became
a perfite birth. Hee damneth not
indeede, the naturall action of conceiving
and nuriſhing of the birth in the
wombe, as a thing vnlawful, either forbidden
by the law of God, ſeeing the
action it ſelfe of the owne nature is not
ſinfull. But he ſignifieth, that hee had
contracted originall ſinne, ſo long
as thoſe natural actions, and lawfull in
themſelues were accompliſhed, and
that now even from the bellie, he was
defiled with that common infection
of nature, not indeed through natures
default, ſuch as it was then firſt created
of God, but through the ſinne of nature,
which degenered into corruption.
Originall ſinne, that I may touch it
in few wordes; it is partly ſeene in the
guiltineſſe of that firſt ſinne, partly, in
the fault or corruption of nature. It is
ſeene indeed in the guiltineſſe, becauſe
we are guiltie of that firſt ſin of Adam.
                        
For in Adam, we haue al ſinned, becaus
we were all then in his loynes: and the
ſinne of Adam is not ſo much to
bee accounted his, as of vs all. Alſo,
in the corruption, original ſin is ſeene,
for our whole nature, and all the faculties
of our ſoule, are corrupted and
made wicked, by that defection of Adam,
the minde is blinded, the iudgement
perverted, the will and the affections
altogether deformed. Now in
this place, we vnderſtand that corruption
of natur, from whence ariſe thoſe
actual ſinnes, as they are called. In this
place, David, while with himſelfe hee
weigheth his owne actual ſinne; from
thence he is led forward, to the knowledge
of the fountaine it ſelfe, of original
ſinne, as they call it. For all our particular
defections, they ſhould put vs
in mind, of this corrupted and defiled
nature of ours, that that being once
looked vpon, and the filthineſſe thereof
conſiddered, we may very diligently
travel, that that may be purged, and

renewed, according to the image of
God. For we ought not to be contente
with externall actions, although they
bee very excellent in outwarde ſhew,
vnleſſe in the meane time wee are doing
them, we feele our mind continuallie
reformed within, and that from
our inwarde obedience, al our actions
proceed. Then David, from thence taketh
an occaſion to aggravate his ſinne
before God. But thoſe Libertines by this
thing, yea, they excuſe themſelues, &
diminiſh their ſin, becauſe they are cō
                        ceived
in originall ſin, & are nuriſhed
in their mothers belly: we haue ſinned
(ſay they) but we are fleſh, what could
we do? It is mans nature to fall. In the
meane time, they meditate nothing of
repentance. But by Davids example,
we learne, that in this reſpect every actual
ſin whatſoever, is the more grievous
& filthie, that it proceedeth from
ſo filthy and bitter a roote. Hitherto
hath bene the argument from original
ſinne: Here followeth next, from the

holy, pure, and ſincere nature of God
himſelfe. For he ſheweth the ſame be
the owne effect. For God delighteth
in inward truth and ſincerity, becauſe
he himſelfe is true and ſincere. Behold
thou delighteſt in truth in the reines] As
if he ſhould ſay, My GOD, thou art
holy and pure, and thou delighteſt in
holineſſe and pureneſſe of the reines,
that is, in the inward cleanneſſe. Nevertheleſſe,
I haue defyled my ſelfe, &
I am become vncleane: As it was done
in bringing in of the former argument:
ſo is it done in this likewiſe. For
this partickle [Behold] craveth attendance,
and poynteth out with the finger,
as it were, vnto God, that his moſt
cleane & ſincere nature, to the end that
God looking vpon, & conſidering his
own nature, ſo cōtrary to Dauids ſin, it
may appear moſt grieuous & filthy: for
he wil not haue any one part of his ſin
to be hid before God, thinking this to
be the only way to take away ſin, if the
whol ſin, how much ſo ever it be, be ſet

down together, and at one time in the
ſight of God. For ſo he is aſſured, that
it ſhall come to paſſe, that God, by that
merite and righteouſneſſe of Chriſt,
ſhall cover his ſinne. For we our ſelues
ought not to cover our ſinne, But wee
ſhould in a ſincere confeſſion, ſet it
downe before the eies of GOD, that
GOD thereafter may cover the ſame.
For that at length ſinne is truely covered,
when it is hid over by Chriſt from
Gods ſight. Moreover obſerue, that he
aggravateth his ſinne from Gods nature:
That the knowledge of GOD,
leadeth vs to the knowledge of our
owne ſelues, and to the knowledge of
that infinite majeſtie, infinite power,
and infinite wiſedome of God, ſheweth
vnto vs, how we our ſelues are nothing:
Finally, it teacheth vs the knowledge
of his moſt holy will, how far we
go aſtray from the right waye. VVhen
we looke vppon our ſelues onely, wee
appeare to be ſomewhat to our ſelues.
But when wee lift vp our eies to that

majeſtie, preſently wee are filthie and
waxe vile, yea, in our own eies. VVhen
we are ignorant of his will, wee thinke
that we haue willed & done all things
paſſing well: But having looked vpon
the law of God, wee ſee how farre wee
haue fallen away from trueth and vprightneſſe.
Paule appeared to himſelfe,
when he was ignorant of the law, that
then he liveth in very deede,Rom. 7. 9. 
                        But 
                              •
                           y the
comming of the commandement (ſayeth
he) ſinne reviued: but I am dead: Againe,
we ſee that Dauid here aggravateth his
ſinne, out of the reveiled will of God
by his Prophete. Some there are, who
indevour to leſſen their ſinne, from
that everlaſting and neceſſary decreet
of God, that is, from Gods vnreveiled
will:Rom. 9. 19 
                        Wherefore then ſay they, is he yet angrie?
For who hath reſiſted his will? Notwithſtanding,
that vnreveiled will of
God, excuſeth no man. For with what
conſcience can any man doe that, that
God ſheweth manifeſtlie by his reveiled
will is not to bee done? Alſo, by

this place of Dauids, wee learne to liue
according to the will, which God hath
manifeſted to vs, neither ye
                           •
                         ought we
curiouſly to inquire of that vnreveiled
wil. Finally, the decreete of God is not
to be brought as an excuſe to our wicked
deedes. Here followeth the third
argument, whereby hee inlargeth his
ſinne from that knowledge of God,
and of his will, wherewith David was
indued. Thou madeſt wiſedome knowen
vnto me (ſayeth hee) in the ſecret place]
That is, thou inſtructed me familiarly,
as one of thy ſervantes, in the knowledge
of thee, and of thy will. Nevertheleſſe,
I haue thus ſo filthilie made
defection from thee, even as I had bin
ignorant of thee, and of thy Lawes. It
is profitable indeede to know the will
of God, but the knowledge of God,
and of his will, aggravateth the ſinne,
and the damnation, if againſt that
knowledge, thou become diſobedient
to his will. Yea, if thou perſevere
vnto the ende, in ſinne, which is conjoyned

with the knowledge of God,
ſurely it were better for thee, if thou
had never heard nor known any thing
concerning GOD or of his will. For
that knowledge of thine, what ſhall
it be vnto thee in that daye, but a teſtimonie
againſt thee? And this knowledge
of the Goſpell, ſo full and plentifull,
what other thinge in that daye
ſhall it do to thoſe men, which in their
deedes deny Chriſt, but increaſe their
righteous condemnation: For the
condemnation of every Hypocrite,
and of him which is but in name only
a Chriſtian, ſhal be moſt grievous, yea,
and it were no more but for this ſame
name of a Chriſtian, which they ſo
impudentlie doe diſſemble, and falſelie
aſcribe to themſelues. Purge mee
with] Hitherto hath ben inſert the firſt
argumēt of the petition, from a true &
ſimple confeſſiō; now he returneth to
that begun petition. And firſt, as he did
before, earneſtly he craveth remiſſion
of ſinnes, and then next regeneraton,

which of neceſſitie, is conjoyned with
the former benefite. Then as concerning
the firſt benefit, he ſaith, Purge me
with Hyſſope that I may be cleane] that is,
ſprinkle mee with the blood of that everlaſting
ſacrifice Chriſt, to the ende
that I may be pure from ſinne. Hee alludeth
to that ſprinkling of the lawe,
which was performed by a bunch of
Hyſſope, in the blood of beaſtes, and
which ſignified, the ſprinkling of the
blood of Chriſt.Leuit. 14, 7 Therefore he ſeeketh
clenging by the blood of Chriſt,Num. 19. 18. never
the leſſe, he doth not deſpiſe the Sacrament,
& type appoynted by God:
but he alſo ſeeketh that ſame very temporall
ſacrament it ſelfe, the more to
confirme his faith. For ſeeing that
grace of God in Chriſt, neither can be
ſeene to the eie, 
                           •
                        neither touched by
the hand, GOD willing to helpe our
weakneſſe, which beleeue not ſufficiently
the thing that is ſpoken, except
wee alſo feele the ſame, yea, with
our bodelie ſenſes, in the ſeales and ſacraments,

even from the beginning he
hath reached forth, as it were, his grace
in Ieſus Chriſt, to bee ſeene with the
eies, & to be handled with the handes.
Waſh me] Againe, hee craveth remiſſion
of ſinnes, waſh mee (ſayeth hee) to
witte, with that ſelfe-ſame blood. That
I may waxe whiter then the ſnow] But hee
ſpeaketh this out by waye of compariſon,
yea, and that indeede making the
compariſon, with the thing which in
the owne nature is moſt white. Alſo,
the compariſon is made from thinges
that are leſſe, to the end hee might declare,
that there is nothing in nature ſo
white, pure and cleane, as is man, to
whome ſinnes are once forgiven, and
who is once waſhen by that blood of
Chriſt. Conſider here firſt, Dauid,
while hee craveth forgiueneſſe of ſins,
and peace of conſcience, hee ſeeketh
it vnder the ſymbolls and figures of
theſe waſhings of the lawe, whereby
ſometimes was ſhaddowed-out that
waſhing through the blood of Chriſt.

We ſee therefore that Dauid ſoght the
forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes, in the onely
bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. There hes never
ben, nor never ſhalbe in time to come,
remiſſion of ſinnes, and conſequently
quietnes of the conſcience, except by
the bloud alone of Ieſus Chriſt, which
is certain, that the ancient Church &
fathers, haue apprehended in the ſacrifices
and ſhaddowes. It may be indeed,
that the Papiſtes, ſo long as they
feele not the weightines of their ſin, &
of the wrath of God for ſinne (for the
conſcience of thoſe men, ſo far indeed
as my judgement can reach, is caſt vp
in a deep ſleep by that doctrine, which
daylie is taught among them) I ſaye
indeed, it may be, that for a time, being
thus afflicted, they vaunt in their merites,
indulgences, Purgatory, and I
cannot tell what ſatisfactiones: By
all which, it is certaine, ſomewhat is
pulled awaie from the grace of Chriſt.
But if it come to paſſe, that they bee
oppreſſed in earneſte, with the burthen

of ſinne, and with the ſenſe of
the wrath of GOD, they ſhall feele
ſurely, and publickly profeſſe, that all
thoſe things are vaine, and none other
things but dreames and triſles, which
now they ſo much commend: for then
they ſhal feele in experience, that there
is no remiſſion of ſinnes, or peace of
conſcience, without that bloud and
alone ſacrifice of Ieſus Chriſt. Which
would to God, at length thoſe miſerable
men ſawe and learned, that both
Gods wrath is pacified, and the conſciences
of miſerable men quieted, by
that blood alone, which in themſelues
are not diſquieted & troubled by any
other thinge, then by that ſenſe of the
wrath of God. O bleſſed is that peace &
quietneſſe, which is by that bloud of
Chriſt only! Mark again in this place,
he promiſeth cleannes & whitenes, whiter
then the very ſnow. If hee but once get
that, to be waſhen with the bloude of
chriſt. And indeed he doth this thing,
not to the end that he thinketh it ſhall

not come to paſſe, that ſinnes once being
forgiven, in time to come, there
ſhall be no remnant left of ſinne and
vncleanneſſe in his nature. But to that
end, becauſe hee thinketh and perſwadeth
himſelfe, that all the guiltineſſe of
ſinne ſhal be taken away by the blood
of Chriſt, and by his perfite ſatisfaction
once imputed, and that he ſhall be
in that eſtate, as if he had never ſinned
in his life. For wee haue a two-folde
purging and waſhing in Chriſte, the
one which is by blood, the other,
which is by the Spirite of Chriſt. That
waſhing which is by the blood of
Chriſt is moſt perfite and quieteth our
conſciences. But this waſhing which
is by the Spirite, it is begunne onely in
this life, and quieteth not the conſcience
properly and of the owne ſelfe.
To ſpeake it in a worde, the forgiuenes
of ſinnes, which is by Chriſts blood,
is perfite and abſolute in all the partes
thereof. But the regeneration, which
is by the Spirite of Ieſus Chriſt, is but

begun onely in this life. Make mee to
heare] He doth yet continue in the ſelf
ſame petition: The meaning is, as if he
ſhould ſay, witneſſe vnto me through
thy holye Spirite inwardelie, that my
ſinnes are forgiuen me. And ſo it ſhall
come to paſſe, that thou ſhalt furniſh
vnto me ane exceeding great matter of
joy and gladneſſe. This is it, which in
other wordes hee ſpeaketh elſ-where.
Lift vp the light of thy face vpon vs,
                        Pſal. 4. 
                              •
                           . 
                        Iehoua,
and put greater gladneſſe in my minde,
then at that time, when their cornes and
their wines are increaſed. For the ſixtenth
Pſalme ſpeaketh: There is ſacietie of
joyes before the face of GOD. Then
he addeth in the text, let the bones which
thou haſt bruſed reioyſe] As if he ſhoulde
ſay, forgiue mee my ſinnes, and then I
whome thou hadeſt humbled before,
ſhal reioice with an vnſpeakable gladneſſe.
For the ioye of the man caſte
downe and humbled, is invtterable:
after that now hee is lift vp, with that
ſenſe of mercy, and confidence of remiſſion

of ſinnes. But wee are to conſidder
the wordes more diligently.
Make me (ſayeth hee) to heare ioy. But
by what Preacher and Meſſenger?
was it not alreadie before preached by
the Prophet Nathan, that Davids ſinnes
were forgiven him? It is true: But the
outwarde teſtimonie of all men is nothing,
except that inwarde alſo of the
holy Spirite be conjoyned. Wherefore
Dauid in this place requireth that
inwarde teſtimony of the Spirite. For
the remiſſion of ſinnes, is an action intirely
hid in the minde of God. And
as no man knoweth the thinges of man,
but the Spirite of man: So theſe thinges of
God, no man knoweth but the Spirite of
God which (as Paule ſayth) ſearcheth the
deapthes of God himſelfe.
                        
                           
                              •
                            Cor. 2. 10 Wherefore,
except the holy Spirite of God teſtifie
in our heartes, that our ſinnes are
forgiven vs, ſurely no teſtimonie, either
of the creature, or of man, is able
to aſſure vs of that thinge. But after
what manner at length, doth the holy

Spirite teſtifie, that our ſinnes are
forgiven vs? The holy Spirite of God
worketh in our heartes, a wounderfull
ſenſe of the loue of God, as the
Apoſtle ſpeaketh, powreth out loue
into our harts, whereby God loveth vs
in chriſt. But what a loue is this? ſurely
not any common loue, but a ſpecial &
natural, to ſpeak ſo, that affectiō, which
they cal the natural affection ſuch as is
the natural affection of the Father, toward
his onely begotten Son. For the
Spirit of God teſtifieth, that fatherlie▪ &
moſt tender affection towards vs: Of
the which alſo it followeth, that the
ſame Spirite beareth witneſſe, that we
are the Sonnes of God. For if it witneſſe
a certaine fatherlie loue; It followeth,
by the force of thinges equal,
that wee are the ſonnes of God. From
whence alſo hee is every where called
the Spirite of Adoption, to witte, in
reſpect he witneſſeth,Rom. 
                              •
                           . 1
                              •
                            19. that we are the
ſons of God through adoption. But if
he teſtifie, that wee are the ſonnes of God,
                        
he witneſſeth therewith alſo, that our
ſinnes are forgiven vs, and that that
heavenly inheritance perteineth vnto
vs.Rom. 8. 17 
                        For if we be ſons, we ar alſo heires. The
heires of God; and the heires annexed with
Chriſt. And all theſe things are done in
Chriſt. For without Chriſt, there is no
feeling of the loue of God toward vs:
yea, without Chriſt, there is but a feeling
of wrath onely. For by nature, we
are al the ſonnes of wrath. Wherefore,
if wee would haue that teſtimonie of
the Spirit: Firſt of all, we muſt beleeue
in Chriſte, every one of the godly feeleth
this in experience in their tentations,
at what time the conſcience accuſeth
them of ſin, if then Chriſt be not
preſent, there is no peace or quietneſſe
of mind in them: But if Chriſt be preſent,
contrariwiſe, they feele in experience,
that their conference is pacified.
The Apoſtle while hee conſiddereth
this ſo neceſſary a preſence of Chriſt,
I had not purpoſed (ſayeth he) to know any,
                        1. Cor. 2.
                        thing among you, but Chriſt, yea, and

him crucified.
                        Gal. 3. 
                              •
                           . And to the Galathians he
writeth, that Chriſt was crucified, to wit,
by the viue preaching of the Goſpell
before their eies. Moreover, marke here
alſo, he ſayeth, make me to heare ioy and
gladneſſe] There aryſeth a great trouble
of the minde, and ane extreame
great dolour of ſinne not forgiven, &
thereafter an evill conſcience. For if
after the ſenſe of ſinne there is no entrie
made open to grace, but contrariwiſe,
there is a feeling of Gods anger,
there aryſeth in the mind intollerable
horrours. For of all enemies, the wrath
full God is the moſt terrible, and it is a
fearefull thing to fall in the handes of the
living God. Theſe are the ſpeeches of
wanton and ſecure men, they had rather
enter in count with GOD, then
with the moſt vile men otherwiſe. But
if the angry God ſhall at ſometime enter
in reckoning with them, ſurely
they ſhall feele, how terrible a thing it
is to fall into the handes of the living
God. Therefore I ſay, that intollerable

horrours follow of the earneſt feeling
of ſinne not forgiuen, and that feare,
with which, as Moyſes threatneth, the
wicked being commoued,
                        Levit. 26. 16. 
                        as with the ſhaking
of a leafe, are altogether driuen hither
and thither. This was the feare of Cain,
who being now caſt out from before
the face of God, and feeling him ſelfe
ſpoyled of Gods grace, hee complayneth,
that whoſoeuer ſhall firſt meete him,
ſhall put their hande violently into him.
Theſe men are afrayde of every creature
of God, and they ſeeme to themſelues
to be ſure in no place. But contrariwiſe,
there followeth ane certaine
exceeding great joye of ſinne forgiven
and of a good conſcience, and a peace
which overcōmeth all vnderſtanding.
For ſin being once forgiven, wee feele
that there is a waye made open to vs
vnto the grace of God; neither yet can
it be ſaide, with how great a joye the
minde boyleth. And this is that rejoycing
of David, which who never
haue yet felt in their life, ſurely they

feele no more gladnes, thē dogs or horſes.
This indeed were to be borne with,
that men do onely ſeeke the joyes and
pleaſures of this life preſente, if there
were no more hope to men, then there
is vnto bruiſh beaſtes, of another life
& immortalitie. But how can that be
ſuffered,2. Cor. 5. 
                              •
                           
                         that men created for eternity
(as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) notwithſtanding,
in the mean time in this life, they
taſte at no time, not ſo much as with
the vtmoſt part of their lippes, the joies
of that life to come; but as beaſtes content
themſelues with the commodities
and pleaſures of this life. Hide thine angry
face away] The third time, hee ſeeketh
the ſame thing, that is, the forgiuenes
of ſins: for he who lightly & for the
faſhiō, craveth that his ſins may be forgiuen
him; this man hath not yet learned
how horrible the offēding of God
is: neither yet how ſweet that feling is
of his loue & mercy. For the ſenſe of
the mercy of god, cauſeth a godly ſorrow,
that is, that ſorow which is for the

offending of ſo gracious a father: from
this ſorrow again, aryſeth a turning vnto
God, hatred of ſin, & loue of righteouſnes,
with a confeſſion of ſin, & an
often calling vpon God; which tendes
to that ende, that the ſelfe aboliſheth
ſinne. But to returne to the purpoſe againe:
Hide thine angry face away from
my ſinnes (ſayth he) and blot out al mine
iniquities] That is, haue not mine iniquities
before thine eies, but blot them
out of thy bookes of record: For hee
ſpeaketh of them, as if they were written
in bookes of record, and were continually
in the ſight of God, which
thing indeed, ſeemeth intollerable to
the wicked ſinner. For we were not able
to abide the ſight of the angry God
if we walked naked before Gods eies,
that is, not cled with Chriſt and his
righteouſneſſe. But as concerning the
wrath of God, in few words, this much
ſpeake we of it. The wrath of God, by
reaſon of his inviolable holines, and
alſo becauſe of the greatneſſe of ſinne,

is ſo horrible, that in no caſe it can bee
borne of the creature. For ſeeing ſinne
is a certain violating as it were, of that
moſt holy majeſtie, is it any wounder
that the wrath which is a mainteiner
and revenger of ſuch a majeſtie nowe
violated, is ſo horrible? From whence

                           •
                        he ſame David, calleth it a conſuming
fyre, and in another place he ſayeth: If
thou ſhalt ſtraitly marke our iniquities, ô
Iehova, who ſhall be able to beare? Suppoſe
with thy ſelfe,Pſal. 130. 3. that all the creatures,
all the Empyres of the worlde
conſpyre together, to ſuſteine and
beare as it were in their handes, that
man with whom God is angry. Notwithſtanding
that man, wer not able
to ſuſteine that wrath. For like as if
God with his owne hande, would vphold
any, and comfort him inwardly
by his Spirite, this man would not bee
oppreſſed with any kinde of violence;
We are afflicted on every ſide (ſayth Paul)
yet wee are not in diſtreſſe, in povertie, but
not overcome of poverty. We are perſecuted

but not forſaken, caſte downe, but wee periſh
not. Everie where vve beare about
in our bodie, the dying of the Lorde Ieſus,
that the life of Ieſus, might alſo bee made
manifeſt in our bodies: So if God would
ſhewe himſelfe angrie againſte anie
man: This man by no force could be
ſuſteined, hee ſhould be afrayde, yea,
with the ſhaking of a leafe, let be any
great commotion. Which wrath indeed,
when David felt, hee was not able
to beare it any longer, and he prayed
that it might bee remooved from
him in theſe wordes, Hide away, thine
angry face from my ſinnes] Thou ſeeſte
therefore, by the example of DAVID,
that even thoſe whome GOD dearelie
loveth, becauſe of their ſinnes at
ſome time, are not without ſome
grievous ſenſe of the wrath of God,
which indeede is done for this cauſe,
that they themſelues may come vnto
the knowledge of Gods nature,
And maie knowe firſte, howe good
hee is who will not haue his owne

to lye ſluggiſhing in their ſinnes.
Then nexte, becauſe hee is holye and
juſt, in reſpect he beginneth his judgement
at his owne houſe, yea, and will
not winke indeed at the ſinnes of his
owne. For that I may affirme boldlie,
that the godlie for the moſt parte are
chaſtiſed of GOD in this life: And
that GOD is exceeding long ſuffering
towarde the vngodlie. But the
Godlie on the otherſide, are touched
with a ſenſe of Gods loue in this life.
From thence ariſe that interchaunge
of ſorrowe and joye in this life. But
the vngodly abuſing the long ſuffring
of God in this life, they ſhal feel at laſt
the vnappeaſeable wrath of God. Hitherto
hath bin repeated, the petition
of remiſſion of ſinnes. Now he ſeeketh
that other benefite of Regeneration,
which is conjoyned of neceſſity, with
the forgiuenes of ſins. Creat in me a clear
mind] Then, by way of clearing of the
mater, be preſētly ſubjoyneth. Renew a
firme ſpirit within me] as if he ſhuld ſay:

This work of New-birth begun in me
by thy Spirit, but vpon my parte interrupted.
O God, renew & repaire in me,
that thy Spirite in time to come may
be firme and conſtant, and I through
the benefite thereof, may perſevere in
thine obedience. There are two benefits
neceſſary in reconciling vs to 
                           •
                        od,
which ſelfe ſame thinges, God promiſeth
to vs in the free covenant, to wit,
forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and regeneration;Ier. 31. 33.
and both are obtained in Chriſt;
For by the blood of Chriſt, our ſinnes
are forgiven, and by the powerful holy
Spirite of Chriſt, wee are borne of
new againe. For the alone and ſelfeſame
Chriſt, as the Prieſt died for our
ſinnes, and as King, he is powerfull to
regenerate vs by his holy Spirite and
worde. Dauid therefore, after hee hath
ſought forgiueneſſe of ſins in Chriſt,
hee earneſtly craveth the New-birth,
and renewing of that interrupted
worke of Gods holye Spirite in himſelfe.
Conſidder here firſt, that the

holye Spirite is made ſo joyfull, by
Gods workes, and a good conſcience,
that he courageovſly maketh progres
in the work of our Regeneration. But
contrariwiſe,Epheſ. 
                              •
                           . 30. the Spirite of God is ſo
touched with griefe, by evil works, as
the Apoſtle teſtifieth, that hee ceaſeth
as it were from that work, and leaveth
off in the middeſt that begun worke of
New-birth. The Spirite now leaving
his owne worke in the middeſt, preſently
there aryſeth darkneſſe in the
minde, which maketh that bright light
of the countenance of GOD to paſſe
out of ſight, and to vaniſh away from
our eies, and incontinent our heart
waxeth harde, as a certaine skarre of a
wound, and becommeth benummed
and without ſenſe, ſo that the holy Spirite
of God is very hardly rayſed vp againe,
being oppreſſed with the darkneſſe
of mind, and hardneſſe of heart.
And from thence aryſe thoſe mournings
and ſighes of the godlie, fighting
with the darkneſſe of their heart. And

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
from thence aroſe that ſpeeche of
PAVLE, O miſerable man that I am, who
ſhall deliver mee from the bodie of this
death?
                        Rom. 7. 24 Conſidder here againe, DAVID
craveth not Regeneration by the
Spirite of Chriſt, before hee firſt haue
ſought the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes,
through the blood of Chriſt. This order
of the petitiones, evidentlie declareth,
that of neceſſitie we muſt bee
firſt juſtified by Chriſt, before we bee
ſanctified in our ſelues: which thing
alſo, the righteouſneſſe of GOD requireth,
which ſuffereth not the Image
of GOD to bee repaired in vs,
which is according to righteouſneſſe
and holineſſe, before firſt God bee ſatisfied
for all our 
                           •
                        innes. For it is not
poſſible, that GOD canne renounce
his owne juſtice. Nowe after that
thou art juſtified, then there is place
to Regeneration, and the Petition
thereof, not indeede that having
attayned to it, thou quiet thy ſelfe
chiefelie in the ſame: But thou muſte

ſpeciallie, and alwaie thereafter, quiet
thy ſelfe in that moſte perfite righteouſneſſe
of Chriſte, without the
which, not all this holineſſe which
is in vs, dare bee ſo bolde to come
foorth once into the ſight of GOD.
For our Regeneration and holineſſe,
is but begunne onelie in this life, and
neither by the ſelfe, pacifyeth the
wrath of GOD, neither 
                           〈◊〉
                        
our conſciences. And 
                           〈…〉
                        
the Papiſtes are more 
                           〈…〉
                        
leaving this moſte perfi
                           •
                        e righteouſneſſe
of Chriſt, will quiet themſelues
in their owne, and in that which they
call inherente; And againe, for this
cauſe they are more miſerable, that
vnderſtande not what this inherente
righteouſneſſe is, which is none other
thing in verie deede, but that the Regeneration
of our nature, is onely but
begun in this life: wherfore we ought
to praye to GOD, that he would not
ſuffer vs to be involved in this darknes
and that he would not ſuffer vs to bee

ſeduced, by men which this daye are
blinded in ſo cleare a light. Caſt me not
away] Hee continueth in this ſeconde
petition of the holy Spirite, and of Regeneration.
Caſt me not away (ſayeth he)
from thy face] then expreſſing the ſame
thing clearely, Take not thine holy Spirit
from me (ſayeth hee) Nothing can befall
a man more grievous in this life,
then if he be left of GOD. For ſeeing
that God is the fountaine of all good
thinges, GOD leaving man, all good
thinges alſo therewith leaue him. All
good things leauing him, hee is therewith
layde open to all evill thinges. If
God be on our ſide,
                        Rom. 
                              •
                           . 31. 
                        who ſhall be againſt vs?
No, not theſe thinges indeede, which
ſeeme to bee moſt diſpleaſant & contrary.
For all things worke together for the
beſt, to them that loue God. Contrariwiſe,
all worke together, for the worſe to
them that loue not GOD, yea, even
thoſe things, which otherwiſe appeare
to make for vs. Nowe, although there
be ſo great an evill in the deſertion of

God. Notwithſtanding, the elect alſo
are at ſome time deſtitute of the Spirit
of GOD, which is the thing that DAVID
teached vs in this place by his
owne example. Verely I ſay not this
for this cauſe that I thinke, the Spirite
once giuen to the elect, thereafter is allutterly
taken from them: For the giftes
and calling of God are without repentance.
But that for a certaine ſpace the efficacie
of the holye Spirite is not ſeene in
governing of the elect yea, & that eſpecially
for this ende, that they maye bee
humbled, & that they may learne, that
it is not poſſible for them to ſtand, yea,
but for one momente, vnles they bee
ſuſteined, by Gods grace and his holy
Spirit. Whereby it commeth to paſſe
that the elect after they haue found in
experience, howe infirme and fragill
they are by nature without the Spirite
of God, nowe being deſtitute thereof
for a time, they more carefully, and
with more feruent deſires earneſtlie
craue his preſence and helpe. This is

the ſecond thing which hee offereth
here to vs to bee learned by his owne
example. Alſo the third, that we in this
place learne by his example, that that
deſertion is exceeding doleful, whereby
he, who is once left of God, yea, &
that by his moſt juſt judg
                           •
                        ment, God,
to witte, leaving him, becauſe of his
ſinne, and being now forſaken & left,
he remayneth in the paines, which by
his owne ſinne he hath deſerved: Yet
notwithſtanding, in the meane time,
neither is his minde enlightened by
Gods Spirit, nor his hart reformed: But
the more he leaneth thereto, the more
is he blinded and hardned. For to ſuch
a man, extreame deſtruction is appoynted,
vnleſſe at laſt he repente. Of
this ſorte of men, that threatning of
Iohn Baptiſt, is to be vnderſtood: The
axe is layde to the roote of the trees.
                        Math. 3. 10 Alſo,
that ſaying of PAVLE, When they ſhall
ſay peace,
                        1 Theſ. 5, 5 
                        and all things quiet, then ſuddaine
deſtruction ſhall come vpon them. Moreover,
it appeareth out of this example

of DAVID, that GOD leaveth
not his owne by ſo ſorrowfull a deſertion:
For Dauid repented very ſoone
at the threatning of Nathan: For God
when he afflicteth his owne, he therewith
illuminateth and changeth them
alſo, by his holy Spirite, that repenting
they may obteine remiſſion of ſinnes,
and may be reſtored to life. Reſtore to
me the ioy] Yet he perſiſteth in the petition
of the holy Spirite, or of the preſence
of God by his Spirite: as if hee
ſhould ſaye, ſurely I haue felt, O my
GOD, an exceeding great joy of thy
ſalvation, that is, ſince the time thou
becammeſt my ſalvation, protectour,
and defender: But now through mine
own default, that whole joy is broken
off in the middeſt: Therefore, O God,
reſtore to me, that wonted joy proceeding
from thy preſence. The onelie
comforte and ſolide joye of man, aſwell
in life as in death, is, that hee is
not in his owne power, and left to
himſelfe, but that hee is the Lordes,

and that hee hath him to be as it were
his protectour and defender. David
when hee felt in experience,Pſal. 2
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           . that God
was no otherwaies his keeper, then the
ſheepheard was to his ſheep, it cannot
be ſpoken, how great a ioye he conceived
thereof, which alſo burſted forth
in theſe wordes: Thy rode and thy ſheepcrooke,
they haue comforted me: This ſpirituall
reioycing, which commeth of
the preſence of God, whoſoever hath
once taſted it, this man wil not be content
with the whole ioy of this world,
vnleſſe ſurely he be therewith participant
in ſome meaſure of that heavenly
ioye alſo. David verely, had refuſed
the whole comfort of this world, and
would haue nothing eſteemed, that
his kingdome & royall dignitie, if that
old and wonted ioye had not bene reſtored
vnto him, which aroſe from the
preſence of God, by his owne holie
Spirite. But if wee would not provoke
to wrath God preſent with vs, neither
yet would grieue his holy Spirit, ſurely

wee ſhould haue that joy of the
Spirite, more ſolide and conſtant. For
from whence commeth that interruption
thereof, becauſe we make defection
from God. Dauid had God preſent
with him, hee had the Spirite the comforter:
But after he had forſaken God,
by committing adultery and murther
together, he ſpoyled himſelfe, both of
that preſence of God, and likewiſe of
that ſolide comforte of his preſence.
Men commonly with all the ſtrength
they haue, provoke that holy Majeſty
of God to anger: But it commeth to
paſſe, I cannot tell howe, that in the
meane time, they appeare to themſelues
to liue at reſte, and with ſufficient
pleaſure, and delight themſelues
with a vaine dreame. For as the Lorde
ſaith, there is no peace for the wicked,
I ſpeak of the true peace, for I would
not call this ſtupidity a peace, whereby
it commeth to paſſe, that neither
they feele their own ſinne, nor yet the
wrath of GOD, which thing they in

wofull experience ſhal learn ſome day
when ſuddainly being awakned out of
this dead drowſie ſleepe, they ſhall be
forced to beholde that angry face, &
terrible countenance. And vphold me]
The ſelf-ſame, is the meaning of theſe
words, & of the words preceeding: for
ſo at laſt wee feele God preſent, his ſalvatiō,
gladnes, ariſing thereof, if we be
vp-holden by his Spirite. David is afraid,
of the affections of his mind, leaſt
he be over-whelmed with them, as by
a certaine deluge. He craveth therfore,
that GOD would ſuſteine him by his
Spirit. For as, if a great boſſe be caſt into
the water, preſently the water running
in into it, it is drowned: but if,
firſt it be blowen vp with wind, the aire
being incloſed, before it be caſt into
the water, it ſwimmeth in the ſuperfice
of the water: So our mind, if it remaine
voyde of the Spirit of God, it is drowned
incontinent in the middeſt of the
waues of our affections: But if it bee
repleniſhed with the Spirite of God,

it is not poſſible that it can bee overcommed
of the affectiones. Let everie
man take heede what minde hee hath,
whither it bee voyde and tume, or rather
full and repleniſhed with the Spirit.
He calleth the Spirit, the Spirite of
freedom
                           •
                        , or of liberty. To the ende
we may vnderſtande the reaſon of the
word. it is to bee learned out of the 8.
chap. to the Romanes, that there is a two
fold ſpirit, or rather, that there is a twofold
effect, of that one & ſelfe ſame ſpirit
of GOD. The Apoſtle calleth the
former, the Spirite of bondage to feare,
that is, which at the preaching of the
law, toucheth vs with a ſenſe of our ſin
& miſery: for vnles the Spirite of God
were effectuall in our hearts, with the
preaching of the law, ſurely by the preching
of the law alone, wee ſhould never
be touched with an earneſt ſenſe of
ſin, & of our own miſery: this ſpirit ther
fore maketh vs to know our ſin & miſery,
and holdeth vs vnder feare of the
wrath of God, death, & cōdemnation:

and therefore, it redacteth vs as it
were vtterly to a ſervile eſtate. For this
was of old proper vnto ſervantes, continually
to feare puniſhment and vengeance
at their maiſters hands. The Apoſtle
calleth that other ſpirit, the Spirit
of adoption: It is he, who while the
Goſpel is preached, maketh vs to know
our deliverance from ſinne and miſery.
For we ſhould never be ſo touched
with the preaching of the Goſpel, vnleſſe
in the meane time, the Spirite of
God were powerfull in vs, which maketh
vs to know our deliverance from
ſinne and miſery, and that we feele in
our heart, that fatherlie affection of
God toward vs, and conſequently leaveth
a teſtimonie within vs, that wee
are the ſonnes of God. And if wee be
ſonnes, that we are alſo delivered from
ſinne, wrath and damnaton. From
thence it is called, the Spirite of freedome
or libertie, becauſe it witneſſeth
that in Chriſt wee are delivered from
ſinne and death. There is alſo another

cauſe, why it is called ſo, to witte, becauſe,
renewing our minde according
to the image of GOD, it maketh vs in
the meane time freelie to ſerue God,
and that we walke in the liberty of the
Spirit. For by nature, there is no freewill,
But where the Spirite of God is, there
is libertie,
                        2. Cor. 3. 17. (ſayeth PAVLE.) And this is
that bleſſed Chriſtian libertie, wherby
we are ſo delivered, that we may ſerue
God, and not that wee ſhould liue according
to our owne will, ſuch as libertie,
as theſe Libertines & Fpicures
doe faine, neither yet muſt wee thinke
that we are forced to doe our duty by
this Spirite, but that willingly we are
led. For God loveth thoſe that are willing,
as Dauid ſpeaketh in an other
place. Nevertheleſſe, in this life, this libertie
is but begunne onely, which at
laſt ſhalbe perfited in that life to come.
But we muſt yet a little more diligently,
marke the word of freedome, for it
ſignifieth, not any common liberty,
but a ſpeciall & noble freedome, ſuch

as is the liberty of a Noble man, or
kings ſon. Neither yet without cauſe,
this worde is applyed to the preſente
purpoſe: For wee are the ſonnes of a
king, that is indeed Noble; the King of
kings, and the moſt hie God. For whoſoever
is regenerated by his Spirit; he
is his ſonne in Chriſt, although otherwiſe
(if wee conſidder theſe prerogatiues
among men) hee be baſe borne,
notwithſtanding hei▪ noble, and more
noble then any King, who hath onely
the firſt nature, and is not regenerated
by the holy Spirit. For the regenerate
man (to ſpeake this with Peter) is made
participant of the moſt noble divine
nature.2. Pet. 1. 
                        Iohn eſteemed much of this noblenes,
when he ſaid, whoſoever receiued
the Worde, that they haue gotten this
dignitie,Iohn, 1, 12 to be made the ſons of GOD.
Beholde, hee calleth dignitie that eſtate,
to the which, the Sonnes of
GOD were lifted vppe, which if men
would ſome-what more diligentlie
take heede to, they would not trouble

themſelues, with thoſe thinges, which
the Apoſtle calleth, Carnall, as are
kindred,2, Cor, 5. 
                        
                           •
                        iches, honoures▪ but would
ſeeke rather the new Creature in Chriſt,
for olde thinges are paſte awaie, and all
thinges are made new
                              •
                           . And hitherto
the petition hath bene two folde. The
firſt, of remiſſion of ſi
                           ••
                        es: The other,
of Regeneration. Nowe followeth
the common argumente of
the craving of both, from the edifying
of our neighbours. I ſhall teach
back ſlyders thy waies] (ſayeth hee:) As
if hee ſhould ſaye; if I ſhall obtayne
at thy handes, the thing that I craue,
O God, I ſhall be a Preacher of thy
infinite and incomprehenſible mercy
to others. Thy waies] (he ſayeth) not
my waies, ſuch as were man ſlaughter,
adulterie, &c. For thoſe then were
DAVIDS waies; which waies indeede,
men are skilfull ynough commonly
to pretend to their evill deedes, who
ſeeke none other thing, then liberty to
ſinne, yea, and that vnder ſome certain

cloake, when notwithſtanding this
example of life, is not ſet before them
by David, that they ſhould follow it,
yea, but much rather the waies of God
a
                           •
                         ſet before them, that is, his vnſpeakable
mercies toward ſinners: which
alſo appeareth of that, that where ſinne
abounded, grace ſuperabounded. The
waies of God by nature ar vnknowen
to man, and ſpecially that way of infinite
mercy in his owne Chriſt, of the
which natur, indeed was not able ever
at any time to ſuſpect. But after, beſide
nature, and againſt nature, it was reveiled;
notwithſtanding, the conſcience
trembling, through the feeling of ſin,
and of the wrath of God, ſo that a mid
cloud as it were, is caſt in betuixt the
ſight thereof, and the grace of God,
that it cannot but ſee very hardly. For
then ſuch an huge heape of ſinne aryſeth,
that it taketh away by force, the
whole ſight of the grace of GOD, almoſt
from it. In the mean time, infidelitie,
which proceedeth of nature perſwadeth

vs to deſpayre, of the mercy
of God. Finally, a thouſand impediments
ingire themſelues, which al maketh
it to come to paſſe, that we are
blind at the light of that grace of God,
ſo that wee finde in experience, howe
hard a thing it is, eſpecially to a man
who is touched with an earneſt feeling
of his ſinne, to haue before his
eies, that mercy of God in Chriſt: For
I ſpeake of him who is touched with a
ſenſe of his ſinne. For others, who
while they ſinne, yea, and ſinne grievouſly
indeede, notwithſtanding, they
feele not that their ſinne, in ſpeech,
ſurely they promiſe to themſelues the
mercy of God in Chriſt, nevertheles,
in very deed they feele it not. For it is
eaſie to any ſecure man, and that ſleepeth
in his ſinne, in a dreame to promiſe
all things to himſelfe. God therefore
willing the weill of ſinners, in
this ſo great a difficultie of feeling of
grace, hee would haue left vnto vs an
example of that this mercy, whereby

moſte grievous ſinnes are pardoned,
ſuch as was this example of Gods
mercy in DAVID, the more notable
in this reſpect, the more grievous
that his ſinnes were, as manſlaughter,
adultery, &c. Alſo, they
were the heavier, in that ſelfe-ſame reſpect,
that hee was a King, PAVLE the
Apoſtle. 1. Timoth. 1. Profeſſeth indeede
himſelfe to bee the chiefeſt of
all ſinners, to witte, a Blaſphemer, a perſecutor,
a man that did wrong. Notwithſtanding
(ſayeth hee) God for this cauſe
had mercie vppon mee, that hee might
ſhewe firſt on mee all long ſuffering, vnto
the example of them, which ſhall in time to
come, beleeue in him to everlaſting life:
This way of bringing men vnto grace,
which is by experience, & by his own
exāple, God wil haue without al dout,
every one whoſoever haue felt at any
time in experiēce his mercy, to follow
& to cōmunicate to others willingly
that taſt of grace, which they thēſelues
before haue felt: which thing, David
                        
promiſeth to do in this place. I wil teach
back-ſliders (ſaieth he) thy waies] In this
place thou ſhalt marke, that the godly,
when God as it were, taking holde of
their hande, lift vp themſelues, they
ſtretch out their other hand, as it were
to lift vp others, whereby they alſo may
be participant of the ſame grace. Whē
Chriſt calleth vpon them, they alſo at
the ſame time, cal others, that they may
come together vnto him, according
to that commandement of Chriſt vnto
Peter, When thou art converted ſtrengthen
thy brethren. For true faith, not only
is careful for the ſelf, but chiefly, this
is the ende of the purpoſe thereof,
through a certain zeale of the glory of
God, to promoove the ſalvation of others,
to wit, that other ſinners may be
turned vnto God & repent. For David
reſpecteth this ende, in teaching others,
that is, the mercie of GOD towarde
ſinners▪ that they alſo might repent,
being mooved to wit, with that
ſenſe of the mercy of God toward thē.

Of the which, that thinge appeareth,
that ſome taſte of the mercy of GOD,
preceedeth turning vnto God, & that
faith is the cauſe of Repentance. For
it cannot bee, that men can be turned
vnto God, vnles they be allured with
ſome 
                           •
                        eeling of his fatherlie loue. Deliver
me from blood] Now the third time
he repeateth that petition, of the forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes, for the conſcience
of his haynous facte continually pricketh
the man, and this infidelitie of nature
laboureth to extinguiſh faith and
the Spirite, whereby the ſinner perſwadeth
him ſelfe of the remiſſion of
his ſinnes, therefore by crying, and by
crying again, he wraſtleth with his infidelitie
of nature. There is none of all,
which is to ſeeke forgiueneſſe of our
ſins at God, without ſome wraſtling:
I ſpeake of that man, which is to ſeeke
by faith, and by a ſerious feeling. For
it is eaſie to the ſecure man, and that
thinketh nothing of ſinne and miſery,
to craue for the faſhion, the remiſſion

of his ſinnes, yea, and that not over againe,
but onely once, O God, (ſayeth
he, very rawly and coldly) be mercifull
vnto me. David therefore now the
third time, craveth pardon and forgiuenes
of his ſinne; and he poynteth
out his ſinne in particular. For when
the conſcience of ſinne vrgeth men,
they are not aſhamed to profeſſe and
name it in particular, yea, & that publicklie.
Alſo, the cauſe wherefore men
are aſhamed, by name to poynt out
their ſinnes, and to confeſſe them, it aryſeth
of this, that there is not an earneſt
feeling and conſcience of ſinne.
But let vs ſee, which was Davids ſin in
particular. Deliver me, ô God (ſayth he)
from bloud] For it appeareth, that the
conſcience of man-ſlaughter, mooved
the man chiefely. For this tormented
him, that hee had ſhamefully ſlayne
that man, whoſe wife hee had defyled
in adultery, and that he had heaped ſin
vpon ſinne: Therefore he craveth that
he might bee delivered from bloud,

no otherwiſe then if he had bin wholie
defiled with the bloud of any innocent
man, which ſo faſtly had cleaved
vnto him, that, vnleſſe it were wiped away
with Gods owne hand, it could
not be at all poſſible to be wiped away
and clenſed. For man-ſlaughter, being
once committed, and the ſlaughter or
the murther of an innocent man executed,
the whole blood is powred out
and runneth backe as it were, vpon the
man-ſlayer, and dyeth him no otherwaies,
then the purple dye doth the
Wooll. If your ſinnes (ſayeth the Lord)
were as skarlet,
                        Eſay. 1. 1
                              •
                           
                         
                        yet I wil make them as white
as the ſnow: As if hee ſhould ſaye; Although
ye were dyed as with skarlet
dye, that aboundant blood being ſhed
out vpon you (for he had ſaid before,
that their hands were bloudy) not withſtanding,
I will make you as white as ſnow.
Alſo, being this way dyed and ſpotted
with the bloud of the innocent man:
The man-ſlayer continually appeareth
in the ſight of God. And God out

of his judgmēt ſent, looketh vpon him
with an horrible countenance, by reaſon
hee ſpoyled his owne Image, and
likewiſe the common natur of al men.
The man-ſlayer, in whatſoever part of
the worlde he be in, is notable to flie
from this face of God. But this is the
ſtupiditie of our murtherers, that no
way they feele this. David alſo for a
time, ſleeped in his ſinne, neither yet
ſaw he that he was defiled wholy with
the blood of the innocent man, neither
yet did he ſee that angry face of
God, but being at length awakened vp
at the threatning of the Prophet, bee
was no longer able to ſuffer himſelfe
ſo to bee defiled with that blood, neither
yet was hee able to abide, being
thus defiled with blood, to be caſt before,
& layd open to the ſight of that
angry eie: but very oft he cryed, & earneſtly
ſought; that God would pardon
him his ſin, that he wold waſh him, that
hee would deliver him from bloud:
which wold to 
                           •
                        od, thoſe murtherers,

who are not touched, either with a
conſcience of their ſinne, or of the
wrath of God, neither yet make any
end of murthers and oppreſſions, they
would ſee at laſt, their owne bloodie
hands, they would ſee alſo that God
ſaw them, which ſurely he ſeeth, & ſhal
at length ſee ſom day, when he ſhal tak
a vengeance vpō them, except in time
they repente. David appeareth to crye
out, through ſome feling of the wrath
of GOD, that he might bee delivered
from bloud. For the ſenſe of innocent
blood, and the feeling of wrath, are
continually ioyned together. Notwithſtanding,
he crieth vnto God, the
God of his ſalvation. Of the which, ſo
familiar an incalling: in this appeareth
ſufficiently, that Dauid felt therewith
the mercy of his God. For the faithful
together, and at one time, vſe to bee
touched, both with ſome ſenſe of the
wrath, and with a ſenſe of the mercie
of God: by which thing indeede, the
faithfull differ from the Infidels: For

the faithful feele both, that is, both the
wrath and the mercy of their God in
ſome certain meaſure, and at the ſame
time in which they are afrayd of wrath
& of the angry God, at the ſame time,
they cleaue faſte vnto him; neither yet
doe they ſuffer themſelues to be pulled
away from his worde and promiſes:
Vpon the which they depende, as
it were vppon a certaine rocke, in the
exceeding great toſſing too and fro of
the waues. But the infidels, and ſuch as
the Lord hath caſten off, at what time
they feele his wrath, in the meane
time there is no ſenſe of grace; & while
they ſee the helles opened: Wherwith
they are even nowe preſently to bee
ſwallowed vp, they haue nothing in
the meane time, to which they may
cleaue, or which, as it were, ſtretching
out the hande, they may take hold on,
neither God, nor yet the promiſes of
God in Chriſt, from which aryſes vnſpeakable
horrours, with which no
comfort is conjoyned. Then indeede

they are compelled to eſteeme thoſe to
bee bleſſed, who haue learned in this
life, to draw neere vnto God by faith,
and to take a grip of Chriſt, and of the
promiſes made in him. Let my tongue
ſing] Here followeth the laſt argument
of the petition, from the glory of God
himſelfe, as if he ſhould ſay, O Lord,
this the whole worke of thy glory, is
to redound to thine own glory again:
Wherefore deliver me. The wordes of
the text are, My tongue ſhall ſing thy righteouſneſſe]
That is, thy mercy, which
for this cauſe, here hee calleth righteouſneſſe,
becauſe it is done according
to Gods promiſe; for that which God
doth according to his promiſe, that
thing hee doth righteouſ
                           •
                        ie. Open my
lippes ô Lord] That is, furniſh vnto mee
matter of thy prayſe, from the remiſſion
of ſinnes and deliverance, & then,
My mouth ſhall ſhew foorth thy prayſe]
Marke what hee doeth, being nowe
delivered from ſinne and damnation:
DAVID being condemned, could

not prayſe God, Who (ſayeth hee) ſhall
prayſe thee in hell? Alſo, Dauid knewe
very wel that God was of that nature
and diſpoſition, that he would haue al
his workes to redounde to his glory
againe, and the fruites of his benefites
to returne vnto himſelfe; and from
thence it is, that hee communicateth
not his benefites indifferently, and
without diſcretion, to every ſorte of
men whatſoever: I ſpeak chiefely of
ſpiritual bleſſings. For he giveth thoſe
temporal and bodely things, yea, even
to the reprobat. But he giveth Chriſte
and his benefites, to none but to the
faithfull; for in theſe onely hee attayneth
to the ende of his benefites, and
thoſe alone who receiue them in faith,
glorifie that God the giver. What, ſayeſt
thou, that ther commeth any thing
to the increaſe of the glory of God, by
the praiſes that cum from vs? I anſwer,
God indeed in himſelf is moſt perfit,
and all ſufficiente, and that his glorie
conſiſteth perfite within himſelfe,

without the helpe of any of the creatures,
without the which, The Father
glorifyeth the Sonne; The Sonne the
Father; The Father and the Sonne the
holy Spirite; The holy Spirite the Father
and the Sonne. But for this cauſe,
God craveth his glory from the creature,
in reſpect hee is righteous. Nowe
his righteouſneſſe requireth, that the
creature, acknowledge the owne Creator,
and glorifie him, the fountaine
of al good things in his benefits. Alſo,
that good thing, which is in the prayſing
of GOD, belongeth to the creature,
whoſe happineſſe conſiſteth in
this, that by all duties, it ſerue God the
owne Creator & redemer. Yea, & this
ſame thing, every one of the godlie
finde in experience in themſelues. For
if at any time they feele not their hart
to be louſed into the praiſes of GOD,
then ſurely there is no comfort, there
is no gladneſſe. But contrariwiſe, if at
any time they feele their heart to bee
touched to prayſe their own Creator,

to ſeeke all whatſoever they haue need
of at him, to giue him prayſe for
benefites received, then ſurely they
appeare to them to be bleſſed. For thou
delighteſt not] David ſaid that he wold
publiſh the prayſes of God, that hee
would ſing with his tongue, the righteouſneſſe
of God: which ſervice indeed,
is onely ſpirituall and inwarde.
Wherefore it might bee asked concerning
the ſacrifices and externall ceremonies,
whether if hee ſhould not by
them prayſe God alſo? He preventeth
this demaund; and aunſwereth to it in
theſe words. Thou delighteſt not in ſacrifices]
as if he ſhould ſay, God taketh
not ſo much pleaſure in the outwarde
worſhippe, as hee doth in the inwarde,
which is ſeene in ſpirit and trueth. Hee
delighteth not ſo much in the ſacrifice
and killing of beaſtes, as he doth in the
internall obedience of the heart, and
inward holines: whereby it commeth
to paſſe, that men preſent themſelues a ſacrifice
vnto God, holy, liuing, and acceptable

vnto God.
                        Rom. 12. Notwithſtanding, it may be
obiected yet, ſeeing that ſacrifices are
of his owne ordinance and commandement,
ſeeing that David lived none
otherwaies, but vnder the iudiments
of the law, Chriſt not being yet manifeſted
in the fleſh: howe is it that either
David himſelfe refuſeth thoſe externall
exerciſes of Religion, or pronounceth
that GOD taketh no pleaſure
in them? I aunſwere: the wordes
are not ſimplie to be vnderſtood, neither
yet abſolutely are they ſpoken:
but by way of compariſon of that outwarde
worſhip, with the inwarde, in
reſpect of which, indeede the outward
worſhip is not greatly to be accounted
of: So GOD himſelfe profeſſeth
that he regardeth not ſo much, in the
reſpect of the ſacrifices, if in the meane
time, prayſes be offered and ſacrificed
vnto him.Pſal. 
                              •
                           0, 4, 
                        Samuel ſharply rebuketh
Saule, becauſe hee had thought, that
God taketh more pleaſure in burnt offrings,
then in obedience: taketh Iehoua

pleaſure (ſayth hee) ſo much in burnt offerings,
as when he is obeyed?
                        1 Sam, 15, 22. 
                        Behold, to obey,
is better then ſacrifice, and to take heede, is
better then the fat of Rammes. There is alſo
another anſwer of others, which indeed
I refuſe not, to witte, that Dauid
here ſpeaketh of the abuſe of the ſacrifices.
The law taught, that ſinnes were
purged by ſacrifices, that ſiners diſtruſting
their own deſervings and works,
they might put their confidence in
Chriſtes ſacrifice alone, where of all
thoſe Leviticall ſacrifices were types:
And that their faith in time comming,
might bee ſtrengthened by that ſacrifice
of Chriſt. This ſurely was the proper
vſe of thoſe auncient ſacrifices. But
men neglecting the ſacrifice of Chriſt,
neglecting faith and repentance, neglecting
finally the inward worſhippe,
they put their confidence in their ſacrifices
offered, and outward ceremonies,

                           •
                        s in merites: He ſayeth therefore
that God taketh no pleaſure in this abuſe
of ſacrifices, which alſo God ſaith

                        he abhorred.
                        Eſay. 1. Thoſe external exerciſes
of Religion, in hearing of the word, in
adminiſtrating, and participating of
the ſacraments, was indeed preſcribed
by God, but if there be not therewith
the internal worſhip of the ſoule, faith,
repentance, good workes, all theſe externall
things are nothing, God taketh
no pleaſure in them, yea, contrariwiſe,
he abhorreth them. Concerning ſacrifices,
I mark this onely in this place,
that thoſe which ſpecially were called
propitiatorie, were ſo many types and
figures of that onely one ſacrifice of
Chriſt, vppon whom were to be tranſferred
the ſinnes of the world, and the
curſe of God. Of the which it appeareth,
how great the excellencie of this
ſacrifice is, vnto which, ſo many ſacrifices
offered, ſince the beginning of
the worlde, did ſerue, as ſo many ſhaddowes
thereof. There was never at any
time a thing, concerning which,
there are ſo many prophecies, ſo many
ſignifications among the Iewes: Yea

not one day hes paſt by, in which morning
and evening, it was not the ſelfe
viuely repreſented, to wit, in this continuall
daylie ſacrifice. And ſurely,
this plainly prooveth, that this ſacrifice
was paſſing excellent, & moſt neceſſary,
which wee ſhould not at any time
ſuffer to depart out of our eies, which
alſo▪ it was of neceſſitie requiſite to be
repreſented to our fathers in certaine
ſhaddowes, from the fall of Adam, to
that time, in which Chriſt was exhibited;
for they conſidered another thing
in their ſacrifices then the blood of
beaſtes, to wit, the blood of the ſonne
of God, which alſo they placed in the
middeſt, betuixt them and the angry
GOD: But wee, to whom it hath happened
to be borne after Chriſt, & his
comming, & who haue fallen in thoſe
times, in that reſpect wee are happier
then that auncient people, becauſe we
behold, not now in a ſhaddow, as they
ſometime did that ſacrifice: but wee
haue Chriſt crucified before our eyes,

in his Goſpell, which thing thoſe auncient
fathers, Abraham, Iſaac, Iaakob,
and all the Prophets, moſt earneſtly
deſired; and yet notwithſtanding, they
obtayned it not. The Fathers and the
Prophets (ſayeth Chriſt) deſired to ſee the
things that yee ſee, but they haue not attayned
to that. And this blindneſſe of
ours is miſerable, and cannot bee y
                           •
                        
                        uough

                           •
                        amented, who ſee not ſurely, as
it becommeth vs this ſonne of righteouſneſſe
which is ryſen. Therefore,
we are to pray vnto God, that as hee
hath ſet this ſacrifice before our eies
to be ſeene, ſo he would open our eies
that we may at length clearely ſee the
ſame. Let vs conſider the worſhip now
which pleaſeth God, and let vs weigh
the wordes of this text. The ſacrifices
of God (ſayeth hee) are ane broken Spirite]
Hee calleth them ſacrifices in
the plurall number, becauſe that onelie
one ſacrifice of a contrite ſoule is
inſteede of manie, yea, and of all whatſoever
haue beene at anie-time. Hee

calleth them, The ſacrifices of GOD,
that is, acceptable to GOD. I vnderſtande
by the broken Spirite, as it were,
bruſed into little peeces, and abjecte
through the conſcience of the
owne weakneſſe and vnworthineſſe.
Then turning vnto GOD, hee ſayeth,
O God, thou deſpiſeſt not a broken
and contrite ſoule] It is a ſpeech vttering
leſſe, but meaning more, whereby
hee ſignifieth, that the broken and
the contrite ſoule is moſte acceptable
to GOD. But let vs conſidder
ſome-what more diligentlie, what hee
calleth a broken hearte. After that
anie man is awakned vppe, out of his
ſinne, and his eyes are opened, that
hee may ſee his owne filthineſſe, having
compared it, to witte, with that
nature of GOD, which is ſette downe
to vs to bee righteous and holie in
the Lawe, hee hath ſeene alſo the
puniſhmente of his filthineſſe, the
wrath and curſe of GOD, (for no
man at anie time canne ſufficientlie

wounder at the blindneſſe of corrupted
nature, thoſe who are blinde in bodie,
haue notwithſtanding ſome ſight,
for they ſee and knowe that they are
blinde: But thoſe that are blinded in
ſoule, they are in this reſpect more miſerable,
that they do not know indeed
that they ar blinde: yea, they think that
they ſee very clearely, when in the
meane time, miſerable men, they are
blinder then any Mowle: while at
length by God, their eies bee opened
vnto them. After then, I ſay, any hath
looked vppon the filthineſſe and vncleanneſſe
of his nature, and Gods
anger therewith, then in hart he is caſt
downe, and he who appeared to bee
ſome thing to himſelfe before, now he
is moſt abject in his owne eies, and ſeemeth
nothing to himſelfe; and this is
the one cauſe of caſting downe and
contrition. There is alſo another, to
witte, the mercy of God in Chriſt, being
taſted ſurely in ſome certain meaſure,
which as ſoone as any man hath

taſted, he is not ſo much ſorrowful, becauſe
of the paine, as becauſe he hath
offended GOD, ſo merciful a father.
And this is that ſorrow,2. Cor
                              •
                           . 10. which the Apoſtle
Paule calleth godly ſorrowe,
which cauſeth repentance, that is, the
changing of the minde, the mortifying
of the old man, and the quickning
of the new man. This ſorrow which aryſeth
from God offended, hath conjoyned
therewith an vnſpeakable ioy,
proceeding from the ſenſe of Gods
loue. For it is not poſſible, that that ſincere
feling of that fatherly loue, ſhould
lacke all ſenſe of gladneſſe. For, which
thing may appeare wounderfull to any,
the more the feeling of the loue of
God in Chriſt be, ſo much more is the
ſorrowe, yea, the gladneſſe is ſo much
the more. For no man reioyceth in
earneſt, who hath not bene in earneſt
ſorrowfull. And this the eſtate of a
repenting ſinner; this is the moſt ſorrowfull,
yea, and alſo the moſt ioyfull
eſtate of mortal men. Now then God

having looked vpon the heart of man
thus broken and contrite, he wonderfully
delighteth therein, and therein
quietly ſatisfieth himſelf. Frō whence
God himſelfe denyeth,Pſay. 66. that hee dwelleth
in Temples made with hands, yea,
he denyeth alſo, that hee dwelleth either
in heaven or earth, but hee profeſſeth
that his dwelling place and houſe
of reſt, is a poore & a contrite hart. But
if thou ſay, ſeeing our minde is not fully
regenerated in this life, no not the
hart of any man, who moſt ſeriouſly repenteth:
how commeth it to paſſe, that
God taketh ſo much pleaſure therin, ſo
that alſo he dwelleth & quieteth himſelfe
therein? I anſwere: He who hath
a contrite heart; this man therewith is
indued with faith: For contrition proceedeth
of faith, and of the perſwaſion
of the mercy and loue of GOD in
Chriſt. And the heart, although it bee
not altogether regenerated, by faith
pleaſeth God, to witte, by faith in that
alone ſacrifice, wherby both the wrath

of God againſt ſin is pacified, and the
conſcience of the ſinner is quieted:
Therefore God taketh pleaſure in the
contrite hart, becauſe the ſame is faithful
alſo, and hath Chriſt dwelling therin
by faith. To the ende therefore that
we may pleaſe God, wee ſhould never
ſuffer that ſacrifice of Chriſt to ſlip out
of our eies.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           20 Do well according to thy good will
to Tzijon, build the walles of Ieruſalem.
                           21 Then ſhalt thou delight in the ſacrifices
of righteouſnes, in the burnt offring, & that
that ſhalbe altogether conſumed away, then
ſhal they offer bullocks vpon thine altar.
                        
                     
                     The other part of the pſalme,
                     
                        DO wel] Hither to hath bene the firſt
ſort of petitiō for himſelf; here followeth
the other for the whole people
& the cōmon-wealth, whereof he was
then thought to haue had no reſpect,
when hee provoked GOD to wrath
by his ſinne, (for the ſinne of the
Prince, caſteth the whole people in
danger) when he layd them out to the
ſworde of the enemie. Nowe this

dammage, whereby he damnified the
people, is compared allegorically, with
the fall of the walles, becauſe the faithfull
are living ſtones in the houſe of
God. Then he ſayeth, (that wee may
come to his owne words) Doe well according
to thy good will to Tzijon] according
to thy will (ſayeth he) that is,1. Pet. 2. according
to thy free mercy. For he pretendeth
no innocencie of the people,
when he hath to doe with GOD: although
otherwiſe he abuſed the innocent
people. Neither yet doth he thus
pray: Do well to Tzijon, becauſe it is innocent;
but thus, Doe wel to Tzijon, according
to thy good wil, that is, according
to thy mercy. Build the walles] That is,
O God, repaire & a mend that breach
which I haue made in thine houſe,
who of thy own power alone art able
to do it. It was an eaſie thing for mee,
ſurely to deſtroy this people by my
ſinne: But it is not ſo eaſie to repaire
the ruine againe, and to make it of new
whole. Of the which you ſee, that David
                        
when he craveth of GOD that
he would doe well to his people, he acknowledgeth
therewith, that in his default
the people were deſtroyed. The
conſcience therfore of that evil where
by hee hurte the people, vrgeth him
now to pray to God for them. If Princes
fayle in any thing, commonly it is
in their office, to wit, that they governe
not the common-wealth aright. Such
was the fault of David, when he layde
out the people of God to the ſword of
the enemie: and therefore of neceſſity
it is, that their fault redoundeth to the
whole people, And from thence it
commeth to paſſe, that the ſinne of the
Prince is more grievous, then any private
mans fault, in reſpect it ſpreadeth
further abroad, and by the daunger
thereof involveth moe. And from
thence it proceedeth, that when God
deliberateth, either to chaſtife or oppreſſe
any people, he giveth to that nation
fooliſh Princes and counſellours,
that ſtirre vp alway pernicious or not

neceſſary warres. But contrariwiſe,
when he will prefer any people, he giveth
to them good Princes and counſellours.
When God would haue the
Iewes to bee exerciſed and afflicted
with the Philiſtims, hee gaue wicked
Princes to the people, Saul, Ioram, Achaz.
When againe he would haue the
Iewes to be in a proſperous eſtate and
flouriſh, hee gaue them good Princes;
David, Ezechias, Ioſias. The common
ſorte of men, while they looke vpon
theſe thinges, and marke this interchaunge,
they impute all, either to the
cowardice and fooliſhneſſe, or to the
courage and wiſedome of the Princes
themſelues: Or finally, to Fortune &
chance: But they cry miſerably, for all
thoſe things proceed from GOD, by
reaſon of the thankfulneſſe, or ingratitude
of the people: Wherefore, while
we ſee theſe things to be done by princes,
let vs lift vp our eies, not ſo much
to the Princes, as to God & our ſelues.
Again ſee, David in this place, whē by

his owne ſinne, he had hurt the whole
people, being touched with the conſcience
of the mater, he earneſtly prayed
to god, for the repairing of his skaith
wherby he dānified the people of god.
Moreover obſerue, Dauid himſelfe being
reconciled to God, preſently he interceedeth
for the people: he who him
ſelf is firſt reconciled to God, & nowe
is quiet in his owne conſcience, hee is
bolde alſo to interceed for others at
Gods hands. But he who is not yet reconciled
to God, and is therefore yet
guiltlie in conſcience, he dare not indeed
be ſo bolde as to plead his owne
cauſe before God. How much therfore
is it profitable for a people, to haue ſum
certain good man, & familiar with god
that hath his conſcience well pacified,
and that by faith in Ieſus Chriſt. Surely
one ſuch like man, by his prayers, is
able to be profitable to many others
before God. God grant that the Lorde
may giue to everie one of vs this faith
in Chriſt Ieſus, which is the ground of

all theſe things, with the which we can
neither do, or be bold to do any thing.
Laſt of al, in the laſt verſe, he mooveth
God to do well to his people from his
owne thankfulneſſe, which hee, together
with the people, wil be bounde to
performe to God, to wit, in offring the
lawfull ſacrifices & acceptable to God,
according as it was the cuſtome of
thoſe times, when men were vnder the
rudiments of the worlde, & diſcipline
of the Law: The words are, Then ſhalt
thou take pleaſure in the ſacrifices of righteouſneſſe]
That is, lawfull ſacrifices ſhal
be offered vnto thee, according to the
preſcript of thy law, & therefore they
ſhalbe ſacrifices of righteouſneſſe. For
it is not permitted vnto vs to worſhip
God according to our pleaſure; but it
is neceſſary, that wee ſerue him according
to his own ordinance. The meaning
therefore is, as if he ſhould ſaye:
The ſacrifices appoynted by thy ſelfe,
ſhalbe offred vnto thee, and thou ſhalt
take pleaſure in them. Thou ſhalt alſo

delight in burnte offerings, yea, which
ſhalbe altogether conſumed to aſhes:
They ſhall alſo offer, according to the
cuſtome, Bullockes vppon thine altar.
God ſeeketh his owne glorie, yea, and
David alſo acknowledgeth the ſame in
deed; nevertheleſſe, except he himſelf
furniſh matter to his glory, that is, vnleſſe
hee provoke men to glorifie himſlfe
by his benefites, they will not
glorifie him: For none there is in hell,
that can worſhip God. Againe, al men
indeed are not thankfull to the Lorde
for the benefites beſtowed vpon thē,
but theſe onely, who haue taſted howe
gracious the Lord is, that is, who haue
ſome feeling of his favour in Chriſt
Ieſus. Of the mercy of God, there are
many evidents indeed; for looke how
many his benefites are, ſo many documents
are there: But ſundry of them
are of a common and vulgare mercie
only, ſuch as is, to wit, of the Creator,
toward his creature: But Chriſt alone
is a ſure evident to vs, of ſingular mercy

and loue; ſuch as is the favour of the
father towarde the Son. For God will
not haue that mercy and that loue
of his, whereby hee hath loved the
VVorlde, to bee made manifeſt by
any other thing, then by his Sonne
given for the world. VVherefore, only
thoſe, who are in Chriſt, and embrace
him by faith, thoſe alone I ſaye, feele
how ſweete the Lorde is, becauſe into
their hearts onely, that loue of God is
powred out. Wherefore alſo, they alone
are theſe, who can be thankful vnto
God for his benefites received. We
conclude therefore that, which hath
now oft bene beaten in our eares, that
we muſt chiefely endevour to beleeue
in Ieſus Chriſt; without whome, no
good thing can we get; without whō,
we doe no parte of our duety, either to
God or men; without whom finally,
there is no ſalvation. Therefore God
is to be prayed vnto continually, that
as of his infinite mercy, he hath given
vnto vs his only begotten ſonne: ſo he

would open the eies of our minde, to
the end that we might ſee himſelf: Alſo
that he would open our hearts, that we
might entirely feele him, without
whom there is no feeling of gladnes in
the hearts of ſinners: And this is to be
prayed for by vs, for and by the ſame
Ieſus Chriſt, the ſonne of God, & our
Lord: To whom with the father and
the holy Spirite, be al honour and glory,
for ever and ever: Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the LXII. Pſalme.
                  The author of this Pſalme is Dauid: And it was written
at that time in which Saul perſecuted Dauid by his
ſpies 
                        •
                     ent out. The whole Pſalme
                        •
                     , concerning his confidence
in God. For partly he ſhewed his confidence
vnto the 9. verſe: partly, hee recommendeth to all the
godly this confidence, from thence vnto the end of the
Pſalme.
               
               
                  The LXII. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme of DAVID, committed to
be ſung, to the maiſter of Muſick in Ieduthun.
                           2 My ſoule onely is at reſt in God, from
him is my ſaluation.
                           3 He is only my rock, and my ſaluation,

my ſtrong hold, I ſhall not be mooved out
of my place, with a great motion.
                           4 How long will ye be deviſing troubles
againſt a man? ye ſhall bee all ſlayne: howe
long will ye be like a bulgeing wall, a wall of
drye ſtones thruſt downe?
                           5 They onely deviſe counſelles to thruſte
him downe from his dignity: they take pleaſure
in a lye: they bleſſe with their mouth,
but within themſelues they curſe, Selah.
                           
                           6 O my ſoule, be at reſt in God onely, for
of him is mine expectation.
                           7 He is only my rock and my ſalvation,
my ſtrong hold, I ſhall not be mooved out of
my place.
                           8 In God is my ſalvation, and my glorie,
my ſtrong rock, my refuge is in God.
                        
                     
                     The firſt, part of the pſalm.
                     
                        MY ſoule onely] As concerning his
confidence; firſt he gloryeth of his
aſſurance in God: Then he gloryeth againſt
his enemies: Thirdly, hee returneth
to that former glorying. As concerning
the glorying in his aſſurance.
David after hee had bene afflicted and
troubled in minde, at length he quieteth

himſelfe in God. Having then felt
ſo great a joy of that reſt, hee gloryeth
thereof in this ſpeech. My ſeule onely i
                              •
                           
at reſt in God] The Hebrew worde it
ſelfe ſignifieth to bee ſilent, which our
interpreter turneth to be at reſt: Then
Davids ſoule made a noyſe within
him, as he ſayeth in another place. Why
art thou caſt downe my ſoule, why makeſt
thou a noyſe within me? But it may be demanded,
doth now his ſoule keepe ſilence;
when notwithſtanding wee ſee,
that hee vttereth out theſe ſpeeches? I
anſwere, that then any mans ſoule keepeth
ſilence, when it maketh not a
noyſe, and is not troubled, although in
the meane time it glory never ſo greatly.
Then there are three arguments,
wherfore his ſoule taketh reſt in God.
The firſt is, becauſe God is the author
of his ſalvation: Then drawing neere
to God himſelfe, and not content with
this his benefite alone, except hee poſſeſſe
God him ſelf, and ſit vpon him as
it were a rocke or mountaine: He is

only my rocke, (ſayth he) &c.] The third
argument, is the effect of the ſecond. I
ſhall not be mooued out of my place (ſaieth
he) by any great motion indeed] whereby
it ſhal come to paſſe, that I ſhal altogether
fall. Mark firſt, David ſurely wold
haue patiently ſuffred affliction,Pſal. 39. (as he
ſpeaketh of himſelfe in another place)
to witte, becauſe hee had decreed to take
heede to al his waies, leaſt he ſhould ſin with
his tongue. But the affliction burſteth
out, and his ſoule maketh a ſturre, notwithſtanding,
at laſt he quieteth himſelfe
in God. Every one of the godlie,
would indeede humble them ſelues
with ſilence vnder Gods hande, but
troubles waxing greater & greater, the
affection cannot conteine the ſelfe,
which after that it is louſed, it reſteth
not, and taketh breath to the ſelf firſte,
before it feele GOD preſent with it. I
will ſpeake this once, there is no ſolide
quietneſſe indeede to our ſoule,
except to GOD alone. It is not in riches,
not in honoures, it is not in the

arme of man. Finally, it is not in Idolles
and fayned Gods, of whome
DAVID ſpeaketh. They multiply (ſayeth
hee) their ſorrowes,
                        Pſal. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                        that giue in dowrie
to a ſtrange God. For with what other
thing I praye you, doe Idols fill
mens mindes, but with fearefull ſuperſtition?
The ſame DAVID
in the fourth Pſalme, manifeſtlie
declareth, that his ſoule taketh not
reſt in riches, Lift vp (ſayeth hee) the
light of thy countenance vppon vs, ô Iehoua,
and thou ſhalt put more gladneſſe in
our ſoules, then at that time, vvhen the
cornes and vvines are increaſed. In which
place, you ſee, that hee preferreth his
ſecuritie and gladneſſe in God, to that
whole gladneſſe of thoſe men, which
take their reſt in ſuch like things. My
ſoule therefore doth reſt in God only] and
therefore, becauſe the wicked cannot
reſte in GOD, there is no peace to
them. (ſayeth the Lorde) Obſerue againe,
that DAVID meaneth not here
anie commoun ſecuritie of minde.

but a ſingular and notable; whereby it
commeth to paſſe, that one may gather,
that ſuch a notable quietneſſe of
mind, went before ſome certaine notable
perturbation. For ſurely, looke
howe much the more the reſte of the
minde is, ſo much the more was the
commotion of the mind before. Mark
in the third roome, David ſeeketh not
out the cauſes of his ſecuritie in himſelfe,
but without himſelfe in God, in
whom, to wit, his ſoule doth quiet the
ſelfe, while he calleth him his rocke and
his rower. Nothing therefore which is
in our ſelues, can properly be the cauſe
of the tranquillity of our mind; no, albeit
thou ſhouldeſt ſpeake indeede of
faith it ſelfe, or of hope; if by the name
of faith thou vnderſtand onely the inſtrumēt
of the apprehending of chriſt.
For whatſoever thinges in vs, yea,
even the regenerate, they are imperfite,
all faith, hope, loue, and workes
flowing from theſe, as from their beginning.
In God alone therefore is the

cauſe of our peace and quietnes in the
ſtrength of God alone, in the loue of
GOD alone through Chriſt. Paule,
when hee publiſhed the ſecurity of
mind; he ſayeth not indeed, who ſhall
ſeparate vs from that loue, whereby
we loue God? But in that place hee
ſayeth, Who ſhall ſeparate vs from that
loue of Chriſt, that is, from the loue
whereby God loveth vs in Chriſt? let
the papiſtes take heed to this, who ſeek
eaſe to themſelues, and their ſoules, in
their owne workes, whereby it is, that
I cannot be perſwaded to beleeue, that
thoſe men can enjoy loue, peace, and
quietneſſe of mind, with a conceit of
their owne workes. Note fourthly,
that he ſayeth, hee ſhal not bee remooved
out of his place with any, at the leaſt, a
great commotion. He denyeth not altogether
a commoving, but hee denieth
that it ſhall not bee any great or
notable commoving. For in this life
we muſt not hope that we ſhal be free
alwaies from all commotions. For David
                        
reaſoneth not ſo, becauſe no waies
ſhall I bee commoved, therefore my
ſoule reſteth in God: For if thou haſte
not decreed with thy ſelfe, to quiet
thy ſelfe in GOD, vnleſſe it be vnder
that cōdition, that thou ſhalt nowaies
be commoved all thy life long; truely
it will never come to paſſe, that thou
ſhalt reſt thy ſelfe in him, either in this
life, or in that other life. Let it be ſufficient
to thee, if thou be not oppreſſed
with afflictions: For the godly haue a
promiſe, not indeed that they ſhall bee
altogether free from all kinde of affliction,
but that they ſhall not bee vtterly
oppreſſed with troubles. For it is
ſaid,1. Cor 7. 10. 1
                              •
                           . 
                        That God wil not ſuffer vs to be tempted
aboue that we are able to beare. Looke
alſo concerning the ſame matter, Pauls
example.Cor 4. 
                              •
                           . 9 
                        How long will] Now he turneth
himſelfe to the enemies, and being
ſet as it were in a caſtell, hee gloryeth
againſt them all. Two things there
are which he demādeth; of the which,
the latter, openeth vp and declareth,

that which is the former. For the meaning
is, as if he ſhould ſay, as a bulgeing
wall and full of riftes, falleth downe
through the owne weight thereof, or
is throwen downe by no great travell,
ſo ye ſhal be conſumed, by your owne
envie and wickednes. They onely deuiſe]
He poynteth out clearely that their deuiſing.
They enter in counſell to thruſt
me downe from my dignitie. Concerning
this dignitie, looke 1. Sam, 18. Dauid
being appoynted captaine of Sauls
gard, he ſo bare himſelfe, that his gouernement
was approuen of all men,
yea, and was preferred by the damſels
that ſang, to the governement of Saull
himſelfe. Saull hath ſlaine his thouſand,
but DAVID hath ſlaine his ten thouſand.
Then he ſhewed vnder what pretence
they did this thing: They haue pretended
a lie to their counſells, (ſayth he)
which againe hee declareth by theſe
wordes, With their month they bleſſe,
but within them ſalues they curſe. As
if he he ſhould ſay, they profes indeed

friendſhip, but in verie truth they are
enemies. Marke firſt, the things which
mooued David before, now the ſame
thinges moue him nothing, while his
ſoule quieteth the ſelfe in God, hee eſteemeth
nothing of all his enemies.
For that ioy which ariſeth in the mean
time that any reſteth himſelfe in God,
it deuoured vp all feare and ſorrowe
altogether, yea, it maketh confidence
to ariſe, whereby wee glory againſt all
contrarie afflictions. But contrariwiſe,
when the ſoule quieteth not the ſelfe
in God, it is moved, yea with the moſt
trifling thinges, it is affrayde with the
name of perſecution. For the cauſe
wherefore this firſt ſeemeth to be terrible
to many, is this, becauſe they ſee
not that life and glorie which is with
Chriſt hidd vp in God. Obſerue nixt,
let the wicked alone to themſelues a litle
ſpace, & you ſhal ſee them fal down
with their owne weight, none other
waies then a wall full of riftes, or a wal
bowing for-ward, which falleth of the

owne weight, Neuertheles, few there
are that ſee this thing, and from this it
ariſeth, that the outwarde happines of
the wicked moueth manye ſo much.
Theſe onely ſee that thing, whoſe ſoul
quieteth the ſelfe in God, and theſe
who look a farre off vpon thoſe men
as it were out of a watch tower. Alſo,
the regenerate themſelues, at ſometime
they ſee not this thing, as David,
or whoſoeuer hee was that wrote that
73, Pſalme, he ſaw it not, while he had
entred into the ſanctuarie, and then in
deede he perceiued their ende, he ſaw
that they ſtoode in verie ſlipperie places,
hee ſawe that in an momente they
went to deſtruction. Obſerue thirdlie.
The enemies laboured to caſt downe
Dauid who was exalted from his dignitie.
He whome God lifteth vppe, the
wicked indevoure to caſte that man
down out of his place, yea even at that
time, when they ſee God himſelfe to
trauell to the direct contrary ſide. Ionathan
did otherwaies, who when he ſaw

                        David appoynted for the kingdome,
he made a covenant with him: ſo it becommeth
all the godlie to doe, looke
the fourth Pſalme. Sonnes of men, (ſayth
he) how long ſhall my glorie bee an ignominie
vnto you, rather know, that God when I
ſhall pray vnto him, wil heare me. Let men
therefore be affrayde of the prayers of
thoſe men with whome God is at 
                           •
                        ne
aggrement. [O my ſoule] He returneth
to that firſt glorying, concerning his
cōfidēce in God, & hauing altered a little
the manner of ſpeach, hee ſpeaketh
to his own ſoule: Alſo he bringeth out
the ſame reaſon which he did before.
The ſecond, drawing neerer to God as
before, he is not cōtent of Gods benefite,
except hee poſſeſſe God himſelfe
and ſit vpon him; as vpon a rocke. The
third is the ſame which was before. In
the eight verſe he repeateth the ſecond
reaſon, the manner of ſpeach being
ſomewhat changed. Of al which argumentes
indeede marke this, that David
ſatisfieth not himſelfe in multiplying

of wordes, whereby he amplifieth
God and his benefites: Alſo he altereth
the forme of ſpeach, hee calleth
him his ſalvation, his rocke, ſtrong
holde, his glorie. He ſayeth that his ſalvation
was receaued of him, & he publiſheth
that he himſelf is ſaluation and
a rock: finally he pronunceth that his
ſalvation is in him. Of the aboundance of
the heart the mouth ſpeaketh, & that feeling
of reſt in God, cannot bee ſufficientlie
expreſſed by wordes. For the
things which the holy Spirit worketh
in the heartes, theſe thinges cannot be
ſufficiently declared by the tongues of
men, from whence ariſe theſe ſighes,
which are furniſhed by the holy ſpirit,
that the Apoſtle PAVLE ſayeth are vnſpeakeable.Rom. 
                              •
                           . 2
                              •
                           
                        
And PETER calleth that
joy of faith vnſpeakable & glorious.1, Pet. 1. 
                              •
                           8.
Of theſe thinges you ſee firſt, that that
ſoule which quieteth the ſelf in God,
returneth nowe and then to glorying
in God. Then conſider and learne out
of this repetition, that the ſoule is not

ſo quieted and ſetled in this life, but
truely in the meane time it is troubled
in ſome meaſure. The ſea while it is
not toſſed too & fro with ſtormes, notwith-ſtan-ding
it is commoued with
ſome ſoft aire. The affection if it bee
not preſentlie inflamed, notwithſtanding
it is puffed vppe in ſome certaine
meaſure. Wherefore our ſoules hath
neede now and then of a newe exhortation
to this reſt in God. Conſidder
thirdlie. The firſt argument of glorying
is, from waiting on or from hope,
to this aggreth that which the Apoſtle
PAVLE ſpeaketh, VVee glory vnder the
hope of the glorie of GOD.
                        Rom. 5. 2, But if this
hope & expectation of ſalvation, cauſe
ſo great a glorying and reioycing of
minde, I pray you how great a reioycing
ſhall the matter it ſelf make, when
we ſhal be placed into the preſent poſſeſſion
of all thoſe thinges, which wee
now ſee but a farre of?
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           9 Truſt in him all time, ô people, powre
out your mind before him: God is a refuge

vnto vs, Selah.
                           
                           10 Theſe that are borne of the baſeman
ar onelie vanitie, theſe that are borne of
the noble man are a lie, thoſe being laide
together vpon the ballance, they ſhould goe
vp aboue vanitie.
                           11 Truſt not to oppresſion, and vaniſh
not away by robberie, if wealth increaſe, ſet
not your mind there
                                 •
                              n.
                           12 God hath once ſpoken. I hearde the
ſame thing twiſe, that ſtrength is Gods.
                           13 And that mercy, ô Lord is thine, that
thou recompenſeſt euerie man according to
his worke.
                        
                     
                     The other part of the Pſalme.
                     
                        TRuſt in him] The ſecond part of the
pſalme,
                           •
                        ne admonition, and that
twofolde, for partlie hee admoniſheth
the godly, partlie the wicked. The admonition
belonging to the godly, is againe
twofold: For partlie he warneth
them to truſt in God, partlie, that they
ſhould not truſt in men. Truſt in God
ſayeth he, Then, powre out (ſayeth hee)
your mind before him, &c.] this latter is
the effect of the former. For they who

truſt in God, they powre out all the
cares and anguiſhes of their troubled
mind before him. The argumēt is ſubjoyned,
for he is, ſayeth he, a refuge vnto
vs. Then he warneth them that they
ſhoulde not put their confidence in
men, for although this be not expreſly
ſet downe, notwithſtanding it is to bee
vnderſtood. The argument of this admonition
is from the vanitie of men,
of whatſoeuer eſtate and condition to
conclude, they bee of. They that are
baſe borne how many ſoever they be,
they are vaine; How many ſoeuer they
be that are noble, they are liers and deceitfull:
And to the ende he may ſhew
their greater vanitie, hee calleth them
lies and vanitie it ſelfe. Alſo he amplifieth
the vanitie of men, making a
compariſon of them with vanitie it
ſelfe. Vnderſtand not this place to bee
exceſſiue or hyperbolick, for it is ſo indeede
it ſelfe as he ſpeaketh. I grant indeed
that man before the fel was ſome
what, but after the fal, he is redacted to

nothing. For there remained not in
him, yea not ſo much as one remanent
crome of vprightneſſe and holines.
And if there bee any thing in him, it is
wholy euill, and if man be any thinge,
he is whollie evill, howe much ſo euer
it be, or very wickedneſſe it ſelfe. And
to bee this waye ſomewhat, it is worſe
then to bee nothing at all. Let the Papiſtes
take heede to this, that make ſo
much of the nature of man, yea to wit,
ſo exellent make they it. Dauid reckoned
it amongſt the moſt vaineſt things
but they will haue it to bee ſomewhat
alſo in themſelues, and they take away
ſomething from gods grace, that ſome
vprightneſſe may be giuen to man. Of
theſe thinges marke firſt, a great difference
betwixt them that put their confidence
in God, and them who truſt to
other thinges. They who put their aſſurance
in God, they verye willinglie
communicat this benefit with others,
and will haue all men with them to
put their truſt in God. But thoſe who

put their confidence in other thinges,
as in riches, in honoures, in the arme of
man, they do not willinglie admit any
others whoſoeuer into their fellowſhip,
and participation of theſe things.
For they woulde together and at one
time devoure them vppe themſelues.
God is a good thinge, which is ſufficient
for all men, neither yet if many at
once bee participant of him, any one
man ſhall be in a worſe caſe who is participant
together with the reſt, neither
yet for this doth hee receiue the leſſe,
but he rather is in a better caſe, and receiueth
more, the mo fellowes he hath
of the ſelfe ſame benefite. Marke ſecondly,
hee admoniſheth vs to put our
truſt in God, and that wee powre out
our mindes before him. Theſe two are
ſo coupled among themſelues, that he
who truſteth in God, of neceſſitie hee
powreth out into his boſome as it wer
all the ſecretes of his minde. But con
                        
                           ••
                        ariwiſe
he who truſteth not, this man
albeit hee ſeeme at ſome time to praye

and to open vp his minde vnto GOD,
notwithſtanding he never dealeth earneſtlie
and freely with GOD, but the
thing that he doeth, he doeth it coldly
and for the faſhion onelie. For it is not
poſſible, that any man who beleeueth
no
                           •
                         in GOD, will communicate his
ſecretes and cares of his minde familiarlie
with God.Rom. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 14. How ſhall they call
vpon him ſayeth S. PAVL
                           •
                        , in whome
they haue not beleeued? Note thirdly,
David while hee quieteth himſelfe, in
that towre as it were, watching and beholding
all men appeare not onelie to
be vaine in his ſight, but to bee vanitie
it ſelfe. Thoſe ſurelie who ſirmelie by
faith-cleane vnto God, theſe I ſay onely
are they, who look vpon the vanitie
of men, yea and rather the miſerie and
vanitie of this world. For it is not granteed
to euerie man, preſentlie to conſidder
and diſcerne it. But thoſe onely
are they, who ſee no ſolide thinge but
in God alone, and theſe are onely they
who rightlie can giue their iudgement

concerning the bleſſedneſſe and miſerie
of the creature, in reſpect they onelie
haue experience of that true blesſedneſſe
that is in God. Truſt not to oppresſion]
The ſecond admonition directed
to the wicked ſeruantes of Saul,
& pertening of neceſſitie to euerie one
of them whatſoever. Now he warneth
them, that they ſhould not truſt to oppreſſion,
and that by reafe they ſhould
not vaniſh awaye. But wee muſt take
heede to this word of vaniſhing away,
for this cauſe we truſt to euerie thinge
that by them wee may firmelie ſtande,
and neither fall downe nor vaniſh away.
Theſe verelie ſtand firmely alone
who put their confidence in GOD alone:
But they who put their truſte in
any other things whatſoeuer, they are
ſo farre away from that, that by them
they are able to ſtande, that contrarie
waies they vaniſh and fall away, none
other wayes then water powred on
vpon ſand. If riches abounde ſet not your
minde] This warning generally pertaineth

to all men whatſoeuer. [God hath
once ſpoken] This is a common argument
to both the partes of the admonition,
and it is taken from Gods judgment
himſelfe. The ſtronge, mightie
and mercifull God, will recompence
all men according to their workes, let
euerie man therefore take heede, whether
hee truſteth in GOD or in other
thinges. The anteſident is prouen by
the teſtimonie of Gods owne worde,
yea and that twiſe repeated ouer. God
hath ſpoken to me (ſayeth he) &c.] As if
he ſhould ſay. The ſame God hath verie
oft confirmed it vnto me. Obſerue
firſt, David envieth not this excellent
good thinge in them, which is GOD
him ſelfe, notwithſtanding they envied,
yea this verie tranſitorie life of his.
For to this purpoſe belongeth this admonition:
By Davids example therefore
thou haſt ſet downe the nature of
the Church, together with the diſpoſition
of the enemies thereof. Theſe doe
envie the verie tranſitorie life of the

members of the Church, but the
Church envieth not them, yea ſhe
wiſheth vnto them earneſtlie life euerlaſting.
Chriſt prayed for them that
curſed him, Steuen prayed that the ſins
of thoſe that ſtoned him ſhould not be
laide to their charge. Marke heare, ſecondlie,
how great the madnes of man
is, for it is a verie greate ſinne to put
confidence in thinges, which otherwaies
are indifferent, as in riches, in
honours, or in the arme of man, which
thinges you may vſe well alſo. How
great then is the madneſſe, and howe
grieuous is their ſinne, which put their
hope in reafe and oppreſſion, and in other
thinges that are of their owne nature
evill, which things you can at no
time vſe well. Notwithſtanding ſome
cauſe of this ſo great a madneſſe may
bee learned, yea by this Example of
SAVLES courtiers, to witte, that they
committed all theſe thinges without
any puniſhment. Now men preſentlie
thinke that this is permitted to them

to doe, which is permitted to be done
without any inflicting of puniſhment.
This confidence therefore in wicked
thinges, is not ſo much to be imputed
to the wicked doers themſelues, as it is
to bee laide to their charge, whome it
became to haue puniſhed them, as to
Saull and to the other magiſtrates, who
vſe to winke at the wicked deedes of
courtiers, and of their flatterers, howſoeuer
perverſlie and prepoſterouſlie
magiſtrates and earthlie judges giue libertie
to wicked men & malefactours.
We learne in this place, that that heauenlye
judge ſhall make it to come to
paſſe, that the wicked at length ſhall
vaniſh away in their reafe and oppresſion.
Finally, this is not to bee pretermitted,
that David ſayeth, that hee was
once and againe admoniſhed concerning
that righteous judgemēt of God.
whereby hee will recompence euerie
man according to his worke: Which
thing indeed is an euident, that David
thought now and then of that laſt and

terrible judgement: Of the which ſurelie
it becommeth vs all, yea the beſte
men whoſoeuer oft to meditate thereon.
For this is the nature, yea of the
beſte men, that looking vpon that terrour
of the Lorde, they haue neede to
be brought vnder correction. For Paul
ſpeaketh thus of himſelf knowing, ſayth
he, that terrour of the Lorde, we bring men
to the faith. VVee are to bee allured I
grant by the ſight of Gods mercy in
Chriſt, to doe our dutie. Notwithſtanding
ſuch is our nature, vnleſſe on the
on parte as we are allured by Gods benefites,
ſo on the other part wee be terrified
be Gods judgements, ſurelie we
cannot bee conteined in our dutie. To
God therefore who provideth al manner
of waies for the ſaluation of his
owne in Chriſt Ieſus his ſonne, bee all
honour and glorie, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the LXV. Pſalme.
                  It is a pſalme of thankſgiuing. Dauid burſteth foorth
firſt in giuing of thankes and prayſing of God in the 
                        •
                     
and 
                        •
                     . verſes. Then follow the 
                        •
                     rgumentes of the propoſed
thankſgiuing, to the end of the pſalme. All thoſe
argumentes are taken from Gods bleſſinges and benefites.
The benefites are partlie ſpirituall and eternall,
which belong onely to the affayres of the Church, vnto
the 7, verſe. And partlie bodielie and temporall, which
againe are of two ſortes in this pſalme For partly they a
                        •
                     
common, and belonging to all things created vnto the
10, verſe and partelie they are proper and peculiar, beſtowed
vpon the Church of God vnto the ende of the
pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  The LXV. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme, the ſong of DAVID, committed
to be ſung, to the maiſter of Muſick.
                           2 O God whoe art in Tzijon, ſetled
hope and praiſe is due vnto the, and to thee
the vowe is to be rendred.
                           3 O thou who beareſt the prayer, vnto
thee ſhall all fleſh come.
                        
                     
                     
                        O GOD] The firſt part of the pſalme,
in which Dauid, firſt through a ſenſe
of his miſerie and ſinne, then through
a feeling of Gods mercie, as it appeareth
out of the fourth verſe; thirdly by
a faith quieting the ſelfe in GOD, hee
burſteth out into Gods praiſe, and aſcribeth
onelie vnto him firſt the confidence

of his ſoule; Then, the prayſe of
his mouth; Thirdly, whatſoeuer duty
we haue bound our ſelues by a vowe
to pay vnto our God, and this thinge
DAVID doeth in the ſeconde verſe.
Then next in the thirde verſe, he promiſeth
that it ſhall certainely come to
paſſe, that euerie man through faith
ſhall come vnto GOD. The reaſon is
conteined vnder the title which hee
giueth vnto GOD, while hee calleth
him the God who heareth the prayer.
In the thirde verſe, hee promiſeth that
faith of men in God, which hee ſayeth
was peculiarlie due vnto him in the ſecond
verſe: As if hee ſhoulde ſay. Men
indeede O God, oughte to giue their
faith vnto thee, and they ſhall giue it
thee, and ſhall beleeue in thee. Learne
out of this place, what it is properlie to
praiſe or glorifie God, it is indeede to
aſcribe vnto him, the thinges which ar
due vnto him: alſo the thinges which
are due to him are thoſe, firſte confidence
of the hearte; then praiſe of the

mouth; thirdlie, are theſe duties which
we are bound to accompliſh, either by
a vow or by any other whatſoeuer obligation.
Then next wee learne heare,
that it is not in the power of any man
to burſt foorth into the glorifying of
God by theſe groundes; from which
out of queſtion the prayſing of Dauid
proceedeth, neither yet is anye man able
indifferentlie to pronounce thoſe
wordes which Dauid then at that time
ſpake [Setled hope and praiſe is due vnto
thee,] But that man is onely able to
do this thing, who putteth his truſt in
God, through a feeling of Gods mercie,
and quieteth himſelfe in him. For
no man glorifieth God, vnleſſe it be of
faith, alſo he that beleeueth in him, he
both confeſſeth and profeſſeth faith, &
that all other offices are due vnto God
in Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           4 Thou clenſeſt the wicked thinges
and our defections, which have preuailed
ouer vs.
                           5 Bleſſed is he whome thou chooſeſt and

admoniſheſt, who maye dwell in thy courtes,
we are ſatisfied with the good thing of thy
houſe, with the holy thinges of thy temple.
                           6 Thou ſpeakeſt out vnto vs in righteouſneſſe
thinges that are to be reverenced, ô
God of our ſaluation, the confidence of all
the vttermoſt parts of the earth & ſea, that
are fartheſt off.
                        
                     
                     
                        THou clengeſt] Here follow the arguments
of the praiſe ſet downe, from
the benefites of God himſelf; and firſt
the benefites ſpirituall towarde the
Church. Of the ſpirituall the firſte is
the forgiuenes of ſinnes, by which he
concludeth that propoſed praiſe, to
witt, that confidence is due vnto God,
&c. Of this argumente that appeareth
to bee true, which wee haue ſpoken,
that DAVID burſteth foorth into this
praiſe, from a ſenſe of Gods mercie,
and of the remiſſion of his ſinnes. The
wordes themſelues, whereby this benefite
is expreſſed, clearelie do ſignifie
that DAVID had firſt wraſtled with his
ſinne, then that ſinne preuailed ouer

him in this combat. Thirdly, that God
had purged this ſinne, from thence he
giueth the glory of the forgiueneſſe of
his ſins, or of his deliuerance from ſin,
to God alone. Thou (ſayth he) clengeſt]
for it cānot be, that any man can aſcrive
to God the praiſe of the remiſſion of
his ſinnes, vnleſſe hee haue firſt foughten
with ſinne, and haue felt himſelfe
weaker then ſin in that combat: Then
that God is ſtronger then ſinne, to the
which he himſelfe was inferiour, from
whence I praye you proceedeth that
voice of PAVLE, I thank God by Chriſt?
We reade in the ſame chapter, that David
had foughten with ſin: Then, that
hee was carried captiue awaye vnder
the lawe of ſinne: of which ariſeth that
complaint, ô miſerable man that I am,
who ſhall deliuer mee from the bodie of this
death? After this complaint, wee eaſilie
perceive, that a godlie man hath his refuge
vnto Chriſt, & in that in him he
hadde obteined deliuerance from his
ſinnes, whereof proceedeth that holy

giuing of thanks, I thank my God throgh
Ieſus Chriſt? Wherefore we come not
to the ſenſe of the feeling of Gods
mercy without a fighting, to the glorifying
of God himſelf. And there is alway
a glorious yſſue of our combate,
for it endeth in the glorifiing of God,
with an vnſpeakeable and glorious joy
Then next, the word of clenſing is to
be marked, whereby is ſignified a purging
by ſome ſacrifice propiciatorie,
whereof he ſpeaketh. Pſalm. 51. 9. purge
me ô lord with byſſope, that is, by the holy
bloode of Chriſte, ſhaddowed out by
that figure. This worde therefore ſignifieth
that which is ſet down in Heb,
9. Without blood there is no forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes. For the fathers did not vnder
the lawe implore at any time mercy &
pardon for their ſinnes without blood
& ſacrifice to pacifie the wrath of God
Neither we our ſelues this day feele in
our heartes the forgiueneſſe of our
ſinnes, but by that ſacrifice of Chriſt,
apprehended firſt by faith, neither yet

dare we ſeeke the forgiueneſſe of our
ſinnes, except in Chriſt and and in his
ſacrifice. Bleſſed is he whome] The ſecond
argument of praiſe, from the benefite
of ca
                           •
                        ling, which by the ordour
of nature, preceedeth the remiſſion of
ſinnes. Then he ariſeth a litle higher in
reckoning out of the ſpirituall benefites
of God to forgiueneſſe, the preceeding
cauſe. Now he comprehendeth
Calling within thoſe partes as it
were. The firſt is whereby God chooſeth
any man, that is, calleth him out
from the number of loſte men, vpon
this parte doeth that follow, whereby
he bringeth vs neerer, and maketh vs
to approch hard to himſelfe. For vnles
he himſelfe tooke holde of vs, & drew
vs, as it were to himſelfe, ſurelie, being
called out, we ſhoulde not bee moved
out of our place. Vpon this finallie
doeth that part follow, which maketh
vs to dwell in his courtes. Our calling
therefore beginneth from that
choiſe which God maketh, and it paſſeth

fordward by that drawing neere
vnto God, and at laſt it endeth in that
dwelling which is with GOD in his
Church. But the phraſe of ſpeach
which hee vſeth in vttering out of this
benefite of calling, is not to bee pretermitted
in ſilence. For hee ſpeaketh
not this coldlie & barelie, thou chooſeſt
vs, but with ane outcrye and a certaine
woundering of the greatneſſe of
this benefite; Bleſsed is he (ſayeth hee)
whome thou chooſeſt. So wee are taught
not ſo much to pronounce as to wonder
at al the benefits of God in Chriſt
ſuch is that in comprehenſible and vnſpeakeable
greatneſſe of them all. But
ſurelie ſome certaine apprehenſion is
ſpeciallie required to this matter, of
the benefites of God in our own harts.
For of the aboundance of the heart the
mouth ſpeaketh, and he who feeleth nothing
in his heart, verelie ſpeaketh ather
litle or nothing in his mouth [We
are filled.] He commendeth this benefite
of calling from the effects following

The firſt is in Gods action toward
them that are alreadie called bee
him. The ſeconde is in the worde of
God. As concerning the action, hee filleth
vs (ſayeth hee) with good thinges
& holy, as concerning the words thou
ſpeakeſt out vnto vs thinges to bee in
thy righteouſnes reuerenced. He who
receiueth anye man in ludgeing, and
ſetteth him at table, there are two
things ſummarilie that he is able to do
in entreating of his guheſt humanelie
and daintelie: Firſt in ſetting before
him the moſt delicate meate which he
may feede vpon, the other is in delighting
his eares, & making his heart glad
with moſt pleaſant and glade ſpeeches
of all ſortes: GOD dothe both theſe
thinges to vs, whome hee hath once
called, and invited, hauing thought
vs worthie of his table. But the wordes
are ſomewhat more diligentlie to bee
conſidered. Of theſe thinges wherewith
we are filled in the houſe of God
there are two properties, firſt they are

good and healthſome vnto vs: Then
they are holie; By theſe good and holy
thinges are all the ſpirituall bleſſinges
in Chriſt meante. Of, the wordes alſo
which hee ſpeaketh, there are likewiſe
two properties, the firſt is, that they are
reuerent, and therefore do require reuerence
at the hearers hands. The ſecond
is, that they are in righteouſneſſe
that is, juſt, vpright and ſincere, without
falſhood, without lying. Alſo in
theſe words the promiſes of God concerning
good and holy thinges are to
bee vnderſtood, greater they are then
we are able to comprehend in this life,
but we ſhall be capable of them in that
other life. You ſee then, with howe
great gladneſſe, with howe greate a reioyſing
of heart, we haue our abode in
the houſe of God, and do ſit as it were
at his table who not onely are ioyfull
by faith of the goode thinges preſent,
that is, by the preſent apprehenſion of
them, but alſo by the hope of the benefites
to come, which will be farre greater

then thoſe preſent. Of theſe effects
wee ſee that, that David not without
cauſe publiſhed that man to be bleſſed,
whome God did chooſe. For what is
it to bee bleſſed, if this bee not, with ſo
great a joy and gladnes of ſoule, to bee
filled with thinges ſo good, ſo holy, &
in the meane time to heare the promiſes
of things to come, exceeding great,
ſo reuerent, ſo righteous, ſo true. O God
of our ſaluation] There is two titles of
God heare, the one which reſpecteth
the Church: for ſaluation belongeth
to the Church. The other which reſpecteth
all thinges created, for confidence
is of al things created. Conſider
heare firſt then, as the goodnes of God
not onelie extendeth the ſelfe to the
Church, albeit chiefly to the Church,
but alſo to al things created, & to theſe
alſo which are without the Churche
for he ſuffereth not yea euen the wicked
to be deſtitute of his teſtimony, Doing
good vnto thē giuing vnto them raynes
from the heauēs & fruitful ſeaſons, filling

their harts with food and gladnes. Euen ſo
the Godlie look vpon God, & not onlye
vppon his benefites towarde the
Church, but alſo in his benefites towarde
All thinges created. Conſidder
nixt that there is ſome confidence alſo
in God of the dūme and brutiſh creatures,
For in their owne faſhion they
thirſte for the grace of God, and haueing
gotten the ſame, in their owne maner,
they repoſe themſelues quietlie in
their God, finally they wait with certaine
ſighes, the Reuelation of the ſonnes of God,
with whome they alſo ſhal be ſet at freedome
Of this matter looke Rom. 8. In which
place the hope of that glorye to come,
is not giuen to man, but to thoſe who
haue the firſt fruites of the ſpirit, but in
the ſame place, ſome hope notwithſtanding
of the glorye to come is attributed
to the creatures, that you maye
ſee that the thinges create brutiſh and
dumme are in a better caſe, then men,
if they be not regenerated by the ſpirit
of GOD. [Stabliſhing the mountaines.]
                        
Nowe followe the corporall benefites
of God, belonging in common to all
thinges created. Thou viſiteſt] Here follow
the benefites bodielie, belonging
to his owne Church, vnto the ende of
the Pſalme. All which thinges ſeeing
they neede no expoſition, but are eaſie
to be vnderſtoode, it ſhall be ſufficient
to haue poynted out the prophetes
minde, eſpecially in reſpect they maye
bee knowne eaſilie out of the longer
writings of others.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the LXXXIIII. Pſalme
                  It is a Pſalme of prayer, of Dauids, as it is likelie, being
baniſhed through the tyrannie of Saull. It is firſte
made of a heauie complaint vnto the 9 verſe. Then of a
petition vnto the 13. verſe. Finallie of ane acclamatorie
concluſion in the 13, verſe.
               
               
                  
                     The LXXXIIII. Pſalme.
                     
                        
                           1 A Pſalme (commited) to the Maſter
of the Muſick, among the poſterity
of Korach, (to be ſong) vpon the inſtrumentes
Gittith
                           
                           2 O Iehoua of hoſtes, how amiable are
thy tabernacles!
                           
                              
3 My ſoule is touched vvith a deſire,
yea it faynteth to come to the courtes of Iehoua,
my heart and my fleſh, cry out to come
vnto the ſtrong liuing God.
                           4 To thine altars, Iehoua of hoſtes, my
king, and my God, yea the ſparrowe findeth
an houſe, and the ſwallowe a neſt for themſelues,
in the which they may lay there yong
ones.
                           5 Bleſſed are they that dwell in thy houſe,
they will prayſe thee alway.
                           6 Bleſſed is the man, who in thee hath libertie
of thy pathes, which the godlie haue
in their mind.
                           7 Bleſſed are they who pasſing through
the valley of the Mulberrie, appoynt that
fountaine, whome alſo the raine of thy blesſings
do couer.
                           8 They goe from battell array, to battel
array, let euery man compeir before God in
Tzijon.
                        
                     
                     
                        O Iehoua] The firſt part of the pſalme
the complaint, in which the diuers
paſſions of Davids mind being baniſhed,
vtter themſelues. And firſt indeede

the affection of that loue whereby hee
embraceth Gods preſence in his
Church, is brought out in this verſe.
For David when he had felt that ſweetneſſe
of the preſence of GOD, which
then was tied vnto the Church of the
Iewes, he was taken with a wonderfull
loue thereof. Alſo hee openeth vp that
moſt tender loue in this word, [How amiable,]
For this word is the ſpeech of
a lover. By the name of Tabernacles he
vnderſtandeth that viſible Miniſtrie,
which then was bounde to the temple
of Ieruſalem onely, and in which God
exhibited himſelfe to his people to be
ſeene in ſome ſort. My ſoule is touched]
In this the paſſion of deſire vttereth
the ſelfe: For when the holy man was
baniſhed, from that preſence of GOD
which he ſo greatly loued, hee was not
touched with a meane deſire thereof.
For deſire properly ariſeth, of the abſence
of theſe thinges which we loue.
Conſidder therefore what it is to haue
once taiſted how gracious the Lord is,

for of the taiſt commeth the loue, of
the loue ariſeth the deſire of the thing
abſent, which thinge the felle ſurelie is
neuer deſtitute of ſome ſorte of enioying
and preſence. Bleſſed are they that
hunger and thirſt for righteouſnes, becauſe
they ſhall be ſatisfied. But they, who at no
time haue taiſted howe gracious the
Lorde is, they ſurelie are not taken
with his loue, and they who loue not,
they deſire not him that is abſent. For
what is the cauſe that you ſee manie
deſtitute of this viſible preſence of
God which is in his Miniſterie, & not-with-ſtan-ding
are not ſo much, as by
the leaſte feeling, touched with the
ſenſe thereof. Theſe neuer taſted, how
ſweete this preſence of GOD was in
his miniſterie. From thence there is
no loue of God, againe from thence,
there is no deſire of him. But what
would you thinke of thoſe, which not
onely doe ſuffer themſelues willinglie
to be depriued of this preſence of God,
but alſo perſecute the ſame al the waies

they can? I pray you of what minde ar
thoſe men toward God, & how wickedly
are they diſpoſed. [Yea my ſoule
fainteth] He aggravateth that his deſire
to come vnto God, and firſte indeede
from that, that through the deſire, his
minde fayleth him: Then from that,
that he is whollie occupied with that
deſire, both in his heart, in his fleſh, in
his minde, in his bodie: Thirdlie from
that, that through the deſire he cryeth
out. Marke therefore in this place, how
vehement the paſſion vſeth to be in the
godlie, not onlie of deſire, but of loue,
ſorrow and rejoyſing &c. For that ſpirit
of GOD, which ſtirreth vp this affectiō
in the godly is in cōprehenſible.
From thence his operation is marueilous
in the hart, not ſuch natural commotiones
indeede as vſe to bee in the
mind, as the naturall deſire, the naturall
loue, the naturall ſorrow, &c. From
thence the ſighes of the godlie are ſaid
to bee vnſpeakeable. Rom. 8, and the
joye vnutterable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1
                        
Neuertheles there is ſomething in the
affection of the godlie, which you may
vvounder at, and which you cannot
finde in the naturall paſſion: Their deſire
is vehement, it is not without ſome
preſence and enjoying of that thing
which they deſire, from thence ariſeth
that pleaſure while they deſire. For
their ſighes cannot be expreſſed, ſurelie
they are not without ſome ioye, if
the vnſpeakeable ioy bee not conioyned
with inutterable ſighes. [To the
ſtrong God.] Vnder theſe titles of God
there is ſome cauſe of ſo great a deſire,
for he felt that his whole power & his
life was from God, who is both ſtrong
and liuing, that is, whoe is not onelie
ſtrong in himſelfe, but furniſheth
ſtrength vnto his creatures, not onelie
liueth himſelfe, but powreth in life into
the things created: they then which
feele themſelues to liue by God, that
they moue and are, ſurelie they ſuffer
not themſelues to wante the preſence
of God: But they who feele not that

thing, they take that abſence of God in
a good ynough part. I grant, all liue indeede,
and are by him, but all vnderſtand
not that: onelie they vnderſtand
and feele that, who haue begun to liue
that life of God, & haue the firſt fruites
of the Spirit. They indeede aſcribe to
God alone as his gifte, not onelie that
ſpirituall life, but euen the ſenſuall life,
[Yea the ſparrow.] The third affection.
Indignation, for he is angrie, yea that a
ſparrow or a ſwallow▪ ſhall haue ſome
entrie to the altars of God: when not-with-ſtanding
the altares of GOD,
belong nothinge to thoſe litle
birdes: But he himſelfe which is a
member of the Church, all entrie vnto
the Church of God is vtterly ſtopped
vp. You ſee therefore that the Godlie,
being deſtitute of Gods preſēce, envie
that the little birdes ſhoulde haue the
ſame, and they thinke themſelues miſerable
in reſpect of the birdes. You
ſee alſo, that God by the birdes, doeth
after ſome ſorte prouoke men to aemulation.

The vngodlie in this life do ſuffer
eaſilie the things created and dum,
to draw neerer vnto god thē thēſelues,
and yet for all this, thinke not themſelues
in this reſpect, either more blesſed
or more miſerable thē themſelues.
But when they ſhall come to that latter
judgement or to that aire, and to
thoſe clowdes, wherewith the Lorde
ſhall be invironed, and vpon which he
ſhall ſet miſerable men, they ſhall
thinke the birdes happie in reſpect of
themſelues. [My King and my God.]
Thoſe names of God, ſufficientlie declare
that there was alſo ſome preſence
of God preſent at that time, when hee
ſo grieuouſlie complaineth of his abſence.
For theſe words proceede from
faith, that is, from ſome preſent apprehenſion.
You will ſee then the godlie
complaine of the abſence of GOD,
when notwithſtanding they feele him
preſent in ſome ſorte. They complayn
alſo of his abſence, becauſe they cannot
get that preſence and communion

of God, which they would haue. For
we liue here by faith, and not by ſight,
that is, we looke a far off onely vppon
the Lorde, and that ſelfe ſame ſight,
which is from a farre off, is hindred
many waies; yea, many times alſo all
preſēce of God, is reſt away from our
eies. From thence ariſeth that deſire of
flitting out of this bodie, and going to dwell
with the Lord. From thence come theſe
complaints, concerning the Lords abſence.
Bleſſed are thoſe who dwel] This
is the fourth affection, woundring. He
cannot ſufficiently wounder at the
bleſſedneſſe of theſe men, who haue
ſome entry patent vnto God, that is, to
that viſible miniſterie, in which God
exhibited himſelf to be ſeene in ſome
ſort. For whoſoeuer at any time haue
God preſent with themſelues, thoſe
define that bleſſedneſſe, that felicity of
man, by that ſame preſence and communion,
which is with God: Neither
ar they able at any time, who haue not
ſeene God in Chriſt, either to thinke

aright or ſpeak truly of that happines.
From thence proceed theſe ſhamefull
errours of prophane Philoſophers, of
which number, ſome haue beene ſo
mad, that they haue placed the miſerie
of man, in place of his happines. Alſo,
thoſe whom in the firſt place hee publiſhed
to bee bleſſed; thoſe appeare to
be the Levites and the Prieſtes. For
thoſe are they who dwelt in the houſe
of God, and according to their office,
perpetually prayſed him. The Miniſters
therefore of the Church, obteine
the firſt place of happineſſe, and no
marvell indeede, if thou wilt meaſure
happineſſe by Gods preſence, and the
glorifying of his name. For the Miniſterie
are ſanctified & ſeparated aboue
others, to communicate with GOD;
vpon whom this thing lyeth as a parte
of their office, that they poynt out as it
were, with the finger, God whom they
firſt haue ſeene in Chriſt, and paynte
out Chriſt before the eies, to others
in the preaching of the Goſpell, and

crucifie him as it were to others: there
fore the faithfull Miniſters and ſtewards
of the myſterie of Chriſt, ar chieflie
bleſſed; but if they be not faithfull,
they are of all men the moſt miſerable,
Bleſſed is the man] Secondly, he eſteemeth
them to be bleſſed, who haue an
eaſie entrie into the Church of God:
For this is that which he ſayeth: Who
in thee haue libertie of thy pathes] For
here alſo is the matter of happines, that
there is an eaſie paſſage made vnto vs,
to the aſſemblies of the Church, in
which the worde of God is heard and
preached, and the Sacraments are miniſtred:
But wee very oft, fulfill that
which is commonly ſpoken; The nearer
that wee draw to the Temple of
God in our bodie; wee are the farther
in our ſoule from God; and we abuſe
that libertie and power, in which there
is any matter of bleſſednes: For wee
haue taken a loathing of the worde of
God, and of the Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies
long ſince. Bleſſed are they] Thirdly,

hee counteth theſe among the bleſſed,
who, howbeit they had a hard way
& a droughthie place to paſſe through
as was the valley of the mulberie, are
compelled to journey, & likewiſe travell
in a raynie weather: Notwithſtanding,
they are able to come vnto the
Church of God: Appoynt that fountaine]
That is, they refreſh themſelues
with a conſideration of that fountaine
of GOD, vnto the which, they ſtriue
through thoſe droughthie places, The
rayne of thy bleſsing.] That is, which for
the moſt parte, is ſent to communicate
the bleſſing of God with the earth, &
maketh it fertil. Thou ſeeſt then that
thoſe are bleſſed, to whome otherwiſe
there is an hard entry into the Church
of GOD, if in the meane time they
come vnto him: For the difficultie of
comming vnto God, taketh not away
our happineſſe, if ſobeit at length wee
take holde on him. But theſe ſurely are
the meet judges of this happines, who
haue once taſted, howe gracious the

Lorde is, and what greate ſweetnes
is in his preſence. They goe from battle
array] The reaſon of their bleſſednes,
who haue an vneaſie waye vnto the
Church of God, from the event. They
go (ſayeth he] from battel aray, to battel aray]
That is, after they are commed into
the Church, that difficil way being
accompliſhed, they paſſe from one holy
aſſembly to another daylie, to exerciſe
publickly, the whole worſhippe of
GOD. It is a borrowed ſpeech from
warfare. Let every man compeare] This
is done according to the Lawe. Hee
ſheweth evidently then their happineſſe,
who haue an hard journey vnto
the Church, from the notable iſſue; for
wee muſt meaſure bleſſedneſſe from
the iſſue, and not from the meanes,
whereby wee attaine vnto the iſſue.
And therefore our Saviour in the fifth
of Matthew ſaieth, Bleſſed are they that
mourne, for they ſhal be comforted, whereby
hee ſignifieth, that bleſſednes is not
ſo much in the mourning, as it is in the

conſolation: Not-with-ſtanding, hee
ſheweth that mourning is a neceſſarie
midds for comfort, ſo that if wee
mourne not in this life, there ſhall be
no comforte for vs in that that is to
come, vnles we paſſe as it were in ſome
ſort through the Helles, wee ſhall not
come vnto the Heavens.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           9 O Iehova, God of hoſtes, heare my prayer,
conceiue with thine eares, ô God of Iahakob.
Selah.
                           
                           10 O our ſhield, behold, ô God, and looke
vpon the face of thy Chriſt.
                           11 For one daye in thy courtes is better
then a thouſand. I chooſe to haunt the threſholde
in the houſe of my God, then to dwell
in the pauillion of iniquitie.
                           12 For God Iehova is the ſunne & the
ſhield, Iehova giveth grace and glory, hee
with-holdeth not good, from them that
walke in vprightnes.
                        
                     
                     The ſecond parte of the Pſalme, the prayer.
                     
                        O Iehova] Now hee prayeth
vnto GOD, that of his mercy hee

would bring him home from baniſhment
into his Church: The petition
is conteined in two verſes: The reaſon
therof is vnto the 13. verſe. The ground
of the petition, vppon the which it is
built, is eaſilie perceived from the titles
and names, whereby hee incalleth
God. Alſo, the ground of the petition
firſte, is indeede in taking holde on
GOD in his everlaſting eſſence, from
whence hee is called Iehova: Then
next, in that his infinite power, from
whence hee is called, the GOD of
hoſtes, and that he hath vnder his dominion,
al hoſtes and armies; aſwel the
heavenly, as the earthly. Thirdly, in
his mercy, which he hath made manifeſt
in that covenant, made with Abraham,
Iſaac, and Iakob, from whence hee
is called, the God of Iahakob. For wee
cannot pray vnto God, except we take
holde on him in our heart, not only in
that his everlaſting eſſence, wherby he
is diſtinguiſhed, from all things created,
but alſo in his proprieties, but

chiefely in two; power, whereby he is
able to ſaue vs, and mercy, whereby he
is willing to ſaue vs. Alſo, we vtter this
apprehenſion of heart, in the titles and
names of God, while wee call him Iehova,
ſometime the God of armies, at
other times, the God of Iahakob; and
finallie, when wee are praying, we call
vpon him by other titles. It is to be
marked in the petition, that hee repeateth
the ſelfe ſame petitiō. This repetition
ſheweth evidently, the earneſt deſire
of the thing ſought for, without
the which, wee ſhould not call vppon
God, for the deſire of the heart, is a certaine
neceſſary foundation of praiers.
From thence aryſe thoſe vehement
and repeated petitions, the which ſelfſame
askings againe, of neceſſitie, God
muſt heare. But if there be not a deſire
of the heart, the askings are but colde
and drye, and therefore againe they
get nothing but a colde & a drye aunſwere
from God, and procure rather
ſome judgement, then any benefite.

For we ſhould not deale for the faſhion
ſake with God. O our ſhield] How
of the craveth, ſo oft he calleth vppon
God moſt reverently, which thing, is
an evidente, that every one of theſe
words proceed from particular apprehenſions
of the heart. Men commonly
when they ſpeake to ſuperiour powers,
they vſe oft and honorable ſtyles;
but for the moſt part fayned ſtyles. But
the godly, when they ſpeake reverently
vnto God, they ſpeake from the entire
ſincerity, reverence, faith and loue
of the heart. For wee muſt deale with
GOD, the ſearcher of the hearts, with
vprightnes of heart, and not make our
word ſo much as our ſoule approoved
vnto him, and this cannot bee done
without his owne ſpirit: For no man
calleth Ieſus Chriſt, but by the holie
Spirite [Behold] As he firſt ſought the
eare, ſo nowe hee deſireth the eie of
GOD: For the godly are not at reſte
within themſelues, before they firſte
feele, that all the ſenſes of their God, as

it were, are exerciſed vppon them; for
even as they, who favoure not but of
thoſe earthly things, ſome not to themſelues
able to liue, vnles they haue the
eare of the Princes of this world open
vnto them, and haue their eie fixed vpon
them: ſo they who ſeek that everlaſting
life, they depend altogether vpon
the eie and eare of God, who is
the alone author of life, and in whoſe
face there is ſacietie of joyes.
                     
                        For one
day is] This is the argument of the petition,
from that joye which is in the
Church of God. Of this joy he entreateth
by way of compariſon, and he aggregeth
it by a compariſon taken frō
a thing that is leſſe, of that joy which is
in the pavillions of wickednes, that is,
which is without the Church, without
the which, there is nothing but
wickedneſſe: as if he ſhould ſaye, The
joye of one daye in the Church, is
more then the joy of a thouſand daies
without the Church; from thence hee
concludeth: Therefore I had rather hant

the threſhold in the houſe of God, &c. Hee
preferreth then the joye of one day in
the Church, to the joy of many dayes
without the Church. The reaſon is,
becauſe the weight & quantity of that
ſpiritual joye which is in the Church,
recompenſeth the ſhortneſſe of the
time: For one crumme, if it were no
more of that ſpirituall joy, is of greater
weight & eſtimation, then is the whole
joy of this world. Marke, if ſo little a
time of ſpirituall gladneſſe, begun but
onely in this fighting Church vppon
earth, ſurpaſſeth by ſo many degrees,
that whole time of the joy, which is of
this world; I pray you, how much ſhal
wee ſay the eternitie of that ſpirituall
ioy to be, which at length is to be perfited
in the triumphant Church, to be
more excellent, I ſay, then all the joye
of this worlde, which laſteth but for a
moment as it were? For the whole
time of this joy, if it be compared with
eternitie, what other thing is it, then a
certaine moment, and that gladnes of

the world, if it be compared with that
heavenly ioy, how vaine and light is
it? Compare therfore, that everlaſting
weight, of that excellently excellent
glorie, ſo to ſpeake with the Apoſtle,
with this momentanean lightneſſe of
worldly ioye.2. Cor. 4 The Prophet ſaid not
greate ioye, which is in the Church,
when he brought in the cauſe, wherefore
he deſired to bee brought home
againe into the Church, but by waye
of compariſon he ſaide, that this ioye
was greater, then that ioy of the whole
world is; yea, he preferred one daye of
this ioy: to a thouſand dayes of worldlie
ioye, and not only preferred he this
ioye, which is in the Church, to that
ioy which is in the world, but having
vtterly abandoned this worldly ioye,
he chooſe that ſpiritual ioy. Here then
I marke, that is not ſufficient, if we ſaye
there is a great ioye in the Church of
God, vnleſſe wee prefer the ſame alſo
vnto the whole ioye of this world. Againe,
it is not ynough, if in worde we

prefer the ſame, except alſo wee make
ſome choiſe thereof alſo in this life.
Moyſes chooſe rather to bee afflicted
with the people of God, then to enjoy
the commodities of iniquitie. If therefore
Moyſes chooſe the affliction and
miſery of the Church, having contemned
altogether the royall pleaſures;
how much more ought we to chooſe
that gladneſſe, which is in the Church
of God, having deſpiſed in the meane
time, all the pleaſures of this worlde.
Which ioy, ſurely if we chooſe not in
this life in ſome certaine meaſure, certainely
wee ſhall never enioy that perfite
pleaſure which is in the other life.
                     
                        For God is the Sun] The reaſon, wherefore
hee chooſe rather to haunt the
threſholde in Gods houſe, taken from
God himſelfe, and from his preſence
in the Church, as of a certaine Sunne
and Shield. God is a certaine Sun, becauſe
the beame of his grace ſhineth in
our harts,2. Cor. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. And
hee is a ſhield, becauſe he protecteth &

reſcueth his Church, and defendeth
it from evill: For without the Church,
there is no protection, no ſalvation, as
there is no light, no grace. But the borrowed
figuratiue ſpeeches following,
expound theſe wordes, by which it is
ſaide firſt, Iehova giveth grace and glory:
For, for this cauſe he is called a Sun.
Then is ſubjoyned: Hee reſtrayneth not
good from them which walk in vprightnes]
That is, who are truly and really of the
Church. But vnderſtand therewith, he
holdeth off and reſtrayneth evill from
the Church, and the members of the
Church. For, for this hee is called a
ſhield. Mark, who finally ar they, who
choſe to dwell in the houſe of God, or
in the church, to wit, thoſe only ar they
who behold that Sunne ſhining in the
Church, and that buckler, which protecteth
the Church. But others, vpon
whome that Sun hath not ſhined, and
whom that ſhield defendeth not, they
are ſo farre from that, that they would
dwell in the Church of GOD, that

contrariwiſe, with all their heart they
abhor the ſocietie of the Church, and
of the Saintes. It is therefore greatly to
the purpoſe, once to haue looked vpon
that preſence of god in his church.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           13 O Iehoua of hoſtes, bleſsed is the man
that hath his confidence in thee.
                        
                     
                     O Iehova, bleſſed is the man] The concluſion
of the prayer, conteining
an excellent acclamatorie ſentence, in
which Dauid having conſiddered that
preſence of GOD in his Church, hee
publiſheth him to bee bleſſed, who
putteth his truſt in God, that is, who is
in the Church, and enjoyeth that preſence
of God in his Church. He therefore
that beholdeth God preſent in his
Church, not only he chooſeth to dwel
in the Church, but he judgeth him to
be bleſſed, whoſoever hee be that by
faith and loue in God, joyneth himſelf
vnto the Church, and that man alone
indeede is the judge of the true
felicitie and miſerie of man, who ſeeth
the preſence of GOD in his Church

for this man judgeth, yea, and he judgeth
indeede aright, from that preſence
of God, either of the happineſſe or miſerie
of man. To God therefore in his
Church, be all glory, through Ieſus
Chriſt, for evermore, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the CXVI. Pſalme.
                  Of this Pſalme, there are fiue partes. The firſt, he
profeſſeth his loue toward God, and he adjoyneth and
amplifieth the cauſe of this loue, vnto the 7. verſe. Secondly,
by ſaith he gloryeth with his owne ſoule Thirdly,
he gloryeth with God, vnto the 10. verſe. Fourthly, hee
confeſſeth his owne weakneſſe, which was ſometime
in him, and that by a compariſon of the faith which
the
                        •
                      he had, vnto the 12. verſe. Fiftly, he taketh purpoſe
to render thanks vnto God.
               
               
                  The CXVI. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 I loue Iehova, for he heareth my voice,
my deprecationes.
                           2 For he hath bowed the eare vnto me,
when I called vpon him in my dayes.
                           3 And when the dolours of death
compaſſed mee about, and the griefes of the
graue met me, finding anguiſh and ſorrow,
                           4 I called vppon the name of Iehova,
ſaying, I beſſeech thee, O Iehova deliver my

ſoule:
                           5 Gracious Iehova and righteous: Our
God, I ſay, mercifull,
                           6 Iehova preſerving the ſimple when
I am brought to nothing, he beſieweth ſalvation
vpon me.
                        
                     
                     I Loue Iehova] The firſt parte of the
Pſalme as we haue ſpoken, in which
he profeſſeth that loue, whereby hee
loved God. Alſo, loue is ane certaine
affection in the hearte, whereby any
man carneſtlie deſireth the communion
& conjunction of that thing which
he loveth: whatſoever thing ſurely it
be. But if the loue of any man towarde
another be very fervente, then verely
he who loveth, deſireth himſelfe to be
made one, & as it were one man, with
him whom he loveth. Paule expreſſeth
the force of this loue, when he ſaide, O
Corinthians,
                        2. Cor. 6. 11. 12. 
                        my mouth is opened towarde
you, mine heart is made large. Ye are not
kept ſtraight in vs, but ye are kept ſtraight
in your owne bowels. By which words indeede,
hee ſheweth by the affection of

his loue toward the Corinthians, that
his heart was ſo enlarged, that he received
them, as it were, within himſelfe,
and into the boſome of his heart, and
that hee became, as it were, one man
with them. The loue of God is, whereby
we deſire the communion & conjunction
with God.
                           
                              •
                            Cor. 5, 6, 8. 
                        Paule ſayeth, Wee
are hold though we know that whiles we are
at home in the bodie, we are abſent from the
Lorde. Neuertheleſſe wee are bold, and loue
rather to remooue out of the bodie, and to
dwell with the Lord. From whence proceedeth
this Pauls approbation? ſurely
from that loue of his Lord, who as hee
ſayeth in the ſame Chapter, verſe 14.
The loue of Chriſt conſtrayned him, and
continually carryed him forward vnto
the Lord. And this is the cauſe wherefore
we ſighing, wait for the comming
of Chriſt: For the loue whereby wee
embrace Chriſt, earneſtly thirſteth for
that conjunction with Chriſt. There is
alſo another thing that is required in
this loue, that is, that for the loue of

Chriſt, wee would be willing to looſe
the moſt deare things whatſoever we
haue in this life. So Chriſt ſpeaketh in
Luke:
                        Luk. 14. 20. 
                        If any man come vnto me, and hate
not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and ſiſters, yea, and
his own life alſo, he cannot be my Deſciple.
By which wordes, Chriſt ſignifieth,
that his loue is to be bought, yea, with
the hatred of thoſe thinges which are
moſt deare, if it can no otherwiſe be
obteined. And this indeede was Davids
loue, which hee profeſſeth in this
place. Such ſhould al our loue be, who
profeſſe the ſame God with him. And
in this reſpect wee are chiefely moſt
happie, becauſe wee haue that God of
Abraham, Iſaac, Iahakob, and David,
whom we may loue, whome wee
may worſhip. For he heareth] This is an
argument of loue frō the benefite of
his deliverance, from whence aroſe a
certain earneſt feling of the mercie of
God toward him. Marke then, that
the knowledge of the goodnes of God,

and the ſenſe of his mercy and loue
towarde vs, continually goeth before
our loue toward him. He loueth vs (ſayeth
IOHN) not becauſe we haue loued him
firſt.
                        1. Iohn. 4. 19. For it is impoſſible that any man
can loue God, vnleſſe that now firſte
that loue of God in Chriſt Ieſus, be powred
out in his heart by the holy Spirit. Dauid in
every place profeſſeth his loue toward
God,Rom. 5, 5. hee giveth an account thereof
continually from the mercy of God
toward him. I wil loue thee (ſaith he) frō
my very moſt inward bowels, And what
is the reaſon?Pſal. 18. 2. 
                        Iehova is my ſtrength, Iehova
is my rocke and my ſtrong tower, &c.
By which words indeed, he declareth
the cauſe wherefore hee ſo much loved
GOD, that it was the mercy of
God toward him. But if verely we wil
loue God (for except we loue him, we
are miſerable) and if we will ſet our affection
vpon God, we haue neede of
nothing ſo much then of diligent marking
of all his benefites, which he continually
heapeth vpō vs. For theſe ar ſo

many teſtimonies of gods loue toward
vs. Now wee haue ſaid, that the loue
of God towarde vs, is the cauſe of our
loue toward him. Wherefore, to the
end that wee may loue God from our
ſoule, every particular benefite of God,
ſo farre as it is poſſible, is to be marked
by vs. For ſurely the cauſe wherefore
our harts burne not in that loue, where
in they ought to burne towards God,
proceedeth from this, that we conſidder
ſo ſlightlie his benefites toward vs,
eſpecially that greateſt benefite of all,
the benefite of our Redemption in Ieſus
Chriſt; for while his benefites are
nor weighed, there is no ſenſe of his
loue toward vs. And when there is not
a feeling of his loue towarde vs, howe
can it come to paſſe, that wee can loue
him? He heareth my deprecation] Therefore
the prayers went before the benefites
of God, and the ſenſe of his mercy.
For by thoſe degrees, we come as it
were vnto the loue of God. Firſt wee
ſeek at Gods hands any benefite, whether

it be Temporal or Spiritual. Then
after we haue gotten the benefite, wee
feel his mercy & loue toward vs, as the
fountain frō which that benefite flowed.
Finally, from that ſenſe of the loue
of God toward vs, that our loue again
towrad him aryſeth. Wherefore, to the
ende, that any man may earneſtly loue
the Lord, his prayers ought to be continuall;
for of continuall prayers and
ſupplications, continuall benefites of
God come vnto vs, which are ſo many
teſtimonies of that his loue toward vs
in Chriſt. For he hath bowed] Hee openeth
vp at greater length, the reaſon
immediatly preceeding of his loue, &
he abydeth in amplifying thereof, vnto
the 7. verſe. In my dayes] Hee vnderſtandeth
the dayes of affliction and anguiſh,
as the verſe following maketh
manifeſt. In this meaning, the word of
[daye] is taken.Pſal. 137, 
                        Remember againſt the Edomites
of the day of Ieruſalem, that is, of
the affliction, whereby the Edomites
afflicted the Church. So Ieremy in the

Lamentation 1. 21. For times, metonymically
in every language, vſe to be taken
for miſery in times and dayes. We
ſee therefore in this place, that affliction
thruſted David forward to praiers.
For the feeling of miſery, ſtirreth vppe
the petition of mercy. Neither doth any
man earneſtly pray vnto God, but
he whom his owne miſerie mooveth.
Conſidder therefore, firſt the fountayne
of that loue which he ſet down,
to wit, the ſenſe of miſery, from thence
proceed prayers; from prayers againe
aryſeth the benefite of deliverance;
from the benefite of deliverance, commeth
the feeling of the loue and mercy
of God; from the ſenſe of the loue
and mercy of God, proceedeth againe
our loue towarde God. This therefore
is the firſt degree of our bleſſedneſſe,
that wee our ſelues feele how miſerable
we are, & it is good to be afflicted.
It is good for me (ſayeth Dauid) that thou
haſt humbled me. Looke the effects of
afflictions. Affliction cauſeth patience,

and patience, experience, and experience
hope alſo hope maketh not aſhamed For although
the roote ſeemeth to be bitter,
notwithſtanding it bringeth foorth at
length ſweet fruites. And when the dolours
of death compaſſed] He declareth againe
more plainely,Heb, 12. 11 the thing that
immediatly before hee had ſpoken,
And firſt, hee ſetteth before our eyes,
that preſent daunger, in the which hee
was placed. Then he ſetteth down his
ſorrow, proceeding from that danger
and perill. Thirdly, the deliverance after
the dolour: And wee haue theſe
things vnto the 7. verſe. Firſt, therefore
he paynteth out vnto vs his dangers, in
theſe words: And when the dolours, &c.
By which words, he meane thane moſt
dangerous and moſt imminent perril,
Looke 2. Sam. 22. 5. and Pſal. 18. 5, David
being conſtitute in this perrill and
anguiſh, almoſt hee was driven to a
certaine deſperation; for, as we ſhal ſee
hereafter, in the 11. verſe. hee burſteth
foorth into wordes of infidelitie, and

accuſeth Samuel of a lie, as if hee had
promiſed him the Kingdome of Iſrael,
not of the Spirit of God, but of a fleſhly
mind. From whence we learne, how
great the force of afflictions & ſorrow
is, yea, in the very godly. Neither
ought we raſhly to judg of the dolour
and impatience of men, when they ar
grievouſ
                           ••
                        e afflicted and exerciſed vnder
the hand of God. Dauid complayneth
in another place:Pſal. 32▪ 
                           
                              •
                           . 
                        When I held my
tongue (ſayeth he) my bones wore away, in
my roaring all the day. Where he profeſſeth,
that for a time in his afflictions, he
rather roared like a Lyon, then vttered
the voice of a man. Anguiſh, &c.] In
theſe words, he openeth vp his ſorrow
which aroſe from the preſent danger.
I called vppon the name] Here wee haue
the deliverance out of the danger, after
the ſorrow. Firſt he declareth, that
he calleth vpon the name of Iehova, &
this was the firſt grace, and a certaine
preparation to the deliverance following.
For ſurely, if we will compare this

gift of praying, with temporal deliverances
whatſoever, the gift of prayer
is a certaine greater gift, then are all
theſe temporall deliverances, and hee
who hath gotten but only the Spirite
of prayer in afflictions and daungers,
hath gotten more at Gods hande, then
if he had gotten this preſent life, and al
temporall deliverances; and it is certaine,
that he to whome God hath given
that his 
                           •
                        pirite, whereby hee may
pray, that hee ſhall not praye in vaine,
but ſhall get a deliverance, either temporall
or everlaſting: from whence
Paule prooveth the certainty of the
glorie to come by that reaſon,Rom. 8. becauſe
the Spirite maketh interceſſion for vs,
with ſighes that cannot bee expreſſed.
We haue the ſumme of Davids petition
comprehended here. I beſeech thee
Iehoua (ſayth he) deliver my ſoule] Then
he craveth deliverance. Marke then,
When affliction oppreſſed David outwardly,
and ſorrow within, that is, his
affaires were no waies in an good eſtate,

neither was the diſpoſition of his
mind quiet, then God would not take
David out of this life, being thus diſpoſed
& afflicted. For if death had ſeazed
vppon him, being thus afflicted,
ſurely not onely the preſent life, but
the life to come had bene brought into
danger. But, having firſt ſent his ſpirit,
he reformed Davids mind within,
and bowed it to prayers. Then he delivered
him out of danger. Mark then,
that the godly are oft brought to an
extreame danger, yea, not only externally,
but alſo they are in an evill caſe
within, and are at ſome times driven
into a certaine deſpaire, in the which,
they being now placed, if God would
bereaue them of this life, or would ſuffer
them to be oppreſſed, they ſhould
be in daunger to looſe that other life.
But God vſeth thus to deale with his
owne, that hee taketh them not out of
this life, except they be well diſpoſed
in ſome meaſure in their ſoule, & well
furniſhed with his Spirit: When contrariwiſe,

he ſuffereth the wicked, being
in an evill caſe, and driven into deſperatiō
to periſh, their ſouls not being
turned vnto him, before their laſte
breath go out. Obſerue ſecondly: We
ſee that Davids laſt refuge is here vnto
God. Good and evill men are alike
ſubject vnto the afflictions of this life,
before they come vnto the laſt daunger,
the wicked appeare ever to be in
the better eſtate, for all things that belong
vnto this worldly life, are for the
moſt parte readie at their hande, yea,
they haue very many deliverances:
But when they come to the laſt daunger,
and when all the helpes of this
worlde fayle, then the godly are in ane
over farre better caſe, and whoſoever
they be that put their truſt in GOD;
for God is a refuge vnto them: But the
vngodly ar driven into deſpaire. Gracious
Iehova] Here followeth the effecte
of Davids petition, deliverance out of
the preſent perrill. When (ſayeth he) I
was vtterly brought downe, God beſtowed

ſalvation vpon me. He ſpeaketh not this
rawlie and coldly, but hee deſcribeth
his God accordingly to the purpoſe;
firſt from his grace, juſtice and mercy;
then from a general effect of theſe cauſes.
Gracious] God is called gracious, becauſe
of his meere grace, without the
deſerving of men, he beſtoweth vpon
vs, all his benefites. He is called [lust]
becauſe he is true and faithfull in his
promiſes. For Iuſtice, if at any time it
bee conjoyned with deliverance (as
when it is ſaide, that God is juſte, becauſe
he delivereth vs) then faithfulnes
is to be ſeene in the promiſes: As Pſal.
31. 2. In thy righteouſnes deliver me. And
Pſal. 51. Deliver me from bloud, ô God, the
God of my ſalvation, and my tongue ſhall
ſing thy righteouſnes. Finally, he is [merciful]
becauſe he regardeth the miſerie
of the afflicted. For mercy hath a reſpect
vnto miſery. Iehova preſerving the
ſimple] That is, that generall effect, proceeding
from the properties of GOD
aboue rehearſed. The ſimple in this

place are they who are deſtitute of
mans helpe and counſell, and who in a
ſingle minde, recommend themſelues
vnto God. This deſcription of God, is
applyed to the following effect of Dauids
deliverance. For thoſe godly men,
if at any time they haue made mention
of any worke of GOD, they deſcribed
God the worker thereof, according
as it aggreed with the worke, and
they called him, either juſt or powerfull,
or wiſe or merciful. Paule going about
to ſpeake of quickning,Epheſa. 4. aſwell of
the Iewes, as of the Gentiles: firſt hee
deſcribed God, frō the cauſe of quickning,
to witte, from his mercy. God (ſaieth
he) who is rich in mercy, becauſe of his
great loue, whereby hee hath loved vs, hee
hath quickened vs together with Chriſt.
That is, hee had conſiddered diligentlie
the benefite of quickning, and felt
it intirely in his ſoule. From thence he
aſcendeth, to the cauſe it ſelfe, to wit,
to the mercy of God. For they who
meditate earneſtlie, concerning the effects

of God, thoſe ſame men alſo, doe
not les ſeriouſlie panſe of the cauſes &
of the effects which are in God, & they
glorifie God in them; and every man
ſurely, as hee weigheth the effects and
benefites of God; ſo hath he an apprehenſion,
either more light, or more
weightie of God; ſo that wee may gather,
yea, of the very naming of God,
how much men are mooved with the
workes of GOD, if at any time they
ſpeake of them. For if in the meane
time, that they ſpeake of the workes of
God, they name not God with that reverence
which is due, ſurelie that is an
evident, that there is but a light apprehenſion
onely of Gods workes.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           7 Returne vnto thy reſt, ô my ſoule, ſeeing
Iehoua is beneficiall toward thee:
                           8 Becauſe thou haſt delivered my ſelfe
from death, mine eies from teares, my feete
from falling.
                           9 I will walke continually before Iehova,
in the countreyes of the living.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        REturne vnto] The ſecond parte of
the Pſalme; The glorying of
faith, both in his owne ſoule, and likewiſe
before God; And firſt he gloryeth
in his owne ſoule. Returne (ſayeth hee)
ô my ſoule vnto thy reſt] Hee oppoſeth
this reſte or peace, to anguiſh & ſorrow,
of the which hee had ſpoken before
in the third verſe: As if he ſhould
ſaye; Diſquiet not thy ſelfe any more,
neither be in any ſorrowing, but nowe
at laſt quiet thy ſelfe: The cauſe is adjoyned.
For God is bountifull vnto thee]
The reaſon then is taken, from the preſent
benefite of God. It may be asked
in this place, whether if the benefit of
GOD, ſetteth the ſoule of the diſquieted
man at reſt? Which if it be ſo, what
is the efficacie of faith or hope, which
is of a thing that is abſent? I aunſwere,
ſeeing faith, vnder which hope is conteined,
& the preſent enjoying of the
thing, are two divers things: Faith indeede
hath great ſtrength to quiet and
pacifie the troubled minde: Notwithſtanding,

the prefence of the thing it
ſelf hath greater ſtrength to bring that
matter to paſſe. Faith indeede, which
reſpecteth that liſe to come, and as it
were, exhibiteth it preſent to vs; I grant,
i
                           •
                        urniſheth a peace, that is aboue all
knowledge: But how great ſhall this
peace be, when we ſhall enjoy that life
to come, fully and perfitly? That is not
to be in ſilence pretermitted, that hee
nameth Iehova to bee the authour of
this benefite and deliverance: Iehoua
(ſayeth hee) is bountifnll vnto me] Hee
ſaid not 
                           •
                        awlie & nakedly to his ſoule,
becauſe thou haſt delivered mee from preſent
danger, but he nameth God to bee
the author of the deliverance, from
thence aryſeth that reſt. For God himſelfe,
the author of all benefites, is a
thing ſomewhat more excellente, and
the conſcience of God the chief worker,
hath greater ſtrength to quiet the
mind, then all the benefites of GOD
haue, for (if we ſhall ſpeake properly)
not ſo much the gift it ſelfe, as the well

willing hart of the giver, quieteth our
mind. That peace which proceedeth
onely from benefites temporall and
worldly is deceivable, ſuch as was the
peace of that rich man, which after
that his barnes were enlarged and filled
full, promiſed to his ſoule in time
to come, all peace and happineſſe. But
what heard he then: O foole (ſayeth he)
they ſhall take away thy ſoule from thee this
ſame very night.
                        Luk. 12. 20 
                        Becauſe] Now he gloryeth
before God, as if he ſhould ſaye,
I ſhall not periſh nowe, but I ſhall liue
among the living; for this is it which he
ſayth, I ſhal walk alwaies in the land of the
living] and not only, ſaith he that, but
he ſaith, I will liue before Iehova, that is,
I wil liue juſtlie & vprightly; ſo that by
mylife, God ſhal be glorifyed; & this is
not without a cauſe adjoyned. For
vnles we walk before God in this life,
while we liue we ar dead, as the apoſtle
ſpeketh of that widow,
                           
                              •
                            Tim, 5. 6 which liveth in
pleaſure, While ſhe is living, ſaieth he, ſhe
is dead. Alſo, he taketh the reaſō of his

glorying, from the gift of God it ſelfe,
which by three degrees is amplified.
Thou haſt deliuered my ſelfe (ſayeth hee)
from death] Yea, and not only that, but
thou haſt delivered me frō al ſorrow] Yea,
and not onely that haſt thou done, but
thou haſt delivered me from all impediment,
which could be able any way
to procure ſorow vnto me Learne out
of this place firſt, that there is no mater
of glorying, but in the grace of God alone,Rom. 3. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
& in god alone, when is the glorying
(ſaith Paul?) it is excluded by what law? by
the law of workes? No waies yea, by the law
of faith. Whereby hee ſignifyeth, that
there ought to bee no glorying in our
owne workes, no, not ſo much, in
deede, as in the workes of regeneration.
For Abraham himſelfe, being regenerate,
had not matter to glorie in
workes before God. For the works of
regeneration, were even now al done;
wherefore, he that deſireth to glory,
let him glory in Chriſt alone, and his
merites. Secondly marke; David ſpeaketh

here of his owne deliverance, as if
it were full & perfite. But ſurely thereafter
hee was layde out to many and
great dangers, and hee was in diſpleaſure:
Wherefore of neceſſitie, here he
hath a reſpect to another deliverance,
and to another life, then to this that is
preſent. For it is not likely to be true,
that ſo godly a man gloryed ſo much
of this temporall life, in which none of
the godly at any time, ever contented
themſelues. But to the end I may ſpeak
of thoſe Fathers, who lived before
Chriſt, they indeed reſpected continually
vnder figures, as it were, and ſhaddowes
of temporall things, things everlaſting:
and in their temporall deliverances
and benefites whatſoever,
they looked within that everlaſting
redemption, and all ſpirituall and heavenly
things: And almoſt all thoſe
temporall things, & earthly was given
them, as ſhaddowes of the Spirituall
bleſſings in Ieſus Chriſt. Alſo, al thoſe
Temporal benefites ſhould be ſo many

earneſt-pennies vnto vs, of that Spirituall
and heavenly life, and perfite
redemption, which then we ſhall attayne
vnto, when Chriſt the ſecond
time ſhall come.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           10 I beleeved when I ſpake thoſe things,
I had ſpoken aboue meaſure.
                           11 I had ſaid, making haſt: Every man
is a lyar.
                        
                     
                     
                        I Beleeued] The fourth part of the
Pſalme, in which hee confeſſeth his
weakneſſe, yea, and his former infidelitie
alſo; and he cleareth the ſame by
a compariſon of this preſent faith. The
meaning is, when I partly thus gloryed
in my owne ſoule; partly before
GOD, faith triumphed in my ſoule.
Paule applyed to himſelfe theſe words
of the Prophet, and after this manner
he recited them: I beleeued (ſayeth hee)
& for that cauſe I ſpeak] vnto you O Corinthians,1. Cor. 
                              •
                           . 1
                              •
                           .
                        of that ſpiritual and eternal life,
leaning to this faith or confidence, that I
myſelfe at ſometime hereafter, ſhould aryſe

from death. For the things which anie
man ſpeaketh vnto others of God, of
Chriſt, of his benefites; firſt of all, they
muſt be beleeved of him, that is, they
are to be applyed, to the ſoule of the
ſpeaker: For ſo it ſhall come to paſſe,
that as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, we ſhal 
                              〈◊〉
                           
a greater libertie and evidence in ſpeaking.
When he ſaid in that place, let vs haue
ſuch an hope, that is, confidence of ſo
glorious a miniſtery, we vſe great freedome
in ſpeaking. I had ſpoken] This
much concerning his faith for the preſent,
here followeth the infidelitie and
weaknes, which was ſometime in him,
and which hee illuſtrateth by his preſent
faith. Firſt in theſe words, is conteined
a propoſition of th
                           •
                        ſe ſpeeches,
which proceeded from infirmity, they
went beyond meaſure, I had ſaid] The
expoſition of the propoſition: As if he
ſhould ſay; being rent away through a
ſuddaine perturbation of the fleſh, I
had ſaid: So he ſpak. Pſal. 31. I had ſaide
in my haſt [every man] Theſe are the

words which proceeded from a troubled
mind: As if he ſhould ſay; Now I
ſee that no faith is to bee given vnto
men, no not to very Prophets indeed.
For Samuel ſheweth vnto mee, that I
ſhould come vnto the Kingdome of
Iſrael. But nowe in very deede, I finde
in experience, that hee ſpake not prophetically
by the Spirite of God, but
that he hath ſpoken of his owne fleſhly
mind & lyinglie: ſo David, through
infirmitie, accuſed not GOD openly,
but Samuel of a lie, as if he had not ſufficiently
tryed out the will of GOD,
but had tranſgreſſed the bounds of his
calling. So Pſal. 31. 23. through a troubled
minde, hee bu
                           •
                        ſted foorth into
this ſpeech, I am cut off fr
                              •
                           m the ſight of
thine eies. Ye ſee therefore, in what eſtate
the affaires of the faithfull are, ſo
long as they liue here. Now indeede
through weakneſſe, they are thruſte
down even to the helles: Then again,
they are lifted vp by faith, vnto the
heavens; but at length, the victorie is

faiths. David after that through weaknes,
he had almoſt blaſphemed. Then
next, through faith againe hee triumphed.
It may come to paſſe indeede,
that the fleſh in the firſt combat haue
the maiſtery as it were, as the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh. Rom. 7. The law of the
members, maketh the man captiue to the
law of ſin, which is in the members: Notwithſtanding
the faithfull perpetually
feele this in themſelues, that the laſte
victory is of the holy Spirit, which ſurely
is an evident, that the fleſh at length
ſhall be vtterly vanquiſhed, & that the
full and perfite victory ſhal belong vnto
the Spirite. This is not in the meane
time to be paſſed by here, that David
in glorying, vttereth a notable confidence;
to wit, becauſe there was before
a great weakneſſe: For in the combat
of the fleſh and the Spirite, the more
that any man is caſt downe through a
feeling of his infirmitie, in that reſpect
he is the more lifted vp through faith:
The greater the ſorow be in the wraſtling,

in that reſpect the joy and gladnes
through the holy Spirite, is greater after
the fight. Finally, this is to be conſiddered,
that he ſayth, that haſtening
thoſe thinges which were ſpoken by
him, that is, he was mooved through a
certaine ſuddaine motion of the fleſh.
Of the which, mark the difference, betuixt
that infidelity, into the which the
godly at ſometime fal, & the infidelity
of the wicked & rebellious. The godly
at ſometime diſtruſt through a certain
ſuddain motiō of the 
                           •
                        leſh & weaknes.
So Peter through infirmitie, denied the
Lord: & in the very misbeleefe it ſelf,
they feele ſome dolor, & they diſtruſt
not ſo ſecurly, but burſt forth ſometimes
into thoſe ſpeeches: O miſerable
man that I am, who ſhal deliuer me from
the body of this death! Contrariwiſe, the
vngodly, they misbeleeue God, not of
any ſuddaine motiō of the fleſh, but of
an obſtinate malice, as thoſe did, who
aſcribed the works of Chriſt, vnto the
divell; & all Heretickes, who after they

are convict, by the teſtimonies of the
Scripture; notwithſtanding, they maliciouſlie
reſiſt the trueth. And from
this it proceedeth, that the vngodlie,
who diſtruſt through malice, ſeldome
attayne they to mercy: the godly, who
misbeleeue through the weakneſſe of
the fleſh, they repente and finde mercie.
Heretickes are ſeldome converted.
Peter was converted, David obteined
mercy, as in this Pſalme, and Pſal. 31.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           12 What ſhal I recompenſe Iehova with?
al his benefites overcome me:
                           13 I will giue openly, the received cup of
all ſalvation, and I will prayſe the name of
Iehova.
                           14 Rendring my vowes vnto Iehova,
even now before all his people, ſaying,
                           15 The threatned death is precious, in
the eies of Iehova, to them whom hee himſelfe
beareth at good will.
                           16 I beſeech thee, O Iehova, ſeeing I
am thy ſervant, let me be thy ſeruant, the
ſonne of thine hand maid, ſeeing thou haſt

lowſed my bands, let my life be precious.
                           17 I will ſacrifice vnto thee, the ſacrifice
of thankſgiving, and I will prayſe the
Name of Iehova.
                           18 I will paye my vowes vnto Iehova,
preſently before his whole people.
                           19 In the courts of Iehova his houſe, in
the midſt of thee, O Ieruſalem. Halelu Iah.
                        
                     
                     
                        WHat ſhall I] The firſt parte of the
Pſalme, in which hee taketh adviſe
concerning rendring of thankes vnto
God. In conſulting, he ſignifieth and
profeſſeth, that hee is not able to recompenſe
ſo many his great and manifold
benefites; as if he ſhould ſaye: It
lyeth not in my power to recompenſe
Iehova, his benefites are greater, then
that they are able to be recompenſed
by mee. Hee propoſeth therefore firſt,
that hee is not able to recompenſe Iehova;
that is, to recompenſe his benefites
toward him. Then he rendreth a
reaſon, from the greatneſſe of the benefites
of God. For the vnequal or ſurpaſſing
greatneſſe of the benefites of

God. For the vnequall or ſurpaſſing
greatneſſe of the benefites of God, being
conſiddered vppon the one parte,
and his vnhability & weakneſſe being
conſidered vpon the other part, being
overcome by the incomparable greatnes
of the benefites of God, not knowing
what to do, he asketh, and in a maner
he cryeth out, What ſhal I recompenſe
Iehova with?] As if he ſhould ſay;
It lyeth not in my power, to recompenſe
ſo many and ſo greate benefites
of God. Then the argument is taken,
not onely from the greatneſſe of the
benefites of GOD, but alſo from his
owne inhabilitie, weakneſſe, and littleneſſe
(to ſpeake ſo▪) In one worde, the
mater is thus, the reaſō is from thence,
that there is no correſpondence and
proportiō, betuixt him & his ſtrength,
and the benefites of God. For the dueties
whatſoever of man toward GOD,
are ſo farre away from that, that they
can deſire any thing at Gods hande,
that they are vnequall and vnable to

recompenſe thoſe benefites received
of God. What madneſſe is that then of
thoſe men, who thinke, that by their
workes, not onely they recompenſe
GOD, that is, recompenſe that benefites
beſtowed vppon them, but that
they alſo deſerue other new benefites,
eſpecially thoſe great benefites, & life
eternal? Wee learne againe here, that
ſuch is the liberty of God towarde vs,
which tarieth not vpon a mutuall and
equall recompenſation to be done by
vs, yea ſurely, which indeede it could
not doe. For this would declare that
GOD had neede of our good, but
GOD in himſelfe is moſt perfite, to
whoſe bleſſednes nothing can be added,
and from whoſe bleſſedneſſe, nothing
can be taken away. For that his
own glorie & happines was with him
before the foundations of the worlde
were laide. Glorifie mee, Father, ſayeth
the Sonne of GOD, with that glorye
which I had with thee, before the foundationes
of the Worlde were layde.
                        Iohn. 17▪ 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . And

the ſame Sonne of GOD againe ſpeaketh
in another place, I ſeeke not glorie
from man.
                        Iohn. 5. 14 The happines or miſery of
the creature, is placed in this, that it either
gloryfieth, or not glorifyeth the
owne Creator and Redeemer. Alſo,
this liberalitie of God, is ſet down before
vs to follow, that wee ſhould giue
mutually, looking from thence for nothing
againe. In the meane time, that is
not to be pretermitted by vs, that ſuch
is the greatneſſe and dignitie of the ſacrifice
of Chriſt, which for our ſake &
cauſe, not onely recompenſed all the
benefites of God, but alſo deſerveth at
Gods handes, not only theſe common
benefites, but alſo thoſe which are paſſing
great, righteouſneſſe and everlaſting
life. If it be asked in this place;
was not this pryde of mind, yea, once
to endevour to recompenſe God alike
for alike? I anſwere, Dauid endevored,
not ſo much to recompenſe GOD in
thoſe words, as by an humble mind he
profeſſed, what little or no ſtrength he

had, howe vnable hee was to recompenſe.
I will giue] Hitherto there hath
bene a douting & interrogation: Now
followeth the anſwere, and as it were,
a reſolution of the doubt; whereby he
concludeth, after conſultation and
douting, with his owne minde, to render
thanks againe vnto God: for this
is the thing that he is only able to doe,
yea, indeede he is not able to doe that
without the grace of God. Firſt therefore
hee declareth, that hee will giue
thanks vnto God: Then he bringeth
out the forme of the Thankſ-giving,
that is, the forme of the prayer, which
he is to vſe before God. Laſt he repeateth
and concludeth, the propoſition
of Thankſ-giving. The propoſition is
conteined in theſe words, I will giue openly,
&c.] To the end we may vnderſtande
this propoſition, it is neceſſarie,
that wee repeate ſome-what out of
the ſtorie, which is ſet down, 1. Chronicles
15. chap. Where after that, the
Arke was brought in into the citty of

Ieruſalem by David: we reade that he
did two things: To wit, the firſt, that
he offered burnt offering and ſacrifices
of thankſgiving vnto God. The other,
that hee made an holy feaſte vnto the
people, in a remembrance of the benefits
of God received. In this place therfore
he ſayth, that he wil do both theſe
things. For that ſpeech belongeth to a
feaſt, I will (ſayeth he) giue openly the receiued
cup of all ſalvation] That is, I will
make an holy feaſt vnto the people, in
memory of all my deliverances, and I
wil propone the cup to be drunken to
all men, in a perpetuall remembrance
of my deliverances. Then next, as concerning
the burnt offerings and the
ſacrifices of thankſgiving, he ſaith, that
hee will offer them in theſe wordes,
when he ſayeth, I will prayſe the name of
Iehoua, I wil paye my vowes vnto Iehova,
&c.] As concerning the vowes, this
onelie we are put in minde concerning
them, that they ſerue our weakneſſe.
Firſte, in perrilles they confirme

the faith of our deliverances;
For, fra once wee haue turned our
ſelfe by a vowe vnto GOD, then
wee conceiue a ſurer hope of deliverance.
Then they ſtirre vs vppe more
to Thankeſ giving, after that nowe
wee are delivered, for being bounde
by a vowe, we feele that there is a neceſſitie
layde vppon vs, to render
Thankes vnto GOD. In vowes wee
muſt chiefely beware, that they bee
not of thinges vnlawfull, and not permitted
by the worde of GOD, ſuch
as are at this daye; Thoſe of the Papiſtes
and Monkes, where-by they
ſerue not GOD, but tempt GOD;
they eaſe not their owne weakneſſe;
but laye a greater and weightier burthen
vppon it: Such a vowe amongſt
the reſte, was that concerning ſingleneſſe
of life. The thinge that occurreth
in this place to bee marked firſte,
is that, that 
                           •
                        ee firſt acknowledgeth,
howe that his dutie towarde GOD is
nothing, in regarde of the greatneſſe

of the benefites of GOD, then he deſcendeth
to giue Thankes; by which
method, wee are put in minde of the
acknowledging of our weakneſſe,
whereby wee are not ſufficient to recompenſe
the benefites of God, that
there preceedeth an earneſt giving of
thankes. For that man ſhall never ſeriouſly,
and from his heart, giue thanks
to any man for the benefite received,
which is led with an opinion of his
owne ſtrength, whereby in very deed
he may recompenſe the benefit. Whē
any puiſſant man hath received anye
benefite from a man leſſe mightie and
poor, he thinketh not the man worthy
of any thankſgiving: For hee thinketh
that hee is not onely able to recompenſe
the like, but alſo far more, when
it pleaſeth him: Contrariwiſe, anie
poore man having received a benefite
from a man more mightie, he is guilty
within himſelfe of his owne povertie,
that he hath no power to recompenſe
him againe, the thing that he onely is

able to doe, he doth, it in giving thanks
by worde. That Phariſee, who together
with the Publican, went vp into
the Temple, that hee might pray vnto
the Lord; he prayed indeede, according
to theſe words: I giue thee thanks,
that thou haſt not made me like other vnrighteous
men, robbers, adulter
                              •
                           rs, nor yet
alſo like this Publican: (for hee poynted
out the man with his finger, ſtanding
farre off from him) then he adjoyneth;
I faſt twiſe in the weeke, I paye my tenthes.
Not onely would he giue thankes for
the benefites received from God, but
hee would alſo enter in count and reckoning
with God, what hee had given
him, and received from him: Even indeede,
as if he had recompenſed thoſe
benefites that he had mentioned, hee
had gotten from God, with his duties
againe toward God. But what did hee
bring to paſſe by ſuch a thankſgiving?
what profited he thereby? Chriſt ſaith,
he returned home not iuſtified, which was
the earand wherefore hee came: That

all men learne, that in the meane time,
they are giving thanks vnto God, not
to put their confidence in any of their
owne deſervings, neither yet to vaunt
of their own righteouſnes before God;
as if they not onely by their righteouſnes
had recompenſed the benefites of
God toward them, but alſo had deſerved
ſomewhat at Gods hand. Wee are
againe taught here, that the acknowledging
of our own weaknes & poverty,
proceedeth frō diligent examining
and weighing of the benefits of God.
Alſo, from a conſideration of our gifts
whether they are able to anſwer to ſo
many & ſo great benefits of god: wherfore
ſo at laſt, we ſhal feel how vnable,
yea, that wear nothing, if we wil weigh
the benefits of God toward vs, and our
ſtrength & gifts together, having compared
them among themſelues. For it
will ſo come to paſſe at length, that having
diligently conſidered, that great
inequality of the benefits of God, & of
our ſtrength, we ſhal acknowledg how

many & how great in lacks there ar in
vs, & how vnable wee are to repay the
Lord again: Wilt thou therefore from
thine heart giue thanks vnto God, and
aſcriue ſolidly & altogether, al the glory
of his benefits to himſelf? acknowledge
how poore thou art in thy ſelf, &
how thou haſt nothing to recompenſe
the Lord withal: now wilt thou know
this thing? examin diligently & cōpare
the benefits of God, & thy giftes and
ſtrength among themſelues. And if we
ſhuld proceed after this order in giving
God thanks, ſurely wee would give all
the glory to God of his benefits, more
earneſtly from the hart, & more effectually,
then we vſe to do. Again, marke
here in Dauid, the token of a thankfull
minde: he voweth vnto God, & he repayeth
his vow. This thankfulneſſe in
promiſing, & the accompliſhment of
the promiſe, is not to bee reckoned among
the leaſt of Gods benefits. For it
proceedeth from the ſpeciall favour of
God, that wee are thankfull to GOD

for the benefite receiued. For wee are
almoſt all more prone after ſome meaſure,
earneſtly to craue Gods helpe, &
to liue vnto him, when we are preſſed
with any grievous perrill, then wee are
to giue thanks, and to paye our vowes
vnto God; after that already, the benefites
of God are beſtowed vppon vs.
Notwithſtanding, the Prophete warneth,
that thoſe two are to be joyned
together, with an inſeparable knot. Pſ.

                           •
                        0. 14. Sacrifice prayſe vnto God, and paye
thy vowes to the moſt High, and cal vppon
me in the time of anguiſh, I will deliver
thee, that thou mayeſt honour mee. Surely
I thinke that that man hath not ſought
any thing at God earneſtly, and with
that heart with which it became him,
who after that he now hath obteined
the ſame, is vnmindfull of the benefite
and of Thankſgiving. For that ſelfe
ſame ſpirite, which teacheth vs to praye
as is requiſite, and maketh interceſsion for
vs, with ſighes that cannot bee expreſſed,
teacheth vs to giue thanks vnto God

for the benefites received, & that with
ane certaine vnſpeakable joy & gladneſſe
of heart. Laſt, it is marked here,
that this was the higheſt degree of
thankſgiving, that David promiſeth
here vnto his God. For an exceeding
great benefite, requireth exceeding
great thankſgiving. Alſo, paſſing great
thanks are not theſe which are given
to God ſecretly, but thoſe that are given
publickly. The whole Church of
God looking on and hearing David,
if at any time he promiſeth or offereth
a chiefe duty vnto God, hee profeſſeth
that hee is not able to offer or to promiſe
a greater duty nor this, then that
he will prayſe God in the publick congregation
of his Church. For the publick
giving of Thanks is more then the
private. For while thou giveſt thankes
publickly vnto God, the whole people
ſayeth, Amen; And ſo they glorifie
God together with thee. From thence
it is, that God would haue his people
togather together in one, and to giue

him thanks together in the Church, to
the end, that the greater praiſe, honour
and glory may redounde vnto him.
Precious in the, &c.] This is that forme
of thankſgiving, which hee ſetteth before
him to bee followed. Firſt, he recommendeth
the Providence of God
toward his owne, aſwell in their life, as
in their death. Then hee confirmeth
this providence of God, from his own
experience. Firſt therefore, ſayeth hee,
the death is precious] Men do commonly
thinke, while they ſee the godly afflicted
and exerciſed with ſundrie calamities;
they thinke, I ſay, that God at
that time taketh no thought of them,
whether they liue or die. And from
thence it is, that the perſecutors themſelues
thinking, that God taketh a like
litle care of their life & death; they wax
the more fearce againſt thē, as againſt
as many vile and abject ſlaues. David
therefore oppoſeth, to the perverſe opinion
of men, in this place, this excellent
paſſage, precious in the ei
                              •
                           s of Iehoua]
                        
&c. Whereby hee ſignifieth, firſt, that
God many times, permitteth not his
owne to die, but delivereth them very
oft out of exceeding great dangers, &
reſcueth them as it were, out of the very
jawes of death. Then next, by this
paſſage he ſignifyeth, that if God at any
time ſuffereth his owne to die, that
commeth not paſſe, by Chaunce or
Fortune, but by the ſure purpoſe of
God. Pilate after this manner ſpake vnto
Chriſt, even as if God had taken no
reſolute adviſe concerning his life or
death. Knoweſt thou not (ſayeth he) that
I haue power to crucifie thee, yea, alſo power
to lowſe thee? Chriſt aunſwereth him:
Thou ſhouldeſt haue no power at all over
mee, vnleſſe it were given thee from aboue.
Thus much ſpeaketh Chriſte.
Thirdly, by this paſſage is ſignified,
that the croce & death of the godly it
ſelf, howſoeuer it be vile in the ſight of
men, notwithſtanding it is precious in
the eies of GOD. Laſte, this ſentence
admoniſheth, that after the godlie are

already dead and taken out of this life,
by the permiſſion of God, & violence
of the vngodly together; GOD ſuffereth
not their death, to ſlip out of his
remembrance at any time: For ſeeing
that is moſte true, that hee hath all the
teares of his owne, put vp in a bottle, as it
were, and in regiſter, howe many they
are; howe much more will he haue the
whole blood of the godly, yea, & every
particular drop alſo of their bloud
kept cloſe with him? Yea ſurely, before
ſo much as any one drop of the
blood of the godly ſhould periſh, hee
will command the earth it ſelfe, which
opening her owne mouth, the time it
was ſhed, received it and drank it in,
he will command▪ I ſay, the very earth
it ſelf to keep it in her womb as it were,
vnto that day of the Lords viſitation,
wherein he wil take a vengeance vpon
all them, whoſoever haue perſecuted
the godly in this life. After theſe foure
divers faſhions therefore, to ſpeake it
it ſummarlie, the death of the godlie

is pretious in the ſight of God: firſt, that
he ſuffereth not his own oft to periſh,
but delivereth them out of exceeding
great dangers. Then, if he permitteth
them to die, that is, not done raſhly, &
without a moſt weighty cauſe. Thirdly,
that the very death of the godly it
ſelfe, howſoever it ſeeme vile in the
ſight of the world; notwithſtanding, in
Gods ſight it is precious. Fourthly, that
continually the memory of the death
of the godly is alwaies freſh & recent.
Of theſe foure manners, that firſt is
chiefly to be vnderſtood in this place:
To wit, that for this cauſe the death of
Gods owne is precious in the eies of
God, he ſuffereth, in reſpect them, not
many times to die, but delivereth thē
out of extreame great daungers. But
whoſe death is precious in the eies of
Iehova? Even the death of thoſe, ſaith
he, whō he beareth at good wil. Therefore,
the loue and favour of God is the
cauſe, wherefore the death of his own
is precious; & thoſe whom he loveth,

he keepeth them aliue, neither doth he
at any time ſuffer them to die raſhlie.
Any would ſuddenly wounder at the
firſt ſhew, why God hath not only permitted,
but alſo hath commanded oft,
that ſo many Nations ſhould bee deſtroyed,
no choiſe being had of men,
wemen, and infants; which thing wee
reade in the booke of Ioſhua come to
paſſe, vpon the people which were in
the Land of Canaan. When I was occupied
in ſeeking out ſomewhat more
profoundly, the cauſe of this ſo greate
a ſeveritie; this firſt came in my minde,
becauſe God favored not thoſe Nations,
but contrariwiſe hee hated them;
whereby it came to paſſe, that their
death was not precious in the eies of
God. If their precious death, or not
precious death. dependeth vppon the
loue or hatred of God; how bleſſed are
thoſe, whome the Lord loveth, aſwell
in life as in death? I beſeech thee Iehoua]
Hee confirmeth Gods providence toward
his own, by his own experience:

as if he ſhould ſaye, haſt thou not, I beſeech
thee ô Iehova lowſed my bondes] For
he ſpeaketh of himſelfe, as if hee were
drawen bound hand and foote to execution.
For he meaneth, that hee was
brought to an extreame daunger of loſing
his life, when by Iehova he was delivered.
He ſubjoyneth the cauſe of his
deliverance, to wit, that he was the ſervant
of Iehova, & for this cauſe a ſervant,
becauſe he was the ſon of a hand
maid: for the ſonnes of the handmaid,
are therewithall, according to the law,
ſervants; When he ſayeth that he is the
ſonne of an hand maid, hee ſignifieth,
that he is not a ſtranger & a ſervant cō
                        ming
from far, but a houſhold ſervant
among the reſt of Gods domeſtickes.
Hee meaneth then, that he is not a man
that is a ſtranger & a ſojorning ſervant
in the houſe of god, but that he himſelf
hath ſome right & title in the houſe of
god, either frō his parents, which befor
him wer cōpriſed within the covenant
of God: for that is no cōmon benefit of

that we are borne as it were, of the domeſticques
and confederates of God.
And ſurely the affection of Davids
mind, vttereth the ſelfe clearely in this
gradation of words as it were: For the
wordes ſhew, that the affection of the
minde, approched vnto God more &
more: For firſt he ſayeth, I am thy ſervant:
This is the firſt degree or ſteppe
of the words, and the firſt approching
of the ſoule vnto God: Then he repeapeth
the felfe ſame thing, and he ſaith,
I am thy ſervant] This is the ſeconde
ſtep of the wordes, and the ſecond approching
of his ſoule vnto God: Then
he ſayeth in the third place, I am the
ſonne of thine hand-maid.] This is the
third ſtep of the words, and chief ſigne
of his exceeding great and third drawing
neere vnto God. For while he ſpeaketh
this laſt, hee coupleth himſelfe altogether
with GOD, and he cleaveth
ſtraitly vnto him; and ſo for this cauſe
he becommeth bleſſed: For our happineſſe
conſiſteth in that communion

and fellowſhip with God. Thou feeſt
therefore, that thing in this place; firſt,
from whence it proceedeth, that hee
publickly recōmendeth, with ſo great
a confidence of mind, that providence
of God toward his owne: Surely it
commeth from that his owne experience,
and of the particular providence
of God toward him ſelfe. For no man
can prayſe generally, the providence
and mercy of God toward his owne
Church, except he hath in particular,
felt the ſame in experience himſelfe:
Certainly that ſaying would haue bin
but coldly ſpoken by Paule, To witte,
that Chriſt came into the World to ſaue ſinners,
vnleſſe that he himſelfe had firſte
felt in experience, both the miſerie of
ſinne, and the mercy of God; and for
this cauſe he ſubjoyneth theſe words,
Of whom (to witte of ſinners) I am the
chiefeſt, to the end he might conclude
in his own conſcience, that he himſelf
was ſaved by Chriſt. Therefore, that
generall faith of the Papiſts is vnmeet

to recommend the providence & grace
of God toward his owne Church. For
never did I ever yet eſteeme at anie
time, any Papiſt to be a meet Preacher;
or publiſher of the benefits of God towarde
his Church; who is not able to
bring out any thing from his own feeling
or experience; who is not able to
ſay that, of the which before we haue
ſpoken in this Pſalme, I beleeued, and
therefore did I ſpeake. Marke ſecondly:
There ar men whom this or that kinde
of death doth greatly vexe and torment,
as violent death, as filthie, ſuddaine,
exquiſite, and cruell deathes;
concerning which ſortes of death indeede,
they do no ſooner meditate vpon,
but preſently they are ſtriken with
a horrible fear: but this care & thought
which is cōcerning the maner of death
is prepoſterous: Why ſhould not that,
much rather be takē thought of by vs,
that we may feel our ſelues beloved of
God: for if we be grounded & rooted
in that loue of God, our death of whatſoever

ſort it be, ſhal be precious in the
eies of God, & we ſhalbe more then conquerors
in very death it ſelf: obſerue thirdly,
Dauid out of all queſtion,Rom. 8. 
                              •
                           7 attayned to
that hid loue of God, which was in the
hart of God; & he obtained ſome ſenſe
from the effect of ſome ſpecial & notable
deliverance; he learned alſo that he
was beloved of Iehova, frō that, becaus
his death was precious in the eies of Iehova.
This is that our onely comforte
in life and death, that wee are not our
own, but our moſt faithfull Lordes, Ieſus
Chriſts, and that we are the Lords,
and that hee taketh a care of vs▪ From
thence alſo thoſe godlie auncient men
chiefly learned the ſame thing, becauſe
they felt God preſent with them in very
deede in whatſoever perrilles. Amongſt
the reſt, David is to be nūbred,
who as he was laid open to many dangers,
ſo he felt exceeding many deliverāces,
& he perſwaded himſelf, that god
had a ſpeciall care of him, & in the ſelfe
ſame place, in which hee ſaide that the

death intended againſt the godly, was
Precious in the eies of Iehova, he without
all doubt, meaneth that this was
a document of the favour & care of God
toward vs, in reſpect that our death is
precious in his ſight. Laſt marke: At
what time doth David finally glory in
that, that he is the ſonne of the handemaid
of GOD; that is, borne of that
mother, which was in the covenante
with GOD, ſurely even then, when
therewith, he acknowledgeth that hee
is the ſervant of God. It is profitable in
deede to be borne of the Saints, and of
thoſe Parents who are in Gods covenant,
ſo long as thou cōtinueſt in that
covenant with God, and art Gods ſervant;
for ſo that promiſe of GOD, of
long & durable mercy, which is made
in the ſeconde command, belongeth
vnto thee; I will haue mercy (ſayeth hee)
vpon the thouſand generation of thoſe that
loue me, and keepe my commandements.
But if thou make thy ſelfe vnworthie,
both of thy parents, & likewiſe of that

covenant of God, that ſhall nothing
profite thee, that thou art borne of the
Saintes & of parents, that are confederat
with God. It profiteth thee nothing
that thou art able to ſet downe thy pedigree,
in a certaine continuall race, even
vnto Abraham himſelf, with whom
the firſt covenante of God was made.
I will ſacrifice to thee] He repeateth that
promiſe of thankſgiving, which was
ſet down before in the 13. verſe. Of the
which, becauſe we haue ſpoken ſufficiently
ynough there, we ſhall be the
ſhorter; therefore in opening of the
ſame: Only we ſhall adde this much to
the things that wee haue ſpoken, that
fra once that ſtupiditie of our mind is
ſhaken off, and fra once we beginne to
prayſe God, and to giue him thankes,
we are ſo carryed away, by that Spirit
of GOD, that wee can ſcarce make an
end of the prayſing of God. We are in
deede, but very ſlowlie ſtirred vppe to
prayſe God; but being once ſtirred vp,
wee take ſuch delight in prayer for a

time, and through that joye, our heart
doth boyle, ſo that in a manner it is altogether
powred out into the prayſes
of our God. Wherfore to the end that
we may praiſe God, this deadly ſopour
of our mind is perpetually to be ſhakē
off, and wee muſt endeavour that at no
time, ſo far as it is poſſible, this our hart
be altogether voyde of feeling, either
of our miſery, or of the mercy of God
in Ieſus Chriſt: for of this two-folde
feeling, there aryſeth a two-fold affection
of the hart, that is, both of ſorrow
and of joye: From ſorrow ſpeciallie ariſe
petitions, & from joy, ariſe giving
of thanks, which ar done in Chriſt Ieſus:
To whom with the Father & holy
Spirite, be all glory, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the CXXX. Pſalme.
                  It is a ſong of Doctrine, written by ſome one of the
Prophets. It is compoſed of three partes: Firſt there is
ſet downe a memoriall of prayers, which hee had at
ſometime conceiued, when he vvas in an extreame great
danger, vnto the 5. verſe. Then making a tran
                        •
                     iſion, he
profeſſeth that he hath yet his hope in the word of Iehova,
and that he dependeth vpon him▪ vnto the 7. verſ.
Thirdly, hee recommendeth the ſame hope to Iſraell,
that is, to the whole Church, vnto the ende of the
Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  The CXXX. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 A moſt excellent ſong. Out of the
deapthes I cryed vnto thee, ô Iehova, ſaying:
                           2 O lord, harken to my voyce, let thine eares
be attent to the voice of my deprecations.
                           3 If then ſhalt ſtraightly marke iniquities,
ô Iah, Lord, Who could be able to
ſtand?
                           4 But with thee is forgiuenes, that thou
maiſt be reverently worſhipped.
                        
                     
                     
                        OVt of the deapthes] The firſt parte
of the Pſalme: The depths in this
place are moſt deepe and terrible dangers,
for ſo are they called. The metaphore,
or borrowed ſpeech, is taken
from waters, in which men are almoſt
drowned. Looke the Pſal. 69. 2. 3. &c.
This is out of all doubt, that while any
man ſticketh in moſt deepe perrilles,
then hee powreth out from a moſte
hollowe and deepe hearte, fervente
prayers, yea, hee cryeth vppon the
Lorde mightelie: For ſo the Prophet

ſpeaketh of himſelfe here: Out of the
deapthes, I cryed vnto thee, ô Iehova. Thou
ſeeſt then, at what time the godly are
exceeding grievouſlie afflicted, & oppreſſed
with the hande of God, at that
ſame time, they vſe earneſtly to deale
with their God, and to haue their refuge
chiefely vnto him, with prayers
and ſupplications. For (that the trueth
of this propoſition may be manifeſte)
afflictiones worke in our hearts, firſte
ſome feeling of our ſinne and miſery.
For vnleſſe God exerciſed his owne,
after ſuch waies as he knoweth moſte
meete, ſurely they would never come
to a ſenſe of this common miſerie of
their nature: then next, when once the
heart is prepared with ſome feeling of
the owne miſery; Then the ſpirite of
God, which they call the Spirite of adoption
toucheth the ſame, with ſome
ſenſe of the mercy of God: And to
ſpeake with the Apoſtle,Rom▪ 5, 
                        The loue of
God is powred out into our hearts, by the
holy Spirite which is given vnto vs, yea,

and that by Ieſus Chriſt, and by his
death. For ſurely the holy Spirite toucheth
not our hart, with any ſenſe of
the mercy of God in Chriſt Ieſus, vnleſſe
firſt they be prepared with ſome
feeling of miſery. And then, after that
the holy Spirite hath powred out that
loue of God into our hearts, then wee
conceiue in our minds that cōfidence,
whereby wee draw neere and incalles
vpon him: For this is the Spirit which
the Apoſtle calleth, The Spirite of adoption,
by whom, we cry, Abba, Father. We
crye, ſayeth hee, becauſe the Spirite of
adoption, through the feeling of the
loue, worketh that confidence in the
heart, that the heart being firſt enlarged;
then nexte the mouth, wee may
call God Father, with a free and ſhrill
voyce. Therefore, fra once the Spirite
hath indewed our ſoules with a feiling
of the loue of God, we goe freely vnto
God, and praye vnto him; For except
there bee firſt ſome feeling of the loue
of God, certainely there can be no calling

vppon his name. Then thou ſeeſt
that that is true, which we ſpake at the
beginning: to wit, the more grievouſlie
the godly ar afflicted, in that reſpect
the more fervent are their prayers. We
becaus we ar not drowned yet in thoſe
deapths, & therfore are not much touched
with that ſenſe, with which wee
ought long ago to haue bene touched,
either of our miſery, or of the mercy of
God, & praye not ſo earneſtly as it becommeth
vs: It were much better indeed
to be afflicted with praiers, thē to
be in proſperity without praiers. Saying
ô Lord] Hitherto he hath declared, that
in daunger hee calleth vppon GOD;
now hee ſetteth downe that forme of
prayer, which hee then vſed in calling
vpon God. Heare (ſayeth hee) O Lorde
my voyce.] Then hee doubleth the
ſame petition. Let thine eares bee attent
to the, &c.] This doubling and iterating
of the ſame petition, proceedeth
from a vehement, and two-folde
affection, as it were of the minde,

and grace of the holye Spirite: For
excepte, by the grace of the Spirite,
the affection bee inlarged, ſurely the
mouth cannot bee inlarged. For it is
the Spirite by whome wee crye, as it
were, with a mouthe ſtretched out
wide. For howe oft wee double our
crye, ſo oft the feeling of the Spirite
is doubted in our hearte: The firſte
crye, proceedeth from the firſte feeling
of the Spirite. The ſecond, from
the nexte. The thirde from the thirde
and ſo forth. For no man calleth Ieſus the
Lorde, but by the holie Spirite. 1. Cor. 12.
And we know not what to pray as it becommeth
vs, becauſe it is the Spirite vvhich
maketh interceſsion for vs with ſighes that
cannot bee expreſſed. Rom. 8. For this
cauſe, I ſpeak thoſe things, that the natural
man may know, that it lieth not in
his power, to pronounce one good
word, except firſt of a natural mā, he be
come a ſpiritual man. But what is that
that moveth him to cal
                           •
                         ſo erneſtly vpō
God, to this end, that he would len his

eare vnto his prayers? Thought the that
God was deafe? Theſe which are oppreſſed
with Gods hande, they thinke
that God is ſo eſtranged from them,
that he nether ſeeth, nor heareth them,
neither that hee remembreth them at
all. From whence ariſe thoſe ſo lamentable
voyces, Heare, ô Lord, See ô Lord,
Remember ô Lord, which occurre every
where in the Pſalmes: But are they
which call vpon God from their hart,
and earneſtly deſire his preſence; are
thoſe, I ſaye, in the meane time altogether
deſtitute of the preſence of God?
Would they, I praye you, bee able to
ſeeke the preſence of God, vnles ſurely
they had ſome preſence of GOD,
through his own holy Spirite. Are we
able without God, to thirſt after God.
What require we therefore, which we
now haue? For this cauſe we doe this,
that we may the more enjoy and poſſeſſe
God. For prayers bring that to
paſſe, that God draweth neere vnto vs,
and they are the increaſe of mercy &

grace, for it is not poſſible, that thoſe
ſighes which are not ſo much oures, as
the holy Spirits in our heart, and the
cryes of that ſame Spirit in our mouth
can paſſe away in vaine. For GOD
knoweth what the meaning of his Spirit
is, And bleſſed are thoſe that hunger
and thirſt for righteouſneſſe, for they ſhall
be ſatisfied. And we find that in experience
in our ſelues, that wee no ſooner
ſigh vnto GOD, but our ſoules are
watered over with a certaine vnſpeakable
ioye: ſo that we truely feele that
thing, to wit, that the preſence of God,
through the Spirit of heavines and invtterable
ſighes, cauſeth the preſence
of God through the Spirit of ioy and
vnſpeaktble gladnes. If thou ſhalt] The
preventing of an objection: For this
might haue bene objected either by
God, or by his own conſcience. Thou
art a ſinner, Then how ſhall I heare
thee? Why doe I not rather conſume
thee in my wrath? He anſwereth, firſt
by a conceſſion, If thou ſhalt ſtraightly

mark iniquities, O God, ſurely I grant
that no mortall man can ſtande in thy
ſight, but of neceſſitie, he muſt be conſumed
be thy wrath. Then next he anſwereth
by an correction: But vvith
the is forgiueneſſe;] As if hee ſhould
ſaye; Thou markeſt not our iniquities
according to thy juſtice, but of thine
infinite mercy, thou forgaveſt them al,
in thy Son Ieſus chriſt. For the Fathers
indeede, and thoſe auncient Prophets,
felt not at any time, their ſinnes to bee
forgiven them, through the mercie of
GOD, but by that mercy in Chriſte,
who hath promiſed vnto them, whom
they ſawe as it were a farre off, and in
whome alone the wrath of God was
pacified, even ſince the beginning of
the world, to the ende, that ſome place
might be left for his mercy. For vnles,
firſt his juſtice be ſatisfied, ſurely there
is no place for the mercy of God. Alſo,
our eſtate, in that reſpect is the more
bleſſed, then that eſtate of the Fathers,
becaus that ſacrifice of Chriſt, is preſēt
& before our eies, which they behold

a far off, & in plain words may ſay, God
in chriſt is merciful, & hath forgiven al
our ſins, which they no way ar able to
ſay. We learne alſo in this place this, by
the example of the Prophete, that the
conſcience of ſinne, which wee call
the trouble or evill of the conſcience,
is an impedimēt that we pray not friely
vnto God: Yea, we finde alſo the ſame
in experience, that an evil conſcience,
vnles it be clenſed, vtterly ſtoppeth vp
to vs, al entry vnto God. For that is the
thing which the Apoſtle ſayeth, Let vs
draw neere with our harts, purged from an
evill conſcience. Wherefore no entrie
is patent vnto God, except the heartes
bee firſt purged, from an evill conſcience.
Alſo, that thing which we ſpake
concerning the conſcience of ſinne,
we affirme the ſame of ſinne the ſelfe,
which if it be not altogether remooved
out of the ſight of GOD; ſurelie
God ſhal not ſo much indeed, as count
vs worthie of his ſight: And this is
that which is ſpoken in this place,

                        If thou ſhalt ſtraightly marke iniquities, ô
Iah, Lord, who can be able to ſtand] Then,
to comprehēd in one word the things
we haue ſpoken. The conſcience of
ſinne, which forbiddeth vs to look vpon
our God: And that is ſinne, which
hindreth God to looke and behold vs
that are miſerable. And we learne the
remedie of this evill, out of the ſecond
part of the aunſwere: But with thee is
forgiueneſſe] Wherefore this is the onely
remedie, that wee haue our refuge
vnto the mercy of God, yea, and that
by a ſimple and cleare confeſſion of
our ſinne. For no man ever yet compeared
before God, but as a certaine
guiltie perſon, craving the mercie of
God earneſtly, with a confeſſion of his
ſinnes: But in this the whole difficultie
conſiſteth, how we may come to that
throne of grace. For ſeeing we cannot
pearſe, but as it were, through the middeſt
of juſtice, as it were, through a certaine
fire, and ſlamming wall vnto the
mercy of God, and to that throne of

grace, ſurely it is requiſite, that he that
would draw neere to that throne of
grace, bee enarmed and prepared againſt
that wrath and righteouſneſſe
of GOD, which ſuffereth nothing,
which hath, yea, and it were never ſo
little vncleanneſſe in it, to approche
neere to that inviolable majeſtie. Now
we cannot be armed againſt the heate
of that fire, with any other thing, then
with the alone righteouſneſſe and ſatisfaction
of Ieſus Chriſt. Wherefore,
whoſoever would draw neere to the
throne of grace, and breake through
the middeſt of that juſtice and wrath
of God, of neceſſitie that man muſt be
found to be in Ieſus Chriſt, and that he
be purged by that bloud offered by his euerlaſting
ſpirit, from his dead workes. Heb. 9.
Then, after he is cōmed to the throne
of grace, by the faith of Chriſt, then is
that paſſing ſweete voice of forgivenes
and iuſtification heard. That thou mayeſt]
This is the ende of the mercy and
forgiueneſſe of GOD, his worſhip

and reverence. For no man ever at any
time reverently worſhipped God; but
he, to whom his ſinnes were forgiven
through the mercy of God, that is, but
to him who felt that benefite of the
forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes. For no man
gloryfieth God, vnleſſe hee himſelfe
firſt be glorified of God; alſo, no man
is glorified, but hee who is already juſtified.
Wherefore the firſt effecte of
forgiueneſſe, or pardoning of ſinnes,
is ſanctification, or our glorifying. And
we, when we are already glorified, we
glorifie our GOD, not that hee hath
neede of any of our glorifying, which
commeth from vs, ſeeing his glory is
perfite in the ſelfe: But becauſe our
duty requireth the ſame, yea, and that
for our owne weill. For in this our
happineſſe conſiſteth, not that wee
our ſelues ſhould be gloryfied, but
that we ſhould rather glorifie for euer
our God. For to this end, as we are created
and redeemed.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           5 I haue waited on Iehova, my ſoule hath
waited: yea, I haue an expectation in his
word.
                           6 My ſoule is more diligent toward the
Lord, then of the watches toward the morning,
watching euen to the morning time.
                        
                     
                     
                        I Haue waited] The ſecond part of the
Pſalme, in which, by a compariſon
made of his owne deed, and of his bypaſt
expectation, hee propoſeth, and
profeſſeth that hee himſelfe yet had
his expectation in the worde of God,
becauſe, to witte, from a patient awaiting,
hee had experience of the mercie
and deliverance of God. For patience
cauſeth experience, experience cauſeth
hope of a greater deliverance and
mercy, then wee haue ever found at anie
time in experience before. For
the experience of the Temporall deliverance,
cauſeth a hope of the everlaſting
deliverance; and that hope ſhall
never at any time mak vs aſhamed. For
we ſhall obtain fargreater things in that
other life, then wee could haue hoped

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
for in this preſent life, looke concerning
theſe thinges, the 5. chap. of the
Epiſt. to the Rom. But let vs weigh
the words ſomewhat more diligently,
I haue waited on Iehova] (ſayeth hee)
Then he ſubjoyneth, My ſoule hath
waited] As if he ſhould ſay, Not onely
with the eie, but with the minde moſte
entirely, I haue waited for Iehova. For
it is the earneſt deſire of the minde
which maketh God preſente vnto vs.
Alſo, concerning the expectation of
the godly, looke Paule in the 8. chap. to
the Rom. We (ſayeth hee) that haue the
firſt fruites of the Spirit ſigh, looking for our
adoption. Thou ſeeſt that the awaiting
for the godly, is with ſighes which proceede
from the heart: for thereafter, in
the ſame chap. he declareth how much
we profite in Gods ſight by theſe inutterable
ſighes: For God (ſayeth hee)
knoweth what is the meaning of the Spirit,
That is, thoſe ſighes which proceede
from our heart, they preſently touche
the minde of God with a feeling, becauſe

it is the Spirit of God himſelfe,
which ſtirreth vp thoſe ſighes in our
heart. Wee may be touched indeede
with a deſire of any man which is abſent,
when in the meane time hee is no
waies touched with that deſire of ours
neither yet doe our ſighes come into
his minde; for wee ſigh not by his ſpirit,
but by our owne ſpirit. But wee no
ſooner indeed ſigh vnto God, but hee
is moved with our ſighes. For all theſe
ſighes proceede from his ſpirit. Nowe
this vnſpeakable joye, putteth vs in
minde, that he commoved with theſe
ſighes of oures, which is felt at once,
with thoſe inutterable ſighes; for this
vnſpeakable joy can proceede from no
thing els, then from ſome preſence of
God. Yea, I haue] He ſayth that he hath
an expectation in the worde of God,
becauſe, ſo long as we walke by faith, and
not by ſight, wee depende vpon the worde
of God, and wee beholde God as it were in
the mirrour of the Worde, and not face to
face and preſently. My ſoule, &c.]
                        
He maketh his expectation cleare, by a
leſſer compariſon, of thoſe who watch
and that indeed are occupied in continuall
watchings; to whome, no man
coms in their roome, but they muſte
watch the whole night long. Learne
here, with how great a care, they waite
vpon the Lord, & depend vppon him;
who haue once taſted howe gracious
the Lord is: For they are not ſo much
forced by any neceſſity to that, as
they are allured by I knowe not what
ſweetnes. Marke in this place, what the
eſtate of the godly in this life is, they ar
continually occupyed in watching,
looking for the comming of the Lord.
For this preſent worlde, is a perpetuall
long laſting night vnto them, if it bee
compared with that world to come, in
the ſecond comming of Chriſt, & with
that morning which is ſo called. Pſal.
49. 15. in which, to witte, that Sunne of
righteouſneſſe, Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall ariſe.
Mal. 3. 20. Alſo, I graunt indeede, that
this worlde is a bright daye, if it bee

compared with that, which preceeded
the firſt comming of Chriſte. From
whence it is ſaid, The night (ſaieth he) is
gone
                        Ro. 15. 
                              •
                           1. 1. Theſ 5. 5. 
                        and the day approaches and, We are all
ſaid to be the children of the light, and the
children of God: but this preſēt world being
compared with the world to come,
and with that incomprehenſible light,
which then ſhall be ſeene; ſurely not
without cauſe, it ſhall rather haue the
name of a Night, then of a Day. Alſo,
a watch-man is not ſo much bounde to
watch, & be occupied cōtinually, vnto
the morning time, then every one of vs
is bound to driue over this whol night
in watching. Of this ariſeth that ſaying
of Chriſt to his Diſciples, Watch, for
yee know not the houre in which the Lorde
wil come.
                        Math. 24. 42. And even as thoſe who watch
in the night, and are thus occupyed
are wearied and faſhed; And therefore
they long for nothing ſo much,
as for the Morning time, at which
time, they may refreſhe themſelues
with ſleepe. So wee that watch vnto

that mourning time, in which Chriſt
ſhall come: Wee are wearied and oppreſſed
with the burthen of our ſinne
and miſery, ſo that many a time we are
tyred of this life, and from thence aryſeth,
that vehemente deſire of that
morning time, in which Chriſte will
come: VVho as ſone as he commeth,
then indeede we ſhall enjoy that everlaſting
reſt. And as the Pſal. 23. 61. ſpeaketh,
We ſhall be at reſte in the houſe of Iehova,
ſo long as the time ſhall be of length
and continue. I ſpeake of thoſe who
haue watched in this life. For they
who haue done nothing but ſleeped
in this life, theſe ſhall be tormenetd
with everlaſting watching and paines.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           7 Let Iſraell haue an expectation in Iehova:
for with Iehova is loving kindneſſe,
and exceeding much redemption is with
him.
                           4 And he himſelfe will redeeme Iſrael
from all his iniquities.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        LEt Iſraell] The thirde parte of the
Pſalme, in which he recommedeth
to Iſrael, that is, to the whole Church,
that ſelfe ſame awaiting that hee hath.
For hee, who by awayting, hath once
felt in experience that mercy of God,
not onely he himſelf waiteth for God
in time to come; but he will haue all
men together with him, to waite for
Iehova, that all together may feele in
experience, the ſelfe ſame mercy. For
he willeth that all men, if it be poſſible
to be done, feele that loving kindneſſe
of the Lord which he hath felt. Alſo,
this chiefely is meete for Iſraell to bee
done, that is, for the Church of God.
But that, which the Prophet reſpecteth
as the laſt end, is the glory of God
himſelf. For every faithful man willeth
that many obteine mercy, to this end,
that many may glorifie GOD, and is
carefull of mans ſalvation, that the glory
of Gods mercy may redounde to
himſelfe. For God, the moo putteth
their truſt in him, in that reſpect hee is

the more glorified. For with Iehova]
Hee putteth Iſraell in minde to waite
vppon Iehova, from his gratious nature.
Hee demonſtrateth not to Iſraell,
a God, either mightie, righteous,
or wiſe; but a mercifull and a gracious
GOD. VVherefore doth hee ſo?
doe not the remanent properties in
GOD, as almightineſſe, righteouſnes,
wiſedome, trueth, &c. Doe not theſe,
I ſaye, purchaſe vnto him the mindes
and faith of men? I graunt all theſe
thinges, that in their owne place indeede,
they purchaſe the faith of men;
but ſeeing miſerable men and ſinners,
haue chiefelie neede of the mercie:
Surely it is the mercie of God, which
men chiefely require, and it is the firſt
object of faith. Alſo, when once faith
hes apprehended the mercy of God in
Chriſt: then the other things which ar
in God, allure the ſame faith to themſelues:
But without the feeling of the
mercy of God, all other things, are rather
a terrour vnto vs, then a conſolation.

Firſt therefore, and properly,
faith is carried toward God as the object,
in ſo farre as he is mercifull, and
the more wee ſeeke out in GOD that
his infinite mercie, ſo much the more,
doe we beleeue him, For what other
thing, I praye you, is the growth of
faith, but an increaſe of the knowledge
of the mercy of God: wherefore to the
end that faith may grow, it is continually
requiſite, that wee ſearch out the
mercy of God in Chriſt, which ſurely
we ſhal do without any danger of curioſitie,
ſeeing the other properties
which are in God, they are not able to
beare a curious ſearching out. Paule amongſt
other things, wiſheth this to the
Epheſians, that being rooted in loue, they
may be able to comprehend with al Saintes,
                        Epheſ 3. 
                              •
                           7. 18. 19.
                        what is the breadeth and length, and depth
and height: and to know the loue of Chriſt,
which paſſeth all knowledge: But in no
place we reade, that he wiſhed, that any
man by knowledge ſhould attaine
to that infinite power, wiſdom, &c. of

God, to wit, becauſe, it permitteth not
ſo much to vs to knowe thoſe thinges,
then to know how greatly god loveth
vs in Chriſt his ſonne. Therfore hee is
ſaid in the 5. chap. to the Romanes, to
powre out loue in our harts: But we reade
not of the Spirite, that he powreth out
power, wiſdome, &c. (which are together
in God) into our hearts, that is,
that he toucheth not our mindes with
ſo aboundant a feling of them. Wherefore,
to the ende wee may beleeue in
God, and may haue our hope in him,
his loving kindneſſe and mercie in
Chriſt, is chiefely to be knowen of vs;
wherof the Prophet was not ignorant
of in this place, ſeeing he maketh mention
ſpecially of his loving kindneſſe,
to the end hee might mooue Iſraell to
hope in God. And exceeding] In words
hee amplifyeth, the ſelfe ſame loving
kindneſſe of God: For no man, together
and at one time, could be able at
any time, by any words whatſoever, to
cōprehend the whole mercy of God:

For there is ever ſomething reſting
beſide that which hath bene ſpoken,
that may be vttered thereof, ſuch is the
incomprehenſible greatneſſe of the
ſame; and thoſe who haue once felt in
their mind, any meane portion thereof,
they indeede are not at any time able
ſufficiently to expreſſe in wordes
that portion, howe little ſoever it bee.
For this ſpiritual feeling in the hearts,
whether it be of ioye or of ſorrowe, is
vnſpeakable, from thence they are
called, ſighes that cannot be expreſſed, and
ane inutterable
                              •
                            ioye.
                        Rom. 
                              •
                           . How much more
therefore,1. Pet. 1
                              •
                           
                         ſhall that whole mercy of
God, not together, and at one time be
expreſſed by words: ſeeing that words
are not able ſufficiently to expreſſe,
yea, and it were no more but that little
apprehenſion thereof, which is in
our hearts. For theſe words are not exceſſiue
and hyperbolicque, whereby
godly men haue endevoured to expreſſe
that mercy of GOD, even as
thought, the words were greater then

the matters themſelves, which thing,
whoſoever think, ſurely they appeare
to me indeed, never to haue comprehended
in their minde, the mercy of
God in Chriſt. And he himſelfe] This
is the other argument, whereby, promiſing
aſſuredly, redemption to the
Church, from her ſinnes; he applyeth
that loving kindneſſe of God, and manifolde
redemption, which hee hath
publiſhed, more neere vnto them. For
it is not ſufficient ynough for faith,
that any man in generall ſhall preach &
recommend onely the mercy of God,
vnles it promiſe, that is apply aſſuredly
the ſame to miſerable men: for the promiſes
are ſo many applyings, of the
mercy of God. And from thence it
proceedeth, that the Scriptures are ful
of promiſes, without the which, that
full perſwaſion of faith, & ſpiritual cō
                        fidence
cannot be. For this generall
doctrine, cōcerning the mercy of God,
doth this to vs, that not ſo much indeede,
we in effect beleeue, as that our

heartes, may be prepared vnto faith.
This is to be obſerved, that he ſaith, that
God wil redeeme Iſrael, not frō perſecutions,
not frō outward troubles whatſoever;
but from al her ſins. For the redēption
of the Church, is not ſene in that,
that ſhe is delivered from the troubles
of this world, as in that, that ſhe ſhal be
delivered from her ſins. For ſin is the
moſt deadly enemy of al, & is the cauſe
of all the reſte of the enemies of the
church: becauſe, al afflictions, are both
frō ſin, & likewiſe tende to the mortifying
of ſin. For it is certaine, if there
were not any ſin in the Church, there
ſhuld be no perſecutiō of the church:
and every one of the godly, ſighs more
vnder the burthen of ſin, then vnder any
other weight of afflictions whatſoever.
Chriſt himſelfe alſo dyed, to redeeme
vs, not ſo much from al afflictions,
as from ſinne and that everlaſting
death. Finally, when at that daye, wee
ſhall be ſet free, into the liberty of the
ſonnes of God, being fully redeemed,

we ſhall glory, not ſo much, that we ar
redeemed from all other afflictions,
then that wee are fully delivered from
ſin, as it appeareth out of that ſaying
of Paule, O death, where is thy victory? O
graue, where is thy brode? And the brode
of death is ſinne,1 Cor. 15. 33. but the lawe is the
power of ſinne. Behold, we ſhall glory
in that daye, that wee are delivered
from the brode of death, and that by
Chriſt Ieſus our Lord: To whom be
all glory, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The Argument of the CXXXVII. Pſalme.
                  A Pſalme it is of a mixt kinde, Of doctrine and of
prayer, It is not manifeſt by whome it was written▪ Yet
it is likely that it was written by ſome Prophet, & that
in name of the whole Church of the Iewes, being nowe
in captivitie. It appeareth alſo, to be written at that
time, when the people were carryed away into Babylonia,
yea, even then when they were in the very journey,
as it may be gathered out of the firſt verſe. Nowe it
is compoſed of two parts. The firſt is, an heavy complaint
of the Church, vnto the 7. verſe. The other, is an
heavie imprecation, and a propheticall denunciation,
againſt the enemies of the Church, vnto the end of the
Pſalme.
               
               
                  
                  The CXXXVII. Pſalme.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 By the rivers of Babylonia, we ſitting
there, we wept very much, when we remembred
of Tzijon.
                           2 In it we hanged vp our harpes vppon
the willowes:
                           3 Although in that place theſe vvho
had led vs away captiues and had buried vs
together, required of vs ioyfull ſonges, ſaying:
ſing to vs of the ſonges of Tzijon.
                           4 How could we haue ſoong the, ſonge of
Iehoua in the land of ſtrangers?
                           5 If I forget thee, O Ieruſalem, let my
right hand forget the ſelfe.
                           6 Let my tongue cleaue to the roofe of
my mouth, if I remember thee not, if I call
not backe vnto Ieruſchalaim the heade of
my ioy.
                        
                     
                     
                        BY the rivers] The firſt parte of the
Pſalme; The complainte, in which
there is firſt, the propoſition of the
complaint, when he ſayeth, wee weept
very much] That is, we were extreame
ſorrowfull: For the Spirit maketh interceſsion
for the church, with ſighes that cannot

be expreſſed Ro. 8. ſo to ſpeak with the
Apoſtle: And it cannot be ſufficientlie
ſpoken, with how great heavineſſe, the
Church is accuſtomed to be moved,
when ſhe is humbled vnder the hande
of God. This murning and ſorrow of
the Church, is circumſcrived by the
own ſubject, when he ſayeth, By the ryvers
of Babylonia] That is, of the Babylonical
monarchie: For the Iewes wer
not only caryed away into Babylonia,
ſo properly called, but they were diſperſed
throughout the Babylonicall
juriſdictions; as it may be moſt clearly
gathered out of Ezekiel, Daniell, & Ezra.
Then the place is the Babylonicall
monarchie in general, but in particular
the brinkes of the rivers: For he ſayth,
By the rivers of Babylonia: Wee ſitting
there, that is, ſitting vpon the brinks of
the rivers, vnto ſuch time, as all were
ferried over. This place of the Babylonical
monarchie, conteineth in the
ſelfe, a certaine cauſe of this weeping,
which hee ſetteth downe. For the

place manifeſtlie ſheweth, the baniſhment,
and carrying away into captivity,
from their natiue ſoile to an ſtrange
lande. Then the people being in their
journey, farre from home, and baniſhed,
bewayleth their ſinnes, which
ought to haue bin bewayled at home.
Not-with-ſtanding, thoſe who will
not murne at home, they are compelled
to murne far frō their home.
For ſinnes of neceſſitie, are once to
be bewayled, and wee muſt bee ſorrowfull,
either ſooner or later, becauſe
we haue offended GOD. And if wee
be not ſorrowfull at home, ſurely wee
ſhall murne far from home. And if we
murne not in this life, ſurely wee ſhall
be ſorrowfull in that other life, or rather
death, where there ſhall nothing
be heard, but wayling and gnaſhing of
teeth. Bleſſed are they alſo who later,
yea, and that in exile, yea, at any time
whatſoever ar earneſtly ſorrowful for
their ſinnes, if ſo be, they deferre not
their mourning to an other Worlde,

bleſſed are they. For even thoſe, who
do later, yea, or at whatſoever time,
murne and repent in this life; in that
other life, all teares ſhall bee wiped awaye
from their eies: But thoſe who laugh in
this life, and refuſe to murne in that other
life, there ſhall be none ende or
meaſure of their ſorrow. When wee remembred]
This is the other cauſe of
the mourning, but ſome-what more
cleare, to witte, the remembrance of
Tzijon, that is, of Ieruſalem, where the
viſible and outwarde preſence of God
to be looked vpon was. For theſe who
are baniſhed from God, they do ſurely
feele, what great profite, yea, and it
were no more but this which is in the
preſence of GOD, and which is in this
his viſible miniſtery, & what great diſcommoditie
is in that his abſence: we
while we haue God preſent in his miniſtery,
and beholde him after ſome
ſort in that mirrour of his Goſpell, we
acknowledge not how happie we bee,
and it were no more, but for that ſelfe

ſame cauſe. But if it ſhall come to paſſe
at any time, through the righteous
judgment of GOD, that this mirrour
of the Goſpell, and this outwarde miniſterie
be taken away from our eies,
then indeed wee ſhall feele in effecte,
what great miſery it is to bee deſtitute
thereof. I ſpeake ſpecially concerning
thoſe, who are accuſtomed at any time
to feele ſome pleaſure, of this ſincere
preaching of the worde, & adminiſtration
of the Sacraments. David being
in exile, Remembring thoſe things (ſayth
he) I poure out my ſoule vpon my ſelf, when
I remember that I was woont to paſſe by in
the congregation▪ to walke with them vnto
the houſe of God, &c. Behold David, being
baniſhed from the viſible Church
of God, he was exceeding greatly ſorrowfull:
But what is the cauſe? Even,
becauſe hee vvas woont to vvalke together
vvith the Church vnto the houſe of GOD,
vvith the voyce of ſinging and prayſe:
That is, becauſe he was to feele no little
pleaſure of that external and viſible

miniſterie. And therefore being nowe
a baniſhed man, the remembrance of
that Spiritual pleaſure & joy, mooved
him to no ſmal diſpleaſure. Here we ar
to be admoniſhed, that this dolor proceeding
frō the remembrance of that
heavenly ioy, is not the ſorrow of this
worlde; But it is, that dolour, which is
called the godly ſorrow, which ſurely,
hath greater ioy mixed therwith, then
is the whole joy of this worlde, yea, albeit
it be voyde of all ſenſe of ſorrow.
For every one of the godly, while they
mourne, they feele in the meane time,
ane vnſpeakable ioy, conioyned with ſighes
that cannot bee expreſſed. In it we hanged
vppe our Harpes vppon the Willowes]
A certaine amplification, of the murning
& ſorrow ſet down. The Church
murned, & caſt away al inſtruments &
matter of conſolation: For theſe who
are ſorrowfull earneſtly, & from their
hearte, they thinke that all ioye, and
matter of ioye, is a diſpleaſure vnto
them, and contrariwiſe, they thinke

all heauineſſe to bee vnto them as a
pleaſure: My teares are vnto me (ſayeth
DAVID) in ſteede of meate. But
what manner of ſongs were theſe?Pſal. 42. 4
                              •
                           
                        
They were holie ſonges, and the
ſonges of the Lorde; thoſe who earneſtlie
& ſanctifiedly do weepe, vſe not
ſo much indeed, as to ſing holy ſongs,
For at ſuch time, as the Lord caſteth vs
downe and humbleth vs; at that time,
it becommeth vs to mourne, rather
then to ſinge,Iam 5. 13. to bee in diſpleaſure,
then to be joyfull?Ezek. 3. 1. 
                        If any man be afflicted
among you? Let him pray: Is any man
merrie, let him ſing. All things haue the
owne time, There is a time of vveeping,
and there is a time of ſinging. Although in
that place] The amplifying of the deed
immediatly preceeding, to wit, of the
caſting away of the inſtruments, & of
al matter of joy, from the contrarie authoritie
& commandement of the Babylonians,
who, when they had caried
the people of God away captiue, they
required of them, thus carried awaie,

Joyfull ſongs; but the Church indeede
was not mooved and brought on to
ſing, for all their authority and command.
For the ſoule that is humbled
by Gods hand, cannot be lifted vp by
any authority of men, neither can bee
be merry. It is God alone, who as he
induced either by praier or reward to
hūbleth, ſo may he lift vp the dejected
minde.Pſal. 40. 4. 
                        He put a new ſong into my mouth.
Marke next, that he addeth, Thoſe who
carried vs away captiues [as if he ſhould
ſaye: Thoſe ſelfe ſame men, who were
the cauſe of ſorrowe vnto vs, they required
vs that we ſhould miniſter joy
vnto them. Nowe the Prophet ſignifieth
here, that they would haue had the
people to do ſome abſurde and vnreaſonable
thing; for the enemies of God
and of the Church, are not to bee ſtirred
vp to joy; for ſo they ſhould flatter
and pleaſe themſelues, in their owne
malice. Thou ſeeſt againe here, that
the Babylonians, are not ſo much indeede
as touched with any ſenſe of the

preſent ſorow of the Church. The vngodly
know not, what the diſpleaſure,
or what the ioye of the godly is. They
vaniſh away in their owne imaginations,
neither yet do they feele inwardly
in their hart, ether true & ſolide dolour
and joy: For their hart is not eſtabliſhed
by grace.
                        Heb. 13. 
                              •
                           . 
                        How could we] The church
bringeth in the cauſes, wherefore ſhee
was not mooved, no, not ſo much, as
by the authority of the Babylonians
to ſing, to the end that you may know
it is not ſufficient, if we reſiſt the ſuperiour
powers, of any obſtinate affection,
and obdured minde (for the power
of the Babylonians over the people,
was according to the will and ordinance
of GOD) except wee haue alſo
moſt iuſt and graue cauſes to diſobey.
Alſo, the firſt reaſon is taken, from the
prophaning of the holy ſongs, which
is to bee vnderſtoode in theſe wordes:
The ſongs of Iehova: Then, in the Lande
of ſtrangers: That is, in a prophane land,
among prophane men. For to ſing the

ſongs of Iehova, that is, the ſongs that
are holy vnto God, at the pleaſure of
prophane men; what other thing is it,
then to prophane the holy things of
God? for to lay out whatſoever holy
things, either the word of God, or the
Sacraments, or any other thing of that
ſort, vnto the pleaſure of men, that are
defiled and vncleane, which doe not
ſeeke ſo much as their owne edifying
in them, or the glory of God, but their
owne vncleane delight, what other
thing is it, I praye you, then to caſte
pearles before ſwine? If I forget] the other
reaſon, from the forgetting of Ieruſchalaim,
& of the church of God: it
is made after this maner: If I ſhal now
ſing (ſayeth the holy congregation)
this were to forget Ieruſalem and the
Church of God: But I will not forget
Ieruſalem: Therfore I will not ſing:
Marke then, what it is to ſing or rejoice
in the meane time, that the Church of
God is any way afflicted. Surely, it is no
other thing, then to forget the church:

But contrariwiſe, to murne with the
murning Church, what other thing is
it then to remember the Church? For
we teſtifie, that we haue a regard of the
Church of God, and that we take care
thereof, from this common affection,
and this mutual compaſſion; whereby
it commeth to paſſe, that wee rejoyce
with the rejoycing Church, & murne
with her, when ſhe mourneth. The aſſumptiō
of this reaſon, is not ſet down
nakedly, but with an execration, wherby
he wiſheth a vengeance to fal vpon
him ſelf; that is, the impotencie of his
own right hand, if he ſhal ſtrik the harp
therwith, & the vnmoveablenes of his
tong if he ſhuld ſing with the ſame: for
this cauſe he doth this thing, becaus he
waited aſſuredly, for ſum trouble & no
table judgement of God, to light vpon
himſelf, if it ſhould come to paſſe, that
he ſhuld forget God & his church: for
thee execrations & obteſtations, ar an
evidēt, that ther abideth thē, who forget
the Church of God, & who th
                           ••
                        
                        
do laugh, when the Church weepeth,
there abideth them, I ſaye, an heavie
judgement of God. If I call not] This is
the amplification of the words preceeding,
as if he ſhuld ſay: Not only will I
remember, but I will prefer and make
more of the Church of GOD, aboue
the head of my ioye, that is, I will eſteeme
more of, then of my ioye, although
it were never ſo great: For it is
not ynough to remember the church,
but we muſt of neceſſitie prefer it to all
things whatſoever.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           7 Remember, O Iehova, againſt the Edomits,
the day of Ieruſchalaim, who ſaid, vncover,
vncover ſo long as the foundation
thereof ſhal be in it.
                           8 O Nation of Babylonia, that is to bee
deſtroyed, let him be bleſſed, who ſhall recompenſe
thee the wicked deede, whereby
thou haſt troubled vs!
                           9 Bleſſed ſhall he be who ſhal tak hold,
and break in peeces thy yong ones, daſhing
them againſt a ſtone.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        REmember] The other parte of the
Pſalme, or an imprecation againſt
the Edomites, and a prophetical denunciation
againſt the Babylonians. Firſt
then after that the Church hath bewailed
her captiuitie, in the middes
of the ſorrow ſhe turneth her ſelfe vnto
God, and ſhee prayeth for an vtter
vengeance vppon her neighbours the
Edomites. Then ſhee turneth her ſelf againſt
the Babylonians, and ſhe denunceth
aſſuredly the judgement of God
to come vpon them. We learne by the
example of this Church, from what affection,
any imprecations and threatnings
whatſoever, ſhould proceede againſt
Gods enemies; That is, from an
heavines and ſorrow of the heart, and
not frō any light motion of the mind.
For when they come from ſorrow &
heavines, then indeed they are heavie,
and in their owne time, they bring on
a ſure judgement; otherwiſe, they are
but light, and they provoke God more
to wrath againſt our ſelues, then againſt

our enemies. Marke, as concerning the
Edomites; we read not that they, together
with the Babylonians, overthrew
the cittie of God, only they did ſhow
                           •
                        
in allowing the Babylonians in the
meane time, while they were deſtroying
Ieruſchalaim, O Babylonians (ſaide
they) vncover, vncover] And therefore
they were involved in the ſame judgement
with the Babylonians. They
who aſſent to the wicked, and perſecutors
of the Church, either in word or
in hearte; they are reckoned alſo in
the number of the perſecutors, and
ſhall bee together judged with them▪
Then, as concerning the Babylonians,
not only they denunce the judgment
againſt them, but bleſſedneſſe is
pronounced alſo, and promiſed vnto
the inſtruments and executors of that
judgement to come Darîus Medus, &
Cyrus, to the end that we might know,
that thoſe are bleſſed who execute the
work of GOD diligently, as contrariwiſe,
they are curſed, who doe the worke of

God negligently: Bleſſing is pronunced
vpon them alſo, who, notwithſtanding
had not ſo much God before their eies
in that work, as the enlarging of their
own Empyre. How much more ſhall
they be bleſſed, who while they ar doing
the work of the lord diligently, for
the Lords ſake himſelf they do it, that
al the glorie of the work, may ſolidely
& for ever, redound vnto him, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               Proverb 10 verſ. 7.
               The memoriall of the juſt ſhall be bleſſed: But the
name of the wicked ſhall rotte.
               Iſaiah 57 verſ 1.
               The righteous periſheth, and no man conſiddereth
it in heart: and merciful men are taken away, and
no man vnderſtandeth that the righteous is taken away
from the evill to come.
               Reuel. 11. 14. verſ. 13.
               Then I heard a voyce from heauen, ſaying vnto
me, Write, Bleſſed are the dead, which hereafter die in
Lord, Even ſo ſayeth the Spirite, for they reſt from their
laboures, and their workes follow them.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   