
      
         
            
            
            A Letter lately written from Rome, by an Italian Gentleman, to a freende of his in Lyons in Fraunce.
            Wherein is declared, the ſtate of Rome: The ſuddaine death & ſollemne buriall of Pope Gregory the thirteenth. The election of the newe Pope, and the race of life this newe Pope ranne before hee was aduaunced. Thereto are adioyned the accidentes that haue fallen out, not onely in Rome, but in Naples & other parts of the worlde alſo.
            Newely tranſlated out of Italian into English by I. F.
            Jmprinted at London by Iohn Charlewoode dwelling in Barbican, at the halfe Eagle and the Key. 1585.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the Right excellent and Honourable Lord, Henry Earle of Darby, Lord Stanley, and Strange: Lord of Man, and Th'Iſles, one of hir Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Counſell, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Lancaſter, and Cheſter, and of the Citie of Cheſter, and knight of the noble order of the Garter. I. F. wiſheth all happineſſe.
            
               IF the teſtimonie of a duetiful mind, might prooue a ſufficient counterpeiſe to a benefite, I might now (right Honorable) diſcharge the bande, where with I am ſo deepelie indebted to your honor: But becauſe I am not able with wordes, to match ſo high and honorable deedes, I am contēted to remaine a debter ſtill. For as the magnificence of Carthage
               
was ſo great, that ſuch as haue gone about to lift it vp with commendation, were ſuddainly ſtopt and enforſt to confeſſe, they had rather ſay nothing, then ſay too little. So when I conſider the excellencie of your calling, the nobility of your bloode, and the vertues wherin you ſhine, though I be deſirous to giue a taſt of your prayſes vnto the world, yet finding my ſight too weake to ſtare vpon ſuch a ſun, I am cōpelde to turne away my face and giue it ouer. Neuertheleſſe, knowing it to be the parte of a Princely coū
               ſellour, to haue an eye in the head of euery common weale, I haue preſumed to publiſh theſe newes of forraine partes in your honors name, and ſo much the rather, becauſe I finde in your honor the

diſposition of Panthoidas, who being ſent Ambaſſadour into Aſia, regarded not their goodly and ſumptuous buildings, the rich ornaments of their houſes, & ſuch other pleaſaunt ſhowes, but rather endeuoured himſelf to learn their policies, their gouernment, their cuſtomes, their Lawes and proceedings, the manner of placing of theyr battayle, the order of theyr fight, with ſuch like enquiries woorthy a Noble man, whoſe notable ſteps your Lordſhip in your honourable laſt Ambaſſage did honourably followe: to the perpetuall eterniſing of your honours auncient and noble name, and the perfect contentation of both their Maieſties.
            Thus being lothe to be too tedious, I leaue theſe nouels to

your honours consideration, vntill time ſhall yeelde better, and better woorthy your honourable viewe. Till when and euer wholy dedicating my ſelfe to your honour, I wyſhe your honour all felicity, and grace. The 29. of Iune 1585.
            
               Your Honors moſt humble & dutifull to commande. Iohn Florio.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Declaration of Newes written from Rome, and from other partes of the world.
            
               IT hath peraduenture (my welbeloued Syr) ſeemed ſtraunge vnto you, that I haue béene ſo long without writing vnto you, to informe you of the ſtate of theſe countries, as you with many praiers intreated me, and with your ſundry curteſies and fauours bounde mée to doo, whileſt paſſing that wayes, you entertained me ſo fréendly in your fathers houſe: and who knoweth, whether you haue conceiued ſome ſiniſter opinion of me? How be it, I haue no more forgot you in mind then I could or would my own brother: Which thing if for my miſhap it ſhould happen, or haue happened, I beſéech you for that deare fréendſhips ſake, that alwayes hath béene betwéene your houſe and mine, that you will vtterly cancell, and thinke that my long ſilence, hath rather béene occaſioned of my ſundry, and

waightie affaires, then of any other cauſe whatſoeuer, which vnlooked for, haue ſo greatly hindred mee ſince my comming home, that I coulde not diſcharge that duetie in effect towards you, which the looue I beare you, and your curteſies bindeth mee to. Wherefore I pray you not onely to accept this as a lawfull excuſe, but as the bare trueth, which dooing, you ſhall increaſe my affection towardes you more and more, Knowe you therefore, that howbeit I haue not writtē vnto you, I haue not omitted to note dayly the acccidentes, and all things worthie of memory, that haue happened not onely in this Cittie of Rome, but alſo in others abroad, as they haue either béene written or reported vnto vs, as by this my letter, if your leiſure permit you to reade it, you may perceiue, which ſhall not ſéeme long vnto you, ſince that it containeth ye ſturres happened for the ſpace of two monethes in diuers parts of the world, all thinges of great importance, and worthy to bée read, & noted of you, who doo not followe the example of many others, who ſpend the greater part of their time in reading

of that which hath béene doone many yéeres agoe, and are altogether ignorant of thoſe thinges which dayly happen in this our age. Know you therefore, that twentie dayes after my departure from you, which was vppon the the ſixth day of Aprill laſt, thankes bee giuen to the Lorde, I arriued ſafe and ſound in thys Citie, where I founde Pope Gregorie the 13, of that name ſomwhat ill at eaſe, but ſo little, that neither he nor any of his fréendes made any account of it, but the third night following being ye ninth of the foreſaid moneth, there diſcended a rume downe into his breaſt, with ſuch violence, that in two houres it diſpatched him. Whoſe death, as it was vnto his fréendes altogether vnexpected and ſodaine, ſo was it vnto them all moſt gréeuous, but eſpecially vnto his ſonnes moſt domageable, for it is to be preſuppoſed, that if he had perceiued any likelihood of death in himſelfe, hee woulde ſo haue ordered his affaires, yt they ſhould not after his death haue béene in thoſe troubles, wherein by reading of this my letter, you ſhall perceiue them to be. Yet was not his death ſo gréeuous vnto the

greateſt number of the Cardinals, vnto whom it ſéemed that he had poſſeſſed the ſeate too long, and that it was more then time for him to giue place to others, aſpiring to that dignitie. I haue ſpoken of the Popes ſonne in the ſingular number which may peraduēture ſéeme ſtraunge vnto you, becauſe yt hée, beſides the Lord Giacomo, whō he had before he was cardinal, by him made Duke of Sora (which Duchie lieth in the kingdome of Naples and he with his money & fauour bought of the King of Spaine) as I am truely informed, he had another in the thirde yéere of his Popedome, by a faire countrie wench, that he kept for his owne tooth at Fraſcato, a place of ſollace, not many miles diſtant from this citie, very pleaſant and beautiful, which ſonne was called Lorde Philip Buon compagni, which liued not aboue 4. yéere, or there about, of whō if wel you remēber, at my laſt being wt you, I had ſome cōmunication with your couſin, who ſaid yt he was ye Popes ſonne, & I anſwered that Lord Giacomo was his father, for ſo it was reported, and giuen foorth at his birth, after which, preſently he was caried to

his houſe, who to take that ſkandall and ſlaunder from his father, that might haue enſued thereby, was contented to father him, vpō which thing was made this Paſquil, which not yet thrée wéekes ſince was giuen me by one of his Courtiers, and becauſe the inuention thereof is pretie, & that I knowe you take great pleaſure in readyng of ſuch deuiſes, I haue thought it good to ſet it downe héere.
            
               The Paſquill.
               The maketh of it fayneth, that Paſquine hauing prepared himſelfe to flie from Rome, meeteth by chaunce with Marforius, who entring into diſcourſe with him, ſayth.
               
                  M.
                  
                     Paſquine whether goeſt thou in ſuch haſt?
                  
               
               
                  P.
                  
                     I goe to ſeeke my fortune, for I will ſtay no longer heere.
                  
               
               
                  M.
                  
                     Alas, what doo I heere▪ and what is the cauſe that moueth thee to forſake thy deare and naturall countrey?
                  
               
               
                  P.
                  
                     Becauſe there is no more religion heere.
                  
               
               
                  M.
                  
                     How many that be? and if there be no Religion heere, where is there any then?
                  
               
               
                  P.
                  
                     That knowe not I, but well I wote, that the holy Trinitie is nothing at all accounted of heere.
                  
               
               
                  
                  M.
                  
                     Alas for you, and where is it more manifeſtly knowen and openly profeſſed then heare? I dare take vpon me to make thee confeſſe, and ſay, that in no place elſe ſo much as in this holy Citie.
                  
               
               
                  P.
                  
                     I pray thee Marforius, doo mee that fauour, as to make mee perceiue that, which if thou dooſt, I promiſe thee I will not forſake my countrey.
                  
               
               
                  M.
                  
                     I would doo it willingly, but I feare thou wilt but mocke mee, being a thing ſo manifeſt that euery one may ſee it, and feele it.
                  
               
               
                  P.
                  
                     I will rather thinke my ſelf beholding to thee then mocke thee. wherfore I pray thee proceed.
                  
               
               
                  M.
                  
                     Is it poſsible that thou dooſt not perceiue in the Popes persō the repreſentatiō of the eternal father, & in the Lord Giacomo, that of Ieſus Chriſt his ſōne, & in yoūg Philip, begotten of the Pope, and fathered vpon L. Giacomo, that of the holy Ghoſt, proceeding both from the father and the ſonne?
                  
               
               
                  P.
                  
                     Ha, Ha, Ha, by my faith thou ſayeſt true. I muſt needes confeſſe that the Trinitie is not ſo apparently knowen in any other place as it is in Rome, and therefore I will euen get me home againe, and ſtay the euent

of the Romaine Trinitie. And thus endeth the Paſquill. But to come to my purpoſe againe, where I left, I ſay that commonly the day after ye Pope is dead, they are wont to conuey his carkas in a litter alongſt Straſteuere, attēded on by his wonted Garde of Swizers. and light horſemen to the Conſiſtoriall chamber in Saint Peters Pallace, where beyng Pontifically apparelled, al in white garments, euen as if he ſhould celebrate the ſacred ſeruice, he is layd vpon the beare, couered with a cloth of gold, and ſilke, with letters about it ſaying, Gregorius 13. Pont. Max. and two Cardinals hats at his feete, and ſo he is left vntill the euening, at which time the whole Colledge of Cardinales beyng aſſembled there, with all the Biſhops and Prelates that then are in Rome, and with all the Canons of Saint Iohn Laterane, and of S. Peter with their richeſt Coapes on, hee is carried into the Popes Chappell before the high Altar, where the Biſhops, Prelates, and ſuch people as be there do kiſſe his féete, after which ceremonie he is carried by the Canons of S. Peters, & layd before the Sacrament Chappel, his

Penſioners goyng before with theyr Polares, the head downeward, accompanyed with the Cardinals apparelled in Purple, (which maketh a goodly ſhowe) where beyng layde, the woonted funerall ceremonies vnto the dead carkas, are celebrated by one of the Canons of the ſayde Church, after that he is caried into S. Sixtus his Chappell, where for thrée dayes ſpace he is left, with his féete towardes the grate, to the end, that thoſe that liſt may kiſſe his féete, he being attyred as I haue ſayd before, with many Torches burning day and night about him, with a multitude of Prieſts tending on him, for feare he ſhoulde run away, Thrée dayes being ended, he is buried in the ſayde Church, where it pleaſeth beſt his kinſmen, wh
                        ••
                     e nyne dayes after continually, many Torches are burning, for ſo long his funerals doo laſt, and therefore they are called Nouendalie, which importeth, in Engliſh, nine dayes workes. A very high ſcaffolde in the forme of a Piramides, beyng made in the middeſt of the Church, couered all ouer with blacke cloth, with his armes rounde about, but without the Keyes,

with letters, ſaying, Pope Gregorie the 13. which Piramides is vpheld by many pillars, vnder which dooth appeare an Hearce, all couered with cloth of golde, with couſhins of the ſame, where euery morning there is a Maſſe ſung by ſome Cardinall, created by the laſt Pope, which Maſſe being ended, he with foure Cardinals more in black Veluet robes, and the Subdeane hauing ſayd the Epiſtle, taking the croſſe in hand, the maſter of the ceremonies, and other his officers aſſiſting, all the other Cardinals following, they goe about the ſcaffold, or Piramides. The dead Popes whole houſhold ſitting about the ſame vpon fourmes all in mourning apparel, with burning torches in their handes, ſome bigger then other ſome, according to the degrées of the men▪ at each corner of the ſayd ſcaffolde, is placed a ſtoole couered with black, vpon which the foure Cardinales in black Veluet doo ſit, and he that hath ſung Maſſe ſitting vpon another ſtoole, in the middeſt of that ſide that looketh toward the Altar. Then he that ſitteth at the right hand, beginneth to giue holly water to the beare lying vnder the

Key, and vntill ſuch time as they haue agréed about the Popes election, they be ſo faſt, that they can not by any meanes come out. Many yéeres ſince it was woont to be but one hall, deuided into ſo many little chambers, with hangings of Tapiſtrie, as there were Cardinals, but conſidering that for want of roome and and ayre, many dyed before the election, there are nowe two great roomes, deuided into more then thrée ſcore litle chambers, each one of them being more then ſixtéene foote ſquare, euery one of them hauing a little cabinet, or cloſet ioyned vnto it, for the Cardinales ſeruing men to be in, before the Chambers there is a long gallerie for the Cardinals to walke in. No Cardinal can bring in more then thrée men, that is to ſay, a Secretarie, a Gentleman, and a Chamberlaine, who ſo long as the election laſteth can not by any meanes come out. All which chambers are dreſſed as it followeth. Thoſe which pertaine to the Cardinales created by the laſt Pope, are hanged with purple, with all furnitures pertayning to it of the ſame, as Bedſteds, Valences, Curtaines, Couerlets, Pillowes, Cuſhines,

with ſilke fring of that colour. There is in euery chamber a little table with a Purple Carpet to it, a little woodden lanterne, a little ladder to hang vp the hangings, one high ſtoole, and one lowe, which they carie to the ſcrutine Chamber, a duſt baſket, a Cheſt wyth locke and key, and ſuch other neceſſaries in a Chamber, euerie thinge couered with purple, with the Cardinals armes vpon them to whom they appertaine. Al other Cardinals haue their chambers, & other implementes hanged, and couered with gréene, The order how they are ſerued in the Conclaue, ſo long as the election laſteth is this. Before the gate of the Conclaue, there is a fayre roome, where al the Archbiſhops, and Biſhops, that then are in Rome, doo ſtande wayting at the doore by turnes, daie & night or as they are choſen by looue, foure of them alwayes ready to helpe, and doo all ſuch neceſſary buſineſſe as the place, and time requireth, what occaſion ſoeuer happen, chaunging euery two houres. Their Chambers being néere the ſayde place. About the gallarie of the Pallace going towarde the newe gate, are the

Romane Barrons, and Lordes attending, with two gardes, one of Italians, the other of Swizers, who are to waite on the Cardinales going into the Conclaue, or that by reaſon of infirmitie come out, together with the dead Popes light horſemen, and groomes of his ſtable, who accompany them home to their lodgings. The order howe the Gentlemen or Sewers doo ſerue the Cardinals their Lords is thus. At ye gate where as I ſayd before foure Biſhops doo ſtād, are two Gentlemē, who are to call ye Cardinals or Sewers, as they are orderly ſet down in writing in a ſcrowle of Paper, yt euery night is faſtened vpon the gate, wherein are the names of all the Cardinals written as they are drawen by lots, ſo that a man may ſée who ſhall firſt or laſt bée ſerued. Euerie night that ſcrowle is newly written. In deede if any of them be ſick, they are firſt ſerued. Euery night there are foure of the ſayde byls of names made againſt the day following: one of which is kept within the Conclaue, another is faſtened to the gate where the Senatours or Sherifes li
                        •
                     , as I ſayd before, the other two are

kept by the two aforeſayde Gentlemen, one of which ſtandeth by the dreſſer, at that doore at which the Gentlemē Sewers goe in with meate, in order as they are called, each one hauing two great baſkets or flaſkets of diuers ſtuffes faſhions and colours, the one for kitchin viandes, the other for other ſortes of after ſeruice, theſe carried betwéene two men with couleſtaues. And this is the manner of theyr ſeruice. Firſt euerie Sewer hath very orderly his diſhes placed in the foreſayd two flaſkets, who were firſt made ready by other officers, as by the Cooke, Paſter, Butler, Spicer, Comfeter, Fruterer, and ſuch other that belong to keepyng, or dreſſing of meates. Before the ſayd meates goeth that Cardinals Gentleman Vſher that is firſt ſerued, and then two groomes of the ſtable with two ſtaues in their hāds painted of the Cornutas colour, for ſo that flaſket is called wherin the kitchin meates are caried, after them followeth the Gentleman Steward, with foure or ſixe Gentlemen more, carying of fayre glaſſes in their hands full of diuers ſorts of wines, and very cleare water, ye Butler

going in the middeſt of them, with a little glaſſe of wine in his hand, the ſaid glaſſes are all couered with Orenge blomes, and other ſwéete flowers, with papers on them ſhowing the qualitie, or ſorte of the Wine, then followe two Groomes of the Stable that carrie the flaſket, wherein all other ſortes of after meates, Comfets and fruites are, then followeth the Cubberd kéeper, with two other Groomes that carie the Cornuta. All the Gentlemen pertaining to that Cardinal attending on them, thus going al in order towards the Conclaue dreſſer, they méete firſt at the firſt doore the Conſeruours, Senatours, or ſherifs gard, then comming to the ſtayers foote, they méete the other garde of Italians and Swizers. And ſo paſſing along the gallerie, they come into a ſeuerall roome where are two little doores, one to go in to ſerue, the other to come out after they haue ſerued, at the entrie of that roome is alſo a garde of Italians and Swizers, which open and ſhut the doores: where ſtande the two Curſors, or gentlemen with bils of names in their hands, who in order call for the Sewer that muſt

come in firſt, at the vpper end of the ſaid roome ſtandeth a table fiftéene foote long, the Sewer being come to that table, he taketh a very fine and whyte Napkin from the Cubbord kéeper, and layeth it on the table, and another he layeth before the aforeſayde foure Biſhops, with two kniues, and two forkes, which they take vp, the Sewer hauing ſet all the diſhes vpō the table, they vncouer them, and taſte of them all, there can no Pies nor Paſties paſſe whole, nor any kinde of poultery, or fowle, for they are al cut, carued, and opened, before the ſayde Biſhops. There can no wine, nor water be carried in, in any other veſſelles then cléere glaſſes, nor any table cloth, towel, or Napkin, that is not firſt vnfolded, opened, & very well conſidered. All veſſels both out of which they eate & drink, of glaſſe, or porcelaine that once goe in, come no more out, for they are the maſter of the Ceremonies his fees. The meate that is left, is deuided among the ſeruaunts or officers in the Conclaue, as Barbours, Mazons, Carpenters, Poticaries, Swéepers, & ſuch like. So ſoone as euery Sewer, or ſteward hath

ſerued, he enquireth whether his Lorde will haue any other meate againſt the next time, or not, then taking Conge, he goeth out of the other doore, whyleſt others come in at the other. And in this order are all Cardinals ſerued morning and night, ſo long as the election laſteth. And all that whyle the Caſtell or Pallace is very well garded, for at the firſt trench, beſides the ſouldiers that are in Beluedere, and thoſe which garde the market place, which are a great nūber, there are ſixe & twentie Swizers wayting day & night, there is a great chaine of yron to croſſe the way, and a little houſe of bordes to ſhield them from the rayne, Aboue the ſayd trench on the left ſide goyng into the Pallace, are eyght peeces of great Artillerie, garded by a band of Swizers, and two other gardes, that alwayes are attendant there. Not farre from the ſayde Artillerie ouer againſt the great gate, which is alſo garded by fiftie Swizers, there are thrée péeces of artillerie more, euen in the entrie of the Pallace, which alſo is garded by thrée bandes of Swizers, and for the ſuccour of the ſayde gate in any néede,

there is at the left hand a place or houſe couered with bordes, in which is continually a bād of Italian ſouldiours, with a going out one both ſides. On the right hand going into the Court, toward Borgias tower vnder the gate, which is locked with an yron chaine, is continually another band of Italians, and on the left hand therof is an Altar, that may be remooued where one liſt, couered with very rich Tapeſtrie, and other ornaments where euery morning all the election while, the Maſſe of the holy Ghoſt is celebrated and ſung, by the ſinging men of the Chappell. All that while that the Maſſe is celebrating, the gates ſtande open, but very well garded, for then all prieſts of what order ſoeuer, & Moncks with the Orflins going before very orderly, doo go Proceſſion like through all Courtes, and places beneath the watches, and gardes ſtand ready armed as if they were ready to fight, or expect the enemie. The Prieſt that ſayth the Maſſe betwéene two Deacons with hys face toward the Conclaue, ſingeth as lowde as hee can the Pſalme Veni Creator mundi, and the Letanies, with other

Prayers, the whole quier anſwering him. This doone, the Canons of S. Peter, and other Prelates, with the woonted Muſick goe in. The proceſſion being ended, at the ſound of a little bell al men depart, for that is a ſigne, that the Scrutinie of that morning is doone, and that there is no Pope choſen, then all ye ſouldiers doo vnarme themſelues. Theſe orders & ceremonies are vſed euery day, frō that time that ye Cardinals goe into the Conclaue, vntill a Pope bée choſen. The maner how ye Cardinals doo chuſe him in the Conclaue, is as it followeth.
               
               After two maner of wayes the election is made. The one is, that euery Cardinall writeth vpon a ſcrowle, the name of him whom he wiſheth to bee Pope, & after he hath folded it, he carrieth it to the Altar which is in ye chamber, where the Scrutinie is made, and there ſtandeth the maſter of the ceremonies which receiueth the ſayd ſcrowles, & that Cardinall which is founde to haue the moſt ſcrowles, of ye two thirds of thoſe Cardinals yt be there, he is Pope, this manner is called the chooſing by ſcrutiny, becauſe therby the mind of ye Cardinals is ſifted

and knowen. But when in the Conclaue any is founde, that hath none to ſtand with him, then the Cardinals ſtay not to haue their opinions enquired by ſcrutinie, but declare themſelues by their voyces, and then the Lord Chamberlayne, or ſome other of the chéefeſt Cardinals, cauſeth him whō they ſée ſo fauoured by voyces, to ſit vpon the Papall ſeate, ſaying vnto him. Adoro te in Pontificem, all other Cardinals following him, ſtriuing who ſhall be foremoſt, leaſt by ſtaying, any be thought to bee agréeued. This is called election by Adoration, although that he which is choſen by ſcrutinie be alſo adored, which adoration is rather doone for cuſtomes ſake, then for any neceſſitie. Preſently after the election▪ the newe Popes ſeruantes run to breake two windowes ouer the Court, where the Maſſe or Proceſſion is ſayd, and there the people flocking about thē, they cry Cardinall Mont-alto is choſen Pope, afterwardes commeth one of the Cardnals with the croſſe in his hand, and ſayth thrée times, Papam habemus. After that, all the Cardinalles for a good ſpace abide with ye new Pope,

reioycing with him for his election, then they accompany him to his Pallace, after that, euery one retyreth him ſelfe to his owne home. Furthermore you ſhall vnderſtande Sir, that as ſoone as it is noyſed abroad that the Pope is choſen, all the people run to the Pallace where he dwelt béeing Cardinall, and wholy ſpoyle and rob the ſame. In times paſt they were woont to finde there many things of great value, eſpecially houſehold ſtuffe, but now they that haue but the leaſt hope to bée Pope, cauſe theyr ſeruants ſecretely to conuay thence all the beſt, leauing nothing but ſuch things as they care not for looſing. Now to ſignifie vnto you the election of this Pope, I ſay, that in Sede vacante, after the death of Pius the fifte, ye King of Spaine writ to Cardinall Farneſe, wiſhing him to ſtand to be Pope, for that he deſyred onely to haue him, who at the firſt ſtoode in ſome doubt, thinking that the Kinge did it onely in mockery, but he confirming it by his Ambaſſadour then reſident at Rome, the Cardinall began to perſwade himſelfe that he meant in good earneſt, and endeuoured himſelfe earneſtly

to the obtaining thereof, and ſuch were his practizes, that many thought he ſhould be Pope, vntill one morning, the Cardinal Granuela in the Conclaue preſented him with a letter from the King, by which he requeſted him at that time to content himſelfe, and to labour no further for that dignitie, and that for a ſpeciall conſideration, marry withall that hée ſhould aſſure himſelfe the next time not to fayle thereof, at the ſight whereof, the Cardinall was greatly aſtonied, perceiuing that the King went about to delude him, and in thought ſomewhat grieued thereat, anſwered, that he acknowledged himſelfe a ſubiect vnméete to beare ſuch a heauy burthen, howbeit to pleaſure his Maieſtie (whō to pleaſe he had alwayes ſought) he was mooued to attempt ſuch an enterpriſe, and now ſith that he ſaw that the Kings pleaſure was ſuch, he ſubmitted himſelf wholy to his wil. Thē Cardinall Granuela thanked him, and requeſted him to agree with him in chooſing the newe Pope, and ſo the next morning Gregorie the 13. of late deceaſſed was choſen. Cardinall Farneſe hauing receiued this

ſcornefull repulſe of the King, although that in ſhowe hée ſéemed to haue forgot it, yet inwardly he déepely imprinted it, and his drift was to vſe ſuch meanes whileſt Gregorie lyued that after his death, of himſelfe without the ayde of the King of Spaine, he might attaine to his purpoſe, and be choſen Pope, which ſecretly he wēt about, yet not ſo couertly, but that many Cardinals had notice thereof, therefore Gregorie beyng dead, and the Cardinales beyng aſſembled in the Conclaue, perceyuing fully Farneſe his intent, they vnderſtoode that if the time were detracted, peraduenture hée woulde haue brought it to paſſe, therefore ſodainely they reſolued themſelues to diſappoynt him and chooſe another. Hereupon Cardinal Eſte, Alexandrino, and Ruſticuzzi with their adherentes, ioyning together by way of ſcrutinie elected Cardinall Mont-alto, & ſuch was their good fortune, that they not thinking that any others woulde giue their voyces, to their Cardinall comes Cardinall Medici, with ſixe voyces to weigh down the ballances on their ſide, and ſo vpon Eaſter day they beyng entred into the

Conclaue, the next morning came Cardinall de Auguſta, who entred in, and ſo did Cardinall Madrucci. On Tueſday at night, and vpō Wedneſday morning following at ten of the clocke, hee was made Pope, & ſo acknowledged, and adored of all the Colledge. Wherby Cardinal Farneſe was two wayes deceiued, the one, in not being himſelfe Pope, the other in not hauing any thing to doo in the election of the new, a thing that happened not vnto him many yéeres before, hee hauing made almoſt all the Popes ſince his vncles death, who was Paulus the third, hauing alwaies had many adherents.
               
                  Mont-alto being thus choſen Pope on Wedneſday in Eaſter weeke, which was (according to our computation) the 24. of Aprill, and preſently after his election, (being before called Felix) he named himſelf Syxtus Quintus, and forthwith he depriued Cardinal Como of the office of Secretarie, and gaue it to Cardinall Ruſticuzzi who had it vnder Pius the 5. and Cardinall Alexandrino had ye place, which Cardinall Sant Siſto had in the conſultation. The Marques

                  Altemps was made Gouernour of Borgo, and generall Captaine of both the Popes gardes. The Duke of Sora was confirmed generall of the Church. The L. Marques of Riano had the roome of S. Mario Sforza, who was Lieutenant Generall. The Gouernour of Rome was confirmed anew, likewiſe the Controuler of the Popes houſhold that was firſt continueth ſtill. Great ioy and triumphes were made at the election of the Pope, but nothing ſo much as was accuſtomed, & that becauſe it is thought the people would rather haue had Cardinall Farneſe. The Sea was vacant fiftéene dayes without any exceſſe or diſorder. Vppon Thurſday laſt Cardinall Mondoui of Piemont, by Sea arriued heere, not without great daunger both of weather and Pyrates, and at Corneton, great contention aroſe betwixt his company & the townes men, there were diſcharged more then an hundred ſhot of Harguebuſſes. Contrary to the opinion of all men, the Lorde Paulo Giordano Orſino, Duke of Braſciano, came and kiſſed the Popes féete, who entertained him very curteouſly, and with all aduertiſed

him to looke to the gouernment of his eſtate, and to the ouerthrowe and rooting out of the baniſhed perſons, or outlawes as we terme them? I layde he did it contrary to the expectation of all men, becauſe you ſhall vnderſtand, that the Pope had not many yéeres agoe a Nephew, a young man of comely ſtature and perſonage, who viewing on a time a beautifull Damoſell of Corambonis de Augubbio, fell ſo in loue with her, that in ſhort ſpace hée won her and wedded her, but he enioyed her not long for ſhortly after hee was ſlaine with a gunne, and it was thought that Lorde Paulo had procured his death, for that not long after hee became very familiar with the Gentlewoman, and meanyng to marrie her, Cardinall Medici, who is brother in law to him, and all his kinſmē of the houſe of Orſini, laboured to ye Pope very earneſtly, that he ſhould not ſuffer their kinſman to match with one of ſo baſe fortune, whereupon the Pope at their intreatie ſent for him, and firſt by faire meanes ſought to diſſwade him from his purpoſe, but ſéeing he could doo no good thereby he grew to threatnings,

ſaying, threatning him with excōmunication, but Lord Paulo nothing terrified nor diſmayed, ſent the Gentlewoman to his houſe in the countrie, and the Pope as ſhe was going thether, cauſed her to be apprehended and put into a monaſterie of Nunnes, where ſhe remained certaine monthes, notwithſtanding, that at the length Lord Paulo found meanes to get her at libertie, and in deſpight of al men maried her, and yet enioieth her. For this cauſe it was thought, that hee would not haue ſubmitted himſelfe vnto the Pope, and truſted him, and that the Pope being now in that ſoueraigntie & dignitie, would haue reuenged the death of his Nephew. But ſée how vaine the iudgements of men are oftentimes, for now there is a mariage intreated of, betwixt the Popes Néece & Lord Paulo his ſonne, & it is thought that he ſhall be general Standard bearer of the Church. The ſame day Cardinall Sforza had audience of the Pope, and ſhowed himſelfe agréeued of the depriuation of Lorde Mario his Vncle, to whom the Pope anſwered, but ſmally to his contentatiō. It is ſayd that the laſt Popes treaſurer

(a man very well ſéene both in the ciuil and Canon lawes, and one that by finding out diuerſe meanes to inriche the Church, hath cauſed a great ſort to cry out of him) is cloſe priſoner in the caſtle, there to giue account of his adminiſtration.
               A little while agoe there were taken out of the Caſtle great ſummes of mony for the vſe of the Sea vacante, which now are reſigned againe. The two thouſande ſouldiers appointed for the Garde of ye Conclaue are diſcargeded, againe, euery one hauing giuen him beſides his promiſed wages a crowne.
               The Pope hath alreadie boūtifully requited a great number, which had ſhewed or doone him any pleaſure, when hee was in lowe eſtate and of ſmall abilitie, amongſt ye reſt he hath enriched a Cobler, who had ſometimes mended hys ſhooes for nothing, who ye day following for ſodaine ioy, ſet all his olde ſhooes, laſtes, and tooles on fire.
               Yeſterday morning the Lordes Conſeruours, or Sheriffes came to kiſſe the Popes féete, and deſired thrée fauours of him, that is, aboundance, iuſtice, & prouiſiō
                  
againſt outlawes abroad, of whom there is a great number: to whom he anſwered, that he woulde prouide for them all as ſpéedily as could be.
               The Pope ſheweth himſelfe verie thankfull to Pius the fifth, who made him Cardinal, & therfore hath commanded Cardinall Alexandrino, Nepew to Pius the 5. that he withall the ſeruaunts and ſuch as belonged to Pius ye 5. ſhoulde come to the Palace, a thing ſurely very commendable in any man, to be mindful in time of proſperitie of his benefactors.
               Yeſterday ye Marques Altemps tooke poſſeſſion of Borgo, accompanyed by a great troupe of horſemen, and with a garde of Swizers.
               The Ieſuites cōming to kiſſe ye Popes féete, obained of him, that the ſumptuous building of their commenced Colledge ſhould be continued, and that whē they want money they ſhoulde repayre vnto him,
               The Lorde Paulo Giordano yeſterday went to Braſciano with his wife, and all his Court, Cardinall Sant. Sixtus, Nephew to the Pope that dead is, goeth to dwell in the Pallace of the Duke of

                  Parma, it being graunted him by Cardinall Farneſe, who deſiring of the Pope, that his father might come to Rome, which the Pope that is dead his brother woulde neuer yéelde, to whom the Pope anſwered, that if he were not baniſhed he might come.
               By letters receyued from Milan the 23. of this moneth wée vnderſtande that the viſiter Reggius, hath commiſſion frō the King to receiue the accounts of Lord Giorgio Mariques, without moleſting of his perſon, which hath happened by the interceſſion of the Empreſſe, and the general muſter is appointed to be ye Kalendes of May, & that to all ye ſouldiours ſhall be giuen a 100. Frenche Crownes a man beſides the ordinarie pay, but not to thoſe of Don Giorgio his company. It is ſaid alſo that there are taken out of the Caſtle 200000. crownes, to ſend into Flaūders. That from Geneua there was brought thither priſoner a Spanyard, which the laſt yéere ſayde to the Cardi. Borromeo, that he had order from Don Pietro Ant. ſonne to the Duke of Terra Noua, to ſhoote him thorowe with a gunne, but being therefore

ſet on the racke, he confeſſed that he ſayd ſo onely to get a piece of money out of his handes.
               We vnderſtand by letters dated the 20, of this moneth from the Court of the Emperour in Praga, theſe newes following. On Friday laſt the Emperour gaue audience, to the Comiſſaries and Ambaſſadours of diuerſe Princes, as touching the deliuerance of the Duke of Saxonie priſoner at Neuſtat, but althogh his enemy ſéeke by all meanes poſſible to hinder the ſayd deliuerance, yet it is hoped that in the end he ſhall haue ſome fauour ſhewed him. The Ambaſſador alſo of Moſcouia had audience, who was accompanyed into the Pallace by the high Chamberlayne, and many of the chiefeſt Courtiers, and preſented vnto his Maieſtie, a great number of exquiſite and fine Armelens, with a furniture of a Goſtone. Of the ſame vncouered of very great value, and brought letters of credite, written in red ſarcenet, he came to confirme and renewe the truce and league that alwayes hath béene betwéen his princes father, and the houſe of Auſtria whereupon he had a long diſcourſe

committed this cruell fact, to heape villanie vpon villanie, tooke the faireſt of the two young Ladies, and in the preſence of all the other rauiſhed her, permitting and commanding his men, to doo the like vnto the other, and to all the Ladies and gentlewomen that attended on them, which done, he cauſed them moſt cruelly to be ſlaine, and flong into the ſea. This villanie being heard of abroade, was of all men deteſted, and condemned to be more then barbarous, eſpecially of the Venecians themſelues, who ſought all meanes poſſible to haue him taken, which thing Emmo perceiuing, and being gauled with the guilt of his conſcience, he tooke him to his flight, and being come to Puglia, perceiuing himſelfe not to be ſafe there, he licenced two of his Galleys, and with all his bootie amounting to the value of 200. thouſand Crownes in money & Iewels, vpon ye thirde which was the beſt and faireſt Galley that was ſéene vppon the ſeas theſe many yéeres, ſayling towards the Ile of Malta, where he purpoſed to yéeld himſelfe, to the great Maſter of the Religion and order, and there to liue vpon

the praye. The Venecians fearing the diſpleaſure of the great Turke, preſently ſent the Captaine of the Gulfe, who is a Noble Veneciā, to purſue him with one of the beſt Gallies, and if it might be, eyther a liue or dead to take him, and all his complices, whoſe enterpriſe, the Lorde God ſo fauoured, to the ende ſuch villanie ſhould not long go vnpuniſhed, that in few dayes, not farre from Puglia he met with him and without great reſiſtance tooke him, and all his men, and carried them to Venice, where ye fourth day after being iuſtly by the lawes condemned, he was publiquely executed and had his head cutte of, and all his goods confiſcated, to a kinſman of his that was with him: but in as much as all the ſouldiers proteſted that he was nothing culpable, and rather had ſought by all meanes and reaſons, to diſwade him frō that crueltie, they did nothing but condemne him to perpetuall priſon. At the firſt, when the great Turke heard of this he ſéemed to be very angry, and demanded to haue (beſides an infinit ſumme of money, Emmo and all the ſouldiers) and Gallies furniſhed in his owne handes.

The Venecians foorthwith, ſent Ambaſſadours vnto him with Emmo his head, excuſing themſelues as well as they could, and that it was a thing they vtterly deteſted, and were altogether innocent of, offering any reaſonable conditions to appeaſe him, but he continuing in his anger, demaunded great and vnreaſonable ſatiſfactiō: but now as we heare by theſe laſt letters, he is much altered, and ſéemes to yéelde to any reaſonable conditions, to which he would neuer haue condiſcended, were he in any good eſtate with that mightie enemie of his, the great Perſian, with whom theſe thrée yéeres ſpace he hath had continuall warre, and hath loſt verie much, who euen at this time troubles him greatly, and that is the reaſon that hee was ſo ſoone appeaſed with the Venecians. So that nowe it were an eaſie thing for the Chriſtian Princes (if there were any zeale of Chriſt in them, and that ſuch enuie and malice did not raigne among them) vniting themſelues together, vtterly to ouerthrowe him, and frée ſo many thouſandes of Chriſtian ſoules that liue in miſerable bondage, which if they

doo not but continue ſtill, in ſéeking to vndoo and deuour one another. You ſhall ſée one day thoſe two mightie States, enemies both to the name of Chriſt, ioyne together & fall vpon vs, as they did vpon the Princes of Greece. Pardon me good ſir, if I haue gone from my former diſcourſe, for nothing maketh mee ſpeake but ye great deſire I haue, that that enemie of Chriſtians, ſhould once be ſet vpon by thoſe that might (if they would) ouercome, hauing the euerliuing Lord to their guide, as they might haue, if they woulde followe that good Godfrey of Buloin, that gathered a Chriſtiā power out of England, Fraunce, Italie, and recouered the Holy Land. But nowe returning to it, I ſay that with the ſame letters, we heare that S. Barberico, who was newly choſen Procurator of S. Marco, which is one of the greateſt dignities in that Signorie, went to the Senate, accompanyed with thrée hundreth noble men, all in their Senatours roabes, which made a rare and goodly ſhowe, and to moſt of them he made a ſumptuous banquet. The Prouiſor of Firme Land was come to the citie, his office is

alſo of great credite among them. A noble man of the houſe of Contarini, euen in ye 
                  Rialto (which is a place in Venice as the Royall Exchange in London) ſhot at another Noble man with a Piſtol, who being taken, was foorthwith baniſhed the citie, and all the States thereof, on paine of a thouſand crownes, and to looſe his life if he be taken, and howbeit many ſue for hym, yet can no fauour be obtained, vntill ten yéeres be expired, and if his father die in ye meane time, his goods ſhalbe confiſcated.
               The Cardinall Ceneda, was ready to take his iourney from Venice to come hether. The Patriarke of Aquileia was looked for there. The Souldiers were preſt before to be ſent into Candia to the gariſons, they began now to take their pay, and to be ſent away vnder diuers Coronels, and Captaines. This is al we heard from thence with the laſt letters.
               From Rome, from the day aboueſayd to the 18. of May. Vpon Saturday laſt, there was a publique conſiſtorie held, in which the Cardinals Mondoni, Terra-noua, and Gioyeuſe, made their firſt entrie to receiue their Hats, who were accompanied

by 32. Cardinals, and a great nūber of other Lords, Barrons, & nobles al on horſebacke. The Cardinals, Eſte, Ramboglietto, Sirletto, & Medici were not there. They were moſt courteouſly & honorably receiued, and entertained of the Pope, who gaue them their Hattes, and made them full Cardinales. The Popes when they made any Cardinals that is not preſent, they vſe this ceremonie. Firſt to ſend them a red Cap where they are, and then the firſt time after they come to Rome, and enter the conſiſtorie, they giue them the Hat. Theſe thrée cardinals were made by Gregory, but they had neuer bin at Rome before.
               The Cardinall Medici had audience of the Pope, and tolde him that ye Duke of Toſcana his brother, deſired to come and kiſſe his féete, and doo his duetie to his holineſſe, but that he deſired to haue audience, and to be receiued in ye kings Hall, the Pope anſwered him▪ that at more leyſure he woulde talke of it, and gaue him an anſwere.
               On Munday in ye Conſiſtorie, by ye reſignation of Monſier Fautino, ye Church of Coſcenza was committed to Abbot Paſtorius, the Church of Concordia in

                  Friuli, to a gentleman of Venice, of the houſe of Quirini: that of Salmona to a Fryer, Chaplaine to the Cardinall of Aragona. Likewiſe, two Churches in Polonia (named by Cardinall Farneſe) were prouided of ſufficiēt Paſtors. The ſame day, and in the ſayd Conſiſtorie, the Pope declared as Legates, theſe Prelates folowing: Cardinall Saluiati to be ſent to Bologna la graſſa. Cardinall Colonna to Campagna of Rome. Cardinall Geſualdo to Marca d' Ancona. Cardinall Spinola to Perugia, and Cardinall Canano to Romagna. And the Pope nominated his aboue named nephew, Cardinall Mont-alto, gyuing him his owne Hat, his Armes, and hys name, with ſeuen thouſande Crownes reuenues at the firſt daſh. On the Tueſday following, the ſealing beeing ended, Cardinall Farneſe departed hence to Grotta ferrata, there to ſolace and recreate himſelfe, and it is thought that he is greatly diſcontented. The day before Mounſier Fieſco caryed a hat and a hallowed ſword to the Duke of Sauoy, and a Roſe vnto the Dutcheſſe, (which is a ceremonie vſed of Popes in honouring of Princes,) for that the Duke and hys

wyfe comming out of Spayne, wil lande at Nizza, where ye Pope hath ſent Lorde Fieſco to receiue them, and preſent them with his preſents: and as ſome thinke, he ſhal continue with the Duke as Nuntio. The ſame day the Duke of Sora renounced his generalſhip, and the Marques Mario Sforza renounced his office, he béeing Lieutenant. Vpon wedneſday Signior Bon compagno, brother to Pope Gregory came hether, who for ſome priuate grudge was not permitted to come during his brothers life. There went to méete him out of the Gates, theſe men folowing: the Duke of Sora his Nephewe, the Cardinalles San ſiſto hys ſonne, and Vaſta villani his Nephewe, with certain others, who conducted him to Cardinall San ſiſto his houſe. Whereby it may be ſéene how variably ye whéele of Fortune turneth, for if he had beene permitted to come whilſt his brother liued, he ſhould haue béene receiued of the Cardinalles and Lordes of the Courte, and with great triumphe brought into the Pallace. Neither will I forget to tel you the cauſe, why the Pope his brother would not ſée him. The cauſe was this.

Before Gregory came to ye Popedome, he was a very poore Cardinall, and maintained his ſonne Lord Giacomo (as well as he coulde) at ſtudie in Padua, who in time of vacation, alwaies repayred to his Vncles houſe in Bologna, where he was very ill intreated of his Aunte, and by her oftentimes miſuſed in termes & ſpéeches, as calling him aſſe, dolt, prieſts baſtarde, with the like, which ſpéeches (as you knowe) with vs are counted ſpightfull and intollerable. This poore youth, ſometimes gaue his father intelligence thereof by letters, who writte to his Brother, and tolde him that he maruayled (ſéeing he had the gouernment of his wife) he would ſuffer it, and threatning him that if he wold not redreſſe it▪ he would be ſo mindfull of him, as hee ſhould repent it. But his brother, who not onely loued but honoured his wyfe, durſt neuer let her vnderſtande thereof, though ſecretely to winne his Nephew, he nowe and then beſtowed ſome ſpending money on him, who alwayes dyd commende him to his father, who preſentlie after he was choſen Pope, ſent for his ſonne Lorde Giacomo, cauſing hym

moſt honourably to be receiued, dayly aduauncing him, as well you knowe.
               
                  Signior Bon compagno hearing of his brothers preferment, foorthwith addreſſed himſelfe to goe to ſée him, hoping to be ioyfully entertained and honoured of him: but the Pope foreknowing his comming, ſent him ſtraight worde to come no further vppon paine of his diſpleaſure, but to returne home againe, not telling him the cauſe why, knowing that if he liſted he might well conceyue it. Hys brother hearing this meſſage, ſorrowfull and penſiue returned backe, and coulde neuer after haue leaue to come thether, (although Lord Giacomo earneſtly ſued for him.) The Pope immitating héerein, Pope Pius the fourth, who woulde neuer ſuffer his brother the Marques of Marignano, to come in his ſight, neither did he at any time ſhow fauour or fréend ſhippe to him or his, how be it, in this point, Pope Gregory differed from him, for hee gaue to his brothers two daughters, eache of thē ten thouſande crownes in mariage, and cauſed them to be nobly and honourably matched, and made one of his ſonnes Cardinall, gyuing hym

great riches, and the ſecond Gouernour of Rauenna, and vpon him he beſtowed a thouſande crownes euery moneth, and one of hys ſiſters ſons he made Cardinal Vaſta villani. Nowe to returne to the things preſent, I ſay that the day folowing, Sig. Bon compagno came to kyſſe the Popes féete, who receiued him verye curteouſly, and ſome ſuppoſe that he ſhal be eſtabliſhed Gouernour of the Citty of Fermo during his life, although the communaltie of that Cittie made ſute to the Pope, to graunt them for their gouernor the new Cardinall Mont-alto, who anſwered them, that as yet hee had more néede of a Gouernour himſelfe then to gouerne others. Mounſier Ahlobrandino is elected Chauncelour, and Mounſier Baſone ſhalbe Nuntio in Spayne, and Cardinal San Giorgio in Naples. Moun ſier Carlo Conti, Gouernour of Camerino, craueth leaue of the Pope to come hether to Rome, it is ſayde he ſhall haue it, and that in his place hee will ſende Mounſier Maffetti. At the requeſt of Cardinall Altemps, the Pope hath confirmed the olde Fiſcull of Rome in hys office, and hath appointed Luſimbardi
                  
ouerſeer and Auditor of the Tower of Bologna. We vnderſtand by letters frō 
                  Spayne, that the day of the Annunciation in the Church of Saragoſſa, the Duke of Sauoy made the Lords Sig. Giacomo Battiſta of Sauoy, his Ambaſſadour reſident in Spayne: the Marques of Ciambra, & Conte Ottauio ſan vitale Knights of the order of the Annunciation, meaning alſo to beſtowe it vppon the Marques Boba, and Don Michele Bouelli at his returne into Italie, and hath appoynted that the ſeconde ceremonie of enſtaling, be doone in Nizza of Brouenza. His maieſty wyll accompany and bring hys daughter, the ſpouſe to Parcelona, who hath vſed much kindnes and fréendſhip towards the Duke his ſon in lawe, and with Cardinal Granuella only, his other daughter ſhall be maried to ye Archduke Erneſto, brother to the Emperour.
               There is a mariage talked of betwixt one of the Popes Néeces, and Sig. Iulianus, ſonne to Signior Giorgio Ceſarmi, and betwixt hys other Néece & Sig. Pietro Gaetano, ſonne to Sig. Honorato, but whether they ſhall come to paſſe or no, it is vncertaine. Mon. Nazaret
                  
ſhalbe Legate in Fraunce to ſéeke to moderate and mittigate thoſe hurly-burlies▪ and therefore the Pope hath ſent for him hither. The Biſhop of Camerino (in his voiage to olonia, going thether as Nuntio) is deade. The Archbyſhop of Naples is come hether. Newes is brought vs, that in the Mountaines of Safso ferrato, a ringleader of Outlawes called Morte, with 22. of his adherents, is beſieged by two thouſand mē & more, wherevpon we hope that he ſhall not eſcape. Cadinall Vercelli on thurſday morning, being taken with a certaine feuer, departed this life in leſſe then 4. houres, and by his death there fell an Abbye of fiue thouſand crownes a yeere, which the Pope hath already beſtowed on Cardinall Mont-alto hys Nephewe. Wee heare that in Naples by reaſon of ye great dearth that is in that Citie, the people appointed one to deale with ye Viceroy, that ſo many people might not die for hunger, who went and did cleane contrarie: for when certaine ſhips laden with corne were in the Hauen, he cauſed them to be ſent to Spayne, ſaying that in Naples there was Corne ſufficient, which

thing when the people hearde of, they forthwith in a great rage and fury ran to the Gentlemans houſe, where they mette with certaine Fryers, who hearing the cauſe of theyr tumult, deſyred them to be contented, that they might goe to his houſe to confeſſe him, and perſwade him to die patiently, and then to kill him, to which the people agréed, but afterwardes, perceiuing that ye Fryers ſought to ſaue him, and to make him flie, they ruſhed into his houſe, and before the Fryers faces killed him, and trayled him a long throughout the Cittie before the Viceroy, crying all with a lowde voice. God ſaue the king and iuſtice. Whervpon, the Viceroy being at his wits ends, withdrewe himſelfe into his Caſtel, and cauſed hys Garde to giue diligent attendaunce, and not ſturre in any wiſe.
               There is come hither another Nephew of ye Popes, who hath béen twentie yéeres abſent from Italie, his profeſſion is to handle his weapon well, it is thought that he hath béene a good one in his daies, that he hath played many pretie parts, notwithſtanding we thinke he ſhall be generall of ye Church. We heare

that he hath another come from Piacenza, ſo that now he wanteth not kinſmen being in proſperitie, and more are comming dayly from ſtrange countries, although whileſt he liued cardinal, it was not knowen that he had any, but ye huſband of Corambona. They write from Genoua, how the foure Gallies of Tuſcane, who had chaſed two Turkiſh Gallies, euen to Marſilia, were come to the hauen of Genoua, where they ſhall take in the Duke of Niuers, which goeth to ye bathes of Luca. We heare alſo that they of Genoua had choſen two Ambaſſadors to ſend to Nizza, to congratulate with the Duke and Dutcheſſe of Sauoy, and to morow to ſend hither, to render their obedience to the Pope. By letters from Praga, we heare that the Ambaſſadour of Muſcouia, was reſolued to ſée the ceremonie of the golden Fléece, & being inuited to a banquet by the Ambaſſadour of Venice, he drūke ſo much that almoſt he was choked therewith. The Vice-chamberlaine began to mend of his ſicknes, and Lorde Traulen was ſore troubled with ye Goute, whereupon his life was greatly doubted, being a man of 76.

yéeres of age. Yeſterday the Emperour diſpached a Poſte to Rome, whether the Ambaſſadour of Tuſcane meaning to ſend another, he was not permitted, for that his Maieſtie woulde haue his man arriue two dayes before the Dukes. This Nuntio is greatly diſcomforted by ye death of Pope Gregorie, fearing leaſt he ſhoulde be depriued of his office, eſpecially for that he hath béene at great expences. By letters from Venice, dated the 12. of May, wee heare that newes were come from Conſtantinople, that ye buſines of the reſtitution of the Gallie, to the great honour of the Ambaſſadour, and ſatiſfaction of the ſignorie, was concluded and ended, and that there was no talke of any army, which is a manifeſt ſigne of peace with the Chriſtians, and therefore hée hath confirmed the league with the King of Spaine for other two yéeres. The Turke is ſo buſied in the warres of Perſia, and againſt the Perſians to his great diſaduantage, hauing receiued another notable ouerthrowe of them, and beſides betwixt the Turkes & Transiluanes, there is like to be ſomething adoo, for yt ſome notable ſkirmiſh

had béene betwéene them already. The prince Valacco placed in his eſtate with the fauour of the Turke, was againe diſplaced of the people, and ye other that was put downe ſet vp. Cardi. Ceneda of whom before I made mention, is returned to the cure of his Church, and at the end of Auguſt wil come hither to Rome. From Genoua tis ſayde that in Sauoia, there is great adoo to intertaine ſumptuouſly the newe ſpouſes, and there bee choſen beſides the foure Ambaſſadours, foure Matrons, which ſpeake Spaniſh to receiue the Ducheſſe. There hath bin a Proclamation againſt certayne vnknowē perſons, which robbed a ſhip in ye hauen with all the munition that there is prouided. Yet neuertheleſſe there be many robberies committed. Doctor Ameranta hath bin ſtayed by ye inquiſition to the great admiration of euery one, he beyng of great credite in the Citie. It is knowen by letters come to the Hebrews, yt the Tartarians are conioyned with the Moſcouites and other Potentates to ſet vpon the great Turke. And this my louing friend, is aſmuch as at this time, I can ſhowe you of the newes we haue in Rome, the which if you well conſider,

you ſhall finde that there is not at thys day, any Court in the worlde, in whych fortune ſheweth more then in thys her power, ſith that you ſee that many which within theſe two monethes, ſat in the higheſt part of her turning whéele, are now thrown downe to ye loweſt of them was ye only talke while theyr proſperity laſted, towards them onely were ye eyes of all men bent, & now there is no more account made of them then of any other, and within a ſhort while their memory will faile ſo, as if they had neuer béene. Contrariwiſe, thoſe of whome no man talked, and which were accounted as the of ſcouring of the baſe, be now the chéefe, and they onely are in the mouthes of men. And to the end, that you may perceiue theſe things better with the eye of your vnderſtanding, I will heere ſet downe before you, as concluſion of thys my letter, the whole life of this preſent Pope, ye whych I had of a learned Doctor of Law, Sometime a familiar fréend of ye Popes, who ſware & proteſted vnto me, that 8. yéeres agoe, when hee was Cardinall, hee voluntarily tolde it hym himſelfe, without any requeſt thereof, & ſaid, he was not aſhamed that any man

ſhould know it, and tooke great delyght in telling it. And this it is. Mont-alto is a little village in Marca d' Ancona hid in an vnpleaſant valley, at the ſide of the mount Appennine, and becauſe the countrey is ſo obſcure, I can not deſcribe it better, ſaue that it is a little village at the roote of ye mountaines, there diſtant from the noble citie of Aſcoli, ten miles. In that place was this preſent Pope borne after this ſort. There dwelt a little fellow named Pietro, who for his lyttle ſtature and ſmal perſonage, was called Peretto, which is aſmuch to ſay, as little Peter, & alſo little Peare. His birth & ſtocke was ſo baſe, & his liuing ſo ſlender, that vpon ye hils of Fermo to maintaine himſelfe, he was glad to kéepe the ſwine of one Sig. Horatio Brancadoro, & being one day in the field looking to his ſwine, there ſodainly aroſe ſuch a mightie ſtorme and tempeſt, that leauing hys ſwine to the broade fielde, at fortunes diſcretion, he betooke himſelfe to hys cabyn a lyttle of to his wife (who was of no greater Parentage then himſelfe) & lying with her that night, hee got her with child, who in due time was deliuered of a iollie boy, who nurſed him her

ſelfe as long as her milke laſted. Which boy commyng to the age of thrée yéeres, the father not being able to kéepe him, he gaue him and recommended him to the Baker of the towne, who was a very poore man himſelfe, for there were no more then fowre or fiue houſes in the village, to whome he did bake, who for Gods ſake tooke him, and ſo the poore childe lyued a great whyle by that ſlender almes, and croommes of breade, or péeces that the poore women which came thether to bake, woulde nowe and then giue him. His attyre was a long time of a courſe ſhyrt ragged and torne, his bed was an Aſhheape which was raked out of the Ouen, whereon he was enforced to lye, leaſt he ſhoulde die for colde, and this poore life led he, till he was almoſt 8. yéeres olde, at which time there came thether by chaunce a gentlewomā of Aſcoli, of the houſe of Maleſpini (who hath at this day two ſonnes liuing, men of great fame and credite, the one▪ called Sig. Piccione, the other Sig. Nicolo Maleſpini) who being mooued to pitie at the miſerie of the childe, tooke him thence, & hauing cauſed him to be wel waſhed and cleanſed, cauſed him to be apparelled in

the habite of S. Frauncis, and committed him to the cuſtodie of a poore Vicar of that Chappell, who had no learning, but could onely read and ſay Maſſe, and becauſe the childe had no other name but Cenaiuolo, that is to ſay in Engliſh, a Lyer vpon the aſhes, the gentlewoman called him Faelix, as propheſying that which ſhould come after, in ſhort ſpace he tooke to ſurname his fathers name, & ſo was called Felice Peretto. There then he learned of his maſter to reade, and to be able to helpe him to ſay Maſſe, in ſo much, as in ye end he grew to be knowen of a quicke wit, ſo as if he were well brought vp, he might become a profitable member of his countrey, wherupon, his Maiſter ſo commended him to the Pryor, of the Friers of his order in the Citie of Aſcoli, that he woulde néedes haue him, and there he began to attayne to ſome learning, wherein in little time hée profited ſo exceedingly, that amongſt the diſputers, he was counted one of the chiefe, afterwards he had the degrée of a Preacher, neither was he inferior therin to the beſt, and therfore he was made inquiſitor, and was called Monſi
                        ••
                      Felice Peretto, and béeyng enforced to vſe

ſome deuiſe, for a ſeale to ſubſcribe the ſentences which hée gaue, hauing firſt ſealed his letters with a piece of money, he deuiſed and tooke vppon him a Lyon Iacent, holding vp in one of his pawes a braunche of a Peare tree, alluding to his name, thus, Beyng inquiſitor, hee was ſent by the Generall to Venice, there to vſe and learne to practiſe the inquiſition, and becauſe he too too ſeuerely behaued himſelfe, he was on a tyme by certaine gentlemen buffeted and dry beaten. By which his miſhap, ſprung al his benefite and preferment, for Pius Quintus (who loued ſuch ſeuere felowes as he had béene himſelfe, hearing this, to ſpyte the Gentlemen that had beaten him, called him to Rome, and within a while after made him Cardinall: calling him Cardinall Mont-alto, becauſe hee was borne there, giuing him ſeuē thouſande crownes reuenewes, and a hundreth Crownes a moneth for almes, as commonly Popes giue to poore Cardinals, after which time, he wholly gaue himſelfe to ye attaining of good learning, and ſtudie of humanitie: & in ſhort time he became a very profound Philoſopher, and is at this day one of the beſt diſputers

that is at Rome. And howbeit it was ſo highly and ſo ſodainely exalted, yet did he not degenerate from his firſt originall, for you ſhould haue ſéene hym héere in Rome, goe in a filthy great, and greaſie Hat, al beſmeared, and his hands foule and dyrtie. Yet is he very politike and patient, which was well perceyued in him not long agoe, when his Nephew (of whom I haue before made mention) was ſlayne, he neuer gaue ſhowe of anger or alteration, which made all the cytie to woonder at him. He is a man who will not eaſily be led, and gouerned of others, which maketh me to thinke, that he will not ſuffer himſelfe to be robbed by others, and as the common Phraſe is to be drawen by the noſe, wherein I pray God he ſtill continue, for wee are long agoe weary, and haue had too many Popes which haue béene thralles, and ſubiectes to ye Spaniards. It was greatly wiſhed, that Cardinall Farneſe, had béene Pope, who wyth hys worthy Progeny and noble minde, myght haue comforted and animated this people, and the miſery of all Italie, for to ſpeake indifferently, wee bee all abaſed and kept vnder, whych commeth to paſſe be the

policie of the Spanyardes, who ſéeke 
                     〈◊〉
                   to haue one that is by baſe Byrth and bringing vp, elected Pope. This man is of ſtature rather lowe then tall, but of a good complexion, leane and dry, vſed to endure labour, wherefore I thinke, that (if hée bee not ouercome with ſuch delicate and dayntie meates as his degrée requireth) hee will lyue many yeares. Héere nowe I ceaſe from further troubling you, aſſuring you that hereafter I will vſe more diligence, if ſo bee that I ſhall vnderſtand that theſe are acceptable vnto you, and ſo I end, deſiring God to ſhield you from all euill. From Rome the laſt of May. 1585.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   