
      
         
            
            
               
LECTVRES VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE COLOSSIANS. PREACHED BY THAT FAITHFVLL ſeruant of God, Maiſter ROBERT ROLLOK, ſometime Rector of the Vniuerſitie of Edenburgh.
            
               COLOS. 3. 16, 17.
               16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteouſly in all wiſdome, teaching and admoniſhing your owne ſelues, in pſalmes and hymnes, and ſpirituall ſongs, ſinging with a grace in your hearts to the Lord.
               17 And whatſoeuer ye ſhall doe, in word or deede, doe all in the Name of the Lord Ieſus, giuing thankes to God euen the Father by him.
            
            AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, dwelling in Pater-noſter row, ouer against the ſigne of the Checker. 1603.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND MY VERY CHRISTIAN FRIEND, Maiſter William Scot of Ely, all goodneſſe in this life, and in the life to come euerlasting happineſſe.
            
               SIr, in many things God hath been pleaſed to linke vs together, as in nature, in nation, and in honeſt familiaritie or Chriſtian acquaintance, and ſundrie ſuch like: yet in none of theſe, hath this great grace of his, more plainely and plentifully appeared, then in the band of the holy Religion which we profeſſe. As the thing it ſelfe hath been, is, and I truſt ſhall for euer be, the greateſt glorie and beſt comfort, that God hath affoorded vs in this world: ſo we cannot but make much of the meanes, and thinke well of the men, by which this and many other graces, haue been offered vnto vs, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ffected in vs.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                meanes are the Word, Sacraments, and Prayers of the Church, together with many other

good helpes and aides, both publike and priuate which are good, not onely becauſe they proceede from God, From whom alone floweth euery good and perfect gift, and is all onely goodnes himſelfe: but alſo becauſe they tend, to our ſpirituall benefit in generall, and in ſpeciall are, the ſtricteſt band, to tye vs together one with another, and to hold vs faſt in the bleſſed fellowſhip of the ſaints. The men are G
                  •••
                faithfull ſeruants, labouring in the miniſterie of Gods holy word and doctrine amongſt vs. Who howſoeuer they bee of themſelues infirme and weake, and haue Gods bleſſed treaſures but in earthen veſſels, and therefore many times euen in both theſe reſpects, not onely deſpiſed, but ill intreated in this euill world, yet are they made vnto 
                  •
               s and the reſt that beleeue, the ſauor of life vnto life, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Christ.
            
            Amongſt others, whom God in this laſt age hath vouchſafed vnto vs, who may we? or who mould we more continually remember, or more reuerently regard, then that worthie Country man of ours, Maiſter ROBERT ROLLOK, who, what hee was in himſelfe (I meane for his life and conuerſation) I ſuppoſe verilie, you of any man liuing beſt know, and can and will moſt truely relate, as time and occaſion ſhall be offered, becauſe you were not onely the longeſt, but moſt inwardly acquainted with all his cariages. And what he was, and hath been to the Church, his worthy workes left 
                  •••
               ind him, beſides his daily labours in the Pulpit and Schooles, can more then ſufficientlie teſtifie▪ What to men in the world, is manifeſted by many things.

But not by any more then this, that hitherto enuie it ſelfe, hath not opened her mouth, neither euer ſhall be able ſo to doe, his conuerſation was ſo Chriſtian, and his iudgement ſo ſincere. This worthie inſtrument of his glorie; God graciouſlie offered, nay liberally lent a long while to our Church: but we 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo reuerentlie eſteeming him, as we ſhould, nor 
                  •••
               refullie profiting by him, as in deede we ought, God in great mercie towards him doubtles, though in no ſmall iudgement to vs ward, hath been pleaſed to retraite him to himſelfe, out of this wretched world, and to bring him to, yea to place him in celeſtiall & heauenlie ioyes. Which whatſoeuer he was doing, he did hunger and thirſt after, yea groane and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and as we may ſay in another mans ſpeech, 
                  〈◊〉
                another matter, he did eate, drinke, and 
                  〈◊〉
                eternall life, euery thing in him in a manner aſſuredly teſtifying, that here was not his hope, but that he looked for a citie, eternall in the heauens. All which graces God gaue him, not onely for his owne conſolation, but in deed for our imitation, if happilie we can ſtriue thereto, that he being in ſome meaſure, both in life and death made conformable, to his head and Sauiour Chriſt, we might learne in deed, and that by an example in fraile fleſh and blood, to purge our ſelues from all filthines of the fleſh and the ſpirit, and to finiſh our ſanctification in the feare of God▪
                Wherein, that the Lord might the better inſtruc
                  •
                
               
                  •
               s, he hath thus farre graciouſlie prouided for vs, that though he be departed from vs, as in regarde of the bodie, yet he is preſent with vs, in reſpect of his ſpirit; yea to ſay truth he liueth, and that not onely
               
               with God, and innumerable Saints and Angels, in the heauenlie places, where is the fruition and fulnes of ioy for euermore, but euen with men, yea holy men vpon earth, and ſpeaketh to them, though not in a bodily voyce, yet in the ſound of his Lectures, and fame of many excellent things of his, prouoking the good euerie day to be better, and admoniſhing the wicked, euery where to turne from dead workes, vnto the liuing God, that ſo they might repent, and be ſaued. And this he doth amongſt others, euen in theſe Sermons or Lectures, which now I preſent vnto you, as a poſthume birth, after the Fathers deceaſe, or as an Orphane deſtitute of earthly parents, not onely to receiue, as it were breath and being from you, for that it hath done alreadie, as without whoſe good meanes in deed, it could neuer haue beheld this light, but all good ſupportation beſide, it lying in you, not onely for your ſelfe, but with ſundrie others, by reaſon of the good credit you haue among all, ſpeciallie with the godlie, to giue it voge, and paſſage.
            Take it therefore I pray you into your good patronage and protection, and receiue it, as it is in deed yours: yea, yours I ſay, if not in many good and gracious reſpects beſides, yet in a double regarde at the leaſt. One in conſideration of the author, whoſe things whileſt he liued, yea and after life and death alſo, were yours, as yours again his, but all in Chriſt. Another, in that it is produced to the view of all, by your meanes, without which it ſhould haue been, as bed-reden, notable to moue hand or foote, nor to ſee or ſpeake, or ſhould haue periſhed inter blattas &
               
               tineas, as we ſay; but now commeth forth into the world, cloathed as it were with your countenance, and to be vpheld by your credit.
            In this holy loue of yours, hold on I beſeech you, and increaſe with the increaſings of God, and ſhew it effectuallie, not onely to his, which yet remaine amongſt vs, as you haue bountifullie done, and yet doe, that ſo that may be verified in you, in the daies of your pilgrimage, which was auerred of a right worthie perſon in former time, he ceaſeth not to doe good to the liuing, and to the dead: but euen to all the Saints and Seruants of God in this world, you manifeſting it, to theſe eſpeciallie, by ſending abroad other fruitfull labours of his, for the bleſſed building of them vp in ſound knowledge, ſtedfaſt faith, and all vnfeined obedience of truth. Aſſure your ſelfe (good Sir) that this labour of loue in you towards them, ſhall not be left vnrequited, neither of God himſelfe, nor of his deare people: for beſides that God, who leaueth not a cuppe of colde water vnrecompenſed, giuen in his name to one of the little ones that beleeue in him, will render it ſeuen folde into your boſome, euen in this life, as hee ſhall ſee good, but ſpeciallie in the reſurrection of the righteous, his Saints vpon earth, will more and more purſue you, with all holy loue, and as a ſure pledge thereof, vouchſafe you their dailie prayers, and performe all other fauours and furtherances that they can. Nay I will ſay more, the Saints in Heauen, and particularlie our ROLLOK ſhall abound, not onely in right and ſound, but in perfect affection to you: and good reaſon, becauſe if when

the Saints that dwell here amongſt vs, doe vnfeinedlie loue one another, they cannot but in Heauen perfectlie loue all that are there, and their fellowſeruants on earth, as well becauſe Heauen freeth vs from all corruption bodilie and ſpirituall, as alſo becauſe it is the place to and in which God hath appointed, fulnes of all ioy, and perfection of all graces. But whither am I caried? It is time to end, ſpeciallie ſith I doubt not but the wiſdome of the Word will teach you, and the power of the bleſſed ſpirit will inable you to performe theſe and all other good things, to the glorie of God, the good of his people, and the comfort of your owne conſcience thorough Chriſt. In whom I reſt aſſuredlie yours, now and for euer.
            
               Iames Hamelton.
            
         
         
            
            The Epistle to the Christian Readers.
            
            
               THe Citie Coloſſe was a very auncient, populous, rich, Zenophon. lib. 1. de expeditione Cyriminoris, ad Coloſſas venit, celebrem vrbē, magnam, & opulentam. Plin. lib. 5. c. 32 and flouriſhing Citie; but much Herodotus lib. 7. qui inſcribitur Polymnia. Xerxes praetergreſſus vrbem Anaua inuenit Coloſſas Phrigiae oppidum. So Strabo. li 12 decayed (as ſome report) long before the birth of Christ. And ſince this Church of Christ was founded among the Coloſsians, theſe three Cities mentioned in this Epistle, Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Coloſſe, were much ſhaken, if not vtterly ruinate with an Earthquake (which happened in Paulus Oroſius. lib. 4. c. 10. Ioh. Cal. ep. ad Coloſſ. 
               Neros time) a fearefull ſpectacle, and iudgement ſent of God, for the Exod. 5. 3. 1. Cor. 11. 30. Num. 14. 11. contempt of the Goſpell, as we may ſee the Citie of Corinth for the ſame cauſe, euen then, ſmitten with the Pestilence, for the inſtruction, no doubt, of all ſucceeding ages to the worldes ende.
            As touching the writing of this Epistle, albeit this bleſſed Apostle had trauailed twiſe or Acts. 15. 32. & 16. 18. 23. thriſe thorough Phrigia, where theſe three Cities were, yet came he not to Coloſſe, for that Epaphras, Oneſimus, Tychicus, with others, had first planted the Church of Christ in thoſe parts. The reaſon is rendred by himſelfe, when he ſaith, I 
               Rom. 15. 20. 1. Cor. 3. 9. 
               enforced my ſelfe to preach the Goſpell, not where Chriſt was, leaſt I ſhould haue built on another
               
               mans foundation. Being therefore afterwards occaſioned, as is most like by Epaphras and Tychicus, with other ſeruants of Christ, he wrote this worthy Epistle, being priſoner in Rome, to the Coloſsians for their further inſtruction and confirmation in the faith of Christ.
            The argument is this in effect: Becauſe the turbulent and ſuperstitious Iewes diſquieted the peace of the Coloſſians, intending, as elſe where often, to make a mixture of the Lawe and the Goſpell: therefore the Apostle giues The argument of the Epiſtle to the Coloſſians. in this Epistle, a ſhort abridgement of all the heauenly doctrine of our ſaluation, deſcribing vnto vs in a most liuely manner what Chriſt is in his natures and offices, working most powerfully in all his liuing members vnited vnto him: and not to be (as the world imagineth) a dead, deformed, idle, painted, Popiſh Christ. So that this Epiſtle will teach Chriſtians, ſoundly and truly, to diſcerne betweene the ſhadow and ſubstance of true Religion, betweene the true Chriſt and fained, and conſequently betweene the true and falſe profeſſors of the Goſpell.
            There are ſeuen parts of this Epiſtle: I finde them ſo Seuen parts of the Epiſtle to the Coloſſians. ſet downe in Maiſter Rollocks latine Commentarie, very briefely and truly obſerued as followeth.  The firſt part is the Salutation, chapter 1. verſe 1, 2. 
                The ſecond  is the Preface, wherein he reioyceth for their faith in  Chriſt, and loue to the Saints, from the 3. verſe to the 12. 
                The third part containes his doctrine of Chriſts benefits to the Saints, namely their calling and redemption, where  the Apostle proceedeth vnto an high deſcription of the Sonne of God, into whoſe kingdome they were called and tranſlated by the Goſpell, applying all things to the Coloſſians, from the 12. verſe of the first chapter, to the 23. of the ſame.  In the fourth part, he exhorteth to perſeuerance

in the faith, and admoniſheth that they take heede of falſe teachers, from the 23. verſe of the first chapter, to the end of the ſecond chapter. In this part he intermingleth admonition with exhortation, for verſe 23. of the first chapter, he exhorteth to perſeuerance in the faith: verſe 4. of the ſecond chapter, he admoniſheth them to take heede of falſe teachers, and in the ſixt verſe of the ſame chapter, he returnes againe to his exhortation: but verſe 8. he fals againe to his admonition, and doth inſist therein to the end of that chapter.  The fift part begins at the third chapter,  verſe 1. and continueth to the ſeuenth verſe of the fourth chapter. This part containeth exhortations to holineſſe of life. And here yee haue againe admonitions partly generall, concerning all Christians, from the firſt verſe of the third chapter, to the 18. of the ſame, partly ſpeciall, which concerne certaine particular ſtates of men, as of Husbands and Wiues, Children and Parents, Seruants and Maiſters, from the 18. verſe of the third chapter, to the ſecond verſe of the fourth chapter, where he returnes againe to generall exhortations, which be continued to the ſeuenth verſe of the fourth chapter.  The ſixt part is from the ſeuenth  verſe of the fourth chapter, to the tenth of the ſame: wherein he ſignifieth to the Coloſsians, that as touching his priuat affaires, he had committed them to Tychicus and Oneſimus, who ſhould report of all things vnto them as they deſired.  The ſeuenth and laſt part, is the concluſion of the Epiſtie, containing Salutations mixt with ſome  Apoſtolicall iniunctions, and this is from the tenth verſe of the laſt chapter, to the end.
            Moreouer, as concerning Maiſter Rollocke and his workes: becauſe this is the firſt fruite of his labours, publiſhed in the Engliſh tongue: he was (as may appeare by

many teſtimonies) a moſt reuerend and faithfull ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt. His name is very pretious and great in all reformed Churches and Nations, which haue receiued the Goſpell of Chriſt. His learned and holy Commentaries on the Prophecie of Daniel, on the Goſpell of Iohn, on the Epiſtle to the Romans, Epheſians, Galathians, Coloſſians, Theſſalonians, with his other workes extant in the Latine tongue, teſtifie aboundantly of his gifts and graces. And leaſt any ſhould except againſt my iudgement, Epiſtola in Tractar. de vocatione efficac. ad D. Iohnſton. which I confeſſe is but meane, or nothing, heare one to ſpeake for all, whoſe wiſdome and learning is reuerenced of all the godly Churches (I meane Maiſter BEZA) concerning this mans workes. He ſaith, That his labours on the Epiſtle to the Romans and Epheſians, be as a rich treaſure ſent from God to his people. Next (ſaith he) without all flatterie be it ſpoken, I haue neuer as yet read any thing written in this kinde, more briefe, more eloquent, and more indicious. And then he proceedeth, ſaying, When I had viewed his workes, I could not containe my ſelfe, but as I was bound, I gaue God thankes for him, reioycing for his bleſſing on the Churches.
            
            This part of his workes, I meane theſe Lectures on this Epiſtle, they were firſt preached in the Scottiſh tongue, not much differing from our ſpeech ſpecially in the North parts of this land; but now they are publiſhed in the moſt common and vſuall Engliſh phraſe, for the comfort and edification, I truſt, of all ſuch as vnderſtand not the Latine tongue in both kingdomes. I could wiſh in mine heart, that all Preachers in both Churches, would learne of this man to Preach the Goſpell of Chriſt; who, wanting neither wit nor learning to ſet forth his exerciſes: yet reſpects he

(as the Apoſtle taught him) neither excellency of words nor humane wiſdome, nor deſires to ſauour of any thing, but of Ieſus Chriſt and him crucified. His continuall care is ſo to ſpeake, as that the ſpirituall power and grace of the 1. Cor. 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Goſpell, might ſpeake onely to the conſciences of the hearers to worke in them: and not himſelfe by any perſwaſions of his learning and eloquence. Theſe workes are now publiſhed after his death, ſo that he hath not performed what he could and would haue done, if his owne hand had been laſt vpon them. The Chriſtian readers will therefore pardon (I doubt not) all faults louingly, which haue paſt in this firſt impreſsion. And thus hauing commended this worke vnto thee, recommend me and it vnto the protection and bleſsing of the Almightie in Christ Ieſus.
            
               Thine in Chriſt Ieſus, Henry Holland.
            
         
      
      
         
            MAISTER ROLLOCKS LECTVRES VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
         
            THE FIRST LECTVRE.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
               
                  1 Paul an Apostle of Ieſus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus our brother,
                  
                  2 To them which are at Coloſſe, Saints and faithfull brethren in Christ: Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Ieſus Christ.
                  
                  3 We giue thankes to God euen the Father of our Lord Ieſus Christ, alwaies praying for you:
                  
                  4 Since we heard of your faith in Christ Ieſus, and of your loue toward all Saints,
                  
                  5 For the hopes ſake, which is laid vp for you in heauen, whereof ye haue heard before by the word of truth, which is the Goſpell,
                  
                  6 Which is come vnto you, euen as it is vnto all the world, and is fruitfull, as it is alſo among you, from the day that ye heard and truly knew the grace of God.
                  
               
            
            
               I Haue choſen (brethren) this Epiſtle which the Apoſtle Paul lying in bands at Rome, wrote to the Church that was at Coloſſe: euen for this cauſe chiefly, becauſe as you ſhall ſee in the deduction, it ſheweth all grace to be in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, all wiſdome, knowledge, mercy, and whatſoeuer a ſinfull creature ſtandeth in need of, is to be ſought and found in Ieſus Chriſt, and nothing to be ſought without

him. But to come to the purpoſe: briefly the Coloſſians were ſo called of Coloſſe, a towne in Phrygia in Aſia the leſſe, whom Epaphras (not an Apoſtle, but an Euangeliſt inferior in ranke to an Apoſtle) had conuerted to the faith of Ieſus Chriſt. After him enters in certaine deceiuers to ſubuert the ground of faith, which faithfully and truly Epaphras had laid, mingling with the Goſpell vaine Philoſophie, the rites of the Law of Moſes, voluntarie worſhipping (as it is called) not content with the ſimplicitie of the Goſpell. In the meane time the Apoſtle lyeth at Rome in bandes, he had neuer ſeene them nor been among them, becauſe they were not founded by him, but by Epaphras, who comes to him and communicateth to him the eſtate of the Church at Coloſſe, how he had founded it, and how falſe teachers had crept in. Wherefore he deſires the Apoſtle to write this Epiſtle to them, to exhort them to ſtand to the true doctrine that Epaphras had taught them: and not to beleeue the falſe teachers. And this is the occaſion of the writing of this epiſtle.
            The Principall parts of it are theſe. Firſt, the ſalutation of Parts of the Epiſtle. the Apoſtle with Timothie to the Church of Coloſſe. Secondly, the preface wherein he indeuoureth to purchaſe the good will and attention of the Coloſſians. Thirdly, the doctrine it ſelfe (ſhort, but exceeding effectuall) of the Lord Ieſus and his office, as we ſhall heare hereafter. Fourthly, after the doctrine, he comes to the exhortation, exhorting the Coloſſians to conſtancie and perſeuerance in the faith and doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt. Fiftly, he admoniſheth them to beware of falſe teachers: theſe things are handled in the firſt two chapters. Sixtly, he commeth to certaine precepts, partly generall, partly particular. Seuenthly, he endeth his epiſtle with ſome ſalutations.
            As touching this firſt chapter, firſt, we haue to obſerue in it the ſalutation: ſecondly, the preface of the Epiſtle: thirdly, the doctrine: fourthly, the exhortation. As for the ſalutation, becauſe it is common to the reſt of his epiſtles, therefore I ſhall paſſe through it briefly. The perſons that wiſh health and welfare to the Church of Coloſſe are firſt Paul the Apoſtle ſent immediatly by Ieſus Chriſt, by the will of the Father: firſt, the will of the father goeth before, then the ſonne the Lord Ieſus

ſendeth out this Apoſtle, for he did nothing without the will of the Father. The ſecond perſon is Timothy a brother, ſo he names him, not an Apoſtle, but an Euangeliſt, and fellow labourer, following Paul, watering where he had planted, for the office of euery Euangeliſt was to water where the Apoſtles before had planted, and to build where they had laid the foundation of the true doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt the Sauiour. The perſons vnto whom this health and welfare is wiſhed, are thoſe that were at Coloſſe: to wit the ſaints, the faithfull brethren in Ieſus Chriſt, that is to ſay, the Church of God that is made vp of faithfull men and ſaints, all brethren in Ieſus Chriſt, at that time in Coloſſe. The thing wiſhed by Paul and Timothy is firſt grace, euen that grace, euen that mercy that is ſhewed vpon the world in Ieſus Chriſt the Lord of grace and mercy: without whom there is no grace to any nation, tongue, nor perſon vpon the earth. Then the ſecond thing is peace that followeth on grace, for his grace once obtained in the remiſſion of ſinnes: vpon it then followeth that inward peace of the ſoule and conſcience eſpecially towards God, and all felicitie both ſpirituall and corporall. And without that grace there is no true peace nor bleſſing of God, all is but a curſe to thee though thou hadſt all the world.
            Now to come to the preface, vpon the which we minde by Gods grace to inſiſt, paſſing ouer the ſalutation, and the reſt before. In the preface of the Epiſtle, the Apoſtle procureth and conciliateth to himſelfe the good will and affection of theſe Coloſſians, to this end, that they liking of the perſon of the writer, ſhould eſteeme the more of the doctrine, exhortations, precepts, and directions that after followe. For the liking of the perſon of the teacher and writer, ſerueth much to the imbracing of the doctrine that is taught: and by the contrarie, the miſliking of the perſon that teacheth the word of God, hindereth the faith of the hearer. The Apoſtle knew this, and begins with a preface to allure and conquer their fauour and good will. The arguments whereby he laboureth to doe this, are two. The firſt is, he lets them vnderſtand that he thanketh God for them. The ſecond argument is, he letteth them vnderſtand that as he thanketh God for them, ſo immediatly he prayeth

for their happie and proſperous eſtate in Chriſt Ieſus. So there are the two arguments whereby hee will procure their good will and attention to this his doctrine. We thanke God (ſaith he) euen the father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, there is the firſt argument: alwayes praying for you, there is the next argument. In the text following he expounds euery one of them in their owne roome.
            Then to come to the propoſition of the argument: we thanke God (ſaith he) euen the Father. In thanking God for them he congratulateth with them for that bleſſed ſtate that they ſtoode in, in Ieſus Chriſt. 
                  Obſer∣uation. 1 Ye ſee brethren his reioycing with them: for that eſtate ſtands not in thankeſgiuing to them, or praiſing of them for that eſtate, but in praiſing and glorifying of God: to teach vs, in all our congratulating together for  the proſperous eſtate of any people or perſon in particular, not to forget God, but to make our congratulation a thankeſgiuing to God, and praiſing and glorifying of him: and why ſhould we not if we looke aright on the matter? whatſoeuer thing ioyfull or proſperous falles out in this world either vpon our ſelues or vpon others, temporall or ſpirituall, all are his benefits and falles downe from heauen from him: and therefore why ſhould we not when we reioyce for any thing either giuen to our ſelues, or vnto others, remeber our God and giue thankes to him for the ſame? Note.Our reioycing ſhould goe vp to heauen, from whence that bleſſing deſcended and came downe. This manner of congratulation is not in this place onely, but through all his epiſtles, and it is far different from the reioycing of the Ethnickes that neuer ſpeaketh one word of God. The flattering Lowne will ſay to the Emperor, it is your wiſedome, you haue done this or that: and neuer a word of God. So that as many congratulations as you reade in theſe prophane men they are all as many blaſphemies againſt God, giuing the praiſe due to God, to a creature that is but vile and ſtincking, though he were an Emperor, or a monarch ouer the whole earth. And as this was the faſhioning of the Ethnickes congratulation that knew not God: it is euen ſo with men in prayſing men now in our dayes forgetting God. How many be there which flatter men as though all were done

by them, and not by the author of grace? what is that but blaſphemie againſt God?
            
               
                  Obſer∣uation. 2 Marke ſecondly for whom it is that he thanketh God and  prayeth, not for himſelfe; praying (ſaith he) ardently for you. We are not bound to pray only for our ſelues, but we are bound to pray for others alſo. Selfe-loue draweth vs ſo neere our ſelues, Selfe loue. that it maketh vs forget others. Thou art not bound onely to pray for thy ſelfe, but if thou be a member of Chriſt, thou art bound to pray for the body in generall, and particular: and all the benefits of God beſtowed on any perſon on the earth temporall or ſpirituall, ſhould be to thee a matter of prayſing God. Brethren, if we had that zeale to the glorie of God, and that loue to our neighbours which we ought to haue, there would not be a bleſſing of God that fell to our neighbour, but we would glorifie God for it, as if it had fallen to our ſelues. Theſe are the latter dayes, and worſt dayes, wherein zeale to God, and loue to man is cleane departed out of the hearts of men. This is a curſed generation. To whom giues hee the thankes? We thanke God (ſaith he) euen the father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: marke the wordes, he ſaith, not God onely, but he telleth vs what a God this is, God ſaid he that is the Father of Ieſus, to let vs ſee that it is vnlawfull for thee to acknowledge another God, but onely that God that manifeſteth himſelfe in the ſonne. The knowledge of God in Chriſt is the very key Seeke the face of God in Chriſt, and Chriſt in the Goſpell. that opens the gate of heauen, & maketh thee to get entry into that light that hath no acceſſe. Knoweſt thou God in Chriſt? then haſt thou an entry to him. Otherwiſe thou knoweſt him not, nor thou ſhalt neuer be able to enter into heauen. The Turke for all his ſpeaking of God got neuer acceſſe to God. The Iewe for all his boaſt of the knowledge of God, knoweth him not, nor neuer ſhall knowe him nor ſee him, without Ieſus Chriſt. God that ſittes in heauen will not looke vpon thee without his ſonne: he is no father to thee neither will be, neither will he ſhew any ſparke of loue to thee, but in his onely ſonne the Lord Ieſus. Therefore ſay not that thou knoweſt God or that he is thy Father, except firſt and aboue all thou knowe the Lord Ieſus: thou ſhalt neuer knowe him, but to thy vtter ouerthrowe and wracke, if thou knoweſt him not in

Ieſus Chriſt. Now to come to the ſecond part of the propoſition contayning his prayer: hee thinks it not enough to thanke God for them, but hee will pray for them inſtantly. Paul was oft on his knees praying. Men wot not what it is to haue to doe with God. I bowe my knees to God for you Epheſ 3. 14. So learne of him that it is not enough to thanke God for the proſperous eſtate of his Church, that is but an halfe dutie to thanke him; but with the thanking of God, thou muſt ioyne prayer for the continuance of the bleſſing of God vpon that perſon, Church, and Common-wealth, for whome thou thankeſt God. There is no man ſo perfect in happineſſe or in any bleſſed eſtate, whether it be ſpirituall, or temporall, but yet ſo long as he liues in the world he hath want: there is a lacke euen in the greateſt Emperor and King, yea euen in temporall things. And he that hath begun well, will fall backe againe a hundreth times in a day, yea hee will runne faſter backeward, then euer he went forward if the Lord withhold him not. Therefore pray for him that he goe not backeward. Then when he is going forward in the good courſe begun, he may not ſtand ſtill, but he muſt run euer looking to the end. There is no man ſo long as he liues that putteth an end to his courſe, his courſe ends with his life. Hath any man a life? He is in the race, he is in the way and iourney towards the But, or as the Apoſtle calles it, the price of the high calling of God, Phil. 3. 14. In the progreſſe he is not able to go one foote forward except the Lord take him by the hand and leade him. Therfore ſeeing there is no progreſſe to heauen, without God his eſpeciall grace, nor thou art not able to lift thy foote without him; with euery foote that thou lifteſt, thanke God for his owne benefit, and pray to God for the continuance and increaſe thereof. Pray feruently for thy ſelfe, and for thoſe that thou wouldeſt haue to continue.
            Thus much for the propoſition: Now followeth the declaration of that wherfore he thankes God: he thanketh God for them but not without cauſe, he ſaw matter of thankes giuing in them, and a vaine thing it is to thanke God for that that is The matter of the thankes giuing. not in a man. What ſaw he in them? We heare (ſaith he) of your faith firſt, and then of your loue to al the Saints without exception.

It is not poſſible but if thou loue one Saint, thou muſt loue all. And if thou hateſt one Saint as a Saint, it will Loue to the Saints. paſſe thy power to beare affection of loue to any: ſo, loue one, and loue all, otherwiſe thou canſt not loue one. Then he ſeeth matter in them wherefore hee thanketh God, and it is for no earthly thing, but that theſe Coloſſians were conquered to that kingdome of Chriſt. It is better for thee to bee conquered to Chriſt then to conquer the whole world.
            Then the ſpirituall matter of reioycing (if thou wouldeſt reioyce, congratulate and praiſe God) ſtandeth in ſpirituall graces; if thou wouldeſt reioyce for thy friend, looke if he haue ſpirituall graces; looke if he haue faith and loue: if he hath not To reioyce for friends. theſe, neither haſt thou matter to reioyce for, nor he, if he had all the world: away with all thy gratulation: all his prayſes, and congratulations, are as many curſes if he want faith and charitie, for there is no bleſſing where they are not. Wot ye what faith is? It ioynes thee with the head: woe is thee that art ſeuered from him, and if thou hadſt all the world: woe is that ſoule that is not ioyned with Chriſt, and being ioyned with him, then art thou faſt. The earth ſhall be ſhaken, and the heauen paſſe away before thou ſhalt looſe thy gripe, and holde of Chriſt, or he twine and part. Who ſhall ſeparate vs from the 
               Faith apprehends. Chriſt. 
               loue of God, ſaith the Apoſtle Rom. 8. 24? there is faith and the vertues thereof. What doth loue againe? As faith maketh the vnion with the head, ſo loue is the band that makes the communion with the Saints, which you rehearſe in your beleefe: and if thou be not ioyned here with his Church, there is no ſaluation for thee, nor life: thou ſhalt neuer ſee the life of Chriſt. Then when wee ſee a man ſtanding firſt in this vnion with Chriſt, and ſecondly in this communion with the Saints, we may ſay bleſſed is that ſoule, for curſed are they that are not ioyned this way. Conioyne thy ſelfe with the head and the members: there is not a member of the body with whom thou ioyneſt thy ſelfe by this communion, but ſo faſt as thy heart cleaues to it, ſo faſt will it cleaue to thee againe. Wherefore reioyceth Paul with the Coloſſians? becauſe they loued the Saints, & ſo he being a Saint his heart ioynes with them. Thou

art a curſed body when a man loues thee, if thou will not loue him againe. Wherefore was it that they had firſt this faith in Ieſus Chriſt, next this loue towards the Saints? what gained they by faith and loue? the Apoſtle ſaith, For that hopes ſake that is laide vp in heauen, it is not for nothing: there is a rich reward of faith and loue. Faith and loue will get thee a fairer thing and richer reward, then all the things in this world. Fye vpon them they are but durt and doung, onely ſee that thou haue faith and loue. Sticke by theſe two and thou ſhall get thee a richer and more glorious thing, then al the things of this world can be to thee. You may learne thē, it is the reſpect that a man hath to a rich reward, and hope that is of the riches of glorie, Epheſ. 1. and not of this peltry in the earth, that makes a man to ſticke with Chriſt, and to haue a communion with the Saints. Otherwiſe if thou haue not this to looke vnto, and this reſpect to that ioyfull end, fye on thee (it is kept to thee Heb. 11. 26 well enough as Peter ſaith, thou haſt no more to doe but to hold thine eye vpon it) if thou haue it not: it ſhall paſſe thy power to keepe thee with Chriſt, and to be ioyned with the Church militant, for there ſhall come ſuch iawes and billowes of temptation, iaw vpon iaw, and billowe vpon billowe, that thou ſhalt periſh. But contrariwiſe, holding thine eie Phil. 3. 20. euer wayting for the comming of thy Sauiour the Lord Ieſus (I confeſſe there be a thouſand things to drawe it downe, but if thou ſtriue to holde it vp) certainely thou ſhalt ſticke faſt with Chriſt, and ſtand with the Saints of God: but if thou carry thine eye from heauen like a moule or muddewart grountling on this earth, thou ſhalt tyne and loſe Chriſt, and the vnion with his Saints. Thou ſhalt loſe thy life and that faire heritage, and then wo is thee for euer more. To come forward, how got they their ſight and knowledge of this life? Note.It is a  looking to this life that muſt keepe the gripe and holde of Chriſt, and make thee to loue the Saints. But how got they it? of the which you haue heard, ſaith he: looke the word. Then they got it by hearing. Well, you that count ſo little of hearing, take heede to your ſelues, they got it by the very eare and that of the Lord. They knewe it not before they heard of it. No knowledge of life euerlaſting by nature. Thou ſhalt not know

that, Thou that wouldeſt liue after this life and after the faſhions of it. Indeede thou ſhalt know that thou ſhalt periſh and dye euerlaſtingly. Adam knew this when hee fell from God: death ſeaſed on him, and this was his knowledge of good and euill that he got, that he knew what bleſſing he had loſt, and into what damnation he hath fallen. But no ſight of his riſing before he heard; ſo no light by nature of life after this life, but a ſight of euerlaſting death and damnation. Long may a ſinner lye ſtill dead in ſinne before he thinke of life, he is no more able to thinke of it then a dead body. How got they it then? by hearing. What heard they? a word: the obiect to the care is a word, or ſound. What word: not a word of lyes, of men, of dreames, of fables. No, how be it thou heare a thouſand yeeres all the inuentions and dreames that Monkes in their cloiſters haue dreamed, build and reſt on them as thou wouldeſt, yet thou ſhalt neuer ſee life by them. What kinde of word muſt this be then? the word of truth: a true word muſt let thee ſeethe heauenly life. What truth is this? the truth of the Goſpell. Euery ſcience hath it owne truth: but there is no truth that will ſaue thee and make thee ſee that inheritance, but onely the truth of the Goſpell: and therefore the Goſpell for the excellencie thereof is called the word of God, and for the excellencie of the truth of the Goſpell, it is called the word of truth. Then in a word to ſpeake homely and familiarly to you: the charter and the euidence of that heauenly inheritance is the Goſpell of Chriſt. Thou haſt no other euidence (looke The Goſpell is the onely euidence of ſaluation. to thy charter cheſt) in heauen, earth, or hell; thou ſhalt neuer get an euidence of thy ſaluation, but the euidence of the Goſpell. Wilt thou keepe the charters of thy land, and heritage on earth, and cloſe them faſt vp in a ſure cheſt and reade them at all times; and forget this onely euidence of thy ſaluation, and not care for it, nor take pleaſure to reade on it? I denounce vnto thee, what euer thou bee, that thou ſhalt neuer ſee life, but thou ſhalt bee ſhut out of heauen. To doe this, it is not a worke of thine own power nor of thine own nature and grace, to drawe thee with ſome delight, to turne ouer the euidence of the Goſpell, to heare it, and to take pleaſure in it, in ſome meaſure ſo long as thou art from the full fruition

of heauen and life euerlaſting. Thou ſhalt neuer brooke it in heauen, and thy pleaſure be not in ſome meaſure on this euidence whileſt thou art here on earth. I denounce ouer againe, and that by the miniſtrie of this word, thou ſhalt be ſhut out, thou ſhalt not haue a furrow of land in heauen. Count of hearing as you wil, by hearing is your life; and there is no pleaſure but in the word of life, and the oft turning of it ouer. When he hath ſpoken of this Goſpell he falleth out in a commendation of the Goſpell: you ſhall finde this in Paul when he falles in ſpeaking of the Goſpell he cannot be eaſily drawne from it. No queſtion he found the power of it ſo forcible in himſelfe, and ſawe it alſo ſo effectuall in others, that where hee ſpeakes of it he cannot goe lightly from it. He loued it ſo well and it was ſo ſweete to him, yea as it is ſaid Pſalm. 119. It was ſweeter to him then the honey, and the honey combe. Well then, he commendeth the Goſpell to them, and there are three arguments of the commendation thereof. Firſt, which (ſaith he) is come to you. Brethren the Goſpell commeth to vs and wee The Goſpell commeth to vs and we goe not to it. neuer go to it, and it comes vnſent for, it would bide long from vs if it ſtayed till we went for it, and though thou wentſt for it, I tell thee thou art no more able to bring it then thou art able to bring the ſunne out of the heauen. For except the Lord ſend it to thee in his mercy and free grace, thou ſhalt neuer get it. But to come to the purpoſe. Doe you ſcar at this Goſpell, that you haue heard becauſe it is Epaphras that hath founded you? you doe euill, would he ſay. Therefore he ſaith ye heard of him nothing but that which is ſpread throughout the world. And Epaphras his Goſpell is that that is my Goſpell, which I haue preached vnto others, which is the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. Take out here a leſſon, wouldeſt thou haue a note or token whereby thou wouldeſt knowe that the Goſpell which thou heareſt and that we preach this day, is the true Goſpell? the Goſpell that muſt ſaue the world? looke if it be the ſame Goſpell that was ſpread through out the world in the dayes of Obſerue. theſe Apoſtles, or if it be that Goſpell that Paul and Peter preached. How ſhall you know if it be that Goſpell of the Apoſtles? It is a long time ſince: where ſhall you knowe it better then by their owne writ? Paul nor Peter preached nothing

but that which they wrote. Neuer a ſentence of ſaluation was preached by Paul, but all is written. He preached the whole counſell of God Act. 20. I ſay and will affirme and will dye with it, that Paul preached the whole counſell of God, and wrote euery word of the ſame. Away with the clouted inuentions of the Papiſts, and that rabble of the cloyſter. Then I pray you examine all our preachings by the rule of this written word. And would to God brethren, that they would ſuffer that to be the onely touchſtone. Oh vaine Papiſt! thy cauſe would periſh, if thou wouldeſt take thee onely to this touchſtone. Thou ſhouldeſt finde all their inuentions to be but lyes. But thou wilt hold thee by lyes, and therefore thou ſhalt periſh and they both. Then thou that findeſt this Goſpell that is preached, to be the written word of the Apoſtles, hold thee by it, and take it for the true word of God, the word of life and ſaluation. Now I pray thee as thou wouldeſt find life and grace in it, put away all preiudice of the miniſter, whether he be come Preiudice againſt the Preacher. from Rome, from the Pope or not, and the Goſpell that he preached be as good as the Goſpell of Paul and Peter; if it be no other, ſtand not vpon the man: if thou counteſt more of the man, or of his calling, then of the Goſpell, thou ſhalt neuer ſee that life.  Looke ye euer to the truth how euer it ſhall pleaſe Notes to knowe the true miniſterie. God either ordinarily, or extraordinarily to ſend it to thee, with whatſoeuer man thruſt out for that effect.  The ſecond argument of the commendation of the Goſpell is the fructifying  of the Goſpell, and the effectuall working of it in the  hearts: as if he would ſay, skar not at the Goſpell preached by Epaphras. I ſhall giue you an argument that it is the Goſpell that I haue preached, looke if it brought out fruites in you (as it hath done in the world) of life and regeneration: if it hath done this, ſcar not at it.  There is another note to knowe the  truth of the Goſpel, if the Goſpell taught at this day brings out in ſome (I will not ſay all, for many are called but fewe are choſen) whoſe hearts it pleaſeth the Lord to open, as he did the heart of Lydia, this true regeneration & renewing the ſoule, how few ſoeuer the number of them be, as it did in the dayes of the Apoſtles. O this Goſpel muſt be the true Goſpell for this is ſure, falſe doctrine will neuer regenerate thee. The inuentions of men

will neuer renew thee. Nay further good morall precepts will neuer alter thy hard heart. Reade Plato, Iſocrates, Cicero, reade them if thou wilt tenne thouſand yeares, all thy reading and hearing of them will not worke in thee the obedience of the heart to God. They may well make thee an Hypocrite. What 
                  Reading of prophane authors their beſt morall can not conuers the heart. Pſal. 19. 7. were all the Philoſophers? as many Hypocrites, counterfeiting humilitie, and the reſt of the vertues. This ground ſhall ſtand then: that there is no renewing doctrine which can change the ſoule but onely the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe it is accompanied with the ſpirit. I ſhall ſend to you the comforter (ſaith Chriſt) and he ſhall giue you my word Iohn 14. Onely this Goſpell then hath the priuiledge to make thee a new man. Therefore let thy reſt bee on this Goſpell, if thou wouldeſt be renewed: and renewed muſt thou be or elſe no life for thee, nor ſight of Chriſt and of heauen and of the ioyes thereof. Sticke faſt I ſay to this bleſſed and glorious doctrine of the Goſpell, that muſt renewe thee by the ſpirit of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to whom with the father and the holy ſpirit be all honour, praiſe and glory,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE SECOND LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians, beginning at the end of the ſixt verſe.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
               
                  6 From the day that ye heard and truly knew the grace of God.
                  
                  7 As ye alſo learned of Epaphras our deare fellow ſeruant, which is for you a faithfull miniſter of Chriſt.
                  
                  8 Who hath alſo declared vnto vs your loue, which ye haue by the ſpirit.
                  
                  
                     
9 For this cauſe wee alſo, ſince the day wee heard of it, ceaſe not to pray for you, and to deſire that yee might bee fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wiſedome, and ſpirituall vnderſtanding.
                  
                  10 That ye might walke worthie of the Lord, and pleaſe him in all things, being fruitfull in all good workes, and increaſing in the knowledge of God,
                  
               
            
            
               THe laſt day Brethren we intreated of the preface of this epiſtle of Paul to the Coloſſians; and to the end that his doctrines, exhortations, and admonitions, ſhould be the more effectuall in them he conciliateth to himſelfe their fauour, and good will, and that by two arguments: the firſt ſhewing that hee thanked God for them: the next ſhewing that hee prayeth continually for them, that they ſhould continue, perſeuere, and grow in that grace receiued. We entred into the declaration of theſe two arguments of beneuolence (to call them ſo.) And firſt we begun to declare the firſt argument of his thankeſgiuing, as it is firſt in order in the text. The thing that moued him to thanke God for them was nothing in this world, no, no earthly grace or benefit: but firſt their faith in Ieſus Chriſt: next their loue to the Saints. He ſetteth downe the cauſe of their faith and loue. They had a reſpect and to-looke to that euerlaſting life, & glorious in heritance that was laid vp for them (and all that beleeue in Ieſus) and kept to them with Chriſt in God, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh: teaching vs that except we haue reſpect to another life, and glorie when this life is done, it cannot be poſſible to cleaue to Chriſt, and loue his Saints; becauſe there are ſo many impediments and temptations to drawe vs from him, and from the loue of the Saints. Then he goes forward and ſheweth by what meanes they had this reſpect and to-looke to this life and glorious inheritance. It bred not in their breſt firſt, but by hearing: and if thou heare not, thou ſhalt not vnderſtand that there is another life. And what a hearing & whereof? Of a word. What word? not of lyes and vanities, of the inuentions of men, nay heare till the day of doome theſe vanities, thou ſhalt neuer get by it the hope of another life, and of glorie hereafter. What a hearing then is this? the hearing of the word of veritie which

he calleth the Goſpell of the bleſſed God, which for the excellencie thereof (for it excelles all the words of the Philoſophers, yea the lawe of Moyſes it ſelfe) it is called the word of truth. Then he recommendeth this Goſpell which they heard by the miniſterie of Epaphras, leaſt the perſon of the man ſhould make them to deſpiſe the doctrine. As for the Goſpell which ye haue heard, doubt not of it, it is the true Goſpell, and I ſhall giue you a token: confer it with the Goſpell that hath paſt through the world, if it be the ſame Goſpell that hath paſt through the world, let not the perſon of the miniſter ſcar you from receiuing it. Then hee giues another argument of this commendation of the Goſpell, looke if it fructifye in you and bringeth forth ſuch fruites as ſanctification, humilitie, charitie, and ſuch fruits of the ſpirit as it doth in the reſt of the world; doubt not of it, for it is the true Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. And therefore let not the perſon of the miniſter ſcar you.
            Then he commeth to the laſt argument, whereat we left you the laſt day, and he calleth them to the remembrance of the ſudden effectualnes of the Goſpell preached by Epaphras amongſt them, of the continuance which it had with them, and ſaith, from the day that ye heard and truely knew the grace of God, 
               
                  Verſ. 6. remember you not that the firſt day ye heard of it, it begun to fructifie in you, and euer ſince it fructifies in you. Therefore if you will looke to the ſuddenneſſe of the effect, and the continuance of it amongſt you, it argueth plainely that it is the truth of God. Vpon this laſt argument learne this beſide the fruite, that the Goſpell bringeth out in the heart of man, in the circumſtance of the time of the haſtie working of the Goſpell in the hearts of men, euen in that ſame hower that man heareth it firſt, he findes it ſo powerfull in him, and the continuance of it working ſtill in him, that it is a ſure argument to him and a note, not onely of the truth of the Goſpell, but alſo that it is the very truth of God. If any hath found this ſincere working in his heart by the Goſpell, this is a ſure argument that it is the truth of God which you heare, though all the world, and the Pope himſelfe ſhould crye againſt it. Briefly, as in theſe words he commends the Goſpell; ſo he commends

the Coloſſians, becauſe they receiued it, and continued in the ſame. The ſpirit of God when he giues thee a grace, he will fall out in commending of thee, and this teſtifyeth a wonderfull loue and mercy in God, and of his liking of them to whom he giues his grace: he will giue them ſuch a praiſe as if they God commends and crownes his own graces in vs. were ſomething, and yet they are nothing, this ſhould make vs to meete him with thankefulneſſe, to praiſe him for ſomething, when he praiſeth thee for nothing. When he hath done with the Goſpell, he comes to the perſon, they might haue ſaid, what is this man that preacheth the Goſpell, hee is no Apoſtle? Paul anſwereth in effect, whatſoeuer the man be, he hath taught you the truth; and then he commends the man, as for the man I will tell you hee is a fellow labourer with me, howbeit I be an Apoſtle, he is no ſeruant to me; but with me, he hath his owne roome: and why? he is a miniſter of Ieſus Chriſt: more, he is beloued of me, I tender the cauſe, he is a miniſter, and a faithfull miniſter, he is ſincere in his calling, and as for you he is wholy for your behoofe and profit, he is ſent to you, and for you a faithfull miniſter in Ieſus Chriſt. And he hath ſhewen indeede that he is for you, for he hath teſtified True loue. of you, and of your heartie loue, and he calleth it the loue of the ſpirit, thereby highly commending their loue, becauſe if loue be true it muſt not onely proceede of thy affection, but it muſt proceede of the ſpirit of Ieſus. Thus for the words, marke then when we ſee a man faithfull in any calling, whether in the Church, or common-wealth, this ſame recommendation Obſerue. that Paul makes of Epaphras, teacheth vs to recommend that man that diſchargeth a faithfull dutie according to the grace giuen him, that they may haue the better lyking of him: I ſay he is a miniſter of Sathan, that ſeeing a man faithfull in any calling, goeth about to ſeuer them and him, to put a miſliking in the hearts of the people, to ſeuer them whom God hath ioyned together.
            Now to goe to the next argument, hitherto haue you heard of the firſt argument touching, thankſgiuing, the next followeth in prayer. Therefore ſaith he from the firſt day that I haue heard of this grace vnceſſantly I pray to God for you: Marke firſt that ſame very grace of ſpirituall loue and charitie wherefore

he thanketh God, moueth him to pray to God for them. Then (brethren) in any grace whether it bee faith, or loue, or patience, &c. there is matter both of thankſgiuing, and prayer to God: as thou art bound to thanke God for the grace receiued, ſo thou art bound to pray for the ſame; and Prayer to God. the more graces we ſee in a man, the greater care ought we to haue to pray to God to keepe him in thoſe graces. But the time is to be conſidered: euen as ſoone as hee heard of their faith, and loue, hee begunne to pray, and from that day to this day, his prayer abideth. This teacheth firſt that after a man hath receiued a great grace from God, hee ſhould euer pray that that grace receiued, may abide with him, and he with it, according to the example of Paul: for ſuch is the frailtie of mans nature, that euery moment he is readie to fal from grace, except the Lord holde him vp. Againe, marke this: when he would haue the grace kept in the heart, what meanes vſeth he? prayer: immediatly hee prayeth to God for them. Then in a word, earneſt and feruent prayer to God is the meanes to get grace from him, to keepe it, either in thy owne heart or in others. If thou wouldeſt haue any grace of God, and haue it abiding with thee fructifying in thy heart, pray to God. Prayer. Prayer is the only meane to effect and obtaine of God whatſoeuer thou ſtandeſt in neede of, and when thou haſt gotten any thing, prayer is the meanes to procure a bleſſing to the ſame, that it abide with thee. What prayeth he for to them? It is no grace that they had gotten alreadie. Wherefore then? that you may be filled. Marke the words (for there is exceeding great pith in them, and would to God we could attaine to the force of them) that ye may be filled (ſaith he) with grace: as if he would ſay, grace is begun with you alreadie, now I pray that you may be filled with grace: you are not full yet: for ſo long as thou liueſt thou mayeſt get grace, but I ſay thou wilt neuer be filled with grace here in this world, but there will euer be ſome emptineſſe and waſtnes in thee. There is euer ſome want in the regenerate man. Learne another leſſon. Wherein ſtandeth thy felicitie, and bleſſednes? euen in this, in a filling vp of that waſtnes and emptines within thee: alas if thou ſaw and felt thy own voydneſſe and want of grace in thy heart, thou wouldeſt neuer

ceaſe but euer bee ſeeking and crying for abundance of faith (for an emptie heart will periſh) Surely if thy heart bee voyde of grace, goe as gallantly as thou pleaſeſt caſting thy head in the winde, if thou haue not grace, and a fulneſſe of grace, in the end thou ſhalt periſh, looke to it as thou wilt. Thinke ye not that our bleſſedneſſe is to be in likeneſſe with God, and Ieſus Chriſt our head? God is full. O what fulnes is in God! Ieſus Chriſt is full; wee ſawe him ſaith Iohn 1. 14. Full of glorie. Then it muſt follow, if we would be truly bleſſed, we muſt bee full as our head is full; and as the Apoſtle to the Coloſſians ſaith, we muſt be filled with that fulneſſe of God: Bleſſed are they (ſaith Chriſt Matth. 5. 6.) that hunger for righteouſneſſe, 
               Col. 3. 19. 
               for they ſhall be filled. Then hunger euer for righteouſneſſe, that thou mayeſt be filled: for to be filled is the bleſſedneſſe of mans eſtate. But what ſtuffe muſt this be wherewith we muſt bee filled? it is not thy happineſſe to bee filled with euery thing, as with meate and drinke; oft times when thou art fulleſt after that manner, thou art emptieſt of grace: He prayeth that they ſhould be filled with knowledge, with light, euen with that that they haue moſt neede of. O the darkneſſe that is in man! naturally he is full of that blacke ſmoake of darkeneſſe; he is choked full of it lying wallowing in it: ſo that of all things, he hath greateſt miſſe of light. If thou were lying in a pit, thou wouldeſt thinke it a great benefit to get a glimſe 
                  The naturall blindnes of man. Epheſ. 6. 12. 13. of light: O but if thou ſawſt thy owne darkeneſſe in thy ſoule, thou wouldeſt neuer bee ioyfull whilſt thou gatſt this light which the Apoſtle prayeth for. So thē the thing we need moſt, is the ſpirituall light of God: for God is light, and dwelleth in light that hath no acceſſe. 1. Tim. 6. 16. What is then thy bleſſedneſſe? to be filled with this light; to be partaker of it in ſome part, as thou art able to be filled with it. So the thing promiſed in the ſcripture, is knowledge and light; and the firſt thing the Apoſtle prayeth for, is to get knowledge of this myſterie of Chriſt. The ſecond word is to be marked, that you may be filled with all knowledge. This ſpeech letteth vs ſee that it will not be a part of knowledge that will fill a man, but he muſt be filled with all knowledge: how beit the heart of man be but of a ſmall roome and capacitie; yet if his heart be ſanctified, it

is a wonderfull thing, the length and the depth of the grace that it will receiue; howbeit it be finit, yet vnſpeakable, how infinite a thing it will receiue. God ſhall dwell and be all in all in that heart that is once ſanctified: ſo infinite a thing it will be capable of. Take it in the owne nature thereof, ye finde it in A ſanctified heart. experience in common ſciences it is not capable of things that are finit: but get it once ſanctified, it will take apprehenſion of that infinit maieſtie and riches in him. That you may be filled with all knowledge: whereof? there are many things better not to be knowen then to bee knowen. Adam would faine haue knowne the myſterie of the forbidden tree, and it had been wel for him that he had neuer knowne it. Whereof then muſt this knowledge be? of his will: what a will is that? Euen that will, that Ieſus his ſonne comming out of the boſome of the father hath reuealed to the world, that was the beſt and ioyfulleſt reuelation that euer was: So it muſt be the knowledge of the will of God reuealed. Where was this will (ſome will aske) all the time preceding the comming of Chriſt? looke 1. Cor. 2. 7. It was a wiſedome in a myſterie hid, and neuer fully reuealed while Chriſt came: which was appointed (reade the place) vnto our glorie.
            Then he comes to that that was contained in that myſterie, The things (ſaith he) that the eye neuer ſaw, the eare neuer heard, neither entred into the heart of man (loue him if thou wilt) which God hath prepared and reuealed to vs by his ſpirit. If thou haue his ſpirit, thou wilt pierce into the gulfe of his loue towards thee in Ieſus Chriſt, and of his riches. And in the epiſtle to the Epheſians 1. hee opens the myſterie more cleerely: well, it is no ſmall matter to get the eye of thy minde opened. Thou wilt thinke it a great matter to get the eye of thy body opened, that thou mighteſt ſee the viſible creatures of God. But what is that ſight and the opening of the bodily eye to the ſight of the ſoule, and opening of the eye of thy ſoule, whereby thou ſhalt ſee God, and the things of God for thy weale? There is no match here. Therefore the Apoſtle to the Epheſians explaines this myſterie more cleerely, where he ſaith, that You may ſee what is the hope of his calling: yet he goeth further, and what is the riches of his glorious inheritance in the ſaints: and then

he goeth further; And what is the exceeding greatnes of his power towards vs. And if thou haſt faith, thou ſhalt taſt of ſuch an excellent grace, that thou ſhalt wonder that that ſame ſory and ſillie heart could gripe and attaine to ſuch vnſearchable riches. The effect of his will is this: the way of redemption to the loſt world is reuealed: the way of remiſſion of ſinnes, how to be made holy, and the reſt of the graces reuealed in Ieſus Chriſt. True wiſedome. This is the will of God. Note then, what call you true wiſdome? Men would be wiſe, man inclines to nothing more then to haue knowledge. Then what is true knowledge? To know the way of thy redemption. And if thou want this, the greater knowledge thou haſt, the greater foole. Be a foole, man, to come to this knowledge. Come down thou art that ſcanſing & ſoring I wot not where, come downe, come downe I ſay, if thou know not Ieſus thou art a foole: thou ſhalt neuer reach to the wiſdome of Chriſt; thou muſt come down and leaue thy foolery and proud conceite of knowledge, if thou wilt be truly wiſe.
            In the end of the verſe, when generally he hath ſpoken of this knowledge, he laieth it out abroad, and ſaith, With all wiſdome and vnderstanding. By wiſdome briefly he vnderſtandeth all that knowledge that conſiſts not ſo much in doing, as in contemplation. By vnderſtanding, he meanes ſuch knowledge as ſtands in doing: for religion and that true Philoſophie and wiſdome is not a bare meditation; for a man to ſit in his chamber all the day, and like a Cloiſter Monke, and in the meane time to doe nothing thereby to profit the Church of God; it is nothing, it auailes not. But religion is a knowledge, and a meditation and a doing. Practiſe thy religion, or elſe it is not worth a penny. And if it ſhine not in thy life, it is but durt: ſo you haue the parts of this knowledge, wiſdome Wiſedome in meditation, vnderſtanding in practiſe. in meditation, vnderſtanding in practiſing to profit the world. You ſee firſt this knowledge is ſpirituall, in quality, not earthly. It is of things that neuer ſhall take end: it is parted, it ſtands in wiſdome and ſtands in practiſing, will you come to degrees? It is perfect in degrees, and then it is perfect in parts, in the which there is nothing that wants or is ſuperfluous. This is that knowledge that we haue in Chriſt: howbeit, the Apoſtle would ſeeme that he prayeth that they ſhould

get this faith here: yet is it ſure that it is neuer gotten in this life, if thou ſhouldeſt liue Methuſalems daies. It muſt be that thou grow in filling vp this faith euery day thou liueſt more and more; but ſo long as thou brookeſt this mortalitie, this fulnes, whereof the Apoſtle ſpeakes, ſhal neuer be: for this mortalitie muſt be ſwallowed vp of life. If thou wouldeſt haue this faith, thou ſhalt neuer get it till the day of the reſurrection, at which time God ſhall be all in all. 1. Cor. 15. 28. thou ſhalt riſe vp glorious, and this vile body ſhall be made like to his glorious body, 
               Matth 13. and then it ſhall ſhine more brighter then the ſunne at noone day. O the glorie of the Saints! when he ſhall fill them ſo that they ſhall not neede a temple, nor meate or drinke, as it is ſaid in the Reuelation 21. but he ſhall be al to thee, becauſe he ſhall be in thee, and thou ſhalt be are him in thee, thou ſhalt be a tabernacle to him; then ſhall this fulneſſe be: and vntill then it ſhall be but in a growing to that perfection. Bleſſed be that ſoule that growes and feeles that heauenly liquor dropping day lie into the ſoule, be aſſured thou ſhalt get this fulneſſe of the light, and God ſhall dwell in thee for euer. You ſee then he hath prayed for wiſedome and knowledge; to what end is all this? will God giue a man knowledge or wiſedome, or will a man pray for it, except hee wot wherefore? wherefore is it then? That you may walke, ſaith he. Wherefore is light giuen, but that a man ſhould walke? wherefore ſhines the ſunne, but that thou mighteſt walke? The ſunne is not giuen thee to Similitude. ſleepe: he is but a ſwinger but a lubber that will lye idle in the day light, and the ſunne ſhall witnes againſt him in that day: much more that heauenly light, that ſunne of righteouſneſſe ſhines he for nothing? If thou haſt gotten this ſhining light, walke, goe, and trauell, be exerciſed in thy calling, and be Vocation. not idle: will this ſunne in the firmament teſtifie againſt thee if thou bee idle? what will the light of the ſonne of man doe troweſt thou, if thou be idle in thy profeſſion? O woe worth thee that euer thou ſawſt it! I ſee there muſt be a walking, but thou muſt not walke as thou wilt. In deede there be many that are ouer buſie, and that were better ſleeping in their beds then walking as they doe in wantonneſſe and wickedneſſe. And there is ouer many reeling here and there as wantons, about I

wot not what. The very day light craues that thou walke according to the light, Rom. 13. 12. thou muſt haue a very comely behauiour in the ſhining of the ſunne, and thou muſt not play the foole, the drunken man, the harlot, the murtherer, and the theefe: I tell thee and thou doe it, the ſunne ſhall witneſſe againſt thy euill deede to thy condemnation. And if the ſunne in the world and firmament craues this comely behauiour of thee, and that thou walke orderly: then much more muſt thou walke by a rule in thy light Ieſus. What is the rule? Walke worthie of the Lord: as if he would ſay, is it the Lord that ſhines? ſtaine not that Lord of light by your euill behauiour. This importeth: as this light ſhines in thee, ſo thou ſhouldeſt ſee him. See him as thou wilt, he ſhines on thee: and if thou get a ſight of this light, bleſſed art thou. Alas theſe filthie perſons if they ſaw theeye of God, trowe ye that they would puddle on this ſort? all ſtands on this, that howbeit God ſee them they ſee him not. Happie art thou if thou canſt ſay when thou riſeſt, Lord thou ſeeſt me, now Lord giue me an eye to ſee thee, and Heb. 12. 14 Gen. 17. 1 by the ſeeing of thee to walke as it becommeth me in thy preſence, neuer to ſtaine that glorious light by my prophane life. Now in the next words he telles more plainely what it is to walke worthie of the Lord: it ſtandeth in this: to pleaſe him in the whole actions of our life. Well is that heart that can in any meaſure be ſet to pleaſe God, and well is the mouth that can ſay, I would pleaſe thee O Lord: Lord giue me grace to pleaſe thee. No no, let not a thought that thou thinkeſt will diſpleaſe him, break out: hold it in, and ſay, Lord ſlay it by thy Thoughts. ſpirit: but fye on thee, when thy filthie thought falleth out into a filthie deede. Therefore ſet thee to pleaſe the Lord in thought, word, and deede. O the ioy in thy heart when thy conſcience beareth witneſſe to thee, that thou wouldeſt pleaſe the Lord! thou ſhalt neuer haue ioy in thy heart while then: When we haue ſet our heart to pleaſe him, it is but a meeting of the 2. Cor. 1. 12. Lord. The Lord hath ſet himſelfe before thee, to pleaſure thee: fye, fye then that thou wilt not ſet thy ſelfe to pleaſure him. Do what thou canſt, thou ſhalt neuer be able to pleaſure God in reſpect of his pleaſuring of thee. Thou art but an vnprofitable ſeruant: yet happie art thou if thou endeuor to pleaſure him, as

he will, and wreſtling and ſtriuing as it were through a thornie hedge to get this cankered heart ſubiect to pleaſure thy God: and ſay, as thou haſt pleaſured me Lord, giue me grace to pleaſure thee.Note. Now the Lord giue euery one grace to pleaſe  him in ſome meaſure. To whom be praiſe and honor.
            Amen.
         
         
            THE THIRD LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians, beginning at the middeſt of the tenth verſe.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 10, 11, 12.
               
                  10 Being fruitfull in all good workes, and increaſing in the knowledge of God,
                  
                  11 Strengthened with all might through his glorious power, vnto all patience, and long ſuffering with ioyfulneſſe,
                  
                  12 Giuing thankes vnto the Father, which hath made vs meete to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
                  
               
            
            
               WE heard brethren the preface of this epiſtle, it ſtandeth firſt in thankeſgiuing: and ſecondly in prayer. We haue heard this other day of thankſgiuing, and of the cauſes of it. We entred into the prayer. The Apoſtle ſheweth that the firſt day that euer hee heard of the grace of God which the Coloſſians had receiued, he not onely thanketh God for it, but immediatly prayeth for them. The effect of his prayer was, that they ſhould be filled (they were not full yet) wherewith? with knowledge, and not ſimply that, but with all knowledge: of what thing? not of euery thing, but with all knowledge of his wil, of the will of God reucaled moſt cleerely to the world, by the ſonne himſelfe, who is in the boſome of

the father, and who manifeſted himſelfe in the fulnes of time, in the nature of man, and with his owne mouth reuealed the will of his father. Then he layeth out this knowledge in the parts of it: In all wiſedome (ſaith he) which conſiſteth in contemplation of heauenly things; and in all vnderſtanding, which conſiſteth in practizing that contemplation. All wiſedome, not earthly but ſpirituall; all vnderſtanding, not earthly but heauenly, touching the loue of God, and the ſaluation of man in the bloud of Ieſus. Now to what end ſhould they be filled with all this wiſedome, that they ſhould ſit idlie in the world? no, no, but that they ſhould walke and trauell: and how? according to the rule. A miſruly life dowes not, it auailes not. The rule is, as it becommeth that Lord of light, as it becommeth that glorious Goſpell, this reuelation of the God of glorie, as it becommeth ſo glorious a calling. Then he ſheweth what it is to walke worthie of the Lord, it is to pleaſe him in all things, in all our actions and cogitations to ſtudie to pleaſe him, to make him a meeting as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, ſeeing he hath ſet himſelfe to pleaſe vs, we ſhould goe about euery way to pleaſe him. Now brethren thus farre wee heard the laſt day briefly: in this text, firſt we haue foure points, or heads, in the which conſiſteth the pleaſing of the Lord. Then we are to enter into the third part of the epiſtle concerning the doctrine to the Coloſſians. The firſt part of the pleaſing of the Lord is this, fructifying (ſaith he) in euery good worke, there 4. points wherein we ought to indeauour to pleaſe God.
                is the firſt part. The ſecond is, growing in knowledge. The third is, to be ſtrengthened with all might through his glorious power. The fourth and laſt is, being ſtrengthened with all might vnto patience vnder the croſſe, to thanke him cheerefully and ioyfully. Theſe are the foure points wherein the pleaſuring of God ſtandeth. To come to the firſt, it is to fructifie in euery good worke: marke it, the ſpeech is borrowed from a tree that brings out good fruite. We knowe the pleaſure of the Husband-man is, when he ſeeth a tree in his garden fruiteful and bringing out good fruite in due ſeaſon: Euen ſo the pleaſure of the Lord is when he looketh downe to thee as vnto a tree planted in his garden, and ſeeth thee fructifying in euery good worke, that is his pleaſure. But here the difference betwixt the fruitfull

tree and the godly man, is this. The tree that is moſt frutefull S. will bring out but a kinde of fruite onely: an apple tree will bring forth apples; a peare tree, peares; and another, his kinde of fruite; and ſo forth in the reſt: but thou that art a fruitfull tree in the garden of the Lord, thou muſt not bee bound to one kinde of fruite; but as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, you muſt bring forth all good workes, both of ſoule and body, for the Lord will not haue the fruite of the one without the other. But if thou be planted in the garden of the Lord, thou muſt bring forth fruite to the pleaſure of God, both of ſoule and body. Againe, you knowe a tree hath the ſeaſon, but thou art not bound to one ſeaſon, to ſommer, winter, or harueſt; but thou art bound to beare fruites continually. So briefly brethren, there is the firſt point of the pleaſing of God: wouldeſt thou pleaſe him? looke that thou bee fruitefull, bee not barren; worke, be not idle, be occupied, and well occupied: doe no euill, but good; not one ſort of goodneſſe, but all the good that is poſſible for thee to doe. Now to come to the ſecond point of the pleaſing of God: it ſtands in growing in knowledge, and that is faith. This point flowes from the firſt, marke it. A man that fructifieth in good workes, he feedes vpon his owne workes: by the very iuyce and ſap of the workes, Growth in knowledge. knowledge or faith is nouriſhed. It is true in deede, good workes muſt come of faith, and there cannot be good workes where faith is not firſt: they muſt riſe of faith in the heart, and faith (as the Apoſtle ſaith) worketh by charitie, Galath. 5. 6. Euen Good workes. Note well. as good workes come of faith; ſo good workes nouriſh, augment, and intertaine the mother of it, that is faith. This is the difference betwixt the fruitfull man, and the tree. The tree bringeth not forth the fruite to it ſelfe, nor feedes on it: It is not ſo with the fruitfull man. In deede it is true, the good workes of a man which are the fruite of faith, they ſerue firſt to the glorie of God, and next to the good of his neighbour. But there is further vſe of them, he getteth the beſt himſelfe. Doeſt thou a good turne to any man? thou haſt the beſt of it thy ſelfe: and thou feedeſt more on thy good worke, then the perſon doth vpon whom thou beſtowdeſt thy good worke. So this is ſure, good workes nouriſh faith; euen as euill workes

ſowre and bitter fruites (whereof this land is ful) foule thoughts in thy heart, foule and filthie ſpeeches in thy mouth, cruell and barbarous deedes in thy hand, nouriſh vnbeleefe in the filthie and wicked perſon. Troweſt thou all is gone from thee, when thou haſt ſuffered a foule word to paſſe out of thy mouth, and an euill deede to paſſe from thy hand, that thou art quit of them? No, no, it comes backe vpon thy ſelfe, and leaueth a foule blacke ſpot behinde it: and if thou bee an infidell, thy infidelitie increaſeth in thy heart, and thou art nouriſhed by it. Alas! the beſt of vs all is ſubiect at all times to one euill or other. If thou be faithfull, the very euill deede will come backe vpon thee and anger thy heart. The very euill deedes if thou goe forward in them ſhall extinguiſh thy faith, or feeling, as the Apoſtle ſaith, 1. Theſ. 5. 19. So thy fruits ſhall either augment thy faith, or elſe extinguiſh thy faith if thou continue. Therefore take heede to thy doings, that they wound thee not to thy heart: and if thou wouldeſt pleaſe God, fructifie in good workes: and ſecondly by them growe in faith. The third point followes, being ſtrengthened with all might through his glorious power: and this followeth from the ſecond, for euery one followeth from other. Wee knowe that the tree that groweth, as it fructifieth; ſo it groweth ſtrong, a growing thing groweth euer to ſtrength, as a decreaſing thing faileth more and more to weakenes, and the more the fruitfull tree groweth, it is the ſtronger: ſo a man growing in faith and good workes, he growes to ſtrength. For except the tree groweth to ſtrength, it may well fructifie for a time, but it is not able to fructifie long, the ſommer will wither it, and the winter will rot it: euen ſo a man except he growe in faith, and in the fruits of faith to a ſtrength, till he be ſtrong, and growe in ſtrength of well doing, he ſhall not be able to ſtand and abide all. He ſhall not be able to abide the dint of perſecutions, the ſword, hunger, impriſonment, and ſuch other afflictions. I ſay he ſhall not be able to abide theſe things, except he growe to a ſtrength of God: but the heate of perſecution ſhall make him to periſh and wither away. He is not content with this ſimple word of ſtrength, but he addeth to all might. A chriſtian man muſt not be content with one ſort of ſtrength in this life. In deede were

there but one calamitie, one affliction, and one perſecution, one ſort of ſtrength might ſuffice; but ſeeing there are manifold, yea a thouſand fold, thy ſtrength muſt bee a manifold ſtrength, thou muſt haue al ſtrength. Then to marke it briefly: I ſee a perfection of all things craueth to bee in a chriſtian. Wilt thou ſpeake of knowledge? the Lord craueth all knowledge. Wilt thou come to workes? hee craueth all manner of workes. Wilt thou come to ſtrength? hee craues all ſtrength. Well brethren, it may bee that we attaine not in this life to this perfection, but certainly theſe words are not in vaine, but they let vs vnderſtand thus far, that once we ſhall attaine to perfection; growe here, and hence thou ſhalt haue a perfection; growe in knowledge here, and hence thou ſhalt haue perfect knowledge: but if thou growe not in knowledge, and in the reſt of the graces of God here, thou ſhalt neuer attaine to perfection. But when ſhalt thou haue it? read 1. Cor. 15. and there ye ſhall finde it. Then he commeth forward and layeth downe the ground, and beginning of this ſtrength: He craues it not of fleſh and bloud, he bids them not be ſtrong in them ſelues: the ſtronger that one is in fleſh and bloud, the weaker is hee in the ſpirit, and the more vnable to receiue knowledge and to beleeue, and to bring forth the workes of the ſpirit and faith: for as the Apoſtle ſaith, Galath. 5. 17. The fleſh fighteth againſt the ſpirit, yea the fleſh (as experience teacheth vs) ouer comes the ſpirit. Therefore he ſaith not, be ſtrong in all might, in your ſelues; but he ſaith according to the force of his glorious power, as he ſpeaketh to the Epheſians 6. 10. he craues that they ſhould be ſtrong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Then thou man be ſtrong in the glorious ſtrength of thy God; not in thy ſelfe, nor in thy owne arme, nor in things earthly, but in the ſtrength of God. But how get wee it? Reade Epheſ. 1. 19. where hee ſaith, what is the excellent greatnes of his power in vs that beleeue: and 1. Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept (ſaith hee) by the vertue of the ſtrength of God: and how? through faith. Then looke how the ſtrength of God comes downe to thee (there is a farre ſpace betwixt thee and God) beleeue in God through Ieſus Chriſt, apprehend him, behold him by faith in his glorie, ſpare not, paſſe through the glorie of

God: if thou get a gripe of him by faith, thou ſhalt ſucke downe  that power and glorie that is in God, and thou ſhalt be filled with it. Note.Ye reade of Steuen in the Acts chap. 7. 5. when he is perſecuted and accuſed, his eye is in heauen: they are looking to him, but he is looking to heauen: his faith pearceth through the cloudes to the preſence of God, and ſuckes downe ſtrength and comfort to him now in the heate of his perſecution, euen when his affliction is at the height, and is ſoreſt vpon him: what ſaith the text? He is filled with the holy Ghoſt, Acts 7. 55. ſo that his face ſhined as an Angell: ſo ye ſee the glorie of God what it is. Now in the words following, he is not content generally to ſpeake of this ſtrength, but he layes it out abroad cleerely ſetting it out in three parts. Firſt, in all patience, the ſecond long ſuffering. Thy patience muſt not be for a time, but it Patience and ioy vnder the croſſe. muſt be in long ſuffering. The third is in ioyfulneſſe of heart, patience without ioy, without willingneſſe to ſuffer auaileth not, if ioy be away burne thee, racke thee, rent thee, all is for nought. So in a word, who is the ſtrong man? men would think that he is ſtrongeſt that is ableſt to perſecute, to oppreſſe, to afflict and to trouble the Saints of God. The King of Spaine is counted very ſtrong, and the Pope is counted very ſtrong, becauſe they haue a ſtrong hand to perſecute the ſilly ones of Ieſus Chriſt. But who is the ſtrong man? that body that A ſtrong man. ſuffereth the ſword, the fire, and all manner of affliction patiently for Chriſts ſake, and hath continuance in patience, and with patience, ioyfulneſſe of heart: there is the ſtrong man. The ſtrength of God is not ſo much in doing, as in ſuffering: ſo that thou that ſuffereſt moſt in patience, and in the ioy of thy heart, thou art ſtrongeſt, and it is thou that getteſt the Rom. 8. 37. victory. Thou that art vndon in the ſight of the world, thou art the ſtrong man, and not he that ſlayeth thee. The filthie murtherers are ſlaues, the man that thou oppreſſeſt is the ſtrong man, and thou art the ſlaue, and ſhalt dwell with the diuell that great ſlaue, when as the afflicted ſhall triumph and be with God. Well, if thou haue this ſtrength of God, and patience in afflictions, thine afflictions ſhall not make thee weake, but the ſtronger to endure. To come to the laſt point, giuing thankes vnto the father. This floweth out of the third, a

man in perſecution ſtrengthened with patience. O the mouth of that man is opened to praiſe and thanke God, though it were in the fire burning! So you ſee this riſeth out of the other. Marke it, wherefore ſhall ye thanke him? it is a harde matter that a man exerciſed by the hand of God (for the perſecutor is but the hangman of God, if he were a King, and the Lowne ſhall be hanged in the end, and the ſcourg ſhall be caſt into the fire) ſhould thanke God in the middeſt of perſecution. The words following lets thee ſee wherefore thou ſhouldeſt thanke him, to wit, for thy calling. This chriſtian calling, to be heire of Which hath made vs meete. heauen, is the matter of thy ioy, vpon the which thankeſgiuing doth ariſe. So in the middeſt of affliction, of perſecution, of martyrdome, the remembrance of thy calling to be a chriſtian, and to be heire of heauen, ſhould make thee to reioyce, and to giue thankes to the Lord of glory, and ſhould euer hold thee vp, and ſhould make thee to open thy mouth, and praiſe the Lord, Rom. 5. 2. We glorie in hope. O that glory miniſtreth ioy in all the afflictions in the world. Then marke Nose of a man truely pleaſing. God. a leſſon out of all this, who is he that pleaſeth God? (woe is him that is in no meaſure about to pleaſe him. O wofull wretch, though thou wert an Emperor of the world, if thou be not in ſome meaſure ſet to pleaſure him, woe is thee for euer more!)  Firſt, the man that fructifieth in good workes: and  if thou be an euill doer, thou pleaſeſt not God, but the diſpleaſure of God lyeth on thee.  Secondly, hee that would pleaſe  God, he muſt bee a growing man (not ſtanding in this world) and that euer in faith: that is, the elder thou be, the neerer and neerer to God, thou muſt growe elder in faith.  Then thirdly, he muſt be ſtrong, not onely able to doe but to ſuffer, and  therefore he muſt be ſtrengthened with patience. A chriſtian man is not a doer onely, but a dyer.  Fourthly, he muſt be euer glorifying, euer thanking God, and praying to his maieſtie,  euen when hee is moſt oppreſt. Put theſe graces together in a man, and that is the man that pleaſeth God. And O the liking of God that hee hath of thee, when thou art thus occupied! Thus far the preface.
            Now followes the third part of the Epiſtle contayning doctrine, both faire and sweete, opening a glorious myſterie,

and that briefly. You that would haue riches, he opens vp the riches of Ieſus Chriſt to you, that was ſo long hid vp from the beginning to his comming. The firſt thing he begins at in his doctrine, it is this chriſtian calling, it is the firſt grace and Our calling. The firſt grace we receiue in time. bleſſing that in time we get in Chriſt. I ſay in time, becauſe our election or predeſtination is before all time. So the firſt grace we get in Ieſus Chriſt in time, is our chriſtian calling. In the epiſtle to the Epheſians he beginneth higher, but in this epiſtle he doth not ſo: he begins not for the height but at this bleſſing, that is firſt in time, to bee called to bee a member of Chriſt.
            
               Note.Now in ſpeaking of this benefit of our calling to be a chriſtian, hee ſpeakes not ſimply of it, but in ſpeaking of it he is thanking the Lord the father who hath made vs meete for a part of that glorie: for you ſhall marke this of the Apoſtle, he can neuer  ſpeake of the graces of God, but he euer thankes God. And in the firſt epiſtle of Peter. 1. 3. to teach thee when thou ſpeakeſt of the graces of God, to remember to praiſe him, and to giue him hartie thankes for his bleſſings. Now to come on firſt in this doctrine of this chriſtian calling, we haue the author of it. Whom thankes he? Thanking, ſaith he, the father: Author of our calling. ſo he giues the glorie of our calling to the father of our Lord Ieſus, the father of glorie; he gets the firſt praiſe of our calling. The ſonne himſelfe ſpeaking of his owne calling; he giues all glorie to his father: So all the godly giue the glorie of their calling, firſt to the father, becauſe he is the beginner of all grace. Then he cōmeth to the benefit it ſelfe, he ſaith not, thanking the father who hath called vs, but in ſteed of the word calling, he putteth the definition of calling, the effect of the calling, who hath made vs meet, or ſufficient in effect: then marke the words, they import firſt this. That then when the father hath put his hand to worke, to cal thee, thou waſt vnmeete: if he made thee meete thou waſt firſt vnmeete 2. Cor. 3. 5. thou waſt vnmeete, euen if it were to thinke a good thought: when he began to worke, thou hadſt no power once to thinke of this calling. Then What our calling is. wherein ſtands our calling? not in a bare name, as you would calaman, but it ſtandeth in a change. When he calleth thee, he changeth thee wonderfully, & makes thee that, that thou waſt

not. Thou waſt an old craſed creature, a faggot for hell: thou waſt nothing becauſe of thy ſinne: and except the Lord make thee a new thing, better it were for thee to be turned to nothing, for thou ſhalt bee turned downe to hell. Rom. 4. 1. he calleth the thing that is not, as though it were. This is the calling of the Lord: when he calleth a man, he changeth the heart of him. The free-will of the Papiſts, that poyſoned doctrine of theirs, that a man hath ſome grace by nature (howbeit vnable to receiue grace of God) will neuer ſtand in the day of the Free-will. Lord: and if thou wilt defend it, thou ſhalt neuer finde this effectuall calling of the Lord. If thou renounce not thy owne ſufficiencie, thou ſhalt neuer get grace. He thankes God that made vs ſufficient of vnſufficient, meete of vnmeete, of dead men quicke men: wouldeſt thou thanke God from thy heart? (for thanking of God muſt riſe from the heart) there is the firſt ground of it: the feeling of thy owne want, of thy owne miſerie, and that great lacke of grace in it, and that muſt be the deepeſt ſenſe in thy heart, and lye at the roote of thy heart: and thy prayer muſt riſe from that ſteppe, and from that Thanksgiuing. ſteppe to come to another ſteppe, to the ſenſe of that mercie that God hath ſhewed thee, that is the next. The firſt is a ſenſe of thy miſerie: the ſecond is a ſenſe of the mercy of God, of theſe two breakes out the thankſgiuing. So that if thankſgiuing beginne not at the ſenſe of thy wants, I tell thee it is but a thankſgiuing from the teeth forward. Take it for a ſure rule, if thou haue not a true ſenſe & feeling of thy owne wants and miſeries, and then of the mercie of God; thou canſt neuer thanke God aright: nay thou canſt neuer in any meaſure ſeeke to God truely. So to returne I ſay, as thou wouldeſt haue grace, begin at this, that thou art nothing in thy ſelfe, that God may haue the glory: there is your calling and the effect of your calling. But whereto are we called? A man that is called, he is called to ſome thing. The Lord calles not, but to ſome end. He hath made vs meete for a part: whereof? A part of a lot, that is, of an inheritance that falleth by lot. Then wouldeſt thou vnderſtand whereto thou art called, and made meete? to wit, for heauen; to make thee able to brooke that heauenly inheritance: ſo thou art not called to nothing, but to an inheritance.

So if thou finde that thou art called and a change is made in thy heart, of an vnmeete man thou art made meete, and if thou finde a change, looke certainely for an heritage, faile not to looke for it, for the heritage ſhall not faile thee. Thy ſufficiencie had not been wrought, if thou haddeſt not been propped vp for that heritage: yet the word would be noted. He calles it not an heritage, but a lot: by the which he will let thee ſee, that thy heauenly heritage falleth out to be by lot. Ye would thinke that a man called ſhould merit to himſelfe an heritage, that hee might worke for it here. No ſaith the Apoſtle, thine heritage falleth to bee a lot, when thou art called. So a benefit is not a merit of another benefit; our ſanctification is not a merit of our iuſtification; but all is of grace, and our inheritance is but a lot, that is, a grace or gift of God without deſeruing. Yet further: whoſe is this inheritance? he ſaith that it is the lot of the Saints of God. God hath giuing it them, and none other hath gotten it, or ſhall enioy one foote broad of it, but the Saints. Thou maiſt inherit here a kingdome, an earldome, a Lordſhip, though thou were as a diuell: but in heauen thou ſhalt haue none if thou be not firſt a Saint, and a holy one here on earth. Marke this leſſon: ere euer thou get a ſhare of heauenly inheritance of the Saints, thou muſt come creeping to that communion of Saints; be ioyned with them here if thou mind to haue any part with them in heauen: ſeparate thy ſelfe from that ſocietie of the Church of God, thou ſhalt be debard from heauen: thou ſhalt neuer get a ſight of it. Looke the epiſtle to the Epheſians, where he ſheweth wherein the riches of the glorie of this inheritance is. Where is it? he ſaith, it is among the Saints, Epheſ. 1. 18. So then aſſociate thy ſelfe to the ſociety of the Saints in earth. Men may paſſe their time, and what reckon they of a Church? It ſmelles in their noſe, what ſhould they ſpeake of it? it is a ſtinking word, mockage and ſcorne to them: but I ſay glad ſhalt thou be to be of that number, or elſe I ſhall debarre thee from all ſocietie of the Saints in heauen. Thou ſhalt be excommunicated out of heauen, if thou excommunicate thy ſelfe here from the Saints. Now where lies it? you take heed where your heritage lyes, and you will looke to your charters, and

euidences diligently; for that cauſe, you will looke the ſcituation of it. Hee ſaith that this heritage of the ſaints is in the light; there is the place, a lightſome and a ioyful pleaſant place. The line of pleaſant places ſaith Dauid, Pſalm. 16. 6. is fallen to me. It lyeth then in the light, it is in heauen, as Peter ſaith in his firſt Epiſtle 1. 4. It is kept and laid vp where God dwelleth: it may well content thee to dwell where God himſelfe dwelles. Yet where is it? Thy life is hid with God, ſaith he. O then thy heritage is in God! what can bee ſaid more? A faire heritage lying in ſo faire a light, euen in heauen with God, and in God. I ſee then all our life and ioy either in this life or in the life to come, is in that light of knowledge, in that ſpirituall knowledge: ſo that a man that hath his minde inlightened to ſee, as the Apoſtle ſaith to the Epheſians, the hope of his calling, the riches of the glorie of the inheritance of the Saints; the man that hath this light, he liues and enioyes a great inheritance, howbeit he hath neuer an ynch in this earth; and his ioy is a true ioy. And againe, a man that is in darkneſſe, not ſeeing the face of God; in no meaſure, knowing nothing: that man liuing hee is dead, if hee were an Emperor, a King, and a Lord. This countrie is full of dead ſtinking carrions, becauſe they want this light, and they would pull out their eyes that they ſhould not ſee this light. But woe to them in the end, when this darkneſſe ſhall bring an vtter darkneſſe, when thou ſhalt be a dead ſtinking dog in hell. Get thou this light if euer thou wouldeſt ſee heauen, and haue a part of it, which is not in darkeneſſe, but in the light of God. To whom we giue all honour, praiſe and dominion for euer.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 13, 14, 15.
               
                  13 Who hath deliuered vs from the power of darkenes, and hath tranſlated vs into the kingdome of his deare ſonne,
                  
                  14 In whom we haue redemption through his bloud, that is, the forgiuenes of ſinnes.
                  
                  15 Who is the image of the inuiſible God, the firſt borne of euery creature.
                  
               
            
            THe laſt day, welbeloued brethren, the preface of this epiſtle being ended, we entred into the doctrine. The Apoſtle in his doctrine begins at the firſt grace that a man or woman getteth in this world in Ieſus Chriſt. The firſt grace or bleſſing of God in time after they are borne into the world (for our grace & mercie begins before all time ere we be borne, our election began before the foundation of the world was laid) but the Apoſtle begins at ye firſt grace in time, the firſt grace in Ieſus Chriſt (for all is in him, nothing without him) is this chriſtian calling from darkeneſſe to light, frō that foule puddle of ſinne, wherein we lye by birth and nature (nay if thou wert borne a king, thou lieſt in the foule puddle of ſinne) we are taken out of hell, for our birth is in hell, and to hell we goe if we haue no more but nature. Thou art taken out of hell and put into heauē, there is the firſt grace in time. Now to come to the text, ye heard ye father he getteth the firſt glorie of

our calling. Thanking (ſaith he) the father. He is the fountaine. Then we heard wherein the calling conſiſteth, not in a bare naming, as one man would call another, but the Lord in calling vs maketh vs meete; of vnſufficient for heauen, he makes vs ſufficient; of vnable, he makes vs able; of dead men, he maketh vs liuely; that is the effectualnes of our calling. Then we heard, whereunto we are called. Our calling is not in vaine, we are called to a lot, a fairer heritage then all the kingdomes of the world: nay ye pooreſt ſoule is called to be an heire of heauē. Such as are called are called to the kingdome of heauen, all other heritages are but dirt and draffe. And who oweth this kingdom? It is the kingdom of ye Saints. It is diſtributed among the Saints: and if thou be not a holy one, and in their ſocietie, thou ſhalt neuer ſee that heritage: laugh at them ſo much as euer thou wilt. Where lieth this heritage? To wit, in the light of God: thou neuer ſaweſt ſuch a light. It lieth in God, for God is thy light, and thy life: and if thou be an heire of this kingdome, thy life is hid with God in Chriſt. To goe forward, yet the Apoſtle inſiſteth in this firſt bleſſing of our effectuall calling, and maketh it more plaine in this verſe. His words are, who hath raught vs out, that is the force of the word: From whence? From the power of darknes. What more? And he tranſlated vs. Whereto? To the kingdome. What kingdome? Of his ſonne: the ſonne of his loue, his deere ſonne, the Lord Ieſus. Now brethren, it is cleere, but I ſhall briefly inſiſt on the words, to let you ſee the force and power of euery word: for they are of weight. For the words that ſpeake of heauenly things are not the words of men. Then the word he hath puld vs out; with a force or ſtrength, with a conſtraining. I hold it not a ſimple deliuerie. Then look to thy calling. It begins at haling of thee. Thou art ſo faſt holdē bound, whē thou art called, that if thou beeſt not pulled out with a ſtrong hand, thou wilt neuer come out: and that Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, No man commeth to me (no not one) except the father draw him, Ioh. 6. 44. Thou wilt neuer ſee heauen, if thou be not drawne. So our calling muſt begin at our drawing: & all the powers in the earth will not draw thee to heauē, if the hand of the Lord draw thee not.
            To goe forward. He hath drawne vs out. From whence? From

vnder a power: then the cauſe of thy drawing is this. Thou art holden ſtreight, and thou art holden by a ſtrong power. There was neuer man holden in iron bands, and priſon ſo ſtreight, as thou art holden by ſinne: for as light as thou wilt skipt and leape, and as nimble as thou ſeemeſt, when thou art leaping lighteſt thou art faſt holden; and the more thou leapeſt in ſin, the faſter and the faſter thou art holden: ſo ere thou get out, there muſt be a power, and a greater power then it that holds thee. No man (ſaith Chriſt) will enter into a ſtrong mans houſe before he haue firſt bound the ſtrong man, and then deuide the ſpoyle, Mark. 3. 27. No man will take thee out of ſinne that ſtrong man, except he haue a power that is ſtronger then ſinne. What a power is this? The next word tels thee; It is the power of darknes. Alas that darknes of Ignorance! O that terrible clowd of darknes and ignorance, that is in the ſoule of euery man naturally, without the knowledge of God, of Ieſus Chriſt, of life, and ſaluation! O miſerable is that ſoule that lies in that darknes! Then it is the power of darknes, a ſtrong power, and the ſtrongeſt power in this world, that holdeth thee faſt. If thou be fettered with darknes, then in deede thou maiſt ſay, thou art fettered faſt.
            Brethren, there is but two great powers only (as for the power of a King, out, out, it is nothing but draffe and dirt: the power of the fleſh is nothing) There are but two kingdomes only: The firſt is, the kingdome of God; the kingdome of light, is a kingdome in deede. The ſecond, is the kingdome of darknes, the kingdome of hell, to call it ſo; yea and all the Kings of the world ſhall be vnder one of theſe two, either a ſlaue of darknes, or els a ſonne and heire of the kingdome of heauen. Now the kingdome of darknes next after the kingdome of light, it is the ſtrongeſt in this world: and to ſpeake plaine to you, this kingdome of darknes is but the pit of God, a dungeon and a priſon houſe, wherein the diuell firſt lies all chained; of the which they are princes lying in bandes abiding their damnation: and next them are the reprobate, Caine, Iudas, and the reſt, and in the which the diuels and the reprobate ſhall be tormented euerlaſtingly. So the kingdome of darknes ſerueth to this kingdome of light, and they who are in it

are but the executioners of God, and rods of his fierce wrath. Now then, it is Ieſus Chriſt that Prince of light that hath drawne vs out of that dungeon of darknes, and ignorance. He is that ſtrong man, whoſe ſtrength is aboue all ſtrength of the diuell, ſinne, and hell. It is he then that hath done this: and what more hath he done? He (ſaith he) hath tranſlated vs, taken vs from one place, and remoued vs to another place; nay it is not enough to bee pulled as it were out of hell, except thou be taken away and tranſlated as farre from it, as thou maiſt looke to it. Thou wilt goe backe againe, if thou be not tranſlated and kept farre from it. Whereunto hath be tranſlated vs? he ſaith, to a kingdome: we ſhall heare more of this kingdome hereafter. A kingdome muſt keepe thee: It is impoſſible to be kept, if thou be not kept in a kingdome. The power of a King is required to keepe thee. Whoſe kingdome is it? not Caeſars, no Emperours in the earth: nay the kingdome of Spaine, Fraunce, England and Scotland will not keepe thee; flye, as thou wilt flye. Whoſe kingdome muſt it be then that muſt keepe thee? The kingdome of his owne ſonne, and more, of his owne deere ſonne; the ſonne of his loue, that is, the kingdom of his ſonne that he loueth ſo deerely. Well, and if that bee the kingdome that thou be tranſlated vnto, thou ſhalt be well kept: it is the onely kingdome that is able to keepe thee. For firſt behold the King. Who is the King? The King is the ſonne of God, a ſtrong King, Ioh. 10. 28. No man ſhall take you out of my hand. O the ſtrength of the ſon of God! He is God himſelfe: then he is more, a ſonne, and a king, that is ſo loued of the father, and in him he loueth all within the bounds of this kingdome. So ſee firſt the power, and then the loue; and no queſtion thou maiſt ſay, that thou ſhalt be well kept. Bleſſed is the ſoule that comes to this kingdom: And if thou be not yet tranſlated to it, ſtriue to it, as thou wilt be ſafe. In a word, will you haue wherein our effectuall calling ſtandeth? I ſay to you, it ſtandeth in this: In taking vs out of one kingdome, and putting vs into another: in tranſlating of thee from the kingdome of darknes, and putting of thee into the kingdome of heauen: in tranſlating of vs from a kingdome, wherein we liue as ſlaues (fie on it, thou liueſt as a ſlaue here, a bondſlaue

to Sathan and thy own foule affections) to a kingdom wherein thou raigneſt like a king. There is neuer a ſlaue there, but all are kings in this kingdome: neuer a ſlaue there, all are ſonnes; and if they are ſonnes, they are heires, as Paul reaſons Rom. 8. 17. It is a tranſlation from a kingdome of ſmaller power, howbeit of a great power, to a kingdome that is infinite. No kingdome is infinite but Chriſts; this is comfortable. Findeſt thou thy ſelfe tranſlated and called to be one of this kingdome? See the infinite power of it, that is able to keepe thee, that thou ſhalt neuer fall backe againe to the kingdome of darknes. And if a man be effectually called, it is impoſſible that euer he ſhall fall backe againe, no more then the diuell is able to take the ſheepe out of Chriſts hands. Therefore in the Epiſtle to the Romanes 11. 29. Paul ſaith, The gift of God is without repentance; ſo that the gift of thy calling is without repentance: Bleſſed is that ſoule that findes it.
            To come to the next verſe, In whom? to wit, in Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God: What haue wee in him? A faire grace: we haue redemption. Through what? Through his bloud, a deere price. What is this Redemption? Remiſſion of ſinnes. Well, well, thinkeſt thou it a ſmal thing to haue thy ſinnes forgiuen thee? Now weigh the words, for in the words he comes to another bleſſing, a ſecond bleſſing euen the remiſſion of our ſinnes, that is the effect of the former: but to begin at the firſt word, In whom. This ſecond bleſſing is not without Ieſus: no, no; no grace, no mercie, no bleſſing without Chriſt; this is plaine talke, would to God wee could faſten to him: ſo he ſaith, In whom, that is in the deere ſonne of God. Brethren, being once tranſlated, that is, effectually called and drawne to him, wee liue not as other ſubiects vnder a king. Subiects would be far Similie. from their king, and ſome there is that will not once get a ſight of their king in all their life time: but being tranſlated to the kingdome of Chriſt, we are ioyned neere to our king: nay neuer Courtier was ſo neere a king of this earth, as wee ſhall be when we are tranſlated to the kingdome of Chriſt Ieſus: hee will not reſt till he haue vs in him. O the tender affection of Ieſus Chriſt that hee beareth to them that are in his kingdome! hee will haue vs ingrafted in him, as the grafts in a

tree: he will not let thee ſtand behinde him, but he will haue thee in his bodie, and ioyned with him as a member of his bodie, and he will haue thee feeding in him, that is, vpon grace flowing from him as from the head. So bleſſed is the eſtate of that bodie that is tranſlated to the kingdome of Chriſt: as by the contrary, miſerable is their condition and eſtate, that abide in darknes and ignorance. When thou art in him, what wilt thou get? he ſaith, we haue redemption. It is impoſſible but if thou be once in him, thou muſt haue grace of him: once effectually called to his kingdome, which is that firſt grace, of force thou muſt paſſe to the next grace, which is the Redemption, and all the graces that are in him; and ſo no end of grace to thee. Get me the firſt grace, get thy heart once entred; I ſhall promiſe there ſhall be no end of grace, vntil thou be glorified without end. O then, what is the next grace which followes thy calling? It is a bleſſing called Redemption. A word ſounding in our tongue commonly, would to God you vnderſtood it aright: As ſoone as thou findeſt in thy heart thy ſelfe to be effectually called, as ſoone will the father ſay; O ſinner, I abſolue thee from thy ſinnes. That is the next bleſſing. There is none who findes themſelues effectually called, but they will finde as it were this ſound, I abſolue thee from all thy ſinnes. If thy conſcience teſtifie thy calling, it will teſtifie alſo that thou art abſolued, and redeemed from ſinne. Let no man ſpeake of theſe things but they, who feele in their hearts daily their effectuall calling.
            Now I ſhall ſpeake of this Redemption as the Lord will leade me, not digreſſing into a common place. What is then this Redemption? to ſpeake it plaine, it is nothing but a deliuerie. The redemption of a ſinner is nothing but a deliuerie of a ſinner, a ſetting of him at libertie. So a ſinner when once he be tranſlated vnto the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt, when the father looketh as it were from his tribunall, and ſees the ſinner ingrafted into Ieſus, ſo ſoone will hee ſhake the fetters from him. For in this kingdome there can be no captiuitie, no ſlauerie, no bondage of ſinne and death; they cannot be in the kingdome of Chriſt. Indeede in the kingdome of Sathan, there is nothing but ſlauerie, and all are but ſlaues: but in the kingdome

of Chriſt there is nothing but libertie. The kingdome of libertie cannot abide a ſlaue: but all muſt be free, free from ſinne and death.
            The next thing in this redemption: if we be deliuered, from what is it that we be deliuered? (a man that is deliuered is deliuered from ſome thing) from ſlauery; if thou wert a King, thy horſe rubber is not ſo ill as thou art, if thou be not tranſlated from thy nature and from ſinne. Thou art deliuered from this when once thou art called: for after we be called and tranſlated, ſinne hath no more dominion ouer vs. Yet Rom. 6. 12 when we are in Chriſt, we are not free of bands, 1. Ioh. 3. 78. A ſinner in his conuerſion, albeit his ſinnes be pardoned with God, yet there is a time of further humiltation giuen him to feele the ſeale of the pardon of ſinnes put to his hart. Confer 2. Sam. 11 with Pſal. 51. Rom. 8. 15. Epheſ. 4. 30. Hebr. 6. 1. no neuer till the ſentence of the abſolution come out from the tribunall of God, and ſay to thee, I abſolue thee.
            But to goe forward: how is this procured? vpon what ground proceedeth it? it is no ſmall matter to get abſolution at the mouth of God. What procures it then? thou muſt be ranſomed: thy ranſome is not without a price. The word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                imports a ranſome, and deliuerance by a price of redemption. For brethren, you muſt vnderſtand that the iuſtice of God cannot be impaired: the infinit iuſtice of God cannot ſuffer the deliuery of a ſinner, except there be a ranſome paid. Thou art conceited of mercie, and neuer haſt recourſe to that bloud that hath ranſomed thee: No, no, ſeeke to the price and bloud of Ieſus, otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer be abſolued: yet this ranſome preiudiceth nothing the mercy. Indeede if the ranſome were taken of thee, out of thy owne purſe; then thou ſhouldeſt neuer haue got mercy: but becauſe it is the Lord Ieſus that paid the ranſome, therefore it is mercy and grace to thee. What ranſome muſt this be? you thinke much of ſiluer and gold, and would to God the bloud of Chriſt was as much eſteemed of by you, as you eſteeme of your gold and ſiluer. But I tell thee, be thou a ſinner, all the kingdomes of the earth will not ranſome thy life, the whole kingdomes of the world will not ranſome the life of one ſinner; yea not of the pooreſt lad and laſſe in the world. I ſpeake thus plainely, to teach you to thinke of better things, then the things of the earth. Fye on thoſe things; we ſhould not eſteeme them pretious to vs, but to be paltry, the dirt of this earth, and vanitie of this world.

What muſt be the ranſome then? It muſt be bloud. It is impoſſible that a ſinner can be ranſomed without bloud; the ſillieſt of you all cannot come to heauen without you be ranſomed with bloud. Therefore in the epiſtle to the Hebrewes 9. chap. 22. it is ſaid, Without bloud no remiſſion of ſinnes: And if there were but an euill thought, no ranſome of it without bloud; elſe ſhalt thou dye euerlaſtingly, and the wrath of God ſhall feede on thee as fire vpon ſtickes; or elſe thou ſhalt bring for thy ranſome the bloud of another. Then whoſe bloud muſt this be? ſurely one muſt dye; the iuſtice of God muſt be ſatisfied: it muſt not be thy owne bloud, nor the bloud of any ſinner in the world; take them altogether and offer a ſacrifice of them all, crucifie them all, all ſhall not make a ranſome for ſinne. Indeede it is true, the wrath of God muſt feede vpon the bloud of a ſinner, and vpon the reprobate: but that ſhall not be a ranſome for one ſinne; ſo hee ſhall neuer be redeemed by his own bloud. A ranſome muſt haue a redemption, but the bloud of a ſinner will not doe this: for ſinners are in hell, and in hell there is no redemption. So, wilt thou be ranſomed? ſay not I will reedeme my ſelfe with my owne bloud. The Lord will take the bloud, but thou ſhalt neuer be ranſomed, but die euerlaſtingly. Whoſe bloud muſt it be then? By his bloud (hee ſaith not by our bloud) that is, the bloud of the ſonne of God. And this bloud of Ieſus Chriſt is that bloud onely that can be the ranſome: none in heauen or earth but his bloud onely, is able to make thy ranſome: and this bloud ſtandeth beſt both with the iuſtice of God and mercie of God, becauſe it is the only bloud of Chriſt that ſatisfies the iuſtice of God. Why? by reaſon of the worthines of the perſon, he is a man, a holy man, without all ſpot of ſinne. It will not be thy ſtinking rotten bloud: it muſt be that bloud of Chriſt, that holy bloud, that muſt ſatisfie the wrath of God. It ſtandeth with the mercie of God: for when the wrath and iuſtice of God hath gotten that precious bloud, then it is well ſatisfied: then mercie reacheth from heauen to the ſinner; if thou canſt preſent that bloud, then the Lord will ſay: I haue nothing to ſay againſt thee, I haue nothing but mercie and grace to giue thee, I forgiue thee all thy ſinnes. Many thinke this but words; but you ſhall ſee

one day what theſe words meane. In the laſt words of the verſe, that that he hath ſpoken of redemption, he ſets out in a plaine terme and common word, euen the remiſſion of ſinnes. In the Epiſtle to the Epheſians 1. 7. when hee hath ſpoken as hee hath done here, of the remiſsion of ſinnes; he ſheweth that it is through the riches of his grace. What is all thy remiſſion to thee, but a free remiſſion through the riches of his grace? thou haſt not paid a mite for it; but Chriſt hath paid the price. So theſe two ſtand in thy redemption: In reſpect of him thou art redeemed by a price; and in reſpect of thy ſelfe it is nothing but free pardoning. So giue him the glorie and praiſe, for I aſſure thee, it is of an vnſpeakable mercie and loue, that he hath forgiuen thee, and taken the bloud of his deere ſonne for thy ſinne. Haſt thou not great matter of praiſing and glorifying of him? O would to God this cankerd generation could ſee and conſider this worke of our redemption!
            Now you haue heard of your calling and redemption, two great workes and benefits of God beſtowed on his elect, in Ieſus Chriſt his deere ſonne. There followes now a higher point of doctrine (ſpeeches of the higheſt things in the world are either of Kings or Queenes, or els of ſome other great nouelties; yet all are but dirt in reſpect of this ſpeech of the Apoſtle vttered according to the ſpirit of God. For he ſpeaks of the higheſt things, that is, euen of the king of glorie: ſo this ſpeech muſt be a high ſpeech: and yet not ſo high, but a man may attaine to the knowledge of it, ſo farre as may ſerue to their ſaluation) when he hath ſpoken of this great king, and of his bloud by the which wee are redeemed, to let vs ſee how great a king he is, and how precious his bloud is, he fals out into a digreſſion, and he brings out an high deſcription of the Lord of glorie. He may well blabber of him, but more he cannot: he is ſo high and excellent in all maieſtie. All the wits of men and Angels are not able to expreſſe the excellencie of the glorie of the ſonne of God: but I leaue that. The firſt part of his deſcription, is from his Godhead; Who is (ſaith he) the image of the inuiſible God, the firſt begotten of euery thing created. Here wee haue to conſider, firſt how God is called inuiſible. And next, how the ſonne is called the image of the inuiſible God: vnderſtanding

theſe two, we ſhall get the meaning of the Apoſtle. Wee finde this oft in the Scripture, eſpecially in the new Teſtament, that God is called inuiſible. No man (ſaith Iohn in his firſt chapter verſ. 18) hath ſeene God at any time: & in another place he ſaith; No man hath knowne him. And Tim. 6. 16. He dwelleth in light that hath no acceſſe. How is this then to be vnderſtood? Looke how he is inuiſible. This is to be vnderſtood of the Father, the firſt perſon of the Trinitie: Note.He is inuiſible, he cannot be ſeene, neither by Angell, nor all the Angels in heauen, neither by  man, nor by the eye of the bodie of man, no not by the eye of his minde. No creature no manner of way can ſee him: yet God forbid but wee ſee him. But how is it that he cannot be ſeene? He cannot be ſeene immediatly in his owne perſon, no not all the Angels can get a ſight of him immediatly. It is only the ſonne of God that hath that ſight; for he is in the boſome of the Father: and therefore no man nor Angell gets a ſight of God (I ſay immediatly) becauſe that all the ſight that man and Angell hath, is by a mediate perſon, the ſonne of God. This is the firſt.
            Secondly, how is it that the ſonne is called the image of the inuiſible God? I will not inſiſt here, to bring in all the differences, and ſorts, and images, becauſe it pertaines more to the Schooles, then to this place. But thus farre I tell you, I cannot get here in the earth a better example, to let you ſee how Ieſus Chriſt is the image of the inuiſible God in ſome meaſure (for who can ſee it in a fulnes?) then the example of an earthly ſon. You ſee an earthly ſonne will repreſent the perſon of his father, in the ſhape of his bodie, and in the linaments thereof; and that not onely in the outward accidents, but in the very ſubſtance that he hath taken from him, and out of him. No image will come ſo neere as that image; ſo that he will repreſent him in all theſe three, in ſtature, ſhape, and ſubſtance.
            Now to come to the ſonne of God, you muſt vnderſtand there are no accidents in God. All is ſubſtance and eſſence. He will then repreſent him, firſt in his perſonage, euen in a kind of portraiture: for how be it, he be diſtinct in perſon; yet nothing is ſo like the perſon of the father, as the perſon of the ſonne. Therefore in the epiſtle to the Hebrewes 1. 3. He is called

the character and the very ſtampe of the father: and he will not onely repreſent him in perſon, but in ſubſtance alſo. So that ſecondly he repreſenteth God the father in a ſubſtance taken from him: for the ſonne of God hath taken his ſubſtance from his father, in that eternall generation. And thirdly, which is higher, and this paſſeth all compariſon, he repreſents him not onely in a ſubſtance, but in that ſame ſubſtance, in number: ſo that there is not two Gods, but one God. Nay the father and the ſonne is but one ſubſtance, and one God in number: and therefore he ſaith, the father and I am one, in the goſpell of Iohn 10. 30. No earthly ſonne may ſay ſo, I am in the father, and the father in me: nay, no ſonne in the earth, how verely ſo euer he repreſent his father, may ſay ſo as Chriſt ſaith: ſo the likelieſt, the quickeſt, and the beſt repreſenting of the image of God, is the ſonne of God. There is no compariſon, and therefore in Iohn 14. 9. to Philip he ſaith, In that thou hast ſeene me, thou hast ſeene the father alſo. Why? becauſe I am the brightnes of his glorie: ſo that if thou ſeeſt me, thou ſeeſt the father, and without the ſight of the father, there is no life. And thou muſt begin that ſight of him here, or elſe thou ſhalt neuer ſee him. And if the ſonne were not ſo liuely an image of God, it were impoſſible to be content with the ſight of the ſonne, but becauſe he repreſents the whole maieſtie of his father; therefore the ſight of the perſon of the ſonne, contents vs, and we reioyce in him. O if we had that ſight of him, as we ſhould haue it, then ſhould we reioyce vnſpeakably: ſo to end, the words imports this, when he ſaith, that he is the image of the inuiſible God, that he is viſible. Then I aske the queſtion, how is the ſonne of God viſible? marke briefly, in his manhood; that is, in our fleſh he is viſible; becauſe Ieſus Chriſt in the fleſh, is as well ſeene with the bodily eye as a man; and when we ſhall ſee him in heauen, we ſhall ſee him in the very body; ſo there is no queſtion of his humane nature. But how is that Godhead ſeene in the ſonne? that is a greater queſtion (I will aſſure thee it muſt be ſeene, or elſe no life for thee.) But how is it ſeene? firſt I anſwere, with the eye of the mind. A man hath a bodilie eye in his head, and againe he hath another eye in his ſoule, which when once it is illuminated by the ſpirit of Chriſt, then that

eye ſhall ſee better than a thouſand bodily eyes: it will pearce vp through the very heauens, and neuer reſt till it come to the ſight and preſence of God. Indeede if it be not illuminated, it will ſee nothing; but being illuminated, it will pearce through the very heauens, and enter into the light of God, & ſee him. So the ſonne of God is ſeene in his Godhead, by the eye of the minde, and held faſt by the heart, and felt of the heart. What meanes this ſweete apprehenſion, that a man will haue of the mercie of God, of the wiſedome, and iuſtice of God? what meanes it? Nothing but a ſenſe of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt; all is in the feeling of Ieſus Chriſt, who dwels in the heart by faith, as the Apoſtle to the Epheſians 3. 7. ſaith: ſo there is the firſt way how he is ſeene. But yet would not the eye of the bodie ſee him? Certainly I would ſee him with this ſame bodily eye. And there is no faithfull man, but their yearning is to ſee him with their bodily eye. Now how ſhall I get a ſight of him with a bodily eye? I ſhall tell thee how thou ſhalt get a ſight of him with the bodily eye. Indeede thou wilt not get it immediatly, but thou muſt looke in through the vaile. There muſt be a vaile hung downe ouer betwixt thee and that glorious maieſtie: now through that vaile, that glorie of God ſhines in that fleſh of Ieſus: ſo the beames ſtrikes ſo farre, that they pearce within thee, becauſe thou wilt ſee the glorie of God through this vaile, and thou wilt not onely ſee the perſon of the ſonne in the vaile, but through him thou wilt ſee the glorious father. So in a word, when thou commeſt to heauen (thou wilt now goe here and there on the earth to ſee glorie, and wilt gaze on heauen) I ſay vnto thee all the glorie of heauen will be cloſed in Ieſus Chriſt; if thou turne thy eye from him, no ſight of glorie: ſo all thy pleaſure then will be, to hold thy eye vpon that glorious ſon of God, and that wil be our heauen, and our ioy, through the ſonne to ſee the father, and to ſee the glorie of the Lord Ieſus clad with our nature, ſitting at the right hand of his father. To whom, with the holie ſpirit, be all praiſe, honour and thankes for euen,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE FIFT LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 15, 16, 17.
               
                  15 Who is the image of the inuiſible God, the firſt borne of euerie creature:
                  
                  16 For by him were all things created which are in heauen, and which are in earth, things viſible and inuiſible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him,
                  
                  17 And he is before all things, and in him all things conſiſt.
                  
               
            
            WE ſhewed you the laſt day (welbeloued in the Lord Ieſus) the Apoſtle when he ended his preface, he entred into the doctrine, and in it he beganne at the firſt grace and bleſſing that wee get in Ieſus Chriſt in time, which is our effectuall calling, and deliuerance from vnder the power of darknes, wherein we are conceiued and borne. Euery man and woman is borne naturally a ſlaue to the diuel, hell, and darknes. The beſt of vs all a ſlaue to hell, the diuell, and darknes: ſo by this benefit of our calling, wee are taken out from vnder this ſlauerie, and tranſlated to another kingdome, not of ſlauerie, but of libertie and light, to the kingdom of his deere ſonne, the Lord Ieſus Chriſt; that is the firſt grace and benefit which the Apoſtle handleth. Then from this hee comes to another benefit, and he calleth it redemption, or otherwiſe remiſſion of ſinnes. Being now by your effectuall calling tranſlated to the kingdome of Chriſt Ieſus, and being ingrafted into him: the next benefit and grace we get is abſolution; we get a free remillion of all our ſinnes, and conſequently we

are freed from death and damnation, that followes vpon ſin. This abſolution and ſetting of vs at libertie from ſinne and death, is not without a price. The iuſtice of God, the wrath of God againſt ſinne, cannot ſuffer a ſinner to be abſolued, without a ranſome and price: ſo our remiſſion and abſolution muſt be by a price, and paying of a ranſome. But let vs ſee who paies it? Indeede if wee our ſelues were bound to pay the ranſome, neuer any of vs could be ſafe: no all the bloud of men and Angels, and it were all ſhed to be a price for ſinne, would not redeeme a ſinner. Then, who paies the ranſome? It is ſaid, we haue redemption, not through our bloud, but through his bloud. It is then the bloud of Chriſt that is the ranſome for our ſinnes; the Lord Ieſus hath bought vs deere. There was neuer from the beginning of the world, nor ſhall not be vnto the end of the world, ſuch a deere price giuen, as is the price of our ranſome, which the Lord Ieſus hath giuen for vs. So that which he hath deerely bought to vs, is nothing but a free remiſſion. Now, to ſpeake familiarly, wee haue not paid a farthing for it, but as it is ſaid in the Epheſians, It is the riches of his grace towards vs; ſo it is nothing but mercie and grace to vs.
            Then to come forward: The Apoſtle when hee hath ſpoken of the ſecond benefit, which we receiued in Chriſt, to let vs ſee that this bloud is no ſmall thing, he paſſeth out as it were, in a deſcription of the Redeemer, whoſe bloud this is: That firſt we may ſee the worthines of that perſonage. And ſecondly, conſidering his worthines, may ſee the preciouſnes of his bloud, by whom wee are redeemed. And thirdly, that conſidering theſe two, wee may ſee how faſt and ſure our redemption (made by that bloud) ſtandeth immoueable. It is no ſmall matter to know how faſt thy redemption ſtands: for if thy redemption were quarrelled or excepted againſt, thou wouldeſt giue if it were all the world for to know the aſſurance of thy redemption: for Sathan and his inſtruments are chiefly buſied about thee, to make thee diſtruſt of thy redemption, in the bloud of Chriſt. Therefore the ſpirit of God in this place and other places, is buſied to confirme thee of the certaintie of thy redemption, that Sathan nor his inſtruments deceiue thee not.
            
               
Then the firſt argument of the deſcription, is taken from his Diſcription. diuine ſubſtance, he is the image of the inuiſible God, that is, an eſſentiall image of God his father; and he is one God with the The firſt part. father in number, howbeit diſtinct in perſons. Then there is the firſt ground of our redemption in the Mediatour the Lord Ieſus, to wit, the Godhead of Chriſt. It is not vpon the manhood that our redemption is firſt grounded, but vpon Ieſus Yet euer remember he is a Mediatour in reſpect of both natures, and not one only, diuine, or humane. Chriſt, God equal in glorie, and maieſtie with the father. This being the ground, then it muſt follow; that his bloud is a moſt precious bloud, as it is called Acts 20. 28, the bloud of God. It being ſo precious, of neceſſitie the redemption of man, that is made by that bloud, muſt hold and ſtand faſt. And all the world, yea all the diuels in hell, be not able to ſhake it, nor to moue it out of the place: keepe this for a ſure ground, when thou art tempted about thy redemption, and the certaintie of it.
            Now followeth the ſecond part of his deſcription, in theſe The ſecond part. words: He is the firſt borne of all creatures. This argument is from his eternitie, he is without beginning. The Redeemer by whoſe bloud we are redeemed, as he is God, ſo he is from all eternitie: he hath no beginning. So the ſecond ground of our redemption is his eternitie: and if hee had been but in time, and not from all eternitie, the price of his bloud would not haue redeemed thee. But the Redeemer being firſt God, and next being from all eternitie, the bloud of our redemption muſt be precious. Yet to inſiſt: The firſt borne, I ſeeke no other Commentarie to explane this, then the words which hereafter follow verſ. 17. and he is before all things: which is to the ſame effect, and it is that that is written Ioh. 1. In the beginning was the word. In theſe words, this his being and ſubſtance is ſet downe by a certaine alluſion to thoſe, yt were firſt borne in the families of fathers, vnder the old Teſtament: for as they were firſt borne, and the reſt borne after them; euen ſo the firſt borne of God the onely begotten, he is not only before all the reſt, as Rom. 8. 29. but before all creatures men and Angels, borne from all eternitie, VVho can declare his generatiō? vnſpeakeably. This would be marked, ſpeaking of the eternitie of the Redeemer, hee ſets it not downe ſimply, ſaying, he is from all eternitie, but he ſets downe

his eternitie in compariſon with the creature. Wherefore doth he this? The eternitie and the glorie of God our Redeemer, appeares beſt by a compariſon with the creature. All things are euer beſt ſeene and knowne of vs, by comparing them with the contrary. The vilenes and naughtines of the creature appeares beſt, in compariſon with the maieſtie and excellencie of God. Therefore the Scripture when it ſets downe the glorie of God, it ſets it downe in a compariſon with the creature: and by the contrarie, when it ſets downe the baſenes of the creature, it ſets it downe by a compariſon with the Creator; that the baſenes of the creature may be the better ſeene. Nay thou, who thinkeſt euer much of thy ſelfe, thou neuer ſaweſt God: if thou ſaw God, thou wouldeſt ſtinke in thine own eyes. All the creatures are but ſtinke and vanitie, in compariſon of their maker.
            To goe forward. In the verſe following, when he hath ſet downe the eternitie of Chriſt, he proues it. The argument is, becauſe by him all things are made. Then neuer any thing eſcaped his hands, all paſt through his hand: the ſobereſt creature in the world paſt through his hand. There is the argument. He by whom all things were created, he muſt be before all things: but ſo it is, by our Mediatour, our Redeemer, the Lord Ieſus all things were created: Ergo, the Redeemer muſt be before all things, and conſequently eternall. There is the argument. The manner of ſpeaking imports, that the Father is the originall of the creation, and it is he who creates, and that by his ſonne, as the diſpenſer of the creation: not that there is difference in creation; nay the father and the ſonne had one power, Ioh. 5. verſ. 19. What euer the father doth, the ſame doth the ſonne. But how? Equally in power, howbeit the father be firſt in order; and then next the ſonne; and in the third place the holy ſpirit: yet all concurres with one equall power and maieſtie. Now as this is the reaſon, prouing the eternitie: ſo it is another part of his deſcription: and the third argument, taken from the creation. Then here thou ſeeſt, the third ground of thy redemption, is thy Creator. He who redeemes thee, created thee; thou haſt not one Creator, and another Redeemer: nay, hee who redeemes thee, is he who created thee. Then, thy Redeemer

being the glorious and omnipotent Creator, the bloud wherewith thou art redeemed muſt be precious. Marke it (ye who count ſo little of the bloud of Chriſt) it being ſo precious a bloud, thy redemption muſt ſtand ſure and faſt: for it is founded vpon the omnipotent Creator.
            But to goe to the text, when hee hath ſet downe generally this worke of the creation, he deſcends to ſpeake in particular of the creatures, and he laies out them as it were abroad; and the firſt difference he makes of them, is from the place of their habitation. Some are in heauen, and otherſome in the earth; he made all theſe earthly creatures, man, and beaſt; yea hee created the Toade it ſelfe; al is made by his omnipotent hand. Will you looke to the heauenly creatures? the Sunne, the Moone, the Angels, thy Redeemer made them all. The next difference he makes, is from their ſubſtance and nature, ſome viſible, that may be griped and handled; ſome inuiſible, amongſt the which is thy ſoule, that thy owne eye cannot ſee: thy ſoule is a glorious creature. Then laſtly, among theſe inuiſible creatures, he makes a difference, and it is not taken from the degrees of them, as though he would make many degrees; that is but a fantaſie of men. But it is from the ſtiles of honour. He hath made all theſe inuiſible creatures, call them as you will, call them Thrones, Principalities, Powers, and whatſoeuer ye pleaſe, thy Redeemer hath made them all: none hath eſcaped his hands. Looke not that I will curiouſly ſcan vpon Curioſitie. theſe words; nay this is not the minde of the Apoſtle: It is but curioſitie to ſatisfie a vaine headed bodie, in laying abroad the diuers ſorts of theſe creatures, made by the Lord Ieſus. Whereto tends this? While he doth this, he laieth out the glorie, not of the creatures, but of him that made them, thy Creator, thy Redeemer. Therefore when we looke to the glorie of any creature, we ſhould be ſo farre from that, to take the glorie of the maker and giue it to the ſtinking creature (as men haue done, who by nature are ſo inclined to Idolatrie, to pull the glorie from God, and aſcribe it to the creature) that by the contrarie, ſeeing he is the maker of all, wee ſhould take all from the creature, and giue it to the God of glorie: though he were an Angell, a king, a fellow, or ſeruant, wee ſhould take all from

them, and giue glorie to the Creator of them. Sticke neuer vpon the creature, but runne to the Creator: for if the creature be glorious, O how glorious is he that created him! For I aſſure thee, that neuer creature hath the thouſand part of that glorie, and maieſtie, that is in God the maker of all: nay it is a vanitie to enter in compariſon, all the glorie of men, Angels, and of the firmament, that are very glorious and beautifull creatures; yet all in compariſon of their maker and Creator, they and their glorie both, are but dirt. When that glorie of God ſhall ſhew it ſelfe, they will be aſhamed to enter into compariſon with ſo glorious a maieſtie: nay the very Angels hide their face for ſhame, they doe not behold the glorious maieſtie of their maker; and wilt thou then, vile ſtinking creature, take this glorie of God, or any part of it, and giue it to the creature? O the Lord ſhall take thee one day in his wrath, and throw that proud neck of thine aſunder, and ſhall ſhew himſelfe glorious to thy euerlaſting ſhame and confuſion! O theſe Idolaters ſhall be aſhamed then of themſelues, and of theſe creatures; to whom they haue giuen ſuch worſhip, which onely belongeth to God!
            In the end of the verſe, when he hath fallen out in the particular creatures, he reiterates again: All things are made by him; ſo he turnes backe againe, he tires not to tell it ouer againe. Brethren, will you looke to the heart of the man that ſpeakes? (for theſe words are come from the heart of the man) Theſe words riſe vpon a deep apprehenſion of the Creator, that glorious maieſtie. He hath created all things: and againe, He hath made all things. For when the heart of man or woman is full of the deepe apprehenſion of the glorious maieſtie of God, the mouth is full of ſounding, and ſetting forth his praiſe. When thy heart is emptie of God, thy mouth will be emptie of his praiſes: and if thy heart be full of God, thy mouth will be full of his glorie.
            Now when hee hath repeated theſe words to the praiſes of the Redeemer, the Creator of all things Ieſus Chriſt, he turnes to the fourth part of his deſcription: All things were created for him, that is, a further point of his glorie, then the former: hee The fourth part. made all things, and that for his owne honour, that he himſelfe

might be honoured in them. That is a higher degree indeed. If the Creator had made them for anothers glorie, his glorie had bin the leſſe: but ſeeing al is made for himſelfe, O the glorie of him! nay, all the tongues of men & Angels are not able to expreſſe the thouſand part of his glorie. All that men & Angels can ſpeak of it, is but like the blabbery and babling of a child: ſo infinite and incomprehenſible is the glorie of that high maieſtie. All then is for his honour, and all honour and glorie be to him for euer, Amen. You ſee a Craftſman will build vp a faire building, but not to himſelfe; but to a more honourable then himſelfe. The Lord is not ſuch a builder, becauſe there is none more worthie then hee himſelfe. Then you haue the fourth ground of your redemption, as it is builded vpon one God, and vpon one eternall God, and one Creator: So all is built for his honour, hee is Alpha and Omega. Then precious muſt the bloud be, wherewith thou art redeemed. The bloud being ſo precious, the redemption ſo honourable, thy redemption muſt ſtand faſt and ſure. Yet to inſiſt vpon this: You ſee the ſonne of God, who with the father made all things of nothing. The chiefeſt reſpect that hee had in the creation, it was all to himſelfe (and why ſhould not that glorious God haue reſpect to himſelfe?) and as he had chiefe reſpect to himſelfe, ſo it cannot faile him: nay there is neuer a creature made with his hand, but al ſhall come about and ſerue to his honor. He ſhall be honoured by the very gnat, and the flye; for hee cannot be diſappointed. Looke that circuit Rom. 11. 36. Of him, through him, and for him are all things: all goeth about and turnes againe to him. Seeing this is his reſpect, thou, who art his creature, looke that thou haue that reſpect to him, and that aboue all things; yea aboue thy life. Preferre the honour of this God thy Redeemer, and if thou doe it, honoured ſhalt thou be with him. Wouldeſt thou looke to it (I appeale to thy conſcience) can there be ioy in thy heart, and in thy conſcience, when the Lord is not in thy heart? It is true, thou maiſt be like a beaſt, haue a beaſtly pleaſure; but thou that haſt not the glorie of God before thine eyes, all the pleaſure in the world, will not make thee haue a ioyfull heart. And if thou wilt not reſpect his honour, thou ſhalt neuer be honoured of

him. Yea I tell thee (and the world ſhall not bring it backe againe) thou ſhalt be ſhamed and ſhent, if thou wert an Emperour: thou maiſt well run and range for a time, but the Lord ſhall honour himſelfe in thy euerlaſting ſhame and damnation, be aſſured of it. Brethren, this is a deepe myſterie of Ieſus Chriſt, and I ſay to you, that ye may thinke of the glorie of the Redeemer more highly then you doe. Fie on theſe miſcreants that know it not. Mark it, there was neuer thing done in time, nor out of time, but all was done for him, and for the honour and glorie of the Lord Ieſus thy Redeemer. And not for him, and his glorie, as he is the ſonne of God onely; but I tell thee more, all was done for the man Chriſt, for thy fleſh and bloud. Thy predeſtination that is before all eternitie, this election of men and women to life euerlaſting (as Paul Rom. 8 29. ſaith) tels thee, it was all for him and his glorie as man. There is the end of it then, that he might be the firſt borne among many brethren. Will you come to that that was done in time, the creation of all creatures? All was done for the man Ieſus Chriſt. The fall of man was ſuffered for the glorie and honour of Chriſt the man, that thou mighteſt bee redeemed with his precious bloud; ſo that the redemption of man is for the glorie of ye man Chriſt. I ſhal tell you the ground of it. That incōprehenſible God in his vnſearchable wiſedome hath laid this plot, that he would be glorified in his ſonne man; and therefore he would haue all to be done for the honour of that man Ieſus Chriſt. Our predeſtination, our election, our creation, redemption and all hee would haue ſo done, that they might ſerue for the honour of his ſonne clad with our nature. Therefore thinke thou, that the end of all is his owne glorie: Nay, we know not the glorie of Chriſt, wee know not how all things ſerues for his glorie; and therefore we count ſo little of all things.
            Then againe hee repeates that part of the deſcription, from the eternitie. And he was before all things: as he ſaid, All things were made by him; ſo he ſaith he was before al things. This cannot goe out of his minde, few words cannot content him: would to God wee could follow him, and the men of God in this point. They tire not to ſpeake of him, and of his glorie in

his creatures: ſo deepe is their apprehenſion which they haue of him. O it is for fault of apprehenſion, that we let the praiſes of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt goe by vs ſo lightly! Well, well, Loue to meditate of the excellencie of Ieſus Christ, and to ſpeake of his praiſes. I tell thee O man, if thou findeſt Ieſus Chriſt at thy heart, and ſaw his glorie in the creatures, thou wouldeſt not ſo lightly paſſe ouer his praiſes. No certainly, but men they neuer felt Ieſus, nor neuer apprehended him, as the men of God of old did. Therefore what is Chriſt to them, but a word that pearces the eare and no more? But woe is me for thee, that in this wiſe eſteemes of thy Redeemer. I pray you all in his name, as yee would be ſaued, ſeeke to apprehend Chriſt, & neuer reſt while you finde him, in a manner ſenſible in your heart; and then I aſſure thee, thou ſhalt neuer reſt to ſpeake of his praiſe, and to glorifie him in his creatures.
            Now after this, followes the other part of his deſcription. Before he hath deſcribed him from his eſſence, eternitie, creation, and from the end of things created: now in the fift roome he deſcribes him from that, that he ſustaines the creatures. The The fift part. hand that made them, holds them vp. A man that builds a houſe, as ſoone as he hath builded it, he takes away his hand: In like manner, a man that builds a ſhip, when he hath built her, he holds her not vp, but incontinently he takes away his hand from it. It is not ſo with our Lord Ieſus who hath made all things: nay the Lords hand is ſtill with the worke that he hath made, and hee holds it vp continually. For if hee take his hand from thee, and hold thee not vp, thou wouldeſt fall down in ye duſt and turne to nothing. Nay the hand of his maieſtie is euen with thee when thou art dead, his hand ſhall keepe the duſt of his owne: And if thou ſhouldeſt caſt it in the ayre, in the water, and where thou wilt; yet he ſhall gather it together, and ſhall keepe the leaſt picke of duſt, that thou ſhalt be reſolued into. Then there is the fift ground of thy redemption: As it is builded vpon a Creator, ſo it is built vpon a preſeruer and keeper. Thy Redeemer being ſuch an high perſonage, the bloud muſt be precious wherewith thou art redeemed; and thy redemption muſt ſtand faſt and ſure. Thou maiſt well ſhatter and ſhake, but thou ſhalt neuer fall from it; for if once thou haue griped it by a liuely faith, thy redemption

ſhall ſtand euer ſure and immoueable. You ſee here then a paſſing maieſtie in our Redeemer. He is a God, an eternall God, a Creator, the end of all creatures, and the preſeruer of all creatures. Whereunto ſhould I tell this? The maieſtie of Ieſus Chriſt paſſeth in glorie and excellencie. The fulnes of God is in him; yea, euen in thy nature. The eternall God is in him; what is it that thou wouldeſt haue, that thou ſhalt not finde in him? Seeke nothing without him; and thy redemptiō behooued to be wrought by ſuch a perſon; and the price of thy redemptiō behooued to be by the bloud of ſuch a perſon: otherwiſe thou wouldeſt neuer haue been redeemed. Alas, fie on their mouthes that ſpeake ſo lightly of this bloud! Seeing then it behooued to be ſuch a maieſtie, and ſuch a bloud, that Swearers. ſhould redeeme thee; it tels thee two things. It ſpeakes as the Apoſtle ſaith, Heb. 12. the firſt thing that it ſpeakes is of ſinne. O ſinne is a great thing that procured ſuch a bloud, if it were no more then a foule motion in thine heart! it is ſo great, that Vſe of the former doctrine. it cannot be taken away without this bloud. Muſt it not then be a great thing that cannot be forgiuen, except thou get ſuch a bloud?  ſo if there were no more, this one thing is ſufficient to  tell thee, of the heauines of thy ſinne.  Then againe it ſpeakes  to thee of the greatnes of that infinite iuſtice, that ſtrikes vpon ſinne. Muſt not that be great that could not be ranſomed but by that bloud of God, in the nature of man the preſeruer of all the creatures? Nay, and thou wouldeſt ſhed all the bloud of men, or Angels, all could not ranſome one ſinne. So if there were no more to tell the greatnes of that iuſtice, and wrath that abides ſinne, this bloud of Ieſus Chriſt thy Redeemer that was ſhed for it, tels thee ſufficiently. Well, look to that bloud, and let no man dallie with God after the ſight of that bloud. Now would to God wee could conſider the thouſand part of ſin, and of that wrath of God for ſinne: for then there would follow a feare of iudgement, and a deteſtation of ſinne. And then no queſtion we ſhould get remiſſion of ſinne, and ſhould be freed from the wrath of God, and that onely in that bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. To whom with the Father, and the bleſſed ſpirit, be all honour, 
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE SIXT LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 18, 19.
               
                  18 And he is the head of the bodie, that is, of the Church: he is the beginning and firſt begotten of the dead, that in all things he might haue the preheminence.
                  
                  19 For it pleaſed the Father that in him ſhould all fulnes dwell.
                  
               
            
            
               YOu haue heard (welbeloued in Ieſus Chriſt) the Apoſtle when hee had ſpoken of the benefit of our redemption and remiſsion of our ſinnes in the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, he falles out into a faire and glorious deſcription of him, and all to this end, to let vs ſee the pretiouſnes of that bloud, wherewith we are redeemed: that thereby conſequently, wee might ſee the ſurenes of our redemption by that bloud. It being of ſuch value, of neceſſitie wee muſt be redeemed by that bloud, and our redemption muſt ſtand faſt and ſtable for euer. You heard in the deſcription of Chriſt, firſt he called him the image, the eſſentiall image of the inuiſible God: then he ſtiles him the firſt borne of all creatures: then he cals him ſuch a one, by whom all things were created: next, the end for whom, and for whoſe honour all things were created that are created: and laſtly, he cals him the preſeruer, vpholder, and keeper of all things created. So, will you compare him with that inuiſible God? he is equall in glorie with him, the image of the inuiſible God, equall with God whom he repreſents. Will you compare him with the creature? there is no compariſon; for hee is the Creator of all creatures in heauen and in earth; and he infinitly paſſeth in glorie all the creatures

both viſible and inuiſible. Now when hee hath ſet him out in theſe points of glorie and maieſtie, hee ſtaies not here: for as yet he hath not told all of him, and he hath not ſet out all his glorie: but in this text he goes forward, and ſetteth him out further in more points of his glorie. This is the difference betwixt the points counted alreadie, and the points of his glorie that follow in the text. Before he hath deſcribed him as he is God, the ſonne of God from all eternitie; for as hee is God properly, he is the image of the inuiſible God, whom he repreſents as the liuely character of his perſon: ſo that the points Heb. 1. 2. paſſed, are the points of his glorie, as hee is God. The points which follow, are of his glorie, not onely as he is God, but as he is man alſo clad with our fleſh and nature.
            There haue paſt alreadie fiue points of his glorie, as he is the ſonne of God; there follow other fiue points of his glorie, as Fiue points of glorie of Chriſt manifeſted in the fleſh. he is God and man in that perſonall vnion. Theſe are they briefly: He is the head of the bodie of the Church: there is one. Secondly, he is the beginning and the firſt borne of the dead. Thirdly, he hath preheminence among all creatures that euer were, or ſhall be in the world. Fourthly, he is a man full of God. Fiftly, in office he is the Mediatour, the midman betwixt God and man, by whoſe bloud the reconciliation of man is made with God his father.
            To goe forward in that order, as they are here ſet downe, firſt he is the head of the bodie of his Church: theſe are the words. Brethren, euery word would furniſh great matter of ſpeaking; but I am not minded to digreſſe into a common place. Onely I purpoſe to ſpeake ſo much for the preſent, as the words will furniſh. He is called the head. The word head that is giuen to him imports ſundrie things in him:  firſt it imports that Ieſus Chriſt is the Lord, and the ſuperiour ouer the bodie, which is the Church; and that worthily, becauſe he is full of grace and excellencie, and in him is all matter of Lordſhip and dominion. Of what reckoning is a Lord, if there bee no matter of  Lordſhip in him? Of what value is an head, if there bee not Ieſus Chriſt head of his Church. greater graces in it then in the bodie? ſo the word imports a ſuperioritie full of grace and honour. Euen as you ſee the head of a man, becauſe of the excellencie of it, it is a Lord and a ſuperiour,

and a commaunder to the bodie.  Then againe the  word that this Lord Ieſus the head of the bodie, he is not like the common ſort of Lords and rulers: but a Lord and a ſuperiour, who is moſt ſtreightly conioyned with his ſubiects the bodie his Church. Euen as you ſee the head moſt ſtreightly ioyned with the bodie of a man; euen ſo the Lord Ieſus is moſt ſtreightly ioyned with the bodie his Church: yea he is more ſtrickly ioyned with his Church, then the head of a man is with the bodie; for the head of a man may be ſoone ſeuered frō the bodie of a man; but if Chriſt thy head be ioyned with  thee, all the powers in heauen and earth ſhall neuer ſeuer thee from thy head Ieſus Chriſt.  Thou ſhalt neuer be ſeparated from him, as Paul to the Romanes ſaith: Who ſhall ſeparate vs from the loue of God in Ieſus Chriſt? As though he would ſay, not any thing. Nay, if Ieſus Chriſt become once thy head, be aſſured he will neuer part with thee.  Yet more, the word imports, that as he is moſt ſtrictly conioyned with his Church and euery member of the ſame, as the head of a man with his bodie; ſo  he is moſt louing and tender affected towards it.  Will not the head of a man loue the bodie well, will it not tender it moſt deerely and intirely, will it not miniſter all graces it hath to  the bodie, giue life and mouing to the bodie? otherwiſe it were no head to the bodie. Euen ſo the Lord Ieſus, he loues his bodie the Church better, then any head can doe the naturall bodie: and in loue miniſters a life to his bodie, better then the life of this naturall bodie. He miniſters to his Church a ſpirituall life; he miniſters a mouing, a doing, and a growing: and in theſe reſpects he is called the head of the Church. Now when he hath called him the head of the bodie, he turnes to the bodie, and hee defines this bodie to be the Church. Then there muſt be a great likenes betwixt the Church of Chriſt The Church. and the bodie of man: otherwiſe it cannot be called a bodie. The bodie of man is ſubiect to the head: euen ſo the Church of Ieſus Chriſt is ſubiect to her Lord, Eph. 5. 23. She is his ſubiect, and he is her Lord. The bodie is ſtreightly ioyned with the head; the Church is more ſtreightly ioyned with Chriſt. The head giues life to the bodie; euen ſo the Church of Chriſt is dead without the head the Lord Ieſus. Laſtly, ye ſee the bodie

accompliſheth the perſon of a man; the head will not make a man, but the bodie ioyned with the head makes vp a man: euen ſo the Church fils vp the whole man Chriſt, made of the head the Lord Ieſus himſelfe, and of the bodie. This for the words.
            If this point of the glorie of Chriſt be weighed, that he is the head of the Church, it is a high point of glorie. The Lord hath greater glorie by this that hee is the head of the Church of the godly and holy ones men and Angels, then by that, that he is the Dominator ouer all creatures, ouer the diuell and all the multitude of reprobates. And as it is high, ſo it is in communicable, no not the Angels gets this honour to be called the head of the Church. Let be ſtinking fleſh, wilt thou ſet vp a Pope, and call him the head of the Church? A plaine derogation of Chriſts honour. Thou wilt come out with a miniſteriall head in the Church: Away with thee and thy miniſteriall head both: there is no ſuch thing. Looke the whole Scripture No miniſterial head in Scripture. through, thou ſhalt reade of a Miniſter in the Church: but thou ſhalt neuer reade a word of a miniſteriall head or Vicar of Chriſt. But would you know how he comes to this glorie? Yea to ſpeake it ſo, before hee came to this glorie, there was much adoe and great ſtirre and buſines in heauen and earth, and a great hardnes. The Pope he will ſtart vp to it at the firſt daſh: before Chriſt came to this glorie, heauen and earth was moued with a wonderfull motion: before hee was exalted to it, he was wonderfully humbled. If you will make a compariſon, it was an eaſie thing to be the image of the inuiſible God, to haue created all things, and to preſerue them, all was eaſie: but when he comes to this, there muſt be a great change, this ſonne of God is humbled, and his glorie is wonderfully obſcured. Reade Philip. 2. 6. 7. and there you ſhall ſee the whole manner of it: Ieſus (ſaith he) was in the forme of God, and hee thought it no robberie: to be equall with God: yet hee is not the head of the Church; what doth he then. The Apoſtle ſaith, he emptieth himſelfe of his owne glorie, he makes himſelfe of no reputation. How doth hee that? In taking on him the ſhape of a ſeruant. What an humbling is this, to clothe himſelfe with the forme of an abiect ſeruant? Thou thinkeſt it nothing, but ſurelie

it a wonderful matter, if ye conſider it rightly: ſo then there is a wide ſtep, a ſtrange ſtep, that he ſteppeth downe from his glorie, wherein hee ſtood equall with the Father. Yet he goes another ſtep downward, being found in the habite of a man: he to whom all other creatures giues obedience, of his owne will becomes obedient to his father. Wherein ſtands this obedience? not in doing only, but in dying. What death? The death of the Croſſe, an execrable death: the bittereſt death that euer was: nay, neuer man died ſo bitter a death as Chriſt died. All the death of men and Angels is not comparable to that death of Ieſus Chriſt, that he died for the redemption of ſinfull man: There is his humiliation.
            Looke now to his exaltation; Therefore (ſaith the Apoſtle) the father raiſed him vp to a wonderfull highnes, and gaue him a name aboue all names, that at his name all knees ſhould bow. In the Epiſtle to the Epheſians 1. 20. 21. the degrees of his glorie are ſet downe: firſt, he raiſed him from death: ſecondly, he hath ſet him at the right hand of his father: that is, he hath giuen him all power of heauen and earth: and he declares this power. Then he turnes to the Church in particular, and calles him head of the Church: for he could not haue been the head, except hee had had fleſh and bloud. Troweſt thou that thou canſt come to that honour to bee a member of his bodie, before thou bee humbled firſt? No, no, thou muſt anſwere in proportion to him, in his humilitie; otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer bee partaker of his glorie. This for the ſixt part of the deſcription of the Lord Ieſus: in the which marke this, as before wee heard many grounds of redemption made by his bloud: ſo in this point of the glorie of Chriſt, there is another ground of our redemption. As thy Redeemer is the image of God, the creator of all things, and ſo foorth, as you heard him defined before: ſo thy Redeemer he is the glorious head of the Church; yea he is thy owne head, and thou art a member of him; ſo thou ſeeſt not onely a glorious Redeemer, but a ſib, a kinſman redeemer. Therefore precious muſt that bloud be, and of neceſſitie if thou beleeue in this bloud thou muſt be redeemed.
            To goe forward. Here followes the ſeuenth part of his deſcription,

and the ſeuenth point of his glorie. The beginning and the firſt begotten of the dead. Yee heard he was called the firſt borne of all creatures, becauſe he was before them all; and not for that onely was he called ſo, but becauſe he gaue the being to all creatures. All creatures were created by vertue of him, and by participation of that being that is in him; for the firſt borne in the families of old, communicated the ſpeciall bleſſings to their brethren: euen ſo Chriſt becauſe he communicates to the reſt of his creatures ſuch ſpeciall bleſsings, as pleaſeth beſt his wiſedome, he is called the firſt borne of many brethren. Now he is called the firſt borne of the dead, becauſe he was the firſt that roſe from the dead, for there was neuer man that died that roſe before the Lord Ieſus. 1. Cor. 15. 20. He is called the firſt fruits of them that ſleepe, becauſe that al yt ſhall riſe, they ſhall riſe by vertue of his reſurrection. Then what will you haue? He was the beginning of the creation: now he is the beginning of the reſurrection of the dead. Then all mercie and glorie muſt come out of him. No creation without him, no reſurrection without him. If you will conſider this, it is a great matter: when he had created man, man by his fall loſt the creation: nay, by thy fall in Adam thou haſt loſt thy creation, and as thou waſt made of nothing; ſo by this fall of Adam thou turneſt to nothing (and well were that man that is out of Chriſt if he were turned into nothing.) No, no; he ſhall not be turned to nothing, but he ſhall be turned to worſe then nothing. So man by his fall loſt his creation, and death ſeaſed vpon him, and leaues him not till he turnes him into duſt and powder. And if Ieſus comes not in, now after that man hath loſt his creation, he would neuer be a creature againe. Therefore the ſecond benefit, which is greater then the firſt, is; that my bodie ſhall riſe againe: ſo in comes Ieſus Chriſt, and that creature that was brought to nothing, he creates him anew againe, and raiſeth him vp more glorious then euer he was before. And if thou be in Chriſt, thou ſhalt be made more glorious then euer Adam was in the firſt creation. Then, would you haue another ground of your redemption? Would you now haue the preciouſnes of it? Thy Redeemer is the firſt borne amongſt the dead. All dead bodies ſhall riſe by vertue

of him, and ſo that bloud is precious; and if thou beleeue in that bloud, of neceſſitie thou muſt be ſaued. Yet he leaues not of (for who can ſpeake enough of the glory of Chriſt Ieſus?) He ſubioynes: That in all things he ſhould haue the preheminence: Euen as he is man, he goes before al the Angels of heauen, and they are ſubiects to him. This is one dominion and lordſhip he hath. You heard before that hee is the Lord of his Church, but in theſe words is vnderſtood a more vniuerſall dominion, reaching euen to all creatures that euer were created: that among all he ſhould be the firſt, and haue the preheminence. This is that vniuerſall dominion that hee takes to himſelfe: There is giuen to me (ſaith he) all power, Matth. 28. 18. And Roman. 4. 9. He died and roſe againe, to the end that he ſhould be Lord ouer both the dead and the quicke. Such like to the Epheſians 1. 2. He was placed farre aboue all empire and dominion. And in the Epiſtle to the Philippians 2. 9. Hee was raiſed vnto a wonderfull height. So this is a generall Lordſhip, and it is not onely as he is God, but as he is man. This is a great glorie to a man, to be ſet aboue al the creatures, and to rule them with a fleſhy hand. The Lord Ieſus Chriſt he rules all creatures, euen with a fleſhy hand now glorified. Whereof comes this dominion ſo large? of his reſurrection. He roſe to be Lord: nay, be thou ſure if Reſurrection. thou riſeſt from the dead, thou ſhalt riſe to be a Lord. For the end of thy riſing from the dead, is to be a Lord: a King greater then Caeſar. But Ieſus Chriſt, he roſe not onely to be Lord, but to be the Lord of lords, becauſe he roſe firſt from the dead. Who euer roſe or ſhall riſe, they riſe by vertue of him, and his reſurrection; and it muſt follow therefore by good conſequence, that he by whoſe vertue we riſe, muſt be Lord of lords: he muſt be the firſt and formoſt in the ranke. The Lord Ieſus, he goes before all creatures that euer were created. So, wouldeſt thou haue another ground of thy redemption? Thy Redeemer is not only the head of the Church, and Lord of it; but he is Lord ouer all creatures: yea euen ouer the diuell thy very enemie. The very hand of the Lord Ieſus hales him hither and thither, as it were in a rope: he carries him, he puls him, he drawes him here and there, as he pleaſeth where he will. Muſt not that bloud be precious, muſt not thy redemption be ſure?

Onely beleeue in that bloud, and thou ſhalt be ſaued. Rom. 3. verſ. 25. God hath ſet foorth Chriſt to be a reconciliation through faith in his bloud. Away with merits paltrie; fie on thee and thy merits both. Thou thinkeſt thou canſt not be ſaued but by thy merits, as though the bloud of Chriſt were not able to redeeme thee without thy merits: away with ſuch vanitie. The bloud of Chriſt is ſufficient to redeeme ten thouſand worlds; yea ten thouſand millions of worlds.
            To come to the end. In the verſe that followes, the Apoſtle inſiſts vpon this dominion vniuerſall of Chriſt, and lets thee ſee by two arguments, that the Lord Ieſus muſt be firſt of all creatures, & haue the preheminence ouer al. The firſt argumēt is taken from that faire and glorious perſonage. The ſecond argument is taken frō that excellent office that he beares. Neuer creature bare ſuch an office, to be the Mediatour and reconciler of God and man. In this doing hee meetes with that that might be obiected. Is he not a man? what office hath he aboue other men? and what a large dominion is this? He anſweres, indeede he is a man; but a man full of God: and as for his office, he is the great Mediatour, ſuch an office as neuer Angell bare, and therefore he is the Lord of Lords. Then the firſt argument prouing the dominion vniuerſall, is in theſe words: For (ſaith he) it hath pleaſed the father that in him ſhould allfulnes dwell: there is the words. The ground both of the excellencie of the perſonage, and alſo of his office is this: It hath pleaſed God the father. If you will aske how is it, that he is ſo excellent a perſonage? He anſwers, it is of the good pleaſure of God. It is a pleaſure, and a good pleaſure, that bleſſed will, that decree, that hath paſſed from all eternitie before all time. It pleaſed the father, that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be ſuch a worthie perſonage, and a Mediatour: ſo the perſon of Chriſt and his office hath a farre fetch, and it comes of a decree as old as God himſelfe, euen from the eternall good will and pleaſure of God, from his eternall decree. So then, wee learne it comes not by chance, that Ieſus was made ſuch a perſonage, as men think, of things in the world; but it was ordained from all eternitie. Then againe, it comes not by chaunce that Chriſt ſhould be a Mediatour: but there is a decree paſt on it. In a word, neuer

thing fell to him, but by a counſaile and plat from all eternitie. The crucifying of him paſt by a decree. There was neuer a naile ſtroken into his hands or feete, but all was done by a decree. Then not to bee curious, to aske why was it that Chriſt ſhould be filled with God? the Apoſtle will haue thee to leaue thy curioſitie, and he anſwers thee, that it was the pleaſure of the father: ſo this one word cuts away theſe thorny queſtions concerning the myſteries of Ieſus Chriſt. For there is a thouſand things in him, that ſhould not be inquired of. And it were almes to ding thy teeth in thy throte, that curiouſly wilt goe Curioſitie in vaine questions. and ſearch out the reaſons of all things in Chriſt, and why he did this and that, and ſuffered this or that. Maiſt thou not vaine bodie be content with this anſwere, It hath pleaſed the father ſo? It hath pleaſed him, that the fulnes of the Godhead ſhould bide ſtill in Ieſus Chriſt for euer: for it is ſaid, that the fulnes of God dwels in him. And ye know that hee that dwels, bides ſtill. Now what a fulnes this is, you ſhall heare hereafter. In him (ſaith he chap. 2. 3. of this ſame Epiſtle) is all treaſure of wiſedome and knowledge. And againe verſ. 9. In him is the whole fulnes of the Godhead bodily dwelling. Then the fulnes that is in Chriſt, it ſtands not onely in theſe graces, with the which the man Ieſus Chriſt is indued aboue his fellowes (neuer man gat or will get ſuch graces, as the man the Lord Ieſus hath gotten: neuer a one hath gotten ſuch wiſedome, ſuch knowledge, and ſuch holines: nay, all the Angels haue not gotten ſuch graces as he hath.) But it is not onely theſe graces, wherein this fulnes ſtands, but he is filled with the fountaine of all grace. The fulnes of the Godhead it ſelfe is in him; that is his fulnes; ſuch as neuer creature got, or ſhall get in heauen or earth. It is a vanitie to ſpeake of the graces of Angels; in compariſon of him, all the graces of men or Angels, they are as it were but riuers and ſtreames that flow from that glorious head, that is full of God. So there is no compariſon of his fulnes. Wee haue receiued (ſaith Ioh. 1. 6.) all of his fulnes. So all our fulnes ſtands in his fulnes, that is deriued into vs. As this is the reaſon prouing his dominion; ſo it is a part of his glorie. Looke to the glorie of that perſonage thy Redeemer, he is not only a man, but a man full of God; and ſo muſt not this bloud yt comes from him be

precious? Therefore it is called the blood of God, Acts 20. 28. Yet only beleeue, and I aſſure thee in his name of thy redemption, if thy ſinnes were neuer ſo great. Faſten thy heart once on him, and thou ſhalt finde mercie. Take his bloud in thy hand, and ſprinkle thy heart with it, and thou ſhalt finde grace Heb. 9. 14 and mercie to flow to thee through the ſame, otherwiſe it had bin better for thee, that this bloud had neuer been ſhed. As for the reſt I leaue it till the next day: concerning the Mediatour onely thus farre.
            As the glorie of the image of the inuiſible God, and the reſt ye haue heard me ſpeake of, is infinitly excellent: ſo this, that he is a man full of God, this is the glorious perſonage of thy Redeemer. It tels thee, that that bloud that came out of that bodie, was more precious then al the things in the world. That bloud yt was powred out of his foot, out of his hand and ſide, al tels thee that it is excellently precious, and beſide that, of great neceſſitie. And further, it tels thee, that ſinne againſt God is great, and greater then thou canſt conſider. Fie on thee vile creature; if thou wiſt what it were to ſinne againſt God, thou wouldeſt ſhake and tremble: nay neuer a ioynt of thee would bide faſt, for feare of that fierce wrath to come on thee. And againe, if thou knew the vertue of this bloud that takes away thy ſinne, thou wouldeſt cleaue faſt to it, and make much of it; but thou conſidereſt not this; and therefore thou knoweſt not the preciouſnes of this bloud: for if thou knoweſt not thy ſinne, thou ſhalt not know the preciouſnes of that bloud of Chriſt that takes away ſinne. And againe, it tels vs of that paſſing iuſtice, and of that infinitnes of the wrath of God (O that infinitnes of the wrath of God!) O wretch, thou wotteſt not The wrath of God for ſinne. what it is: but if it lighted on thee, it would ruſh thee to hell. So the precious bloud that was ſhed for ſinne; without the effuſion of the which thou couldeſt not be redeemed: It tels thee, I ſay, that the wrath of God for ſinne is infinite, and if it were but an euill thought. It ſtrikes vpward, and ſtrikes the Lord in the noſe, and kindles his wrath againſt thee: therfore feare and ſtudie to mortification. And more I tell thee, that notwithſtanding thou art once redeemed, and by this bloud of Chriſt freed from ſinne and death, by ſuch a ranſome; yet

if thou take delight in ſinne, the murtherer in his murther, the oppreſſor in his oppreſsion, being once redeemed, thy ſinne if it were but an euill thought, it is a thouſand times the greater by reaſon of thy redemption. For why? it brings with it the contempt of the bloud of Chriſt. And thou ſinner, who takes pleaſure in weltring in the foule puddle of ſinne, what doeſt thou? thou goeſt on with thy foote, and treads the pretious bloud of the Lord Ieſus vnder thy foule feete. And therefore thou ſhalt be chalenged in that day, not onely becauſe thou waſt a murtherer, an oppreſſor, and a harlot; no, no, there ſhal be thy chalenge, villaine thou treadeſt vnder thy foote the bloud of the couenant, the precious bloud of thy Sauiour, that ſhould haue redeemed thee from thy murther and ſinne: and therefore wel were it for thee, if thou hadſt been a Gentile that neuer had heard of this couenant; and therefore if thou mindeſt not to leaue off thy ſinne, in paine of thy life, thou come not to heare a word of Chriſt. For why? the more thou heareſt, the greater ſhall be thy damnation. And there is not one word ſpoken this day, but if it be not effectuall to chaunge thy euill life, ſo that thou begin to leaue off thy ſinne, but it ſhall increaſe thy damnation in that day. Therefore take my counſell, either amend your liues; or els come not to heare one word of this Goſpell. For this word, as the Apoſtle ſaith, ſhall be either a ſauour of life vnto life, or els a ſauour of death vnto death, and it ſhall ſlay thee with a greater dead ſtroke, then if a thouſand rapiers were thruſt through thee. I beſeech the Lord Ieſus to touch thee with his word, that it may be effectuall in the hearts of the hearers; ſo that they may amend their liues to their owne weale, and his glorie. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be praiſe.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 20.
               20 And through peace made by the bloud of that his croſſe, to reconcile to himſelfe, through him, through him (I ſay) all things, both which are in earth, and which are in heauen.
               
            
            
               YE remember (beloued brethren) the Apoſtle, when he had ſet downe that great benefite of the redemption of mankinde by the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, hee fals out into a high deſcriptiō of the ſonne of God, tending to this end, to let vs ſee the preciouſnes of that bloud. He ſet him to be firſt the image of the inuiſible God, a high ſtile. Secondly, he ſtiles him to be the firſt borne of all creatures. Thirdly, hee ſtiles him to be the Creator himſelfe, by whom all things in heauen and earth were created. Fourthly, he calles him to be the end of the ſaid creation of all creatures, for whoſe honour and glorie all creatures were made. Fiftly, he ſtiles him to be the preſeruer and keeper of all the creatures made by him. Sixtly, he comes forward, and conſidereth him not onely as he is the ſonne of God, God from all eternitie; but as he is man alſo: and he makes him to be the head of the Church, as he is God and man. Then he cals him the firſt borne of the dead, as hee is man; who by his power ſhall raiſe vp all men that ſhall riſe from the dead. Then hee cals him the vniuerſall dominatour of all the creatures; not only cals he him the Lord of his Church, but he cals him the vniuerſall

dominatour of all creatures in heauen and earth: yea the Lord ouer the very diuels themſelues. He hath the preheminence before all creatures. Now hee inſiſts vpon the laſt point, and he giues two arguments to proue him to haue the preheminence of all creatures, and before all creatures. The firſt argument is taken from the worthines of his perſonage, In him (ſaith he) is all fulnes. And God the Father decreed, that all fulnes, not only of the graces of God, but of the Godhead it ſelfe, ſhould dwell in the man the Lord Ieſus. The ſecond argument is taken from the dignitie of his office; hee is the Mediatour by whom reconciliation is made betwixt God and man. So brethren, this day (by Gods grace) we haue to inſiſt in the office of Chriſts mediation.
            We haue then in the firſt verſe a deſcription of the Mediatour. He ſaith not ſimply he is the Mediatour, but in place of the name he giues a deſcription of the name. The Mediatour is The office of the Mediatour. he, by whom it hath pleaſed the father to reconcile to himſelfe all things in heauen and earth, by making peace through the bloud of his croſſe. Now becauſe the Mediatour is defined here from the benefit of our reconciliation: therfore we ſhall ſpeak of this benefit only, ſo farre as the words ſhall furniſh. If you will look what is before, and weigh the words of this text; you ſhall finde theſe things, namely to be conſidered, concerning this benefit of our reconciliation. Firſt, the word of reconciliation, what it meaneth. Secondly, who is the reconciliator, to wit, the Father. Thirdly, who mooueth him to reconcile all things. Fourthly, who are they that are reconciled. Fiftly, to whom they are reconciled. Sixtly, by whom, to wit, the Mediatour. Seaventhly, after what manner. All theſe circumſtances are in the text, partly before, and partly after, in theſe words read. Now for the word of reconciliation, it ſignifies agreement, and attonement, and friendſhip made betwixt two parties that were at variance together. This way generally is the word taken; euen ſo our reconciliation with God: It is an agreement betwixt God and vs that were at variance, enmitie and open warre together; fighting in ſuch ſort, as neuer two contrarie parties fought together. When we were enemies (ſaith Paul, Rom. 5. 10. we were reconciled by the death of his ſonne. Yet

brethren, the word imports more, not onely it imports an agreement, but (to ſpeake it ſo) it imports a reagreement, and a renewing of an old friendſhip betweene two that firſt were friends, and then became foes by offence done againſt the other partie. Euen ſo our reconciliation, it is a renewing of the Reconciliation what it is. old friendſhip that was betwixt God and vs in the creation; and becauſe thereafter we offended him, firſt we become enemies to him, and through ſinne fight againſt him moſt cruelly. So this word includes three things within it: firſt it includes an old friendſhip we had with God, as old as our creation. For we were created in the beginning friends to God, and hee was our friend, and we were his friends. Secondly, it imports a variance that followed the creation, and that by our foule defection in breaking of the couenant. Thirdly, it imports a renewed friendſhip after that enmitie, and that by the Mediatour the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. I remember Paul, writing to the Epheſians 1. 10. he hath a word that he cals recollection, which imports a gathering together of them that were ſcattered, and it includes all theſe three, that wee haue ſpoken of reconciliation. Firſt, it imports a vnion, which wee had with God at the beginning. Secondly, that after there was a ſcattering. Then it imports a gathering together of vs by the Mediatour. Now this for the word.
            In the knowledge whereof, you may learne the three eſtates of man from the beginning. Firſt, wee ſtood in friendſhip and amitie with God: he was ours and we were his; and wee were bound with him in a couenant. Why ſhould wee not remember this our firſt eſtate and condition in our creation? wee ſtood then in amitie with God, ſuch as neuer was betwixt creature and creature. It hath no compariſon in this world. Secondly, we learne our enmitie, the ſtate of variance and diſagreement. Enmitie with God. The eſtate of battell and of warre with God: a miſerable eſtate! For like as it was the felicitie of man to be at one with God (for if thou hadſt all the world, and all the confederacie with all the Kings on the earth, and with the diuell himſelfe; thou haſt no part of bleſſing, thou haſt no happines, if thou be not at one with God) euen ſo our enmitie with God is our miſerie: curſed is that creature that is enemie to God.

Thirdly, in ye word we learne our laſt eſtate, our renewed amitie with God againe. We began with friendſhip, wee fell into emnitie; wee returne againe to friendſhip, and this is made by the Mediatour. If you will compare this friendſhip with the old friendſhip, it is both greater and better then the old friendſhip. The new friendſhip that is gotten by this reconciliation The reconciliation we haue by Chriſt is vnchangeable. is vnchangeable: the old friendſhip was changeable. Wee became his enemies, and hee became ours: but this new friendſhip it muſt ſtand, and ſhall ſtand immutable in the Mediatour, and it ſhall be immutable to thee: and if thou be truly reconciled to God, thou ſhalt neuer be an enemie to him againe, nor hee to thee. For Ieſus Chriſt, who hath made the peace, ſhall hold faſt the band of peace betwixt thy God and thee: neuer any was truly reconciled with him, but hee ſhall ſtand firme and ſtable in that reconciliation. For Chriſt makes interceſſion for thee; and thy reconciliation ſhall ſtand as long as his interceſſion ſtands, which is euerlaſting: therefore thy friendſhip ſhall ſtand euerlaſtingly. It is a plaine blaſphemie to ſay that a man once truly reconciled to God, can fall from grace againe: and it is as much to ſay, as that Chriſt ſhal not continue in his interceſſion. So our laſt eſtate is moſt bleſſed: onely hold thy eye on thy Mediatour that makes interceſſion for thee, and I will aſſure thee thou ſhalt neuer be ſeuered from him: nay heauen and earth ſhall goe together ere thou be rent from that God. Thus briefly for the word.
            Now to come to the ſecond point; who is the Redeemer, and the author of our reconciliation. In the verſes preceding The ſecond circumſtance. it is ſaid, It hath pleaſed the father that in him all fulnes ſhould dwell; and that by him all ſhould be reconciled to himſelfe: ſo the author of our reconciliation is the father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Who was the author of the enmitie? who was the cauſe of the variance? where begun it? Man himſelfe he begun the variance. But who begun the friendſhip? began man it againe? Ioh. 3. 16. began Adam the reconciliation? thought he of it? No, he neuer thought of it to begin it againe. God the father, who called vpon him when he was runne away, began the friendſhip. Thou begans it not: nay, there was neuer ſuch a thing as a thought of it. The father he began it, euen when thou waſt

running headlong to thy deſtruction, turning thy backe vpon God. Thou maiſt be at oddes with God when thou wilt; but thou wilt not be the beginner of the friendſhip againe, except The loue of the father the fountaine of reconciliation. hee of mercie begin it with thee: ſo it is the father that is the authour and fountaine of our reconciliation. Yet brethren, what is this that the father begins the friendſhip, being the partie aduerſarie, and the greateſt, and the worthieſt partie? This is a rare thing, that one of two parties aduerſaries, and the worthieſt, ſhould ſeeke reconciliation of the other, that is nothing in compariſon of him. So this lets vs ſee a paſſing loue and mercie in God, that began firſt to ſeeke thee. But yet what a partie aduerſarie was he? to wit, he was that partie aduerſarie that was offended by man: he did no offence to man, but man offended him. Indeede there had been leſſe matter of marueiling, if hee had begun the feude and enmitie: but hee brake not a iot to man of his part, of the couenant made with him. But man, falſe man, kept neuer a point of his part: and therefore as man is called a lier after that breach of promiſe to God his maker; ſo this is found that he who hath receiued the wrong, and the more ſtrong and worthie partie, that that partie will begin the amitie againe. This is that incomparable loue, that in the Rom. 5. 18. is ſpoken of. There is not ſuch a loue to be found in heauen or earth, that the partie that is offended and hath done no offence, that he ſhould beginne the peace: yea more, ſhould giue his onely begotten ſonne, his deere ſonne, to be a ranſome for the offence done to him. There is that incomprehenſible loue of God towards man. What tongue is able to expreſſe yt thouſand part of that loue? Nay, al the wit of men and Angels is not able once ſufficiently thinke of it. Let be to expreſſe it as it is in thy ſelfe. Thus far for the ſecond.
            Now the third is, what moued the father to enter into new friendſhip with man? ſaw hee ought in me, in thee, or in any man, to moue him to be reconciled with me, or thee, or any man? It is ſaid: It hath pleaſed him: then it was his owne pleaſure, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , beneplacitum eius; this was it that moued him to be reconciled with vs. This pleaſure, it was not a thing in time, What the loue of the father is. but it was a decree that paſt in heauen from al eternitie. A decree,

that proceeded of meere loue and grace, and not of a foreſight of any good that either he ſaw thē preſently in man, or that he foreſaw ſhould be in man hereafter; but it was of a free grace, without any merit of man. And therfore in his own time for the fulfilling of this decree of reconciliation, hee ſent his onely begotten ſonne into the world, to preach this word of reconciliation to the world. So this word, It hath pleaſed him, excludes all merit and worthines in man; and it lets thee ſee that that friendſhip was without thy merit; yea to ſpeake Merit. it ſo, againſt thy merit. I know not a merit that thou haſt, but the merit of hell and damnation.
            Come to the fourth circumſtance, who were they that were reconciled? It is ſaid, It hath pleaſed him to reconcile all things. 
               The fourth circumſtance. And then in the end of the verſe, he laies this vniuerſalitie in the parts of it, All things both in heauen and earth. This vniuerſall particle All things, extends not to all creatures; yea it extends not to all reaſonable creatures; it extends not to the diuels; no reconciliation with the diuell nor with the Angels that made that foule defection. I tell you more, it extends not to all men and women: no reconciliation with the reprobate for euer: they are in ranke with the diuell himſelfe. This reconciliation, it extends then to the bleſſed Angels, who haue ſtood from the beginning. It extends to men and women, not to all, but to the choſen and elect ones from all eternitie. Now there is no queſtion of ſinfull man. All will graunt that man, who was choſen to life, howbeit before hee was an enemie to God, yet now in time he is reconciled to him. But all the queſtion is about the bleſſed Angels that fell not from God. How can it be ſaid, that they are reconciled to God? Well, I will not be curious, if you will conſider theſe bleſſed Angels in themſelues Whether the elect Angels be reconciled to God by Chriſt, or what benefit they haue by him. apart, from the bodie which is the Church; indeede it is true, they cannot properly be ſaid to be reconciled, becauſe they were neuer at feud or enmitie with God (for reconciliation, as yee haue heard, imports a feud) but if you conſider them in the bodie, in a manner they may be ſaid to be reconciled in the bodie: for howbeit they be bound vp without the bodie, yet they muſt euer be conſidered to be in the bodie, and ſo in the bodie they get a new coniunction with God, through

the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. The eſtate of the bleſſed Angels before the comming of Chriſt it was this: They hung as it were by the head (to ſpeake it ſo) by a ſtitch, as certaine members ſeuered from the body: when Chriſt comes in, he couples them together, he makes man and Angell all vp together faſter then euer they were before. So to leaue this, you may ſee the very bleſſed Angels, who fell not from God, they got a benefit by the Mediatour, as man doth. I ſay the bleſſednes of the Angels was not perfected, till Chriſt came: They were indeed bleſſed, but they had not a firme bleſsing, while Chriſt came, who eſtabliſhed their bleſſednes. And therefore as it is ſaid, ye 
               Abraham long before the Lord Ieſus came into the world, ſaw him and reioyced; ſo the Angels they ſaw the Lord Ieſus long ere he came; and when he came, they reioyced at his comming. And it is ſaid in 1. Pet. 1. 12. that it is their pleaſure to looke in through that vaile to ſee and behold the Lord Ieſus. Thus much concerning the Angels.
            Then the thing I note for our ſelues is this. Will you marke what care God hath had of man? God, he would not perfect the bleſſednes of the Angels without man: he would not giue them that bleſſing till Ieſus Chriſt the man the Mediatour came, and ioyned them with man. So you may ſee the care of God towards mankinde, to haue been very great and very louing. The Apoſtle to the Hebrues 11. verſ. 39. 40. comparing the old Church with the new, ſaith; That the Saints that ſuffered before, they got not the thing promiſed, becauſe God had a reſpect to vs: Euen ſo he did with the Angels, hee would not giue them their full bleſſing without vs, vile ſtinking ſinners. What regard is this that thy God ſhould haue of thee? Laſtly, I will ſpeake this to thee, that eſteemes ſo little of the communion with the bodie of the Church. O miſerable creature! vaine lowne! thou ſhalt neuer bee bleſſed till thou bee ioyned with the Saints of God in the Church. Vaine ſoule, if thou be not ioyned with the bodie of Chriſt which is his Church, thou ſhalt periſh for euer, thou ſhalt goe to hell, I giue thee this doome.
            Now followes the fift circumſtance of this reconciliation. The fift circumſtance. To whom is it made? It is ſaid to himſelfe, not to another. It
               
               hath pleaſed him to reconcile all things to himſelfe. Then all bleſſednes is in that coniunction with God: ioyne thy ſelfe with Bleſſednes wherein it conſiſteth. him, and thou ſhalt be bleſſed; if thou be not ioyned with God, thou ſhalt neuer be bleſſed; ſeeke bleſſednes here and there, yet no bleſſednes but with God. The Angels haue no bleſſing, but in that they are conioyned with God through the Lord Ieſus Chriſt: yea, I tell thee, the earth, and the heauen haue no bleſſing, but in that amitie and friendſhip with the creator. O what vanitie is it to thinke thou haſt any bleſſing without the coniunction with the creator! But to ſpeake of man: thy reconciliation muſt be with the father, with whom thou art at enmitie, to whom thou waſt an enemie, whom thou offendedſt: therefore thy reconciliation muſt be with God. Marke it: a ſinner, ſinne againſt whom he will, ſlay and it were all the world; in ſo doing, he ſinnes not ſo much againſt man, as againſt God. No, no, it is againſt God himſelf, as Dauid ſaith, Againſt thee, O Lord, haue I ſinned and done euill in thy ſight, Pſal. 51. For ſinne is the tranſgreſſion of the law, 1. Ioh. 3. 4. O foule butcher! O oppreſſor and ſacrilegious theefe! Thou that doſt any euill againſt a man, thou doſt it not ſo much againſt the In euery ſin a man fighteth againſt God. perſon of the man, as againſt God himſelfe that is in heauen: and ſo man that ſinnes, muſt be reconciled with him, becauſe it is againſt God that the ſinne is committed. The creatures alſo that ſtood and fell not, are at enmitie with thee: for when thou waſt enemie to God, thou waſt enemie alſo to the very creatures, and God and the creatures were enemies to thee, (O well had it been for thee, who art a Reprobate, that thou hadſt been made a ſtone, when thou becameſt an enemie to God through thy ſinne! for thou madeſt not onely God to be thy enemie, but thou madeſt all the good creatures of God to be thy enemie: the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres and firmament, the Angels in heauen; yea theſe very ſenceles things of the earth, and the beaſt, and the foule of the ayre) the earth grones vnder thee, and it would be quit of thee, as of an enemie: it will not binde vp friendſhip with thee, if thou be an enemie to God. So if thou be an enemie to God, thou art an enemie to all the good creatures of God, and they are enemies to thee: but if thou be in band and coniunction with God,

the heauen and all the creatures will be friends to thee. The enmitie and friendſhip that ſtands with any creature, it depends vpon the feude and friendſhip with God: ſo that if thou All the creatures in enmitie with all vnbeleeuers. be at feude with God, all the creatures will be at feude with thee; and if thou be at friendſhip with him, all the creatures will be thy friends. Marke this well: marueile not that the Sea ſhould drowne thee, and thy houſe ſmother thee, that art at ſtrife with God through thy villanous life: wonder not, it is a wonderfull thing; that they that are at feude with God, dares enter into a houſe or go out of it, or venter on the ſea. But the conſciences of men are ſo locked vp, that they will not vnderſtand nor feare this: but the vaine ſleeping lowne, ſaies peace, peace. Oh but the iudgement comes with ſuch a rattle about the eares of the lowne, that hee cannot get once ſpace to ſay, God is mercifull! Haue you not marked this in theſe bloudie murtherers and the reſt? Nay thou that crieſt peace to thy ſoule, when thou art doing all the miſchiefe and villanie thou canſt, and if thou goe on ſo, the fierce wrath of God and terrible iudgement ſhall oppreſſe thee, ere euer thou be aware of thy ſelfe.
            Now followes the ſixt poynt or circumſtance to be conſidered in reconciliation. By whom is it made? There muſt be a mediator, or elſe it cannot be made. Indeed the firſt friendſhip was made without a mediator, becauſe man and woman they were created at the beginning holy, without ſpot of ſinne: but at the making of the next friendſhip, becauſe of the offence there muſt needs be a mediator to paſſe betwixt thee, and that fire that was readie to deuoure thee: for thou thy ſelfe dareſt not appeare and ſue for it immediatly: for thou art not able to ſtand in the preſence of that terrible God, before whoſe face there goes a fearefull fire that would conſume thee at an inſtance. So there muſt be a Mediator. It is true that the Father made this reconciliation of his free mercie, and of a paſſing grace hee bare to mankinde. Would to God wee had a ſenſe of it; but I tell thee, this grace and mercie was deere bought (it is not an eaſie thing to a ſinner that hath violated ſo holy a maieſtie to get acceſſe againe.) This mercie, from whence this reconciliation comes, it ſprings out of the

Lord Ieſus, as a faire greene tree in a garden: it ſprings out of the very bloud of the Mediatour the Lord Ieſus. For why, the mercie could neuer haue been nor had place, if the wrath and iuſtice of the Father had not bin ſatisfied with that bloud: there could neuer haue been ſuch a thing as mercie to the world, if that bloud had neuer been ſhed: and ſo ſay, I, this mercie and grace ſprings vp ſweetly and gratiouſly, out of the bloud of Chriſt. So, wouldeſt thou haue mercie? lay hold on the bloud of Chriſt; and as thou wouldeſt haue part in heauen, reſt neuer while thou finde that bloud ſprinkled in thy conſcience, & thy heart waſhed with it. Now from whence comes this Mediatour? how is he giuen to thee? The father (ſaith the Scripture) loued the world, Iohn. 3. 16. So the Mediatour, vpon whom this new band of mercie and grace riſeth, is giuē of the father to the world, and that in loue. There is nothing in this new band, but mercie vpon mercie: mercie in the beginning; mercie in the progreſſe; and mercie in the end. Indeede it is not without iuſtice and wrath; but thou art ſpared, and the iuſtice and wrath it ſtrikes on the Mediatour; ſo that that is iuſtice and wrath in the Mediatour, it is mercie and grace to thee. Nay he hath not ſpared his owne ſonne; yet he hath ſpared the ſtinking ſinner. Wilt not thou be thankfull for this benefit? Well, if there be not a ſenſe of the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt, looke not for heauen. I warne thee that art a King, an Earle, a Lord, a Baron, a ſubiect, man, wife, laſſe, and lad; if ye haue not a ſenſe of this mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt, ye ſhall neuer ſee heauen.
            Now to come to the laſt circumſtance: after what manner is this reconciliation made with ſinfull man? The manner is ſet downe in theſe words, making peace by his bloud ſhed on the croſſe. The father reconciles vs to himſelfe after this manner, by making peace with vs in the bloud of Chriſt. Brethren, when two men are at variance, the third man will ſtep in and intreate the perſon that is at variance with the other, to be friends with him, and he will obtaine it, eſpecially if he be an intire man. But O that ſonne of God! that deere and that welbeloued! when he comes in, it is not faire words, it is not ſupplications, that will doe the turne; but him it behooued to go

to ſuffer death: and that dead ſtroke of hell, that ſhould haue lighted on me, and thee, and ſhould haue bruſed vs euerlaſtingly, he caſts in his head, and that ſtroke lights on him. It cannot be holdē off thee, by no other buckler, but by his head and bloud ſhedding: without bloud no remiſſion, Heb. 9. nay, nay, either ſhall thy bloud paſſe for it, or els the bloud of the Mediatour. O it is a terrible thing, to haue to doe with the wrath of an infinite God! there is nothing can ſatisfie him, but the precious bloud of his own deere ſonne: and no other death can ſatisfie him, but a curſed death, the death of the croſſe: a painfull death to be nailed quicke to a croſſe. It was the figure of the death of hell. He was pained vpon the croſſe with the paines of hell. If he could not eſcape ſuch a death who was an innocent, how wilt thou, who art a ſinner, eſcape that terrible death? O what death ſhall abide thee, if thou be not in him! Theſe words then teach vs two things: firſt, the greatnes of the enmitie, that could not be remoued but by the bloud, and execrable death of the Mediatour. For if this enmitie had bin but a ſillie and ſmall feude, what needed all this, that the ſonne of God ſhould dye ſuch a death? Wherefore ſhould all this adoe haue been? wherefore ſhould he haue ſuffered ſuch extremitie? So, if there were no more to tell thee the greatnes of ſin, the death and the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt ſhed on the croſſe tels thee. O ſinne is great! and yet the world will not heare it, but the ſoule ſtinking ſinner will wallow in it more and more. O ſinner! ſinne is foule and fearefull. An euill thought is a great and terrible mountaine. The firſt world had experience of this greatnes of ſinne, being without Chriſt. Our Gentles in Scotland with the reſt felt it. I tell thee, before this bloud came and the full time came, there was nothing to hold off the dint of the wrath and ſtroke of God, that that world found before the comming of Chriſt. What, was it a ſmall matter to be an enemie to God? was it a light thing to ſinne? No, no, for all that time before Chriſts comming, for the greateſt part, God was doing no other thing, but ſtriking and haſhing on ſinners, ſlaying her, and ſlaying him. Sinne raigned all the time to death, ſaith Paul Rom. 5. in the end all periſhed, and went to hell for the moſt part, except ſome very few. And I tell you,

this world thinkes there is no hell, and very few get this grace: for ſo long as that olde Tabernacle ſtoode, few got entrie to grace. So they, miſerable ſoules that lie now in torment, they teſtifie and crie the horriblenes of ſinne: and O the preciouſnes of the bloud that hath freed now the ſoules of men from ſinne! Now when he came into the world, I put it out of queſtion, The calling of the Gentiles increaſed the number. whereas one was ſaued before, hundreds were ſaued after. For Chriſt ſaith, for once the bloud was ſhed, men and women thronged into heauen, Matth. 11. So all tels thee the bleſſednes of thy eſtate that hath fallen in this time. If thou hadſt any ſenſe, if thou wert ſent out naked to begge thy meate, thou art happie, conſidering this time wherein thou art borne. O the happines of this time! when the bloud of Chriſt runnes abroad as a riuer to ſaue ſinners: but wee are blinded, and (as I ſaid before) that number is drawne in, and beginning to be abridged, and the force of the bloud is drawne in and begun to bee leſſened; and the force of faith is nothing now, in reſpect of the former time of the Primitiue Church and daies of the Apoſtles: and therefore as it began with a handfull; ſo it ſhall end with a very handfull: and bleſſed is that man that can ſtriue to throng into heauen, through this bloud of Ieſus. Now the Lord worke this in our hearts, that as wee ſeeke for the kingdome of heauen; ſo we may throng in at it, through this bloud of Ieſus. To whom be praiſe and honour,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 21, 22.
               
                  21 And you which were in times paſt ſtrangers and enemies, becauſe your mindes were ſet in euill workes, hath he now alſo reconciled,
                  
                  22 In that bodie of his fleſh through death, to make you holy and vnblameable, and without fault in his ſight.
                  
               
            
            THeſe daies paſt (beloued in Ieſus Chriſt) wee haue heard a high deſcription of the Sonne of God the Lord Ieſus, in the which he is painted out in a marueilous glorie. In the laſt part of this deſcription, ye heard it was ſaid, that by him, as the Mediatour, it pleaſed the Father to reconcile to himſelfe all things both in heauen and earth, making the peace by the bloud of his croſſe. In the which words the Apoſtle turnes ouer vpon the whole Church, that hee hath ſpoken of the ſonne of God. For all his glorie tends to the weale of his Church; all to the reconciling of the Church with God the head, in him as the Mediatour. Now brethren, in this text that we haue read, verſ. 21. he applies this bleſsing of reconciliation to the Church of the Coloſſians in ſpeciall; And you alſo (ſaith he) hath he reconciled. In the which words, as before he turneth ouer the whole glorie of Ieſus Chriſt vpon the vniuerſall Church; ſo now he turnes it ouer vpon this particular Church of Coloſſe. For the glorie of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, as it is the glorie of the whole Church; ſo it is the glorie of euery particular Church: and in ſo doing, no queſtion hee

applies it to euery particular perſon in the Church: ſo that the glorie of the ſonne of God is mine, and thine. Beleeueſt thou in him? All this glorie is thine. There is no point of it in him, but thou ſhalt haue the vſe of it: ſo that no man or woman that is in the Church, needs to enuie this glory in Ieſus Chriſt. It is naturall to men and women, to enuie the glorie that others haue aboue them: yea, ſubiects will enuie the honour and glorie of Princes aboue them. But thou who art a ſubiect in Chriſts Church, thou needes not to enuie Chriſts glorie. All his glorie is thine; yea thou oughteſt to haue no pleaſure but when thou lookeſt vpon his glorie and exaltation.
            But to come to the words. We ſee then in theſe words, there is a particular application of this benefit of reconciliation to the Church of the Coloſſians. The text firſt offers vs to be conſidered, who is the reconciler. Now (ſaith the Apoſtle) he hath 
               The Reconciler. 
               reconciled. Who is this that hath reconciled the Coloſſians to God: Before ſpeaking of the reconciliation in generall with the whole Church, he ſaid, It hath pleaſed the Father to reconcile all things to himſelfe in him: but now plainly in the text the Reconciler is changed. It was the father before; now the ſonne of God, the ſecond perſon of that glorious Trinitie, hee is the Reconciler. Wherein the Apoſtle lets vs ſee that in this worke of reconciliation, this ſonne of God is not onely a patient, not onely a Mediatour to ſuffer for our ſinnes; but he is an agent, a doer, a reconciler. As he is the Mediatour of the reconciliation, he is not onely a ſacrifice, in the which the reconciliation is made; but he is a ſacrificer offering himſelfe in a ſacrifice to God for our ſinnes. For looke how willingly the father offered him a ſacrifice for vs, as willingly, gladly, and ioyfully offered hee himſelfe for vs: for if hee had not died willingly and gladly in the nature of man, but againſt his will as men will dye, his death would neuer haue done men good, nor ranſomed their ſinnes. So this is a point of our beleefe, that as wee beleeue hee died; ſo wee beleeue hee died willingly: and that Chriſt died willingly. they who crucified him, were not ſo willing to crucifie him, as he was willing to offer himſelfe to be crucified. If thou haſt not this faith, thou haſt no good of the death of Chriſt. So the perſon reconciler, is Chriſt. Then to amplifie this benefit of reconciliation,

he cals them to remembrance of their miſerable eſtate before they were reconciled. What were they before? Who were in times paſt (ſaith he) ſtrangers and enemies, meaning to God: and where was this enmitie? In the inward mind. And why? Becauſe their mindes were ſet onely vpon euill workes. Hee will not ſpeake to them of this benefit of reconciliation, before hee aduertiſeth them of that eſtate they ſtood in before they were reconciled. Marke it: there is no ſight of the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt, no preſence of mercy and grace, except The miſerie of man without Chriſt. in the mirrour (to ſay it ſo) of the paſt miſerie wee were in: ſo that except thou looke to that, thou ſhalt neuer ſee, as thou ſhouldeſt ſee, the benefit of mercie and grace in Ieſus Chriſt. There is no ſinfull creature that is able to ponder and weigh aright in the heart, the greatnes of the bleſſing of God in Ieſus Chriſt, except hee take the bleſſing and mercie, and put in a ballance with the miſerie, and ſee which of them weigheth downe: otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer know the weight of mercie, and glorie, if thou take it not from the miſerie of that ſtinking nature, and filthines of thine; neither ſhalt thou euer be touched with that ſound ioy, except the ſenſe of miſerie goe before. He that hath neuer found himſelfe in hell, hath neuer found himſelfe in heauen: for all the ſenſe of heauen breakes out of hell.
            Now to weigh the words. The firſt word wherein hee ſets down their miſerable eſtate is this: Sometime (ſaith he) ye were ſtrangers farre off. From whom? From him, who ſhould haue bin their greateſt friend; whoſe domeſticks they ſhould haue bin, from God, and ſo from the Common-wealth of Iſrael, from his Church. If thou be a ſtraunger from God, and then from his Church, there is no life in thee: thou art but a dead rotten member in ſinnes and offences, Epheſ. 2. 1. Liue as thou wilt, breathe as thou wilt, haue thy ſenſes as quicke as thou wilt; fling here and there, and leape as lightly as thou pleaſeſt; thou art but dead, and more then dead, and dye ſhalt thou euerlaſtingly. Yet marke the words: hee cals not them ſimplie ſtrangers and aliants; but he ſaith, they were made ſtrangers; to let vs ſee that all this ſtrangenes from God, is not by our creation: we were created friendly with him, and his domeſticks;

but by our owne defection, we haue made our ſelues of domeſtickes and houſehold children, ſtrangers. And therefore it is ſaid in Eſai. 59. 2. Your ſinnes haue diuided betweene me and you. So it is thy ſinne, it is not that naturall ſubſtance of thy ſoule and bodie; but it is the corruption of the ſubſtance that makes thee a ſtranger from God. Yet marke the words, hee ſaith not that God was eſtranged from them; but that they were eſtranged from him. No, no, the Lord is not the beginner of this ſtrangenes, hee turnes neuer firſt vpon thee, but thou turneſt thy backe firſt vpon him: he neuer drawes from thee that ſweete countenance of his, firſt; but thou draweſt thy countenance from him. For brethren, to ſpeake the trueth; when thou haſt turned thy backe vpon him, and eſtranged thy ſelfe from him; yet if thou be one of his elect, his loue toward thee ſhall neuer leaue thee nor turne from thee. O that loue of God! he loues a ſinner that is as it were ſpitting vpon Gods loue. him: for the loue of God is inalterable. And when thou haſt played thee with thy owne counſell, ſerued thy luſts in thy owne time, the Lord vtters that loue towards thee and calles thee home againe. So there is the firſt degree of their miſerie. Yet it is not all ſaid: he comes on with another degree, and higher then the firſt; Sometime ye were ſtrangers, yet more, enemies. One man may be a ſtraunger to another, and yet not his enemie; but ſaith he, ye were not onely ſtrangers, but you were enemies alſo. The words import not onely a ſecret hatred, but a plaine and open hoſtilitie: they fought againſt him: there was neuer ſo hot a battell betwixt man and man, as was betwixt God and vs, before the reconciler came: there was neuer Before the calling of the Gentiles by the Goſpell. ſo much bloud ſhed, as was from the time of the fall of Adam to the cōming of Ieſus Chriſt. So there is a higher degree of miſerie; not onely ſtrangers, but enemies, fighting againſt heauen with an vplifted hand. This degree muſt follow the former. It is not betwixt God and man, as it is betwixt man and man. One man may be a ſtranger to another, and yet not his enemie; but if thou be a ſtranger to God, thou art his enemie. A ſtranger to God is an enemy to him. For Chriſt ſaith, He that is not with me, is againſt me. Beware then of the firſt. Turne not ſo much as thy foote from him: but ſtriue to be at home with him, and to creepe to his houſe, and

to creepe vnder his boord: otherwiſe thou ſhalt take vp a banner againſt him.
            Now to goe to the words: where begunne this ſtrangenes and enmitie? where is the firſt ſeate of it? which is the fountaine whereof it ſprings? It is not the bodie firſt: it is not in the eye, howbeit it be an enemie to God; if thou ſtand in nature thou wilt lift vp a proud eye, teſtifying that thou art an enemie to God: it is not in the mouth, howbeit thou blaſpheme God therewith: it is not in thy hand, ſuppoſe thou fight therewith againſt the heauens; but it begins within thee, and the chaire wherein it ſits is thy ſoule. If thy ſoule were not an enemie, thy eye and the reſt of thy members of thy bodie could not be enemies: It comes out of the heart that defiles the man, ſaith Chriſt Matth. 15. 18. Then againe it begins not at the inferiour powers of thy ſoule, at the ſenſuall appetite: it goes further, it begins at the minde of man; ſo ſaith the Apoſtle, that is to ſay, at the chiefeſt power of the ſoule, the Epheſ. 2. 3 minde, the eye, and the light of thy ſoule. The Miſtriſſe, the Queene, that ſhould haue kept all cleane, ſhe hath ſet vp a vile whore, and troubles the whole ſoule. This reaſon which ſhould haue made the ſoule to ſee and know God, ſhe is the firſt enemie Very reaſon in the naturall man an enemie to God. of God. The very reaſon whereby thou not onely excels the beaſt, but euen thy ſelfe is become a whore, and greateſt foe that God hath in man, and abuſeth the whole ſoule of man with her foule cogitation: and it defiles the whole parts of the bodie, the eye, the hand, and all the reſt with her motion. What is the cauſe of this, that the firſt ſeate of this enmitie is in the minde and reaſon of man? becauſe all her muſing is vpon euill workes; ſhe is ſet vpon them. Nay, muſe what thou wilt, if thou bee but in nature, all thy muſing and thinking ſhall be but enmitie againſt God. For thou ſhalt muſe nothing but of euill workes. Ye know (brethren) the firſt deuiſer of any miſchiefe, is the firſt enemie, and not the executor: he that abuſeth others is the firſt enemie and lowne, and ſhould firſt dye. But ſo it is, the firſt deuiſer of all euill workes is this corrupt minde of man. If it come not firſt in thy mind, would thy hand cōmit the euill? No, no, it is firſt in thy minde, and then ſhe puts it out into the inferiour parts of the bodie. And therfore

if thou gets not grace, the firſt thing that the Lord ſhall torment, ſhall be thy mind: and he ſhall ſo torment it, yt thou ſhalt crie, would to God when I had had a reaſonable minde, that I had been a beaſt. Let the Philoſophers ſpeake of it as they pleaſe, as Plato that ſets vp the minde as a Queene, and the Pope with his philoſophicall reaſon diſputing ſo finely, as he troweth, extolling nature, and free will to good. Note.That mind of his and his rabble, ſhall one day be wrung and rent in peeces, with ſuch torments as the tongue of man and Angell can  not expreſſe. And therefore it is that Paul commaunds ſo earneſtly the Epheſians, to bee firſt renued in their minds, Eph. 4. 23. The greater reaſon not ſanctified, an argument of greater damnatiō. It is the mother of all miſchiefe and Idolatrie: thou haſt not to glorie in thy reaſon, if ſo be it be not ſanctified; yea the greater conceit thou haſt in reaſoning, the greater damnatiō, except it be ſanctified in that ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt. This is the eſtate they were in before they were reconciled, which the Apoſtle remembers them of, that it ſhould neuer go out of their minde. Let neuer the ſtinke of nature goe out of thy mind, but Let neuer the ſoule ſent of thy naturall corruption goe out of thy minde. weigh it diligently, that thou maiſt giue thankes and praiſes to God for his grace and deliuerie. Next he ſheweth the manner how he reconciled them to himſelfe and his father; for all is alike: marke the manner. It is two-fold. Firſt, in that bodie (with an emphaſis) of his fleſh. The meaning is this, he reconciled you by aſſuming and taking to him a true fleſhy bodie: hee calles it, The bodie of the fleſh: to let vs ſee, that the bodie which Ieſus Chriſt bare in the world, and that hee beares now in glorie at the right hand of the father, is not a phantaſticall bodie, or an appearance of a bodie without ſoliditie (as the Heretikes called it) a mathematicall bodie, a maieſtaticke bodie. All is but vanitie; but it is a reall bodie, as reall as euer the bodie of man was, or is, of fleſh, bloud and bones: otherwiſe The bodie of Chriſt a reall bodie. hee could neuer haue been a Mediatour to vs, and wee could neuer haue been the better for him, either in his death or life. Then the firſt manner of our reconciliation is the aſſuming of this fleſh, of this bodie of man: hee is firſt the ſonne of God, Bodie and ſoule. then he takes to him the bodie, the fleſh, and the ſoule of man. The next word is, by death, that is, by becomming a ſacrifice in that bodie which he tooke to him. For otherwiſe if hee had not

offred vp his bodie, he could haue done vs no good: for it is the pearced bodie, the ſhed bloud, the vexed ſoule, the tormenting of the man that redeemes and ſaues thee. And therefore Chriſt ſuffered in ſoule. when thou haſt recourſe to Chriſt, goe not to him, as hee is in heauen, or as he was going vp and downe in Iewrie; but goe to him hanging on the Croſſe, that is, to his bloud to ſprinkle thy ſoule; otherwiſe he ſhall neuer profit thee. The Father was not appeaſed in his wrath vntill hee got his bloud; nothing will pacifie the conſcience, but onely this bloud of Ieſus. Now marke: the Father reconciles vs to himſelfe; the Sonne againe he reconciles vs to himſelfe. This is common, but in this worke there is a great difference betwixt the Father and the Sonne. The Father when he reconciles vs, he neuer changeth nor alters his condition; he ſits ſtill in that maieſtie on his throne of glorie, keeping that kingly maieſtie of his. What doth he? He humbles his ſonne (for be aſſured that thy reconciliation could not be purchaſed, but by the humbling of God, not in God muſt be humbled before thou couldeſt be reconciled vnto him. the perſon of the father, but in the perſon of the ſonne) and therefore the ſonne he leaues his throne, and ſteps down from it, to reconcile vs to his father; and comes downe here to the earth, and as it is ſaid in the Philip. 2. 7. He abaſed himſelfe, by taking vnto him a vile fleſh (howbeit it be cleane without ſin, yet it is vile in reſpect of that glorious maieſtie) he takes on him the ſhape of a ſeruant. What more? In that fleſh he becomes obedient to his father (that ſits ſtill on the throne) to the death. And what a death? to the death of the croſſe. So there is the difference. The father wrought it not, altring his maieſtie and glorie, but the ſonne wrought it, altring his maieſtie: and that ſo obediently, that the Angels wonders at it; yea they can neuer wonder enough, to ſee that glorious maieſtie of the ſonne of God ſo humbled as he was. Now, howbeit it differeth in the The father as mercifull as the ſon. manner, yet the father and the ſonne are equall in mercie. The father is as mercifull as the ſonne, and the ſonne is as mercifull as the father; they are equall in glorie in this worke: the father gets as great glorie in this worke as the ſonne; and the ſonne gets as great glorie as the father. Now to the father and the ſonne be all honour, glorie, and praiſe for euer and euer, Amen.
            
               
Before (brethren) when he ſpake of the reconciliation in generall, ye heard the whole Church in generall was reconciled by this bloud and death of Ieſus Chriſt. Now ye heare that this particular Church at Coloſſe, is ſaid to be reconciled by this ſame bloud and death. Yea more, I ſay not onely this, a particular Church (as for example the Church of this towne) Euery one of gods elect reconciled by the bloud of Chriſt. Chriſts eye ſet vpon euery particular perſon. reconciled by that bloud, and death of Chriſt, but there is no man or woman that is choſen, but they are redeemed by that bloud. And this is a true ſaying; when the Lord died on the croſſe, and ſhed his bloud, his eye was not onely in generall ſpread abroad, throughout the whole earth; but diſtinctly ſet vpon euery particular perſon. It was ſet vpon this ſame Church of Coloſſe, and vpon this Church of Edenborough (as certainly as euer it was on any, that was preſent at his death.) Howbeit, it was not a Church at that time, yet his eye was ſet vpon it; and he ſaid in his heart, I will die for the Church of Coloſſe, and for the Church of Edenborough. Yea his eye was ſet vpon euery particular bodie; yea vpon the pooreſt elect lad, or laſſe, now preſently liuing, or which ſhall liue hereafter. And he ſaid, I die the death for this particular perſon; otherwiſe if he had not ſaid it, that he would die for me, and die for thee, thou, nor I, could not haue been ſaued. I giue thee a token to know that his eye was vpon thee in the time of his death. Findeſt thou reconciliation and redemption in thy heart? ſay then he had an eye to me, and the force of his death hath comen to me. For what auailes a generall knowledge of his death, if thou haue not a particular applying of it to thy ſelfe?
            A queſtion may here be moued; how is it that it is ſaid that Chriſt ſhed his bloud for the Coloſsians, ſeeing they were not as yet called, but remained enemies till Epaphras came amōgſt them, and preached the word of grace, and ſaluation in Ieſus Chriſt, and by his trauell hath drawne on ſome to the faith of Ieſus? I anſwere, the reconciliation made in the bloud of Ieſus Reconciliation by the bloud of Ieſus of two ſorts. is of two ſorts; there is one made by the merit of his death: there is another made by the efficacie and powerfulnes of his death. When he ſuffered, that ſame very time and houre of his ſuffering, all nations that euer were to be reconciled to the end

of the world, were reconciled by the merit of the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. But if you will looke to the effectualnes, it followed long after. Scotland, Edenborough, that abode long after enemies, at that ſame houre, by his merit were reconciled. For why? that bloud that was ſhed, merited that ſaluation: but the effect of that merit followed. A man that will haue the merit, muſt feele the efficacie and power of it. When he is following his owne luſts, lying out at his whoredome and villanie, at that ſame time (it may be ſaid truly) he hath the charter of the merit in his keeping: howbeit vntill the time he looke about him, and begin to ſee Ieſus, the vertue of Chriſts merite vtters 
                  We muſt feele and finde the vertue and power of Christs death working in vs, Rom. 6. 2. 3. 4. 5. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. not it ſelfe vnto him. But when he findes it, then he remembers he had the merit. Howbeit, he wiſt not that euer he had it, till he found this working. Then he reioyceth that Chriſt ſuffered on the Croſſe for him.
            In the laſt words he ſets downe the end of their reconciliation. The end is, that thou maiſt be preſented holy, vnreproueable, without ſpot or wrinckle, as he ſaith in Ephe. 5. 27. Firſt then, we are reconciled to the end we ſhould be holy; clenſed of that filthines and ſinne, wherewith wee were polluted before; and The end of our reconciliation is holines. being clenfed, wee ſhould be vnreproueable; for the cauſe of reproofe is ſinne: It is ſore to abide a reproofe of God. This holines is not gotten perfited in this life, but wee muſt ſtriue to it continually. Then thinke not that thou art reconciled with God in effect, if thou finde not holines begun in this life: if thou finde no holy motions in thy heart, and actions in thy hand, thinke not thou ſtandeſt in friendſhip with God. For as euer two ſtand together, theſe two muſt ſtand together vnſeparably, reconciliation with God, and holines of life. And if Holines & reconciliation inſeparable. thou haue not a ſanctified heart and life, thou abideſt a rebell to God. Thus for the firſt end.
            The other end is expreſſed in the ſame words; That you may (ſaith he) be preſented before him: that is, that you may get his preſence, and he yours: and being preſented, ye may get your felicitie for euer. For brethren, that full bleſſednes of man ſtands in the ſight of God. Then marke this leſſon; vpon this holines followes our preſenting before God: So it is he or ſhe that is holy, that gets the preſence of God. If thou be not ſanctified,

if thou liue not in ſome meaſure in a holy life here, I Heb. 12. 14 Mat. 5. 4. 5 giue thee this for doome, thou ſhalt neuer ſee the face of God, that is, thou ſhalt neuer be bleſſed; but ſhut in hell for euer. But to ſticke vpon the words, the word in it owne language, to preſent a man perſonally in ſuch ſort that he hath the eye of him vpon the Iudge, and the Iudge vpon him. then theſe words import, that wee ſhall one day be perſonally with the ſame bodie and ſoule, and no other, preſented before the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. No, no, there ſhall not be ſuch a thing as one ſhall Euery man muſt perſonally preſent himſelfe naked before God appeare for thee, but thou ſhalt perſonally preſent thy ſelfe, and ſtand naked before God there. If thou ſtand vp in holines, and ſee thy Lord thy Iudge with a holy eye, hee looking on thee with a holy eye, there ſhall be a mutuall pleaſure: for if thou be preſented holy, thou ſhalt finde ſuch a ioy in thy heart, as it is wonderfull to ſpeake of, and God ſhall reioyce of thee, Luk. 15. So there ſhall be mutuall ioy on both parts: we ſhall be preſented before Ieſus, not as before a Iudge, but as a The faithfull preſented to Chriſt as a bride to the bridegroome. bride before the bridegroome: ſo ſpeakes Paul 2. Cor. 11. not as folke to abide the triall: nay, there is no iudgemēt for thee that ſhalt be preſented as a bride to thy bridegroome, with whom thou ſhalt liue in ioy and pleaſure for euer. You ſee when a bride is preſented to a bridegroome, there is ioy. O the ioy that thou ſhalt haue, when thou ſhalt be preſented to thy Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt as a bride! who can expreſſe and thinke of the greatnes and excellencie of that ioy? Then as thou wouldeſt haue this infinite and vnſpeakable ioy with thy huſband Ieſus, ſtriue to holines, and ſeeke to be preſented to him, and then it ſhall be well with thee. Now in this Ieſus with the Father and the holy ſpirit, be all praiſe,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE NINTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 23.
               23 If ye continue grounded and ſtabliſhed in the faith, and be not moued away from the hope of the Goſpell, whereof ye haue heard, and which hath been preached to euery creature, which is vnder heauen, whereof I Paul am a minister.
               
            
            
               WE haue heard (brethren) from the beginning of this Epiſtle, firſt the ſalutation the Apoſtle vſeth to the Church of Coloſſe. Secondly, his preface before the doctrine. Thirdly, we came to the doctrine it ſelfe, wherein ye heard propounded briefly the benefit we haue in Ieſus Chriſt, our calling to this eſtate of grace, our redemption in the bloud of the ſonne of God. Then after to let vs ſee the pretiouſnes of this bloud, and the neceſsitie of this redemption by this bloud, hee fell out into a faire and high deſcription of the ſonne of God, ſetting him out in many points of his glory, partly as hee is God, the ſonne of God onely; partly as he is both God and man the Mediatour, the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Of the which whole points of his glorie, we concluded the bloud of ſuch a glorious perſonage, muſt be exceeding precious; and ſo it behooued that this bloud ſhould ranſome vs, and ranſome the world. Yea if we looke to the preciouſnes of it, it is not only ſufficient to ranſome a world; but to ranſome ten thouſand worlds.
            Now (brethren) wee ended the doctrine the laſt day: it followes in this text, that we haue now read in your hearing, that 
                  Verſ. 23. wee ſpeake of the exhortation that the Apoſtle vſeth, and ſubioynes to the doctrine. The exhortation is in a word, Abide in
               
               the faith, perſeuere, ſtand, and keepe it faſt; for it is a precious thing. The firſt argument hee vſeth to perſwade them to this Perſeuerance in the faith and conſtancie in religion an infallible argument of our reconciliatiō with God. perſeuerance, & abiding in the faith, is from that benefit of reconciliation, wherof he ſpake before. And he reaſons after this manner: If you abide in ye faith, you are reconciled, you ſtand in amitie with God, you are friends to him, and he to you: and therefore if you count of ſuch a benefit, ſtand faſt in the faith.
            Now to come to the faith, and to marke ſuch things as God will giue the grace, and time will ſuffer. If ſo be (ſaith he) you abide in the faith. As if hee would ſay: you are reconciled, and ſtand in friendſhip with God, vnder this condition and reſtriction; If you ſtand in the faith: if you ſtand in the faith, you ſhall perſeuere in the friendſhip with God. Then ye ſee, it is the perſeuering in the faith of the Mediatour, the ſticking faſt by the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who is the Mediatour of our reconciliation, that makes a man to ſtand in the reconciliation, and friendſhip with God. Sticke to him, by whoſe bloud thou art reconciled to God, and thou ſhalt ſtand faſt in that friendſhip with God: As by the contrary, ſo ſoone as a man lets the hold goe of the Mediatour, hee ſhall fall from the friendſhip of the father; and falling, his laſt eſtate is worſe then the firſt. If he were miſerable before the reconciliation, he becomes tenne times more miſerable then euer hee was. And it had been better for him, that he had neuer beleeued, nor bin reconciled to God; but as he was an enemie, ſo he had continued an enemy. So you ſee what it is to ſticke to Ieſus Chriſt by faith in him, vnto the end.
            Againe, he ſaith not, if you perſeuere in well-doing, in holines, 2 Perſeuerance in the faith. Sundrie kindes of perſeuerance.
                but in the faith. The perſeuerance he craues, is in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt. There be ſundrie ſorts of perſeuering: wee are ſaid to perſeuere in faith, in hope, in holines, in weldoing, in a godly life; and finally there is not a grace, but wee are ſaid to perſeuere in it, and exhorted to perſeuere in it. But the firſt ground of all perſeuerance is, In the faith of Ieſus Chriſt. Marke it well. And if this ground be laid downe, the abiding in Ieſus by a true faith, all the reſt followes willingly. Keepe me faith, and ſtand in faith, thou ſhalt keepe hope of neceſſitie: keepe Faith the eye and light of the ſoule. faith, that eye and light of thy ſoule; thou ſhalt keepe holines,

thou ſhalt walke in the light, and bring out the works of light. On the contrary, let goe or forſake faith, thou ſhalt let goe hope of life; let Chriſt goe out of thy eye once, he ſhall go out of thy hand: and looke neuer to doe any good turne. A faithleſſe bodie cannot doe a good turne to pleaſure God: yea though it ſhould ſeeme the beſt thing in the world; yet wanting faith, all is but dung before God. So you ſee, what ſhould be the firſt thing we ſhould begin at: to wit, at a ſtanding and perſeuering in the faith of the Mediatour. Abide in this, and all ſhall follow of their owne will, holines, weldoing, and the reſt.
            In the words following, he ſhewes vs the way, how to perſeuere in faith; If ſo be that you abide in the faith, grounded, founded. The word is borrowed from building on a ground ſtone; How to perſeuere in faith. the ſecond word is, and eſtabliſhed, euen as you ſee a man ſet down in a chaire, reſting without mouing or wagging, ſitteth ſtill immoueable. If thou wilt abide in faith, thou muſt bee grounded and ſet downe, and muſt not goe wagging, fleeting and flowing, as you ſee ſome doe. Then what is this foundation whereupon thou muſt be grounded? It is euen this ſame faith: Thou muſt be grounded on it, or elſe thou ſhalt not abide in it; and if thou bee not built vpon it as vpon a building, thou ſhalt not abide in it. Faith then muſt bee the ground. It muſt not be built as it were vpon thy heart; it is the falſeſt ground The heart muſt be built and reſt on faith. that euer was; but thy heart muſt be built on faith. For faith in Ieſus is a faſt and establiſhed ground. Now what is the ſeate? euen this ſame faith. Faith muſt not ſit vpon thy heart, which is but a ioggling ſeate, a looſe ſeate; but thy heart muſt be turned ouer vpon the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, that is a faſt ſeate: ſo that all the powers in the world will not moue it. In a word, if Reſt not night nor day till thou ſeele thy faith lying vnder thy heart, and thy heart resting firme and ſtable on it. thou abide and perſeuere in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, bee built on it; reſt neuer while thou riſe vp vpon it as a building. Reſt not night nor day till thou feele it lying vnder thy heart: reſt not till thou finde thy heart ſetled without ſtaggering, ſitting downe as it were on a faſt ſtoole and ſeatc. If thou be once ſetled and builded, all the waues of temptations ſhall not once moue thee, thou ſhalt ſtand faſt like a houſe built on a ſtrong rocke: but if thou be not built and ſetled on it, the leaſt blaſt

of winde of falſe doctrine and of affliction, wil blow thee from Matth. 7. 24. 25. thy faith; & thy faith from thee like chaffe. Alas, ſee we not this inconſtancie in fleeting and flowing? A vaine lowne, he is here to day, and away to morrow; a Proteſtant to day, a Papiſt to morrow; a Chriſtian to day, a Turk or Pagan to morrow, and what ye will haue him. What is the cauſe of this? O that heart of thine, was neuer eſtabliſhed by grace! A vaine and emptie heart, was neuer grounded vpon faith in Ieſus Chriſt. And therefore it is that theſe miſerable creatures are caried away as they are: and be aſſured, let thy heart abide in that miſerable eſtate of inconſtancie till the Lord come, thou and it ſhall be turned into hell headlong, as the lighteſt and rottenneſt thing in the world. Thus much for this firſt perſeuerance in faith.
            He ads to another perſeuerance, and he ſaith; If you be not 
               2 Perſeuerance in hope of the Goſpell.
                
               moued from the hope of the Gospell; that is, if you perſeuer in the hope of all theſe faire graces and mercies, eſpecially of that life euerlaſting, promiſed in the Goſpell. Now (brethren) would you know what this Goſpell is? The Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt is like a mirror or looking glaſſe; ſo the Apoſtle cals it, 2. Cor. 3. 18. In the which we may ſee many faire things. Firſt we ſee Ieſus Chriſt the Lord of glorie: and then all the faire graces that followes on him; thy remiſſion of ſinnes; thy iuſtification; 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4. thy ſanctification; the heauen and life; and all things: what wouldſt thou haue more? Now the eye that lookes in it, is not the eye of the bodie, but the eye of faith, quicker and cleerer than all the bodily eyes in the world. The hand that holds vp that mirror, is faith: faith is an eye and a hand; it ſees and holds. Now as faith is looking in the mirrour to Ieſus Chriſt, and to all the graces that followes him, and to that life and glorie that neuer ſhall haue end; in comes this hope, and ſhe awaiteth conſtantly for the accompliſhment of all thoſe graces, Hope what. and of that life euerlaſting, that faith ſees in the mirror: and ſhe awaites till Chriſt come with that life in his hand, with the glorie in his hand, that he ſhall bring with him for them, who awaits for him. As ſoone as he comes, the mirror fals downe: The word goes away; there ſhall be no more preaching, when he comes. And as thou ſawſt him before in the mirror; ſo then thou ſhalt ſee his glorious face as he is: ſo the mirror ſhall goe

away, that faith of thine ſhall goe away. What ſhall be then in ſteed of all this? Thou ſhalt get that that Paul ſaies 2. Cor. 5. 7. Now we walke by faith, but then we ſhall walke by sight. Our reioycing ſhall be in the ſight of him for euer.
            Now brethren, you ſhal marke here briefly: it is not enough to abide in the faith of the promiſe, wherein thou haſt promiſed to thee life euerlaſting; but with the faith thou muſt haue a hope awaiting conſtantly for the thing promiſed: as thou beleeueſt the promiſe, that is, the word; ſo thou muſt hope for himſelfe and his comming; and that life he brings with him. Ioyne theſe two together, faith in the promiſe; and hope in the performance; of neceſſitie thou ſhalt get life. That hope ſhall 
                  Faith and hope companions. Rom. 5. 5. 6. neuer make thee a ſhamed. It is a thing impoſſible, that a man that waits for Chriſts comming can be diſappointed; for heauen and earth ſhal periſh ere that man be diſappointed of that he hoped for: ſo then ſaith he, if you be not moued from the hope of the Gospell: I ſay then, ſo long as we liue, we muſt not want Take away the Goſpel, yee take away faith and hope. this mirror of the Goſpell. Take away the mirror, thou ſhalt ſee nought. Take away the Goſpell, thou ſhalt not haue faith. Take it away, wherein ſhines all theſe heauenly graces, thou haſt nought to hope for: and if thou heareſt not of a life after this life, thou canſt not hope for it. So theſe men in the world (not onely among Pagans, but amongſt Chriſtians) Lords, Barons, that haue no pleaſure in hearing of the Goſpell to looke into Ieſus, that is in it; trowe yee if thus they continue, that they ſhall goe to heauen? thinke ye that they can haue faith and hope? no: no more then a dog hath, and their death ſhall be worſe then a dogs death. As euer then you would haue life, faith, and hope, keepe the Goſpell. Thou wilt looke in a glaſſe to decke thy ſelfe, and wipe off the ſpots of thy face: but wilt thou looke to the Goſpell, thou ſhalt ſee a more beautifull face, euen the face of Ieſus: and the more thou lookeſt How powerfully the power of Christ transforms vs if we looke vpon his face in the Goſpel. on it, the more it caſts out theſe beames of glory, and tranſformes thee from glorie to glorie. So as euer thou wouldeſt haue the ſight of Ieſus, let thy pleaſure be to looke into the mirror of the Goſpell; for he, who takes not pleaſure to looke in the mirror, ſhall neuer ſee the Lord Isſus face to face. This is a decree, and I pronounce it againſt all theſe contemners

of the Goſpell: they ſhall finde it ſure, they ſhall neuer ſee Ieſus Chriſt, but to their damnatiō. Thou, who contemnes All contē
                  ners of the Goſpell goe to hell. this mirrour of the Goſpell, thou art the diuels ſlaue, and ſhalt be condemned with him in that great day for euer. O if wee ſhould be carefull to keepe this preaching of Chriſt! it ſtands vs vpon paine of life and death. See then what enemies they Preaching. be that would take this mirrour from vs, by the which wee are Papists. comforted and kept to life euerlaſting.
            To come to the next words: The Coloſsians might haue ſaid, what a Goſpell is this thou ſpeakeſt of: It is that which Epaphras taught to vs. Is it his, in whoſe hope we ſhould abide? Counteſt thou ſo much of his Goſpell? It ſhould ſeeme that the perſon of the man offended them. He anſwers, it is the ſame Goſpell that Epaphras preached, that I recommend to you. Well, you ſee this how readie wee are to be offended with the good Goſpell of Chriſt, and to caſt off the word, becauſe of the perſons of men, becauſe he is a ſillie man. This our nature is a ſtumbling nature: we haue a ſtumbling heart, ſtumbling like a horſe. Thou wilt heare a man, and accept of him and his doctrine: and thou wilt heare another, and count little either of him or his doctrine; euen as though thy faith ſhould leane vpon a man, and not vpon the Goſpell. What haſt thou to doe with the man if he ſpeake the true Goſpell ſhouldeſt thou be holden back from the word, becauſe of the baſenes of the man? This cannot be gotten away this day in Edenborough. Ye ſee againe he is very carneſt to commend this Goſpel of Epaphras, and to remoue the ſlaunder that they tooke vp againſt him. It teacheth all preachers, that euery one of them recommend the doctrine taught by others, ſo it be the ſame doctrine, let the perſon be what hee will; this man hath deliuered ſound doctrine. A good leſſon for preachers. Yea if he haue greater graces, he ſhould recommend him which hath the ſimpleſt; as Paul recommends Epaphras. So it ſets not one miniſter to detract another; but if hee deliuer ſound doctrine, he ſhould recommend him, and ſpeake to his praiſe: for looke what diſpraiſe or reproch thou putteſt to the man, it turnes ouer vpon the Goſpell, that the man preacheth; as experience this day plainly proues. For ſee ye not men, who becauſe of ſome infirmities of the preacher, either will contemne

the doctrine of the Goſpell which hee preacheth, ſo that they will not abaſe themſelues to come and heare him; or elſe if they come, they are ſo preoccupied in minde, that they begin Preiudice againſt the perſon of the preacher keepes many from profiting by him. to ſcoffe at it. Away with this kinde of dealing, and beware what you doe, when ye either ſpeake euill of the preacher, or ſuffer others to ſpeake euill of him: for if thou doe ſo, thou ſhalt not faile to loath the Goſpell, and ſo conſequently ouerthrow thy ſelfe.
            Now the arguments of the recommendation followes. Ibid you ſtand (ſaith hee) in hope of the ſame Goſpell, becauſe it is the ſame Goſpell that hath been preached to euery creature vnder the heauen, through the whole world. As if hee would ſay, Epaphras hath not taught a doctrine diuers from mine, and I another diuers from his; but all is one, and the ſame doctrine and Goſpell, that hee and I both haue taught. Then take vp the note, which Paul here giues thee of the true doctrine; ſeeing our life A note of the true Goſpell of Chriſt. ſtands in the trueth of the Goſpell, wee ſhould be carefull to know the true Goſpell. Looke if it be that Goſpell that hath been preached to euery creature, to al the world: Chriſt ſaith, Preach to euery creature, Mark. 16. 15. but this is not enough. The Papiſts doctrine hath been preached throughout all Europe, and further: yet it is not the true Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. There muſt be yet more then this vniuerſalitie: look if it be in the beginning preached by the Apoſtles, and in their daies; if it be ſo, thou art ſure thou haſt the veritie of the Goſpell. But thou wilt ſay, how ſhall I know this? Looke their writings, go no further. The ſureſt warrant is their writings. Looke Pauls writing, Peters writing, and the reſt of the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts The written word our warrant. writings, their bookes ſhall teſtifie of their writings: for they haue written no other thing but yt they ſpake. There is not a ſentence left out that euer the Apoſtles taught, that is not written in this booke of the new Teſtament, as concerning the ſubſtance of it. So if thou haue their writings, be aſſured thou haſt their Goſpell preached by them; and conſequently Chriſts owne words and his Goſpell. And if an Angell would preach to thee another Goſpell, then this written Goſpell in the old and new Teſtament; then ſay thou, Anathema to it, Gal. 1. 6. curſed be thou and thy Goſpell both; curſed be thou Papiſt

and thy goſpell, which is nothing els but the vaine traditions of men. And as you would be free of the curſes of God, flie frō a Papiſt and his goſpell both, he is vaine, and his goſpell is the peltrie of men.
            Then the next argument of recommendation, is from his own teſtimonie in particular, as if he would ſay; It is euen that which I haue preached, I giue my aſſent that it is the ſame with my owne goſpell. O the teſtimonie of an Apoſtle is a great thing! yea greater then the teſtimonie of many thouſands, becauſe they were inſpired by Gods ſpirit, that they could not erre. Others might erre and haue erred, and there is none now but they may erre, and may teach hereſie, and haue taught hereſie when they paſt a iot from the written veritie; as eſpecially may be ſeene in that beaſt of Rome, and ſhauelings and Clergie (O that damnation that abides him for many thouſands that haue periſhed, through his falſe erronious doctrine!) Yet I ſay more, if a holy man ſhall giue his conſent, it auaileth, if it bee agreeable to the doctrine taught by the Apoſtles; otherwiſe it is worth nothing: if it were Paul himſelfe, let him be Anathema. This for the commendation of the Goſpell preached by Epaphras, I ſhall end. Paul at this time lay in Rome in bands, and was vnder an heauie affliction. Now hee conſidering his bands might bee offenſiue to them; in the next verſe hee meetes with this ſlaunder; Now (ſaith he) I reioyce of thoſe things which I ſuffer for you: As if he would ſay, my afflictions that I lie in, let them not offend you: It is a marueilous thing how ready men are to offend, and to take a ſlander when it is not giuen. Theſe men were before offended with Epaphras, becauſe hee was not an Apoſtle: now they are offended with Paul the Apoſtle himſelfe, becauſe he is lying in bands. O there is neuer a thing, but the diuell can make it an offence to the Goſpel (he knowes how ſtumbling a heart thou haſt) and all to hold thee backe from the Goſpell. Bleſſed is he that hath not been offended at any thing, as Chriſt ſaith, Matth. 11. 6. How takes he away the offence of his bands? The firſt argument to reuoke it; he ſaith, I reioyce for theſe things 
               
                  Verſ. 24. 
               which I ſuffer for you, or for your ſake: as if he would ſay, be not offended at my bands, becauſe they are for you. If I had not

comen out at the commaund of my Lord to preach Chriſt, what needed me to be lying in theſe fetters? and if I had not loued my Lord Ieſus and his Church; what needed I to be in The afflictions of the Martyrs do ſerue for the confirmation of the faithfull in all ages. theſe bands? Well, he ſuffers for the Coloſsians, and he neuer ſaw them. Epaphras taught them, I tell thee looke whatſoeuer Paul ſuffereth, or any of the Apoſtles or godly Martyrs who ſuffered, count it all for thee. It was all to hold in this light which is thy life, and if it had not been kept and entertained and holden vp by their preaching, and ſealed by their bloud, thou ſhouldeſt neuer haue gotten light. And without this Goſpell thou ſhouldeſt neuer ſee life. This world is blinded; they know not this darknes they lie in. If the light of this Goſpell ſlide from thee, thou blind ignorant that lies now in darknes, thou ſhalt be caſt into hell: for the end of darknes here, is that blacke darknes in hell. So hee ſaith: All that I ſuffer is for you. Well, if men thought that the ſufferings of the ſeruants of God, which they ſuffer, whether it be bands, baniſhment, or whatſoeuer it be, if they could thinke that all was for them, to hold in that light of the Goſpell: alas they would be ſo farre from that, that the bands and theſe things ſhould be offenſiue to them, and ſo be offended at the Goſpell; that by the contrarie, they would kiſſe their ſufferings, and would take as great pleaſure in their bands, as in their preaching; for they ſerue as well to thy weale as their preaching. For by their bands they ſeale vp in thy heart all that they haue preached to thee. O if thou couldſt thinke of this well! The time will come that theſe who now preach, ſhall be afflicted (and Lord giue them ioy in their affliction.) Be ye therefore prepared not to be offended at it. You ſhall ſee ſome ſteale downe cloſely from the Miniſter, when he is caught by the necke; howbeit now, they will accompanie him. Well then, be readie to take part of his affliction, as Paul ſaith 2. Tim. 1. 8. Yet to recommend his affliction more, I reioyce, ſaith he: he ſuffereth for a good cauſe, for the ſafetie of the Coloſsians. Beſides this, hee ſuffered with ioy, 1. Pet. 4. 15. Let no man (ſaith hee) ſuffer as a murtherer, a theefe, or an euill doer: which is now the pleaſure of men, but let vs make vs readie to ſuffer for a good cauſe: if thou ſuffer, ſee thou ſuffer for Gods cauſe, for this light, the beſt cauſe that

euer thou ſuffered for. Let euery man be prepared to ſuffer for it, otherwiſe thou ſhalt haue no good of it. It is not the paine will make thee a Martyr; but it is the quarrell; the good cauſe, that will make thee a Martyr. And againe (he ſaith) if thou ſuffer as Chriſt ſuffered, reioyce: As if he would ſay, when thou Ioy in godly afflictions. ſuffereſt for a good cauſe, looke thou haue ioy and willingnes. No, let not the enemie haue greater will to draw thee to the ſhambles, then thou ſhalt be willing with ioy to ſuffer. So there is another condition requiſite in ſuffering; we muſt not onely be content to ſuffer for a good cauſe, but wee muſt be Note. willing and ioyfully willing: Otherwiſe the good cauſe will not make thee a Martyr. Thou muſt haue ioy and patience, and willingnes, glorifying God. Looke how the Martyrs ſuffered, and follow them; and then thou ſhalt dye like a Martyr, and bleſſed ſhalt thou be. The Lord prepare vs for it, that we may paſſe from this miſerie to ioy, through the Lord Ieſus. To whom be praiſe and honour for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE TENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 24. 25.
               
                  24 Now reioyce I in my ſuffrings for you, and fulfill the reſt of the afflictions of Chriſt in my fleſh, for his body ſake which is the Church,
                  
                  25 Wherof I am a miniſter, according to the diſpenſation of God, which is giuen me vnto you ward, to fulfill the word of God.
                  
               
            
            
               YOu heard the laſt day (beloued brethren) how the Apoſtle hauing ended his doctrine, he comes to his exhortation, and exhorts the Coloſſians to perſeuer

in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt. Secondly, he exhorts them to perſcuere in hope: The argument he vſeth, is from that benefit of their reconciliation with God. Now (ſaith he) ye are reconciled, and hee hath reconciled you, but with this condition and reſtraint; if ſo be that you abide in the faith grounded and ſtabliſhed, and be not moued from the hope of the Goſpell. Then they might haue ſaid: what Goſpell meanes thou of? is it that goſpell that Epaphras hath taught, counteſt thou ſo much of it? This he meetes with, and ſaith, yea, I meane of that ſame goſpell that you haue heard of that man Epaphras. Then he falles out into a cōmendation of that goſpell of his. And the firſt argument is taken from this, That it is no other goſpel but that, Coherence. that hath been preached to euery creature. The ſecond argument is, hee hath preached nought at all, but that that I haue preached. Then they might haue ſaid; what haue wee to doe with thee? we ſee nought of thee, but a man in bands at Rome. The Apoſtle anſweres: Now (ſaith he) I reioyce in my afflictions for you. Well, it is true, I am afflicted: but vnderſtand this, that my affliction is for you; it appertaines to you, to eſteeme of my affliction. I reioyce that I am afflicted for the Gentiles, becauſe I am appointed their Apoſtle. You are a part of the Gentiles: therefore in that that I ſuffer, it is for your cauſe, that the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt may haue place amongſt you, as among the other Gentiles.
            The ſecond argument: In the middeſt of my afflictions I The ſecond argument. The vſe of affliction. reioyce, to teſtifie my loue towards you: for except I had loued you, I would not haue ſuffered with ioy for you. Brethren, of thoſe that ſuffer affliction,  firſt it is required that it be for a good cauſe, for Gods cauſe, for his truth, and for his Church  ſake. Suffer not like a theefe or a murtherer, as an harlot or an euill doer in any wiſe. Alas it is a paine, yea of all paines in the world the greateſt, to ſuffer for euill doing.
            
                Secondly, it is required of him that ſuffers, that he ſuffer for a good cauſe, with ioy, cheerefully, and with patience: otherwiſe  thou loſeſt thy trauell and praiſe, ſuffer as thou wilt. It is not the good cauſe onely that makes martyrdome; but it is Martyrdome. the ioy, cheerfulnes, and patience ioyned with the good cauſe, that makes thee in ſuffering to be a Martyr. It is hard to fleſh

to digeſt this: how can there be ioy in the paines of moſt exquiſite torments? Brethren, Paul at this time is lying in bands at Rome, and yet ye ſee he vtters that in his bands he hath ioy: and no queſtion when he came to the very point of death (for 2. Tim. 4. 6. 7. 8. he was martyred) he had great ioy. And certainly, I am compelled to think that there is more ſhrinking and ſadnes at the remembrance of the affliction to come, then there is in the More grief in the remembrāce of afflictiō, then in ſuffering it when it comes. chiefe time of affliction. The minde will be more troubled thinking on it, then when the perſon is afflicted. For out of queſtion, whē the Lord giues a man cōſtancie to ſuffer, he will giue him patience & ioy, which ſhall ſwallow vp all the paine: and the experience of Martyrs hath proued this. Stir not, howbeit thou ſhrinke at hanging, heading, ſcalding, burning and whatſoeuer paines moſt cruell & exquiſit deuiſed for thee: yet ſtir not, for if the Lord giue thee conſtancie, all the paines ſhal be ſwallowed vp, and thou ſhalt be armed to ſuffer with ioy.
            To goe forward. The third argument, whereby he remoues the offence, they might haue taken at his bands, is this: I (ſaith he) fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ Ieſus: as if hee would The third argument. ſay, mine afflictions are not ſo much mine, as they are my Lords afflictions: how can ye then be offended at them? You cannot chuſe if you bee offended at my afflictions, but you muſt be offended at Chriſts afflictions, becauſe my affliction is nothing elſe but the afflictions of Chriſt, and the fulfilling of them. Then all theſe afflictions that are laid vpon the members of the bodie of Chriſt, they are all Chriſts afflictions: and when they are afflicted Chriſt is afflicted. And the Lord counts it his owne perſecutions, when the members of his bodie, Chriſt muſt ſuffer in his members. which is his Church, are perſecuted. Saul, Saul (ſaith hee) Acts 9. 4. why perſecuteſt thou me? He ſpeakes this to Paul, when he was not perſecuting him, but his members. This he calles his perſecution? for it was ordained from all eternitie, that the Lord Ieſus, who is the head of the Church, ſhould not onely ſuffer in his owne fleſh; but alſo that hee ſhould ſuffer in the members of his bodie, which is his Church. So that none of that bodie ſhould be free from ſuffering, no not from the greateſt to the leaſt; yea euen to the little finger, all ſhould ſuffer; and the meaſure hereof was meaſured, and ordained in that

counſell from all eternitie. Suffereſt thou much or little? It was meaſured to thee ere euer the world was. It was not appointed that euery particular perſon ſhould ſuffer al, and euery ſort of affliction: no, no; but as the head ſhould ſuffer one kinde of affliction proper to himſelfe; ſo the reſt in the bodie ſhould ſuffer, ſome in one ſort and meaſure, and ſome in another. All ſhall ſuffer one thing or other: prepare thee for it; and it is a token that thou art in that bodie, if thou ſuffer ſomething for Chriſt.
            But to ſticke to the words; he calles them not ſimply the ſufferings of Chriſt, but the fulfilling or accompliſhment of the afflictions of Chriſt: I (ſaith he) fulfill the reſt of the afflictions of Chriſt. Marke the word well. Euen as the Church of Ieſus Chriſt is the accompliſhment and fulfilling of him, to make him a perfect man; ſo it is called Ephe. 1. the laſt verſe: Euen ſo the afflictions that the Church and her members ſuffer, they accompliſh and fulfill the ſufferings of Chriſt. And as the glorie of the head Chriſt is fulfilled and accompliſhed in ſuffering: euen ſo the ſufferings of his members they accompliſh and fulfill the glorie of Chriſt. Wherein wee haue to marke a loue that Chriſt beares to vs, that cannot bee ſpoken of. The Lord Ieſus is perfect in himſelfe, and he needeth vs not; no, he hath no neede of me, of thee, nor of no fleſh to make him perfiter, The loue of Chriſt. then he is alreadie in himſelfe. He is full, and he fils all in all: yet ſuch is his loue to me, and thee, and to the whole body, that he cannot thinke that he is perfect till he haue thee ioyned with him: yea the leaſt member of his Church, hee will haue to be ioyned with him; or els hee counts that his glorie and ſufferings are not fulfilled. So his afflictions are perfect, and hee needes not thee to fulfill any part thereof; yet ſuch is his loue that hee will not haue his afflictions perfect without thee. He will haue thee made like to himſelfe in affliction: howbeit, his glorie be perfect now at the right hand of the father; yet he cannot thinke that he gets the perfection thereof, till he get all his members glorified with him in heauen. This is his loue. Rom. 8.
            
            Now let vs ſee how we account of this. We count it a benefit and a grace to be ioyned with him, to be the members of his

bodie, and to be glorified with him; but when it comes to the What a great benefit it is to ſuffer afflictions. ſufferings, there is the ſhrinking, there is none that can accord or be content to be like him in ſufferings; but they will flye backe, there we faile; and we cannot thinke that it is a benefit to ſuffer, but rather that it is a curſe. So ere thou count it a benefit to ſuffer, thou muſt haue more then fleſh and bloud; thou muſt haue the ſpirit of Ieſus. It is not onely a benefit to beleeue, but alſo to ſuffer, Philip. 1. 29. And Philip. 3. 10. Paul counts it a bleſſing to ſuffer, calling it the communion or fellowſhip of his affliction. There he counts it bleſſednes to ſuffer with Chriſt. Looke not to raigne with him, except in ſome meaſure thou be a companion with him in ſuffring. Yet to ſticke vpon the words. The word in the owne language is not ſimply to fulfill, but to fulfill courſe about; as he would ſay, my head hath gotten his courſe; now comes in my courſe in ſuffring. So the word affoordeth a good leſſon & true, all theſe afflictions go by courſes: al men and women are not afflicted at once; but Afflictions in the Saints goe by courſe. euery man hath his turne, euery man his courſe about. Chriſt begun, and hee is afflicted firſt. The Apoſtles are looking to him, their courſe was not come; but ſoone after came their courſe. Others ſtood looking to them, but ſoone after their owne courſe came alſo. Brethren, we are but lookers on now; we look to France, and to men ſuffring for this Goſpell: & we are looking to Italy, and Spaine: for our time is not come yet. The Lord hath ſeene that we are not yet ripe; as ſoone as thou art ripe, hee will plucke thee like a ripe apple. Prepare thee, prepare thee, O Scotland, for thou ſhalt finde one day thy part of the ſuffrings of Chriſt: thy courſe is approching. He ſaith not ſimply, he fulfilled the afflictions of Chriſt his courſe about, but that in his courſe he fulfilled the reſt of the afflictions of Chriſt. The words import the reliques and hinder part, or the reſidue of the afflictions of Chriſt. So all the ſuffrings of Paul and the reſt of the elect, were but as ſmall reliques, and remnants of Chriſts ſuffrings. What we ſuffer, yea if it were but in the little finger, we thinke it great; but if thou wert pained in all thy bodie and ſoule, that is but a remnant of the afflictions of Chriſt. And where this remnant is, there the bodie is: but the greater part, the heape and multitude went before. Who ſuffered

the former part? who was he that ſuffered the multitude, if Paul ſuffered the hinder part? who but the head Ieſus Chriſt? The heape of afflictions was heaped on him. The dint lighted vpon him. The waue or billow of Gods wrath tumbling down from heauen, lighted vpon the head Ieſus Chriſt. All that wee ſuffer are but flaſhes breaking off from that waue and billow that lighted vpon Chriſt. So that if you will compare the afflictions of the Church to the end of the world, all is nothing in compariſon of that that Chriſt ſuffered. Therefore compare thy ſelfe neuer with him in affliction, but when thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe afflicted, then conſider what Chriſt hath ſuffered. When thou ſeeſt a little thing ſo bitter, then conſider what bitternes was in the whole ſuffrings of Chriſt. He drank out the full cup of bitternes of Gods wrath; but thou onely taſts it, to teach thee to count what he hath ſuffered for thy redemption.
            Now in the reſt of this verſe, he ſets downe the cauſe wherefore he ſuffered. No man ſuffers for nothing; as the head Ieſus Chriſt did not ſuffer for nothing, ſo neuer a member of his ſuffers in vaine. For whoſe cauſe then ſuffered Paul or Chriſt in him? for the bodie. What a bodie? The bodie which is his Church. All theſe afflictions (ſaith he) that Ieſus Chriſt ſuffers in me, are all for the bodie of Chriſt. Well, there haue been many ſuffrings for this bodie. The Lord Ieſus ſuffered the extremitie for this bodie: Paul and al the Martyrs ſuffred for this bodie; but there is a great difference betweene the ſuffrings of the head and of the members. The head ſuffered for the redemption The difference betweene the ſuffrings of Chriſt, and of his mē
                  bers. of the bodie, which was in hell vnto the time that heredeemed it out of hell: Paul, Peter, this Martyr, that Martyr, they ſuffered not for the redemption; their bloud could not be the price of redemption; all the bloud in Paul and Peters bodie cannot furniſh out a farthing of redemption; but onely the bloud of that immaculate lambe is the price, and only the price of our redemption, in deſpight of all the Papiſts in the world: onely the bloud of God makes out that redemption. Theſe baſe bodies they haue dreamed a dreame of Indulgences and pardons, and ſay, that the people will be ſafe with Popiſh pardons. 
               the Pope that lownes pardons: he ſhall not get pardon himſelfe. What are theſe Pardons and Indulgences, which theſe vaine

heads haue found out to deceiue the ſillie people with? The Pope hee calles it the remiſſion of ſinnes, by the bloud of the Martyrs, this Saint, and that Saint. O vaine lowne! is a pardon a remiſſion of ſinnes by the bloud of Peter, and Paul, this Martyr or yt Martyr? What a vanitie is this, that they think that a man ſhould not be content with the bloud of Ieſus onely, and eſteeme it ſufficient? but they muſt ſeeke to their workes; and where they faile in this, they muſt ſeeke to the merits of the Martyrs, ſetting this with the reſt of their works. And this merit of the Martyrs, he calles the Treaſurie: he will ſend out this his vanitie, and this his doctrine through the world. Woe to thee Scotland if euer this come among thee. And againe I ſee here plainly, that there can come nothing to the church without ſuffering. As for her redemption, which is the remiſsion of ſinnes, it is not without the bloud of the Lambe, the bloud of God: that is a great matter, except this bloud of God had bin ſhed, thou ſhouldeſt neuer haue been redeemed out of hell. But this is a ſtrange matter: when thou art redeemed by this bloud, when thy righteouſnes is bought; yet thou canſt not get it without ſuffring: and it cannot be miniſtred to thee, except the miniſter of it die. Paul it behooued to die, & it Peter behooued to dye, and all for the ſaluation of the bodie. The diuell hath ſuch an enuie to the ſaluation of man (would to God thou knew it) that there is none that would preach to thee of this ſaluation, but he wil ſtand vp and ſeek the ſlaughter of that man. So that this that wee call the Church (which now is come in contempt, the name of the Saints is ſcorned at) this Church is a precious iewell, the ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt: be what ſhe will be in her ſelfe; yet the bridegroome counts much of her: otherwiſe, there would neuer haue been ſo much bloud ſhed for her. Chriſt had notſuffered; Peter & Paul had not ſuffred, if thou hadſt not bin precious in the eye of Chriſt. Dareſt thou then offer to deſtroy that that Chriſt hath dyed for? How dareſt thou thou dog offer it? He is called an Earle, and a Lord, and a King, and an Emperour, and what will hee doe? He will oppreſſe the profeſſors of the Goſpell of Ieſus; he will burne, and ſcald the members of the bodie: but if thou knew what Chriſt is, and what a member of his Church

meanes, thou wouldeſt hold vp thy hand. But there are many falſe Chriſtians worſe then Pagans, and in ſeueritie and crueltie againſt Chriſt and his Church more fierce and malicious, and more exquiſit tormentors of Chriſt in his members, then Popiſh perſecution. euer a Pagan or a Turke would be. The truth of this is euident in the example of the Martyrs, who finde none more malicious againſt Chriſts Church then theſe, who would bee counted Chriſtians. Well, Pagans and Turkes ſhall finde greater caſe and leſſe iudgement at the comming of the Lord Ieſus, then falſe Chriſtians. O their paines ſhall be vnſpeakable!
            To goe forward: in the next verſe hee ſets downe another cauſe wherefore hee ſuffered. Of the which Church (ſaith he) I am made a miniſter: as if hee would ſay, I fill out the reſt of the afflictions of Chriſt in my bodie, becauſe I am bound and obliged thereto: I am made a miniſter to it; there is the meaning. Marke the words, I am made. He ſaith not, I was borne a miniſter: nay, no man is borne a miniſter, howbeit, euery man thinkes he may be a miniſter out of hand. I am made a miniſter would he ſay of a very crooked wood, as he teſtifies of himſelf, 1. Tim. 1. 12. 13. He placed me in his miniſterie when I was a blaſphemer; and a perſecutor. Looke what ſtuffe I had, and whereof I conſiſted before I was made a miniſter: And if this was good ſtuffe, and a way to make a miniſter of me, iudge ye. I was of al ſinners the firſt in perſecuting Chriſt and his members, and blaſpheming of him. But (ſaith he) God had pitie on me. Euen this Chriſt whom before I blaſphemed and perſecuted, hee ſhewed mercie, and put me in his miniſterie. The Lord can make a miniſter of a blaſphemer. I am made a miniſter, that is, a ſeruant to ſerue the Church, to ſtand and fill the cup, and cary it to the Church. Peter and Paul were none other, 1. Cor. 3. 22. 23. All is yours (ſaith he) whether it be Paul, or Apollo or Cephas: ye are our maſters, and we are your ſeruants, and ye are Chriſts. So he is but a ſeruant to the Church, and not a Lord ouer it. It followes that Paul when he ſuffered, hee ſuffered not The ſufferings of the Apostles and Martyrs were not for the redemption of man. as a Lord of the bodie, but as a ſeruant: neuer any ſuffered as a Lord but Chriſt onely, Paul and Peter and the reſt ſuffered as ſeruants. Ye ſee a faithfull ſeruant will die for his maſter; ſo the Apoſtle ſuffered for his maſter, the Church: what were the

Apoſtles but the friends of the Bridegroome? Of this it followes, that Pauls ſuffrings was not for the redemption of man: no, but for his miniſterie and diſpenſation of the grace committed to him. It is a lye to ſay hee ſuffered for the redemption of man; ſo it was neuer for the redemption and remiſſion of ſins to any, yt 
               Paul or any of the Apoſtles ſuffered. For no man, Chriſt Ieſus excepted, was able to abide a lot of yt ſuffring for redemption: no not all the men and Angels in heauen and earth were not, nor are not able to abide one aſſault of that ſuffring. That fierce wrath ſhuld haue ſo ſeazed vpon thē, that it ſhould haue conſumed and deſtroyed them. He muſt bee an excellent perſonage, God and man in one perſon, as Chriſt was, that will beare out that ſuffring: otherwiſe hee ſhall not be able to abide one point of it. Well, not to paſſe by this, I ſee a Miniſter is bound to dye for the Church. Wilt thou be a Miniſter? The Miniſter is boūd to dye for the Church if neede ſo require. prepare thee to dye for the Church: otherwiſe thou art but an hireling, a falſe deceitfull ſeruant. So art thou made a Miniſter? thou art made a ſeruant to the Queene the Church: ſhe is greater then any Princeſſe in the earth. Count thou of a Miniſter as thou wilt: the faithfull Miniſter is in greater glory & honor, then al the ſeruants of Kings & Princes in the world: yea he ſhall be preferd to the great Monarches of the world themſelues. Call ye them vaine fellowes? They are the Lords ſtewards; the King of kings Chambermen and Counſellors.
            But to ſpeake to the Miniſterie. Art thou called to be a Miniſter? thou muſt prepare thee for ſuffering: yea there is no calling in the Church of Ieſus Chriſt, which is not to ſuffering. Thou maiſt bee called to a politicall gouernment, yet not to ſuffering; but to take thy paſtime and to be in honour: but if thou be called to be a member to Chriſt, thou art called to ſuffer, as it were a ſheepe to the ſhambles. Set not thy head within this fold, except thou think thou muſt ſuffer. Peter ſaith, We are called, yea appointed to ſuffer, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Then when thou art clapt on the ſhoulder to be burned, hanged, headed; yea, and the skinne to be flaied off thee, goe to it cheerefully; for thou art bound thereto. Well, if euery common Chriſtian be thus waies bound; how is a Miniſter bound? I ſay, the more degrees thou getteſt of Chriſt, the greater preferment thou

haſt in Chriſts Church; the more art thou obliged to die for Chriſt, and his members. Hee is a vaine man, that thinkes, when he is a miniſter, that he is preferd to eaſe, to greater pleaſure The Miniſterie no place of eaſe, but of labour. then the people: no, no. Is thine honour double? firſt a Chriſtian, and then a Miniſter to ſerue the Lord Ieſus? Thou art bound doublie to ſuffer, and to vndergoe the greater croſſe for his ſake and the Church. I ſay, if thou couldeſt be ſlaine a thouſand times, thou art bound to ſuffer more then a common Chriſtian. And if gladly thou be content to ſuffer, thou getteſt double honour, firſt as a Chriſtian; and then as a Miniſter; and thirdly as a Martyr. Many haue been Miniſters, but few haue gotten this honor that the Apoſtles got, Acts 5. 41. when they were perſecuted, they departed with ſuch ioy, with a ſong that they were thought worthy to ſuffer for Chriſt. I ſpeake this to make vs ready to ſuffer, & that with ioy. It is no ignominie or ſhame to thee to ſuffer, if it were the moſt vile death for Chriſts ſake, and thy Creator ſake. Immediatly after that thou ſhalt ſuffer, thou ſhalt be tranſlated from paine and miſerie, to euerlaſting ioy: yea and in the chiefe time of thy ſuffring, thou ſhalt Ioy vnder the croſſe. finde exceeding great ioy, as the holy Apoſtles and Martyrs found.
            When he hath ſpoken of his Miniſterie, he fals out into a deſcription of it, and that to this end, that we may ſee the worthines of this Goſpell: Firſt he calles it a dispenſation and ſtewardſhip: then there muſt be a familie; if he be a ſteward it muſt be a great calling. Ye thinke, to be the maſter of the Kings houſehold, is a great office; but to be a Miniſter, a ſteward in the houſe of the King of kings, and the maſter of his houſehold, of Ministerie what a high calling. all offices of honour it is the greateſt; and he ſurpaſſeth all the honour of office-bearers in the world: and he ſhall haue the fulnes of his honour in heauen, and he were a foole to ſeeke for it here. Secondly, would yee know of whom he hath this diſpenſation? Of whom; but of the Lord of the familie? Who dares make a ſteward, but the Lord of the houſe? Euen ſo who dare make a ſteward in Chriſts houſe, but Chriſt himſelfe? So that he that hath not his calling of God, of Ieſus Chriſt, he is but a hireling and worthie to be hanged. Then let euery one haue this warrant in his conſcience, that he is called by Chriſt,

either ordinarily conformed to the rule of the Word and diſcipline of the Church of Chriſt; or els extraordinarily, as were the Prophets and Apoſtles.
            Now what foode is this that hee miniſters? It is called the word of God. Vaine man thinkes it is but words that hee miniſters (as many ſay this day that a Miniſter, what doth he for his liuing? but goes vp to the pulpit, and ſpeakes a few words:) but I ſay to thee, they are ſuch words that if thou be not fedde with them, thou ſhalt dye and that euerlaſtingly, though thou wert a King. A man (ſaith Chriſt) liues not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedes out of the mouth of God, Matth. 4. 4. But who thinks that the words of a Miniſter be the words of God? I ſay to thee, eſteeme the words of a Miniſter as thou wilt, if he ſpeake the word of God (as I am perſwaded all true Miniſters doe) if thou take it not as the word of Gods mouth, thou ſhalt die like a miſcreant and wretch: for he that heares you (ſaith Chriſt) heares me, and he that contemnes you, contemnes me, Luk. 10. 16. Look to that part of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues, where it is ſpoken of the iudgement that lighted on them that contemned Moſes and his teſtimonie, Heb. 10. 28. and you ſhall finde it not a light matter, to contemne the meſſenger and Ambaſſadour of Chriſt, euen the voyce of a ſillie Miniſter. Then he ſheweth the manner how he receiued it: he ſaith, it was giuen him: he merited it not. No, not one of them, notwithſtanding all their graces, merited ſuch a glorious calling as the Miniſterie: not a man can merit ought in his houſe. But the Apoſtles they are called to the Apoſtleſhip onely of the free grace and loue of God; and in ſuch ſort all the faithfull preachers of the word, none of them were euer called to the Miniſterie, becauſe either of their Nobilitie (as there is few of that ſort) or for their gifts of cunning and vtterance, or any ſuch like thing; but onely of the free grace of Ieſus Chriſt, and his ſpirit that called them, they were elected and put apart to the Miniſterie and the worke thereof: therefore it is a free gift. 1. Tim. 1. 12. Paul confeſſeth the ſame of himſelfe, I thanke God (ſaith he) that he found me faithfull, and placed me in his miniſterie or ſeruice: O the thanks which he giues for ſo free a grace! I ſay thou art called to a Miniſterie, wherein if thou reſpect

him that calles thee, and the office that thou art called to (for what art thou? vnworthy of the ſmalleſt roome in his Church) thou art neuer able to thanke him enough for it all the daies thou liueſt. Well, to whom got he this Miniſterie? got he it to himſelfe, to put his hand euer in the Ambrie to feede himſelfe? The Miniſters of Chriſt feed not themſelues only. No, no, he is a hireling worthie to be hanged like a theefe, that reſpects himſelfe onely, being not carefull to feede the familie of Ieſus Chriſt. So then he gets not this office of Miniſterie for himſelfe; no, no, thou that art a Miniſter getteſt not this gift, that thou ſhouldeſt take it and locke it vp in thy cheſt; but thou getteſt it, to giue it to others: and I ſay to thee, by diſtributing it, it ſhall not be impaired; yea the more thou diſtributeſt, the more thou ſhalt haue. The goods of this Miniſterie are not like the gifts of theſe earthly ſtewards, as they themſelues in office are not alike. The more theſe earthly ſtewards giue, the leſſe is behinde: but the more the Miniſter giues of Faithfulnes and diligence in the worke of the Ministerie how gainfull. the grace of God giuen to him, the more hath he: for it growes exceedingly.
            Laſtly, the end of this ſtewardſhip is ſet downe, to fulfill the word of God. He is a Miniſter of the word: To what end? To fulfill the word of God, not onely to fill the familie, and euery perſon, man and woman; but that they may leaue behind to fulfill the word, to amplifie the food it ſelfe. Marke it well, for the more he giues out, the more it growes; the more the word is miniſtred, the more it is increaſed; and the growth of the word is by the miniſtration of it. Who doth not finde this that euer God hath called to that office, but that the more that hee hath giuen of it out, the more it grew, the more was behinde? Therefore let him neuer goe out of the pantrie: ſtand euer at the doore, and be euer giuing out; and ſo it ſhall ſwell and grow: and thou who receiueſt it, ſhall grow to thy ſaluation, and to the glorie of God whoſe foode it is. To this God be all honor and glory,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 26. 27.
               
                  26 Which is the mysterie hid ſince the world began, and from all ages; but now is made manifeſt to his Saints,
                  
                  27 To whom God would make knowne what is the riches of his glorious mysterie among the Gentiles, which riches is Chriſt in you the hope of glorie.
                  
               
            
            
               WE heard (brethren) that the Apoſtle when he had entred into the exhortation which he ſubioyneth vnto this doctrine, exhorting the Coloſſians to perſeuere and to abide in faith and hope: immediatly he falles out againe into a ſpeech concerning his owne perſon. And firſt he remoues the offence and ſlanders that might haue been taken at his bands and ſuffrings, which he ſuffered at that preſent in Rome. Then he fals out into a recommendation of his Miniſterie, calling it a diſpenſation or ſtewardſhip in the familie of God; which was giuen to him as a free gift without deſeruing; yea and contrarie to his deſeruing, giuen to him by God the Coherence and ſumme of the former Sermō, Lord and maſter of the familie: and giuen to him, not that he ſhould keepe it to himſelfe, and not communicate it to others; but giuen to him to diſpenſe it to the Gentiles, and amongſt the reſt to the Coloſsians, who were a part of the Gentiles. To this end, that that word of God giuen to him to diſpenſe, it ſhould be filled out and accompliſhed: for euer the more, that

men receiue that word, it growes the greater, and the more it increaſeth continually. It is not ordained to bee hid vp and ſmothered, but to be giuen out.
            Now to come to the text, and to goe through it briefly. When he hath ſpoken of this word which he hath receiued to diſpenſe, he leaues it not, but ſtickes on it; and immediatly he termes it a myſterie. A myſterie, to ſpeake of it briefly, it ſignifies a thing hid from the eyes of men; ſo that it cannot be ſeene, ſo A mysterie. long as it is hid: eſpecially it ſignifies a holy thing concerning religion, and the worſhip of God, that is the proper ſignification of a myſterie: and in this place Paul takes it ſo, as he doth 1. Tim. 3. 16. where he ſaith, Great is the mysterie of godlines, that is, not the myſterie of euery religion, but of the true religion, which hath been hid from the beginning; and now is manifeſted among his Saints. Then marke briefly. You ſee this word of God it is a myſterie, a thing hid, and ſo kept cloſe, that the naturall man could neuer ſo much as haue a thought in his 1. Cor. 
                     •
                  , 14. minde of it, or once to thinke that there was ſuch a thing in the world, as this Goſpell that we preach to you this day: that the naturall ſoule could not doe ſo much as once ſuſpect; that there was a Sauiour. It is a folly to thinke that the knowledge of Chriſt is naturall; nay, by nature thou wouldeſt neuer haue once dreamed that there hath been ſuch a thing. If God had let Adam alone after his fall, he would not haue euer once ſo much as dreamed of redemption; or that there was a Chriſt or a Sauiour: and therefore this Goſpell, it muſt be precious, that was kept ſo cloſe. If a man get a precious iewell, hee will keepe it cloſe, and will not let it ſee Sunne nor winde: The Goſpell, of all iewels in the world, it is the moſt precious; and it hath been kept ſecret and cloſe this long time: yea men knew not what it meant, til the Lord Ieſus Chriſt the wiſedom of the father reuealed it, and opened it to the world, and to his Diſciples: and therefore it being ſo precious (if we had eyes to ſee and hearts to conſider) O how highly would wee eſteeme of it! yea, euen thou that now lookes ſo lightly to it! but alas the world periſheth for fault of ſight and conſideration.
            But to leaue this, and to goe to the next point. In the words following, he defineth the time of the hiding of it; he ſaith, Hid
               
               ſince the world began, that is, from all eternitie. Secondly, it was hid from all generations of men. The firſt word meanes, that before or euer this world was made, it was hid in God, Ephe. 3. 9. The ſecond word meanes, that after this world was created, it was hid from ſo many generations, euen till Ieſus Chriſt was manifeſted in the fleſh, and then it was reuealed. Then marke this. This word is an ancient thing, a thing before all things. It The antiquitie of the word. came not this day or yeſterday; but it was before the world was: and looke how old God himſelfe is, the Goſpell is as old, hid in that ſecret counſell from all eternitie. And if you compare it with the world it ſelfe, before this world was made it was hid, and conſequently it was in rerum natura. Then brethren, if antiquitie, if age will recommend a thing; let eternitie recommend the Goſpell. It had not a beginning no more then God (in whoſe breaſt it lay) hath a beginning: and it is the ſame Goſpell we preach to you this day. Let them call it a new Goſpell. O vaine men! this Goſpell is the ſame Goſpell that was hid from the beginning. Then marke againe. I ſee here this world hath lien long in darknes after the creation, and hath wanted the light for a long time. For brethren, I neuer counted of the light of the Sun, when the light of Ieſus Chriſt is lacking. Woe is thee! better it were thou hadſt neuer been borne nor ſeene this light of the Sunne that ſhines in the firmament, The light of Christs Goſpel how precious. if thou haue not ſeene the light that is in the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. All light in compariſon of that light is meere darknes. So then, this world hath been long without the light of the Goſpell, and it hath been a long night euen from Adam to Chriſt; in a manner there hath neuer any thing been al that time but darknes, and night. As for the Gentiles, they ſaw neuer one glimſe, but dyed in miſerable darknes; they were led blindfold to death and damnation. As for the Iewes their caſe was better; yet their light was but a glimmering; they had 2. Pet. 1. 19. not the light of the Sunne. The greateſt they had, it was but the light of a lantorne, that is, the light of the Prophets. O then, this behooued to follow, that in the old world before Chriſt came, many dyed in miſerable darknes! for without light and life in Ieſus, there is nothing but death. Remoue thy light, thy life is remoued: remoue the Goſpell, thou dyeſt and periſheſt

incontinently. And therefore Paul Rom. 5. 21. ſpeaking of this eſtate from Adam to Chriſt, he ſaith, Sinne raigned vnto death: where the light of Chriſt is not, there is nothing but the raigning of ſinne to death and damnation. Well then, this tels vs how we ſhould eſteeme of the Goſpell: Alas, if thou wiſt what miſerie they were in that wanted this Goſpel, then thou wouldeſt account all thy bleſsing to be in the hauing of it.
            To goe forward: When he hath ſhewed how long it was kept cloſe; then he ſhewes when it was reuealed and brought to light. Now (ſaith he) it is reuealed to his Saints. (Now) that is, in the fulnes of time, as it is ſaid in the Epiſtle to the Galathians chap. 4. 4. and Ephe. 1. 10. In the diſpenſation of the fulnes of time, that is, whē Chriſt was comen into the world, that was brought to light. Yet this word (now) reacheth further, euen to the whole time that the Goſpell is preached, and ſhines in the world. And it is that, that in Heb. 3. 7. is called the day, ſaying, while it is day, harden not your hearts: and in 2. Cor. 6. 2. it is called that acceptable time. Then here I ſee, the world ſince Chriſt came into the world (as we ſay) is the bleſſedeſt come that euer came. It hath bin a lightſome world, and I ſee the Sunne hath euer ſhined, and that there hath neuer been night, but euer day: no, no interchaunge nor courſing about; but where Chriſts Goſpell is, there is euer day. Therefore it muſt follow that ſince Chriſt came, there haue bin many ſaued. They died and periſhed in multitudes before his comming; but after his comming when that light and that Sunne of righteouſnes roſe vp: looke as in huge heapes before they periſhed; ſo now millions and great numbers are ſaued. And whereas before it was but now one, and then one that preaſed into the kingdome of heauen: now they come in multitudes ſtriuing and thrunging who ſhould firſt enter into heauen, Matth. 11. 12. For it is impoſsible that this light ſhould be without life. If thou take a pleaſure in the light, it is not poſsible that thou canſt dye: but if thou take no pleaſure in it, woe be to thee, a double death The calling of the Gentiles. ſhall befall thee. Woe is to that man, who dyes in the light of the Goſpell, without taking pleaſure in the ſame. Well it had been to thee that thou hadſt dyed in darknes with the Gentiles: for thy damnation ſhall be doubled. Take therefore a

pleaſure in it, and all the world ſhall not make thee to periſh: and that is that which Paul ſaith; Sin raigned to death, but grace raignes by righteouſnes vnto life through the Lord Ieſus, Rom. 5. verſ. 21. But looke to the laſt words of the verſe. Vnto whom is the manifeſtation of the Goſpell made? Not to euerie one; beguile not your ſelues; for the Lord will not vouchſafe to manifeſt himſelfe, and grace in him to euery man: but hee calles them his Saints, to whom chiefly hee manifeſts himſelfe. Looke your books, ye that ſcorne at the name of Saints: if thou be nota Saint, thou ſhalt neuer ſee heauen: then this If thou be not a Saint thou ſhalt neuer ſee heauen. manifeſtation is not made to euery man. It is true (brethren) it is preached to all, and all heare it, & it ſtrikes in euery ones eares: yet it is alſo true, all men ſee not. It is to many as the light of the Sunne is to a blinde man; and the great multitude Simile. gets no more good of it, then a blind man gets conſolation of the Sunne. Who is it then that ſees it? None but the ſanctified one: that is, none but they that are ſanctified by the holy Spirit. Nay, no ſpirit, no ſanctification; no ſanctification, no ſight of God: and ſo thou art no Saint, but the diuell poſſeſſeth thee. So none ſees what this Goſpell is, but the ſanctified ones, and that man is he that hath gotten the ſpirit of Ieſus to open the eye of his ſoule: for it is the ſpirit of God that opens the ſoule, to ſee what the Goſpell of Chriſt is, and what vertue comes with it, when it comes. If thou hadſt the quickeſt ſpirit that can be, if thou haue not the ſpirit of God, thou ſhalt not ſee one whit in God, becauſe as it is the ſpirit of man, that ſearcheth the ſpirit of man; ſo it is the ſpirit of God that ſearcheth all things, yea the moſt ſecret things of God, 1. Cor. 2. 10. So none ſees what the Goſpell is, and what it brings with it, but ſuch as are illuminated by the ſpirit of God. Heare as long as thou wilt, thou ſhalt a bide in blindnes, till thou come to a deſperate hardnes of heart, if thou be not enlightened with the ſpirit of Ieſus, & this is to be had in and by the Goſpell. Therefore brethren ſay euer, Lord make me a Saint, make me one of that number, and make me to crie for the ſpirit of Ieſus to ſanctifie and Luk. 11. 9. 10. 15. enlighten me: for otherwiſe thou ſhalt periſh for want of the light of God.
            Now to come to the next verſe, when he hath ſpoken of the

Saints, he inſiſts vpon the reuelation of the myſterie made vnto them, and hee ſets it out in ſundrie circumſtances. Firſt hee ſheweth, who is ye Reuealer, to wit, God. Secondly, what cauſe moued him to make this reuelation to the Saints, to wit, his 
               The reuelation or manifestation of the Goſpell. 
               good pleaſure towards them. Thirdly, what thing is reuealed, to wit, this mysterie. And he termes it not ſimply a myſterie, but he calles it, the riches of his glorious myſterie, and not that onely, but the mysterie of Chriſt. Fourthly, among whom is it reuealed? to wit, not among the Iewes onely, but among the Gentiles alſo, through the world. All tends to this, to let vs ſee the glorie of the grace of God: as it is ſaid Ephe. 1. 6. So that this Goſpell is ſhining bright, and aboundantly, in ſuch a wonderfull great mercie, that there is not a circumſtance, but it lets you ſee a wonderfull grace in God.
            To come then to the firſt. The reuealer of this myſterie, is no other but God. He was the author of the reuelation of this The firſt circumſtance. myſterie of the Goſpell. The Saints, they begun not to ſee firſt, but God firſt reuealed before they ſaw, or could ſee: yea they had neuer ſeene one glimſe with their eye, if God had not begun to reueale it: no, thou ſhalt neuer ſee any heauenly or ſpirituall Fleſh and bloud can not teach vs ſpirituall things. thing, vnto the time it pleaſe the Lord to reueale it vnto thee. Then in that hee is the beginner of grace, herein appeares the more the glorie of his grace, and the matter of praiſing of him: but it ſtaies not here. We will come then to the next.
            What moued him to reueale this myſterie to his Saints, both of Iewes and Gentiles? The Lord doth nothing raſhly, he hath The ſecond circumſtance. euer good cauſes mouing him, wherefore he doth this or that. He is not like a vaine man, that doth, and vndoeth again; and wots not what hee doth. Saw hee any thing in theſe Saints to moue him? Some Papiſt will ſay, hee foreſaw ſome merit in them. O but the text ſaith, that there was no ſuch thing at all without himſelfe which could moue him: hee ſaw nothing I Nothing in the world did moue God to ſend Christ and his Goſpell vnto vs, but his owne loue and good pleaſure. ſay in the ſame, or yet in the world, which could moue him, but his owne goodnes. His good pleaſure, which was ere euer they were Saints, is it that moued him to reueale this myſterie. Then againe, they were not Saints before the reuelation was made. There is not a Saint before Chriſt be reuealed to them.

It is the ſight of Chriſt that makes a man holy; ſo there was neuer none holy, but he that firſt gat that ſight of Ieſus: the ſight went before holines, and holines followed vpon the reuelation: becauſe holines is the effect of the reuelation of the Goſpell. Then ye ſee, that as the Lord is the beginner of the reuelation, ſo it is not our deſeruing, but his owne good pleaſure that moues him thereto. The Lord of his good pleaſure ſhewed himſelfe to the world; and no queſtion this is ſpoken, that thou ſhouldeſt euer glorie in God. Alas, would to God as we haue matter to glorifie God, that we could anſwere to the thouſand part of it.
            Then to come to the third circumſtance. What is the thing The third circumſtance. that he hath reuealed? He calles it a mysterie, and not barely a myſterie, but a glorious mysterie; and not that onely, but he cals it the riches, that is, the infinitnes of the glorie of this myſterie. Then ye haue a glorious myſterie, and a rich myſterie of glorie; a plentie of glorie, ſuch as neuer was. I remember in the Epheſians 1. 18. Paul ſpeaking of that inheritance, he calles it not barely a heritage, but the glorie of his inheritance: and not that only, but his inheritance glorious among the Saints. This let vs ſee firſt, that all the graces wee haue in Chriſt, are good in ſubſtance; they are profitable: and not that onely, but alſo it The riches of Chriſt. lets vs ſee the gloriouſnes of them in qualitie: and not that only, but alſo it lets vs ſee the infinitnes of them in quantitie. So, what would you haue in Chriſt? In him thou haſt good things; in him thou haſt glorious things; in him thou haſt infinite things: infinite in length, breadth, and heighth; infinite in deepnes, incomprehenſible euery manner of way. So in Chriſt, all things glorious, and neuer a thing we haue in Chriſt, but it is a thing of infinite weight: yea the leaſt thou haſt, it is of infinite weight. All theſe earthly things, in compariſon of theſe, are of no value: the leaſt bit of thy regeneration is worth them all; ſo the grace of Chriſt is incomparable. Howbeit the Apoſtle borroweth the ſpeeches to expreſſe the ſame in ſome manner: yet the grace of Chriſt is vnſpeakable. O if we could take ſome apprehenſion in heart, and but once thinke of it! no, the heart is not capable of it, no more then the tongue can expreſſe it. And in the day of the Lord we ſhall ſee theſe things

to be verified; and happie ſhal we be if we can ſtriue to know theſe things of Chriſt, and ſtriue to haue them in vs in ſome meaſure. All our ſtrife ſhould be to preaſe forward, to take euer a further and further apprehenſion of theſe gifts of Chriſt in our hearts: then next, to ſpeake of them with a full perſwaſion. Alas, our ſpeech is but a taſteleſſe word, which teſtifies How we ſhould ſpeake of Chriſt. that thou wotſt not what the grace of Chriſt meanes. When wilt thou learne to call it a glorious Goſpell? Yet brethren, marke this Goſpell: for as ſillie as it ſeemes to you, it is a rich thing, it is the riches of God. Wouldeſt thou bee rich? Seeke the Goſpell. Wouldeſt thou be wiſe? Seeke the Goſpell. For if thou hadſt all the riches vnder the Sunne, if thou want Chriſt thou art a poore wretch. And if thou hadſt al the glorie in the world, if thou want Chriſt, thou art an ignominious bodie, full of ſhame. If thou want the Goſpell, thou haſt no wit; thou art a foole, if thou wert neuer ſo fine a Mathematician, a Phiſitian, and a Lawyer. O foole! if thou haſt not the reuelation of Chriſt, thou haſt a fooliſh head; and thou ſhalt be ſhut vp in hell as a foole. So brethren, there is nothing to make choiſe of beſides this Goſpell, and one day it ſhall proue ſo. And one day you ſhall ſee it either to your ſhame, or to your glorie.
            Now to goe forward. Among whom is this ſo glorious and ſo rich a Goſpell reuealed? He ſaith, among you who are Gentiles. Not among the Iewes and their nation onely: for brethren, ſo great a light craueth greater bounds: who will goe draw in the Sunne into a houſe to make a houſe the ſeate of it, and make it as it were a candle ſhining in the houſe? O this paſſing light of the Goſpell, it muſt not bee drawne into one nation onely! but this light that would illuminate a thouſand worlds, it muſt be ſet vp on high to ſhine on all the nations in the world. And therefore hee ſaith, it is manifeſted among the nations, and ſo it is extended to this ſillie vnworthy nation of Scotland. O Scotland! thy onely light is the Goſpell; and thy onely glorie is the glorie of the Goſpell; and ſhame and darknes ſhall come to thee, if euer thou let this glorious light of the Goſpell depart. And I ſay to thee, let this glorious Goſpell ſlip, and then of all the iudgements that euer came vpon a nation or countrey, the moſt fearefull and

terrible ſhall light on thee. And therefore as euer thou wilt haue life, and the ioyes of heauen, ſtriue euer to hold in this light. But here the goodnes of God appeares, that to condemned creatures, he ſhould haue ſuffered this light to ſhine: all were condemned creatures, the ſentence was pronounced againſt all. We of Scotland were of that number, Gentiles. Alas, if we could once conſider this! O wretched man that euer thou ſhouldeſt haue ſeene this ſight of the Sunne of righteouſnes, if thou reioyce not in it! If thou couldeſt conſider the benefit, that thou art borne in the daies of light, that ye beames of Ieſus Chriſt goe into thy heart, thou wouldeſt count more of it then of al the kingdoms in the world: yea thou wouldeſt ſay euery morning and euening, Bleſſed be God that I was borne in this lightſome time; and among all things yt ſhould make thee thankful, this ſhould be the chiefeſt, that thou waſt borne in the time of the light and grace of Ieſus Chriſt offered to the world.
            Hitherto wee haue ſpoken of theſe foure circumſtances. In euery one of them ſhines the glorie of God, and that ſo wonderfully, that God got not to himſelfe in the creation ſuch a glorie, as he hath gotten by the reuelation of this myſterie of Ieſus Chriſt. For aboue all his workes, the worke of this his mercie is the greateſt. Now in the end of the verſe, hee makes this more plaine, that hee ſpake of the riches of God and the Goſpell. And hee comes downe more homely to their vnderſtanding, as if he would ſay: O ye Coloſſians, would you know what I meane by theſe riches? I meane nought but Chriſt, as theſe riches be nothing but Chriſt. What was hid in this myſterie of the reuelation? nothing but Chriſt, when it was reuealed, and the glorie of it laid out abroad, as merchandiſe is vſed to be, there was nothing in it but Chriſt. For brethren, all this word of the Goſpell, is nothing but Chriſt. Al our preaching, what is it but Chriſt? The word of the croſſe, and then of his aſcenſion: all our Goſpell hath no other matter nor ſubſtance. And when he hath drawne theſe riches to Chriſt, and made him all: then hee comes neerer them, and drawes in Chriſt to them, to their conſolation. It is not enough that they ſhould heare of Chriſt, and him preached; but he applies the

ſame vnto their hearts and ſoules: ſo the leſſon is: All the heauenly glorie and riches which thou heareſt tell of, draw it into In Chriſt conſiſts all fulnes of glorie. Chriſt: for there is no glorie but Chriſts glorie. For the glorie of the Father and of the holy Ghoſt dwels in him bodily: and thou ſhalt neuer ſee ſo much as a iot of glorie without Chriſt. Therefore when thou heareſt ſpeaking of glorie and riches, call it all Chriſts: and then ſticke not here, but when thou haſt drawne all to Chriſt, then take him to thy ſelfe. What auailes me all the glorie of God and of Chriſt, if I haue no part of it? for it is the greater damnation to thee, if thou haue no part of it. The more power he hath, the greater terror is it to thee: the greater mercie, the greater ſadnes to thee. So take him and put him in thy heart: and troweſt thou not, that God will dwell in thy heart? The Scripture ſaith, he dwels in the heart, Eph. 3. 17. Well then, take him, and put him in thy heart, and thou ſhalt get the fulnes of glorie: and all his glorie ſhall be in euery one. So getting Chriſt, thou ſhalt get all glorie. It is a ſmall matter to know that in Chriſt is all glorie, except thou get Chriſt applied to the heart. him applied to thy heart. O the conſolation that will be in the heart that hath Chriſt! and without him, fie on thee and thy ſtinking heart both. All the things vnder heauen ſhall not miniſter ioy to thy ſoule, if thou want Chriſt in thy heart. Alas, all other ioy is but vanitie, and from the teeth forward.
            Now in the laſt words, when hee falles out in ſpeaking of Chriſt hee cannot leaue him. Would to God wee could finde Chriſt as powerfull as Paul did. Alas wee haue nought but a caſtleſſe word of him, and away with him. If he were in thee, as he was in Paul, thou wouldeſt not ſpeake of him ſo ſlenderly, but thy mouth would euer ſpeak of him in great aboundance: and thou wouldeſt thinke that thou couldeſt neuer ſpeake enough of him. And why ſhould wee not learne of Paul, and ſuch holy men to ſpeake as they ſpake of Chriſt? Then (I ſay) he falles out, and calles him that hope of glorie, as if he would ſay, that glorie that is hoped for. Ieſus Chriſt is that glorie that is reuealed in myſterie: Ieſus is the riches of that glorie, and is that ſame thing that wee looke for. Hee is glorie here in this life, and he is that glorie we hope for in the life to come. Think not that thou ſhalt ſee another glorie in ſubſtance, but that

thou ſeeſt now in the Goſpell, as in the mirrour of all glorie. Seeſt thou not this glorie of Ieſus Chriſt in the reuelation of the myſterie: thou ſhalt neuer ſee this glorie after this life. Looke if this be a ſtreight band; it bindes thee with life and death. As euer then thou wilt ſee Chriſts glorie after this life, looke that thou ſee his glorie in the mirrour of the Goſpell. We must ſee Christs glorie in the Goſpell if we will ſee him after this life. O vaine foole! wilt thou take pleaſure to looke in a mirrour to ſee thy vaine foule face; and wilt thou take no pleaſure to looke in the mirrour of the Goſpell to ſee the ſweete face of Ieſus, that caſts his beames not to thy face onely, but downe to thy heart alſo; and makes it light, and illuminates thy blinde minde, and makes a faire ſoule? Well is the man that hath a lightſome ſoule. O foole! thou wilt be carefull to haue an eye in thy head, but it had bin good if thou neuer hadſt had one, if thy ſoule abide blind. It is ye light of Ieſus that makes a ſoule a ſoule. When he ſhall come in his owne perſon, thou ſhalt ſee him no more in a mirrour; thou ſhalt heare no more of the Goſpell, but in ſteede of it, the Lord Ieſus ſhall ſtand vp in proper perſon, and the beames of his glorie ſhall transforme thy face, and all the parts of thy bodie ſhall begin to bee more glorious then the Sunne in the noone day. Thou ſhalt be made conformable to his glorious bodie, Phil. 3. 21. Hold on therefore To looke on Chriſts face in the Goſpell, till we ſee him face to face. in looking on the mirrour till hee come. He is comming behinde, he is at thy backe; he is at thy hand, the mirrour will away, and then he ſhall ſhine on thy face. Hold on therefore, and looke in the mirrour till he come, and fill thy ſoule with glorie and honour for euer. Now to this Ieſus, with the Father and the holy ſpirit be euerlaſting praiſe,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE TWELFTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 1. verſ. 28. 29.
               
                  28 Whom we preach, admoniſhing euery man, and teaching euery man in all wiſdome, that we may preſent euery man perfect in Chriſt Ieſus:
                  
                  29 Whereunto I alſo labour and ſtriue, according to his working, which worketh in me mightily.
                  
               
            
            
               I Shewed you brethren, the Apoſtle in the end of this chapter, he ſpeakes eſpecially of his owne perſon, to the end he might gaine authoritie, and reuerence to his doctrine and exhortation.  Firſt, ye heard he ſpake of his ſufferings, The ſum of the last Sermon. remouing the offence which the Coloſſians might haue taken at them.  Secondly, he ſpeakes of his miniſtery, that he was a Miniſter of the Church, according to the diſpenſation  giuen to him from God, for the Coloſſians in ſpeciall: to this  end, to fulfill the word of God. After this he ſpeakes of that hid myſterie: for he defines the word which he preached, to be  that myſterie ſo long time hid, and at laſt reuealed to the ſaints: and he interprets it to be of Ieſus Chriſt, who is ſaid to be the riches of the glory of this hid myſterie. Thus far we haue heard. When he hath ſpoken of the myſtery, he returnes and ſpeakes of his owne perſon. And in the firſt part of theſe words, to ſpeake of them word by word as they lye; he ſaith, whom we preach; that is, the which Ieſus Chriſt that hope of glorie (as he

tearmed him before) we preach, that is, I and the reſt of my fellow laborers. So no queſtion in theſe words he endeuours to purchaſe authoritie to his miniſtry, from the ſubiect of his preaching. All his preaching was of the moſt glorious things that euer were, or ſhall be in this world. All his preaching was of Chriſt, the riches of that glorie that ſo long was hid, and at the laſt was reuealed. Briefly, we ſee of theſe words of Paul, a Miniſter of the Goſpell of Chriſt hath gotten in truſt committed to him, a faire and precious thing. He hath vnder his hand The word of reconciliation committed to the Ministers of the Goſpell. the riches of the glorie of God, to wit, Ieſus Chriſt. He is a treaſurer (to ſpeake of it ſo) and hath in his cuſtodie a treaſure: but ſuch as is the richeſt that euer was, is, or ſhall be in the world. And he hath a commiſſion not to keepe it cloſe, but to giue it out and deale it to the world, that euery one ſhould haue their portion of it. And therefore what is the glory of the Miniſter, the Preacher, what is his eſtimation? All his glorie 2. Cor. 5. 19. 20. and his eſtimation, all his honour is in this treaſure Ieſus Chriſt, that he hath in cuſtodie. Marke it. And in what thing conſiſts his honour, and glorie, and eſtimation? As it is his honor to diſtribute this rich treaſure to thee and to the world: ſo here is all thy glory to put out thy hand and take in theſe riches to thy ſelfe. Thou haſt more honour to doe this, then if thou wert aduanced and promoted to the higheſt honor and dignitie vnder the ſunne; then if thou wert made a King of all the world: for when thou art made a King, if thou haue no part with Ieſus, thy end will be miſerable, and woe is thee for euermore.
            To goe forward: in the next words, he laies down his preaching in the parts of it, admoniſhing and instructing euery man; there be the parts: admoniſhing them that were out of the way; inſtructing them that had entred in the right way. It is Admonition and inſtruction, how they differ. not enough to tell a man that he is in the way; but to counſell and inſtruct him to hold on: which if he doe, to aſſure him of life euerlaſting. Then briefly, all the preaching of Chriſt ſtands in theſe two points, in admoniſhing the ſinner and telling him his fault, that he is in the wrong way: if he were a King admoniſh him of his error, either in manners or doctrine. And then tell him the high way of his manners and doctrine, wherein he

ſhould walke. If the Miniſter cannot doe this; yea if it were to a King, if he cannot admoniſh, inſtruct, and teach him, he cannot preach Chriſt: let him therefore be ſilent, and neuer ſpeake a word of Ieſus Chriſt. And what euer they be of the people, that will not ſuffer admonition, and will not receiue inſtruction, they ſhall neuer be rich in Chriſt: if they had all the riches in the world, they are but beggers, and ſhall dye like beggers. Who are theſe that he admoniſheth? and who are theſe whom he inſtructs and teacheth? Marke euery word, he ſaith not one man, two men, this ſort or that ſort of men onely; but euery man, and al ſorts of them, Iew, Gentile, Grecian, and Barbarian; wiſe, vnwiſe, Kings, ſubiects, poore, rich. There is neuer a one exempted from admonition: neuer a ſoule exempted from inſtruction. Wherein brethren, you may ſee that vniuerſall dominion and lordſhip, that Chriſt Ieſus hath ouer euery man, and euery eſtate of them; ouer Kings and ſubiects, rich and poore; ouer them that be in honour and diſhonour. Whatſoeuer ranke thou be of, thou maiſt well exempt thy ſelfe from his dominion; but thou art not exempted in deede, though thou wert a King or a Monarch, the Goſpell hath a Lordſhip ouer thy head. If thou draw out thy necke from vnder the yoke of the Goſpell, thou ſhalt one day vndergoe the heauie yoke euen of Gods vengeance and fearefull wrath: ſo then we ſee the vniuerſalitie of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt ouer man, and how this miniſtry that ſeemes ſo contemptible to all men, is extended to all. And if thou wert a King, thou art vnder the miniſtry of the word; thou muſt ſuffer of the Miniſter admonition; and thou muſt receiue inſtruction. If thou wert neuer ſo learned in thy owne conceit, thou art but a ſcholler to this miniſtry, and oughtſt to ſit with reuerence, and to heare. And laſtly, ye ſee the common miſerie, that all ſtands in in this world: all is out of the way; thou art out of the way by nature, Euery man by nature in the high way to damnation. and in the high way to damnation. And therefore if thou lay not hold on admonition, thou ſhalt goe to damnation. By nature thou art ignorant like an Aſſe; and therefore periſh ſhalt thou if thou receiue not inſtruction, by this miniſtry of the Goſpell. All haue ſinned, ſaith the Apoſtle Rom. 3. 23. and fallen 
               Epheſ. 2. 1 2. 3. Pſal. 32. 
               from the glorie of God: and therefore admonition, and inſtruction

extends to all men. But I would aske, who is he that can admoniſh, teach and inſtruct effectually? Paul ſaith, We teach Christ, admoniſhing and instructing all men. I anſwere then, Who can admoniſis. none can admoniſh, but hee that can teach Chriſt. Will you ſay, that a prophane Philoſopher could euer admoniſh or inſtruct any to frame their life aright, howbeit he will take it vpon him? No, no, onely the man that can ſpeake of Ieſus Chriſt, that man can admoniſh and teach others, becauſe he onely can ſpeake to thy heart. For brethren, it is the word of Pſal. 19. 7. God that is able onely to reforme the heart. All the words vnder the ſunne will not doe it. For this word of the Goſpell hath onely the concurrence of the holy ſpirit of Ieſus, that cauſeth this word to goe downe to thy heart.
            Now what doctrine is this he teacheth? Instructing, ſaith he, euery man in wiſdome; ſo wiſdome is his doctrine. O but in what meaſure? in all wiſdome, ſaith he. It is perfect wiſdome, there is no lacke or want in that wiſdome, that he teacheth. He teacheth euery man, and euery ranke and ſort of men wiſdome, and a perfect wiſdome, whole wiſdome and full wiſdome, euen that fulnes of wiſdome that was in Chriſt. O the treaſure of wiſedome and knowledge that is in him! In the ſecond chapter of this epiſtle, verſ. 3. it is ſaid, he is full of wiſdome and knowledge. Neuer any had all wiſdome, except Chriſt; no not all the Philoſophers: onely Ieſus hath this prerogatiue. This wiſdome, this full wiſdome (I ſay) is giuen to the Apoſtlés, and to Paul in a high meaſure; but ſo, that they haue it of Chriſt, and not of themſelues. And therefore Chriſt, as I haue ſaid, hath onely this prerogatiue, to haue all wiſdome in himſelfe. Looke next: who teacheth this wiſdome? Paul an infirme weake man, he teacheth all wiſdome. Then marke, Ieſus Chriſt he hath put theſe treaſures in earthen veſſels, as it is ſaid, 2. Cor. 4. 7. In a weake brittle bodie: ſo that if thou take it not out of this veſſell, Ministery. thou ſhalt neuer get it out of Chriſt: if thou contemne this treaſure for the frailtie & ignominie of the veſſell wherein it lies, thou ſhalt neuer get this riches of God. For the Lord hath ordained that thou ſhalt take it out of the hand of a ſilly man. Againe, you ſee the bleſſednes of the ſchollers of Chriſt (O bleſſed is the ſoule that is a ſcholler to Chriſt!) It was counted a

bleſſed thing to be a ſcholler in Platoes ſchoole, or Aristotles ſchoole, by reaſon of the wiſdome they taught: but Plato nor Aristotle neuer taught all wiſdome, nor true wiſdome; but Wiſdome. thou who art a ſcholler in Chriſts ſchoole, thou haſt the true wiſdome, and that not in a meaſure, but thou haſt all wiſdome to make thee perfect in knowledge, that is, thy bleſſednes. Alas, this miſerable world knowes not the true bleſſednes! O would to God we could know what bleſſednes we are called vnto, by the preaching of this Goſpell!
            To goe forward: What is the end of all this preaching, of this admoniſhing and teaching; and that in all wiſedome? The faireſt end that euer was. What is that end? That we (ſaith he) may preſent euery one perfect in Ieſus Chriſt. The meaning hereof is, that wee may preſent euery man and woman to whom wee preach, of what eſtate ſo euer they be, a perfect ſcholler, and that in Ieſus Chriſt, without whom there is no perfection. So this end of this preaching, inſtructing, and admoniſhing is, a preſenting of euery man in perfectnes and holines, eſpecially in the great day of the Lord, before that glorious tribunall, and to ſet them vp before their Iudge. For if you will reade Paul, you ſhall gather thus much of him, that Heb. 13. 17 there is neuer a faithfull preacher, but in that day hee ſhall bring in his companie, them whom hee hath conuerted, and ſay, Lord, there is my companie, that were conuerted by my miniſtery, vnto the faith in thy bloud. Paul appeares to meane this in theſe words. Alwaies I marke of this preſenting, that all men and women were once abſent from God: if thou art to be preſented, then it muſt follow that thou waſt abſent. Nay, all fleſh wandred away from his God.
            The ſecond thing I marke: what is the end of all this feruent The end of the miniſterie. preaching, admonition, and inſtruction? There is the end, to bring men and women that wandred away home againe 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. to their God in Ieſus Chriſt: to bring thee who waſt abſent from God, preſent to him, and to that ſight of that countenance, in the which is the ſacietie of all ioy. And in that day when euery Paſtor ſhall preſent ſo many, as he hath conuerted by the voyce of the Goſpell; then hee ſhall ſee the fruit of his labours: for let him preach what he will, yet hee ſhall not ſee

what is the fruit of his trauels till that day. Then it ſhall be ſaid to him, Thou didſt winne theſe ſoules. Then he ſhall get his reward. He gets not his wages here modified, as you would modifie them to one that ſerueth you. Nay, nay, but at that day he ſhall get a Crowne of glorie. Paul looked for a Crowne, A Crowne of righteouſnes (ſaith he) is laid vp for me, which the Lord that righteous Iudge ſhall giue me at that day, and not to me onely, but to all thoſe who looke for his appearing, 2. Tim. 4. 8. Who ſhall be preſented? Shall onely Kings be preſented, who haue heard the Goſpell? ſhall onely the rich be preſented to that glorie? ſhall onely the honorable? the Grecian, and not the Barbarian? ſhall onely the wiſe, and not the vnwiſe, be preſented? No, no, euery man, from the King to the very begger that hath heard the Goſpell, as they all are ſinners without exception: all hearers of the Goſpell of grace, all ſhall be preſented without exception in that day. Marke it. So thou, who heareſt this Goſpell, haſt no ſmall conſolation; looke for a faire preſenting of thee: onely lend thy eare, and thou ſhalt not be fruſtrate of that glorie, howbeit thou be here ignominious and deſpiſed for this Goſpels ſake: yet ſhall it make thee glorious. I promiſe thee it ſhall glorifie thee, if thou wilt honour it in this life. So all the faithfull ſhall there be preſented. And in what ſtate? Perfit (ſaith he.) Brethren, a perfect wiſdome, makes a perfect man in all knowledge and glorie; and be aſſured of it, howbeit thou heareſt the Goſpell in imperfection, yet if thou wilt continue in hearing, thou canſt not but come to perfection; in the end thou ſhalt be filled with all wiſedome; and when thou ſhalt be preſented, thou ſhalt be preſented in ſuch a perfection, as the learnedſt in this world cannot attaine vnto. Thou art an idiot now in their conceit; but if thou wilt heare Chriſt in his Goſpell, thou ſhalt be more wiſe then euer Plato 
               The wiſedome of the world and of Chriſt how they differ. or Aristotle; or the wiſeſt worldling that euer was; and thou ſhalt get perfect wiſedome in the end. And this is that difference betwixt that wiſedome of the Philoſophers, and that wiſdome of Chriſt. All their wiſedome neuer perfected any man, becauſe it was imperfect in it ſelfe, as they themſelues who taught it were imperfect: but this wiſedome of the Goſpell which is the wiſedome of Chriſt and of God, as he is perfect, ſo

is it perfect. So ſhall it perfect the man that heares it, if he continue but a ſhort time in hearing.
            In the end of the verſe, he ſhewes in whom this perfection is. There is nothing without Chriſt Ieſus, there is no grace out of him: no beginning of grace, no progreſſe in grace, no perfection without him. Wouldeſt thou begin in grace? Begin in him. Wouldeſt thou proceede in grace? goe on in him. Wouldeſt thou be perfected? be perfect in him, and thou ſhalt be perfected. For euen in this life by reaſon of that coniunctiō we haue with Chriſt through faith in his bloud, wee haue perfection euen in this imperfection of ours. If thou be ingrafted in Chriſt, thou art alreadie perfect in him, and maiſt ſtand vp and claime it, and ſay: O my God, I am perfect in Chriſt. But in that great day, when wee ſhall be preſented (being in Ieſus Chriſt, for the hold we get of him here ſhall neuer let goe, thou ſhalt neuer be ſeuered from him) thou ſhalt haue a double perfection. Thou ſhalt not onely haue his perfection and his glorie, which ſhall ſhadow thee and couer thee as a garment, but beſide that, thou ſhalt then be filled with perfect glorie thy ſelfe. All thy bodie and ſoule ſhall be filled with exceeding great glorie. So thou ſhalt haue no ſmall vantage in him. All comes to this exhortation, ſticke by Ieſus, and be not ſeuered from him: for if thou ſeuer from him, thou art ſeuered from thy grace; and if thou cleaue to him, all thy glorie and perfection ſhall neuer be hindred. Let them rent thee and teare thee as they wil, thou ſhalt be glorified and perfected in ſpite of their teeth. Fie then on thee creature, that ſuffers thy ſelfe to be ſeuered from Chriſt: cleaue to him as euer thou wilt ſee glorie and perfection.
            Now we come to the laſt verſe. When he hath ſpoken of the end of his miniſterie, now hee ſheweth he laboured to attaine to it; vnto the which (ſaith he) I laboured. If there was euer any laborious man, Paul was one; he was a painfull man, neuer reſting night nor day, and all to this end, to preſent many to the Paines in the Miniſterie. Lord Ieſus. Then marke the leſſon: would a Miniſter attaine to the end of his calling? let him be painfull. A ſluggiſh Miniſter will neuer doe good; if he be not painfull, he is no louing man; for loue is euer painfull, 1. Theſſ. 1. 3. He that loues, will

ſtraine himſelfe, if it were to the death, for the weale of them he loues. So if he be not painfull, I doubt if euer he ſhall preſent himſelfe (let by other men.) Therefore the people ſhould be carefull to haue a painfull man to watch ouer them. For the Miniſter is ordained to preſent thee before the Lord, and hee cannot do that if he be not painfull. I will neuer giue the people counſell to hold a man, that is not painfull to preſent and gaine them to God. And curſed be that Paſtor that takes his eaſe and reſt, and lets the ſheepe of the Lords paſture goe here and there aſtray: curſed be he, and the Lord himſelfe curſeth him in Ierem. 48. 10. that doth the worke of the Lord negligently. Alas, it will not bee the ſtudying nor the preaching of a Sermon, that will make thee to be a painfull Miniſter; but it muſt be the continuall teaching of thy flocke, and euery one of them, admoniſhing them that are out of the way, and by thy trauels bringing them home, and inſtructing them that are in Idlenes in the Miniſterie dangerous. the way of grace to goe on, that they goe not to the left hand, nor to the right hand; but that they hold out the high way to Chriſt Ieſus, neuer reſting till they get his preſence; and night and day to be watching, and on his guard praying for the people; this man is a painfull man that doth thus. So a Miniſter ſhould not be an idle bodie; neither can he be idle if hee haue any whit of conſcience in his calling. And I count a ſluggiſh Miniſter worſe then a theefe: he will goe and ſtudie a peece of a Sermon, and vp to the pulpit and preach that; and then come his way: hee thinkes hee hath done enough, and neuer more thought nor care hath he of the people of God. O vaine man! thou art a ſluggard, worſe then a theefe; thou ſhalt preſent but few or none at that great day. And therfore thy damnation ſhall be the greater: for the bloud of all theſe ſoules that through thy default dye ignorant, ſhall light about thy ſhoulders and preſſe thee downe like milſtones in hell; where thou and they ſhall be tormented euerlaſtingly. Yet there is more here, this preſenting craues more then labour or paine. He ſaith, he ſtroue, as a man fighting a combat, or as a ſouldier vnder a banner. And to ſpeake the truth, this mans life is but a battaile, as is plaine in the 2. Tim. 4. 7. I haue (ſaith he) fought a good fight: yea, and the ſoreſt fight that is fought, is to fight

for the ſoule, to bring it out of the diuels hands, and to put it in Chriſts hands; to bring it from hell, and to ſet it in heauen, How hard a thing it is to winne a ſoule. from death to life, that is a ſore fight. The man therefore that will bring ſoules to God, he muſt not be a painfull man onely; but he muſt be a warriour, and he muſt oppoſe himſelfe ſtanding and fighting with euery one, who oppoſe themſelues againſt Chriſt, if they were Emperours or Monarchs; and hee muſt fight the battaile to the end: otherwiſe, if he be not painfull and a fighter alſo, I doubt if he ſhall preſent himſelfe, much leſſe others, in that day to Chriſt. A coward that will take a backe ſide, he will not be meete to preſent one: he is not for the field; away with him. Of al this I marke: it is a hard thing to winne a ſoule to God; nay the ſoule of one cannot be won, but with great paine, and labour and fighting. Why then labour ye not with ſtriuing and wreſtling for the ſafetie of your ſoule, that you may preſent it to the Lord ſafe and ſound. The ſoule of euery bodie hath many enemies, and mightie enemies. O if thou wiſt how many enemies thy ſoule hath to ſtay The enemies of the ſoule. thee from going to heauen, thou wouldeſt not ſit in ſuch eaſe as thou doeſt, neglecting thy ſelfe and the time both: but thou wouldeſt euer bee labouring, and painfully labouring and fighting to keep thy ſoule ſafe to the Lord. Againe, we ſee that heauen is a faire thing. For this is true, Difficilia quae pulchra, The more glorious, the harder to get: ſo heauen is too faire a iewell to loſe through ſluggiſhnes. No, theſe things in the world haue no ioy: A heape of ſtones is no iewell: and if thou wilt loſe the iewell of heauen for that, looke what aduantage thou wilt make.
            Now let vs ſee what fruite reaped he of his paines, according to his working the effectualnes of him (ſaith he) who worketh in me mightily: the end of his labour was effectualnes: he was effectuall in the hearts of them, who heard him. In deſpite of the diuell and his impes, he drew great multitudes by the power of the word, out of the kingdome of the diuell and darknes, and wanne them vnto Chriſt. Take paines on thee, meete the diuell, fight on to relieue ſoules, and be aſſured thou ſhalt ſee the effect of thy labours: for there was neuer none that ſtroue, but he ſhall be preſented at that day glorious. Yet albeit men

would labour and ſtriue neuer ſo much, ſome will periſh. All ſhall not periſh in that great day; therefore let vs fight with paine and labour. To whom giues hee the glorie of his labours and effectualnes? aſcribes hee it to himſelfe? ſaies hee according to my effectualnes? No: how then? According to his effectualnes that workes in me mightily: that is God. So that all power and al the effectualnes, that is in his hand, is not in himſelfe, but in God, and of God: and that power of God is craued, and is needfull to the recouerie of a ſoule; yea of the ſillieſt ſoule of you all. The ſillieſt ſoule that is, ſhall neuer be ſafe by any power or vertue of man: of the Miniſter there is no power that can free a ſoule, but the almightie power of God. The power of God only muſt free a ſoule. This his power comes downe from heauen while the Miniſter is ſpeaking; and it gaineth & conquereth the ſoule that heares the word. Therefore looke not to the man that teacheth, but pray that the power of God would come downe, and free thy ſoule from bondage. And as thou ſhouldeſt depend vpō God, ſo when thou haſt trauelled all thy daies, turne back thy praiſes vnto God, and thank him for it. The Apoſtle takes nothing to himſelfe. Marke and behold the words, he ſaith, according to his effectualnes that worketh by me, that is in a word, hee taketh the honour and reputation of an inſtructer, of a Miniſter and ſeruant of God, and God giues him that honour. As the Lord will haue the honour of the principall worke to himſelfe (and good reaſon he haue it) ſo when hee hath imployed thee, hee vouchſafeth to impart honour vnto thee. He will giue thee a honour that thou art his ſeruant, and therefore 1. Cor. 3. 5. 6. he ſaith, Paul is nothing, and Apollo is nothing, but God who giues the increaſe. When he hath giuen God that glorie; then in the fourth chapter verſ. 2. he ſaith, let men ſo esteeme of vs, as the dispoſers of the mysteries of God: ſo let men euer giue God all glorie and praiſe, and let them be aſſured the 1. Sam. 2. 33. God whom they honour in their calling, ſhall honour them againe. Now to this God be all honour and praiſe,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE THIRTEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 1. 2. 3
               
                  1 For I would ye knew what great fighting I haue for your ſakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as haue not ſeene my perſon in the fleſh,
                  
                  2 That their hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in loue, and in all riches of the full aſſurance of vnderſtanding, to know the myſterie of God euen the father and of Christ:
                  
                  3 In whom are hid all the treaſures of wiſdome and of knowledge.
                  
               
            
            
               YE haue heard, brethren, from the foure and twentith verſe of the firſt chapter of this epiſtle, how Paul hath inſiſted vpon his owne perſon, purchaſing authority to his doctrine yt he hath propounded, and to the exhortation begun. As yet he continues in ſpeaking of himſelfe, from the beginning of this ſecond chapter, vnto the ſixt verſe thereof. Then after he returnes to his exhortation, exhorting the Coloſſians to perſeuerance in that faith which they had receiued, The ſum of the former Lecture. and exhorting them from vaine traditions, obtruded or layd on them by the falſe teachers; letting them vnderſtand that there was nothing, except Chriſt and his Goſpell to be acknowledged or receiued by them; and that all other things without him, are but vanitie.
            Then to come briefly to our purpoſe, and this text now

read: in the laſt verſe of the chapter preceding, yee heard the Apoſtle vttered what paines he tooke, and what ſtrife he ſuffered, and all for this end; to preſent euery man without exception perfect before God, eſpecially in that great day. Now the Coloſſians to whom he writes, whom he neuer ſaw bodily, nor they him, might haue obiected againſt this his paine, labor and ſtrife which he ſuſtained. Well Paul, thou pineſt thy ſelfe; but for whom? what is that to vs? It is not for vs, thou neuer ſaweſt vs, nor we thee: ſo all thy labour, fighting and trauell, Obiection. is nothing profitable for vs. The Apoſtle in the firſt verſe meets Anſwere. with and anſwers it, I would you knew (ſaith he) what great fighting I haue for your ſakes, and not for you onely, but for your neighbours them of Laodicea: (this is a towne in Phrygia) and not for them only, but for as many (of the Gentiles) as haue not ſeene my perſon in the fleſh. There is his anſwere: it is plaine: onely hereout I ſhall gather ſome ſhort notes for our inſtruction. Then firſt I marke in the perſon of the Coloſſians, that moues the queſtion. They thought he could haue no care of them, except he had ſeene them: ſo commonly men thinke that they, who are abſent from them, and neuer ſee them, neither know them by their face (as we ſay, whom they haue not ſeene face to face) can haue no care of them, nor loue to them. This is the iudgement commonly of the world, and it is ſo indeede, for naturall men, that haue no more than naturall loue, will ſpeake thus of them, with whom they haue not been acquainted; I knew him not, what haue I to doe with them, whom I neuer ſaw nor knew? What good can ſuch men doe to me, or I to them? This is the faſhion of the worldly men. But this is all wrong as you The difference betweene the regenerate and vnregenerate. The loue of the Saints exceedes the loue of the world. ſhall ſee, and therefore marke in the anſwere of Paul, what great difference is betwixt naturall men, and renewed men: the common ſort of men, and the ſeruants of God.
            In his anſwere we learne, that they that are of God, which haue gotten that new birth aboue nature and contrarie to nature, the ſeruants of Chriſt, eſpecially ſuch as Paul was, they loue them whom they neuer ſawe; haue a care ouer them whom they neuer knew: yea they will ſtriue and fight to the death for them. For why brethren, you muſt vnderſtand, concerning them that are conioyned in the bodie of

Chriſt, one hand will not know another better, then they will know one another although they haue not ſeene one another bodily, being far diſtant in perſon and place the one from the other: becauſe it is the ſpirit of Ieſus who ioynes them together, and giues euery one a ſure knowledge of the other conioyned with Chriſt, as a member of that body. Hence commeth this liuely knowledge which one chriſtian will haue of another, whom otherwiſe he neuer ſawe in properperſon. For they haue not onely this fleſhly ſight of naturall men, and bodily eye to ſee a mans body and face before them, but they haue a ſpirituall eye, whereby they can ſee to the fartheſt nooke and corner of the world, and will ſend as it were the very ſpirit and ſoule out of the body to the vtmoſt part of the world, where they know there is any of Chriſts members. Therefore Paul ſaith 1. Cor. 5. 4. When ye are gathered together and my ſpirit, &c. Thou that haſt no care of the Saints of God, where euer they be ſcattered, thou hadſt neuer this ſpirituall and heauenly eye of Paul. Suſpect thy ſelfe; thou art but a naturall man: and if thou haue not a loue to them to embrace and fixe them as it were in thy heart; alas, it is a token that thou art not in that body of Chriſt as yet. Thirdly, in this anſwere I ſee it is requiſit that we loue them that are Saints, howbeit we neuer ſaw them, nor they vs in this world; for when the conſcience is touched with a feeling of that loue, there ariſeth The feeling of loue in our hearts. a conſolation to the ſoule. When thou feeleſt in thy ſoule that the Saints loue thee, thou maiſt be aſſured that God alſo loues thee: and therefore it hath pleaſed the Lord to leaue in regiſter the acts of the Apoſtles, containing that loue and care they had for the Saints, not onely for their owne time, but alſo for all who ſhould liue to the end of the world. For Paul he had not onely a care of the Coloſſians, but alſo of the whole gentils, his loue and care extended ſo far, that it reached out to the end of the world. If thou be a member of Chriſt, the care of Paul reacheth to thee, as one of that body. Then laſtly I note, it is ſo requiſit that we vnderſtand of this loue of the We must endeuour to make our loue knowne to the Saints. Saints to vs, whether we haue ſeene them, or they vs or not: that the man that loues vs although hee be abſent; yet he ſhould ſtriue to make his loue knowne to vs, by a regiſter and

putting of it in writing, as Paul did. He writes vp and regiſters his loue to vs. It is no ſhame to Paul to tell vs that he loues vs, if ſo be he haue the glorie of God and our conſolation before his eyes. So all comes to this in a word: it is a comfortable thing for thee to know, that the Saints of God loue thee; and that thy paſtor loues thee; and it is an argument that God loues thee, and that thou art deere to him. This for Pauls anſwere in the firſt verſe.
            To come to the ſecond verſe, and to goe forward word by word, he ſets downe the end of his care he had of them, and his ſtrife he ſuſtayned for them: the end is, that their harts might be comforted, that they might get conſolation, not in their head, Conſolation is felt in the heart. but in their heart. Conſolation is in the heart: It is not a fleeting thing in the head; it is not an imagination or phantaſie in the braine: it is not ſuperficiall, but it occupies the whole heart: it takes roote in the heart, and it ſpreads all the roots of it through all the parts of the ſame: and this is the true conſolation. Then brethren, you may perceiue by theſe words, that all men by nature are comfortles: no man by nature hath Euery man comfortles by nature. any conſolation. O comfortles miſerable creatures are we! if thou wert borne a king, thou art borne a comfortles body, and miſerable by nature: for by nature there is no conſolation to mankinde after the fall of Adam, but woe and miſerie. For as touching theſe earthly things and benefits, what ſound conſolation is in them? The light of the ſun miniſters no true conſolation to man, that hath no more but nature; nay the more bleſſings, which might miniſter of themſelues conſolation, the more curſes to thee if thou ſtand in nature: the greater honor, the greater miſery, if thou ſtand in nature onely. And againe, all theſe benefits ſhall ſerue to thy welfare if thou be in Chriſt, through faith. This preaching of the word, it miniſters conſolatiō to thy ſilly ſoule. For the end of it (as this place lets you ſee) is, to miniſter true conſolation to the comfortles. And this is the end of all the care, trauell and ſtrife that the Apoſtle The end of the goſpel and miniſtery therof is to bring conſolation vnto men. takes to miniſter comfort vnto thee. And therefore Iohn ſaith in his 1 Epiſtle chap. 1. 4. Theſe things write I vnto you, that your ioy may be full. So all that is ſpoken and written in the Scriptures, ſerues this end, that thou mayeſt haue ſound ioy in thy

heart. And thou that wilt not take conſolation at the hand of the miniſter, I denounce againſt thee though thou werſt a king, thou ſhalt get no conſolation in this world, and thou ſhalt ſee no ioy nor conſolation in the life to come.
            To come to the next word. By what meanes come they to this conſolation? by being ioyned and compacted in one, altogether as the members of a man: there is the meane to obtaine this conſolation. This leſſon is eaſie, the meane of true conſolation and comfort, of ſound ioy, tranquillity and peace of conſcience is this, a bleſſed coniunction with the members Communion with Chriſt and his members brings ſound conſolation. of Ieſus Chriſt. This is it that we call the communion of Saints, and to be ioyned in the ſocietie of the Church here in earth. And thou that wilt ſtand thy ſelfe alone, if thou cut thy ſelfe off as a rotten member, and diſdaine the ſocietie of the Saints, and runne from them, run thy way if it were to the end of the world, the curſe of God followes thee. And therefore this being the meane of this conſolation, without the which no ſaluation nor ioy can be, he that would haue that comfort, let him be ioyned with the members; and the miniſter that would comfort any, let him labour to make them members of that body of Chriſt; that the ioy of Ieſus Chriſt may flow downe from Chriſt to them.
            To come to the next word. Hee ſets downe the meane, wherby this coniunctiō is brought to paſſe, being conioyned together (ſaith he) through loue. Albeit that faith goes before by nature, yet I will follow the text as the words lie. The meane whereby thou art ioyned with the body of Chriſt, and ſtandeſt The firſt meane of the communion of Saints. Loue the band to binde vs with men, but faith with God. with that ſocietie of the Church in the earth, is loue. Wouldſt thou be coupled with the body? loue thy neighbour. One member of this naturall body will loue another: So if thou be a member of the body of Chriſt, thou muſt needes loue thy neighbour truely. And he that cannot loue, nor will not loue, he ſhall neuer be ioyned with the body; for wanting loue, no band can binde thee to Chriſt, nor his Church. A malitious euill body that cannot loue (call him as ye will a chriſtian) he is not in the body; and ſo hath no conſolation; for without the coniunction with Chriſt, there is no comfort. Therefore he that will haue comfort, let him be conioyned with the body,

and hee that would be conioyned with the bodie, let him loue the members of the bodie. Loue God firſt aboue all; and then thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. And therefore Iohn in his firſt chapter of his Epiſtle, when he had ſpoken of this coniunction, hee euer in the reſt ſpeakes of loue. For without this loue, there is no coniunction, nor ſocietie with his Church.
            The ſecond meane of this coniunction is in theſe words, The ſecond meane of our communion with the Church. 
               And in all riches of the full aſſurance of vnderstanding: by theſe words he meanes nothing els, but this faith in Ieſus, which by nature in this coniunction is formoſt, and loue followes. For (to ſpeake it ſo) faith is the maſter ſinew, that binds the members with the head, and this loue is the band which bindes vp the members among themſelues. Then to come briefly to the matter: here ye ſee the chiefe meane of this ſocietie with the Church. One faith in Ieſus Chriſt, not two, or three, or foure faiths: ſundrie faiths will not make thee a member of the bodie True faith. of Ieſus Chriſt. If thou be of another faith then this true faith, which hath this full aſſurance; then the Church will not be conioyned with thee: it will be like a braſen and firie wall to hold thee backe from that ſocietie. So that without one faith there cannot be one bodie. Therefore Paul when he hath ſpoken of one bodie, then he ſubioynes one faith; meaning that there cannot be one bodie without one faith. Marke the place Epheſ. 4. 5. All theſe bands of bloud, of conſanguinitie, will not ioyne men together, if faith ioyne them not: if thou wert all my kinne, if thou haue not one faith with me, we cannot be ioyned together. And therefore conſidering this, whatſoeuer thou bee that wouldeſt labour to conioyne a bodie with the Church, ſtriue day and night to bring that perſon to the faith of the Church. For he will neuer be conioyned with the body, that hath not this faith of the body.
            But let vs marke the words; All riches (a high word) of the full aſſurance of vnderſtanding. To begin at this, hee calles faith Faith is an vnderſtanding. The wofull ſtate of ſuch as be ignorant of the Goſpell. an vnderſtanding. Faith is not ignorance and blindnes, but it is an vnderſtanding; and thou that art altogether ignorant of God and of Ieſus Chriſt, thou haſt no more faith then a dogge. Bragge as thou wilt of it, ignorant men will begin to crake of faith, as though they knew it. Faith is an eye that

ſeeth more cleerely, then all the eyes of the world. It is a light Faith is an eye. and vnderſtanding, the eye of the ſoule whereby we ſee God, and his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour: yea faith is more then an vnderſtanding, it is a certaintie of the whole truth of God, eſpecially of the promiſes in Ieſus Chriſt. When thou art ſure that euery word of the Goſpell is true, that is the aſſurance of faith: and with this there is conioyned a heartie imbracing of the heart: for when thou art ſure of the promiſes, O how the heart wil fold about ye promiſes of God! Haue you not aſſaied it yet? Whē the heart hath aſſurance of the truth, O how it wil cleaue to it! For as it is ſaid, A true ſaying is worthie to be imbraced. Now faith is not onely this full aſſurance, but it is a riches. 
               The beleeuer moſt rich and moſt ioyfull. Ye that would be rich, take heede; faith is not a poore thing, a beggerly thing. A faithfull bodie is no begger, but he is rich. But yet more, he calles it not only riches, but he calles it all riches. So there is no riches without it: thou that haſt not faith, haſt no riches: for howbeit thy hand be full, yet if thou want faith thy hand is emptie. He that hath not faith is euer poore, and the beggerlieſt creature that is: but he that hath faith, giue him but a coate on his backe, he is rich enough, and he is the ioyfulleſt body that euer was, ioyfuller by ten thouſand times, then theſe worldlings that gruntle on this pelfe of this world. Well, well, then get faith, and thinke that without it, thou art not rich: for if thou haue an emptie bag in thy hart, thou art but a poore miſerable creature.
            Brethren, ye heard how Paul ſpeaking of this myſterie of the Goſpel, he called it the riches of God hid: now ſpeaking of faith he calles it riches alſo, and all riches. So I ſee all is riches, Ieſus is riches, all things concerning Ieſus be riches. That myſterie of him, is the riches of glorie. This faith and full perſwaſion is riches. And therefore wilt thou be rich? ſeeke to Chriſt, ſeeke to this Goſpell, ſwallow it vp, ſeeke to faith. And be not content till thou haſt got a heartfull of this faith of Ieſus Chriſt: and then I promiſe thee thou ſhalt be rich, and more ioyfull then if thou hadſt all the world, howbeit thou leaue not a peny behind thee.
            Now to come to the reſt of the words that I haue read, they tend to the declaration of that, that is ſpoken, eſpecially of the

riches of faith. Defining firſt the riches of faith, hee cals it the knowledge that was hid vp in a myſterie; and at laſt reuealed to the world, to the euerlaſting conſolation of the world. Then I ſee this faith is a relatiue to the myſterie, that is, to the Goſpel, and to ſpeake it ſo, the obiect of faith, which faith ſeeth and vnderſtandeth, is the Goſpell. Now concerning this myſterie, you heard before, it was the riches of glorie. Well, if the obiect of faith bee the riches of glorie, of neceſsitie thy faith muſt be glorious & rich. For a rich obiect, makes a rich knowledge. The Goſpel the obiect of faith. Knoweſt thou all the Sciences in the world? all is but beggerly knowledge, if thou want the knowledge of faith. Therefore thou who wouldeſt know, ſtriue to know this rich myſterie; for it ſhall giue theefull riches. Now in the words God the ſubiect of the Goſpel. following he inſiſts vpon this ſubiect of faith. It is the mysterie of God; then the ſubiect of it is God: O that is a faire ſcience that ſpeakes of God! All other ſciences that ſpeake of the creatures, it is but of dirt they ſpeake of, in reſpect of him who made them all. One will come of, and ſpeake of the earth, of fiſhes, and paint out a faire ſtorie of this King, or that King, of cornes, of lands, and that will be his ſubiect. Another will goe vpward, and ſpeake of the heauen, and ſtarres: but what is all that, in reſpect of that glorious Creator, but dirt? So this Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, is onely the eminent ſcience, that mounts The Goſpel the ſcience of ſciences. vp aboue all ſciences. And therefore this myſterie and this Goſpell that ſpeakes of this ſubiect, muſt be glorious, albeit the coate of it be but ſober and ſimple; howbeit it be preached by ſimple men, and therefore our great men thinke nothing of it. But if thou ſaw the glorie and riches that is in this Goſpell; O thou wouldeſt ſeeke it before all riches and all glorie! It would be thy ioy day & night, teach it who will. Well then, take the Lord Ieſus, who is offred to thee in this baſe clothing, as thou wouldeſt be partaker of him in glorie, when this coate ſhall be ſhaken off.
            The Apoſtle hauing made mention of God, he leaues not off ſo; but laies him out in two glorious perſonages, and ſaith, God euen the father, and of Christ. God (ſaith he) that ſtands in theſe two perſonages, glorious and equall in glorie, the Father and the Sonne. So what place would ye haue to know the Chriſt proued very God.
               
Godhead of the Lord our Sauiour, if this place will not tell you? For when hee hath ſet downe the Father to be the onely true God, he ſets down his ſone Ieſus Chriſt to be God equall with him in all things euery way. So that Ieſus thy redeemer he is ſo man, that he is God glorious for euer. I ſee againe there is no true vnderſtanding of God, but that whereby hee is knowne diſtinct in perſons. It is not enough to know that he The true knowledge of God. is one in eſſence, but if thou know him well, thou muſt know him diſtinguiſhed in three perſons, the Father, Sonne, and holy Spirit: all eternall, all equall in power, glorie, and maieſtie; onely one true and euerliuing God. If this (brethren) be the true knowledge of God, as it is indeede; O the blindnes the world hath lien long in! eſpecially the Gentiles. Plato ſeemed to haue great knowledge of God, he was called diuine Plato, but he had no knowledge in deede: for he knewe him not diſtinct in perſons. And all other knowledge is to damnation: for there was neuer a ſcience that made this plaine, but this Goſpell of Ieſus preached by the Apoſtles, and left to this day in regiſter to vs. All the ſcience of Philoſophers is meere follie, in reſpect of this ſcience of the Goſpell. The knowledge that the Iewes had of God, was but as a glimmering: for all were vnder ſhadowes and types; but in the Goſpell there is the full ſight. So that as thou ſeeſt the Sunne ſhining, whereby thou art able to diſcerne and iudge of euery obiect: ſo thou hauing this Goſpell ſhining in thy ſoule, thou ſhalt ſee diſtinctly the God of heauen in his eſſence, and ſhalt diſcerne the perſons of the Trinitie, wherein thou ſhalt finde ioy.
            O the ioy that ariſeth vpon this ſpirituall knowledge and ſight of God, as hee hath reuealed himſelfe in his word! Alwaies (brethren) marke the gloriouſnes of this Goſpell. It lets thee ſee cleerely and diſtinctly thy God, thy redeemer: if thou 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4. wilt preaſe to looke without it to ſee him, thou ſhalt be the more blinde, and the more dimme, and the further from ſeeing of him. Therefore ſtriue to get a ſight of God in his Goſpell; otherwiſe thou ſhalt not get a ſight of him to thy comfort.
            Now making mention of Chriſt, he ſubioynes a deſcription of Chriſt, In whom, ſaith he, that is, in Chriſt Ieſus, is all treaſure (weigh euery word) of wiſedome and knowledge. I cannot ſee

when euer he names Chriſt, that he can let him goe ſo, but the heart is ſo full of him, that his mouth is full of him alſo. He before called him that hope of glorie: and now naming him, hee ſaith, In whom is all treaſure of knowledge and wiſedome. Alas brethren, to ſpeake this by the way, this taſtleſſe ſpeaking of Chriſt, teſtifies that there is little of Chriſt in the heart of men How to ſpeak comfortablie and cheerefully of Christ. and women now adaies. If thy heart were filled of him in any meaſure, thou wouldeſt euer be ſpeaking of him, and ſo fully as thy heart could deuiſe. Now the Lord teach vs to ſpeake of him ſo ioyfully, as wee may euer more and more take pleaſure to ſpeake of his name, to his euerlaſting praiſe; that wee may finde what vertues be in the Lord Chriſt Ieſus, Amen.
            But to come to the words, he laies out the rich merchandiſe that is in him (take heed ye that would be merchants) and that The riches of Chriſt. that is in him, he calles wiſedome and knowledge. I will not be curious to diſtinguiſh them, except ye will call wiſedome that hid myſterie; and knowledge, this knowledge of earthly and heauenly things: all is in Chriſt, hee hath this knowledge: theſe two are diſtinguiſhed Rom. 11. 33. O the deepnes of this riches both of the wiſedome and knowledge of God! For there is no other wiſedome but in Ieſus Chriſt; for the fulnes of God is in him. Now he calles it not bare knowledge and wiſedome, but he ſaith, In whom are the treaſures of all wiſedome and knowledge. Many will haue wiſedome and knowledge, but neuer a one hath the ſtorehouſe of it, ſaue Ieſus Chriſt. Now hee ſaith not the treaſures, but all treaſures; to ſhew you that there is not a treaſure without him. Ye haue heard before of this fulnes: In him (ſaith he) this fulnes dwels. Now againe hee ſaith, In whom are all treaſures: And againe in a higher ſtile, hereafter verſ. 9. In whom dwels the fulnes of the Godhead bodily: looke what a Sauiour ye haue, all is included within the vaile and nature of man, and ſhines as it were through the vaile. Then of this I conclude, there is nothing to be ſought without him. Thou that haſt need, ſeeke nothing without Ieſus. For he that would be wiſe without Ieſus Chriſt, hee would be wiſe without God, becauſe the father is in him. So thou that wilt haue all fulnes, ſeeke it in him. Brethren, if this Ieſus that is reuealed this day, were ſought earneſtly, we would finde it by plaine experience

in our ſelues, that there was nothing lacking in him that might doe vs good; but he would miniſter vnto vs wiſedome and knowledge, and all other benefits. And I charge thee vnder the paine of thy life, that thou goe to no other, to ſeeke for ought without him. Seeke not to mans traditions, to theſe deceiuers of Gods people. May not their deceits be perceiued by you? May you not ſee that poyſon of theirs in their doctrine? Fie on that man of ſinne; fie on him that drownes all the world with his foule ſtinke of traditions. Reſt vpon this Goſpell, and ſpit at this beaſt, and this poyſon that hee offers to the world. Content thee with this Goſpell. Would to God I or thou could attaine to the thouſand part of this Goſpell. If thou wiſt what this Goſpell were, and what treaſures of wiſdome were in it, thou wouldeſt neuer let it be out of thy ſight night nor day. Thou wouldeſt ſpit at all other doctrine and tradition, that ſauoured not of this Goſpel. For in this Goſpel is light and life; but in mans tradition, thou ſhalt finde no light nor life. Darknes and damnation ſhall be the end to them which imbrace them. O damnation to thee ô man that leaues the fountaine of liuing waters, and diggeſt vp to thy ſelfe ceſternes of rotten water! Woe vnto thee that leaues the truth of the Goſpell, to follow the traditions and fantaſies of mans braine! Lord deliuer vs from that poyſonfull doctrine, and they that are in the chaines of it, the Lord deliuer them out of the ſame, and giue them this full riches of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. To whom with the Father, and the holie Spirit, one euerlaſting God be praiſe for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE Epiſtle of PAVL to the Coloſsians.
            
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 4, 5, 6, 7.
               
                  4 And this I ſay, leaſt any man ſhould beguile you with entiſing words:
                  
                  5 For though I be abſent in the fleſh, yet am I with you in the ſpirit, reioycing and beholding your order, and your ſtedfaſt faith in Chriſt.
                  
                  6 As ye haue therefore receiued Chriſt Ieſus the Lord, ſo walke in him,
                  
                  7 Rooted and built in him, and ſtabliſhed in the faith, as ye haue been taught, abounding therein with thankeſgiuing.
                  
               
            
            
               AFter (brethren) that the Apoſtle hath ſpoken at large of his owne perſon, to purchaſe authoritie to his doctrine and exhortation: now in the firſt verſe which I haue read, hee returnes to the exhortation begun in the firſt chapter; taking the occaſion of the words going before. For there the Apoſtle ſhewed that in Ieſus Chriſt were all treaſures of wiſedome and Coherence. vnderſtanding hid. Vpon this hee concludes in this verſe, ſeeing in him are hid all treaſures of wiſedome and knowledge, therfore be not wiſe without him: ſeeke not wiſdome without him. There are falſe teachers entred in that make you thinke there is wiſedome without him; but I ſay vnto you, if you would not be deceiued, ſeeke no wiſedome without him: for in him is the treaſure of all wiſedome and knowledge. There is the force of the argument briefly. Now marke the order of the Apoſtle.

Before hee exhorted them that they ſhould not be deceiued by the inticing of mens words and doctrine, and hee laies out the reaſon taken from the treaſure and riches of wiſdome and knowledge that is in Chriſt. So the Apoſtle to the Hebrues 13. 8. being about to exhort them, that they ſhould not be carried about with ſundrie and ſtrange doctrine; hee laies downe this ground; Chriſt is today and yesterday &c. therfore be not carried away from him. As if hee would ſay, there was neuer ſaluation without him, from the beginning of the world; and there ſhall be no ſaluation without him to the end thereof: therefore ſticke to him. This order teacheth vs this leſſon: that after wee haue let men ſee what is in Chriſt, after we haue opened as it were, and laid abroad before the eyes of the world, all that ſtore of wiſedome and knowledge that is in him: then it is time to exhort men to leaue all their doctrine and vanitie, and inticing words of men; and to ſticke by this Chriſt, in whom there is ſuch wiſedome and knowledge. For brethren, you muſt vnderſtand; men if they ſee not true wiſedome, they will drinke in vanitie: the heart muſt be filled with The heart muſt be filled vvith ſomething. ſomething, if thou ſee not the truth, thou muſt drinke in lyes. And more, when thou haſt begun to receiue the truth (as theſe Coloſsians did) except that truth be opened and laid before thy eyes as it were to be ſeene what is in it, and what is the meaning and true ſenſe of the ſame: except this Goſpell (I ſay) be continually taught; O vaine man, thou wilt goe to the puddle of mens fancies; thou wilt fall againe to mens doctrine, The preaching of the Goſpell muſt be cō
                  tinued. traditions and vanitie; thou wilt be a Papiſt, yea and an Atheiſt to. And therefore there is nothing more needfull then this, that theſe riches of Chriſt be laid out before our eyes, and euer tolde to vs, that in Chriſt is all wiſdome and knowledge. I aske, what is the cauſe that this miſerable world, all men, and all nations for the moſt part be ſo drunke in mens dreames? (what is the Popes doctrine but dreames and poyſon? drinke it in, thou ſhalt be poyſoned with it) I tell thee, becauſe theſe falſe deceiuers cloſe vp the Goſpell, and ſwaddle vp Chriſt in the ſwaddle bands, this is the cauſe that theſe poore ſoules ſee no better; and therefore they are led to damnation blindfolded. O miſerable bodies! theſe foule ſpirits ſend out their

poyſon to dampne the world withall, as alas the greateſt part of Europe this day can tell.
            But to ſticke to the words: The Apoſtle ſaith, I ſpeake this, leaſt any man ſhould beguile you with inticing words. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                are ſet out in faire flattring talke. Then ye ſee here, he oppoſeth to all the treaſures of Chriſt inticing words: to wiſedome he oppoſeth flattring words. There is no wiſedome without Chriſt, all is plaine ſophiſtrie, as it is called in the Schooles. Then in a word, all wiſdome being in Chriſt, if thou yt wilt be wiſe without him, ſeeke thy wiſedome where thou wilt, runne to Rome, runne here and there, to the Ieſuites to get wiſedome out of them; thou ſhalt be filled with dreames, thou ſhalt finde nothing but ſophiſtrie; thou ſhalt not meete with wiſedome. All that thou ſhalt ſee and finde, ſhall be but inticing words. And what wilt thou winne by this? He ſaith, that ye be not deceiued, and tooke in a grin. Thou ſhalt be taken in a grin as a beaſt, if thou ſeeke ought without him. Alas brethren, when I remember Antichriſt and his wofully deceiue ſoules this miſerable world, it is a pitie to ſee how it is abuſed by theſe traitors and deceiuers of mens ſoules. O that damnation and iudgement that ſhall fall on that curſed kingdome of Antichriſt! For I aſſure you, this world for the greateſt part are taken in the grins by Antichriſt; and ſo reſerued to iudgement. And the more miſerable are they, that are in the grin of Antichriſt, that they thinke that they are in ſweete bands; for the end ſhall let ye ſee how bitter the bands were: let them now be to thee as ſweete as they will, thou ſhalt finde in the end that of all bands in this world, they are the worſt.
            To goe forward. He hath vttered a great care to the Coloſſians, whom hee neuer ſaw nor knew. Therefore they might haue ſaid; what care is this thou haſt of vs? thou neuer ſawſt vs, nor we thee. He meetes with this in the next words: O ye Coloſſians (ſaith he) though I be abſent from you in the fleſh, yet am I with you in the ſpirit. Then ye ſee the Saints the true members of Chriſt, they haue a ſight and knowledge of others, that the world knowes not of. This world and naturall men, that haue Iudgement. and loue of the world concerning other men. not the ſpirit of Ieſus, thinke that none can reach out to the worlds end, and can haue knowledge of another, nor any care ouer him if he ſee him not with his bodily eye; but al is vaine.

For a ſpirituall man will ſend his ſoule to the end of the world, and vpon this hee will vtter his care vnto him by his exhortation. And this is a token of a greater thing, euen of this ioyning of the godly together, that one day they ſhalbe together ſoule and bodie. If thou haue a heart and care with the Church of God, thou ſhalt raigne with her in heauen for euer. And in deede if thou haue not this, it is a venture if euer thou raigne with her.
            Now when he hath ſet downe this ſpirituall preſence with them, he ſubioynes the effect of it, reioycing (ſaith he) there is the effect of that ſpirituall preſence, his ſoule was with them, Spirituall preſence of the faithfull one with another. and with ioy hee reioyced to ſee them. So this preſence ſpiritual, whē the heart of the faithfull is with others, it is no fantacie, as a vaine head will thinke: but I ſay thou hadſt neuer ſuch ioy, as the faithfull will haue with others in a ſpirituall preſence. Thou neuer kneweſt this ioy, that haſt not this ſpiritual preſence. And brethren, it is euen with the Church, as it is with Chriſt, 1. Pet. 1. 8. he ſaith, you haue not ſeene Chriſt with your eyes, yet beleeuing in him who is farre from vs in his bodily preſence, and louing him, howbeit he be away, ye reioyce with a ioy that is vnſpeakable and glorious. It is euen ſo with the Church, howbeit wee ſee not the members of Chriſt in the bodie; yet if we haue the ſpirituall eye, we ſhall ſee them and they vs, and ſhall haue this ſpirituall ioy, ſpoken of in this place. And this ſame ioy that is in this life, with the Saints, is a ſure argument of a paſsing ioy, that wee ſhall haue with the Church, when we are gathered to our head Ieſus Chriſt, when with the eye of the bodie we ſhall ſee thoſe glorified bodies. O vaine bodie! thou neuer wiſt what ioy, glorie, and beautie meaneth, if thou attaine not to this, to be a member of Ieſus Chriſt, and to haue a ſpirituall preſence with others.
            Now followes what matter of ioy he heard in them. Beholding (ſaith he) your order: then the ſtedfastnes of your faith. Hee ſaw this in ſpirit, and not with the eye of the bodie. Brethren, certainly the thing that man walkes in, if it be in the ioy of the heart, it muſt be pleaſant; it muſt be a pleaſant ſight, that will make a man to reioyce. Ye ſee when a man ſees a thing that is not pleaſant, he wil not reioyce. So that except the man

of God ſee that that is pleaſant, he will not, neither can he reioyce in heart. Now what is more beautifull then the ſpouſe of Ieſus, ſauing the Lord himſelfe, who is the bridegroome? There is nothing more beautifull to the ſpirituall eye, then the Church of Chriſt; howſoeuer ſhe ſeemes to be vile in this world.
            The firſt part of this beautie, is Order, that is, a well ordered The beautie of the Church. life, holines of manners, according to the rule of the Goſpell: ſo holines of life is the order he ſaw among them: and thou ſhalt neuer ſee a face ſo pleaſant as holines is, when it is vttered by a well ordred life. That is the faireſt beautie that a man or woman can haue: if thou want this, waſh and decke thy ſelfe as well as thou canſt, thou art no better then dirt and dung, that is troden vnder feete. If a man looke vpon thee with a ſpirituall eye, if thou wert a Queene, pamper thy ſelfe vp as thou wilt, want thou holines, thou art but dirt and filthie dung, for all thy outward brauerie of attire.
            The ſecond thing that made him to reioyce with them in Faith. ſpirit, it was deeper then the firſt: Holines is outward: therefore he goes further downe, and in through their life he looks and ſees the faith that lay in the heart: that is to ſay, of the outward behauiour, he gathers more of their inward faith, from the which holines proceedeth. For certaine it is, that thou canſt not be holy, if thou haue not a good action in thy hand; nor an holy word in thy mouth, if faith be not in thy heart. So when a man hath a ſpirituall eye, hee will preſſe into the heart, and not ſtand vpon outward appearances. O then how great is the beautie of faith! Thy outward actions are nothing without this faith in thy heart; and it is a thing moſt pleaſant to God, when hee ſeeth faith in thy heart, and that thou beleeueſt in Ieſus. He calles it not ſimply faith, but hee calles it that ſolidnes, that ſtedfaſtnes of faith in Ieſus Chriſt. Well, thou that wouldeſt haue faith, thou muſt haue a ſolide faith: if thou be wagging and wauering, & nodding here and there; ſo that when thou art in Scotland, thou art of the religion there profeſſed; when thou art in France & Germany, of Trauellers into Spaine and Italy. the religions profeſſed there; and when thou art in Spaine, Italy and Rome, thou art of their religion: Is that thy faith?

That faith of thine ſhall doe thee no good, thou art but a vaine bodie, there is no ſtedfaſtneſſe in thee; and except there bee ſtedfaſtneſſe of faith in thy heart, thou ſhalt neuer be a holy liuer. Many will profeſſe at this day, I haue faith in Chriſt Ieſus, I beleeue: but to come to their life, there is no ſuch thing: and this is becauſe there is no ſound faith in their heart; but their faith is onely in the tip of their tongue. For thou that leadeſt a life contrary to faith, thou haſt no faith at al. For the Apoſtle ſeeing a godly life in theſe Coloſsians, hee gathers that there was a ſolide faith in them. Then in a word, there is the matter of ioy, that the godly haue, when they ſee firſt that outward How wee may truly ioy in our brethren, when vve ſee them ſtand faſt in faith, & liue godly and righteouſly. beautie of holines and godlines of conuerſation in thee or in any man; and then that ſtedfaſt faith from whence it ſprings, there is matter of ioy. When wee ſee a Church liue godly, and then haue faith ſtedfaſt in Chriſt, here the ioy of the heart will ariſe: and by the contrary, there cannot be a greater diſpleaſure, then to ſee a Church out of order, liuing a life directly contrary to their profeſion; there is the diſpleaſure and grief of the faithfull.
            And ſo to come to our ſelues, if we would be pleaſant to others that neuer ſaw vs, let vs liue after this order, and ſeeke to haue faith in Ieſus: otherwiſe be ſure, they that neuer ſawe thee, will be witneſſes againſt thee to thy iuſt damnation, that thou profeſſeſt one way, and haſt liued cleane contrary to thy profeſſion.
            In the next verſes, hee returnes to his exhortation, and gathers his concluſion. Therefore (ſaith the Apoſtle) as ye haue receiued Chriſt Ieſus the Lord, and begun exceeding well both in life and faith; ſo walke in him, perſeuere in him: there is the exhortation. Note heere firſt, the thing that ſhould moue a Church, or any perſon to perſeuerance. What ſhould moue thee to hold on to the end? Haſt thou begun in holines of life and faith in the heart? The beginning ſhould moue thee to goe forward to the end. A good beginning would haue a good end: otherwiſe it had been better thou hadſt neuer begun. I ſhall giue thee a faithfull counſell, either minde neuer to be a Chriſtian man or woman, or elſe beginning once, and taking that name vpon thee, hold on, perſeuere for euer. For if thou Perſeuerance.
               
perſeuere not, thy damnation ſhall be double, and thou ſhalt curſe the day that euer thou heardſt of Ieſus: ſo Ieſus ſhall be either ſaluation to thee or damnation. Peter ſaith in his ſecond Epiſtle chap. 2. 21. It had been better for them, not to haue knowne the way of righteouſnes, thē after they haue knowne it, to turne from the holy commaundement giuen vnto them. It had been better for thee neuer to haue receiued this word and doctrine of the Goſpell, then to haue fallen backe from this holy doctrine.
            Then I note the manner of perſeuering: Euen as thou haſt receiued him walke in him. As if he would ſay, ye haue receiued him in ſimplicitie of heart, ye haue receiued the Goſpell without the traditions of men, perſeuere in the ſame manner, and put not to it ſo much as one tradition of any man. The Lord Traditions Ieſus cannot abide that the inuention of mans braine ſhould be foyſted into his Goſpell. So either keepe the Goſpell in the owne ſimplicitie, and ſpit out the dreames and traditions of men (which they labour to put to it, as though it were not ſufficient;) or elſe neuer know it, let it goe by thee, and then woe to thee euermore. Keepe it in it owne ſimplicitie: for if thou mingle of thy inuentions with it, thou ſhalt loſe the efficacie and force of the Goſpell. Imbrace once Papiſtrie, I aſſure thee thou haſt fallen from Chriſt: thou haſt but fancied to thy ſelfe the name of a Chriſtian. Therefore either lay the Goſpell from thee, and take thee to traditions, or elſe keepe it in it owne ſimplicitie.
            Then thirdly I ſee what faith is. Faith is nothing els but the VVhat faith is, and perſeuerance. receiuing of Chriſt, not with the hand, but with the hart. He is giuen thee; thou receiueſt nothing but that that is offered. And what is preſeuerance? A walking, and going forward in Chriſt. Wouldeſt thou perſeuere? Thou muſt not ſit downe, thou muſt not ſtand ſtill, but thou muſt goe forward in him, and make progreſſe: at the leaſt thou muſt ſtriue to goe on, vnto the time thou meete with him. A bodie that ſits downe ſhall neuer meere with him: thou muſt therefore goe on thy way, and be on thy iourney, or elſe thou ſhalt loſe him. If thou make not progreſſe, thou ſhalt goe backward. Therefore run,

hauing thy eye vpon the goale, and count not that thou haſt done, till thou get the goale, which ſhall be in the day of the reſurrection.
            In the next verſe when hee hath exhorted them to perſeuerance, hee lets them ſee how they ſhall come by this perſcuerance. Marke the way, if thou perſeuere in him: Thou muſt be well knit vp and faſt ioyned with him; or elſe thou canſt neuer goe on foote for foote with him. This coniunction is ſet downe in two borrowed words. The firſt is rooted in him: no, neuer tree tooke ſuch roote in the earth, as thou muſt take in Chriſt, if thou goe with him. And therefore he borrowed this word from a tree, and if thou be rooted in Ieſus, that ſappe of life muſt runne from that roote, and make thee to grow. The ſecond word is, as wee would goe forward with him, wee muſt be grounded vpon him, as a building builded vpon a foundation. Nay, there was neuer building ſo builded and ſetled, as thou muſt be in Chriſt, if euer thou wilt perſeuere, or elſe the leaſt blaſt of winde ſhall blow thee away. As the Lord in the Goſpell in the ſimilitude of the houſe, builded vpon the ſea ſand doth declare, Matth. 7. 26. 27. Then marke: wee muſt haue a ſtreight coniunction with Chriſt, if we wil goe forward with him. Therefore our care ſhould be euer to ſee, that wee take roote further and further in Chriſt, and to ſee that ſtedfaſt foundation laide vp vnder our hearts, and that wee grow euery day more and more on him. Well is the man that can enter into this count with himſelfe. Then learne thy leſſon at the tree, when thou ſeeſt it rooted in the earth: ſay, O Lord let my heart be builded on thee, and as the building riſeth, ſo raiſe thou 
               A prayer. 
               vp my heart on thee. And the Lord ſhall make thee a fairer building then all the buildings in the world. Then that which he hath ſpoken in borrowed ſpeeches, he ſpeakes it plainly, and he ſaith, establiſhed in faith. As if hee would ſay, it is nothing that I meane, but your ſtabliſhing in faith. O the vnſtabilitie of man without faith! O vaine man that hath not faith! If thou finde any ſtabilitie in faith, thou ſhalt ſay; O my heart where haſt thou been ſtragling? there is no anchor that can faſten or ſtabliſh thine heart, but faith and hope in Ieſus

Chriſt. When by this anchor thou art anchored on him, then thou ſhalt ſtand ſo faſt, that no winde nor waue of the ſea ſhall be able to remoue thee. And therefore except thou wouldeſt goe loſe thy ſelfe, ſeeke to get thy heart anchored on Ieſus, who is only able to make it faſt. A Papiſts heart hath no ſtedfaſtnes nor ſtabilitie, becauſe it is grounded on the wrong place; it is founded vpon Antichriſt.
            Now to the eſtabliſhing of thy heart, he requires two properties. To ſtabliſh thine heart in the faith note two things. The firſt is, in the faith that ye haue been instructed into, that is by the Goſpell of Chriſt. Then (brethren) there is nothing will ſtabliſh thy heart, but that faith that is taught out of the Goſpell. If thou get not thy faith out of this Goſpell, the Scripture of God, and that onely without paring or adding of mens dreames, thou ſhalt neuer get it. The Lord ſhall iuſtifie this one day; ſeeke it where thou wilt, thou ſhalt not find it without the Goſpel. Seeke it in the Councels of the Fathers; ſeeke it among the Popes Clergie; thou ſhalt not finde it amongſt them; thou ſhalt euer be the further from it. For the Apoſtle ſtreightens them ſore: he ſees lownes creeping in vnder the cloake of Chriſt, and ſtealing in traditions of mens wiſedome: Therefore he warnes them, and ſaith, I charge you that ye ſeeke ſaith only out of this Goſpell. And this day alſo, I charge all fleſh from Kings to beggers, to ſeeke faith onely out of this Goſpell; and ſpit at the vile inuentions of men: or elſe thou ſhalt neuer ſee the face of God, nor the ioyes of that life in him. Therefore ſticke by this Goſpell, and ſuffer not thy ſelfe to be ſeuered from it: yea rather ſuffer thy skinne be pulled off thee as the Martyrs did, before thou ſhouldeſt be parted from the Goſpell.
            The ſecond propertie that is required to the eſtabliſhing of thy heart in faith, is; Thy faith must abound, abounding (ſaith he) with thankeſgiuing. It muſt abound, it muſt grow aboundantly; it muſt not begin onely, but it muſt grow degree by degree. For (brethren) O how voide is the heart of man of grace, and ful of vanitie. It wil not be a degree of grace yt will fill thy heart, nor two, nor three, &c. but there muſt be aboundance. Faith muſt abound and grow, ſo long as thou abideſt in this world: thy heart muſt euer be filling. But alas thou art

euer filling thy bodie, and forgets thy heart. O but thou muſt be more carefull to fill thy heart, then thy bodie! Crie therefore euer to haue thy heart filled with faith in Ieſus: and ſay, Lord, as thou filleſt my bodie, ſo fill my heart alſo. For thy body being Pray that thy heart may be filled with faith. filled ſhall periſh: but if thy ſoule be filled with the faith of Ieſus, thou ſhalt liue for euer and euer. And therefore ſeeke this aboundance, and be not content with one degree of grace or two, or ſixe or ſeauen: for there is no facietie till thou get that ſight of the countenance of Ieſus in the heauen, as he is.
            Now he ioynes with this aboundance, thankeſgiuing: as if he would ſay, as thou findeſt thy faith grow, euer thanke him that giues thee it. For theſe two are inſeparably coupled together; ſo that if you take thankes away, there will be no abounding of faith. Thou that canſt not thanke God, thou haſt no faith: thou that canſt not perſeuere in thankſgiuing, thou groweſt not in faith. For thankſgiuing is an vnſeparable companion of faith. Groweſt thou in thankſgiuing? thou groweſt in faith: True ſignes of faith. for it is a plaine argument of the growth of faith in thee. Haſt thou a pleaſure to pray, and to aske, and to thanke God? thou canſt not get a ſurer token of the aboundance of faith then that. Then thou maiſt reioyce and ſay, Praiſed be God, my faith growes, and I ſhall get daily a cleerer ſight of the face of Chriſt, and ſo ſhall be made conformable to my Sauiour the Lord Ieſus. Now the Lord worke this grace and earneſtnes in our hearts, for this his Chriſts ſake. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be praiſe for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 8. 9. 10.
               
                  8 Beware leaſt there be any man that ſpoyles you through Philoſophie, and vaine deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Chriſt:
                  
                  9 For in him dwelleth all the fulnes of the Godhead bodily.
                  
                  10 Andye are compleate in him which is the head of all principalitie and power.
                  
               
            
            
               THe Apoſtle (brethren) hauing ſet downe his doctrine, as ye heard in the firſt chapter: he addes hereunto an exhortation and admonition. He hath exhorted to perſeuerance in faith, now hee admoniſheth to beware of falſe teachers and of falſe doctrine. He began his exhortation in the firſt chapter: then hauing ſpoken ſomething of himſelf, partly in the firſt, partly in the ſecond; he returnes and giues this admonition to beware of falſe teachers. Then after he returnes to the exhortation again, calling vpon them to be conſtant in the doctrine once receiued. Now in the text that wee haue read this day, he returnes to the admonition, admoniſhing them to beware of falſe teachers. Then briefly to come to the words: Beware (ſaith he) leaſt there be any man that ſpoyles you. The word in the originall language ſignifies, Let no man 
                  The ſenſe of the word ſpoiles. carrie you away as a pray. The word is borrowed from robbers and theeues that come vpon a folde of ſheepe, and carrie away

the ſheepe as a pray. Euen ſo falſe teachers are naught elſe but robbers, brigands, theeues that come vpon the ſheepfold of the Lord Ieſus, and carrie away his ſheepe as a pray. The manner how they doe this; is not by ſtrong hand or by violence, but it is by Philoſophie, by deceiuing of the ſheepe and ſnaring of them: firſt by ſophiſtrie, and then when they haue ſnared them, and trapped them, they binde them, and ſo take them on their ſhoulders, and they goe on willingly being deceiued. Therefore, wouldeſt thou not be a pray to a falſe teacher? keep thee from his deceit, keepe thee from the Papiſts traditions, mens Philoſophie. For all their religion is meere peltrie. I ſay to thee their Philoſophie, that is their deceit, and vanitie in doctrine, The philoſophie of the enemies of the Church more to be feared then their violence or power. is more to be feared then their violence and power, becauſe by it onely they get their pray: if thou keepe thee from their deceit, they ſhall not bee able to take thee as a pray. As for their violence, if they beguile thee not, it ſhall neuer ſeuer thee from the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Yet to inſiſt vpon this; hee calles it Philoſophie. A faire name to be called wiſedome, but hee giues it as foule a name afterward, when he names it vaine deceit, that is, vanitie that deceiues: there is no ſoliditie in all their doctrine. Search it who will? Indeede it is true, the wiſedome of man ſo long as it is within the bounds of things that are earthly and worldly, things naturall, things concerning policie; it will haue ſome ſoliditie: but ſo ſoone as the head of a man, albeit neuer ſo ingenious and learned, reacheth without the bounds of earthly and naturall things, & begins to climbe vp to heauen, and to ſeeke out God and his worſhip; there the head of man vaniſheth and becomes fooliſhnes. O how great diſtance is there betwixt the wiſedome of God and man! Therefore Paul to the Romanes chap. 1. 21. ſpeaking of the wiſe Philoſophers ſeeing to be wiſe, ſaith, they became ſtarke fooles. Diuine Plato, a very foole in the knowledge and worſhip of God, and all the reſt fooles concerning God.
            Yet (brethren) he ſaith: This wiſedome of theirs is deceiuing. Although it be vaine, notwithſtanding it is effectuall to beguile thee, becauſe it will ſeeme to be wiſedome, and it is dyed with the colour of wiſedome: ſo that if thou wilt looke on it at the firſt face, it wil ſeeme wiſedome: for outwardly it hath a

fairer ſhew, then the greateſt wiſdome of God. So I note here, alas how lightly, and with how light a thing is a bodie deceiued? Follie will ſeeme wiſedome, and vanitie will ſeeme ſtedfaſtnes vnto him. There is none borne otherwiſe, if he haue no more then his natural birth. So there muſt be a deeper ground of this matter. What can be the cauſe that vanitie and follie can ſo ſoone deceiue a man? Alas, if the cauſe were not in thee, thou couldeſt not ſo ſoone be deceiued. Thou art borne with a vaine hart, and thou drinkeſt it vp as naturally as ſand doth water. If thou hadſt not this nature, and this vaine heart, none would be able to beguile thee. When I conſider this (O fie vpon the deceit of the world) I wonder not to ſee millions of Papiſts, Poperie is a naturall religion. Kings and nations, to be ſo blinded this day, at the light of the Goſpell: for that is the naturall diſpoſition of all men: but rather I wonder to ſee one ſilly body, to haue that change, that he can drinke in the truth of God. And if thou haue it thy ſelfe, wonder at it, and giue him thanks that hath ſhewed ſuch grace and mercie on thee.
            To go forward. In the ſecond word, when he hath ſet down this vaine deceit, he ſpecifies it more particularly, and ſaith: Through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not according to Chriſt. I aske the queſtion, what thinkeſt thou by the vaineſt doctrine that euer was taught? I anſwere out of this place of the Apoſtle, when hee hath ſaid Traditions of men the vaineſt deceit in the world. vaine deceit, hee expounds it mens traditions: ſo the vaineſt doctrine in the world is mens traditions. If thou wouldeſt be vaine, all the fables of the Poets be not ſo vaine, or will not make thee ſo vaine, as the vaine traditions of the Papiſts, called their vnwritten verities. O vaine Papiſt! I giue thee the ſoueraigntie of the vaineſt creature that euer ſtepped vpon the ground.
            In the words following he declares it yet more particularly, according to the rudiments of the world. This is one ſort of mens traditions. In this chapter, ye ſhall ſee two ſorts of mens traditions, one that neuer was knowne, ſuch as the holy Ghoſt Two kinds of traditions here ſpecified. neuer gaue, nor was ordained to be preached, as the inuocation vpon Angels, or Saints; Satisfactions; Purgatorie; ſuch as God neuer knew. Another ſort called the Rudiments of

the world, or the elements of the world, that is, the elements and ſhadowes of the law ceremoniall that God gaue to his people; which hee willed ſhould be aboliſhed, when the truth it ſelfe which they ſhadowed ſhould come; I meane the Meſſias: whē he came into the world, all theſe ceremonies ceaſed. Learne heere that euen thoſe ceremonies that were giuen by God to be obſerued, before Chriſt came into the world; now when Chriſt is come, are to be counted the doctrine and traditions of men. And now if God will not know theſe ceremonies, which he himſelfe gaue; O vaine Papiſt! will he acknowledge thee and thy dreames, and the reſt of that peltrie? No, in that great day thou ſhalt finde the Lord ſhall ſay; I know neither thee nor thy doctrine.
            In the laſt of theſe words oppoſing to mens traditions, and ſpecially to the ceremonies of ye Iewes, he ſaith, not after Chriſt; that is, that Chriſt and his Goſpell hath not to doe with them. Then wouldeſt thou haue two oppoſite things, that will not ſtand together, where wilt thou ſeeke them? Thou thinkeſt water and fire, a wolfe and a lambe be moſt contrarie. No; I muſt tell thee, what is more contrarie, yea that it will neuer be glewed together: the ſincere word of the Goſpell, the written word of the Scriptures, and their vnwritten verities. Let the Papiſts endeuour as they will to glew and to ſoder them together, they ſhall neuer agree together. Heauen and hell ſhall bee as ſoone put together, as thou ſhalt put them together. And looke how ſoone thou putteſt to a part of mens traditions to the Goſpell, ſo ſoone thou putteſt to a peece of ſower leauen to ſweete; and ſo all is made ſower to thee. So thou haſt no ſweete bread in the Goſpell. Put me in a tradition to Ieſus Chriſt, paint him out in as good intention as thou canſt, I ſay in mans tradition Ieſus Chriſt is nothing but a maine Idol, and thou art an Idolater, and thy death ſhall be with Idolaters.
            When he hath giuen them the admonition, that they ſhould beware of falſe teachers, & their doctrine, whereby they were led away captiue as a pray to perdition; he ſubioynes a good reaſon in the next verſe, wherefore they ſhould not feede vpon vanitie: For in Christ (ſaith he) dwels all the fulnes of the Godhead
               
               bodily. As if hee would ſay; would ye be filled? And certainly The heart deſires to be filled with ſomething. the harts of mē naturally craue to be filled, either with one knowledge of God or other: yea and ere it will want a filling, it wilinuent a God to it ſelfe. Nature tels this. So would ye be filled, ſaith he? Leaue not the full plenitude that is in Ieſus Chriſt, and runne to puddles that will turne to poyſon in the end. Then before I come to the words in particular, marke this. There is ſuch a fulnes in Chriſt, that thou needeſt not to be emptie, or to ſeeke to be filled without him, with any thing in this world. Thou art bound to ſeeke out of this plenitude to be filled, and not elſewhere. That fulnes in him is offered to thee, and if thou ſeeke without him to be filled, his fulnes ſhall make thy damnation double. Remember I tell thee, the fuller he is of grace and glorie, if thou get not a ſhare of it, the greater ſhall be thy damnation in that day: either ſhalt thou get grace; or elſe his fulnes ſhall aggrauate thy iudgement.
            
               In whom (ſaith he) dwels the fulnes of the Godhead bodily. Then what is in him? Firſt not onely grace (as we ſay) by participation, as it is in vs; but in Ieſus is the God of grace himſelfe. The deitie, the Godhead, Gods owne eſſence, and nature is in Ieſus Chriſt. He ſaith not ſimply, the Godhead is in him, but hee ſaith, the fulnes of it; not a part of it: ſo that one part is here, and another there; one part in him, and another part without him: but hee ſaith, the fulnes of the Godhead is in Ioh. 14. him. He is full of God, the perfect God is in him; yea the Godhead of the Father is within him. The full Godhead is in him, in ſubſtance, nature, and eſſence. Hee ſaith not ſimply (looke euery word) that the fulnes of the Godhead is in him, but hee All the fulnes of the Godhead is in Chriſt. ſaith, all the fulnes is in him: as if hee would ſay, The fulnes of the Godhead in euery ſort and manner of way is in him. The fulnes not in wiſedome onely, in power onely, in iuſtice only, in mercie only; but the fulnes in all theſe together, and euery propertie of the Godhead is in him. In a word, the whole glorie and maieſtie of God is in him. And not this onely, but hee ſaith, it dwels in him. God is not in Ieſus, ſimply to ſpeake it ſo, in him today, and tomorrow out of him, but he abides in him euerlaſtingly. He ſhall neuer leaue him. Then he ſaith, he dwels in him. How? not after a common manner, but bodily, that is

to ſay, eſſentially. So that the very ſubſtance of the Godhead in Ieſus Chriſt, is become corporall in the perſon of the ſonne: The word was made fleſh, Ioh. 1. 14. The very eſſence of God is become incarnate, as it were: a marueilous coniunction there is of two natures in Chriſt. For that the nature of man in Ieſus Chriſt is conioyned with the nature of the Godhead; and the two natures are become one perſon, to wit, the perſon of God is become one, ioyned with the nature of man. No creature hath this prerogatiue, only Ieſus hath it: and ſo in this reſpect it is ſaid, the Godhead dwels bodily in him. This is the meaning of the words. This is the third time that he hath ſpoken of his fulnes. Note.In the firſt chapter verſ. 19. he ſaith, In him dwels all fulnes, and then in this ſecond chapter verſ. 3. In him are hid all the treaſures of wiſedome and knowledge. Where ye ſee in his ſecond ſpeaking, hee ſpeakes more fully then he did in the firſt. Now laſtly in the third roome hee ſaith, In him dwels dwels all the fulnes of the Godhead bodily; there is a more full ſpeaking then before. So by his example (wee that cannot ſpeake as the Apoſtles and Saints of God did) wee ſhould learne how to ſpeake of God. Paul the more he inſiſts in ſpeaking of Chriſt, and his fulnes; the more his heart aboundeth, and the more How to ſpeake of Chriſt with grace. his mouth is filled with words to his praiſe, degree by degree. So the mans heart being filled with Ieſus, his mouth is filled: & a full mouth ſpeaking of Chriſt, wil fill the harts of the hearers. Then brethren learne: the more yt one ſpeakes of the fulnes of Chriſt and of his glorie, the more & more ſhall he finde his hart abound, & his mouth filled. And it is impoſſible if thy heart be full of him, but thy mouth muſt be full, and thou wilt ſpeake of him with a full mouth, and not lightly a word and away. And then who wots, but the Lord will make that fulnes to fill ſome of the hearts of the hearers? Bleſſed is that heart that can get any part of that fulnes of Ieſus: for thy heart was neuer ſtabliſhed with grace that neuer got no part of the fulnes of Ieſus.
            All this ſpeaking tels thee Chriſt is no winde, nor vanitie. If thou hadſt no other thing to know ſtedfaſtnes by, this ſame ſpeaking of Paul tels thee that all ſoliditie and fulnes is in Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore when thou readeſt this, marke it, and ſay:

I ſee here a fulnes: Alas, that there ſhould be ſuch fulnes in Chriſt, and I hauing ſo ſmall part of it. Lord let me finde this fulnes in ſome meaſure. Ceaſe not while thou finde it, for it ſtands thee vpon life and life, and the heart that is not filled with Chriſt here in ſome meaſure, ſhall neuer be filled with his preſence and ioyes in heauen hereafter. And therefore thou that wouldeſt haue that onely fulnes, which ſhall be in heauen, by the ſweete preſence of Ieſus there, where thou ſhalt ſee him, as hee is in our nature, full of glorie and maieſtie; which ſight ſhall make thee reioyce exceedingly: looke as thou wouldſt haue ioy for euermore, that thou be filled with Ieſus here on earth in ſome meaſure, otherwaies away with thee, thou art a caſt away, and thy end ſhall be in euerlaſting woe, woe vpon woe, and euer in woe. So then you may ſee all the glorie in heauen is in Ieſus Chriſt; there is not a iot of glorie out of him, but all is in him, that is, in thy Sauiour. Wouldeſt thou haue a Sauiour? where wouldeſt thou get one if thou miſſe this Sauiour? See the honour of thy nature in him. All the glorie of heauen ſhines through the vaile of thy nature in him: thy nature is the very vaile, that hangs about that glorious Chriſt God manifested in our fleſh maieſtie, that light that hath no acceſſe, and it ſhines to thee through the vaile. I ſpeake this, for this cauſe, that thou preſſe not to ſeeke heauen, nor no ioy, nor glorie therein, but in this Lord Ieſus Chriſt. No, looke not here nor there, but directly ſet thine eye vpon him, that ſits at the right hand of the Father. For in him is all the glorie of the Father, and looke that thou imagine not to ſee any glorie, but that that is in thy head. Where is thine heauen? Ieſus is thine heauen. All thy heauen here, and hence is as it were included in him. Seeke it where thou wilt, thou ſhalt finde no heauen without Chriſt.
            Now to come to the next verſe, the Coloſſians might haue ſaid: What is that to vs, that thou haſt told vs of the great fulnes that is in him? he is full, but we are emptie: what vantage haue wee by it? Euen as if one would tell of a glorious King: another will anſwere, what is that to me? The Apoſtle meetes with this obiection, and ſaith, In whom ye are complete, who is the head of all principalitie and power. As if he would ſay: O Coloſſians, in him ye are filled, his fulnes is yours: it ſerues

for your profit. So you ſee, that not onely all fulnes of glorie is in Ieſus Chriſt, in his owne perſon; but with the beames of it, as it were all creatures are filled: yea heauen it ſelfe is filled with his glorie; and the earth is filled with his glorie: and this is the felicitie of all the creatures in the world. Wherein troweſt thou ſtands the bleſſednes of the earth? of the heauen? and of all the elements? Note.Looke the eight chapter to the Romanes, verſ. 21. 22. and there you ſhall finde that the bleſſednes of the creature ſtands in the gloriouſnes of  Rom. 8. 21 22 Chriſt, one day to be reuealed. And therefore Paul ſaith, that the world groanes, ſighing for the reuelation of his glorie: for the glorie of the earth and heauen, is not yet reuealed. Peter ſaith in his ſecond Epiſtle chap. 3. 12. 13. When that the Lord ſhall come in his glorie, that the heauens ſhall burne, and be diſſolued, and the elements ſhall melt: then there ſhall be new heauens 
               A new heauen and a new earth. 
               made, and a new earth: So that thou ſhalt ſee another glorie in heauen and earth, then euer was before, or is now ſeene. But to ſpeake of man eſpecially; they that would beleeue and would be in him, they ſhall be ingrafted as it were into him, and ſet as it were in his fulnes, aboue all other creatures: for they ſhall be filled with his own fulnes. If thou be ſet in him as the Sunne is in the firmament, the fulnes of the glorie that is in him, ſhall ſhine in thee, aboue the earth, aboue the Moone, & aboue the Sun it ſelfe. So that this is felicitie, to haue a ſhare and portion of the grace and glorie of Chriſt, to receiue of his fulnes; for he is full of grace, and veritie, ſaith Iohn 1. 14. It is true indeed, and ſo long as wee liue here, this appeares not. There is neuer a one that beleeues, but he is a Kings ſonne, and a Kings daughter. But ſaith John, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. it appeares not as yet; but when hee comes, then it ſhall appeare, wee ſhall all ſhine in glorie. And the reprobate that thought thee but a loſt creature, ſhall wonder that euer there ſhould be ſuch a glorie prepared for thee. Albeit thou ſhine not now, yet if thou beleeue, thou haſt this vantage: all that glorie that is in Chriſt is thine. I ſay to thee, a man is not ſo ſurely clad with his ſhirt, as thou that beleeueſt in Chriſt art clad with him. He is a garment to thee, haue what clothing thou wilt; if thou hadſt but a ragged coate, yet if thou beleeueſt in him, thou art clad with

him. Goe where thou wilt, if thou caſt off thy coate, Ieſus will ſticke by thee: There is neuer a faithfull Saint wants Ieſus. And therefore thou maiſt ſay, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. Onely beleeue in him, be ingrafted in him by faith: Onely poſſeſſe him in thy heart. Thou haſt all his glorie and maieſtie. And againe, you ſee no man needes to enuie the glorie that Chriſt hath in him; for he communicates that glorie to vs; you ſee we enuie the glorie of earthly Princes. This wee haue by nature, we would haue it all our ſelues, and the ſeed of ambition is in the beaſtlieſt bodie that is vpon earth, which Ambition. raiſeth all theſe ſeditions, tumults, warres and vprores that is now adaies, and hath been from the beginning. Such is the enuie that euery man hath againſt another mans preferment, his honour, and eſtimation, that hee cannot away with it, except he haue all in himſelfe. And therefore hee leaues nothing vndone, if it were to cut his throte, ſo be it he may get his glory and renowne. But thou that beleeueſt, needs not in ſuch wiſe to enuie the glorie of Ieſus Chriſt. A King will not communicate his glorie with thee, no not a iot of it; but Ieſus Chriſt communicates all his glorie with thee: and therefore thou ſhouldeſt loue him the more; yea and the faithfull man, the more he ſees God glorified, the more is his ioy: but a reprobate wil enuie the glorie of God. Nay, there was neuer ſuch a ſubiect that enuied the glorie and honour of a Prince, or of his maſter, as a reprobate will enuie the glorie of Ieſus. Hee would if he might plucke him from his glorie: ſuch is the malice of his heart againſt Ieſus Chriſt. Yea the reprobate would The reprobate. if it were poſſible, bereaue the Saints of their glorie: and whē this glorie of the Saints ſhall be reuealed, the reprobate ſhall fret and fume: they deſire not to heare tell of the glorie of Chriſt and of his Saints. And when they heare of it (for they ſhall heare of it in deſpite of their teeth) they heare it with the ſadnes of their heart; it is no comfort nor conſolation to them to heare of it. And by the contrary, the faithfull one reioyceth, when he heares of it, it makes his hart to leape for ioy, as Iohns did in his mothers belly, when Mary the mother of Chriſt A ſure token of election. ſpake to Elizabeth, Luk. 1. 41. Therefore if thou canſt reioyce, when thou heareſt of Gods glorie in Ieſus Chriſt, it is a good

and ſure token of thy election. And againe, ſeeing that in Ieſus there is this fulnes, thou needes neuer to be emptie, or feare to want. Thou that findeſt any waſtnes or emptines, put out thy hand to the ambrie of the Goſpel, wherein this fulnes of grace The Goſpel is the meane whereby Chriſt communicates his fulnes vnto vs. and glorie is to be had. A contemner of the Goſpell if he were a King, he ſhall not taſte of this fulnes, and of this glorie of Ieſus, for there is no way to be partaker of this fulnes, but by the Goſpell. It is the ambrie wherein it is contained. And if thou miſſe it, thou ſhalt neuer get a cheekefull or morfell of any fulnes in thy ſoule.
            When hee hath ſaid, And in him ye are filled, he ſubioynes a glorious deſcription of him, who is the head of all principalitie and power. He cannot leaue of to ſpeake of that glorious maieſtie: he ſaid before, In him are hid all treaſures of wiſedome and knowledge: and againe, in him dwelleth the Godhead bodily, and ſo foorth, as you haue heard: now againe, when he hath caſt in a word of him, he leaues him not ſo, but hee will yet paint him out in his glorie. Then learne to ſpeake fully of Chriſt. Alas this hungry ſpeaking of Chriſt teſtifies the emptines and voidnes To ſpeake fully of Chriſt. of God in our hearts. It is a true ſaying, Of the aboundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh. If thy heart were full of him, as I haue ſaid, thy mouth would be full, and thou wouldeſt ſpeak fully of him: but thy heart being ſo emptie, what marueile is it, to heare thee ſpeake coldly of this Lord full of glorie. Well, there is no queſtion, but by this deſcription, wherein he makes him Lord ouer all, both in heauen and earth, hee meanes this, that he is not onely Lord aboue them all, but that alſo they are caſt downe vnder his feete, hee is mounted aboue them all.
            Now there be two things that will make vs chiefly to account of this gloriouſnes, that is in Chriſt Ieſus. The one Two things do cauſe vs to thinke highly of Chriſt. thing is his highnes, a maieſtie about all maieſties. There is not a maieſtie but that maieſtie. The other thing is, thy lowlines and thy baſenes; thou art but a worme on earth, hee is aboue all heauens. Is not this a great goodnes, that he that is ſo high, ſhould ſo lowly humble himſelfe, ſo that he ſhould abaſe himſelfe as it were, to become a worme? Men would wonder that euer the God of glorie ſhould ſo haue humbled himſelf; yea the Angels wonder at this, that euer ſinfull man ſhould

haue gotten a ſhare or portion of that grace of God. So this is my counſell, if thou feele a ſmacke of grace, of conſolation, or A ſpeciall conſolatiō. of faith, if it were but as a muſtard ſeede, count more of it, then of all the kingdomes of the earth. For it will weigh downe all, keepe it well in thy heart, and loſe thy life and all before thou wilt loſe it. I counſell thee to looke vp to heauen firſt, and ſay: yet this Lord will giue me more of his grace and glorie: when I ſhall ſee him with this eye of the bodie; then the Lord will fill me with glorie, and I will hope and be content to loſe all before I ſhould loſe this. Keepe this earneſt peny, for it is the ioy of the creature, to keepe this earneſt peny: for one day thou ſhalt get the full ſumme and fulnes of ioy. If thou keepe it not, and haue no regard of it, and hold not vp thy eye by night and by day, by looking to Ieſus in this Goſpell, thou ſhalt neuer get the full ſumme and entire payment. The ſucking of the hearts of the faithfull, and the drinking in this milke of the word, is the way to get Ieſus to The way to get Ieſus into the heart. thy heart, and to keepe him night and day: yea it is the way appointed from all eternitie. Abraham ſought for him, and got faith in him by the word of promiſe, which is the Goſpell. Therefore it is ſaid, that he ſawe him and reioyced, Ioh. 8. 56. Nay, Abraham neuer ſuffered himſelfe to be ſeuered from that grace that was in him. So the Goſpel is the way to bring Chriſt out of heauen to thee, and to fill the elect with all ioy and glorie. To him therefore be euerlaſting glorie, praiſe and dominion, for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 11. 12.
               
                  11 In whom alſo yee are circumciſed with circumciſion made without hands, by putting off the ſinfull bodie of the fleſh through the circumciſion of Chriſt,
                  
                  12 In that ye are buried with him through Baptiſme; in whom ye are alſo raiſed vp together through the faith of the operation of God which raiſed him from the dead.
                  
               
            
            
               IN this ſecond chapter of this Epiſtle (brethren) you haue heard how the Apoſtle exhorteth to perſeuerance in that faith receiued: next how he admoniſheth the Coloſſians to beware of falſe teachers and falſe doctrine. The laſt day ye heard, how he admoniſheth them that they ſhould take heed that no man ſpoyle them, or driue them away as a pray, and that through Philoſophie, which hee calleth vaine deceit. His argument was from that fulnes that is in Chriſt. In him (ſaith he) dwelleth the fulnes of the Godhead bodily. 
               Summe of the former Sermon. Therefore be contented with him, and ſeeke not to be filled with vaine traditions of men and their deceitfull philoſophie. Then for that they might haue ſaid, he is full, that is true, let him be full, and let the fulnes of the Godhead be in him, what is that to vs? we are neuer the fuller in regard thereof. He therfore meeteth with this obiection and ſaith, you are compleate in him, his fulnes filleth you: if you be in him, you ſhall receiue

of his fulnes and be filled. And who is this that filleth them? To let them ſee that it is no ſmall matter to be filled with his fulnes, he painteth him out and ſaith, he is the head of all the Empire. Well, would you thinke it a ſmall matter to be filled with his fulnes that is ſo high?
            Now to come to the words which we haue read. They might Coherence. Obiection. haue ſaid, we want Circumciſion (for the falſe teachers did alwaies beate that into their heads) & they themſelues thought they could haue no grace in Chriſt, but by Circumciſion. The Iewes receiued Circumciſion, which was an entrie to grace: we want this Circumciſion: therefore wee can haue no entrie to grace, as the Iewes had. In this verſe the Apoſtle meeteth Anſwere. them and ſaith, In whom alſo ye are circumciſed. He granteth to them circumciſion in a manner, and ſaith, Complaine not, you want not circumciſion in Chriſt. Neuer Iew had it in greater effect then you haue, and therefore complaine not. Then note here ſhortly this queſtion of theirs, and his anſwere thereto. He ſaith plainly, that we cannot be filled with the fulnes of Ieſus Chriſt, except after ſome ſort we be circumciſed; that is to ſay, except the foreskinne, not of the bodie, but of the heart, Our naturall corruption must be circumciſed if we be in Chriſt and Chriſt in vs. be cut away. For except this originall and naturall corruption, wherein we are borne, be cut away, there is no grace for vs. For I tell you; if in no meaſure it be aboliſhed (it ſo occupieth all the parts and powers of the ſoule) that there is no place to the grace of Chriſt Ieſus. Therefore it muſt be firſt thruſt out; and think not that the original corruption wherein thou art borne, and the grace of Chriſt can dwell together: Simile. the one expelleth the other, as water doth the fire.
            The ſecond thing which I note is this: I perceiue there is The ſecond obſeruatiō. nothing that the Iewes had, but in effect Chriſtians haue the ſame. Wilt thou ſpeake of Circumciſion? The Church of Ieſus Chriſt hath it in a farre better ſort then euer they had. It is true, that they had more Ceremonies, Sacraments, figures and outward rites in their religion, then we haue: but we haue no loſſe by the want of them, but rather a plaine aduantage. They had the ſhadow, wee haue the bodie. Haue you not a greater aduantage by the body thē by the ſhadow? They followed the ſhadow going before the bodie; but thou laieſt hold vpon the

bodie following the ſhadow. Oh would to God the Church of Scotland could conſider this grace we haue in the bodie! that the Iewes nor any els in the old world could get. Thou wouldeſt wonder at that grace of God in Ieſus Chriſt. But alas wee eſteeme it not in our daies.
            Well to goe forward, leaſt they ſhould miſconſter him, hee expoundeth himſelfe, and ſheweth of what circumciſion hee meant: to wit, not of the groſſe circumciſion of the Iewes; He ſaith, Ye are circumciſed, not with circumciſion made with mens hands, not of that outward skinne, but with an inward circumciſion of the hart, that is made by the ſpirit and finger of God, there is the meaning. In this you ſee a difference betweene the Iewes religion & ours. All things among them were outward obiects to the eyes of men; their religion for the moſt part ſtoode in an outward glorie and ſhew. Things among them were made by the hands of men, as their Circumciſion and their Tabernacles, as appeareth in the Epiſtle to the Hebrues: but the religion that Chriſt brought to the world, when hee was manifeſt in the fleſh, aboliſhed all their religion, and ſtandeth in ſpirit and veritie. He is not, neither will be worſhipped in this mountaine, and that mountaine; but hee will be worſhipped in ſpirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 21. His religion ſeeketh not this outward pompe. So when I looke to theſe men that haue brought into Chriſts Church this outward vanitie, I am compelled to ſay, that the deceiuers of the world haue turned Poperie. Chriſtianiſme into Iudaiſme; yea into Gentiliſme and Paganiſme. Fie on them; I may ſay to them, as Paul ſaid to the Galathians chap. 3. 1. O fooliſh Galathians, who hath bewitched you? So I ſay, O fooliſh man! when thou haſt begun with a ſpirituall thing, wilt thou end in a fleſhly thing? thou ſhalt neuer ſee heauen, if thou make ſuch an end. The Lord began with an outward thing, and ended with a ſpirituall thing: but thou wilt begin with a ſpirituall thing, and wilt end with a fleſhly and outward thing. O thy end ſhall be damnable!
            To goe forward, he inſiſteth vpon this circumciſion made without hands, & he defineth it in plaine words, that thereby he would make them vnderſtand theſe ſpirituall things (for it is hard to cauſe a naturall man to vnderſtand ſpirituall and

heauenly things) he ſaith, it ſtands. Wherein? In a putting off, in an vncloathing of thee, as one would caſt off his coate or ſhirt: ſo the circumciſion that is not made with hands, ſtandeth in this; thou muſt caſt ſomething from thee. He maketh it not to ſtād in the outward cutting off of the outward skin, but the inward circumciſion of a foule heart: the cloathes that it is clad with, they are peſtiferous, and they muſt be torne and throwne off, that thy heart may be circumciſed. For I tell thee there was neuer any one more ſurely clad with infected apparell, then thy heart is enwrapped with the botchie corruption of thy nature. And if thou keepe it on, it will infect thee, and ſteale thee to death & deſtruction before thou be aware.
            But to come to this garment, the Apoſtle tels thee what garment and cloathing it is that thou haſt: firſt he calleth it a bodie, it is a bodie, then a maſſie lumpe: this is a borrowed word from the bodie of man. So the garment wherewith thou art clad by nature, and which muſt be ſhaken off of thee, if thou wouldeſt be ſaued, it is no ſuperficiall thing. O vaine man! Our naturall corruptiō no light or ſuperficiall thing. thou thinkeſt it a ſuperficiall light thing. No, it is a bodie and a lumpe, with all the dimenſions thereof, length, heighth, breadth, and deepnes: yea thou art not able to finde out the deepnes thereof. Thou maiſt indeede feele the deepnes of thy bodie, of fleſh, and bones: but thou canſt not finde the deepnes of thy heart. For as thy ſoule is compaſſed with thy bodie, euen ſo thy heart is compaſſed and clogged with an heauie lumpe, heauier then the whole earth. One ſinne is heauier then the whole earth: no marueile then if thou be drawne to hell, if thou be not relieued.
            Now let vs ſee whereof this bodie is. He calleth it a bodie of ſinne. O ſtinking nature! Then (brethren) ye ſee the arraignement of nature, a bodie not of fleſh, bloud and bone, but of ſinne, and of all ſorts of ſinne. Wilt thou looke into thy heart? thou ſhalt ſee it full of foule ſtinking cogitations, and affections. And if thou haddeſt any ſmell of it, thou wouldeſt ſtink Naturall corruption how vncleane a thing. in thy owne noſe. I forbeare to ſpeake of the outward effects, as foule ſpeeches, and the wicked deedes of the hands, which returne to the heart againe, and makes vp the ſtinking bodie.

The heart of man is drowned in the ſinke of ſinne, and if thou relieue not thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt be drowned in ſin. The world will not beleeue this, nor yet learne this leſſon.
            In the next word he calleth it, the bodie of fleſh. Wouldeſt thou haue the originall of ſinne? it is called fleſh, not this outward bodie that thou beareſt; but an inward hid thing, and ſtinking corruption that is runne through thy whole ſoule and bodie, and infecteth them; ſo that there is not an inch of thee free. So you ſee the welſpring of this ſinfull maſſe; it is not outward; it is within thee that ayleth thee; the ſeate of it is in the heart, and occupieth the depth of it, and no part therof is free, and it ſpouteth out vehemently this foule ſtinking venome of ſinne, as euer thou ſaweſt any ſpout, ſpout out water. So that if thou grow not in regeneration, thou ſhalt grow in ſinne, which poyſons thee day by day, till at the laſt thou drop downe like a poyſoned bodie. Therefore roote it out, and digge it vp: let this be thy occupation night and day, as Kill ſinne, or elſe it will kill thee. thou wouldeſt be ſaued, or elſe it will deſtroy thee. So thou ſeeſt this garment, this bodie wherewith thou art ſo clogged muſt be caſt off; otherwiſe of neceſſitie thou muſt be a firebrand of hell.
            In the end of the verſe he taketh vp that which he hath ſpoken in one word, I meane (would he ſay) by this of caſting off the bodie, nothing elſe but that circumciſion of Chriſt: that is to ſay, not onely that, that he ſuffered in his owne fleſh paſſiue, but that this is made by him actiue, as we ſpeake. Then note ſhortly, that all this, of putting off this foule garment, is not by the hand of man (all the men in the world cannot get their hand into thy heart, to plucke off this foule ſtinking garment) hee may open thy breaſt, and pull out thy fleſhie heart; but there is no hand that can pull off, and draw out that foule heart, but onely the hand of Chriſt Ieſus. Therefore if thou wilt be freed of that mortalitie, craue his hand to pluck Chriſt alone doth circumciſe the heart. off this garment, and crie, O Lord, put in thy hand, and plucke this foule heart away: fie on it, it ſtinkes in mine owne noſe. When he hath thus ſpoken, he leaueth vs not ſo; but maketh it plaine, ſhewing the manner how this is brought about.

Thou muſt not dreame of a groſſe faſhion; for the manner is ſpirituall. In old time a man would haue put to his hand bodily; but Ieſus Chriſt puts to his hand ſpiritually.
            Now the circumciſion of Ieſus Chriſt ſtandeth in a conformitie VVhat the circumciſiō of Chriſt is. and likenes betweene Chriſt and vs. This likenes ſtands in two poynts; firſt in the likenes with him in death and buriall: thou muſt dye, I tell thee, thou that wouldeſt be made like to Chriſt thy head: Secondly, it ſtandeth in a conformitie in life, and in riſing againe to life; and truly thy life ſhall be more ſweete and ioyfull, then euer thy death was ſower and heauie. But he beginneth at his death, his words are, being buried. Buriall preſuppoſeth death: no man is buried but he that is dead. Then vnderſtand how thou canſt neuer liue with To be buried vvith Chriſt in griefe for ſinne. Chriſt, vnleſſe thou dye with him: thinke not that euer thou ſhalt riſe, except thou bee firſt buried with him in griefe for ſinne. Well, well, wanton companions, burie your hearts in teares and holy repentance. Repentance if it be holy, is thy buriall; for who euer roſe except he lay downe? Can a man riſe from death to life, except he were firſt dead? Canſt thou riſe to that ſpirituall and eternall life, except thou be firſt ſpiritually dead? It muſt be the death of this bodie of ſinne, of this body of fleſh that is within thee, that muſt bring thee to this buriall of Chriſt. Couldeſt thou neuer ſigh for thy ſinne? then waſt thou neuer at deaths dore; nor dead with Chriſt. And except thou ſigh continuallie day and night for thy ſinnes, and dye to them, and euery one of them, how canſt thou ſay thou ſhalt riſe with Chriſt? Art thou a murtherer and greeueſt not for it, ſo that thou abſtaineſt from it? then thou dieſt not, and ſhalt not therefore riſe with Chriſt. Art thou an oppreſſour, and repenteſt not? then thou dieſt not, neither ſhalt thou riſe with Chriſt. Art thou an euill ſpeaker of thy neighbour behinde his backe (as this land is full of ſuch people, who thinke it no ſinne) and ſorroweſt not? thou neuer waſt dead with Chriſt, neither canſt riſe with him. O the villaine, that will pleaſe himſelf in this ſin & the reſt, and yet will imagine to riſe as well as the beſt men to life in Ieſus! But O foole! thou art altogether vaine, and thy cogitations are

meere deceits: for Chriſt will not be a Sauiour to any but to ſuch as die with him, mortifying their ſinnes. If thy buriall be not with him, thou ſhalt neuer riſe to ſpirituall life with him. Thou maiſt indeed riſe, but not to thy comfort: if thou be not buried to ſinne in ſome meaſure in this life, there ſhall be no reſurrection for thee to that life which is in the heauens purchaſed in the bloud of Chriſt Ieſus. Men thinke not hereof; and thoſe that neuer mourne for their ſinnes, doe ſuppoſe that they ſhall riſe laughing. The promiſe is made to them that mourne: Bleſſed are they (ſaith Chriſt) that mourne (to wit for ſinne) for they ſhall receiue comfort, Matth. 5 4. Men thinke they ſhall come to heauen before their feete be colde, and yet they delight themſelues in their ſinnes. Nay, goe thy way, crucifie thy ſinne and thy ſelfe to ſinne, or elſe thou ſhalt neuer ſee heauen nor come to glorie. Would to God this were as well felt as it is knowne.
            Now the meanes whereby this dying is wrought, is Baptiſme, inſtituted by Ieſus Chriſt, that put away and aboliſhed Baptiſme not only repreſenteth the crucifying and burying of Chriſt, but alſo is powerfull in the baptized in the whole courſe of his life. Circumciſion, and placed Baptiſme in ſteede thereof. I will ſpeake ſomewhat of Baptiſme, but as it concerneth the matter we haue in hand: It not onely repreſenteth the death and buriall of Chriſt, and as oft as thou ſeeſt it, ſo often thou ſeeſt, or at the leaſt ſhouldeſt ſee Ieſus crucified and buried: it hath not onely the naked repreſentation hereof, but the vertue of that death and buriall. It crucifieth the bodie that is baptized: it burieth the old man: it is the very power of God, to the mortification of thy ſinfull nature: and the Lord is powerfull in it, not onely at that inſtant when thou art baptized (as the Papiſts ſay) but alſo continueth ſo in thee in the whole courſe of thy life. Thou thinkeſt it is but for children onely: nay it is euen for old bodies alſo: and if thou keepe it in thy ſight and remembrance, thou maiſt be perſwaded that the Lord will worke moſt aſſuredly thy mortification, as long as thou liueſt. Therefore neglect not thy Baptiſme, as thou wouldeſt goe forward in the mortification of thy ſinne, and thinke euer and The vſe of baptiſme in our whole life. ſay: O Lord, I was baptized in thy name, Lord let it not be gone out of my minde; make it powerfull in me to the mortification

of ſinne: and it ſhall haue force euen in thy very death. I ſpeake this becauſe men thinke there is no more required but an outward ſhew: but if thou kneweſt the force and powerfull working of the Lord, thou wouldeſt remember thy Baptiſme, euen as long as thou liueſt: and if thou diddeſt finde it to haue any working in thee, thou wouldeſt reuerence it more and more. And ſo much for the firſt part of the likenes of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Then he proceedeth to the ſecond part of this conformitie that is by Baptiſme; In whom ye are alſo raiſed vp. This followeth vpon the other, as the Apoſtle Rom. 6. 5. proueth this conſequence, where euer this buriall goeth before, all the world cannot ſtay thee from life. Thou that findeſt any mortification of ſinne, aſſure thy ſelfe of life: but if thou finde not the death and buriall of ſinne, looke not to finde life. And I ſay more, there ſhall be no deferring of time, for thy comfort, as if thou ſhouldeſt firſt dye a long time before thou riſe to Ieſus Chriſt. Indeede the laſt reſurrection ſhall be in the laſt day: but I ſay When the life of God begins in vs. thou ſhalt begin no ſooner to dye to ſinne in this life, and find any compūction and heauines in thy heart for it, but with the death of ſinne and the buriall and ſlaying of it, immediatly ſhall come life. This life breaketh vp through death, and ioy breaketh vp through ſadnes, al heauenly ioy riſeth vp through an heanie heart: ſo that thou ſhalt not feele ioy vnleſſe thy heart be preſſed downe with the heauines of ſinne. And this ioy, as Peter 1. Epiſt. 1. 8. ſaith, is vnſpeakable: ſo that when a man is ſighing moſt for ſinne, drawing ſighes from the bottome of his heart, then the quickeſt and ſweeteſt ioy ariſeth: but whē thou art laughing and ſinging, there is no ſuch thing as ioy at thy heart. Wherefore ſhould I ſpeake of theſe things? Onely learne this, to be ſad and to ſigh for ſinne, that with it thou maiſt get ſome ioy of thy heart; which is an earneſt peny that thou ſhalt be filled with it, at the ſight of that glorious maieſtie.
            Now to goe forward: How is this reſurrection wrought? Euen as death was wrought by Baptiſme: for as it repreſenteth the death of Chriſt; ſo, ſo often as thou ſeeſt Baptiſme

miniſtred, thou ſeeſt in it the reſurrection of Chriſt. Yea, and it raiſeth vp the bodie of him, that is baptized, to life, by vertue of the reſurrection of Chriſt, who is alſo manifeſted in Baptiſme. Immediatly and in one inſtant, the Lord will work two contrary things; he will caſt thee downe to hell, and then in the ſame moment he will raiſe thee vp to heauen. And Baptiſme hath this force continually, ſo long as thou liueſt, if ſo be thou remember it, looke for the vertue of it to the laſt houre of thy death.
            In the words following, leaſt they ſhould haue thought this ſigne of Baptiſme ſhould haue had this force (as we ſay, virtute operis operati) to haue buried ſinne and quickened a man againe, without any more; he ioyneth, by faith, not onely by Baptiſme: as if he would ſay, we are buried to ſinne, and raiſed Faith required in baptiſme to apprehend Chriſt and to receiue vertue from him. to righteouſnes; but this great worke is wrought alſo by faith: ſo that if thou haue not faith apprehending and taking hold of God, if thou ſend not faith to heauen in the miniſterie of the Sacrament and the word preached, and if thou want faith to applie grace to thee, the Sacrament and the word preached ſhall neuer doe thee good. And if thou get not this faith at one time or other, this Sacrament ſhall be a ſeale to thy damnation, and the word preached ſhall aggrauate thy iudgement. So if there were no other place to condemne the Papiſts error of opus operatum, this place were ſufficient to condemne it: for Opus operatum. the Apoſtle meaneth plainly, that Baptiſme hath no force without faith, and this Goſpell hath no power to thy ſaluation without faith. Away then with that erronious doctrine of theſe vaine babling fooles of opus operatum. It is diuelliſhnes and lying.
            In the next words he ſheweth the obiect of faith: It muſt lay hold vpon ſomething: for faith is an holding faſt: an hand that taketh hold apprehendeth ſomething. It is an anchor caſt out, to hold thee by: ſo this faith muſt haue ſome obiect to leane vpon, otherwiſe thou wouldeſt be daſht on euery ſide Obiect of faith. with each waue, till thy ſhip be broken. What is then the obiect of faith? The word is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an effectualnes. The Apoſtle to the Epheſians chap. 1. 19. taketh it to bee the effectualnes

of the ſtrong power of God, that muſt be the thing to ſtay thee, that muſt hold thy heart that it fleete not, nor flow not here and there: that which thou muſt reſt vpon, muſt be nothing elſe but the power of God, the efficacie of the ſtrong power of God. Thou muſt not lay hold vpon Angels, Saints, or vpon Princes in the earth; thou wilt be beguiled: yea thou and they (going about ſo to vphold thee) will both to hell together. Therefore ſuffer not thy ſelfe to be deceiued with an opinion of them. I dare be bold to ſay, that if the Angels and Saints would take the honour that the Pope and his Clergie Inuocation and worſhip of Saints and Angels. would giue them, they ſhould all goe to hell, and leaue the ioyes which they now haue. So the ſtay of thy faith, and that which thou muſt apprehend, is the mortification of thy ſinne; and thy quickening to newnes of life: it muſt not be by the mediation of man or Angell, or of any Saint glorified; but by the onely and immediate mediation of Ieſus Chriſt; there only thou getteſt that ſpirituall power that quickeneth thee to life. It is eaſie to ſlay a man (and men now a daies think ſlaughter but a ſport; yea and rather then they will not ſlay, they had liefer goe quicke to hell, as they vſe to ſay) but the ſlaying of ſinne muſt be onely by the power of God: Sinne muſt be vanquiſhed by faith, and without faith thou ſhalt neuer mortifie ſinne. Therefore continually put out that hand of faith, and pluck down that power of God, for thy ſaluation, & euer crie for this hand of faith. Draw, draw, ſpare not; for there is no want in him. That well of his effectuall power will neuer waxe drie, and this bloud of Chriſt will neuer drie vp, all power is through that bloud of Chriſt. Then firſt by a true faith lay hold vpon Chriſt on the croſſe; and then ſitting at the right hand of the Father: and ſo thou ſhalt neuer depart with him, till thy glorious reſurrection be accompliſhed.
            When hee had ſpoken of God, when hee had ſaid, through faith of the effectualnes of God; then he ſubioyneth: Who raiſed him from death. Hauing once ſpoken of that God who is ſo effectuall, when hee nameth God hee leaueth him not, but hee ſubioyneth ſome glorious deſcription of him; ſo ſpeaking of him here, hee deſcribeth him firſt, in reſpect of Chriſt and his

reſurrection. Secondly, in reſpect of raiſing of the Gentiles. Thirdly, in reſpect of the aboliſhing of the law, and quickning of the Iewes. And in reſpect of Chriſt hee ſaith: who raiſed him from the dead: to wit, by the effectualnes of that ſtrong power that is in him. The firſt that euer he raiſed by that power, is Ieſus Chriſt. And therefore he is called the firſt borne of the dead, chap. 1. 18. For this reſurrection from the dead, is firſt by decree afore all times, and then in time it begun at Chriſt, who was that lambe that was ſacrificed from the beginning, and gaue grace to all other ſacrifices; ſo that they in his ſacrifice Reſurrection following regeneration, and both depē
                  ding on Chriſt. were accepted of God: and then his reſurrection is deriued to all them that doe, or euer ſhall riſe hereafter in Chriſt: for they that are not in Chriſt, haue no reſurrection for them, becauſe there is no regeneration for them in this life, and conſequently no reſurrection for them hereafter. It is true, that by vertue and power of that Godhead, the moſt wicked and vnregenerate ſhall riſe; but they ſhall not riſe in him, that is, new creatures, who before in this life were regenerated, and liue the life of Chriſt. There ſhall be no ſuch thing, to follow them in their reſurrection. Againe, you ſhall perceiue in the writing of the Apoſtles, when hee would ſet out that all-ſufficiencie of God, and his mightie power, he deliuereth it by the effects, for therby it is knowne. Now what an effect chuſeth he? not the creation of the world, for he leaueth that, and maketh choiſe of the raiſing of Ieſus Chriſt: as though the all-ſufficient mightie power of God, had neuer been ſo powerfully declared, as in the death of Ieſus Chriſt, & his reſurrection. Reade in the Epiſtle to the Epheſians, chap. 1. 19. 20. where you ſhall finde this manifeſtly proued, how God ſhewed this his power when hee The greateſt power of God manifested most in Christs death and reſurrection. raiſed vp Ieſus from the dead, and placed him at his right hand, Rom. 1. 4. There was neuer ſuch a power vttered as this was, in raiſing Chriſt from the dead. What can be the cauſe of this? Is it not a great power to create a thing, and to create all things of nothing? Ieſus was ſomething lying in a graue. I anſwere, that that power was ſo much the greater, in reſpect there was neuer any ſo humbled, as Ieſus was; ſo cōpaſſed with the bands of death as he; ſo that by looſing of thoſe bands, there

muſt of neceſſitie appeare the greateſt power that euer was, or ſhould be: for the ſtrongeſt bands require the mightieſt power to looſe them. There were neuer bands ſo ſtrōg, as Chriſt God equall with his Father was bound withall. As for thee and me, the bands of death wherewith wee are or ſhall be bound, they are but gentle, and it is but an eaſie matter to binde any of vs. Neuer any was bound as Ieſus; and therefore a ſtronger power is required to raiſe him, then to raiſe any of vs. Well, the Lord he raiſed him vp by the efficacie of his great power. Now hee being raiſed, who was bound in ſuch ſtrong bands, deſpaire not thou, but take thee comfort and ſay; My Lord, when he was bound with a ſtrong power, God raiſed him: therefore it is an eaſie matter for him, when I am dead and laid in graue to raiſe me, in reſpect of him: if he did raiſe Chriſt with his whole hand, he will raiſe me with his little finger. But (beloued) learne if by faith thou be not bound and ioined with him in his death and burial (for thou muſt be conioyned with him in his death, and thou muſt lie as it were vnder him in the graue) if thou be not ſo conioyned, thou ſhalt not riſe with him. But if thou be bound with him by faith (as I haue ſaid) as he roſe, thou ſhalt riſe, and thou ſhalt be pulled vp out of that graue with him; otherwiſe when the Lord raiſeth him, thou ſhalt lie ſtill. Then ſeeke faith in Ieſus, and that bleſſed coniunction with him through faith: ſticke by him in death, and in the graue; and let him not be raiſed without thee: fixe thy heart to him, and aſſuredly thou ſhalt riſe with him in that day, and he ſhal pull thee out ſo glorious a bodie, as that then he and his father ſhall take pleaſure in thee, and thou ſhalt raigne with him for euer and euer. Now to this powerfull God that raiſed this Lord Ieſus, with the holie Spirit, be all honour and dominion,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE Epiſtle of PAVL to the Coloſsians.
            
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 13. 14.
               
                  13 And ye which were dead in ſinnes, and in the vncircumciſion of your fleſh, hath he quickened together with him, forgiuing you all your treſpaſſes:
                  
                  14 And putting out the handwriting of ordinances that was againſt vs.
                  
               
            
            
               REmember (brethren) the laſt day we had in hand the circumciſion not made with the hands of man, but ſtanding in a putting off of the bodie of the ſinnes of the fleſh, he tooke it vp in one word, and termed it the circumciſion Summe of the laſt Lecture. of Chriſt, that is, an inward circumciſion made by him, and by his vertue. Now to make this more plaine, he inſiſteth in the next verſe on the circumciſion of Chriſt: and hee made it to ſtand in a conformitie betweene Chriſt and vs, that as Chriſt after his death was buried; ſo wee ſhould be buried with him, that is, our old man and the corruption of nature ſhould be buried with him. Next, as after his death and buriall, he was raiſed vp to life; ſo we being dead and buried to ſinne, ſhould riſe vp to newnes of life in him. Now this is obtained not by the Sacrament of Baptiſme onely, but by faith laying hold on God and his mightie power. After this, when he had ſpoken of the effect of this ſtrong power of God, he abides on it, deſcribing God himſelfe & his omnipotent power. The deſcription ariſeth of the effects that proceede from him. The effects of Gods power. You haue heard the firſt effect: it was in raiſing Chriſt from

death; in which worke the power of God chiefly appeared: there was neuer a worke that God wrought from the creation to this houre, or will worke to the end of the world; in the which ſo mightily appeared the power of God, as it did in the raiſing of Chriſt; becauſe there was neuer a creature ſo humbled, and ſo bound with the bands and dolor of death as was Ieſus Chriſt.
            Now in this that we haue read, preſently followeth the reſt of the deſcription of God in his power; and firſt wee haue his The ſecond effect of Gods power deſcription from the ſecond effect and worke of his power. It is the quickening of the Gentiles (that were dead with Ieſus who was firſt quickened) namely the Coloſſians, to whom he writeth. Then followeth the third effect, the quickening of the The third effect. Iewes that were as well dead as the Gentiles. But to ſpeake of the quickening of the Gentiles, and namely of the Coloſſians, and ſo to come to the words, he ſaith, And you, that is, you Coloſſians and all the reſt of the Gentiles, when you were dead in ſinnes, and in the vncircumciſion of the foreskin of your fleſh; then he quickened you, and raiſed you vp from the death, that ye lay in, with him, meaning Ieſus Chriſt, whom hee raiſed vp firſt, and that in this order. He hath freely forgiuen you all your ſinnes, theſe are the words. Now (brethren) this is to be conſidered; he ſetteth not downe the quickening of the Coloſſians, and of the reſt ſimply; but he ſetteth it downe in a compariſon with their former eſtate, wherin they were before their quickning, calling them to remembrance that before they were quickened, they were dead, life followeth death: the firſt gate to life with Ieſus, is to be dead with him; ſo it behooued, that before they were quickened they ſhould be found dead.
            Now in the compariſon and example ſet downe here, mark firſt, it is the will of God, whatſoeuer grace hee giueth vs, wee doe much eſteeme it; and if he giue thee life, he will haue thee highly account of it. The ſpirituall grace that is gotten in Ieſus Highly price the leaſt grain of the grace of Chriſt. Chriſt, it cannot be highly enough thought of in the heart of man. For when thou haſt put it in a ballance, with al earthly things, all is nothing: the leaſt graine of this ſpiritual grace gotten in Ieſus Chriſt, is worth them all. Therefore the Lord that giueth thee it, will haue thee to make much of it. Now the

way, to weigh aright this heauenly life receiued in Chriſt, is this: to caſt thy eye back and looke ouer thy ſhoulder to that death wherein thou lateſt, before thou gotteſt it: looke what thou waſt before; looke whether thou waſt dead or quicke before thou gateſt this ſpirituall life. And therefore there is nothing more required then a ſanctified memorie in a Chriſtian. Remember wealth and woe, both good eſtate and ill what euer it hath bin. Now looke to the working of God; for rather then his own elect ſhall be forgetfull of their former eſtate, of their death they lay in before they got life; he wil make ye very ſtink of their ſinful nature, wherof they haue yet a remnant: he will make it I ſay, to ſtrike them in their noſe, and make them feele that ſtinking ſauour. For he keepeth ſtill the remnant ſtinking The remnant of ſin in the regenerate, what vſe is hath. in them, that they may remember what eſtate they were in, before they got this life in Ieſus Chriſt: that they might remember the life they haue gotten to be the ſweeter. Nay marke it, thou ſhalt neuer feele the ſweete odour of the life in Ieſus Chriſt, except thou feele the ſtinke of thy nature. And if thou take a delight to looke into thy owne nature, and thinke it delicate, thou neuer thoughteſt what grace meant; yea thou ſhalt neuer account of it: but once taſting of the life of Ieſus and the ſweetnes of it, then thou ſhalt abhorre that ſtinke of nature wherein thou before delightedſt. For whē once thou haſt taſted of that ſweetnes, for all this world thou wouldeſt not returne againe to that death of ſinne, wherein thou liuedſt before it was taken away by the quickening power of God.
            But to inſiſt vpon the words. When ye were dead, as if hee ſhould ſay: ye Coloſſians did imagine that you were quicke; but I ſay ye were dead, not onely ye, but all the Gentiles were dead. Then (brethren) ye may ſee, a man if hee were neuer ſo quicke, being out of Chriſt, he is but dead, as Paul ſpeaketh of the wanton widow, 1. Tim. 5. 6. and the quicker thou thinkeſt thy ſelfe, if thou be out of Chriſt, thou art the deader. But here is our miſerie, wee feele not that we are dead: alas theſe miſerable creatures that wallow in ſinne, they haue dead bodies, but they feele it not; and certainly there is no man that getteth the ſenſe of the bitternes of that death, or that loathes and is ſqueamiſh at the filthines of his nakednes, vntill he be in

Chriſt, and vntill he feele the ſweetnes of the life of Chriſt, hee The ſweetnes which the faithfull feele by Chriſt, in their regeneration. neuer knoweth himſelf to haue haue been dead, or vnder the power of death. And therefore whatſoeuer ye be, which he dead without Ieſus, ſtriue to get a feeling of the ſweetnes of that life which is in him. I doe promiſe thee if thou doe it, thou ſhalt haue the bitternes of thy nature taken away, otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer poſſeſſe a contented heart.
            What a death this was he expreſſeth when he ſaith; which were dead in ſinnes: there is the firſt cauſe of this death, ſinnes and treſpaſſes, that is, all the actuall ſinnes of their life, all the foule thoughts of their heart, all the prophane words of their mouth, all vnruly actions of their hands, all theſe be vnderſtood vnder this word ſinnes, in the plurall number. Then (brethren) this word importeth firſt, the kinde of this death Death in ſinne. that man lieth in before he be in Chriſt; it is not the death of the bodie. In the bodie thou wilt ſeeme to be quicke enough, when as thou art but dead; but this death it is the death of the ſpirit; it is the death of the ſoule: for when thou goeſt on in ſinne, thou doeſt nothing elſe but ſtick and goare thy ſoule: and beſides in the end, thou wilt ſlay the bodie alſo: ſo as if thou continue in it, it ſhall neuer leaue thee till it ſlay both ſoule and bodie for euermore. Thou maiſt be a wanton harlot, and a cruell murtherer; but yet take thy delights howſoeuer thou wilt, promiſe thy ſelfe as great aſſurance of life, comfort and ioyes, as thou canſt imagine; yet thy perſeuerance in ſinne ſhall ſlay thee with death in this world, and in that to come: For the wages of ſinne is death, Rom. 6. 28. Then this cauſe of death importeth not onely that this death is ſpirituall, but alſo it importeth that it is a death exceeding fore, and withall the diſſoluing of this very bodie into powder and aſhes. Death in generall is nothing els but the depriuing of life. A mā is ſaid to be dead, when he wanteth life. Now theſe ſinnes which he ſpeaketh of here, doe depriue thee of the quickeſt and ſweeteſt life that euer was: and what a life is it that ſinne depriueth thee of? euen the life of God, the beſt life that is, or can be. Woe is thee that euer thou gotteſt life in the bodie, if thou want this life of God, that thou maiſt liue with Ieſus Chriſt for euer.

Yea woe is thee for euermore, that thou ſaweſt either Sunne or Moone, if thou want the life of God in Ieſus Chriſt: and there is nothing but ſinne that can depriue thee of it. And further, it not onely bereaueth thee of life, but it maketh thee guiltie of eternall death both in ſoule and bodie. Thou haſt theſe two Tvvo aduantages ſinners haue by ſinne. aduantages, delight in ſinne as thou wilt; ſinne ruling in any man, ſo long as hee liueth without Ieſus Chriſt, remiſſion of ſinnes, and ſanctification, it excludeth the life of God from him; and more then this, it holdeth him poore miſerable wretch vnder the guiltines of euerlaſting death for euer. You will aske, how can a man be dead in ſinnes? Is he not liuely in actions? is hee not counted the gallanteſt fellow in all the Realme, and the liuelieſt, that is the greateſt ſwaggerer, that can commit moſt euill? Is hee not counted the liuelieſt, that is the greateſt murtherer? I anſwere thee, the quicker hee is in murthering, in adulterie, and ſuch like, the more is hee dead: becauſe firſt he wants the life of God. And further, all theſe are but dead actions, dead workes comming from a dead man, and they are as it were a ſtinking ſauour from a filthie carrion: ſo theſe men, trimme them vp as you wil, they are but ſtinking carrions. O thou murtherer, thou defileſt the heauens, the earth and the ayre! O thou harlot, thou defileſt all the houſe and the bed thou lieſt in! Thou oppreſſour, thou defileſt all the world, though thou werſt an Earle, a Duke or a King, thou art a dead ſtinking carrion worſe then a dead dogge.
            To come to the next words, he aſcendeth to a higher ground of this death, and he ſaith; they were dead not onely in actuall ſinnes, but they were dead in a ſort of ſinne that did cleaue faſter and neerer to their ribbes. You were dead (ſaith he) in the vncircumciſion of your fleſh, that is, in your originall ſinne. Hee ſetteth downe this, by an alluſion of the foreskinne; the Gentiles vncircumciſion was a ſigne of their originall ſinne, which Originall ſinne. was inherent in them; as circumciſion was a ſigne of the taking away of the ſame. Then the cauſe of thy death in bodie and ſoule, is not onely theſe actions that paſſe away (as when thou haſt murthered, the action goeth away, although the guilt remaine: for the action that paſſeth, it leaueth vpon thy backe

a guilt which ſhall bring downe damnation vpon thee.) The cauſe I ſay of thy death in bodie and ſoule, is not only in theſe fleeting actions, but the grounded cauſe of it is original ſinne, the ſinne conceiued in thy mothers wombe. Thou art borne in ſinne, and it ſticketh faſt to thee: and therefore it muſt follow, that ſeeing the cauſe is a ſticking and biding cauſe, the death muſt alſo be abiding death. I called it before a ſore death: now I call it an abiding death, & that greatly encreaſeth the miſerie. You know that a diſeaſe naturall that commeth of any vitioſitie of nature, as of the birth, ſo many as haue that diſeaſe it doth ſtill accompanie their bodie: It may wel be that they get it mitigated, but they cannot fully clenſe it: They may procure a relenting of it, but neuer be able to take it away. And therefore this death hauing the ground in that foule feede that thou art conceiued in, by the generation of all thy forebeers, it will paſſe the power of the world to get it away. No, the Angels of heauen will not bee able to relieue thee of it: nothing will free thee of it, but grace, which is contrarie to that corruption of nature. You know the prouerbe, That which is bred in the bone wil hardly be driuen out of the fleſh. It therefore thou wouldeſt be cured of this rooted euill, thou muſt crie for grace, and ſay; Lord ſend thy ſpirit of grace into my heart, to rid me of this corruption of nature. It thou crie not for this night and day, yea and finde it in ſome meaſure working in thee, thou ſhalt neuer be relieued. Crie therefore and ſay, Lord, I was conceiued dead, I was borne dead, I A good prayer. am euery way dead: ſend thy ſpirit of free grace, and free me of this death that ſo ſore ſetleth vpon me, that I may once enioy that life of Ieſus. Crie this way night and day, and all thy time; and then I aſſure thee thou ſhalt finde deliuerance, and ſhalt taſte how ſweet the life of Ieſus is. And this for their former eſtate which is miſerable, being out of Chriſt Ieſus.
            Now followeth the eſtate in Chriſt: He hath quickened you, that is, the father hath put life in you. It is a quickening when death is expelled, and life commeth in his place: but what a life is it that wee receiue in Chriſt? Would to God wee could meditate vpon this life that is in Chriſt, you ſhall know it beſt

by this; what a death waſt thou in? It was a ſpirituall death, both of the ſoule and bodie, ſtanding in the want of the life of God. Then this life muſt be ſpiritual alſo, euen the life of God, that thruſts out that death, that is, that corruption, and fruites of the ſame. If thou haue this life, though thou werſt dying bodily, thou wilt be liuing in thy ſoule; and when thou art dead, thou ſhalt be liuing: this is the aduantage of this life of God. But if thou want this life dying, thou ſhalt be onely dead and nought els: and woe is that man or woman that is onely dead. 2. Cor. 4. 10. Paul ſpeaking of himſelfe ſaith, Euery where we beare about in our bodie the dying of the Lord Ieſus, meaning this dying in the bodie, but yet (ſaith he) the life of Ieſus is manifested in my bodie: that is, in dying bodily, I liue ſpiritually. And verſ. 16. The more that the bodie died, the more he was renued daily. Paul felt this in himſelfe; doeſt thou not feele this naturall life wearing away, the ſtrength of it decaying daily? Striue thē with Paul, that with the decay of the one, thou maiſt feele the growth of the other in thee; and woe is thee, loſing the bodily life, if thou get not the growing of the ſpiritual life. But if thou doeſt feele it, keepe it well; otherwiſe thou ſhalt die euerlaſtingly. He ſaith not ſimply he had quickened them, but he ſaith, he hath quickened them with him, that is, with Ieſus Chriſt, in this order: Firſt he raiſed Chriſt from the dead: then with him he beginneth their riſing here in this life, which ſhall be accompliſhed in the ſecond reſurrection that is to come. If ye wil conſider theſe words, they import three things:  Firſt, there is none quickened alone; ſo as if thou be alone Three things in our 
                     •
                  iuification to be conſidered.  and ſeparate from Chriſt, thinke not to liue, conceiue not to get the life of God; and therefore he ſaith, hee hath quickened you with him. 
                The ſecond thing is, there is no man that is firſt quickened in order, but Chriſt is firſt quickened, and thou commeſt in the ſecond roome: thou canſt not get life before  him.  The third thing to be conſidered in this place, is, no man getteth life from God immediatly; for firſt hee giueth life to  Chriſt; and thou being in Chriſt, thou draweſt a portion out of him. He hath the fulnes: if thou be ioyned with him, thou draweſt out a ſhare of life, where by thou doeſt liue. And therefore

take this admonition; Wouldeſt thou haue life? ſtand not alone, but ioyne with thy head Chriſt, and then with the bodie: for if thou be not a member of this bodie (though it ſeeme ignominious to thee) thou ſhalt haue no life in thee. Creepe then vnto Chriſt, be neuer alone, be euer in the ſociety of the Saints. And if Chriſt be the head, then claime not to be the firſt to haue life, but let Ieſus thy head be firſt; and then come thou creeping in to him; ſtriue to be next him as much as thou canſt: and ſtriue not to be firſt; for hee will be firſt in deſpite of thee. The laſt is, ſeeke not to get grace and life immediatly of God without Chriſt, as if there were any life of thy own without him: thou wouldeſt be deceiued, & in ſteed of life the curſe of God will fall vpon thee. Thinkeſt thou that the Iewes which looke vp to heauen, and ſeeke life without Chriſt; thinkeſt thou that they will get it? Nay, they get death in ſteed of life: but thou that getteſt a drop of his grace (which is better then all the kingdomes of the earth) to refreſh thy ſoule, that is parched, as it were, with the heate of ſinne, thou (I ſay) wilt get life in him; for all grace is in him: therefore ſeeke for it in him.
            To goe forward, he laieth downe whereupon this proceedeth: It muſt be builded vpon a ground, which is a remiſſion of thy ſinnes; which is in effect, the iuſtifying of thee in Ieſus, accompting thee to be a iuſt man, notwithſtanding thy ſinnes: ſaying, I pronounce thee a iust man. Then briefly mark this, and looke by what order thou attaineſt to life. This is the order to come by the life of God: firſt before euer thou get that quickning How to attaine life. ſpirit (for it is the ſpirit that quickens) thou muſt haue the bloud of Ieſus. For there are two things that come from Ieſus, his bloud and his ſpirit; thinke not to get the ſpirit before the bloud; but ſeeke the bloud, bathe and waſh that foule ſoule of thine. Waſh and clenſe thee againe and againe in that bloud ſhed on the croſſe, to the end that the guiltines of thy ſinnes being waſhed away from thy ſoule (for this is the vertue of that bloud to all that beleeue) thou maiſt get the ſpirit of Ieſus. For being once waſhed in his bloud, then thou getteſt that that is called the remiſſion of ſinnes, which are waſhed away Heb 9. 14.
               
through faith in the bloud of Chriſt: and hauing got this free remiſſion, the ſpirit will come and will pull out that roote of bitternes, and digge it vp by the rootes: all the power in the The power of Christs ſpirit. world cannot pull it vp, but the ſpirit of Ieſus will doe it; it will (I ſay) pluck vp that roote, and all the branches and members of it: howbeit he will not doe it at once; yet hee will doe it by degrees. Then if thou wouldeſt haue life, goe on in this order, and ſay to God; Lord forgiue me my ſinnes in the bloud of 
               Two petitions. 
               Ieſus; ſay not Lord quicken me, but ſay, Lord forgiue me my ſinnes, and take away the guiltines of them in the bloud of Ieſus.  It is moſt certaine that if thou haue faith in the bloud of Ieſus, thou muſt be forgiuen.  Then ſay in the ſecond roome: Lord quicken me, giue me that ſpirit that may pull out this naturall corruption, and put life in me. Come on in this manner, and if thou haſt a faithfull heart, it is not poſsible but thou maiſt obtaine remiſsion of thy ſins, and be quickened. Crie then continually, Lord forgiue me, Lord relieue me of the death which I lie in; relieue me of this corruption, & put life in me, and all this through thy beloued ſonne Chriſt Ieſus. For it will not be the life of thy parents that will make thee to liue; crie to root out that poiſon which thou haſt from thy parents. Our gentlemen thinke it enough for them, if they be deſcended of ſuch a deſcent of people. Ha, ha, thou wilt die like a dog, if thou haue no more: be neuer contented til thou haſt gotten a new birth. For all they that will raigne with him muſt haue a new birth. It is impoſſible for thee to be one of Gods children and of Chriſts, and to haue place in heauen, if thou be not borne anew againe, by the ſpirit and water, as ſaith Ioh. 1. Epiſt. 5. 6. And ſo much for the ſecond effect of the ſtrong power of God.
            Now followeth the third effect in quickening of the Iewes: The third effect of Gods power there muſt be ſomething ſupplied in the text: And vs, that is, the Iewes: ſo I ſhall ſtand vpon theſe words where he ſaith, he hath put out the hand writing. 
               Note.The order whereby the Gentiles were quickened, was the remiſſion of their ſinnes: but the order whereby the Iewes are quickened, is otherwiſe, before euer  they gate life, there muſt be an hand writing blotted out: and

if we looke to it, the Iewes were more bound to death, then the Gentiles, becauſe they had ſubſcribed to their death, and that publikely in the face of the world. But to come to the words. We haue to marke theſe things: firſt, who is this that blotteth out, and ſcrapeth away this hand writing. Secondly, what is meant by the blotting out. Thirdly, what is the thing that is blotted out. Fourthly, wherefore ſerued this hand writing; he telleth it was againſt them, it ſerued to their condemnation. I ſhall goe through theſe foure as time ſhall ſerue. As for him that is the blotter out, his name is not expreſſed, it is Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God: for I ſee here, that which I noted 
                  Foure points in the 14. verſe.
                in the firſt chapter, the perſon is changed, he ſaid it is God the Father that quickened the Gentiles: now he changeth the perſon. There is no fault in this: for that, that the Father doth, the Sonne doth: To let you ſee that all is common to the Father and to the Sonne, The Father worketh and I worke, ſaith Chriſt, Ioh. 5. 17. Then what is meant by this blotting out? The word in the originall ſignifieth a perfect ſcraping out, as it were of an obligation; ſo that there remaineth not behinde any memorie of that that is ſcraped out; there reſts not one letter or tittle vnſcraped out. Then Chriſt Ieſus is made a Chauncellor of the Father to cancell, to blot out at his pleaſure, and as hee pleaſeth. Hee hath rent the obligation and drawne lines through it: ſo thou that wouldeſt haue thy obligation cancelled, get thee to him, for wee haue bound our ſelues to him. Thirdly, what is that that is blotted out? The handwriting ſtanding in ordinances, that is, in rites and ceremonies. Then it is the ceremonies or rites that be blotted out, which was an obligation of the Iewes, ſubſcribed with their owne hands. Now wherfore ſerueth it? He ſaith it was againſt vs, not for vs; it did vs no good, but euill. It bound and tyed vs to death, and ſealed vp to vs the guiltines of death and damnation. He exempteth not himſelfe from this death: hee ſubſcribeth it with his owne deede. To make this plaine, the Iew in vſing of circumciſion, he proteſted hee had originall ſinne, and ſo was guiltie of damnation: in vſing of theſe waſhings, he proteſted and proclaimed, hee was all filthie, and ſo guiltie

of the curſe of the law, and ſo ſubſcribed to his owne death. How the Iewes in the vſe of the ceremoniall law proclaimed their owne guiltines and death. And laſt of all in ſacrificing, hee proteſted hee was ſinfull, and that he had deſerued that death, which the innocent beaſt ſuſtained for his cauſe: and therefore guiltie of iudgement and damnation, and ſo ſubſcribed to his owne death. Brethren, this was marueilous, the rites and ceremonies were figures of Chriſt, and ſerued to leade them to Ieſus Chriſt, to ſee that bloud of Ieſus in a figure, which waſheth away the ſinnes of the world. How is it then a handwriting againſt them? I anſwer, it is true if their ceremonies be taken as figures of Chriſt, they were no handwriting againſt them, if they had an eye to the bodie that is Chriſt, and ſought not life in the ceremonies, but in the thing figured. But brethren, take them from Chriſt, take waſhings, and ſacrifices, as a kinde of religion without Hovv the ceremonies vvere an handwriting againſt the Ievves. Chriſt, all was but a handwriting againſt them. And whatſoeuer Iew he was that looked not to Chriſt in his Circumciſion, in his waſhing and rubbings, and in ſacrificing, that Iew periſhed; and all his doings was but the ſubſcribing to his owne death.
            Now to come to the Apoſtle; hee taketh the ceremonies as ſeparate from Chriſt, and ſo they were a handwriting againſt them. He was a rare Iew that vſed them with reſpect to Chriſt, but the multitude tooke them as a religion without Chriſt; and therefore the greater multitude periſhed. And ſo I ſay that outward ceremonies cannot ſaue vs. In comming to the Church thinke not to get life, except thy heart pearce into Chriſt Ieſus, all thy outward worſhipping ſhall not helpe thee, but ſhall be an obligation to thy owne condemnation, as the outward Ceremonies of the Iewes were to them a handwriting againſt them to their owne deſtruction. And if thou abuſe theſe Ceremonies which we haue in religion, in preaching, Spirituall vvorſhip. praying, and outward meeting, I aſſure thee thou ſhalt not eſcape the iudgement of God. And therefore beware, and neuer content thy ſelfe with the outward worſhipping; fie on it all, if thou haue not an inward worſhipping in thy heart. Againe, I ſee no man that goeth to hell, but before hee goe, hee ſubſcribeth to his owne death. I ſubſcribe with my owne hand

that I am worthie of death. The obligation paſſeth againſt thee either ſecretly or openly in thy owne conſcience; and then thy mouth ſhall be cloſed, and the Lord ſhall caſt thy handwriting before thee, and ſhall ſay, Seeſt thou not thy owne handting? knoweſt thou not that thou ſubſcribedſt this? And if thou werſt an Emperour, thou ſhalt keepe thy mouth cloſe then, and goe from him with howling and ſcritching. And therefore neuer reſt as thou wouldeſt haue life, till thou get that handwriting taken away. Thou wouldeſt be buſie to get that handwriting taken away, which thou ſeeſt and knoweſt will doe thee euill here, and that may trouble thee in thy perſon, goods, or lands; fie on thee that ſhouldeſt be ſo buſied about trifles and vanities, and forgetteſt to take away this fearfull handwriting: which if it ſtand vntaken away, may doe, and ſhall doe thee more harme then the loſſe of this whole world can doe. Seeke therefore continually night and day to haue this handwriting of thy ſinne and guiltines taken away, as thou wouldeſt ſtand with ioy in the preſence of thy maker, at that day. To whom with the Sonne and holy Spirit be all honor for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHTEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians, beginning at the midſt of the 14. verſe.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 14. 15.
               
                  14 Which was contrary to vs, he euen tooke it out of the way, and fastened it vpon the croſſe:
                  
                  15 And hath ſpoyled the principalities, and powers, and hath made a ſhew of them openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in the ſame croſſe.
               
            
            
               WE inſiſt yet (brethren) on the deſcription of God, and of the effectualnes of his power. Ye haue heard that he is deſcribed from his effects, the workes that hee hath wrought. The firſt effect and worke in which chiefly the effectualnes of his ſtrong power vttred it ſelfe, was the raiſing Coherence. of Ieſus Chriſt from the dead: not by remitting him any ſinne that he had done, becauſe he neuer ſinned; but ſimply he raiſed him by his power. The ſecond effect is, the raiſing of the Coloſſians, and generally of the Gentiles, when they were dead in ſinne, and in that vncircumciſion of the fleſh. But how? by forgiuing them their ſinnes: for there is no life, nor quickening of thee, but by the remiſſion of thy ſinnes. Firſt that guiltines muſt be taken away, before euer that ſpirit of life enter into thee. The third effect, that wee entred into the laſt day, and now this day, wee ſhall finiſh it, by Gods grace,

and it is the quickening of the Iewes, who had alſo as great neede to be quickened, as the Gentiles had. And Paul confeſſeth his owne miſerie, and wants, naming himſelfe among the reſt. But how? by putting away the handwriting that was againſt them: for beſides the guiltines of ſinne, they had ſubſcribed to their own guiltines: for ſo oft as they vſed the ceremonies of the Law, ſo often did they ſubſcribe to their owne condemnation. So that before they could be quickened, it behooued that this handwriting ſhould be ſcraped out. It ſtanding, there was no forgiuenes to them: ſo their life is by taking away of this handwriting.
            But to proceede: the laſt day we opened theſe words: Hauing put away the handwriting of the ordinances that was againſt vs: That is to ſay, hauing put away the rites and ceremonies of the Law (for Chriſt by his death aboliſhed them all) the which rites were as an obligation or handwriting, ſubſcribed by the Iewes againſt themſelues, ſealing the guiltines of death and damnation for ſinne. Now to goe forward in the text as it followeth, as God will giue grace. Immediatly after theſe words (marke euery word, for they haue weight) hee ſubioyneth, which was contrary to vs: he repeateth it againe, but hee tooke it out of the way, that is the handwriting of rites that was contrarie to vs, and made not for vs: the Lord Ieſus took it out of the way. It lay in our way, and it was a ſure ſtumbling blocke to vs, and we were not able to remoue it, nor to take it out of the way: but yet the Lord Ieſus, hee taketh it out of the middeſt of the way. So ye ſee there is nothing but a repeating of that, that was ſpoken before: howbeit in other tearmes; he ſaid before, which was againſt vs: now hee ſaith, which was contrarie to vs, al is one in effect. Repetition of a thing is not without cauſe: for the holy ſpirit neuer ſpeaketh any word in vaine. Thou and I may often ſpend words idly, but the holy ſpirit cannot waſte one iot or ſillable. The cauſe of this repetition is: Paul cannot forget the thing that he and the reſt had done againſt themſelues, and that that Chriſt did for them. O, if thou remembredſt the benefits of God, once telling thē ouer would Repetition not idle in Scripture. not ſerue thy turne! and it learneth thee neuer to forget that, that thou haſt done againſt thy ſelfe, and that which Chriſt

hath done for thee. By that that thou haſt done, thou had deſt beene vndone, if this that Chriſt hath done had not beene done. Beſides this, it ſerueth for the greater certaintie of that that was done. He will force an aſſurance into thee, both that thou haſt ſubſcribed to thy owne death, and alſo that Chriſt hath taken away thy ſubſcription, that thou ſhouldeſt not doubt. Woe to that vaine doctrine of doubting, and woe to Doubting. the doubting Doctors. The dolts will bid thee doubt whether Chriſt hath taken away that ſubſcription: woe to ſuch Doctors! If wee will marke the words, ye ſhall ſee an oppoſition, that, that thou haſt done Iew or Gentile, it is againſt thy ſelfe: that, that Chriſt hath done, is for thee. This lets thee ſee, not only the Iew but the Gentile, that thou art more beholding to Chriſt then to thy ſelfe: thou ſubſcribedſt againſt thy ſelfe; and if the Lord proceede vpon thy handwriting, thou ſhalt certainly dye. But Ieſus Chriſt hath put that ſubſcription of thine out of the way: ſo that if thou be thankfull thou ſhouldeſt loue him better then thy ſelfe: for the greateſt enemie that man hath is his owne ſelfe: And therefore ſhouldeſt thou not loue him better then thy ſelfe? If thou doe it not thou ſhalt dye. But not to leaue the force of the word (for this word importeth a greater meaning then the other) the word of blotting The word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , putting out. The word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to take out of the way. out was great indeede, ducere tranſuerſas lineas, is a great word; but to deſtroy the very tables, paper, and all, and to rent it aſunder, is more then both. Marke it; for it lets vs ſee that his mercie is not halfed; he ſhewes not a peece of mercie vpon vs. Men will halfen their mercie towards others: but Ieſus Chriſt halfens not his mercie towards vs, but he perfecteth it. If he once meant to ſhew mercie, he wil not leaue that work till he end it: and if he once meane to remit, he will not leaue off till he haue freely forgiuen: for that that he doth, he doth it perfectly, to his glorie and thy ſaluation. The Pope will make him to halfen his mercie. O vaine doctrine! doeſt thou halfen the mercie of the Lord? thou art a lyer; the mercie of The guilt of ſinne & the puniſhment both remitted in Chriſt. the Lord is perfect: ſo that when hee remitteth, hee remitteth both the ſinne and the puniſhment thereof.
            Now to come to the words that follow. In the laſt words he ſheweth how the handwriting is taken out of the way. It was

not after ſo light a manner, as a man would take an obligation and rent it: but before it could be rent, it behooued the Lord to be crucified. Well (who would be hanged for another mans obligation?) and he being crucified, he taketh that obligation and naileth it to the croſſe, and rents it aſunder. Now to make this plaine, when Ieſus Chriſt was crucified, he was not crucified alone, but many things were crucified with him; and many things that ſame very houre were nailed to the croſſe with him: This handwriting of thine, thy inditement that would haue condemned thee, thy ſinne originall, thy actuall ſinnes, the death that followeth thereon, and hell, euen all theſe were nailed to the croſſe with him: finally that curſe was crucified with him; all died together, hee died not alone: all depended vpon his death, he died firſt, they followed. For brethren, the ſinnes of the world were laid vpon Chriſt; and for that cauſe he came into the world, to take them of the back of the world, and to lay them on his owne backe, as is ſaid Eſai. 53. 5. The Lord laid on him all our iniquities, tumbled them on him: ſo that when Chriſt was lifted vp vpon the croſſe, there was neuer ſuch a lift lifted vp. Take all the mountaines and lay them on one perſon, and there was a heauier burthen lying vpon his backe. For the wrath of God was lying vpon him: who felt it? the Iewes? Nay the Lord Ieſus felt the weight of that fierce wrath; and he hanging on the croſſe all hanged with him, thy malediction, thy obligation, thy death and curſe were on his backe and hung with him. Therefore Peter in his firſt Epiſtle and ſecond chapter, verſ. 24. ſaith, that he bare in his bodie our ſinnes, all hung with him. Now brethren, think ye that his burthen was light? That handwriting of the curſe of God for ſin, thy ſinne and euery particular mans ſinne, that beleeueth or ſhould beleeue in him, their death and torments due to them, haue they eſcaped Chriſt crucified on the croſſe? No, no, all were laid on him, and al were crucified with him, and the ſame nailes that were driuen into his hands and feet, were alſo really beaten into thy ſinnes, and into that death due to ſinne, and they were driuen through hell, the laſt torment for ſinne. But who did this? The Iewes had little minde of this; no not of their owne obligation. Who was it then that crucified them?

The Iewes nailed the Lord: but the Lord nailed them. The very death that Ieſus dyed was the nailes that were ſtriken thorow The Iewes nailed Christ on the croſſe: but he him ſeiſe nailed our ſinnes, the obligation, death and hell to that his croſſe. that obligation, and the ſins of all the beleeuers, to the vtter ouerthrow of all things that before had offended his father in the elect, or that ſhould offend him thereafter. For in that hee died, it was not for ſinne done before alone, but for ſinne alſo that after ſhould be done by any of his elect: for he is the mediatour that taketh away the ſinnes of the world for euer and euer: as he was the lambe of God that was ſlaine from the beginning. O then let neuer that powerfull death of Ieſus goe out of thy minde, as thou wouldeſt be ſaued, and haue comfort in the day of thy death! The Lord Ieſus in his death was the moſt bleſſed agent that euer was, the very death of Ieſus ſlew all the ſinnes in the world.
            Now to goe to the next verſe. To the end that they ſhould not doubt of the deſtroying of the hand-writing, the Apoſtle telleth them what more he did, when he was on the Croſſe, that ſeeing the greater thing they ſhould not doubt of the leſſer: for he that can doe the greater, he can doe the leſſe. What did he? He tooke all the diuels in hell, he diſarmed them, he ſpoyled them, and led them in a triumph like ſlaues, with their hands bound behind their backes, and hee mounted vpon the croſſe, as vpon a chariot, triumphing ouer them, and that is more. Now to vnderſtand this the better, we muſt vnderſtand there were two things againſt vs (howbeit he ſpeaketh of the Iewes, yet all may be drawne to vs generally) firſt there was thine owne hand, it ſtood vntaken away: then there were powers and principalities and diuels: there was not one diuell but he Two things against vs all. was againſt thee, accuſing thee vpon thine owne obligation. There is his obligation (ſaith he) how can he eſcape iudgement and condemnation? And they neuer ceaſe to accuſe thee, yea within thy owne conſcience, and they make it to condemne thee. Now what doth Chriſt? He taketh thy obligation and all that may be laid to thy charge, and aboliſheth it; and then hee turneth to the accuſers and fighteth with them, diſarmeth How vainly vaine men ſpeake of Christ crucified. thē, and leadeth thē captiue in a triumph. O would to God we could weigh ye mercie of God! O vaine bodie! it is but a word to thee, that Chriſt was crucified, as if thou werſt ſpeaking of a

hanged man, ſo vainely thou ſpeakeſt of Chriſts croſſe. Then this I marke generally. I ſee Ieſus Chriſt, when hee was on the croſſe dying, hee was the moſt occupied that euer was in any action: thou when thou art dying, thou doeſt no more, but Ieſus Chriſt when hee was in dying hee wrought and ſought moſt buſily. So that the death of Ieſus was ordained for the aboliſhing and deſtroying the aduerſeſt powers in the world, thy ſinne and hell, and whatſoeuer was contrarie to thee and thy ſaluation. Brethren, the argument that the Apoſtle vſeth, is from the greater to the leſſe: he hath ſpoyled the principalities and powers; therefore concludeth he, be aſſured he hath taken thy obligation away. When thou heareſt this, doubt not but thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee; the one thing is the ſmaller, the other is the greater. When thou ſeeſt the diuell rageth not in the world, when thou ſeeſt his dominion empayred: An argument to aſſure vs our ſinnes are pardoned, becauſe that Sathā and ſinne doe not raigne in vs. make thy vantage of it, and ſay, O my ſinnes are forgiuen! For be ye aſſured, if there were not remiſſion of ſinnes, the diuell would raigne and rage: and therefore this reſtraining of him, is a ſure argument that thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. For if thy hand writing were not rent, hee would raigne in thee, as hee raigneth in ſuch men as rage in their wicked luſts of adulteries and murthers. Thou that art exerciſed in thy pollutions and murthers, and ſuch like; thou haſt no warrant that thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee, for as yet the diuell raigneth in thee. Seeke therfore to this Lord Ieſus, and the vertue of his croſſe, that the diuell raigne not in thee. O miſerable is that creature whatſoeuer it be, that walketh in ſinne, whatſoeuer it be, thou maiſt be aſſured: for that handwriting of thy curſe, ſtandeth as yet againſt thee, and will condemne thee in that great day. It will be daſht in thy teeth to thy ſhame and confuſion for euer.
            He ſaith, Hauing ſpoyled. The word is ſtripped, taken off all that cloathing of theirs. Of whom? no ſmall creatures, but of principalities and powers, that is, the diuels, of whom one is ſtronger then al the men in the world. He were able to deſtroy all liuing men: and there are millions of them. O if thou kneweſt them, thou wouldeſt feare continually! Thou wilt looke to a ſillie creature and wilt ſtampe vpon it, but thou haſt

enemies aboue thy head, and if thou ſaweſt them, thou wouldeſt take little thought of the enimitie of men: looke Epheſ. chap. 6. verſ. 12. This power of the diuel is restrained only in the beleeuers, for he rageth euery day more and more fiercly in vnbeleeuers towards the end of the world, as Saint Iohn ſaith in the reuelation, becauſe his time is but ſhort. Then it followeth: before Chriſt was crucified, the diuels raigned as armed men, to the deſtroying of men. O how much be we beholding to Chriſt, that liue now in theſe daies, after this reſtraining of the power of the diuels! Now brethren, it is a thing that one might wonder at: will ye compare him and them together? The Iewes ſpoyled Chriſt of his clothes, ſetting him vp naked; what is he doing in the meane time? They are not ſo buſie in ſtripping him, as he is in ſtripping the diuels. They are ſtripping him, and he is ſtripping the Lords that raigned among them. And that yee may thinke the more of it, by the vertue of the ſtripping of him, and the pulling off of the clothes of him he pulleth off the armor of the diuels. If Chriſt had not been ſtripped, he had not ſtripped them; by the ouer comming of him, binding of him, he ouercommeth and bindeth the diuels: To learne you to account much of euery particular poynt of the ſufferings of Chriſt; for there was no poynt of it without a power to ſlay ſinne, and to ſlay the diuell. The nakednes of Chriſt is ſtronger, then the armed diuell is. And ſo much for this part.
            Then to ſee againe concerning theſe principalities, ſince Ieſus Chriſt hath ſuffered, what are they? Naked creatures: I may ſpeake it boldly, they are naked creatures, and this is to thy comfort. Thinke not but that thou muſt meete with him once, by day or night. It is his pleaſure to haue thy heart wrapped vp, and to lull thee a ſleepe. Then this is thy comfort, when thou haſt to doe with the diuell, thou haſt to doe with a naked creature, whom the Lord hath ſpoyled. But looke to this condition: if it be ſo, that thou be armed with the breaſtplate of faith: that thou be armed with Ieſus Chriſt. Haſt thou this? the diuell is but a naked bodie before thee. He may well tempt thee, but he ſhall not ouercome thee: yea, he ſhall not be able to dare thee: it ſhall paſſe the power of all the diuels in hell to doe thee harme. But if thou be naked and meete him without Chriſt, thou wilt meete with an armed man; he will draw thee here and there: and in very deede he raigneth like a Lyon in euery infidels heart: howbeit his kingdome be impaired;

yet if thou be an infidell, hee raigneth in thee like a Sathan in vnbeleeuers. wood roring lion, and hee will draw thee euery way from one ſinne to another, till by ſinning he bring thee to deſtruction. Ye ſee daily examples hereof in ſuch miſerable creatures that Epheſ. 2. 1 ſuffer on ſcaffolds. Fie on thee that ſuffereſt him to abuſe thee as he will; he will abuſe the murtherer to waſh his hands in the bloud of his brother; he will abuſe the harlot to commit whoredome; the oppreſſour to rage in oppreſſion, and ſo out of their open and horrible tranſgreſſions hee bringeth them to deſtruction. Such is the tyrannie of his kingdome. Fie on thee that knoweſt this, and yet ſuffereſt thy ſelfe to be abuſed with him. Well, well; ſeeke thy faith in Ieſus Chriſt to be clad with him, as euer thou wilt be free of this tyrannie of the diuel, of his tempting thee, and of his abuſing of thee to commit ſin euer at his pleaſure. Thus much for the victorie which the Lord getteth ouer theſe principalities and powers euen while hee is in crucifying.
            Now followeth that glorious triumph and progreſſe, which he maketh in the ſight of God and the Angels. The words are theſe, He made a ſhew of them openly: in the originall, he led them thorough openly, thorough the world, they looking on this ſide and that ſide. This manner of ſpeech is borrowed from Orators that haue vſed to ſet out glorious triumphs of Emperours in ſuch ſpeeches: it is taken from them and giuen to Chriſt: and no wrong done. Ye know the Romane Emperours, when they triumphed, they vſed to be honoured with many points of honour, and to be briefe, the manner of their triumph was The Romanes triumph. this: The Emperour himſelfe was mounted on hie in a glorious Chariot, and all the people aſſembled and ſtood gazing on him: and then the Captiues were brought before him, their armour taken from them, and their hands bound: they were led formoſt, and the Emperour followed. The Apoſtle alludeth to the ſame manner, in this triumph of Ieſus Chriſt. But to come to euery word, he ſaith he led them thorough, as it were thorough a companie of men and women. The diuels are led thorough thē: but this is that, that is to be wondred at; Chriſt is led to the croſſe bearing his own croſſe like a ſlaue, and the Chriſts triumph. people are gazing on him, and hee is made a mocking ſtocke:

he is raiſed vp vpon that ſhamefull croſſe, & dieth that ſhamefull death. The Apoſtle turneth this ouer and ſaith, it is the diuell that is led in chaines; it is the Lord Ieſus that triumphes, and they are in chaines: he goeth forward in glorie, and they goe in ſhame. This ſame turning ouer letteth thee ſee, that by When the diuell thought to triumph ouer Chriſt, he triumphed ouer him. that leading him out to the croſſe ſo ſhamefully; he was ſhaming the diuels of hell, and leading them captiues in ſuch ſort, that if he had not been ſhamed, he could not haue ſhamed the diuels. In his ſhame he ſhameth the diuels. Indeede it had bin a ſmaller matter if by his glorie he had ſhamed them: but this is marueilous, that with the ſhame wherewith they ſhamed him, he ſhamed them. Ye may ſee againe, it is for our conſolation to ſee the diuels deiected. I ſhewed you before that ſince that very houre that Chriſt ſuffered, the diuels are naked: now as they are naked, ſo they are ſhamed, and they are without power: and ſo thou haſt a great vantage ouer them. The diuell bluſheth when he ſeeth thee, his head hangs downe. The daſtard dares not looke vp to heauen; when thou haſt to doe with him, thou haſt to doe with a ſhamed creature, that is aſhamed to looke thee in the face: they are ſhamed creatures. O but note the condition! If thou be glorious in Ieſus Chriſt, if thou come out honourably in him, comming out in his glorie, the diuels will be aſhamed to looke on thee, they cannot abide the ſight of thee. The very glance of thee wil ſtrike them blindfold. Indeede they may well puſh at thee, but they dare not come ſo neere thee to hurt thee: but if thou come out againſt them, without the glorie of Chriſt, in the ignominie of thy owne nature, if thou werſt a King (thou art but a confounded creature in thy owne nature) he ſhall caſt vp his face, and he ſhall be glorious aboue thee (for he is a principalitie) and he will oppreſſe thee: So bleſſed is that man, and that ſoule that is clad with Ieſus, and hath his faith in him: for he ſhall ouercome the diuel & find ſtrength in the day of temptation. Caſt Gorgons head, or Meduſas: ſo many as did looke on it were turned into ſtones, as Poets faine
                vp Ieſus Chriſt as it were Gorgonis caput, the diuell dare not look vpon thee: but if thou appeare in thy own nature, without Chriſt, lying in thy ſtink, he will boldly and fiercely ſet on thee. He will caſt vp his face & aſſaile thee mightily, & he ſhall not leaue thee till he deſtroy thee: for there is no mercie or pitie

with him, he is more cruell thē a Tiger. Well, ſeek to Chriſt, as ye would be ſaued, and ſtand faſt in the day of temptation.
            
               He led them through (ſaith he) openly. That is, in the ſight of God, his Angels, and all the world, and theſe that ſtood about the croſſe. What auailes a triumph that is done in ſecret? The glorie of this triumph ſtood in that, that it was done ſo openly. I tell thee his croſſe was no more open then his triumph was; his glorie was as open as his ſhame. But thou wilt ſay, who was this? all the Iewes and the nations about, ſaw him crucified ignominiouſly: who ſaw this triumph? alas, if they had had eyes they might haue ſeene it. Whereto tended his death? but to the vanq
                  •••••
               ng of the diuell: ſo the fault was not in the croſſe, bu
                  •
                in them that they ſaw not. If there were no more but that title, Ieſus of Nazareth King of the Iewes, which Pilate would not alter, if they had taken heede to that title, they might perceiue hee was triumphing. But howbeit they all ſaw it not, yet I doubt not but there were ſome ſecret ones that ſaw it: both God and his Angels ſaw it; and Paul looking back againe to the croſſe, he ſeeth that triumph. There is none of vs, but when we looke backe to the croſſe of Chriſt Ieſus, wee ſee in the croſse a triumphing King, ſitting in a triumphing chariot, this is Pauls ſight, and it is the ſight of euery faithfull ſoule. They ſee it and they feele it daily, and out of my ſight it ſhall neuer goe, nor out of thy ſight that beleeueſt in the Lord Ieſus.
            In the laſt words he taketh vp in one word, the triumphing He cōpares Chriſts triumph with the Romanes triumphes. ouer them: ye know the greateſt glorie of victorie, when men triumph ouer their enemies, is to be ſet aboue them; and al the Romane Emperours neuer got ſo great glorie, as when they got a triumph. But all is nothing to this glorie of the triumph of our Ieſus: for he getteth the greateſt honour, he getteth the triumph, which is worthily called a triumph. What is his triumph? The Romanes got their triumph when they had oppreſſed men moſt vniuſtly, and ſo it was but a tyrannie: but the Lord Ieſus triumpheth not, becauſe hee oppreſſeth this or that man; but he triumphs becauſe hee oppreſſed principalities and powers, that is, the diuels. Neuer a Caeſar ouercame

the diuell; but the diuell ouercame them, when they were in their greateſt royaltie; ſo that the diuell was leading them to hell faſteſt, when they triumphed moſt vniuſtly: but Ieſus Chriſt triumpheth after a iuſt victorie. The ſpoyling of them was moſt iuſt, and ſo it paſſeth all the triumphes of all the Romane Emperours and Caeſars. Their Chariots are not to bee compared with that croſſe of Ieſus. So wouldeſt thou triumph with Ieſus Chriſt, and after a iuſt conqueſt? Alas, alas, ſeeke not to triumph ouer men, ouer this or that King, this bodie or that; ouer poore tenants to ſhed their bloud, to wring thy hands in their heart bloud as thou wilt. O villaine, villaine, ſtay! let not that King of Spaine, that ſlaue ſubiected to that beaſt of Rome reioyce, in that by his crueltie he triumphs ouer many nations. O thou wilt call thy ſelfe a Chriſtian King! learnedſt thou of Chriſt to oppreſſe thy neighbour countries? No, if thou werſt a Chriſtian King, thou wouldeſt learne to oppreſſe the diuell, that raigneth ouer thee. But to leaue them and to ſpeake of this victorie of Chriſt: thou that wouldeſt haue a true triumph, ſeeke to haue the victorie ouer the diuel, that ſeeketh to triumph ouer thee, and that in Ieſus Chriſt: for without him there is no true victorie.
            To end in a word: ye would marueile, if you looke to this writing of this Apoſtle, and I doubt not, that mē in this world, that know not what Ieſus and his croſſe meane, would ſcorne all this language: for the wiſedome of God is fooliſhnes to this world. What is this he is telling? He is ſpeaking of an ignominious croſſe of Chriſt: and againe, he is ſetting him vp as it were a Caeſar. There was neuer an Oratour that ſpake more highly of an Emperour, then hee doth, ſpeaking of the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt. He is making a glorie of an ignominie; and a Chariot of a gallowes; a triumph of a man that is hanged. Brethren, this ſame ſpeech of the Apoſtle (would to God we could ſee as he ſaw, it is a triumphing ſpeech of a triumph) teſtifieth plainly, that hee felt in his heart the power of the croſſe and A triumphing ſpeech in the Apoſtle of Chriſts triumph. death of Ieſus Chriſt, as he ſaith, Galath. 6. 14. God forbid that I ſhould reioyce but in the croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Christ, It teſtifieth that his heart was full of the power of God, and of the

death of Chriſt; and that the obligation was cancelled, and the diuell vndone; and by this effectuall feeling, the mouth and the heart are opened. Alas, alas, he would not haue compared the croſſe of Chriſt with the triumph of Emperours, if his heart had not felt the vertue of the croſſe of Chriſt. O then, ſeeke a ſenſe of the death of Chriſt, and the power of it! otherwiſe reade not theſe words; for thou wilt ſcorne the Goſpell. Againe I ſay, thou wilt ſcorne the Goſpell, if thou finde not the vertue and power of the death of Chriſt in ſome meaſure ſenſibly in thy heart; yea and the wiſer thou art, thou wilt euer account it the greater follie. Therefore as euer thou wilt account of it, and ſpeake of the croſſe of Chriſt to thy ioy, ſeeke to feele ſenſibly the power of that death of Chriſt: for it is not like a common death. In the death of the man Ieſus Chriſt what was there? There was the life of the Sonne of God that quickened the death of the man. So that it is more powerfull then all the liues of Angels or men that are, or that euer will be. So all tendeth to this: ſeeke to finde the power of that death, that thou maiſt reade it with ioy, and heare tell of it with ioy. And certainly, if thou ſhalt feele the power at the hearing and ſpeaking of it, if thine hart ſhal leape for ioy: it is argument for thee, that Ieſus Chriſt hath triumphed ouer death to thy ſaluation. To this Ieſus, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all glorie and honour for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE NINETEENTH LECTVRE VPON THE Epiſtle of PAVL to the Coloſsians.
            
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 16. 17.
               
                  16 Let no man therefore condemne you in meate and drinke, or in reſpect of an holie day, or of the new Moone, or of the Sabboth daies,
                  17 Which are but ſhadowes of things to come: but the bodie is in Chriſt.
                  
               
            
            
               THe purpoſe of the Apoſtle in all this place (beloued brethren) it is partly to exhort the Coloſsians to beware of falſe teachers, that had crept in amongſt them; & partly to admoniſh them. Now, heretofore ye heard, hee fell vpon occaſion into a faire deſcription of God, and of Coherence. the effectualnes of his power, which was from the effects: firſt from the raiſing of Ieſus Chriſt from the dead. Secondly, from raiſing vp of the Gentiles, and namely the Coloſsians, who were dead in ſinnes and in the vncleannes of their fleſh, from that death they lay in. And thirdly, from the quickening of the Iewes, who had ſubſcribed an obligation againſt themſelues, ſealing vp that they were guiltie of damnation. Therefore Ieſus Chriſt, the firſt thing he doth, is the cancelling of the obligation, and putting it out of the way, by nailing it on the croſſe: then when he had done this, he turneth him vpon the ſame croſſe, to principalities and powers, who are the diuels that perſecuted mankind, and accuſed them vpon that handwriting. He turneth (I ſay) to them, and fighteth with them, ſpoyling and leading them captiues. Then hauing ſpoyled

them, he leadeth them to their ſhame and his glory in the ſight of God and his Angels, openly in a triumph, hee ſitting as it were, in his triumphing chariot the croſſe, more glorious then all the chariots wherein any triumphing Emperour euer triumphed from the beginning. Now (brethren) in this text which we haue read, the Apoſtle returneth to his former purpoſe, and vpon the former doctrine, containing that fact of Chriſt vpon the croſſe, in nailing the hand-writing to the croſſe, and putting it out of the way, and vanquiſhing the diuels; he gathers this admonition. Seeing this hand-writing of ordinances, all rites, ceremonies and all, are aboliſhed by the croſſe of Chriſt: therefore ye Coloſsians, let no man condemne you for theſe things. They are not, they are all aboliſhed, and put away; therefore beware of the falſe teachers, that would condemne you for not vſing of ſuch things: I meane (ſaith he) new Moones, Sabboths, meates, drinkes, and ſuch other ceremonies. If wee will weigh theſe words well, wee ſhall finde in them not onely a ſimple admonition giuen to the Coloſsians, that they ſhould not ſuffer themſelues to bee condemned in ſuch things: but alſo we ſhall finde an inhibition giuen to the falſe teachers, forbidding them to condemne the Coloſsians, or any of the Gentiles, in any of theſe rites that were alreadie aboliſhed, forbidding them ſtreightly vnder the paine of their condemnation to vrge them with the ſame. The very forme of the words ſheweth, that it is a very law: for it is giuen after the manner of a law: Let no man. As if he would ſay, I inhibite that no man condemne you for theſe ceremonies of the law alreadie aboliſhed in the death of Chriſt.
            Then briefly (brethren) ye ſee there is a law giuen: the holie Spirit giueth it, the Apoſtle proclaimeth it, the law is this, An euangelicall law. 
               that no man condemne them whom God abſolueth. When God abſolueth a man, let no man condemne him: no, if it were all the Kings in the earth they are ouer bold to condemne the ſillieſt creature that God abſolueth. Paul to the Rom. chap. 8. 33. 34. commandeth and vrgeth, Who will intend any crime? who will be ſo bold to doe it? it is God that iustifieth, who then dare be ſo bold as to condemne him whom hee iustifieth, and abſolueth? The law is giuen in generall. But to come to the particulars. There is a

law giuen concerning the Iew, that after God hath rent his hand-writing, and aboliſhed all the rites that hee was ſubiect vnto; let no man condemne him for not obſeruing of theſe ceremonies. And as concerning the Gentile, there is a law, let no falſe teacher condemne a Gentile for not obſeruing any of theſe ceremonies, conſidering the Gentiles neuer receiued them: they were impoſed vpon the Iew. As for the Gentile, they were not impoſed vpon him, and therefore it is a great preſumption to impoſe theſe rites vpon them who neuer had receiued them. But to come neere and ſpeake plainly. There is a law againſt the Pope and Papiſts, that they condemne no Chriſtian man vnder paine of condemnation, for not obſeruing of ſuch rites, as their feſtiual daies, & ceremonies of their owne inuention. And in the name of the ſame Ieſus (as the Apoſtle intimateth this law) ſo doe I intimate the ſame to them and you that heare me; let no man condemne you for not keeping of ſuch things, as the Papiſts would impoſe vpon you. The Lord hath made you free of them. The Lord hath giuen you libertie: He is too impudent to binde you with the obſeruation of ſuch things.
            But let vs particularlie ſee the things, in the which he will not haue the Coloſſians and the reſt of the Gentiles & vs this day condemned. He calleth them, in meate drinke, and holy daies, apparantly he vnderſtandeth the feaſts, that were moſt ſolemne, as the Paſſeouer, the feaſt of Tabernacles, and ſuch others. And then he commeth to them that were not ſo ſolemne, as the new Moones and the reſt. And if you will marke the manner of ſpeaking, he ſpeaketh of theſe rites with a diſdaining of them. They are of no worth after the body is come. I will not inſiſt to ſpeake of the rites of the Iewes, onely thus farre concerning their meates. Before the Lord came and was manifeſted, Leuit. 11. 1. Deut. 14. there ye ſhall finde that among the Iewes there was a difference of meates, ſome cleane, ſome Of the Iewiſh obſeruation of meates. vncleane and forbidden. All was to ſignifie the difference betweene the Iewe and the Gentile, that the Iewe ſhould not communicate with the Gentile. But that partition wall was throwne downe by Ieſus Chriſt at his comming, and all difference was taken away. Now the falſe teachers did as much as

they could, to haue raiſed vp the partition wall, and ſo to make voyde the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt.
            As concerning holy daies I onely touch it, among the Iewes there were many feaſts obſerued, but all were figures of Chriſt; Holy daies. and when he came, they all tooke end. And therefore the falſe teachers, that preſſed the obſeruation of thoſe daies, did what they could to annihilate the comming of Ieſus Chriſt, as though he had neuer yet come into the world. And here yee may cleerely perceiue the nature of erronious ſpirits that incline Erronious ſpirits. to hereſie, for the moſt part they are occupied about trifling things; things indifferent, as meate, drinke, holy dayes, and ſuch like. O as the Papiſts here are buſie about meates, holy dayes of their owne making, and ſuch like, from the which the Lord hath freed vs: To impoſe lawes neceſſarie to be kept (as they ſpeake) vnder the paine of ſaluation and damnation; as the eating of fleſh on friday: O vaine foole! As for things neceſſarie to ſaluation and the worſhip of God, Papiſts paſſe ouer them as friuolous. They will not condemne an adulterer. Behold their religion (brethren) I thinke ye deſire that I ſhould ſpeake ſome thing of the obſeruation of daies, and difference of meates. Seeing this hath been handled in the doctrine of the Catechiſme; it is not my purpoſe to inſiſt vpon it. Yet I ſhall ſhew you mine opinion as plainly and briefly as I may poſsibly, agreeing with the godly and learned in theſe daies. Ye will aske, is there any difference betweene meates, what ſhall we thinke of them that wil abſtaine from meates? I anſwere, if for policies ſake, becauſe of any politike law, and in regard of a common-weale, thou abſtaineſt from meates, Law concerning meates. thou doeſt well. As on the contrary, thou doeſt euill, if thou abſtaine not: for the Magiſtrate is to be obeyed for conſcience ſake, Rom. 13. 5. If againe thou abſtaine from meates, and vſe not theſe bodily exerciſes, that by abſtinence and faſting thou maiſt be the better helped in the exerciſes ſpirituall, as prayer and repentance: whether there be a conſtitution of the Church to that effect, or whether of thy owne motion, thou doeſt it, thou doeſt well. But if thou begin to place godlines True fast. in eating and not eating, putting a neceſſitie in them, and that with the opinion of merit, that thou deſerueſt this or

that (as the Papiſts ſpeake) away with thee and thy faſting. If thou be of that opinion, faſt and it were fortie daies together, thou art an Idolater, and all thine exerciſe ſtinkes in the noſe Superſtitious faſt. of God; yea though thou doeſt faſt till thy bones and skinne came together.
            Now as concerning daies, what ſhall wee thinke of other countries, that yet keepe holy daies? I ſhall tell you, the holy daies (as they call them) they are either commaunded by God, or inſtituted by man: God is the author of them, or els man. The daies commaunded by God in old time before Chriſt came, they were many, as ye may reade in the bookes of Moſes: but as touching the daies inioyned by God to be kept of vs, after the comming of Chriſt, reade the Scripture from the beginning to the end, and yet thou ſhalt finde but one day onely inioyned thee to be kept, and that by the law Morall, and this day is the Lords Sabboth: and in keeping of this ſtandeth the worſhipping of God. So thou that keepeſt the ſeuenth day, thou doeſt the thing that is acceptable with God; and thou that doeſt it not, thou highly offendeſt God. Then concerning the daies inſtituted by man, whether of old, or of late, they are different. Some were inſtituted by man, for the honour of vulgar and common Saints: of ſome of the which it may be doubted whether they were Saints or no. Some were inſtituted for the honour of the Apoſtles, indeede they were Saints; yea euen although the Pope would not canonize thē. Some were inſtituted for the honour of God and Ieſus Chriſt. Now to go thorow: as for the holy daies appointed for ye honor of common Saints, I ſay this (and it is the opinion of the learned) they are Idolatrous; thou that doeſt run to the bones of Popiſh holy daies. this Saint, or that Saint, & kiſſeſt it, and thou woteſt not whether it was the bone of a murtherer, a theefe, or an oppreſſour, or of a Saint: And therefore the reformed Churches in Europe haue aboliſhed theſe daies. As for the daies inſtituted to the honour of the Apoſtles, indeed it is true ye reformed Churches agree not vniformally in this point. Some keepe theſe daies, and yet without perill of Idolatrie, becauſe they keepe the daies only, and yet without dedication of ſeruice to the Saints. But certainly, will ye ſee the matter as it is. It wanteth not ſuperſtition

(if the Apoſtles were neuer ſo holy) to dedicate a day to them, and ſeruice for them. I wil not bring in more reaſons, yet this I ſay, to celebrate a feaſt to any man, whether dead or liuing, with diuine worſhip to the ſame, it is Idolatrie: for the celebration of a feaſt, with ſeruice adioyned thereto, is a kinde of worſhip, that pertaineth to God onely. Reade the Lawe, and ye ſhall finde this. Now will ye haue Gods mind in this matter? When Moſes was dead, God taketh his bones and cauſed them to be buried ſecretly; that not one of the people ſhould know where they were laid. And wherefore doth he it? To preuent the ſuperſtition of the people, that they ſhould not worſhip them, and celebrate a feaſt to them. He knew the vanitie of mans braine, he will make a God of a dead bone: Bleſſed art thou that art reſtrained by the word of God.
            Will ye haue the example of the Iewes, reade where euer they made a feaſt to Moſes, or Aaron, or old Abraham? And if any ſhould haue a feſtiuall day, they ſhould haue had it: but I neither read nor heard tell, that they got any. Come to the Apoſtles themſelues, reade the Acts, when that idolatrous people would haue worſhipped them, they rent their cloathes for griefe of their ſuperſtition: And this day I trow they ſhould riue their cloathes, if they ſaw and vnderſtood the ſuperſtition and worſhip that is done to them: and if Paul had accepted of thy feaſt, O vaine Papiſt! hee ſhould not abide in heauen one moment: for that were to the diſhonour of God: they giue thee no thanke: if they wiſt of it, they would not faile to rent their cloathes and bodies both, and to curſe thee to thy face, for taking the honour that is due to God, and to giue it them. So concerning this, it is a peece of ſuperſtition, and idolatrie, to celebrate a feaſt, and appoint diuine ſeruice to the Apoſtles; I will except none of them: no, not Mary would not ſtand in heauen, if ſhe accepted of that honour that thou giueſt her. Fie on theſe vaine Papiſts, they rent Gods cloake aſunder, and would put it on another: fie on them and their ſtinking idolatrous daies.
            To come to the next word. In it hee ſubioynes another argument of his admonition, that none ſhould condemne them of theſe ceremonies, and it is taken from the nature and definition

of all the old Ceremonies. What are they all, but ſhadowes? and therefore ſeeing they are vaniſhing things, let no man condemne you vpon trifles; let no man find fault with you, nor thruſt them vpon you, as though they were neceſſarie poynts to the ſeruice of God. Then no man ſhould be condemned for a ſhadow, a vaniſhing and fickle thing: if thou werſt a King doe it not, there is no man ſo giuen ouer into the hands of men. It was not giuen to Angels to condemne a man for ceremonies; much leſſe oughteſt thou to condemne a man, ſpecially for a ſhadow. And yet for all that brethren, as I ſaid before, this is the nature of an erronious ſpirit, all their cenſuring Iudging of men by their obſeruation of ceremonies. proceedes of iudging a man for obſeruation of ceremonies, and they will ſend him to heauen and hell for euery trifle at their pleaſure. So marke an erronious ſpirit and a deceiuer: his head is buſie about theſe trifling things, cenſuring vpon ſhadowes, putting a neceſſitie where there is none, and ſtepping ouer the neceſſarie poynts of Religion. In a word, ye ſhall finde the diuell hath been a ſore enemie to this chriſtian libertie, to burden thee with things indifferent. But as Paul counſelleth thee, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the libertie wherewith Christ hath made thee free, and count him for a falſe teacher that would reſtraine thee.
            But to weigh the words better, which are but ſhadowes, that is, no ſubſtantiall thing. There is a great difference betweene the ſhadow and the body: for a man going to the Eaſt, his ſhadow ſtriketh to the weſt; ſo all the ſhadowes, when Chriſt roſe in the Eaſt, were ſtricken backe to the precedent times, and for the times ſince his reſurrection, are aboliſhed and done away. The Sacraments that we now receiue, are not ſhadowes, but ſure ſeales of Ieſus Chriſt alreadie come. Marke what was the eſtate of the Iewe: he liued vpon ſhadowes vnder the law, and yet he was ſafe: not by the vertue of the ſhadowes, but becauſe in the meane time, while he is in remembring of the The Iewes before Christ. ſhadowes, his eye lookes out beyond the ſhadow to that body that was comming: So it was hope that ſaued him. As for thoſe that had no eye to the bodie, they got no life but death by the ſhadow. Thou ſhalt neuer haue life by theſe outward exerciſes of Religion, except thou haue the inward ſubſtances: for

the outward ſhall euer turne to thy damnation, if thou haue not the inward. And further, the very eſtate of the Iewes doth recommend to thee the bleſſednes of thy eſtate aboue the Kings, and all the Prophets of old. They embraced the ſhadow, but thou embraceſt the bodie. Ieſus Chriſt is come alreadie crucified in the Goſpell: ſo that thy eſtate is ſuch a bleſſed eſtate, yt thou canſt neuer think enough of it. But alas, heauēly things are not regarded! when thou haſt gotten ſome ſmall preferment in the world, thou wilt make much of it: but as for this preferment in Ieſus Chriſt thou careſt not for it. Yet the end will commend or condemne all thy ioyes. Now mark the power that riſeth from the ſhadowes of Chriſt: the very ſhadow of him, being rightly taken, ſaueth and comforteth the ſinfull ſoule. It was his ſhadow that ſaued Adam, and all Kings and people, before his comming in the fleſh: but yet, as the ſhadow muſt be ſtill vnderſtood to be accompanied with the bodie, and to haue the power from it. O what power muſt be in the bodie when it is ſtanding before thee without the ſhadow, ſeeing the ſhadow is ſo powerfull! O the wonderfull power that is offered to me and thee! fie on vs that finde it not: the blame is in vs that we finde not this power; and not in Ieſus. Seeke to Ieſus, take hold of him by faith, and I doe aſſure thee there ſhall come out of him ſuch a power that ſhall quicken thee ſo, as thou wouldeſt not want it for all the world.
            Thirdly, ye ſhall ſee how fooliſh theſe falſe teachers are: they are teaching to embrace a ſhadow, when the bodie is come. See how vaine they are. The Iewes did well, that embraced the ſhadow before Chriſt came; but after his comming it was vaine to doe it: and ſo it was as much as to bid them embrace the thing that was not. And admit that the ſhadow abode ſtill, were it not follie to comprize the ſhadow with the bodie? the ſhadow goeth before, the bodie commeth after. But brethren, ſuch is the follie of theſe vaniſhing heads, this fellow will ſeeme to be ſome bodie, a iolly fellow, as who but he; and yet hee will make thee to thinke that light and darknes may dwell together, the ſhadow and the bodie to be both in one place. O but all this is vanitie! decline thou once from the

truth, thou be commeſt mad, thou wilt cauſe the people to erre. So bleſſed is the man that ſtickes by Ieſus, and ſtands by the ſcripture of God: and if thou doe it, thou ſhalt be ſafe, otherwiſe thou ſhalt goe into euerlaſting darkenes: As the Apoſtle Rom. 1. 21. teſtifieth, ye ſhall become mad fooles, and in the end periſh with the reprobate, if yee ſticke not to this Ieſus Chriſt and his word.
            Now to come to the end: they might haue ſaid, if theſe be the ſhadowes, where is the bodie? He anſwers, But the bodie is in Christ. There are two things here: firſt, there is the ſhadow of things to come: the ſecond is, the bodie which is Chriſt, and followes the ſhadow. The bodie that followes, is not this or that bodie; not Iohn the Baptist, not one of the Prophets, but onely Ieſus Chriſt. Then note firſt, there was neuer from the beginning, nor is nor ſhall be to the end, any other ſubiect of Religion, of godlines, but Ieſus Chriſt the Lord: ſeeke it where ye will, there is no other foundation of faith: No man (ſaith Paul, 1. Cor. 3. 11.) can lay any other foundation beſide that that is laid, Ieſus Christ. Onely this is the difference: amongſt the Iewes he was but a ſhadow, now he is the bodie. So, wouldeſt thou haue a godly man defined? it is he whoſe heart is occupied about Chriſt in ſome meaſure: how he was incarnate, and of his paſſion. Thinkeſt thou that this ſhould goe out of thy thought? Alas, if thou thoughteſt of thy ſin, thou ſhouldſt neuer get reſt, till thou thinke of his croſſe, then of his reſurrection. This is the godly harted man Paul, 1. Tim. 3. 16. when he had ſaid, Great is the mysterie of godlines, then he comes to the parts of it, God manifested in the fleſh, iustified in the ſpirit, and ſo forth till he comes to the laſt, receiued vp in glorie: where we are taught, that the myſterie of godlines is onely in Ieſus Chriſt. So that if thou wouldſt haue thy heart occupied in godlines, fixe thy heart on Ieſus Chriſt: for I aſſure you this, thinke of any thing in this world, or out of it, and leaue out Ieſus Chriſt, not thinking of him; thou ſhalt find that thy heart ſhall not be ſanctified, but prophane and wicked. So there is nothing to make a godly heart, but to thinke on Ieſus. When thou art thinking of many things, reſerue a peece of thy heart for him, giue him a thought; if thou wert a King, be not ſo

buſie in thy affaires; if thou wert in Parliament, take heed thou forget him not, but euer giue him a thought or a looke, otherwaies thou art not ſanctified: yea, if in all thine affaires thou thinke not on Chriſt, and haue not a preſence of God, the very horſe thou rideſt on, is better then thou; and the higher thou art mounted vp, the more miſerable, if thou want a thought of God in Ieſus Chriſt. Againe, yee ſee Ieſus is called the bodie, yee know that by humane reaſon, a bodie is a ſolide thing, with dimenſions, that thou maiſt apprehend ſolidlie. In a word, Chriſt hath this prerogatiue to be called a bodie: Ieſus Chriſt, of all things is the ſolideſt and firmeſt: in compariſon of him, there is not a bodie in the world. I ſay to thee, when thou putteſt out thy hand to lay hold on the moſt ſolid thing in the world, thou ſhalt not find it ſo ſolid as the heart of the godly ſhall by, when it by the hand of faith layeth hold on him, for as ſoone as Ieſus toucheth the heart, then the heart that before was vaine and ſuperficiall, is made a ſolid bodie, ſo there is not a ſolid heart, but it that hath Ieſus cloſed in it. I tell thee thy heart is but as an emptie bagge if thou get not Ieſus into it: therefore crye euer, Ieſus fill my emptie heart. Neuertheleſſe, fooles ſet not greatly by this, but I ſay to thee, if thou wert a King thou ſhalt neuer be ſolid, thy heart ſhall neuer be ſolid, but a blaſt of wind ſhall carrie thee away, if thou haue not Ieſus Chriſt in thy heart. Laſtly, I ſee the religious heart that is occupied vpon Chriſt, is occupied vpon the firmeſt thing in the world: thoſe that faine would bee godly, and ſeparate themſelues from this world, and lay hold on Chriſt, the prophane may well ſay of him, what is this bodie doing, he is a ſillie fooliſh bodie? But if he were a King, if he knew the eſtate of that bodie, he would change his eſtate with his: this you may ſee in the example of Paul, ſpeaking to Agrippa, Acts chap. 26. verſ. 29. Well, as I haue ſaid before, the end ſhall trie all, and they that in this life followed Ieſus, and ſet their eye vpon this ſolid thing, they ſhall abide, becauſe they haue laid hold on him who is eternall and abides for euer, and bleſſed is the ſoule that apprehendeth this onely ſolid thing Ieſus. And thou that laieſt holde on the things that are ſeene, on the pleaſures of this world, O they ſhall vaniſh, they ſhall be caried

away as duſt! becauſe the things that are ſeene are momentanie and paſſe away. Therefore if thou wouldeſt liue for euer, faſten thy heart vpon Chriſt: it will not be honour, meate and drinke that will eſtabliſh thy heart when heauen and earth ſhall be ſhaken together, nothing ſhall eſtabliſh thee but that ankering of thee vpon Chriſt, and therefore ſeeke to bee ankered vpon him. To whom bee all honour and praiſe,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE TWENTITH LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 18.
               18 Let no man at his pleaſure beare rule ouer you by humblenes of mind and worſhipping of Angels, aduauncing himſelfe in thoſe things which he neuer ſaw, raſhly puft vp with his fleſhly mind.
               
            
            
               THe Apoſtle (brethren) throughout this whole chapter admoniſheth the Coloſſians to beware of falſe teachers, and of mens doctrine and traditions. The traditions he admoniſheth them to beware of, are of two ſorts: the firſt ſort is the olde ceremonies that the Lorde ſometime gaue to bee obſerued by the people of the Iewes, which at Chriſts comming were wholy aboliſhed, and put away; and therefore the receiuing of them againe into the Church of Chriſt, it was nothing elſe but the doctrine of men and not Two ſorts oferaditions. of God.
            
               
The ſecond ſort of traditions are ſuch, as God neuer gaue to any people, nor will giue to the end of the world to be obſerued: as this: To bid men goe worſhip Angels: to call vpon Saints: they are ſuch as the Lord neuer knew of, nor gaue to man; he neuer commaunded to worſhip an Angell, nor call vpon a Saint. Wee heard the laſt day of the firſt ſort of mens traditions; and the doctrine concerning the ceremonies that were aboliſhed by Chriſts comming: Let no man condemne you (ſaith he) in meate or drinke: there is the firſt ſort. The ceremonies of the Iewes, in the which the Apoſtle wils them that they ſuffer not themſelues to be condemned for not keeping them, becauſe they are alreadie aboliſhed.
            Now (brethren) in this text preſently read, we are admoniſhed concerning the ſecond ſort of traditions: namely, concerning the worſhipping of Angels. To come then to the purpoſe, and words of the text: Let no man (ſaith he to the Coloſſians) at his pleaſure beare rule ouer you by ſubmiſſion of minde, and worſhipping of Angels. Theſe are the words, Let no man beare rule ouer you. The word is to bee conſidered, in the originall it ſignifieth to play the part of a moderator and of a Iudge; and not that onely, but it ſignifieth to beare rule, not for men and their will, but againſt them, and to their hurt and domage. This is the force of the prepoſition (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) as if he would ſay; Let no man beare rule ouer you, that is, against you, and to your hurt and domage. The Apoſtle vſeth ſundrie words, whereby hee expreſſeth the action of falſe teachers and deceiuers. Firſt in the eight verſe of this chapter he ſaid, Let no man ſpoyle you, carrie you away as a pray: Then he ſaies, Let no man condemne you, ſit vpon you to iudge and condemne you. Thirdly, Let no man beare rule ouer you. What meanes this varietie of words, and euery one worſe then other? All tends to this; to let vs ſee Falſe teachers deſcribed. that there is no kinde of euill that one man can doe againſt another, but a falſe teacher will doe it againſt man. What thing can any man doe againſt another bodily, but a falſe teacher will doe againſt him ſpiritually? and it is worſe an hundred times to be hurt ſpiritually then bodily. One man wil come to another, and take him and draw him away bodily, but a falſe teacher will draw him away ſpiritually; and that more

cruelly then one man will draw away another bodily. This man will giue him whom he draweth, leaue to breathe, and to reſt a while: but a falſe teacher, if once hee take a man in his ſnare, he will not giue him reſt night nor day till he bring him to damnation. Againe, men will condemne thee bodily, but falſe teachers wil condēne thy ſoule. So in one word, there was neuer a tyrant frō the beginning of the world, that hath done ſo much euill to the world, as the Pope and his Clergie haue done. O the ſoules of them that he hath made to periſh! fie on this world, that ſees not this lowne plainly playing the tyrant daily. Alas, worldly tyrants deſtroy the bodies, and goods of men only: but he deſtroyeth the ſoules and bodies of men for euer. Fie on this world, that will not once ſee it. And yet to inſiſt on the word, Let no man beare rule ouer you, that is againſt you. The word that hee aſcribeth to falſe teachers, lets vs ſee the nature and engine of a falſe teacher. He is ambitious, and ſeekes by all meanes to beare rule ouer all men: not for their weale, but for their woe: woe is them ouer whom hee beares rule. What matter is it if he ſought to beare rule ouer the body and ſubſtance of man onely? but the chiefeſt thing that hee ſeekes, is to beare rule ouer the ſoule: which importeth two things. Firſt, an vſurping of the place of God (for God onely is the Lord of the conſcience and ſoule of man: neuer Angell gate place to beare rule ouer the ſoule & conſcience of man.) Note theſe two things in falſe teachers which deſire to dominiere ouer conſciences. Secondly, it importeth an euerlaſting wracke to the ſoule of the creature, if he be kept vnder his gouernment. If thou giue thy ſoule to be vnder his gouernment and tyrannie in ſuch a cleere light, thou ſhalt be ſure to periſh both in bodie & ſoule. This for the firſt word of this text.
            The ſecond word is, At his pleaſure. Let him not beare rule ouer you, and that at his pleaſure; not according to God and his word, but according to his foule affections. A deceitfull villaine lookes neuer to the word of God, but to the foule affections of ſinne. I told you before hee was ambitious; but now he is a tyrant, which is the more perilous in that hee ſeeketh to beare rule ouer the conſcience, after the fancie of his foule affections: and if hee continue with thee, thou ſhalt dye euerlaſtingly.
            
               
The next words giue vs to vnderſtand, when he is ſet vp in his throne aboue a man, what lawes he giues out. A Prince or King when he is placed in his throne, hee will giue out lawes: the words tell you that firſt hee begins at the ſubmiſſion of minde, lowlines: there is his beginning. A faire preface, and true in generall, that men ſhould be humble and lowly minded. There is no man, no not the trueſt teacher that is, that can haue a fairer beginning and entrie of doctrine, then a deceiuer, and can lay downe ſome grounds of doctrine more truly then he: and ſpecially he will begin at that, which is moſt pleaſing to the people: he will begin with humilitie, and in the meane time he will counterfeite ſuch an humilitie, in his eyes, with his hands, with tricking and ducking of his head, and in all that he ſhall ſpeake of, he ſhall ſpeake as an Angel of light. This is faire, but looke to the end, when he hath begun with a faire preface, where goeth he to next? Worſhip Angels. How gathereth he this? Be humble; therfore worſhip Angels. How gathereth The argument which falſe teachers vſe to moue men to worſhip Angels and Saints departed. hee the concluſion? He gathereth it this way: It is a point of pride to paſſe to God immediatly, and to come in before him at the firſt daſh: therefore ſir, worſhip Angels, becauſe they are in the gate betweene thee and God. It is a foule aſſumption; It is pride to goe to God immediatly. Ha, ha, falſe deceiuer: it is no pride to goe to God, and to paſſe by all the Angels in heauen: but it is a point of humilitie, as it is moſt cleere through the whole Scriptures, in the examples of the Prophets and Patriarchs. So to be ſhort, ye ſee what followeth a faire preface; when a deceiuer propoundeth a faire preface, be ſure of a foule end; when the lowne hath commended good vertues, hee will fall out in a filthie concluſion of one thing or other. He will be ſpeaking of things in generall, and will gather a foule particular concluſion: and therfore when he ſpeakes faireſt, ſuſpect him moſt. When a Papiſt propoundeth a point of true doctrine, he is moſt dangerous; ſuſpect him then moſt: when he commends humilitie, and that with many a bowing of the bodie, beware of him, for then hee will ſubioyne, Call vpon Saints, and worſhip Angels, and doubt of thy ſaluation, it is preſumption to ſay, that a man is ſure of ſaluation, humilitie bids thee doubt. Now fie on thee and thy doubting

doctrine both. So if thou heare his preface, hee will come in with this end: cloſe therefore thine eare at his generall; for he is a Sophiſter to allure thee in the end, and to draw thee into the net of deſtruction. Therefore neuer account of his beginning, for the end of it is deceit. Well (brethren) was this point of doctrine concerning the worſhip of Angels in Paules daies? Yes. Then I am enforced to graunt that there are ſome points of the Papiſts doctrine very ancient; yea as ancient as the Apoſtles themſelues. Goe to the Papiſt, hee will ſay it is preſumption to goe the hie way to God; therefore goe to Saints, and Angels. This is very old, and ſo it may be that through Popiſh antiquitie. antiquitie their doctrine is commended. Looke to the ancients, ſay they; yet I ſay, if antiquitie will commend an hereſie, away with thee and thy antiquitie both. Well, well, then all their reaſon from antiquitie is to confirme hereſies, that haue been damned in hell. I will not inſiſt to ſhew what hereſies they haue raiſed vp againe (for their religion is clouted and patched vp with all hereſies in the world, of Gentiliſme and Iudaiſme) there is little pleaſure to ſpeake of them or their doctrines either. Now to bee ſhort, in the next words the Apoſtle fals to the confuting of ſo foule and falſe a head of doctrine, to wit, concerning the worſhipping of Angels: he condemneth it: let them defend it as they will. The firſt argument he vſeth is from a ſhameleſſe pertnes of the falſe teacher; aduancing himſelfe (ſaith he) in things which he neuer ſaw. The words import a violent entring into another mans profeſsiō, as if he would ſay; where ſaw the deceiuer any Angels? How knew hee that the Angels make interceſsion in heauen, the word of God told him neuer a word of it, who made him ſo wiſe to know that the Angels are mediatours? ſo it may be a ſhameleſſe pertnes that he ſpeakes of the worſhipping of Angels. Marke then (brethren) the Apoſtle notes a falſe teacher with this note, ſhameleſſe pertnes. He rubbeth off all ſhame of his forehead. Nay know ye not? There is the firſt preparation, A note of a falſe teacher. in his chamber before he come out to the people, he rubbes off ſhame from him, and then he comes out with a vizard on his face ſhameleſſe, and then he will ſpeake of things which he neuer knew, heard nor ſawe, and that were neuer written; yea

that are impoſſible for men to know in this life, he will ſpeake A notable confutation of all popiſh ſigments. ſo frankly of them, as if he had ſeene them all; he will begin to ſpeake of Angels and of their orders, and tell you there bee ſo many orders of them. Who told you that? and then he will begin to ſpeake of Saints, and he will bid you call on them. Did God commaund him to bid thee doe ſo? and when hee hath done with heauen, he will goe downe to hell, and will tell you of all the chambers and places there, of Limbus Patrum, Purgatorie, with the reſt, as though he had bin there: And againe, with ſuch confidence he will ſpeak of theſe things, as if he had ſeene thē with his eyes. This then tels vs, yt this doctrine of the Papiſts, is not a new, but an old hereſie; and how like is a new heretike to an old heretike? Well, to be ſhort, let neuer man be curious in that which God hath neuer reuealed. If God Curioſitie. hath not reuealed what the Angels be doing in heauen, what the Saints be doing, queſtion not of it: where hell is, and what parts are in hell, if God haue not reuealed it, be not curious to ſearch it, let it be, leaue off queſtioning of things that God hath not reuealed, ſeeing there are ſo many things reuealed which thou canſt not attaine vnto, if thou ſhouldeſt ſit night and day meditating vpon them.
            Againe, let no man bee bold to affirme the thing that hee knoweth not, whether it be true or not; if thou vſe thy ſelfe to ſhameleſſe pertnes, thou wilt come in the end to confirme lyes. Euer keepe a moderation, and ſpeake according to thy knowledge that, that thou haſt ſeene and heard. And ſpeake (ſeeing it is the office of the Paſtor to ſpeake) ſpeake aſſuredly of ſaluation: for ſurely thou muſt be ſtudious to get the truth, and to ſpeak boldly of it, and to die in the truth of God. There is the firſt argument why the Apoſtle wils the Coloſſians, that no man condemne them for meate and drinke: learne of it to anſwere the Papiſts after this manner. Thou art a pert and ſhameleſſe bodie to intrude thy ſelfe into this point and that point of religion, whereof thou haſt no ſure warrant, and in that thou neuer ſaweſt, heardeſt, nor was neuer reuealed to thee. The ſecond argument is from as euill a ground, euen from pride, and a poore pride, as the words import: for ſo the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, blowne vp, as a bagge with winde; no ſolide

ſtuffe. Now after what manner is he puft vp? Raſhly: that is, without cauſe, hauing no matter but onely winde. For ye ſhall vnderſtand, that there is but two ſorts of pride. There is one that is called a poore pride, as we ſay, A proud heart in a poore Two ſorts of pride. breaſt, whē vpon a vaine conceit men are proud of that which they haue not: Such was the pride of the Phariſie, vpon the conceit of his righteouſnes, & through it he ſcornes the poore man beſides him, who was notwithſtanding more iuſtified then he was. The ſecond ſort of pride is, when one is proud, but hath ſome matter of it, as a rich man for his riches; a man of ſcience for his ſcience, whether the matter of it be outward or inward. Of this the Apoſtle ſpeaketh 1. Cor. 4. 7. What haſt thou that thou haſt not receiued? why then boaſteſt thou, as though thou haddeſt not receiued it? Alas, no gift ſhould make one proud! For where that is, it is a tokē that thou misknoweſt the giuer. If a man haue pride with his graces, all his graces are poyſon: for pride is a poyſonable ſeaſoning of them, ſo that they ſhall neuer doe thee good. As for example, hee that hath grace to ſpeake well, if he be proud, he may well doe the people good; but he ſhall neuer be able to doe himſelfe good. A man of law Pride poysons all gifts. that is full of law, euen to the throte, if he haue pride with it, he may doe thee and the people good with it; but not himſelf: yea it is a curſe to him. A Preacher that hath knowledge in the Scriptures, and can diſcourſe vpon them finely, if hee haue pride with his gift, all is poyſon; he may well doe the auditorie good, but hee ſhall neuer be able to doe his owne ſoule good. So it is no ſmall grace of God with thy gifts to haue humilitie: and grace with humilitie is more worth then many graces that are conioyned with pride. Now to goe to the words. Where from commeth this pride? this miſchieuous pride, that hath no matter to be proud for nothing, it is a thing which is intolerable. Hee ſets downe the ground of it. It comes from the minde: there is the mother of it. It is not without thee: it is not riches, honour and what euer thou haſt, that will make thee to haue a conceit of thy ſelfe: it is not theſe things outward, Pride whence it comes. howbeit they will greatly further thee and helpe thy pride, as ye may ſee this day in the perſons of rich and honourable men. What is it then? euen the beſt thing of nature giuen

to thee, euen thy minde; the reaſon that is within thee, it poyſoneth al thy gifts. A natural mā wil make a faire diſcourſe in reaſoning, yet with ſuch a pride, that he will not yeeld to any that ſaith againſt him, and his reaſon. So the beſt thing in man is his greateſt enemie. Man hath reaſon, a reaſonable minde, and that is his preferment aboue the beaſt: but I ſay to thee, if that reaſon be not ſanctified by the ſpirit of Chriſt Ieſus, if thou werſt a King, well had it been to thee that thou haddeſt bin borne a dog: yea that thou haddeſt bin created a ſtocke, or a ſtone, if thou be not ſanctified in thy reaſon. This reaſon in the minde hauing pride conioyned with it, beguiled all the Philoſophers, Rom. 1. 21. What a minde is that? a fleſhly minde, ſaith the Apoſtle. If there be any pure thing in man, it muſt be the minde. Yet the Apoſtle calleth it fleſhly, and Roman. 8. verſ. 7. The wiſedome of the fleſh is enmitie against God: I ſay to thee, as the bodie is groſſe and corrupt; ſo the minde is as groſſe and corrupt by nature. So that as the bodie can feele nothing, but that that is groſſe: no more can thy ſoule apprehend ſpirituall things, but groſſe things: So there is the mother of all miſchiefe. That that Paul calleth fleſh, the canker of nature, will ye ſee her daughters? ſhe begetteth vaine diſcourſing. Then when ſhe is in conceit of wiſedome, followeth falſe 
               The daughters of reaſon not ſanctified. 
               opinions of doctrines, as this; that Angels ſhould be worſhipped: and then followeth the laſt childe, Pride. So all tends to this, ſeeke mortification, the ſlaughter of this mother the fleſh, or els ſhe will deſtroy thee: I ſay, if ſhe be not mortified, thou ſhalt die euerlaſtingly. For ſhe ſhall fill thee ſo with wind and puffe thee vp ſo, that when the iudgement commeth, thou ſhalt be burnt vp like ſtubble. Alas, haſt thou not thought of mortification? crie for it, or els thou ſhalt die, and apprehend the death of Chriſt: for it is the death of Chriſt that ſlayeth the fleſh, and takes away the corruption of thy nature.
            Now to come againe to the falſe teacher. I gaue you a mark Markes of falſe teachers. of him before, hee is pert, hee is ſhameleſſe, and hath a braſen face; otherwiſe hee durſt not affirme ſuch points of doctrine.  Another marke of a falſe teacher; he is proud, as proud as the  diuell, as wee ſay; what were it if hee had matter?  but hee is

proud with the winde of falſe doctrine; for as humble as hee will ſeeme to thee, yet beware of him: his heart is blowne vp with pride. There is not a falſe teacher, but hee is proud; a proud heart in a poore breaſt, he is a poore diuell. I remember a ſentence of Augustine to Paulinus; It is a wonderfull thing that a man ſhould be more proud of humilitie, then if he were openly proud; and I will aſſure thee, a deceiuer will be prouder in his counterfeit humilitie, then he that is openly proud. A ſimple man cannot doe it, and of all the proud men in the world, the deceiuer is greateſt. Another thing I marke; falſe doctrine and pride are companions together: ſo that if thou  ſay there is falſe doctrine; I will ſay there is pride alſo. If thou wilt ſay there is falſe doctrine in this heart; I will ſay there is a proud bodie, as a man of a foule ſtomacke will giue a foule belch: So a blaſt of falſe doctrine is a puffe of pride, wherewith the heart is filled vp: Therefore it is no marueile, though I ſay a falſe Doctor is a proud man. Be not deceiued with a Ieſuite, when hee commeth with his ſide long cloake and his broad brimbd hat, who is ſo humble as hee? but I ſay hee is full of pride, and thou ſhalt bewaile the time that thou ſaweſt him. Keepe him in thy chambers as thou wilt, hee ſhall ſting thee to death.
            The laſt argument of the condemning of this falſe doctrine, is in theſe words; he ſaith, He hath not to doe with the head Ieſus Chriſt. 
               The third argument of falſe doctrine. He vttereth plainly, he neuer wiſt what Chriſt was, and that hee neuer taſted of that power and vertue, which deſcendeth from the head to the bodie: for if hee had taſted of it, O for all the world hee would not haue put an Angell betwixt him and Chriſt! VVilt thou put one betweene thee and thy head? An Angell is but a ſtranger to thee in reſpect of Ieſus. Is not a mans head the moſt familiar and beſt thing that a man hath? will he not haue recourſe to his head? O would the deceiuer put thee from thy head Ieſus Chriſt! he plainly teſtifieth that Ieſus Chriſt thy head ſtood neuer vpon his necke. Ieſus ſtood neuer vpon the necke of a Papiſt: ſpeake of him what he will, for if he were thy head O Papiſt, and haddeſt taſted the vertue that deſcended from him! thou wouldeſt neuer

ſeeke to Angels and Saints, to bid them open their mouth to pray for thee. But thou that followeſt after Saints, and hunteſt after Angels, thou ſheweſt that thou neuer taſtedſt of the head Ieſus Chriſt: And therefore thou teſtifieſt that thou art a falſe teacher: and thou that followeſt ſuch a teacher, thou art a falſe profeſſor of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Here I end: onely I requeſt you, ſticke to Ieſus, once get him to be thy head, and I ſhall promiſe thee, thou ſhalt neuer long for Angell nor Saint. For thou ſhalt finde ſuch a power and vertue of life to flow out of him to thee, and ſuch a ſweetnes as therewith thy ſoule ſhall be contented: and as thou continueſt with him, thou ſhalt finde thy ſelfe more and more liuely and ioyfull in thy heart; thou ſhalt ſucke continually life and ioy out of him, till at the laſt thou ſhalt ſee him in his Iob. 21. 22 glorie, and be filled fully in him; for in his countenance is the ſacietie and fulnes of ioy: And thou ſhalt not ſeeke to Angels and bid one of them goe betwixt thee and him at that day. O then acquaint you with him! for the Angels are but miniſtering ſpirits at his commaund. I ſay, O acquaint you with him, and ſticke by him immutably! and thou ſhalt finde the ioy of thy heart vnſpeakable. To Ieſus Chriſt, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honour and praiſe,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXI. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 19. 20.
               
                  19 And holdeth not the head whereof all the bodie furniſhed and knit together, by ioynts and bands, encreaſeth with the encreaſing of God.
                  
                  20 Wherefore if ye be dead with Chriſt from the ordinances of the world, why, as though ye liued in the world, are ye burdened with traditions?
                  
               
            
            
               YE heard (brethren) the admonition of the Apoſtle, that the Coloſſians ſhould not ſuffer themſelues to be abuſed by falſe Apoſtles: eſpecially with the rites and ceremonies that ſometimes were giuen to the people of the Iewes, and after aboliſhed by Chriſts comming. Secondly, that they ſhould not ſuffer themſelues to be abuſed by no other kinde of traditions, which God neuer gaue to any people: as the worſhipping of Angels, whereon wee inſiſted the laſt day. This kinde of tradition it came in vnder the pretence of Coherence. humilitie, and it was refuted, and condemned by the Apoſtle, as ye heard by three arguments:  firſt it comes of ſhameleſſe pertnes of men, pretending to haue a knowledge of that they  neuer ſaw, nor heard. Where ſawe they the Angels, and their interceſsion they make in heauen? where heard they of it? and ſo it is a falſe doctrine to propound any thing, whereof they haue no warrant.  The ſecond argument is taken from the pride that is in them; for this doctrine concerning the worſhipping  of Angels, it commeth of pride without any cauſe or

knowledge; and ſo it is no more but a blaſt of a foule proud ſtinking heart.  The third argument, which is in the beginning of this verſe, is from the want of Chriſt the head. Theſe doctors  neuer taſted that Chriſt was their head: for if they had, they would neuer haue ſought, nor bidden ſeeke to Angels to bee mediatours betwixt them and God. So briefly, there be theſe three arguments, whereby this falſe doctrine is refuted, and taken away. Yet the Papiſt defendeth it by the ſame arguments that the falſe Apoſtles defended it. It commeth of humilitie to vſe them as mediatours that are moſt familiar and conuerſant with God. Alas, a new heretike is wondrous like to an old heretike! So it is but a damned doctrine that they haue raiſed vp in theſe daies. Now the Apoſtle hauing ſpoken of the head Ieſus Chriſt, hee falleth out into a deſcription of him from the relation to the bodie, and from the effects of the bodie which is the Church, all to this end to ſhew the falſe teachers and their followers, of how great a good they had depriued themſelues. Ah, woe to all falſe teachers, and woe to them that doe depriue themſelues of ſuch an head, and make the Pope their head!
            But to come to the words: he ſaith, He holdeth not the head: that is, the falſe Apoſtle. Then he ſubioynes, whereof, that is out of the which head (the Lord Ieſus) through ioynts and bands the whole bodie is knit, and compacted together and furniſhed. Whereof, it importeth not onely that Chriſt the head is the efficient and worker of all grace that comes to the bodie: but more, Chriſt the head of the Church. that out of him as out of a ſtorehouſe, and not elſewhere, all grace and vertue doe flow vnto man. So the word hath a great force: for as out of the head of a man flow all the vertues, mouing, life and ſenſe that is in the bodie (take the head away, no vertue is in the bodie) euen ſo from this head the Lord Ieſus, to his myſticall bodie, flow all power and mouing, that the bodie, that is, his Church, and euery member thereof, hath. Thou haſt nothing but that that floweth from him. Therefore the Apoſtle ſaith, in him dwelleth all fulnes: and againe, in him are all treaſures: and againe, in him dwelleth the Godhead bodily: and againe, in him wee are compleate: To let you ſee that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſtorehouſe of graces. Goe thy way to heauen,

thou ſhalt not finde one iot out of thy head the Lord Ieſus. Thou ſhalt ſeeke all thy time, and thou ſhalt not get a droppe without him. Then he ſaith, that by ioynts and bands the whole bodie is furniſhed, not a part, but the whole bodie, and euery member, neuer a one being excepted, neither rich nor poore. But to inſiſt in the compariſon: euen as the whole bodie of a man, and euery member of the bodie to the finger and toe, ſucketh vertue from the head; and the head is powerfull to cauſe euery ioynt to liue: it is euen ſo with this myſticall bodie. There is neuer a member of this bodie, but it receiueth ſome vertue from the head the Lord Ieſus: yea the ſillieſt bodie of them all receiueth it owne grace, and Ieſus Chriſt is effectuall in euery one from the higheſt to the loweſt. If it be in the bodie it cannot want grace: It is impoſſible that any that are in Chriſt Ieſus can want grace, but the Lord muſt be powerfull in them. Runne then and ioyne thee with the bodie; for if thou be not of this bodie, I giue thee this doome, thou Ioyne thy ſelfe with the Church if thou wilt be in Chriſt ſhalt neuer ſee grace, nor get the ſpirit of Ieſus, which is the worker of this grace in Ieſus. 1. Cor. chap. 12. 7. he ſaith, To euery one is giuen the manifestation of the ſpirit to profit withall. And Epheſ. 4. 7. likewiſe he ſaith, To euery one is giuen grace according to the meaſure of the gift. This importeth that Ieſus Chriſt is not onely full of grace, but that there is ſuch a varietie of grace in him, that there is not onely one or two graces in him, but he is full of varietie of graces. There is not a member but he hath gotten a different grace: I haue gotten mine, thou haſt gotten thine, and euery one hath gotten his owne different grace. So looke what varietie there is of the faces of men, Varietie of graces in Christ. as great varietie there is of the graces of Chriſt; and ſo there is no grace out of Chriſt; ſeeke grace in him, or els thou wilt neuer finde it. To goe forward; the firſt thing that euer commeth downe from the head to the bodie, what thinke ye it to bee? What is the firſt thing that commeth downe from the head of a man? It is yee know the ſinewes, as the firſt thing: for the head by them is bound to the bodie; euen ſo the firſt thing that commeth from Chriſt, he calleth it bands or ligaments, that goe downe from him as from the head. So that there is not a member of the bodie of Chriſt, but there is a ſinew, a band

comming from Ieſus Chriſt the head to it. Ye will aske what The bands which knit vs vnto Chriſt. are theſe myſticall ſinewes?  The firſt of them is the ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt. God himſelfe is the maſter ſinew, without that ſinew thou ſhalt neuer bee conioyned with the head.  The ſecond band, is faith: for when that ſpirit commeth, he is not  idle in the perſon in whom he is, but hee worketh faith in him.  There is the other ſinew, whereby thou takeſt hold of him: he taketh hold firſt of thee, and then thou takeſt hold of him.  The third and laſt band, is loue to thy neighbour, a branch as  it were ſtriken out from faith; where faith is, loue will ſtrike out from it as a branch ſtriking out from the maſter ſinew; ſo theſe are the three bands: The ſpirit entring into vs, faith riſing from vs, and our loue riſing from our faith, whereby we mutually embrace one another. I neede not to inſiſt to proue by the Scriptures theſe points, ye ſee in this Epiſtle chap. 3. 14. Loue is called the band of perfection. Now brethren, ye muſt know this moreouer, euery one of theſe bands muſt extend to euery member. There is not a member of Chriſts bodie, but firſt he muſt haue the ſpirit of Ieſus: next, faith: and thirdly, loue; otherwiſe thou canſt not be a member of Ieſus Chriſt. For if thou want but this loue, which is the laſt, thou canſt not be one of Chriſts: I ſay, and affirme, thou haſt not the ſpirit, nor faith, and ſo art not conioyned with the head. It is true that euery one hath his particular gift, different from other: but I aſſure you, a man may not want one of theſe three. Thou maiſt want the gift of tongues, miracles, and ſuch others: but thou muſt not want the ſpirit, faith, nor charitie. Want what thou wilt, and if thou haue not theſe three, thou canſt not ſtand in the bodie: thou haſt not to doe neither with Chriſt nor with his bodie; therefore if thou haſt the ſpirit, faith, and charitie, and doeſt find thy ſelfe to haue them; then thou maiſt be ioyfull.
            Now to goe thorow: after he hath ſet downe the bands, he ſets downe three effects that proceede from Chriſt by theſe Three effects proceed from Chriſt to euery member. bands downe to the bodie. The firſt effect is a furniſhing of the bodie; wherewith? not with earthly furniture, but with ſpirituall furniture; otherwiſe it cannot ſtand. For as when the bodie is knit with the head by ſinewes, and then downe

through theſe ſinewes, as thorough certaine conduits doe flow vertue and power to the bodie (cut off thy head, thy bodie nor no member thereof hath any power to moue or ſtirre:) euen ſo this myſticall bodie being ioyned to Chriſt by theſe ſpirituall meanes, the ſpirit, faith, and loue, there commeth downe through theſe conduits to vs that water of life: and that is the furniture that Paul in the Epiſtle to the Epheſ. 4. 16. ſpeakes of. For this cauſe calleth he them the bands of furniſhing, becauſe their office is to furniſh grace, life, mouing, and whatſoeuer How the water of life proceeds from Chriſt. ſpirituall thing, to the bodie. To make this plaine, there are two ſorts of furniſhing; there is one which is common, that euery man hath: as for example, life and mouing. This thou muſt haue, or elſe thou canſt not be a man: ſo if thou want a ſpirituall mouing by the ſpirit of Ieſus, thou canſt not be in the bodie. And there is not a naturall bodie, but it muſt receiue life, ſenſe, and mouing from the head: ſo there is not a ſpirituall member of the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, but it muſt receiue from the head Ieſus, through his ſpirit, ſpirituall life, ſenſe and mouing: and if thou ſtand in the bodie, this furniture muſt flow to thee from the head. This is the firſt ſort of furniſhing.
            There is another ſort, which is of other particular graces, conueighed into men and women by this ſpirit, faith, and loue; and yet of great varietie. I will get a particular grace; thou wilt get another particular grace; another man will get the third: ſo that it is not needfull that thou haue this whole furniture. Seeke not all graces, ſeeke them not: for there is none that hath all graces. Hath the eye all graces? Nay, the Euery man muſt not haue all gifts of the ſpirit. foote hath a grace, that the eye hath not. Seeke then for grace, but ſo that it be without an ambitious deſire of the grace of others. Be euer prouiding that ye want not ſome of this furniture; ſtriue to excell in the grace of regeneration with all the world; but in other graces ſtriue not. Then ye ſee this firſt effect of furniſhing. It followeth, vpon the ioynts and bands, ſo that if thou haue not the ioynts and bands, thou canſt not haue the furniture of grace. Therefore looke that thou haue the ſpirit, otherwiſe thou ſhalt get no life, ſenſe, mouing nor ſanctification. I repeate it againe; looke thou haue the bands,

or els thou ſhalt not be in the myſticall bodie of Chriſt.
            So to the next effect flowing from theſe ioynts and bands, it is the knitting together of the bodie, and euery member thereof one with another: as the ſpirit of Ieſus is the band that The ſpirit is the band vvhich knits vs with Chriſt and his members. knits vp the members with the head; ſo hee is the band that knits the members among themſelues; that knits thee with thy neighbour, and makes a mutuall band of loue among the members. This effect is wrought by the head, who bindes all ſo ſurely together, as is vnſpeakable: nay, no man can expreſſe that ſure coniunction this band will make. The force of the word importeth a compact coniunction: there was neuer ſo compact a coniunction as this is. Thou ſhalt neuer binde any thing ſo ſtreightly, as the members of Ieſus be bound to the head, and mutually together among themſelues. The word alſo ſignifieth a decent compacting together; ſo that there is no coniunction ſo well fauoured as this is. Therefore the Apoſtle to the Epheſ. 4. 16. vſeth a word ſignifying a harmonie and comely ſituation of the parts: when thou ſeeſt that bodie thou ſeeſt a moſt pleaſant ſituation. To inſiſt in this effect of knitting: this effect it goeth before the other. Firſt, things muſt be knit together; and then commeth the furniture; ſo marke this order. If firſt there muſt be a compacting, and then the furniture, I giue thee a leſſon: looke neuer to get grace, except thou be conioyned in the bodie; for then that ſpirituall grace ſhall flow to thee. Let not one that is not knit in the bodie, ſeeke for grace. A lowne will ſcorne when he is cut off from the body by excommunication: well I ſay, go & ride where he will, he wants the ſpirituall life of Ieſus, and ſhall not get it till he come to the bodie againe.
            To come to the third effect: the third effect is growth; and followeth the other two. For after once by ſinewes the members are knit, and then receiue furniture, of neceſſity the members muſt grow, and the whole bodie muſt grow according to the portion of grace giuen. Reade Epheſ. 4. 16. looke how hee ſetteth downe there the manner of the growing: he ſaith, euery member groweth according to the meaſure of grace giuen. Thinkeſt thou that thou canſt not grow, except thou grow in all graces? wilt thou haue thy hands growing as thy

feete, to goe as thy feete? No, no: but euery member groweth Euery one growes in his owne gifs. as is giuen to it, euery one groweth in his own gift: and thank the Lord for the growth in thy owne gift. Then hee ſaith, the bodie groweth as effects to the bodie, as if he would ſay, the bodie groweth in all graces: the member groweth in one grace. So as euery member groweth to the growth of the bodie in all graces: ſo the bodie groweth in all grace when the members growe in their particular graces. Then euery one ſhould ſet their minde, that for their part, they may build vp the bodie of the Lord Ieſus. This is the counſel of the Apoſtle, if thou carrie not ſtones to build vp the building, thou ſhalt neuer get to be of that building whereof the Lord Ieſus is the head.
            Now laſtly marke this of the order: firſt there is the compacting of the bodie with the head, by bands and ioynts. Secondly, there is the furniſhing thorough ſinewes and bands. Thirdly, there is the growing; and then the building groweth to a full ſtature. But howſoeuer thou getteſt it not here fully, yet grow in him daily and neuer reſt, and then thou ſhalt come to the ſtature of a perfect man. And as there cannot be a compacting of the members without the bands; ſo without the furniture thou canſt not grow. Therefore crie euer for the furniture, that thou maiſt grow vp in Ieſus Chriſt. Firſt compact thy ſelfe in the bodie, and then aske graces night and day: I Note this order. ſhall then promiſe that thou ſhalt grow in thy owne grace night and day, till thou meete with Ieſus Chriſt, in whom ſtands full bleſſedneſſe.
            In the laſt words he ſhewes, what kinde of growth is this? to wit, the growth of God; it is not common, not naturall, but it is a diuine growth, God giueth it. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water; but it is God that giueth the growth and encreaſe, 1. Cor. 3. 7. none can giue thee growth, but onely hee: and therefore when thou art watered by the Goſpell, euer ſeeke growth at his hand onely: for all the Angels in heauen haue no power to make thee grow a hand breadth. It is the ſpirituall worke of God, as the creature is of God, euen ſo the bodily growth of the creature is of God: and how much more is that ſpirituall growth in Ieſus Chriſt, of God? Therefore ſeeke

it of him. He calleth it the growth of God, becauſe the furniture is of God: for where the furniture is of God, there muſt be the growth of God. As the naturall furniture maketh the naturall growth; euen ſo where the ſpirituall furniture is, it maketh the ſpirituall growth: and as the one failes, ſee that the other grow daily. Endeuour to grow ſpiritually, otherwiſe this life is moſt miſerable, and a wofull death will abide thee. Therefore haue a greater reſpect to the ſpirituall growth, then to this temporall. If it be a great corſiue to this life to be bereft of viſible and earthly things; what a ſore ſting ſhall it be, to be depriued of the life to come, and the ioyes of heauen, and the ſight of the ſpirituall things there? There muſt bee ſorow of ſorrowes, the greateſt and wofulleſt ſorrow that euer was.
            Further I ſee, there is ſet downe here an oppoſition betwixt this growth of God, and the ſwelling vp of the falſe Apoſtles. Where Ieſus is the head, and furniture ſent downe from him, Where Chriſt is. there is the growth of God: where he is not, and no furniture from him, there is no ſolid growth there. There may well be one blowne vp, with a vaine winde of poyſon, as a bodie that will ſwell foote and hand: he may well ſwell vp in the wombe of ſinne; but if there be not a furniture from Ieſus, thou ſhalt neuer grow truly, either in knowledge, or ſanctification: thy eſtate ſhall be as the women learning, but neuer come to the knowledge of the truth. Our Noblemen will take in Ieſuites into their chambers, and will giue eare to them: but I ſay to thee, heare as thou wilt, there is no ſolid growth to be had of his ſpeech. There is no ſound ſpirituall growth in the kingdome of Antichriſt. It may be ye thinke it growes, becauſe the world followeth it (for the kingdome of the truth of Ieſus is in a narrow bound) but I ſay vnto you, there is no good growth in that kingdome of Antichriſt: therefore flye from them, flie from Babylon; for Babylon ſhall be deſtroyed, flie away then from them. Shame ſhall befall them that ioyne with them. This for the deſcription of Ieſus, and the growth in him.
            In the next verſe hee returneth to his admonition, and he

ſaith, be not burthened: alas, theſe traditions are a burthen of Traditions ſuch weight, that whoſoeuer will take them on, they ſhall preſſe them downe to hell and damnation! The argument that he vſeth, ye are dead with Chriſt, and by his croſſe he hath freed you; if (ſaith he) ye be dead with Chriſt, why ſhould ye ſuffer your ſelues to be burthened with ſuch trifles, as the falſe Apoſtles would haue you berthened with? as if he would ſay, it is a great indignitie done to Chriſt, if ye doe ſo. He ſaid before, they were buried with him, now he ſaith, they are dead with Christ: Who euer thou be then, that haſt any part with Ieſus, thou muſt be dead with Ieſus. There is none but they muſt be dead in this world with Ieſus, if they would haue any part with him. A man that is quicke in this world, giues a token that he hath no part with Ieſus. But heare this death deſcribed: Yee were dead (ſaith hee) with Chriſt, then hee hath a companion: that is a bleſſed death that hath the fellowſhip of Ieſus. It is better to die with Ieſus, then to liue with all the world. The word which he vſeth, imports further: To die by vertue of his death, ſo it is his death that maketh vs to die. O there is a double happines! bleſſed is that ſoule that dieth by vertue of the death of Ieſus. So then it is not ſo much thou that dieſt, as it is ſinne that dieth in thee, by vertue of his death.
            Yet more, he ſaith, ye were dead with Chriſt. Where from? from the ordinances, or elements, that is, the groſſe rudiments of Religion, that imported a ſubiection and a thraldome to the law. Looke if this be a burthen or not? So in a word, there is the greateſt happines to die with Chriſt: for to die with him is to be freed of the law, and of ſinne: So, wouldeſt thou haue a bleſſed death? dye this death with Chriſt, for it bringeth to thee a faire libertie. It is better to dye with Chriſt, then to liue a ſlaue with ſinne. And if thou wouldeſt liue a free man, leaue Libertie. ſinne, and ſeeke the libertie that is in Chriſt. He ſaith, if ye be dead with Chriſt, why are ye burthened with traditions? ſomewhat ſharply and angerly: Fie ſhame, fie ſhame on thee that goeſt to put thy necke vnder traditions, wherefrom thou waſt once freed: fie on thee man that makeſt defection to Papiſtrie, why goeſt thou to be burthened with ſuch vanities? Now

he lets them ſee that it was a miſchieuous thing that they caſt off Chriſt, to liue to this life. This is a miſerable caſe with the wofull and ſinfull life in this world. O thou Papiſt! woe is thee that makeſt this choice, thou that haſt dyed with Chriſt, thou wilt begin to liue with the Pope and his vaine traditions. It ſhall neuer make thee to haue life, no not in this world, as quicke as thou ſeemeſt to be. I inſiſt ſo much the more in this, that ye that ſtand, ſhould be moued to ſtand ſtill: and not to be chaunged from your Chriſt, as many doe when they goe to theſe parts of the Popes dominions. O it will be a blacke day to you, if ye ſtand not faſt euer by Chriſt and his truth! Be ioyfull that ye are crucified with Chriſt, and be not wanton with the world; but be ſorie: for ſinnefor if ſinne liue in you, ye ſhall dye: but if thou leaue it in the teares of repentance, thou ſhalt liue for euer. I loue not a wanton ſinner, be therefore buried and dead with Chriſt, that ye may liue with him. To whom with the Father and holie Spirit bee euerlaſting praiſe and glorie, for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 2. verſ. 21. 22. 23.
               
                  21 As touch not, taſte not, handle not,
                  
                  22 Which all periſh with the vſing, and are after the commaundements and doctrines of men.
                  
                  23 Which things haue in deede a ſhew of wiſedome in voluntary religion and humblenes of minde, and in not ſparing the bodie, which are things of no value, ſith they pertaine to the filling of the fleſh.
                  
               
            
            
               YE heard the laſt day (welbeloued brethren in Ieſus Chriſt) the Apoſtle when he had ſet downe that faire deſcription of Chriſt the head of the bodie, he returned to his purpoſe, and that admonition which is through this whole chapter; that they ſhould beware of falſe teachers and falſe doctrine, and eſpecially that they ſhould not take on thē the burthen of ordinances, that is to ſay, ye burthen of the rites and ceremonies of the law, that ſometime had place in the Church of the Iewes before Chriſts comming: but now Coherence. are ſo aboliſhed, that they become not the tradition and doctrine of God, but of men. His argument was, Ye are dead with Christ from all theſe things, by your death ye are freed. Therefore why ſhould ye be burthened with ordinances? I inſiſt not vpon that which was ſpoken, but I goe to the verſe that followeth, wherein he ſetteth downe a certaine kinde of rite, whereunto the falſe teachers preſſeth them, to wit, concerning meates; and hee bringeth in this matter by counterfaiting of the voyce of the falſe teacher: O ſaith the falſe teacher, Touch
               
               not, taste not, handle not: there is the doctrine of the deceiuer: ye heard when hee admoniſhed them to beware of theſe ceremonies. The firſt ſort was concerning rites: from that he paſt to daies. Now againe, the onely ſort of ceremonies, which here he expreſſeth, is the ſame concerning meates. This importeth ſomething that he ſticketh ſo vpon this ceremonie of meates. Wherfore the Apoſtle ſpecifieth the Iudaicall ceremonie concerning meates. It teacheth vs this, that the diuell, the enemie of man, ſpecially tempteth men about meate. He begun betimes. Our firſt parents were not ſo ſoone created and placed in Eden, but he begun to tempt them about meate; and from that houre to this houre, he neuer reſteth to tempt men about meate, either after one manner or other; either to abſtaine or elſe to exceede. He hath thus tempted the world in this ſubiect of meates. VVhat is the cauſe of this? He ſeeth not a meeter ſubiect to tempt men with, then meate & drink. It is the thing that we vſe and muſt vſe daily: therefore he ſetteth his engine to tempt men in this. Yet to open this matter better: there are two things eſpecially, wherein the Lord hath giuen men libertie, meate and mariage: In theſe two the Lord hath giuen vs libertie. And this hath euer been the craft of Sathan to reſtraine this libertie giuen by the Lord. The Apoſtle foreſaw this in the 1. Tim. 4. 1. and foretold that in the latter daies, men ſhould ariſe, with a lying ſpirit, and ſhould deliuer the doctrine of diuels. And then he nameth theſe two points of their doctrine, forbidding (ſaith he) meates, and mariage. Now there muſt be ſome cauſe of this temptation of Sathan: he knoweth well enough there is a faire The pretence of hypocrites. pretence for reſtraining of mens libertie; to wit, the mortification of the fleſh: Abſtaine (ſay they) from meate, abſtaine from mariage, becauſe it mortifieth the fleſh. So hauing a faire pretence, he tempteth men in theſe things, and reſtraineth the libertie that the Lord hath graunted. This pretence is friuolous, becauſe there is no meane of mortifying, but that that God hath commanded. Therefore if thou ſhouldeſt pine and famiſh thy ſelfe to death, thou ſhalt not be mortified; but the more thou vſeſt that dealing, without the ſpirit of Ieſus, thou ſhalt be the more puffed vp in the vanitie of thy minde: for it is a meane to pride to vſe that which the Lord hath not commaunded thee. It is true that Paul ſaid, 1. Cor. 9. 27. he held his

bodie vnder at a ſtraite diet, and ſo doe all godly men; this is a good meane, and the Lord hath commaunded a diet to be kept: but to abſtaine frō meat as an vncleane thing, thou haſt no warrant; neither oughteſt thou to follow ſuch as would perſwade thee to the ſame. Therfore follow no meane to mortification, but that which the Lord commaundeth thee. And as for that which Paul did, hee had the warrant of the ſpirit of Ieſus: but yet ye ſhall ſee there that he placeth no merit in it. But the falſe teacher, as the Pope and his Clergie, they place a merit and neceſſitie in theſe things.
            But to come to the words of the Apoſtle: he counterfaiteth the voyce of the falſe teacher, and ſpeaketh as they doe, and that with bitternes of heart: O ſaith the deceiuer, Touch not, taste not, handle not: which teſtifieth plainly that in the heart of the ſpirit of God, there is a bitternes againſt the hypocrite, yea a bitternes like gall, eſpecially againſt the falſe teacher. O thou ſhalt finde one day a bitter voyce vttered againſt thee! Touch not, ſaith hee, that is, lay not thy fingers end vpon ſuch meate, hold backe thy hand from it. Taste not, that is, bring it not to thy mouth, let not the tip of thy tongue taſte it. Handle not, that is, lay not thy hand groſly vpon it, nor meddle not with it in any wiſe: handle not ſuch vncleane and forbidden meates. Brethren, theſe commandements that are ſo ſtreight, import that theſe falſe teachers thought there were in certaine meates vncleannes, and that they were poyſonable, and had force to infect and make a man vncleane: this was their mind concerning meates, and therefore their ſinne was manifolde. For firſt they are iniurious to the meate, in accounting the creature vncleane, which was cleane. In 1. Tim. 4. 4. it is ſaid, the creature is cleane. And Rom. 14. 14. that there is no meate vncleane. So they were very iniurious againſt the creature the meate. And then, that which is more, they were iniurious to the Coloſſians in taking their libertie from them, and in burdening them with an vnneceſſarie burden. To bind a man to this meate or that meate, thou ſnareſt the conſcience, and doeſt worſe then if thou ſhouldeſt ſtrangle that man, whom thou thus entrappeſt. What God commaundeth, that thou countermandeſt, Laſtly, they were iniurious to God

who created althings cleane, & eſpecially to them that are in Ieſus Chriſt, who ſanctified althings, and gaue libertie to man to eate what it liked him: as wee ſee in the Acts 10. 15. when all ſort of meate was offered to Peter, and he being commaunded to eate indifferently of all, refuſed. Then the voyce commeth to him halfe in anger, and ſaith to him, that which God hath made cleane, make not thou vncleane. O Papiſt! God hath not made the meate foule, but it is thou that defileſt thy ſelfe, and the meate both: the Lord hath cleanſed it in the bloud of Ieſus; and thou deceiuer, ſhouldeſt thou ſtand vp and ſay, it is vncleane? O deceiuer! thou art vnworthie of meate. Yet more; ye ſee in theſe words, the nature of an hypocrite: A falſe The marke of a falſe teacher. Doctor, he is the ſtricteſt yt euer was in that that auaileth not; in a trifle he will be wondrous preciſe: in the things wherein the Lord hath giuen libertie, he will be a niggard and cloſe the hand of him. And by the contrarie; in that which the Lord hath forbidden, he will be liberall. Come to murther: he will giue thee a pardon before hand; hee reckoneth not of adulterie and oppreſsion, and ſuch groſſe ſinnes. Paul 2. Theſſ. 2. 4. giueth this as a note of the Antichriſt, that he ſhal oppoſe himſelfe to euery thing diuine; he ſhall be euer in a contradiction to God. So where ye find this oppoſition, ſay, here ſitteth Antichriſt. Therfore I ſay, in the Church of Rome ſitteth the Antichriſt. There he ſitteth & ſhall ſit, vntill he be aboliſhed by the breath of the Lord Ieſus. This for this point of falſe doctrine.
            In the 22. verſe he falleth to, and refuteth this doctrine, and he bringeth in two forcible and pithie arguments: and firſt he reaſoneth from the periſhing nature of theſe things: what are they? They are corruptible things. Who will ſet downe rules about things that periſh, as though religion were in them? Paul 1. Corinth. 6. 13. in handling this ſame matter, he ſaith, Meates are ordained for the bellie, and the bellie for the meates, but God ſhall destroy both it, and them. As if hee ſhould ſay, both the meate and the bellie ſhall periſh. Now this argument taken from the corruptible nature of theſe things, hee aggrauateth when hee ſaith, but in the vſe they periſh. When they are in the hand and mouth they periſh. It is true that all theſe earthly things appointed for this mortall life paſſe away, all goeth

away that is appointed for the ſuſtenance of man; yet there are ſomethings more laſting and more durable then others: but as concerning meate, and cloath, and ſuch things, they all weare away by the vſe. So the Apoſtle would ſay, that of all vaniſhing things, meate is the moſt vaniſhing thing that is. Then note this: Religion, godlines, and the worſhipping of God, it is not in things corruptible; it is not in things indifferent, as meate, drinke, daies, cloathes, and the reſt of theſe vaniſhing things: but true religion ſtandeth in things permanent, and in things neceſſarie. I giue thee an example: To eate this, and not to eate that, I will not count thee the more godly or religious; for that is to be in the kingdome of Antichriſt; but to honour one God onely, the true God ſincerely, that is religion. And ſo goe through the whole commaundements, and if thou finde thy heart ſanctified to obey God in his word, and to follow him onely; then I ſay to thee, thou art truly religious. Eate what thou pleaſeſt, all is ſanctified to thee; and to keepe temperance in the vſe of them, that is acceptable to God. But to eate, or not to eate, that is no religion; if thou haue not the warrant of the word of God for thy religion, I will not giue a poynts end for thy religion: for there is no religion, but that which the Lord hath commaunded. And therefore Paul to the Romanes chap. 14. verſ. 17. he ſaith, that the kingdome of God is not meate and drinke: religion conſiſteth not of theſe things, but in an vprightnes, peace with God, and with thy neighbour, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt. Albeit thou ſhouldeſt faſt all the fridaies and wedneſdaies in the yeere, yet if thou be a wrangler with thy neighbour, thou haſt no religion, thou art an hypocrite. Ye ſee the religiō of the Papiſts ſtandeth in things corruptible: goe to Rome and Spaine, ye ſhall ſee this; their religion ſtandeth in wearing this cloathing and that cloathing; in abſtaining from this meate, and eating of that, and ſuch other trifles, wherewith they haue troubled the world. Fie on them, will they neuer be aſhamed of it? Thus for the firſt reaſon of the refuting of this falſe doctrine: now followeth the ſecond.
            What are al things ſaith he againe, but the doctrine of men? This doctrine, Touch not, taste not, handle not, was not the doctrine

of God: and therefore ſaith the Apoſtle, it auaileth not. For euen as theſe things corruptible, as meate, drink, with the reſt of that ſort, they are no matter or ſubiect of religion: euen ſo the commaundement of man, and the doctrine of man that commeth from his braine, is no rule of religion. Liueſt thou after the doctrine of man? I affirme thou art not religious. Liueſt thou in abſtinence at the commaund of man? Ha, ha, there is a faire countenance in thee: but I ſay to thee, all is ſuperſtition, which is ruled by the doctrine of men. In one word, take all that religion in that Church grounded on the braine of man, not to be religiō, but ſuperſtition. Thou ſhalt find out a ſuperſtitious Friar by his habit; goe through all their Cloyſters, ye ſhall finde nothing but the doctrine of man: and the doctrine of man will neuer make a religious bodie. Secondly, The doctrine of mē cannot make any religious. I perceiue in this place, and ſuch others, that men in all ages haue buſied themſelues to ſet downe doctrine about things indifferent. Looke the doctrine of the Romane Church, ye ſhal finde this true. This teſtifieth whereto the wit of man inclineth, to wit, to be religious in vanities: in eating, drinking, cloathing, and to let thee liue as thou wouldeſt. As for other neceſſarie points, it will not acknowledge them: as for the honour of the parents, thou wilt paſſe by that. O the wicked nature of man! it hath no inclination to any thing, but to vaniſhing things, and it will haue a religion of theſe things in any caſe.
            To come to the laſt verſe; hauing thus confuted this falſe doctrine concerning meates by theſe two arguments, the falſe teacher might haue excepted and ſaid: O yet there appeareth ſome reaſon in this doctrine of abſtinence, becauſe it hath a ſhew of wiſedome. Secondly, it hath the appearance of the ſubmiſsion of the minde: and thirdly, it is a mortifying of the The third obiection. bodie: it ſpareth not the bodie, but it humbleth the body; and therefore this doctrine muſt haue ſome reaſon, and ſhewe of wiſedome. The Apoſtle graunteth this, but he ſaith, it auaileth not, becauſe this doctrine is about fleſhly things, the filling of the bellie, &c. But briefly to examine the words, which indeed hath the ſhew of wiſedome. Marke firſt a falſe teacher a Sophiſter, howbeit there be no wiſedome in his doctrine; yet if it haue a

faire ſhew and a glance, it is enough to him. This is the nature of a Sophiſter, he is well contented with a ſhew of wiſedome, and beguileth the world with this: And the people are naturally as vaine as he. If thou get a ſhew of wiſedome, thou wilt be content with it: And why? The heart is vaine, and vanitie may ſerue a vaine heart, a vaine emptie heart that hath no ſoundnes, will drinke in vanitie greedily as a man drinketh in water, 2. Theſſ. chap. 2. verſ. 10. 11. Therefore (brethren) wonder not to ſee this world wander after vanitie, wonder not to ſee ſo many Papiſts and ſuperſtitious perſons to ſpread abroad, and the people to follow them: no wonder, becauſe the world inclineth to drinke in vanitie, and the world is content with a ſhew of truth; but thanke God if hee hath made thee able to diſcerne betwixt a ſhew and a ſolid thing: for thou haſt gotten a great grace. And therefore if thou heare of Phil. 1. 9. their vaine arguments, thanke God that thou haſt that heart to conſider of them aright, and that thou haſt an eye that can rightly diſcerne thereupon: for few hath gotten this ſpirit of God to diſcerne aright betwixt the ſhew and the ſound truth. Againe, note there is not one head of doctrine, but it will get a colour of an argument to defend it. There was neuer an hereſie, but it got the colour of truth: neuer doctrine ſo foule, but it will take to it a faire ſhew. Thinke ye that the diuel that can change himſelf into an Angell of light, that he hath not taught his owne to colour that vanitie of theirs, and to couer ouer with ſugar their poyſon ſpued into them by that foule ſpirit? No, no, I warrant you hee forgetteth not that: therefore be not deceiued with a colour of ſeeming probabilitie, but when thou heareſt a noueltie in doctrine, trie and proue the ſpirit, and hold that that is good. Truſt not till thou trie, and credit not lightly; for thou wilt be deceiued, except thou trie skilfully, and with time.
            Now I paſſe to the colours of their doctrine. I tell you in generall of theſe ſorts of colours that teachers will put on. There is one that is falſe in it owne nature, as the doctrine is falſe. It is a falſe argument concluding a falſe head of doctrine. Secondly, there is another colour, that is a true colour, but falſely applied to ſuch a ſubiect, as thou wouldeſt colour a

peece of dirt with faire colour; ſo a falſe teacher will take a faire colour and put it vpon his dirt, vpon his dreames, and phantaſies. But to come to the ſpeciall, and that ye may ſee this more cleerely: the firſt colour whereby the doctrine of meate is coloured, is called voluntarie worſhipping, that is, ſuch Colours of falſe teachers. worſhip as is not commaunded by God, but inuented by the vaine head of man. Woe worth ſuch a worſhip! when a man followeth his owne fanſie. And how coloured they this head of doctrine? after this manner. This doctrine of abſtinence from meates, is a kinde of voluntarie worſhipping, that God hath not commaunded (ſo readie is man to ſerue God vnbidden) Voluntarie worſhip. apparantly hee that tarieth for bidding, deſerueth no thankes at Gods hands, as the falſe teacher would ſay: but to anſwere. To worſhip God vnbidden, it hath a falſe colour, and it will not be allowed of God. If thou worſhip God vnbidden, thou ſerueſt a thankleſſe maſter. He will not accept of thee, nor thy worſhip. So there is a falſe colour applied to ſuch a ſubiect.
            Come to the ſecond colour, humilitie and ſubmiſſion in the minde, how put they on this colour? O ſaith the deceiuer, the doctrine that maketh thee humble, it muſt be the doctrine of wiſedome. But ſo it is: this doctrine concerning abſtinence, it humbleth thee, and maketh thee lowly minded, for meates puffe vp: therefore this doctrine muſt be a good doctrine. I anſwere, this is a faire colour, humilitie and ſubmiſsion of minde, a thing commended: ſo it is a true colour. O but it is euill applied! for as the deceiuer ſaith, that ſorow & faſting is for humilitie, he belieth it. No, no, faſt all thy life long, hauing no warrant of God, it ſhall not profit thee to humiliation. Will then a falſe teacher bid thee abſtaine from that, that God hath commaunded, and hath giuen thee libertie of? I ſay to thee thou ſhalt neuer be the more humbled. So it is a good colour, but falſely applied to this foule doctrine.
            The laſt colour is the ſubduing of the fleſh. Man conſiſteth of two parts, and this abſtinence ſerueth for both, how layeth he on this colour? That doctrine is a doctrine of wiſedome, that ſerueth for the chaſtening of the bodie, I can it not denie:

but (ſaith he) that doth the doctrine of abſtinence. I ſay to thee, that is falſe; for there is no meanes wil ſerue thee for that turne, but that which the Lord hath commaunded. Put in thornes in thy ſhooes, put in pinning ſtones in thy ſhooes, ſcourge thy ſelfe: vaine lowne, thou ſhalt be whipped in hell; take penance to thee; doe all theſe things, and ſuch like; I ſay to thee, O deceiuer, the more thou vſeſt theſe, the more thou ſhalt bee puffed vp. There is none more proud then theſe of the Church of Rome: for I tell thee, it is a pride to follow that, that God hath not commaunded. So it is a faire colour, but falſely applied as a colour vpon dirt, and all commeth to this. Trie well the argument of a Papiſt; for the argument of a Papiſt hath euer ſome falſehood, if thou haſt an eye to ſee it, howbeit it will not at the firſt appeare to thee. And if it bee a true thing, which he ſpeaketh, looke how he applieth it. For ye ſee that hee can take good and faire colours, and applie them very falſely. Truſt neuer any of theſe Ieſuits; for he will make thee beleeue that blacke is white: be not deceiued then with their colours. Now will ye haue the Apoſtles anſwere: he is ſhort. He granteth all theſe colours and ſhewes are true, and ſaith as it were to theſe falſe deceiuers, your doctrine will haue all theſe colours: but I anſwere you, all auaileth not, they are of no value, colour it as ye will colour it: for that which is not good in it ſelfe, it will neuer bee good, vſe what argument thou wilt. Thy argument what euer it be, will neuer make a falſe doctrine good. He condemneth then this doctrine of abſtinence, that the Papiſts this day vſe; for that that is falſe in it ſelfe, ſhall neuer ſtand true by any colour. He giueth the reaſon wherefore it auaileth not: becauſe it is a doctrine that serueth for the ſtuffing of the fleſh; as he would ſay, there is no true religion concerning things of the bellie, nor cloathing of the backe, nor filling of the purſe; what hath religion to doe with theſe things? Eate and drinke Papiſt (looke chap. 1.) while thou burſt, keep thy cord and cowle on thy backe, what hath religion to doe with that? He cutteth it therefore away in one word, it is of no value. Then brethren take the leſſon. The doctrine concerning things that ſerue for this life, for thy

bodie, thy fleſh, thy bellie, thy back and cloathing, and if thou ſhouldeſt cloathe it with ſackcloath, and in one word things of this life haue not to doe with religion, with God, and his worſhip. God is not worſhipped by theſe things. There is not one commaundement giuen by God touching theſe things. Where readeſt thou it? is there ought concerning this meate, or that, this garment or that? no, no, all the commaundements that ſerue for the worſhipping of God, are all in the word of God. So then I ſay againe, there is no doctrine of religion in the things of this life: for why? the doctrine of religion is about things that concerne ſpirituall life, about faith, about worſhipping of God, about the honouring of thy parents, abſtaining from murther, and ſuch like, as thou haſt ſet downe to thee in the law of God, which is the lanterne that ſhineth before the feete of his elect ones. So then brethren, be earneſt in keeping and hearing ſuch doctrine as concerneth life euerlaſting: and when thou heareſt this doctrine of dirt, turne thy eare away from it, for there is no godlines in it. And I giue you my counſell, heare him not that ſpeaketh of ſuch things, but heare him that will ſpeake of Chriſt Ieſus and his doctrine, which ſhall feede thee to life euerlaſting. It will not be meate and drinke, and the doctrine thereof, which will feede thee; but it muſt be this doctrine of Chriſt, wherewith thou muſt be fed, and thou muſt ſtill feede on it, vntill thou be glorified in him and with him for euer and euer. To whom with the Father and holy Spirit, be al praiſe and honour now and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXIII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 1. 2. 3.
               
                  1 If ye then be riſen with Chriſt, ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue, where Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of God:
                  
                  2 Set your affections on things which are aboue, and not on things which are on the earth.
                  
                  3 For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Chriſt in God.
                  
               
            
            
               
               WE haue heard in this Epiſtle (beloued brethren in Ieſus Chriſt) firſt the inſcription of the Epiſtle.  Secondly, The parts of this epiſtle alreadie handled.  the preface.  Thirdly, the doctrine touching  Chriſt and his benefits.  And then fourthly, wee haue heard  how he paſſed from the doctrine, to the exhortations and admonitions,  exhorting the Coloſſians to perſeuerance in that faith which they had receiued, admoniſhing them to beware of the falſe Apoſtles, their doctrine, and mens traditions. In this admonition hee inſiſteth throughout the whole ſecond chapter. Now (brethren) in this third chapter, taking occaſion of the vaine and corruptible things, as meate, drink, and ſuch things (of which are the traditions of men, from the which he had diſſwaded them in the former chapter) he begins to exhort them to other things not corruptible, but euerlaſting; not earthly, but heauenly; in the which true godlines and holines ſtandeth. Throughout all this whole chapter he inſiſteth vpon this firſt in general; and then he cōmeth to his exhortation in

ſpeciall. And he continueth ſo to the ſeuenth verſe of the next chapter. The particulars I remit to the diduction of the text, and I come to the words preſently read.
            In thē there are two exhortatiōs to one thing, together with ſundry arguments, hee exhorteth in both, to the things aboue, to heauenly things: and the foreſaid exhortation which he vſeth for this purpoſe is to ſeeke them: and the ſecond exhortation is to know them, to be wiſe in them, and to vnderſtand them; for that is the force of the word. Then to come to the firſt exhortation: If ye be riſen with Christ, ſeeke the things that are aboue. There is the exhortation, and the firſt argument, which is, ye are riſen with Chriſt to life, after that ye were dead to all theſe beggerly ceremonies, to mens traditions of meate and drinke and ſuch like. Now after ye were dead to theſe, ye are riſen againe to a life, and to an heauenly life: therefore ſeeke the things that are in heauen. Now to inſiſt vpon euery word: Ye ſee here, and in the chapter before, mention is made of a dying of Chriſt, and of a buriall with him, and of a riſing and liuing with him: ſo that when he dieth, wee die; and when hee riſeth and liueth, we riſe and liue. Marke it well. In a word, as he altereth, wee alter: ſo many as beleeue in him, of neceſſitie they change as he change; when he dies they die, by vertue of his death, to ſinne and to the world, and ſinne dieth in them: when he riſeth, they riſe with him, vnto that heauenly life. This alteration is wonderfull. What man is high in the world which wil draw others after him after this manner? that when he dieth wil cauſe another to die with him, that neuer ſaw him bodily in this life. What is he I ſay, looke through the whole world, and to all the Kings of the world, whom will ye find in heauen or earth, that will alter men after this manner by his death and life? This is one common doctrine, but it would be conſidered well: for there are few which vnderſtande this doctrine. Then of neceſſitie in Ieſus Chriſt there muſt be a great force and vertue. Ye ſee now, the Heauens, Planets, Sunne, Moone, and the reſt, becauſe they by their operation do make alteration in theſe inferiour things, as in plants, graſſe, fields, and euen in the bodie of man; becauſe (I ſay) of this operation in theſe inferiour creatures wee aſcribe a great vertue to them.

But all theſe celeſtiall bodies cannot worke ſuch effects, as Ieſus Simile. his death and life can worke. No, no, if thou were once dead, theſe celeſtiall ſignes and planets will not make thee liue againe. The Sunne nor the Moone cannot make thee liue, when once thou art dead; but when thou art dead, Ieſus will raiſe thee vp more liuely then euer thou werſt before. So there The power of Christs death and reſurrection. muſt be in him a force aboue all the force and power, that euer God made or gaue to any creature. But marke brethren, concerning this power: he muſt be a man in whom this power is, becauſe this vertue cannot come to thee, but through the nature of man: man cannot die to ſinne, and liue to righteouſneſſe, but by that vertue that commeth through man; yet he muſt be more then a man, and that a holie man without al ſpot of ſinne. He muſt be more then this: I ſay, he muſt be God, to Rom. 8. 11 Phil. 3. 10. 11. make thee die to ſinne and riſe vnto righteouſnes. This commeth of the ſpecial power and vertue of God; for none is able in heauen or earth, to worke ſuch a ſtrange worke as this, except hee be God. Yet there muſt be more of neceſsitie, there muſt be a coniunction betwixt thee and him; he muſt be ioyned Our communion with Chriſt to thee, and thou to him; otherwiſe his vertue will not come to thee either to thy death or to thy life: he muſt bee thy husband, and thou his ſpouſe; yea hee muſt be more then thy husband: for the husband cannot draw the wife after him by vertue of his death or life, either to liue or to die, as Chriſt can doe. He muſt be then thy head: he muſt be as neere as thy head is neere thy bodie. That is the familiar ſimilitude of the Scripture. When the head dieth, the bodie dieth with it; and when the head is liuely, the bodie hath ſenſe and being: So when Ieſus dieth, the bodie dieth; when Ieſus riſeth, the bodie riſeth alſo. So the meeteſt thing to expreſſe him and his coniunction with vs, is the head & bodie of man; and yet he muſt be more then the head: for there came neuer ſuch vertue from the head of a man to the bodie, as there ſhall come from thy head Ieſus Chriſt vnto thy ſoule, when thou art ioyned to him by faith. He muſt haue vertue and power to giue thee, whereby thou maiſt be able to die or to liue. Now brethren, if there were no more but theſe effects to flow from Ieſus into vs, it telleth vs plainly, that there was neuer giuen ſuch a power to any in

heauen or earth, as there was giuen to Ieſus Chriſt, man our Regeneration. head. It telleth, that as hee is man, ſo is he God. Looke if thou haue regeneration in thee, and thou ſhalt feele this to be true: if wee haue it, it will tell vs that Ieſus Chriſt is the neereſt to me, and thee of all others. There is none that will make thee to die with them, but Chriſt only: no, thy father and mother will not be able to doe that: none will draw thee after him in death and life, ſaue onely Chriſt. So if thou be ioyned with Chriſt, it is impoſsible to ſeparate thee from him, as thou maiſt be from thy wiſe and children, and the deereſt things thou haſt: no, no, if thou be once ioyned to him as thy head, there is no ſeparation for thee, he ſhall be all things to thee.
            Now this much for the firſt argument, the exhortation followeth. If ye be riſen with Chriſt (ſaith he) ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue. There is an action required, and life, and euery kind of life muſt haue an action, otherwiſe it cannot be a life. The naturall life muſt haue an action: the earthly life muſt haue an action. Then this heauenly life, that we are riſen to, with Ieſus, it muſt haue an action, otherwiſe it cannot be a life. Note.Thou  that art quickened with him, muſt be a doer; otherwiſe thou haſt not his life: for as his life is the quickeſt thing that is, or euer was (for it is the life of God) ſo it muſt haue the quickeſt action that is. This action is firſt a ſeeking with the whole hart, and all the affections, and members of the bodie. There is the firſt action, ſeeking. Euery life, ye know, ſeeketh for the things VVhat the ſpirituall life of Chriſt workes in his members. that ſerue for the ſuſtaining of it. This naturall life that periſheth, ſo long as it abideth, it is occupied in ſeeking for the maintenance of it by night and by day, by al meanes poſsible. Should not then this heauenly life haue a ſeeking? Shouldeſt thou ſit when thou ſeeſt this man catching here and there, ſeeking for the maintenance of this naturall life? Wilt thou not take an example of theſe earthly things and earthly creatures, to ſeeke for heauenly things to the confirmation and preſeruation of thy ſpirituall life? O if thou hadſt a ſparke of heauenly life, thou wouldeſt ſeeke more earneſtly for the entertainment of it, then euer any creature did for the maintenance of this naturall life! Well then, by the example of theſe earthly things that are occupied in ſeeking for the meanes of

this preſent life, learne thou to ſeeke ſpirituall graces, and ſay to the Lord: O Lord, grant that I may ſeeke heauen, and heauenly things, for the preſeruation of this my ſpiritual life, as al theſe earthly bodies ſeeke for theſe periſhing things.
            
            Now come to the things that they ſhould ſeeke, Seeke (ſaith he) what? nothing beneath, meate, drink, and the reſt of theſe things: No, what ſhould they ſeeke? Things aboue in heauen that are in Ieſus Chriſt. O the fulnes that is in him! Brethren, all grace firſt is in heauen, yea aboue theſe viſible heauens, where that glorious bodie is: then it commeth downe to the earth. Therefore he ſendeth thee vpward to heauen for to ſeeke. Ye know euery kind of life ſeeketh things proper and meete for ſuch a life: The life of a beaſt will ſeeke for that, that is proper for the life of a beaſt; the life of a tree, for that that is meete for ſuch a life; and the life of a man for ſuch things as are meete for the life of a man. Euery life will ſeeke for things which ſerue for the preſeruation of it: euen ſo if thou hadſt this life of God, thou wilt ſeeke things proper for this life. Thou wilt ſeek things from heauen, becauſe heauenly things are proper for ſuch a life. For heauenly things are proper for an heauenly life. Ieſus Chriſt after his death and buriall, or euer his bodie was in heauen, the heart of him was in heauen: So if thou haue the life of Ieſus, of neceſsitie thy heart muſt goe to heauen; for looke whither his heart went, if thou bee riſen with him, of neceſſitie thy heart muſt goe thither: and by thine action meaſure thy life in Ieſus: for if thou haue not a heart to heauen and heauenly things, alas thou haſt not the life of Ieſus: but if thou haue it, thou wilt euer be ſeeking for heauenly things; and then, in ſome meaſure thou art in heauen.
            Then to conclude this firſt exhortation and firſt argument thereof in a word, and ſo to come to the ſecond argument. If there were nothing more to moue thee to ſeeke after heauen and heauenly things, but this ſpirit of regeneration, the life of the ſpirit in Ieſus Chriſt, it ſhould lift thee vp to heauen as heauie as thou art. For it is true, thou art a lumpe: but if thou haue the ſpirit, if thou werſt neuer ſo heauie, he will raiſe thee; and giue thee ſtrength to flie vpward, though the body be neuer ſo clogged. If thou haue a ſparke of that life, it will cauſe

thee to mount aloft. Indeede this bodie will draw thee downe, and muſt doe ſo; yet bee aſſured, if thou haue one ſparke of that ſpirituall life, it will raiſe thee vp, when the other is pulling thee downe; and in the end when mortalitie is ſo ſhaken off of thee, then in a wonderfull manner the bodie ſhall be lifted vp, and that ſoule and bodie of thine ſhall be glorified. Therefore marke euer this life by the effect: if thou findeſt thy heart in heauen and heauenly things, ſay, thou haſt the life of Ieſus: but on the contrarie, if thou finde not thy heart ſet A true note of the life of God in vs. on heauen, and ſeeking for heauenly things, thou haſt not to doe with the life of Ieſus, and woe be to thee for euermore. When thou riſeſt in the morning, if thou findeſt thy heart vpward, O thou riſeſt with ioy! therfore neuer reſt till thou haſt Eph. 4. 18. gotten the life of God. Lord make vs carefull to haue a ſenſe of this life, without the which there is no glorie, nor ioy for the ſoule of any perſon liuing.
            Now to come to the next argument, which is taken from Chriſt himſelfe, and the place where hee is: Seeke (ſaith he) thoſe things that are aboue where Chriſt is. As if he would ſay, Chriſt is aboue, that glorified bodie with all the ſpirituall graces, and that fulnes is aboue; yea aboue theſe viſible heauens. Therefore let thy heart goe where he is; let it be lifted vp aboue theſe heauens. Brethren, the preſence of Ieſus and the loue of that preſence ſhould make vs to loue heauen, and make vs oftentimes to caſt vp not onely the eye of the ſoule, but alſo the bodily eye, to theſe viſible heauens, if we loue the preſence of Ieſus, who is aboue theſe heauens, and to ſtriue to pearce through them as to his owne preſence. For if hee were not there, what reckoning is there of theſe heauens? I would not reckon of them more then of the earth which wee tread on: and I had rather dwell with Ieſus in the earth, then in heauen, for all the glorie thereof without Ieſus: for all the pleaſure that is either in heauen or earth is in Ieſus, and without him, away with heauen and earth both, I will giue nothing for them. And therefore the loue of that preſence ſhould make vs to loue heauen. Ye know if a man loue another entirely, he will loue the place where he dwelleth, and (as we ſay) hee will A note of loue. loue the ground hee goeth on: ſo if thou loue thy Lord, thou

wilt loue the place hee treads on; nay thine eye would not be off theſe viſible heauens, at the leaſt once in the day; for hee is aboue them, and ſhall abide there, till his laſt comming: So if thou loue him, thine eye would follow him where he is. But alas, for the lacke of the loue of his preſence, this loue is not to be found in many mens hearts, and of this it commeth to paſſe that men are ſo loth to die: nay if the loue of thy ſoule were with him, thy ſoule would ſay with Paul, I groane to be with the Lord; it will groane within thee to be out of the bodie. And take this for a token; where there is not an eye to heauen, alas there is no loue of Ieſus Chriſt in thy ſoule: and alas, what good thing can poſſeſſe thy ſoule, if it be emptie of the loue of Ieſus Chriſt?
            Now followeth in the end of the verſe the third argument, taken from the eſtate of Chriſt in heauen; but what is his eſtate? He is ſitting at the right hand of God. As if hee would ſay; he is in heauē, but not there as a ſeruant or an Angel; there are ſundrie in heauen, but in diuers rankes. He is in heauen exalted to that height; hee hath ſuch glorie as thou neuer The glorie of Chriſt in heauen. ſaweſt. All the Angels bow their knees, hee is Lord ouer them all, euen as he is man. Then as the preſence of Ieſus and loue of him ſhould draw our heart to heauen: ſo the eſtate he ſtandeth in preſently, that paſſing glorie, and that kingdome he is in, ſhould draw our hearts vpward to heauen. If his glorie were deare to thee, thy heart would be where his glorie is, and thou wouldeſt not be content vntill thy heart were lifted vp to him, and the eye of thy ſoule ſet on him: yea this bodily eye would euer pearce to get that preſence of Ieſus in the heauens glorified in our nature. Ye know, if a man, vpon whom our life and comfort dependeth, were in a ſtrange land, and promoted A ſweete ſimilitude. to be a Lord; thou wouldſt neuer reſt vntill thou were with him, and thy thought would be euer vpon his glorie: Now I would to God wee could haue that affection to Ieſus the King of glorie. It is true, we cannot loue him as we ſhould: but (I ſay) bleſſed is that ſoule that hath any loue towards him, pearcing through this bodie of clay. Bleſſed is that heart that can giue once but a ſigh either by night or day, if it were after neuer ſo ſmall a meaſure for the preſence of Ieſus: for be aſſured

that ſoule ſhall be glorified with the Lord of glorie. Note.This for the firſt exhortation, with the three arguments, the life whereunto we are riſen, the preſence of Ieſus, and his glorious  eſtate in heauen, al which ſhould make vs ſet our eye vpward to heauen, and bee occupied in ſeeking of heauenly things meete for the ſpirituall life.
            Now to goe to the next exhortation, and it is to theſe ſame things that are aboue. Before hee exhorted the Coloſſians to ſeeke them, now he exhorteth them to be wiſe in them, to fill themſelues with them, to Or to deſire that they may affect all their ſenſes. ſent them with all their ſenſes: to ſee them with their eyes, and to feele them ſenſibly, as it were with their hands. This exhortation is grounded vpon the firſt argument. If ye be riſen with Chriſt, &c. Then be 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . wiſe in the things that are aboue: that is a common ground to both. This is ſo ioyned with the firſt, that there can be no ſeeking without wiſedome. How canſt thou ſeeke that, that thou knoweſt not? If thou haue no knowledge of heauen & heauenly things, how canſt thou ſeeke them? what deſire canſt thou haue of them? for the prouerbe is true, Ignoti nulla cupido, there is no deſire of that wee know not. Then as before he exhorteth to ſeeke; ſo now hee exhorteth to know; and knowledge goeth Knowledge. before ſeeking: And therefore thou that wouldeſt ſeeke heauen and for heauenly things, know them firſt; and when thou haſt gotten a knowledge of them, then let thy affection come after: for if thou ſeeke without knowledge, thou ſhalt neuer finde them. Therefore euer ſeeke the knowledge of Ieſus, and of that fulnes of grace that is in him, and thinke not that thou haſt enough of knowledge alreadie. No, crie euer, Lord open the eye of my ſoule to ſee thee and the things that are with thee, that I may ſee the things I haue not ſeene, and that I ſhould ſee. Heare the word of the Goſpell; for knowledge is gotten by the word of the Goſpell. Seeke, that thy mind may be inſtructed, but to the purpoſe.
            
               Bewiſe. As ſeeking is an action; ſo wiſedome is an action. There is no action without ſome ſenſe and knowledge. The life of a beaſt is not without ſome ſenſe; take it away, the beaſt periſheth. The life of a man cannot be without ſome ſenſe and knowledge; therefore thou canſt not haue the life of God, except

thou haue a ſenſe and ſmelling of God and of heauenly things. It is a thing impoſsible, that thou that haſt no taſte of things aboue, canſt either ſeek or ſee them; and if thou thinkeſt otherwiſe thou art deceiued. Can the life of Ieſus be in thee without a knowledge of heauenly things? No, no, deceiue not thy ſoule, it is vnpoſſible: for Ieſus liueth not in the ſoules of men altogether ignorant. So that if thou get not a portion of this knowledge, of this heauenly life, and of things aboue, thou ſhalt neuer ſeeke for them, nor haue a deſire of them: no, I ſay to thee, if thou want knowledge, thou ſhalt neuer get them.
            Come forward. Let vs ſee of what things muſt this knowledge be? He anſwereth, of things aboue, that is, of ſuch things as are proper for ſuch a life. I tell you this earth, and all the things in it, your ſiluer, gold, drinke, and all the reſt, the knowledge of theſe things ſerueth not for the life of heauen: but if thou wilt haue ſuch a life, thy knowledge muſt reach to heauen: and howbeit thy knowledge be finite; yet it will compaſſe things infinite: if thou haue the ſpirit of Ieſus, ſaith the Apoſtle, it compaſſeth the breadth, and depth of him, Epheſ. chap. 3. verſe 18. 19. Knowledge of heauenly things neceſſarie if we be in Chriſt. So this heauenly life requires wiſedome in heauenly things. Ieſus Chriſt when hee roſe, the eye of him went vp to heauen; he knew no more theſe carnall things; all went away, and the minde of him was occupied vpon heauenly things: ſo if thou riſe with him, thy minde will to heauen, and in ſome meaſure thou wilt vnderſtand things, and thou wilt be wiſe in God. If thou haue not this, I ſay thou haſt not riſen with Ieſus, but art yet filthie, wallowing in thy owne bloud to thy eternall damnation.
            Now he is not content to exhort them that they be wiſe in theſe things aboue, but hee excludeth things of this earth: to teach thee that thou canſt not be wiſe in theſe heauēly things, in caſe thou be wiſe in theſe things beneath; yea theſe heauenly things ſhall bee but fooliſhnes to a wiſe man in earthly things: for they ſhall be but as a dreame and imagination to ſuch: the ſpeech of the Goſpell ſhall be follie to him. So think not to take both in thy armes; when thou art looking downe, how canſt thou looke vp? Thinke not to compaſſe heauen and

earth both together: for in compaſſing the one, thou ſhalt loſe the other: Therefore the Apoſtle ſundreth them. This ſeemeth to be hard, for how can we caſt all care of this world away, we muſt eate, drinke, and be cloathed, and haue ſome care of theſe things ſo long as we abide in the earth? The Apoſtle anſwereth in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinth. chap. 7. verſ. 29. for hauing ſpoken of mariage, he ſaith, the time is ſhortned. As if hee would ſay, ye will not be long in this life. Therefore ye that haue wiues, be as though ye had them not. By the which he meaneth not, that we ſhould caſt all care away of this world, but that we ſhould take the things of this earth by the way as it were: that is to ſay, let not thy chief care be on them, but ſo farre as they ſerue for heauen. Doe euen as though thou were going on a pilgrimage, yee will take meate, drinke, gold, ſiluer, and ſuch other things to helpe you forward in your iourney; yet your care will not bee on them, but your care will bee chiefly on your iourney, euer hauing your eye vpon the end of it. Thou wilt not ſit downe vpon thy riches, vpon thy meate, and the reſt Simile▪
                while thou art in iourneying; but wilt be euer going forward in thy iourney, vſing theſe things by the way: euen ſo the Lord in this our iourneying to heauen, hee will not haue vs to ſit downe, and ſet our care chiefly on theſe things in the earth, but to take them as it were by the way, hauing thy chiefe care Matth. 6. on him, and the things with him: therefore ſit not down vpon any thing in this earth; if thou doe, thou ſhalt neuer come to thy iourneys end; yea thou ſhalt loſe the remembrance of it.
            Now to goe forward in the words following. There are two arguments to this purpoſe ſet downe by the Apoſtle: the firſt is to diſſwade them from earthly things, ye are dead. The next is to ſeeke heauenly things; your life is hid with Christ in God. To ſpeake then of the firſt argumēt, which is, ye are dead to the earth: therfore ſtriue not to be wiſe in ye earth. Ye knowe that a mā that is dead, ſuppoſing that he had neuer ſo great care of this world, and could neuer get a fill of the things in it, ſo long as he liued, yet when life is gone, the bodie lieth ſtill, and will not giue a peny for all the world, all pleaſure goeth away, and Simile. as a man dieth, he will begin to ſpit at the world: yea, a man full of the honour of it, he will at his dying day ſpit at it. Euen

ſo brethren, the ſoule dying with Ieſus ſpiritually (as the bodie dieth naturally) to ſinne, to the earth, and to all earthly things, to what end ſhould it care for theſe earthly things? Nay, if thou didſt finde that death of Ieſus, thou wouldeſt loath theſe things. In deede it is vnpoſſible to be altogether voyde of the care of theſe things of the earth, as long as we are in the bodie here: but if thou be buried with him, certainly thou wilt loath all theſe things beneath, and deſpiſe the wiſdome of them, and begin by little and little to ſeeke the things of heauen. And if thou be thus wiſe dead, it is a ſure argument, thy ſoule is mortified, lying as it were in the buriall of Ieſus, vntill the time thou riſe glorious in that great day. As by the contrarie, if thou be not buried with Ieſus in thy ſoule and bodie, thou art liuing to ſinne, thou wanteſt the life of God, and haſt nothing but a ſinfull life. Brethren, ye heard before, he ſayd they were liuing: now he ſaith, they are dead. How can theſe two ſtand Obiection. Anſwere. together? I anſwere, a ſpirituall death in the ſoule, when it dieth to ſinne, to foule affections, and to earthly things, ſuch a death as that ſtandeth very well with a ſpirituall life; yea, this death is ſo ioyned with the ſpirituall life, that except the ſpirituall death precede, the life of Ieſus will not enter into thee. Thinke not to enioy both together at once, the life of ſinne, and the life of God; but ere thou get the life of God, the eye thou hadſt to earthly things muſt be cloſed: no, thinke not to looke vp and downe together at once. No, no, be dead to the world ere euer thou minde to open an eye to heauen. So then, the death to the world, and the life to heauen ſtandeth well together.
            The laſt argument followeth, perſwading to the things aboue, your life is hid aboue with Christ. There are the words, and why ſhould ye not follow him, and ſet your heart and your eye vpon him, where your life is? Brethren, I ſee there are many things to moue vs to ſeeke heauen, and to be wiſe in heanenly things. Now I would to God one of them could moue vs, but alas! as for a ſtonie heart, ſpeake and reaſon with it as ye will, and conuince it as ye pleaſe, it will abide hard, and will not be moued. Wouldſt thou goe downe to the things of this life? that death that thou dieſt forceth thee vp to heauen; it giueth thee wings to flie vpward, and cloſeth thine eyes from

the world, and then commeth that ſpirituall life; which alſo forceth thee vpward: will not this moue thee? Then commeth the preſence of Ieſus that is in heauen, he is drawing thee vpward with his hand; the other two thruſteth thee vpward, but he draweth thee by his ſpirit: Father (ſaith he) in Iohn chap. 17. verſe 24. I will that thoſe which thou hast giuen me be with me where I am. Will not this moue thee? yet there is more, his glorie wherewith he promiſeth to adorne thee with himſelfe. Would not that yet moue thee to ſeeke heauen and heauenly things? O thy life is not here! In deed thou haſt begun a peece of the life of heauen, when thy deſire is ſet vpon it; but thy glorie is in the heauen, thou art alreadie the ſonne of God, but yet it appeareth not what thou art, 1. Iohn 3. 2. Thy life is in heauen. Then ſeeing there are ſo many arguments to moue thee to ſet thy heart and affection on heauen and heauenly things, to drawe thee vpward to heauen; O miſerable ſoule! that yet wilt goe downe to hell. There is no want of power to conuince, and arguments to moue vs to ſeeke for heauen and heauenly things; but alas all the want is in thy miſerable heart, to let thee ſee how great an induration is in thy heart, that will vndoe thee ſo in the light of the Goſpell. The greateſt ſinne that thou canſt commit, it is not thy murther, thy adultery, thy oppreſſion, it is none of theſe that holdeth thee backe from God. No, no, it is the hardening of thy heart againſt Hardnes of heart how perilous. ſo many graces, whereby the Lord would heaue thee vp to heauen. And ſo the ſpeciall poynt of thine enditement ſhall be, that thou hardeneſt thy heart, and wouldeſt haue none of his grace. I would haue forgiuen thee freely, will the Lord ſay, if thou wouldeſt haue taken me by the hand when I put it out to thee. O bleſſed is that ſoule that can put out the hand, and take grace of God when he offereth it! Yet I muſt not paſſe by the words. Your life (ſaith he) is hid aboue with Christ, and in whom? In God. By life is meant that perfection of glorie, that once we ſhall ſee, when the glorie of Ieſus ſhall ouerſhadow vs, and make this vile bodie of ours glorious, as it is ſaid in the Epiſtle to the Philippians, chap. 3. verſ. 21. There our life (he ſaith) is hid aboue, it is not open to be ſeene. The eye of man hath not ſeene it: the eare hath not heard of it: and all the

tongues of the Angels cannot tell you of the greatnes of that glorie; neither can it enter into your heart, Hebr. 2. 7. So it is hid aboue from the world: the wicked ſeeth it not, and ſo it commeth to paſſe that the child of God is leaſt accounted of; and why? becauſe the life of him is not ſeene, and the reprobate ſhall wonder at it, at that day, when it ſhall be cleerely reuealed to him, but alas, to his euerlaſting confuſion; yea the very ſonnes of God ſhall wonder at it themſelues: for thou ſeeſt not the glorie of thy eſtate. Alas, heauen is but as a dreame to thee, and is as it were a glimmering; thou ſeeſt not the thouſand part of it, neither feeleſt the thouſand part of the ioy that thou ſhalt haue there: but we ſee it a farre off; and therefore it ſeemeth like a mote. But when we draw neere it, it ſhall be like a great mountaine. So it is hid. With whom? with Chriſt: where he is, there is thy life. Then it muſt follow, as it is hid, Ieſus is yet hid from thee; thou liueſt not by ſight of him, but by faith in him, 2. Cor. 5. 7. He is hid from thee, and thou ſhalt wonder, when thou ſhalt ſee him: When thou ſhalt ſee him, euen as he is man, he ſhall make thee aſtoniſhed. And where is Ieſus hid? He anſwereth, in God. It is not theſe heauens: it is not this viſible circle, theſe cloudes that hide him. No, take them away, thou canſt ſee him with that corruptible eye of thine. In whom then is he hid? In God. That is, in a light that hath no acceſſe. 1. Timoth. chap. 6. verſ. 16. where God is himſelfe, Ieſus is hid vp. So all the ſight of things inuiſible is in Ieſus: So that no eye can ſee God, but in Ieſus; and if Ieſus be hid vp, God is inuiſible to thee, all is hid vp within that vaile, and all is dwelling in that vaile of man. So all is hid: thy life is hid, and Ieſus is hid vp. Therefore wonder not, although thou canſt not get ſuch a ſight of that life of Chriſt, and ſuch a ſight of God, as thou wouldeſt haue: for the appointed time is not as yet come. The Lord hath appointed a time, when Chriſt ſhall be reuealed, and then ſeeing Ieſus, thou ſhalt ſee thy life, that was hid vp in him: yea then thou ſhalt ſee God himſelfe. Now what ſhall we do in the meane time? I will tell thee, hold thee by the faith of Ieſus, vntil thou get this ſight: that is, ſtick 
                  A ſweete concluſion. 2. Cor. 3. 17. 18. to the mirrour of the Goſpell, hold thy eye to it, and euer bee looking on it: and then in a moment Ieſus ſhall ſtand vp before

thee, ere thou be aware; and when the mirrour ſhall goe away, Ieſus ſhal ſtand vp in ſteed of it; and he ſhal not ſo ſoone ſtand vp before thee, but hee ſhall as ſoone transforme thee, and ſhall make this vile bodie to be glorious. And ſo ſoone as this mortalitie ſhall be ſwallowed vp, then thou ſhalt poſſeſſe that infinite ioy euerlaſtingly, and ſhalt looke into the deepenes of that Lord for euer. Now Lord giue vs grace to looke ſtedfaſtly in this Goſpell of Ieſus till wee be glorified in him, and get his preſence to look on for euer and euer, Amen. Now to this Lord Ieſus with the Father and holy Ghoſt be euerlaſting praiſe, honour and thankes for euer.
         
         
            THE XXIIII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſains.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 4. 5.
               
                  4 When Christ which is our life, ſhall appeare, then ſhall ye alſo appeare with him in glory.
                  
                  5 Mortifie therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication, vncleannes, the inordinate affection, euill concupiſcence,
                  
               
            
            
               THe laſt day (brethren) we entred into the exhortation to true godlines and holines of life. In the firſt three verſes of this chapter we had two exhortations, and both were to things that are aboue, to heauenly things. The firſt exhortation was to ſeeke them: the ſecond was to be wiſe in theſe heauenly things. There were ſundry arguments which the Apoſtle vſed for this purpoſe, ye heard euery one of them as they occurred in their own place. The laſt argument whereby

he would moue them to be wiſe in theſe heauenly things was, that life that was hid vp with Chriſt in God, euen that life which is the perfecting of this ſpirituall life begun here. The perfect life of glorie is with Chriſt, therefore they ſhould ſet their eye on heauen and heauenly things. Now to go forward: they might haue demaunded, when ſhall wee haue that life, and when ſhall it be manifeſted? To this, the Apoſtle in the firſt verſe which I haue now read, anſwereth and ſaith, it ſhall be reuealed to you; yea rather, ye ſhall appeare as ſoone as Ieſus Chriſt the Lord of life ſhall be reuealed. After this followeth another exhortation, grounded vpon this anſwere and promiſe of life to be reuealed, as we ſhall heare.
            To come then to the firſt part of their demaund and queſtion they moue: I marke this firſt, when once any hath begun to taſte of that life to come, and of heauenly things, as the Coloſſians did, there is a continuall longing and deſire to haue the fulnes and accompliſhment thereof. If thou hadſt taſted it, thou wilt long for it, and aske when it ſhall be fully reuealed. Such as haue taſted Chriſt effectually long to ſee him. And therefore Paul to the Romanes chap. 8. verſ. 23. ſaith, We that haue receiued the first fruites of the ſpirit (there is the beginning of the life ſpirituall and of heauen) we ſigh within our ſelues, waiting for the adoption euen the redemption of our bodies.
What thing can be more cleere then this? And in the 2. Cor. chap. 5. verſ. 2. We (ſaith he) being burdened with this mortalitie, we ſigh; not that we would cast away theſe bodies, but that we would be cloathed vpon. Then he expoundeth himſelfe, that mortalitie might be ſwallowed of life. So the taſte of a ſpirituall life here, hath euer a continuall longing and a deſire to haue it fully manifeſted, that it might appeare as it is. It is euer enquiring The first obſeruation. when it ſhall be fulfilled: but thou that haſt not taſted it, thou canſt not ſeeke after it; and thou that haſt not taſted it in this life, thou ſhalt neuer finde it hereafter. But I debarre thee from heauen, and this life of Ieſus (play thy part as thou wilt, and reele here and there at thy pleaſure, if thou haue not a taſte of heauen and of the life of Ieſus here) thou ſhalt neuer ſee it hereafter; I giue thee this doome.
            The next thing I obſerue about this demaund is: They aske not ſo ſoone, but as ſoone they are anſwered; yea they are preuented, The ſecond obſeruatiō.
               
and they get no leaſure as it were to aske. So thou that ſeekeſt for comfort, ſhalt get comfort; & they that ſeeke for that life euerlaſting, ſhall get a meeting, and finde a comfortable anſwere. It cannot faile; at the leaſt while they be put in poſſeſſion of it, they ſhall be fed with the promiſe of that life, and ſhall no ſooner aske for it, but the anſwere ſhall be made to them: When Chriſt ſhall appeare, then ſhall ye alſo appeare with him in glorie. And leaſt (brethren) ye ſhould thinke theſe promiſes to be but bare words: Peter in his firſt Epiſtle and firſt chapter reſolueth you when he ſaith, beleeuing in the promiſe, ye reioyce with a ioy vnſpeakable and glorious. The faith in the promiſe of things that are not yet come, filleth the heart with ioy, and bringeth ſome ſenſe of that we long for: for the faith in the promiſe ſucketh that life out of heauen. Therefore beleeue while thou ſeeſt, let faith hold vp thy heart vntill thou be put in the full poſſeſſion of the things beleeued in.
            To come to the words of the text. The promiſe is this: Ye ſhall appeare in glorie, and ye ſhall ſee your life. There is the promiſe. The time is defined here, when Chriſt ſhall appeare: vpon this defining of the time, ye ſhall note: Our life dependeth vpon Chriſt: the time of it dependeth vpon his time, all the time from the beginning to his firſt comming in our nature, as hee was hid and was not yet manifeſted. So that heauenly life lay hid, and ſhined not in the world: and more I tell you, few gat it, and few ſaw it. Then againe, when hee begun to come out, and manifeſt himſelfe in our nature, then our life came out and begun to appeare. Laſtly, when hee ſhall come againe in this full manifeſtation of his glorie, that that thou now haſt, is but little in reſpect of that which thou ſhalt ſee. It was but a ſmall ſight the Iewes gat, in reſpect of that thou ſhalt get then: for then ſhall thy life appeare in the fulnes of it: there ſhall nothing be hidden, but all ſhall be made manifeſt. And ſeeing then our life dependeth on him alwaies, hang thou on him by faith, and waite for his comming. Alas cannot thy eye once in the day be lifted vp to heauen to waite for him? Paul maketh the promiſe to none, but to thoſe who waite for his laſt comming; and ſo it ſhall not pertaine to thee, if thou waite not for his comming.
            
               
Againe, another thing followeth cleerely of theſe words, and The third obſeruatiō. this manifeſtation: The glorie of Chriſt muſt be in the firſt place, it muſt be formoſt. Then ſecondly followeth thy life, and thy glorie, as one pendicle of his glorie: for thy life is manifeſted with him; when hee ſhall appeare, who is thy life, then ſhalt thou appeare. So his life and glorie goeth firſt, and then thine followeth after. And when Chriſt ſhal come in that day, the chiefeſt reſpect he ſhal haue ſhall be to his own glory. And therefore 2. Theſſ. chap. 1. verſ. 10. it is ſaid, when he ſhall come, he ſhall come that he may be glorified among his Saints. So the end of his comming, is his glorie, that hee may be admirable; that all The manifeſtation of Chriſt in his compleate glorie vnto men and Angels with admiration. the Angels and all the Saints may ſtand about to giue glorie to Ieſus. Nay there ſhall not be ſuch a wondring at the elects glorie, as at his glorie; he ſhall be a perpetuall admiration to man and Angell. Then the leſſon is: ſeeing it is his glorie that firſt ſhall appeare, giue it the firſt place, and let it be deerer to thee then thy life, and thy glorie both. Thou ſhalt not diminiſh one iot of that; yea chuſe rather to goe to hell, then that he ſhould not haue his glorie: yea if thou account more of thy life, then his of glorie, thou ſhalt neither get life nor glorie. In ſome meaſure thou muſt do as Moſes and Paul did, rather then hee ſhould want his glorie, deſire rather to be raſed out of the booke of life, and to be Anathema, accurſed: for therein thou ſhalt loſe nothing, but thou preferring his glorie to thy very life and ſaluation, ſhalt find life, glorie and ſaluation for euer; for he loueth them decrely that loue him.
            In the beginning of this verſe, there is a ſhort deſcription of Chriſt, when Christ that is our life. This ſhort deſcription containeth the cauſe wherefore when he ſhall be glorified and appeare, thou ſhalt be glorified: The cauſe is, becauſe hee is thy life, and then hee appearing, of force thou muſt appeare, becauſe his life is thine. Is not this comfortable, that the glorie The glorie of Chriſt and thy life cannot be parted. of Ieſus and thy life cannot bee parted? Thou canſt not liue without him, and hee will not want thee. Againe, as ſoone as his life ſhall appeare, thou ſhalt appeare. It is very comfortable: yet the phraſe is to be marked. He ſaith not, when Chriſt of whom wee haue our life ſhall appeare, but hee ſaith, when Chriſt who is our life ſhall appeare. This is a more effectuall ſpeaking,

and the very manner of ſpeech noteth this, that that ſpirituall life that we begin to liue here, is not ſo much a life different from his life, as it is the very life that Chriſt liueth himſelfe. Chriſt hath a life, and wee haue the ſame in number, the life of Chriſt ouerſhadoweth vs. That ſame very life and no other extendeth to vs ſo farre as wee are capable of it. Brethren, ye may perceiue this to be a ſimilitude. Liueth the bodie another life then the head? No: There is but one life in the man, and that that the head hath, the ſame the whole bodiehath, and it quickeneth euery member of the bodie: Euen ſo is it to be thought of the life of Ieſus our ſpirituall head. There is a neerer coniunction betwixt vs and him, then there is betweene this head of ours and the bodie: ſo that of neceſsitie there is but one life of Chriſt and ours; and we liue that ſame life of Ieſus as members of that myſticall bodie, whereof he is the head. Paul Galath. chap. 2. verſ. 20. he ſaith not, by Chriſt I liue, but he ſaith, Chriſt liueth in me. And Epheſ. chap. 3. verſ. 17. he dwelleth in me. So his life is mine: And the 2. Cor. chap. 4. verſ. 10. the life of Ieſus is manifested in me. The life of Ieſus was Pauls life. What elſe then is thy life, but this ſame life of Ieſus? This is comfortable, he hath made thee a fellow companion to himſelfe: he will not giue thee another life, but his owne life. O that this miſerable world wiſt what it were to liue the life of God, to haue Chriſt and his life in it! It is no ſmall glorie to liue the life of Ieſus.
            In the laſt words, he ſaith not, when Chriſt, who is your life ſhall appeare, your life ſhall appeare: but he ſaith, ye ſhall appeare, euen ye your ſelues in proper perſon, and none others for you, but ye your ſelues ſhall appeare with Ieſus in that day. For their demaund would ſeeme to meane another thing; to wit, that howſoeuer Chriſt ſhould appeare, who was their life, yet they would be farre to ſeeke, as we ſay. But hee anſwereth them more comfortably, ye your ſelues ſhall appeare at that day, and not your life onely. For your life ſhall not ſo ſoone appeare, but as ſoone incontinently thereafter, within the ſpace of the twinckling of an eye, ye your ſelues ſhall appeare: ſo this ſpeech telleth vs, that there is a ſpace of time, wherein the ſonnes of God are not knowne in the world: the Lord

hath children here and the world knoweth them not; yea The world knowes not the Saints. ſcarſely they themſelues ſee it, much leſſe the world. Then againe, they haue a time when they are made knowne to be Kings ſonnes, the leaſt of them (euery one is the Kings ſonne) 1. Ioh. 3. 2. 3. and they themſelues will know themſelues then. When is it that they are not knowne? when his glorie is not ſeene. What difference is there betweene a Kings ſonne and another, when he is not in his own place and dignitie? So is it with thee: thou art not in thine owne place and honour. When ſhalt thou be knowne to be the ſonne of God? when the ſonne of glorie Simile. ſhall appeare, then thou ſhalt be knowne to be the ſonne of God. Then the diuell ſhall be compelled to ſay, there is the ſonne of God; there is a Kings ſonne, and an heire of the euerlaſting kingdome. Then againe, when appeares not thine honour? when the honour of thy eldeſt brother appeareth not: ſo long as he is obſcured, ſo long thou art obſcured. When ſhall it appeare? when thy eldeſt brother ſhall appeare, then thou, if thou be firſt, ſecond, third, fourth; yea if ye were tenne thouſand, the honour of the eldeſt brother ſhall reach to all. Then in one word, the manifeſtation of the ſonnes of God dependeth vpon the appearance of Ieſus Chriſt the firſt borne our eldeſt brother. When he ſhall appeare, then thy glorie and honour ſhall appeare. Therefore yee pray, Let thy kingdome come, that is, let Ieſus appeare in his glorie, and let me next appeare. This is the effect of the prayer.
            Now to come to the next verſe vpon this promiſe of appearing and life to be manifeſted: he groundeth his exhortation, and ſaith, therefore mortifie your earthly members; as if he would ſay, your glorie is to bee reuealed, yee ſhall once appeare the ſonnes of God in glorie and dignitie: what ſhall ye then doe in the meane time? Be occupied (ſaith hee) in mortifying the members of your bodie, that ye may be found cleane; otherwiſe ye ſhall not ſee that life to come. Now to obſerue this ere wee goe further. Such a glorious life requires a death; thou ſhalt neuer get it, if there be not a death in thee: thinke not to come to it, with all thy luſts with thee, if thou fall not to the mortification of that hand that hath ſlaine thy eldeſt brother the Lord Ieſus; thou ſhalt neuer get that life. This vaine world

thinketh to carrie vp a bloudie hand, and a wicked eye to heauen: no, if thou take it with thee, thou ſhalt not get entrance, the gate ſhall be hurled on thy face. The harlot thinketh that ſhe ſhall get heauen with her harlotrie: No, ſhe and her harlotrie ſhall goe to hell; no vncleane thing ſhall enter there: if thou be not holie and in ſome meaſure ſanctified, and that filthie 1. Cor. 6. 9 luſt of thine ſlaine, thou ſhalt neuer get heauen, deceiue not your ſelues. Yet to marke the words, he ſaith, mortifie, ſlay. Hee ſaid before they were dead, meaning to ſinne; now hee biddeth them, ſlay on, and die on: thou that haſt begun to die, continue, otherwiſe thou wilt not liue. This telleth vs, ſin is not ſlaine in an inſtant: yea if thou ſhouldeſt liue a thouſand Sinne is not ſlaine in an inſtant. yeeres, it will liue with thee as long as thou liueſt, ere thou die it ſhall not die: it hath a quicker life then thou haſt: thou art but a bubble of water: all the Kings of the earth cannot ſlay ſinne; yea when this life is gone, that ſame originall ſin goeth to the graue with thee, and reſolueth the bodie into aſhes; Originall ſin liueth after death in the aſhes. and after that, lieth in the aſhes and leaueth thee not, vntill Chriſt come and take vp the bodie; and ſo ſinne is not a light thing. Seeing then it is ſo hard to ſlay theſe affections, continue in ſlaying them, and thinke it not enough thou haſt giuen ſinne a wound to day, and ſo leaue off: I tell thee, it will ſlay thee, if thou ſlay not it daily and hourely. For that is it Paul ſaith, Rom. chap. 7. verſ. 18. 19. A wanton girle and a wanton fellow, they thinke they are liuing; but I ſay there is not a ſparke of life in them, and well were they that they had not that life. Therefore continue in ſlaying of ſinne, or elſe thou ſhalt be ſlaine of ſinne, and the life of lifes ſhall be taken from thee. Ye that haue bin occupied in ſlaying of others, ſlay your ſelues, and your affections. But how ſhall ye ſlay your affection? It lieth not in thy hand to doe it, there is no vertue in thee: thou canſt not ſlay one affection: I will tell thee. The meanes are two, the firſt is faith in Ieſus, and in his death, that is the death of Ieſus apprehended by faith, draw him as greedily Two means to kill ſin. to thee, as thou ſuckeſt ſinne. It is the vertue of the croſſe of Ieſus that ſlayeth ſinne, and thy foule affections; ſo that if thou haue not faith in him and his death, thou ſhalt neuer be Gal. 6. 14. 15. able to ſlay ſinne in thee, nor to mortifie one foule affection.
            
               
The other meane to ſlay ſinne and foule affections, is the ſpirit of Ieſus, that accompanieth the croſſe of Ieſus (take away the croſſe of Ieſus, no ſpirit.) Then this ſpirit comming into thy heart, it falleth to and putteth his hand in that ſinne which is within thee, and killeth it by little and little: for as hee is a quickening ſpirit, ſo hee is a ſlaying ſpirit of ſinne. So Chriſts croſſe embraced by faith, & then his ſpirit, they are the meanes to ſlay ſinne in thee. Then thou haſt no more to doe, but by faith to entertaine that croſſe of Chriſt and his ſpirit: for woe Rom. 8. 2. 3. 4. is that heart that is without the ſpirit of Chriſt. But how ſhall this be? I tell thee faith is by hearing: heare the Goſpell then; for if thou take no pleaſure in the Goſpell, faith, Chriſt, and his ſpirit ſhall goe from thee. Beſides theſe two, there are other godly exerciſes, profitable to the ſame purpoſe, continuall prayer; for that is the exerciſe that God delighteth in: Meanes to come by & to increaſe ſaith. earneſt exerciſing of the workes of charitie; if thou leaue off theſe exerciſes, thou ſhalt loſe Chriſt and his ſpirit, and ſhalt grow in ſinne, and then thou ſhalt be caſt into damnation for euer. Gods iudgement ſhall light on thy necke, and ſhall cruſh thee downe to hell, and thy ſinne both. This for the word mortifying.
            
            The next is, what ſhould wee mortifie? Hee ſaith not thy neighbour: no, no, but hee ſaith, mortifie thy cancred affection that moueth thee to ſlay thy neighbour; ſlay thy ſelfe, that is, that maſſe of ſinne, that is within thee, and cut off from thy bodie euery vncleane thing, and ſlay euery member thereof, and leaue not ſo much as thy little finger vnſlaine. By the mē
               bers Members of ſinne. I vnderſtand the foule affections in thy heart, which run thorough the whole bodie, and fill the eye with pride, with adulterie, with wrath, and crueltie: in ſuch ſort, that the very looke of the eye is defiled, and will runne to vncleannes. The hand is defiled, and runneth to bloud: the foote is defiled, and haſteth to murther: yea thy foule affections in the heart, they will come to the tongue, and imploy it all in their ſeruice; ſo that thou maiſt perceiue, what a ſinne lieth in thy heart, that infecteth all the members. Therefore this is the exhortation of the Apoſtle, ſlay the foule affections in thy members: if it be in thy eye, plucke it away, that is, plucke away that foule affection

in thy eye; for better it is for thee to bee crooked and blinde, then to be caſt into hell, and there to curſe thy hand and feete, and all the members of thy bodie euerlaſtingly. Now then of this briefly. Ye ſee how farre ſinne ſpreadeth in man and woman: it is not content to occupie one part onely of man: it will not be content with thy ſoule, but it runneth through all. It leaueth not one part free, but filleth al the parts of man and woman. Therefore mortification muſt not bee in one part; it muſt not be in the ſoule onely, but as farre as ſin Mortification in all parts. reacheth, ſo farre muſt thy mortification reach. Then begin at thy heart, and next come to the outward members of the bodie; for it auaileth nothing to haue a faire counterfaite face without, if thou haue a foule heart within. Yet the ſtile is to be noted, that he giueth the members, he calleth them earthly, not heauenly. All theſe foule affections are called earthly, becauſe in themſelues they are groſſe and earthly, and their obiects are earthly: And what matter (brethren) if theſe affections were made of the beſt part of the earth, they are made of the dirt of the earth, of theſe ofſcourings of the dirt, that thou wouldeſt lothe to look to. Note.Indeed there are ſome that be of the good earth, as eating, drinking, and ſleeping, &c. therefore  are lawfull being ſanctified: but as for theſe affections of harlotrie, of concupiſcence, of murther, of couetouſnes, they are vnlawful and vncleane: wilt thou then foſter them? No, mortifie them, ſlay them, and cut them away. Chriſt came not to make thy harlotrie cleane to thee: no, no, thou lies in thy throate; cut it away therefore, otherwiſe thou and it both ſhal periſh. This for the generall. Now I come to the particular members.
            Becauſe the large diſpute vpon the particulars fitteth not for this time, onely I will ſpeake ſo farre, as ſerueth for the purpoſe of this text. Hee beginneth firſt at fornication. Then hee commeth to vncleanneſſe. Thirdly, to inordinate paſſions. Fourthly, to euill concupiſcence. And fiftly, he commeth to auarice: and he would haue all theſe cut away. Now to proſecute euery one of theſe. The firſt is fornication, harlotrie, when whores and harlots go together. Paul to the Romanes chap. 1. verſ. 24. and Epheſ. chap. 5. verſ. 5. when hee counteth out the

vices of the Gentiles, hee beginneth alwaies at harlotrie and fornication; and then from that hee commeth to other vices. In the firſt to the Corinthians chap. 6. he inſiſteth more largely Fornication. in condemning of that ſinne, then commonly yee ſhall finde him to doe in any other vice: and hee vſeth for the condemning of it, fiue or ſixe arguments. What meaneth this conſtant doing in condemning this vice? The ſpirit doth it not in vaine, no, not one word commeth from that holie ſpirit in vaine. I ſhall tel you the cauſe. This ſinne was a ſinne common among the Gentiles, and they thought it no ſinne; they thought it a thing indifferent, that might be done without any fault: they were come to that reprobate ſenſe, that nature condemneth. Therefore the Apoſtle to let them ſee that this was a ſinne, and one of the firſt, when he reckoneth the ſinnes of the Gentiles, he nameth fornication firſt to be the ring-leader to the reſt, and the more they extenuate it, the more the ſpirit aggrauateth it. The more thou ſhalt extenuate any ſinne, the more the ſpirit of God ſhall aggrauate it to thy conſcience. Wilt thou ſay, murther (which now is ſo rife) is no ſinne? The Lord will ſay to thee, it is a ſinne, and a huge great ſinne: if thou do not amend it, thou ſhalt neuer inherit the kingdome of heauen. Therefore wee learne, that theſe ſinnes, the world accounteth leaſt of, the Lord accounteth moſt of; and thou ſhouldeſt account moſt of them, and in condemning of them thou ſhouldeſt inſiſt. This harlotry is euer conioyned with prophanenes: Thou that takeſt pleaſure to defile thine owne bodie, thou groweſt a prophane bodie, and ſo thou art ready to be drawne to al miſchiefe, for thou art left of God. Heb. chap. 12. verſ. 16. Let no man be a harlot, or a prophane perſon, as Eſau was, meaning hereby, that a harlot is a prophane dogge, readie to be polluted with all vice.
            But to come to the next vice. It followeth: Vncleannes. Harlotrie is one ſort of vncleannes. But now hee ſubioyneth, all manner of vncleannes: And from the leſſe member, which is harlotrie, he goeth to the greater. This teacheth vs, that we are full of filthines. For if this vncleannes in all manner of waies were not in vs, the Apoſtle would not bid vs mortifie the generall vice that is in vs: and ſo though thou were come of a King,

thy nature is full of filth, and vncleannes. No, the ſow was neuer Greater filthines cō
                  mitted by man then by a beaſt. ſo vncleane as thou art by nature: A ſow hath not the filth of ſinne; but thou haſt. There was neuer beaſt that will fall into ſuch filthines, as man will doe: wilt thou reade hiſtories, yea the Scriptures? thou ſhalt finde greater filthines committed by man, then by any beaſt. This thing and that will make thee loathe: but if thou hadſt an eye to ſee thy ſin, thou wouldeſt loathe it more then all the filthines in the world. The ſecond thing that we learne here is this: It is not enough to mortifie one ſort of vncleannes. In caſe thou be a drunkard, it is not enough to mortifie that ſinne: in caſe thou be an harlot, it is not enough for thee to mortifie this (howbeit it be well done to do it) but thou muſt paſſe from one ſinne to another, and neuer leaue it aliue in thee; but mortifie them all, ſlay all, cut all away: for I aſſure thee one vncleanenes will cauſe thee die; it will cauſe thee goe to hell. The Germanes thinke that drunkennes is no ſinne; but I ſay it is: and it is enough to cauſe thee die: as a ſicknes will cauſe thee die if thou mend it not, ſo one ſinne will cauſe thee die, if thou repent not.
            Now to go to the next member. He calleth it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an vnruly 
               Vnruly affection. 
               affection what euer it be. Here it is taken for a raging luſt, that ſetteth a man on fire, 1. Cor. chap. 7. verſ. 9. So yet I ſend you to nature, looke what ſtuffe it is made of. There is a fire in nature of foule luſt that will burne thee to death, and in the end put thee in hell, if it be not mortified. May ye not ſee this by experience? when ye ſee that which is fit for ye a bating and quenching of luſt, cannot quench it, but he will runne and mingle himſelfe with harlots; theſe harlots teſtifie of this fire. Looke to the adulterer, there is a fire. Yet more then that, when this fire hath burnt vp all the moyſture of the bodie, and waſted all; yet it burneth in the heart. Ye ſhall ſee this in filthie aged men, when the bodie is decrepit; yet the fire of this luſt will be burning ſtill in the heart, and it looſeth the tongue to filthines: fie on thee, it becommeth not an old man to ſpeak foule filthie talke. This is one thing. I marke another thing by ſubioyning firie luſt to vncleannes: It teacheth vs, that among all vices we ſhould take heed of it. This burning loſt is not the leaſt; we ſhould put out that fire firſt: for I tell thee, if thou

let it burne, all the things in the world will not quench it. Thou muſt get the water of the ſpirit of Chriſt to quench it. Therfore crie for that water, or els thou and it both will burne in hell for euer. When he hath ſpoken of this, he goeth to euill concupiſcence. It is not one filthie affection, but all filthie affections, and euery kinde of them, which are many in number, Euill concupiſcence. that he will haue mortified. Thinkeſt thou there be no more but vncleannes and burning luſt in thee? Yea although they were taken away, yet thou art full of other affections. This letteth thee ſee yet, how foule thy nature is. The Papiſt ſaith, we aggrauate the filth of nature ouer much. Ah filthie creature, thou haſt not felt the ſtinke of nature, and therefore thou art Stinke of nature. the worſt teacher of nature: I ſay to thee, the filth of nature cannot be ſpoken of ſufficiently enough: yea an Angell can not paint out ſufficiently the myſterie of ſinne, and the filthines of thy nature. And therefore the Apoſtle teacheth vs to enlarge our mortification; when thou haſt mortified one ſin, two ſins, three ſinnes, yea many ſins; think alwaies there are more behinde: when thou haſt mortified all theſe former ſins, yet auarice is behinde: ſuppoſe thou ſhouldeſt quit thy ſelfe of them all, yet if thou be auaritious, it ſhall cauſe thee die, thou ſhalt not inherit heauen. Then as there is no end of ſinne: ſo let there be no end of mortification of ſinne. There are more members of ſinne within thee, then there are members of thy bodie; and therefore be ſlaying one. And here I end, crauing of him, who is able to ſlay this filthines of nature, to graunt his holy ſpirit and faith in Ieſus Chriſt to that effect. To whom with the Father be all honour and thanks for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXV. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians, beginning at the end of the fift verſe.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 5. 6. 7.
               
                  5 And couetouſnes, which is Idolatrie:
                  
                  6 For the which things ſake, the wrath of God commeth on the children of diſobedience.
                  
                  7 Wherein ye alſo walked once, when ye liued in them.
                  
               
            
            
               YE haue heard (brethren) the firſt exhortation the Apoſtle maketh to the Coloſſians in this chapter was, that they ſhould ſeeke the things aboue. The ſecond  exhortation was, that they ſhould be wiſe in them. And wee haue entred into the third exhortation the laſt day, which is, that they ſhould mortifie their earthly members; and after  the generall he commeth to the deliuerie of theſe ſeueral foule affections that breake out in the bodie: and the  firſt hee nameth was fornication;  the ſecond was vncleannes in generall whatſoeuer;  the third was one ſpeciall kinde of vncleannes, the inordinate affection, the burning luſt that cannot bee quencht: the fourth was generall, euill concupiſcence. Now (brethren) wee ſpake of theſe the laſt day, as God gaue the grace, and as this permitted, leauing off the generall diſcourſing pertaining to the common heads of doctrine, and therefore without further repetition of any thing that was ſpoken, I goe forward. This day we proceed with the fift member, and then after wee ſhall come to the two arguments, whereby hee

will moue them to this mortification of the luſts of the fleſh. The fift member then hee termeth it auarice, or couetouſnes: Euen as before, when he had named the generall vice or member called vncleannes, hee ſubioyned a ſpeciall member which he called the inordinate affection, the which member of affection among all parts and ſorts of vncleannes, is the greateſt: Euen ſo now when he hath named the general member, which he calleth euill concupiſcence, he ſubioyneth, the ſpeciall called auarice, which is the worſt kinde of euill concupiſcence in this world: therefore he maketh a choiſe of it beſides al other concupiſcences in the heart of men. For euen as that burning luſt of the heart is vnquenchable, and cannot be extinguiſhed by any earthly meane; without the ſpirit of Chriſt, it will neuer be quenched: ſo this wicked concupiſcence of auarice, it is vnſatiable; it can neuer be filled. It is like a deuouring gulfe; for though it could ſwallow in all this world, yet it would be too little for it. Giue an auaricious man the whole world, hee will yet craue more: and this is no marueile; for this world, and all that are in this world are finite and bounded within termes: but the deſire of an auaricious man is in a manner infinite: And to ſpeake the truth, if it get not God, it will Nothing can fill the couetous heart but God himſelfe. neuer be ſatisfied. There is nothing that will content or fill it: the more he hath, the more hee will craue. In a word, there is nothing that will be able to fill the deſire of man, but that infinite God. And as one ſaid well, alluding to the ſhape of this world, and comparing it with the heart of a man: The world is round and circular; the heart is foure cornered. Therefore the couetous mans heart may fitly bee compared to a ſquare which can neuer be compleatly filled vp by a circle, though a 
                  
                circle be of all others the moſt capacious figure: ſtill there is a corner voide, turne the circle which way thou wilt within the ſquare: Euen ſo though the whole frame of the heauens, earth, ſeas and ayre, with all that be within thē were ingroſſed in the gulfe of a couetous mans vnſatiable hart, yet would it neuer be filled, neuer contented, neuer haue enough. It is knowne that a quadrangle is neuer filled: euen ſo the heart of an auaricious man, being a quadrant, it is neuer filled. The more he hath, the more hee will craue: the auaricious heart will neuer be ſatiſfied,

vntill it drowne the man. Paul 1. Timoth. chap. 6. verſ. 9. ſpeaking of them that will be rich, he ſaith, they drowne themſelues. There is their end. Brethren, if ye will compare together theſe two foule affections, as the ſpeciall worſt members in a man: certainly, I account auarice farre worſe and more incurable, then the other. As for the luſt, and that fire, it will grow leſſe; and as a man groweth old, it wil grow old and faile with him. But as for this affection of auarice, it groweth more and more: and as a man groweth in age, it groweth in youth; the older thou art, it is the younger: for the more thou decayeſt in ſtrength of thy members, the more ſtrong groweth it, according to the prouerbe: All vices grow old, but auarice groweth young. Therefore aboue all wicked affections, this vice of auarice A prouerb. requireth mortification. Now ſlay it I beſeech you, and fill it vp once; fill vp that gulfe: And wherewith? either with godlines, or elſe it will neuer be filled. Godlines is great gaine, 1. Timoth. chap. 6. otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer haue contentation. I tell thee, there is no other meane then to fill thy heart with godlines: & if thou haue thy heart filled with godlines, a little thing will fill thy heart, a ſober ſupper and a ſober dinner will ſerue thee: but if thou want godlines in thy heart, auarice ſhall raigne in thee, as a tyrant: and how beit he had gotten a world of things; yet if he heare of any thing behinde, he can not be ſatisfied, but requireth that alſo. For his greedines can not be filled.
            Now to goe forward: when he hath named this auarice, he leaueth it not as he did the reſt of the vices before, ſimply naming it; but he inſiſteth in it, and deſcribeth it to be idolatrie; as he would ſay, it the greateſt vice that is: it bereaueth God of his honour and worſhip. Brethren, it is not in this place only where he calleth this vice of auarice idolatrie, but in the fift to the Epheſians 5. verſe, he termeth the auaricious man an idolater, and Ieſus Chriſt in 16. of Luke verſ. 13. No man (ſaith he) can ſerue God and riches. Where ye may ſee he attributeth that to riches, which is proper to God: for the auaricious man honoureth his riches, and is a ſeruant, yea rather a ſlaue to his riches, whereas he ſhould ſerue his God. But I ſay to thee, pretend to ſerue God as thou wilt, thou ſhalt not ſerue God and

riches both: for the words of Chriſt meane, that when once thou beginneſt to be in loue with thy riches, thou biddeſt God farewell. For thou wilt be content rather to be a ſlaue to riches worſhipping them, then to ſerue God, as he cōmanded thee in his word. Brethren, ye may aske of me, what man is hee that will adore his riches? (for he is an idolater that will adore any Idol whatſoeuer it be) what rich man will fall down to a piece of money? I ſay there was neuer an Idolater tooke greater pleaſure to looke on a grauen Image, then an auaritious man Auarice is idolatrie. 1. The couetous man loueth his mony more then God. 2. Truſteth in his mony
                will delight to looke on a piece of money. The outward eye of him ſhall be ſo fixt on it, that he ſhall forget his God: ſuch ſhall be his pleaſure to behold it. But to ſpeake nothing of the outward worſhip: There was neuer an idolater that had greater confidence in his Idoll, then the couetous man in his money. Remember ye not the rich man, who when hee had filled his barnes: My ſoule (ſaith he) take thy reſt: whereon? vpon thy riches: there is his confidence, Luk. 12. verſ. 9. What Idolater Luk. 12. had greater confidence in any thing, then this man had in his riches? The auaritious man then can haue his confidence in nothing, but in his riches. Therefore in the firſt to Timothie chap. 6. verſ. 17. the Apoſtle ſaith, Charge the rich men in this world, that they be not proud, nor put their confidence in vncertaine riches. And Dauid in the 62. Pſalme verſ. 10. ſaith, If riches abound, ſet not thy heart vpon them. Dauid knew well that man would make a God of his riches. Well, if he put his truſt in his riches, and doth worſhip and honour them, he is an idolater. For wherein ſtandeth the worſhip of God, but in putting of confidence (which is the inward worſhip of God) in him? Doeſt not thou then honour riches, when thou putteſt thy confidence in them? yea certainly: yea I ſay, none will goe beyond him in that. Looke to him that will put his confidence in an Idoll moſt, an auaritious man ſhall goe beyond him, and ouermatch him. Ye will moue another queſtion: Is there no other vitious man an idolater? Is not the ambitious man an idolater? puts hee not his confidence in his honour? and the belly-god in his bellie? and ſome in the arme of men? put not all theſe ſorts of perſons, and many more then theſe, their confidence in their ſeuerall vices like Gods? are not

theſe idolaters alſo? I anſwere, it is true indeede, thou that art ambitious, art an idolater; thou that art a belly-god, art an idolater; and thou that putteſt thy truſt in the arme of man, art an idolater: but I ſay, certainly not without cauſe hee termeth the auaritious to be an idolater before all other; euen becauſe it is moſt common, and leaſt counted of, by reaſon that men moſt naturally are inclined thereto. What is he that cannot cloake his auarice? It is thriftines, will the auaritious man ſay, and why ſhould I giue out my goods to this & that? why ſhould not I keepe them well, when I haue them? And ſo they are moſt readie to cloake it with a colour. And therefore the Apoſtle, to let them ſee it is but vaine ſo to doe, termeth this vice the greateſt, and more like to idolatrie then any other. So that idolatrie is firſt, and then auarice that is likeſt to idolatrie ſucceedeth, and then ambition and the reſt. And to ſpeake the truth, it is an harder thing to draw the heart of an auaritious man from this world, then it is to draw the heart of any man: yea it is eaſier to winne the idolater from his idolatrie, then it is to winne the couetous man from his couetouſnes: for couetouſnes is bred in the marrow of thy bones. Then I ſay againe, this vice hath moſt neede to be inſiſted vpon, and aggrauated. For all the world will not ſatiate the heart of man: it is onely the ſpirit of Ieſus that will fill it. Now one thing note here, and ſo I will goe forward. Certainly this aggrauating of auarice, & calling of it idolatrie, lets vs ſee, that the chiefe ſinne in the world is idolatrie. When he would make one ſinne greater then another, he will take the greateſt ſinne and ſet with it: as here, to ſhew that auarice is a great ſinne, Auarice and idolatrie compared. and greater then many others, he ſetteth it downe with idolatrie that is greater. And therefore it muſt follow, that idolatrie is the greateſt ſinne; for that ſin that is next to the greateſt ſinne, muſt needs make that that ſinne which is before it, to bee the greateſt ſinne. But ſo it is, that couetouſnes is next to the greater ſinne which is idolatrie: therefore idolatrie is the greateſt ſinne. And therefore fie on them that leaue the true God, and ſet vp an Idoll to worſhip it. O that true God Idolatrie. ſhall not leaue of to purſue them while they come home again! and all the Kings of the earth ſhall not make them to proſper,

except they come home againe! O then come home, come home! or els I pronounce it ſhall not be the Pope that ſhall be able to ſaue thee from damnation. It was eaſie to win the idolatrous Gentiles, but to winne falſe Chriſtians from their Hard to cō
                  uert Papists from idolatrie. idolatrie, of al things of the world, it is one of the hardeſt. Wilt thou not be wonne by the light and truth of the word? that iron rod ſhall bruſe thee together.
            Now to ſpeake ſomething of theſe members: will ye ſee the obiect of theſe-foule affections? The obiects are two in number. The firſt is pleaſure, the very pleaſuring of the fleſh. The ſecond is profit and gaine. There are the two. The luſt is occupied about pleaſure, and this deſire is occupied about profit; and ſo the two obiects are pleaſure and profit. Now it is true, the Lord that hath created all things, hath created thee with theſe affectations of pleaſure, and deſire of theſe things in this world: ſo that it is natural to deſire the things of this world, and to take pleaſure in them. And the Lord that hath created thee ſo, hee hath giuen thee pleaſure and profit: and ſuch is his liberalitie towards thee, that hee alloweth that thy affections be ſatisfied, ſo be it that thou vſe all to his honour and worſhip, whether thou eate, or drinke, or whatſoeuer thou doe; and that in vſing thy libertie with an vncleane heart, thou defile not the good gift of God: otherwiſe of neceſsitie theſe foule affections muſt be double ſinnes. Thou ſinneſt doubly not onely in thy luſt, but in the liberalitie of God: thou ſinneſt in harlotrie, and in ingratitude againſt God. The Lord hath permitted thee to haue riches. And the Lord ſhall ſay to the harlot, permitted not I thee to haue pleaſure? but thou wouldeſt not take it as I commaunded thee: but thou wouldeſt perſeuere in whoredome from one to another, and Inordinate affection. ſo pleaſure thy ſelfe in vncleannes, which I haue forbidden thee. And likewiſe he ſhall ſay to the auaricious, permitted not I thee to haue riches? but what haſt thou done? Thou haſt made a god of thy riches and ſerued them, whereas thou ſhouldeſt haue knowne me for thy God, and me onely ſhouldeſt thou haue worſhipped; and therefore thou and thy luſt, and thou and thy profit ſhall both to hell in my hot indignation: and as one affection that is foule bringeth many ſinnes with

it; ſo it bringeth double iudgement with it. Beware then, and marke well theſe affections, that they bee not in exceſſe and paſſe meaſure. This inordinate affection to the foule luſts of the fleſh, and the gaine of the things in this world telleth vs, that the corruption of nature, and of theſe affections, is more bent to an exceſſe, paſsing meaſure, then to a defect in nature. There are ſome things that are in exceſſe, and ſome in a defect: but this corruption that is in man tendeth more to an exceſſe, then any other thing. Man is readier to offend in ouer great deſire of riches, then in ouer little. Looke thou through this age, thou ſhalt finde that it inclineth to ouer great ſeeking of riches. Againe, ye ſhall finde that a thouſand faileth in ouer great deſire of pleaſure; and ſo it tendeth more to an exceſſe then to a defect. And therefore this mortification hath more adoe to hold downe theſe affections, then to draw them forward, ſeeing they ſet vpon exceſſe on euery ſide. Bridle then your affection: for will you goe to your owne experience? ye ſhall finde more adoe in drawing backe your affections from this world, the pleaſure and riches of the ſame, then in putting them forward.
            Now to come to the arguments: ye haue heard the firſt from that life hid vp in God: he pointed it out to them, which ſhould moue them to mortifie their members, as they would looke for the reuealing of it. Now in the verſe that followeth, the ſecond argument is ſet downe on the contrarie. Before, he ſet downe heauen: now hee ſetteth downe damnation before  them. Note.
               For the which things (ſaith he) the wrath of God commeth on the childrē of diſobedience. They are tumbled into hell for vncleannes; of any ſort, men and women, are thruſt daily into hell, not onely for them altogether, but alſo for any one of theſe ſinnes, if it raigne in them. And indeede there are few in whom ſome one of theſe vices (if not the whole number) doth not raigne: ſo that if he be not auaritious, yet it may be he is a fornicatour, and giuen to this filthie vncleannes of the fleſh, or ſome other of theſe ſinnes. And I ſay to thee, there is not one of theſe ſinnes, if it raigne in thee, but it will draw thee to hell: that is his meaning. So he cloſeth in this mortification betwixt heauen and hell; heauen on the one ſide, and hell on

the other; mercie on the one ſide, and iudgement on the other: to let thee vnderſtand that if heauen will not moue thee, hell will get thee; if that life will not moue thee, iudgement and hell ſhall deuoure thee. In the world we are allured with heauen, and threatned with hell; if thou wilt not be moued with the one, the other ſhall oppreſſe thee; if thou were a King thy eſtate ſhall not helpe thee. And therefore ſlay thy foule affections, as thou wouldeſt haue heauen and eſchue hel. And in that he ſetteth hel before them, it letteth vs ſee the canker of our nature; yea euen of the regenerate. Thou art not ſo well renued, but thou haſt neede to be chaſed and compelled to thy grace, and to haue the terrors of hell and of the wrath The beſt haue neede to be awakened with Gods terrors. of God obiect to thee, to chaſe thee to heauen, as the Apoſtle 2. Cor. chap. 5. verſ. 11. ſaith, knowing this terror of the Lord, therfore I am faithfull in my vocation, & bring others to the faith. A Miniſter if he were neuer ſo good; yea if it were Paul himſelfe; yet ye ſee hee hath neede of this terror of the wrath of God to be obiected to him, that he may be faithfull, and waite vpon the glorie of heauen. Then againe, ye ſee fornication will procure the wrath of God euerlaſting: much more the temporall. Well, thou thinkeſt ſimple fornication, a ſingle man with a ſingle woman, it is but a ſmal fault: but the Apoſtle ſaith, fornication, if thou lie in it, it will thruſt thee downe into hell. Sinne in any ſort or meaſure will procure the wrath of God. There is no ſinne, but it will bring the wrath of God againſt thee, and in the end ſhut thee in hell. But this is to be marked; For the which cauſe (ſaith he) the wrath of God falleth: vpon whom? vpon the children of diſobedience, that is, vpon theſe perſons that will not repent. Therefore it is not euery fornication and vncleannes that will cauſe thee goe to hell, but it is fornication vnrepented for, and vncleannes vnrepented for: that is the ſinne which will put thee in hell, and vpon that ſinner that is impenitent the wrath of God falleth. Auarice that is not repented for, and a man that is hardened in heart, that is he, and that is the ſinne that will put thee in hell. So to ſpeake it properly, it is not ſo much harlotry, fornication, vncleannes, and auarice, or other ſinne in it ſelfe, that procureth the wrath of God, as it is the impenitencie of the perſon that cannot, nor

will not repent. Alas, could the harlot repent him of his ſinne, hee would be ſaued? Could the murtherer repent him of his murther, he would be ſaued? Could the auaricious repent him of his auarice, hee would not be vnder the wrath of God? For there is no ſin ſo great, but if repentance follow, there is grace The greateſt ſinne is pardonable to the penitent. for thee. Repent thee then of thy ſinne, as thou knoweſt it, and aske mercie in the Lord Ieſus, and if thou doe this thou ſhalt be ſaued, and free from the wrath of this great God: for of all ſinne in the world, the ſinne that is accompanied with impenitencie, is the greateſt. Therefore ſet your heart euer to repent, The least ſinne vnpardonable to the impenitent. as thou wilt declare thy faith in Ieſus; for faith in Chriſt can not be without true repentance. If we ſhould liue Methuſalahs daies, all is little enough to repent of ſinne; yea euen the ſmalleſt that euer thou diddeſt, or art guiltie of. Thou that haſt bin an harlot, ſpend the reſt of thy life in repentance, and thou ſhalt finde grace and ſaluation. And ſo likewiſe, thou that haſt been a murtherer, an oppreſſor, an auaricious bodie, ſpend the time ye haue behinde in heartie repentance; and I aſſure you ye ſhall finde mercie and ſaluation: otherwiſe I debarre you out of heauen. Or I leaue theſe words, marke: he ſaith, For the which the wrath of God commeth vpon the children of diſobedience: Suppoſing that the Coloſsians had been ſuch men as had walked in all the ſinnes he ſpake of: yet this wrath commeth not vpon them. Then it is not the elect that be made a ſpectacle to the world of the wrath and iudgements of God, but they are the reprobates that are made the ſpectacles of Gods wrath and iudgements: for they are the children of diſobedience. As for the elect none of them falleth vnder this wrath. O happie is the eſtate of the choſen number! and if thou be not one of the number of Gods elect in the Lord Ieſus, woe is thee: thou ſhalt be made a ſpectacle of Gods wrath. But as for the elect, he chuſeth them out to let them ſee his wrath rather in others, then that they ſhould experiment it in their owne perſons. He will take a ſlaue and torment him in the ſight of his elect, and Pſal. 50. teare, him (as it were) in pieces (O the terrible hand of God!) to make them to ſtand in awe: for all the reprobate, if they were Kings, they are but ſlaues and veſſels of earth, and not of gold, let them cloathe themſelues with gold as they will. So behold

the ſeueritie and mercie of God; ſeueritie for the reprobate, and mercie for the elect. Ye will aske; makes not God the choſen ſometime a ſpectacle of his wrath? was not Dauid in a miſerable caſe, and a fearefull ſpectacle of Gods wrath, when as the ſword went neuer out of his houſe all his daies? and are there not many daily, that are made fearefull ſpectacles; and yet no doubt there are many of them that are of the choſen of God? I anſwere, indeede it is true, the Lord will chaſtiſe his very ſore here; but all is in this world, hang him, head him, burne him, all is nought; and that that is, is euer conioyned with the mercie of God, and his paine hath an end. But the Apoſtle ſpeaketh here of an eternall wrath. The elect incurre not this wrath: it is proper to the ſonnes of infidelitie. And therfore I ſay, the elect are neuer made ſpectacles of Gods Gods puniſhments in this world on his are but chaſtiſements. wrath, whatſoeuer the chaſtiſement be that fals vpon them. Ye will aske againe: where was there euer ſuch a ſpectacle ſeene? In hell. Saw you euer one tormented in hell with this wrath? ſaw you euer one tormented in this world with this wrath? God forbid, I will not iudge ſo hardly of any that ſuffereth, or are viſited by the hand of God. How is it then that the reprobate are made the ſpectacles of Gods wrath? I ſay, albeit thou neither ſee it, nor thou heare it, yet there are infinite numbers tormented in hell. But there are ſome ſo pitifull hearted bodies, who cannot heare tell that one goeth to hell. O fooliſh pitifull hearted bodie! I tell thee, infinite numbers go to hell, and ſhall goe; and thou, if thou beleeue not this, ſhalt go with Hell. the reſt to hell. For if this word will not ſerue to confirme thee in this truth, that the, reprobates ſhall be made ſpectacles of Gods wrath: the wrath of God ſhall ſerue one day when it ſhall light on thee, and them both, as infidels, to your vtter deſtruction.
            Now to goe forward: ye haue heard two arguments ſeruing to mortification. The firſt was taken from heauen; the ſecond from hell, as ye heard. The laſt followeth, and it is taken from theſe ſame ſinnes, in the which the Coloſsians ſometimes walked, as if he would ſay: ye were ſuch men ſometime, theſe ſins all raigned in you before ye came to Chriſt; ye were fornicators, idolators, couetous, &c. all theſe raigned in you, as they

did in any infidell. Therefore let the remembrance of theſe ſins be matter of mortification to you. This is the argument briefly. Of the which yee may gather, that men ſhould not looke How to remember our old ſins. idly on their ſinnes wherein ſometime they walked: for when thou remembreſt thou waſt an harlot & murtherer, an oppreſſor, and an auaricious man, let that remembrance ſerue to an earneſt ſlaying of ſinne to come, and mourning for thy ſinnes paſt continually. Fie on thee for euermore, if this be not the effect of the remembrance of thy ſinnes, and ſo ſlay that foule affectiō that made thee an harlot, and crie for that bloud of Ieſus that waſheth it away. And certaine it is, as all things that befall the elect are for their good: euen ſo are their ſinnes Rom. 8. for their good, when they begin to repent them of their ſinne, and to ſlay it. Dauid was better after his adulterie, then he was before; and he neuer remembred his ſinnes (as he euer remembred them) without mortification. For this is the nature of a ſanctified remembrance, it euer worketh ſorrow in the heart, and a mortification of the ſinne. O fie on thee, when thou remembreſt thy harlotrie, and wilt not haue ſorrow in thy heart for it, nor mortifie it! Well, Paul ſaith, Godly ſorrow bringeth foorth repentance, which is nothing elſe but a mortification of thy ſinne, ſorrowing that thou haſt done it: and brethren, ſanctified remembrance maketh a freſh wound in the heart. If thou ſtand in the grace of Ieſus Chriſt, thou wilt not ſo ſoone remember thy ſins, but as ſoone thou ſhalt be wounded with ſorrow and griefe for them: and thou ſhalt not ſo ſoone bee wounded, but ſo ſoone that oyle of gladnes ſhall be powred into thy heart to comfort thee in Ieſus and his grace, and ſhall bring to thee a ioy vnſpeakable. Therefore this is my minde, and it is true: the ioyfulleſt bodie that euer was or is, is a penitent The ioy of a penitent ſinner. ſinner, who with ſighes vnſpeakable groanes for ſinne. O then, there is ioy vnſpeakable and glorious in that heart! 1. Pet. chap. 1. it refreſheth the hart ſo ſweetly, that the mourning ſinner is ſwallowed vp with ioy, and bleſſeth the time that euer he mourned for ſinne.
            Come to the words of the text, there are three things he noteth Three points. in them:  Firſt he ſaith, they walked in them: that is, in theſe ſinnes.  Secondly, he ſetteth downe their manner of walking.

And thirdly, the time when they walked in them. As to the firſt, ye walked, that is, in fornication and vncleannes, and the reſt; ye walked in them, as men are wont to goe from morning to euening. The word teacheth vs this, that a ſinner cannot ſit idle (if ſinne raigne in thee thou canſt not ſit idle) but he muſt be euer going on; yea and running on to ſinne. It is ſaid in the epiſtle to the Epheſians, that they gaue themſelues to wantonnes with greedines, ſtriuing who ſhould be formoſt. There Eph. 4. 19. 20. was neuer two in a courſe of running, ſtriuing who ſhould be formoſt and formoſt, as a ſinner in whom ſinne raigneth, will ſtriue to be formoſt in ſinne before all others. There is none that went to hell, nor none goe or ſhall goe, but their owne Sinners walke to hell, they neede no horſe. foote carieth them thither; they neede not a horſe to ride on and gallop thither. There was neuer none ſo readie to goe to heauen, as the reprobates are to goe to hell: Would to God we could make as good ſpeede in the way to heauen, as they doe in the way to hell. And ſo there is none that dieth that euerlaſting death, but it is according to his owne will. Thy perdition is of thy ſelfe, O Iſrael; but thy ſaluation is of me, ſaith the Lord. Thou wilt runne of thine owne will to hell, except the Lord meete thee and hinder thy courſe.
            
                The ſecond thing he marketh in them, is the manner of their  walking. Ye alſo, that is, euen ye walked after the ſame manner, as the children of infidelitie did. Looke as they walked, ſo yee walked; as they ranne, ye ranne; no difference betwixt you. So the leſſon is, before the effectuall calling of God by his ſpirit and faith, there is no difference betwixt the elect and the reprobate; the ſoule of the elect will be as vitious as the ſoule No difference betweene the elect and reprobate before grace. of the reporbate. So look to the perſous, there is no difference vntill God make the difference: he will runne to hell as faſt as he. Then wherein ſtandeth the difference? it ſtandeth not in thee, but in yt counſel and purpoſe of God; it is in the breaſt of God: there is nothing in the elect himſelfe, but all in God: And in his owne time he maketh the difference. So aſcribe nothing to thy nature and birth, but aſcribe all to God, to his counſell, and to his election; and giue him the glorie, and ſay, I thanke thee, O God, that haſt elected me, and for that thou haſt called me to thee by thy ſpirit in time, and haſt made me to know

thee and thy goodnes. Who hath diſtinguiſhed me from thee, and thee from another? but God. Why then ſhouldeſt thou glorie in any thing, but in God? O vile creature and vaine! fie on thy nature, it ſhall turne to thy deſtruction: ſo then, only glorie in God, and in nothing beſides.
            
                The third thing marked here, is the time when they walked. Sometime, ſaith he. Then he maketh it cleare, when ye liued in theſe vices, that is, as outwardly ye walked in them; ſo inwardly in your ſoules ye liued in them. Walking is outward, and liuing is inward in the ſoule: ſo as the ground of theſe naturall actions, as of going on the way outwardly, is the life of the ſoule (for take the life away thou canſt not goe) ſo the ground of all theſe ſinfull actions, theſe wofull actions, woe to them all! the ground of all thy fornication and vncleanenes, is a wofull life that thou liueſt. Sinne is liuing within thee; if ſinne liued not within, the actions would not appeare in thy bodie that appeareth. Thou art dead, and yet ſinne is liuing in thee. Thou and it ſhall not liue both together, Rom. 7. ſaith he. Sinne is reuined in me. Thou art dead, and ſinne is quickened in thy breaſt. And or euer one be a harlot in his bodie, in his outward action, it is firſt in the ſoule of him: or euer one be a murtherer with the hand, he is a murtherer in his ſoule: it beginneth firſt there; and then it raiſeth and ſtirreth vp the hand to the outward action. It is ſo of all ſinfull actions, they proceede firſt from the ſinne liuing in the ſoule; ſo thou that wilt mortifie ſinne, and the outward actions of ſinne, ſlay firſt the ſinne that liueth within thee, or elſe it will ſlay thee; either thou or it muſt die: and I pronounce this, that if thou ſlay not the ſinne that is within, thou ſhalt be ſlaine by it for euer. Begin then in order to the ſlaying of ſinne; for there is an order in mortification, and God that biddeth thee ſlay ſinne, is the Lord of order. He comming in, bid deth thee firſt ſlay the ſinne that is within thee; he will not bid thee begin at the hand, the eye, or any of thy members outward; but he will goe into thy heart, and he beginneth and putteth out that life of ſinne, that liueth in theethere. He firſt maketh thy heart cleane, where ſinne dwelleth and taketh roote; and ſo he will haue thee to

roote it out that it bud not in thee. This way God beginneth in taking away ſinne and ſlaying of it, and this is the way that the elect child of God doth. But hypocrites will make a well fauoured outward countenance, and who are ſo holy as they; Hypocriſie begins without. and in the meane time, will be foſtering the filth of this foule life of ſinne inwardly in his heart with pleaſure. But the holy ſpirit, who beginneth to mortifie thee, beginneth at the heart, and ſlayeth the man of ſinne in thy heart firſt; and he will wound it ſo deepely when he ſhall ſtrike vpon it, that he ſhall mortifie it, and then thou ſhalt begin to ſee thine owne filth, and ſtinke in ſuch ſort, that thou ſhalt abhor thy ſelfe; but the hypocrite countes all theſe things, but as words of office. But O that dolefull waking, when the conſcience wakeneth thee! It will cauſe thee ſay, O foule harlot! what haſt thou been doing? walking in harlotrie and deceiuing men, with a ſhew of godlineſie. Therefore happie is the ſoule that is this wiſe wakened in time, and wounded with the ſight of thy own filthines; for it ſhall procure ioy comming vpon ſorrow. If thou wilt be content to reſtraine thy hand, foote, and eye for a time, ſo that thou ſinne not openly as others doe, but that thy life that lurketh in thee, muſt vtter it ſelfe at the laſt; ſo as thou maiſt be a fornicator, a murtherer, and an auaritious bodie (for there is no hypocrite, but he muſt vtter himſelfe at the laſt) thou haſt no true mortification in thee; and therefore thou ſhalt finde no comfort in all thy outward ſhewes: ſtudie then to this 
                  〈◊〉
                mortification. Suppoſe a man to be bound hand and foote, and that the man be a harlot in the inward man, ſo as he had no vſe of the outward action in all his life time: admit this, that thou hadſt not the outward action in all thy time; yet I ſay, if that life of harlotrie be in thee, and not ſlaine within thee, thou wilt to hell. It will not be that outward abſtinence that will ſaue thee; but it muſt be the ſlaughter of the inward appetite, and then the hand nor no other of thy members needeth to be fettered, but all will be peaceable and ſtand ſtill when once that life of ſinne is quencht. Therefore ſlay euer the ſinne in thy ſoule, and let it not raigne; for if it raigne, thou wilt to damnation. We beſeech him that is able to worke

this worke, to put to his hand, and doe it; for all the words of the world will not doe it, onely he muſt doe it. Now to him be praiſe and honor,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE XXVI. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 8.
               8 But now put ye away all theſe things, wrath, anger, maliciouſnes, curſed ſpeaking, filthie ſpeaking, out of your mouth.
               
            
            
               YE remember brethren the laſt time we occupied this place; wee inſiſted in the exhortation that the Apoſtle hath to the mortifying of the ſinfull members, the foule affections and actions of the ſoule and the bodie: Mortifie (ſaith he) your earthly members, that is, your cankred affections that hold the bodie occupied in euill. To this purpoſe he vſeth ſundry arguments:  the firſt was taken from the  life euerlaſting, that was hid vp with Chriſt in God, laid vp in heauen: as if he would ſay, as euer thou wouldeſt ſee that life, Coherence. mortifie thy earthly members, ſlay thy affections; for it is impoſſible that they can ſtand with that life of heauen.  The ſecond argument was taken from that death in hell: if heauen  will not moue thee to mortifie thy earthly members, thy foule affections; yet let hell terrifie thee and moue thee. For becauſe of theſe members, the wrath of God commeth vpon the children of diſobedience.  The third argument was from that former

life of theirs; they were in life no better then the children of diſobedience. Now certainely, thou that haſt been a ſinner, and haſt liued as wickedly as any other, when thou lookeſt ouer thy ſhoulder, and ſeeſt that life thou liuedſt in, it ſhould be a motiue to thee to mortifie thy members and foule affections; for if thou doe it not, thou ſhalt goe backe againe. Waſt thou an harlot? thou ſhalt goe backe againe to thy harlotrie. Waſt thou a murtherer? thou ſhalt fall to thy murther againe. Waſt thou an auaritious perſon? thou wilt to thy auarice againe, and be worſe in theſe ſinnes, then euer thou waſt before: if thou mortifie not ſtill theſe thy foule affections, thou ſhalt backe againe to theſe ſinnes and many more.
            Now to come to the text, vpon this laſt argument he concludeth his exhortation: therefore put now away all theſe things, wherein ye haue liued ouer long; thinke ye haue liued ouer long in ſinne, as it is ſaid, 1. Pet. 4. 3. an houre in ſinne is ouer long. Alas, if thou couldeſt abhor thy ſinne! there was neuer ſo great a ſtinke, as the ſtinke of ſinne: thou thinkeſt thy The pollution of ſin. dirt to be ſomething to thee; alas, thou wilt periſh and drowne thy ſelfe in it, if thou take not vp thy ſelfe. Briefly, theſe words containe the ſame in effect, that was ſaid before: Put away ye alſo now. There is neuer a word here without force; and for your better vnderſtanding, I will note foure things in them to be conſidered.  The firſt is, what this putting away meaneth.   The ſecond is, what things they ſhould put away.  The third is,  the manner of putting them away.  The fourth is, the time  when this ſhould be. 
            To come to the firſt. The word that he vſeth, put away, it ſignifieth as much as to mortifie, to ſlay; for in other places alſo he vſeth theſe words indifferently. The words are borrowed. The firſt word of mortifying from things that are ſubiect to the ſlaughter: and the word of putting away, is borrowed from 1 Put ye away.
                cloathing, that is put away off a man: ſo brethren, as ſinne is an old man (as Paul ſaith) hauing life (it hath life as euery thing hath life) and therefore is ſlaine: euen ſo thy ſinne is a botched cloathing, a cloute, and a filthy garment where with we are cloathed naturally; and therefore muſt now be put away off vs: we muſt ſhake it off, as we would ſee that life of heauen,

or elſe it will bring thee to deſtruction. Further, the word importeth more then a bare putting off: it importeth alſo a putting Put off ſin ſo as you neuer put it on again. off of it from thee, that thou ſee it no more. Thou muſt not play with ſinne, as thou doeſt with thy coate. No, caſt it not off now, and then put it on thee in the morning; nay, rather hold it ſtill: and thou that art a harlot, caſt not thy harlotrie from thee this day, and then put it vpon thee to morrow; no, but continue a harlot ſtill: for if thou put it now off, and now on, the Lord ſhall make thee finde it, to ſticke faſter to thee then thy skinne doth to thy backe. Goe not then to thy cuſtome againe, but if thou once put off or away ſinne, put it away foreuer; meddle neuer with that ſinne againe. This is the firſt thing here to be conſidered.
            The next thing to be noted in this place, is, the things to be 2 All theſe things.
                put away; not one thing onely: manifold are the pleites or foldings of ſinne, Lord, if it be not a thick cloathing for if thou be cloathed with ſinne, thou haſt a thicke coate vpon thy backe: there is ſuch a varietic of ſinne in thee. And therefore he biddeth thee not, put away one of them, and keepe another; as to put away thy adulterie, and keepe murther; to put away theft, and keepe couetouſnes: No, play not ſo with ſinne; ſay not, I will ſhake off that ſinne, and keepe this: but the Apoſtle biddeth thee put all away; yea the leaſt ſinne that can be, as well as the greateſt. Iames in his ſecond chapter, and tenth verſe ſaith, he that faileth in one is guiltie of all. If murther raigne in thee, thou art gone; keepe temperance as thou wilt, if one ſin raigne in thee thou art a loſt man: for I ſay, if one ſinne raigne in thee, there is no mortification in thee, and ſo there is nothing in thee that pleaſeth God. And ye know, as ye ſee a man will die of many maladies; euen ſo ye ſhal ſee a mā die of one Simile. maladie: Euen ſo, ſuppoſing that you were cleane of many ſinnes, yet if there be one in thee, that one ſinne will cauſe thee die. Yet the word is to be marked. He biddeth not onely generally all, put away all ſinne, but the direction is giuen to euery one in particular, of the which it muſt follow, that there are none that are borne, but they are cloathed with all ſinnes vnder the heauen: for howbeit a man burſt not out in euery ſin, an open murtherer, an open adulterer, a theefe, an auaricious

perſon; yet he hath the ſeed of euery one of theſe by nature in his heart: thou art a murtherer by nature, & a drunkard, &c. Therefore I ſay to euery one of you, put away all theſe things; put away murther out of thy heart, put harlotric out of thy heart; and in a word, put all ſin away; ſlay all.
            
                The third, that is to be marked here, is the manner of the  putting away of theſe affections. And it is ſet downe in this word alſo. That is, as the reſt of the world that is faithfull hath done, if ye would be accounted Chriſtians, be ye like them; as they haue mortified in themſelues theſe affections, and ſlaine the earthly members, ſo doe ye likewiſe: as if he would ſay, ye ſtroue before with the children of diſobedience, who might be firſt in euill: euen ſo ſtriue now with the children of light, the faithfull, who may be firſt in mortification of ſinne, and in baniſhing ſinne from you; for this compenſation muſt bee by thee that art called to ye light of the Goſpel, or elſe thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe neuer to haue been called. Haſt thou ſtriuen with the wicked before in wickednes? ſtriue now with the godly in godlines. Saweſt thou euer the broad gate, thou wenteſt in? go now and ſee the ſtreight gate, and thruſt in with the faithfull that way. For if thou be a counterfaite, and ſay thou art a Chriſtian, and walkeſt not as a Chriſtian, but after thy old manner of life in wickednes like to the Infidels; I ſay, thou ſhalt finde greater iudgement and damnation in that day againſt thee, then againſt an open infidell. Hee ſetteth then before them the faithfull, and all to worke this mortification. For as the Lord mortifieth by his word (when the Apoſtle ſaith mortifie, that ſame word is a word of mortification) euen ſo he mortifieth men by example. Hee will take a ſlaine ſoule, and Examples of the faithfull ought to moue vs. ſet it vp as a ſpectacle to thee, and bid thee that art a ſinner, looke to that ſlaine ſoule; he will point it out to thee, and bid thee take an example of it of mortification; and ſo, well art thou that preacheſt by thy life, howbeit thou neuer preach Heb. 12. 1. 2. 3. one word with thy mouth: for thou wilt be able to edifie by thy life, as another will be by ye word. Now howbeit that the Lord vſeth both the word and example, to teach vs mortification; yet for all this, it is not effectuall in euery one of vs: for where one will be moued by example, two will ſcorne at it.

Know yee not how a naughtie packe ſold to wickednes will ſcorne, when he ſeeth the life of a godly man or woman propounded to him; he wil ſcorne at him: what matter if he were a Lord, or whatſoeuer he be, if hee ſcorne at the life of a godly man, I ſay he is but an impious man void of grace. 1. Pet. chap. 4 verſ. 4. 5. it is ſaid, Becauſe yee will not runne on with them, they blaſpheme. But what addeth he? Who ſhall render an account to him that is readie to iudge both quick and dead, thou ſcorner ſhalt firſt render an account of thy prophanenes; and then of thy blaſphemie againſt the Saints.
            
                To come now to the fourth; that is to be marked here which is the time, put away (now) ſaith he, that is, while it is to day: before  it was night and darknes, and therefore yee walked in darknes; but now it is day: and fie on thee that wilt liue in the day light, as it were in the night. Brethren, there is no ſmall force in the time, to doe this or that. Ye know by experience, when it is night, and when the clowdes couer the earth, it prouoketh men to doe that, which they would not doe in the day, and prouoketh a man to ſleep. A man that is inclined to drunkennes, will goe to it in the night; and he that deſireth harlotrie, he craueth the night: for he that doth euill, hateth the light. And by the contrarie: there is no ſmall force in the day light, it will ſhamethee, and will make thee to wake, and compell thee to put to thy hand to doe ſome good thing. But to come to the ſpirituall night and day: if this day hath this force, hath not the ſpirituall night a great force? Thou that lieſt vnder the clowd of ignorance, thou art more heauily oppreſt therewith, then the clowd of the night doth the bodie: this clowde will cauſe thee to runne to all miſchiefe in the world. And by the contrarie, when once that light, the ſunne of righteouſnes ſhines, when the ſhining of the Goſpell beginneth to breake vp, it prouoketh men to goe to heauenly workes, which are the workes of the light. Therefore Paul ſaith, The night is paſt, and now is the day; walke then as in the day time, Rom. 13. verſ. 12. Fie on thee that euer thou ſhouldeſt let this glorious light of Ieſus ſhine vpon thee, and then walkeſt in the workes of darknes, and in the night. Better were it for any in Scotland, that they had neuer ſeene the light of the Goſpell, then to haue ſeene it.

For there are many in Scotland that the more they heare of the Goſpell, they are the wickeder: for except this Goſpell be forcible to the ſlaying of ſinne in thee, it ſhall be forcible to the workes of darknes, which ſhall worke thy damnation. If it make thee not the better, it will make thee the worſe: for it ſhall be either the ſauour of life vnto life, or els the ſauour of death vnto death: either Chriſt ſhall quicken thee, and ſlay thy ſin; or els he ſhall ſlay thy ſelfe. In a word, neuer Turke, nor Pagan was ſo wicked, and ſo euill a liuer as a Chriſtian man; and yet he will heare the word, and turne vp his eare and liſten to the preaching: now if this word alter him not, it ſhall harden him. And therefore I giue thee my counſell, except thou finde a mortification in thee of thy affections by the hearing of this Goſpell, neuer lend thy eare to heare the word of Chriſt, for it ſhall be a ſealed booke vnto thee. And therefore take good heed that the Goſpell be powerfull to life to thee; and crie, O Lord, let the word of life be powerfull to life, that I may finde life in me by it.
            Now brethren, I haue ended theſe firſt words. When hee hath generally exhorted them, to put away all theſe things, he commeth on in particular, and beſides the members that hee hath rehearſed before, he reckoneth more of them, but not all. And in this text he reckoneth vp ſeauen, wrath, anger (as it is turned) malice, blaſphemie, or curſed ſpeaking, filthie ſpeaking, lying-ſpeaking. Let vs heare of euery of them as they are ſet downe. Onely I ſhall touch them ſo farre as ſhall ſerue for the purpoſe. The firſt foure are contained vnder the generall Sixe common iniuries. Foure degrees. ſin, called iniurie or wrong done againſt our neighbour; they are ſet downe in degrees, and paſſe vp in degrees. The firſt is wrath, that is the loweſt degree: anger is the ſecond; and a firie malice is the third; and curſed ſpeaking is the fourth. To come to the firſt, he termeth it wrath; that is the firſt member of the argument, that hee will haue them to put away from them. This wrath is the firſt commotion ſinfull in thy heart againſt thy neighbour, to this end to be reuenged on him. An angry man is euer reuengefull, and there is nought in him but vengeance, and the vengeance of God ſhall ouertake him: I call it a ſinfull commotion, becauſe there is a commotion that

is holie. God forbid that men want wrath; the Lord hath wrath, the Angels haue wrath, and the godly man hath wrath, Holy wrath and that a holie wrath; I call it ſo, when it is not ſo much thou that art angrie, as it is the holie Spirit that dwelleth in thee, that is, when the holie Spirit ſo ruleth & gouerneth thy wrath, that in wrath thou ſinneſt not in any circumſtance. Wrath in it ſelfe is a thing indifferent, but if thou faile in circumſtance, it is a ſin. Some will be angrie without a cauſe for the turning vp of a ſtraw: thou ſinneſt, if thou paſſe meaſure in anger: thou ſinneſt if thou be angrie, when it is no place, nor time: thou ſinneſt, if thou bee angrie with one, with whom thou ſhouldeſt not bee angrie. So it is a ſinfull commotion when there is fault committed in theſe circumſtances, either in one Eph. 4. 30. or all. And then when thou faileſt, it is not the ſpirit of God in thee that directeth thee in thy anger, but it is thou thy ſelfe in thy corruption: And thou makeſt the ſpirit ſad; and if thou continue on, thou wilt make the ſpirit to diſlodge himſelfe out 1. Theſſ. 5. 22. 23 Pſal. 37. 11 of thee; for the ſpirit of Ieſus dwelleth in a pacified heart. And to be ſhort, it is true, a man to be angrie and not to ſinne in it, it is a hard matter: for wrath of all affections, it is the hotteſt, ſodaineſt, and miſrulieſt. It is a ſhort furie depriuing thee of thy wit. Therfore the counſell of the Apoſtle to the Epheſians chap. 4. verſ. 26. is to be followed, Be angrie, but ſinne not; where he ſheweth that it is a hard thing to be angrie and not to ſin. Now then, as all the affections would haue the direction of his ſpirit: ſo chiefly anger would haue the direction of the ſpirit of God, otherwiſe it is ſinne. Aske then the direction of that ſpirit, and ſay; O Lord, guide my wrath; yea ſuppoſing it were a iuſt cauſe, ſeeke the ſpirit; otherwiſe thou wilt paſſe the bounds, and ſpill a good cauſe: therefore in anger, the ſpeciall thing to be craued is the ſpirit of Ieſus.
            The ſecond degree of wrong, he calleth it anger, the word is too milde to expreſſe the firſt language. The word importeth Anger. a firie wrath, and commonly to ſpeak it ſo, when the bloud ſwelleth and gorgeth about the heart, and runneth, and fireth the tongue, and the eye: ſo that when this firie wrath is enkindled, there is no mercie at thy hand: it cannot be reſtained from euill, and thy tongue wil fall out in curſed and euill ſpeeches

againſt thy brother and neighbour; and ſo this ſinne is Anger reſteth in the boſome of ſooles. worſe then the firſt. I ſay, thou that haſt this vice, except thou ſeeke mortification in time, if thou let it raigne within thee, I will aſſure thee an euill turne will be in thy hand: a furious man will either ſtab or be ſtabbed. Therefore temper thy anger in time, and be not content that it burſt within thee, but euer ſtriue to quench the fire in the heart. Ye know if a houſe bee ſet on fire, if it bee not quenched in time, it will burne thorough, and ſpoyle both the houſe where it is begun, and others Simile. beſides: euen ſo if thy heart be ſet on fire with wrath, if it be not quenched with the watrie ſpirit of God, it will burne thee vp, and hurt thy neighbour alſo: quench it then with the ſpirit of Ieſus.
            Now come to the third degree, hee termeth it malice, worſe then the two firſt: there is no worſe bodie then a malitious Malice. body. Malice is a continuing wrath; it will lodge with thee night and day, and thou and it will ſleepe on together. The other two commeth on with a ſudden puſh, and they will flie away at an inſtant: but a malitious man taketh a purpoſe to doe ill, when he ſeeth his time. Paul ſaith, Let not the Sunne goe downe on thy wrath; it will keepe thee waking, & the diuell will come to thee, and thou and the diuell will take counſell together to ſlay thy neighbour. And therefore if common wrath, and that firie wrath are to be mortified, how much more ſhouldſt thou mortifie thy malice? As for a furious bodie, he wil ſoone be pacified: but a malicious man, hee will come laughing and ſlay the man.
            Now come to the fourth that he ſpeaketh of here, he calleth it blaſphemie: that is, a curſed ſpeaking, that hurteth the name 4 Blaſphemie.
                of thy brother. It is the effect of the former, all runne to the tongue, and from the tongue the action paſſeth to the hand: So that when thou haſt ſtrooken him with thy tongue, thou wilt ſtrike him with thy hand. Therefore ſlay the firſt, ſlay the curſed ſpeaking, that it may haue the hand holden off.
            Now (brethren) there is yet a higher degree: where is ſlaughter, murther? there is not a word here of it. The higheſt here is curſed ſpeaking: I marke this in Paul, while he is condemning vices, ye ſhall finde that he ſpeaketh either little or nothing of

murther: which is an argument to me that this curſed vice of murther had not at this time been ſo rife amongſt them, to whom hee writeth, as it is at this day. O villaine! how dareſt thou take away the life of a creature? Thou wilt ſay, I will diſcharge a piſtoll on him: O, God ſhall powre downe his iudgements vpon thee vile murtherer, that ſo lightly eſteemeſt of the creature of God, created to his owne image! The like was not found among the Ethnickes, that at this day raigneth in Scotland. For ſo I perceiue this hainous vice of murther hath Note this of murther not ſo rife among the Gentiles as among Chriſtians. not raigned ſo amongſt them as it doth this day. And I am ſure, if Paul were to write an Epiſtle to Scotland, hee will condemne this vice moſt: for of ſuch ſcalding, burning and murthering, as there is in this land, was neuer heard of in any part of the whole world; and yet hee will be called a Chriſtian, while he is more cruell and tyrannous then the worſt Gentile that euer was. And ſo Paul hee leaueth this vice vnſpoken of, becauſe it raigned not ſo among the Gentiles; yea he abhorreth it ſo, that hee would not haue it once named among the Chriſtians. Ye ſee then here this garment of iniurie againſt our neighbour: there is wrath, firie anger, malice and blaſphemie put together, and all to let you ſee that that wofull garment it is a thicke cloath, and that our neighbours may many waies be wronged. Againe, I note that thou ſhouldeſt not bee content to put one pleate, two, or three away, but goe to the ſingleſt of all, & put it off of thy heart: for if thou foſter it, it will grow thicke vpon thee, and it will not reſt till it come to the vtmoſt action: for mortification is not of one ſinne onely, but it is of all ſinnes; yea of the lighteſt corruption in the heart. Therefore begin not to extenuate and ſay, I will leaue this, and keepe this: no, away with the leaſt ſinne, if it were but the ſmalleſt canker that is in thee, keepe not a bit of it: no, ſlay all, or elſe thou ſhalt be holden at heauens gate.
            When hee had ended theſe foure vices contained vnder the generall iniurie, hauing ſpoken of the iniurie of the tongue, he leaueth it not ſo; but inſiſteth vpon the euils that followeth the tongue. To lend the tongue to euill ſpeaking againſt thy neighbour, either before his face or behind his backe, as it is the cuſtome of many now adaies; it is a dangerous thing.
            
               
Looke how the third chapter of Iames deſcribeth the tongue. It is a world of wickednes: and therefore it is chiefly to be taken Sinnes of the tongue. heed of. Slay that member and ye affection, or els thou wilt periſh. It is no ſmall matter to let thy tongue fall a chiding; it ſhall fire thee. Well, to come to this vice of filthie ſpeaking; would ye know it? There is no houſe but it is full of this villanie. The villaine cannot ſpeake two words, but the one is filthie ſpeaking; and ſo it is no wonder that this ayre is defiled. Thou bringeſt on Gods iudgements on thee, and thy corne both; thou art a foule ſpeaker. Paul in the Epheſians calleth it rotten ſpeech, ſtinking ſpeech; and that becauſe it is of foule things. For where the thing is filthie, the talke muſt be filthie alſo. And as the filthie thing defileth and corrupteth the fleſh, and vitiateth all that it toucheth: euen ſo out of queſtion, the filthie ſpeech will rot thee. Put a freſh apple amongſt the rotten, the very rotten apples will rot the freſh: euen ſo thou Simile. ſhalt rot thy ſelfe by thy foule ſpeech. Ye will ſay to me: Is there ſuch a force in a word? what doe I reckon of it? it is but winde. But Paul 1. Cor. chap. 15. verſ. 23. ſaith, be not beguiled, thou thinkeſt words be nothing; what addeth he? wicked ſpeeches corrupt good manners; wicked ſpeeches therfore will rot thee; be not beguiled with them. By this learne thou then how ſubiect the heart of man is to vanitie, and how readie hee will be to ſucke it in. Hee will ſucke it in faſter, then euer a drie mouth will drinke in drinke, and he will ſpeake of his vanitie and filthines: no, there is not an obiect caſt vp, but it will defile the ſoule of the filthie ſpeaker. To what end ſhould I ſpeak of theſe things? the foule heart will commit filthines with the ſhadow of it: and ere euer thou be a harlot in thy bodie, thou wilt be a harlot in thy heart and tongue firſt; and then it will not reſt vntill thou pollute that bodie of thine. Looke to it, and proue thy experience, if thy heart hath not committed adulterie, or euer thy bodie committeth it. The bodie was neuer ſo ſubiect to draw a peſtilence, as the hart is to attract the vice of adulterie, and all other filthie vices; and thy ſenſes in thy head are as many doores to the ſoule, that letteth in either good or euill things, when they are open; eſpecially take heed The ſenſes windowes. to thy eyes and eares, for they are principall, but the eares

chiefeſt. For as the greateſt grace is let in by the care (for from whence commeth faith but by the hearing? From whence cō
               meth edificatiō but by the care?) and ſo it is a ſpecial ſenſe in a man: and therfore take heed to it. As it receiueth the greateſt grace; ſo it will take in the fouleſt & greateſt vice that is. Take heed thē to it, let it not be giuen to euery bodies talk, keep her chaſt, lend her not to filthie ſpeaking: when thou heareſt any ſpeake filthie talke, turne thy eare from him. I giue this exhortation to yong ones, that are brought vp in filthie houſes with gentlemen, with ſwaggerers; I ſay this therefore for them, that they may receiue knowledge; for it will take a deepe impreſſion. And therefore it ſhould be enformed in good things: for there is none of you, but the filthie things ye gate in your youth, hindreth you in good operation. Therefore thou that art young, keepe a chaſt eare, abhorre filthie companie. And you know if the peſtilence were in a houſe, you would not abide there: O if thou kneweſt the peſtilence of filthie talke! thou wouldeſt not abide in the houſe with him that ſpeaketh filthie talke. For as filthie thoughts are put from the heart; ſo filthie ſpeaking is from the mouth: and as there is mortification required in the heart; ſo there is mortification required in the mouth and tongue. That ſpirit crieth to all, runne vp thorough the bodie, and all the members of it, and mortifie them, beginning at the heart. Therefore thou that wouldeſt ſpeake, ſpeake cleane things; miniſter grace in thy talke; purge the heart: for yee know out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth ſpeaketh. Therefore I ſay to you, if thou heare a Lord ſpeake foule talke, ſay, my Lord, your heart is foule, ſtinking like a priuie; I will ſay this to thee, Lord clenſe thy heart and tongue, or els both will be burnt in hell. Againe brethren, as the contagion ariſeth out of the heart to the tongue: euen ſo the filthy word goeth not ſo ſoone from the mouth or tongue, but it ſendeth a ſtinke back againe to the heart, and it maketh it fouler then before; and ſo thou defileſt not thy tongue only by thy filthie ſpeech, but thou defileſt thy heart, and laieſt on it a double filthines. Is it not as good then to be ſilent and euer purging your hearts? Thou that thinkeſt both filthie things and ſpeakeſt filthy things, O vile villaine! thou ſinneſt doubly.

But alas, who can hinder this filthines in man or woman! alas ſo long as we liue, we ſhall finde it in them: yet I giue thee my counſell, lend not thy tongue to it, but aske grace of God in Ieſus Chriſt to keepe thy heart and tongue from this vncleannes, and be ſlaine in thy heart, and ſurely thou ſhalt get grace in thy heart to ſlay it by the ſpirit of the Lord Ieſus: to whom be all honour and praiſe for euer.
         
         
            THE XXVII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 9. 10.
               
                  9 Lie not one to another, ſeeing that ye haue put off the old man with his workes;
                  
                  10 And haue put on the new which is renued in knowledge, after the image of him that created him.
                  
               
            
            
               WE inſiſt yet (brethren) in this exhortation, which the Apoſtle hath to the Coloſsians, to this end that they ſhould mortifie their earthly members: that is, their luſts and foule affections. He vſeth ſundrie arguments to this purpoſe, as we heard, and at laſt hee concludeth that purpoſe in other words. Before he ſaid, mortifie; and now, put away; ſeeing it is to day, it is a ſhame that they ſhould bee ſeene now in Coherence. the day light of righteouſnes, to walke in vncleannes and filthie luſt. Then he rehearſeth vp a number of vices beſides them that were before, namely wrath, anger which is firie, malice, curſed ſpeaking, filthie ſpeaking. And here we left the laſt day. Now we ſhall goe forward with the laſt vice, which is lying, we

be to ſpeake of it firſt here, and ſo to paſſe forward to the argument taken from that regeneration begun; and therefore it ſhould perſeuere in vs to the end.
            But to come to the vice of lying. There be here three vices Three vices of the tongue. reckoned, that follow the tongue: for if it bee euill, it is the worſt member in the bodie. The firſt is curſed ſpeaking, when we hurt the fame of our brother. The ſecond is filthy ſpeaking, rotten ſpeaking, as hee ſaith in another place, when wee defile the eare, and conſequently the heart of our brother, with the breath of our mouth: for we defile all, and our owne heart alſo, whereunto our foule ſpeech returneth, as ye heard. The third and laſt is lying ſpeaking, when we ſpeake not the truth to our brother, but thinke one thing and ſpeake another with the mouth. That is as euill a vice, as was yet any. Now then brethren, becauſe this ſinne of lying is ſo common and naturall to man and woman; for all men are lyars, ſaith the Apoſtle Rom. 3. 4. by nature. The diuell began it, and in the fall of man he ſpued that venome into him: ſo that al men naturally from the beginning are lyars. Therefore we will ſpeake to you of lying, howbeit not ſo amply as it would require: yet for your ſatisfaction to open to you the greatnes of this ſin, and to begin at the word.
            To lie, it ſignifieth (to take the meaning of the word) to ſpeak The ſinne of lying. one thing and thinke another in the minde. It is a variance and diſagreement betwixt the minde and the mouth. Alas, all ſhould goe together. The minde of God and his mouth goeth together; and if thou be reformed to this image, all will go together in thee alſo. Now this variance proceedeth of a diſagreement:  Firſt it goeth aſunder within the man. The minde ſhewing the truth, the will repining. Now you muſt vnderſtand  that the tongue is chiefly commaunded by thy will, and the diſordred appetite of man, and not by reaſon: for if reaſon ruled it, it would not ſpeake ſo much wrong as it doth.  The ſecond thing that wee ſhould obſerue is this: To lie, to ſpeake one thing and thinke another, is a ſinne againſt God. Suppoſing there were no more euill that followed it, and that thou  iniureſt no bodie; yet that ſame contradiction betwixt the minde and the tongue, is a ſinne againſt God, and thou iniureſt

God himſelfe by thy lie. There is nothing then more vnbeſeeming a Chriſtian man, and that is more vnworthie of the Lord Ieſus, then is lying. For what ſaith he of himſelfe, I am the truth, Ioh. 14. 6. and wilt thou then be a liar? looke how thou agreeſt with Chriſt.  But brethren, there is yet more in a lie, to wit the end, and reſpect that the lyar hath before him when he  lieth, and by this hee maketh the ſinne the greater: for this is moſt ſure, all lies are to deceiue. Thou that lieſt to thy brother, thou wilt deceiue him, and oftentimes the end of thy lie is either to hurt him in his bodie, or goods and ſubſtance. And therefore the Apoſtle ſaith: Lie not againſt him to hurt him: Yet there is more. Suppoſing a liar be not ſet to hurt his brother, but to profit him: As for example, when a Phiſition will ſay to the patient, the medicine is ſweete, when it is bitter; when thou art ſet thus way to profit him, as thou profiteſt his bodie, thou hurteſt the minde; for there is no wrong information but it hurteth the minde; if thou make me to beleeue that, that is not, hurteſt not thou my minde?  But brethren, to goe forward. Suppoſing the lyar hurt not his brother by his lie,  neither in bodie, or goods, nor minde, neither one way or other: yet it commeth backe to thine owne hurt. Let profit come to thy neighbor as it will by thy lie, yet thou hurteſt thy ſelfe; and that is a ſimple aduantage to pleaſure any with thine own hurt, and eſpecially to diſpleaſe God with the pleaſuring of thy neighbour: if there were no more but this, thou ſhouldeſt not lie. If thou get an habite to lie, thou canſt not, ſpeake one true word; and if thou ſpeake the truth, thou wilt Simile. mingle it ſo with fallehood, that ſcarſely canſt thou be beleeued, and that is a foule fault. Ye ſee this by experience. Well then, euill cuſtome is euill. And beſides this, thou loſeſt thy credit amongmen, howbeit at times thou ſpeake the truth. For this is true: Quiſemel malus, ſemper praeſumitur malus: He that is once euill, it may be preſumed he is euer the ſame. But what mattereth this? Know yee not that a lyar procureth the wrath of God? Among the reſt whom God hateth, Salomon ſaith in his Prouerbs: The Lord hateth a lyar. To conclude, a lie of whatſoeuer ſort, is a ſin againſt God: yet yt ye may vnderſtand this better, ye ſhall know there are ſundry ſorts of lying.

One is pernitious, tending to the hurt of thy neighbour. The ſecond is an officious lie for the good of thy brother: and the third is a merrie lie for the delectation of thy brother. There is none of theſe but they are euill, howbeit they be not alike. That lie that ſerueth to the good of thy brother, is a ſinne to thee; and again to deliuer thy brother with a lie, it is a greater ſin: but the pernitious lie is the greateſt of all. Now all commeth to this; all is ſin. Would ye haue me inſiſt in probation? If there were no more but the commaundement, Thou ſhalt beare no falſe witnes, it may ſerue: for this commaundement teacheth thee, that all ſorts of lies are euill in their owne nature. And Paul to the Romanes chap. 3. verſ. 7. 8. Doe no euill, (ſaith he) that good may come of it. This telleth thee, that that is That which is euill in his owne nature can neuer be good. euill of it owne nature, and forbidden by Gods commaundement, that thing will neuer be made good by any circumſtance in the world: lay to it the ſweeteſt ſalue thou wilt, it will neuer be good, yea if it were to ſaue the life of thy brother, if thou lie, it will not be good to thee; yea though thou were able to alter the nature of a lie, it is a ſinne, and it is a follie to thinke that the pretence of a good end will make an euill thing of it owne nature to be good. Augustine ſaith: If wee looke not ſimply to the nature of the action as to the end, then the euill may haue a defence. Therefore (ſaith he) looke euer to the action, put all other things aſide; if it be not good, ſay not that that action is good; how beit the beſt thing in the world ſhould follow it, it will euer abide a ſinne. Further, if there were no more but this naturall conſcience in man, it telleth thee that all ſorts of lies are euill: I appoſe thine owne conſcience, if thou haſt any. Thou wilt not ſo ſoone lie, but thy conſcience will admoniſh thee, and will ſay to thee: Thou haſt ſinned. Brethren, there is no man that will ſeeme to lie and confeſſe it, but he will be aſhamed of it. What meaneth this? but that the cōſcience telleth them, it is a ſin. Look to the children, they will bluſh when they are challenged with a lie. What is the cauſe of this? but that the conſcience ſheweth them they haue ſinned. Ye ſee that a man thinketh he cannot haue a greater iniurie done to him, then to ſay to him; hee lieth. This telleth him, that there is a conſcience within him,

that abhorreth a lie; and that it is vnworthie of the nature of man, becauſe man is created to the image of God, and God is truth: So euery lie is a ſin before God. Alas, when Chriſt in the 12. of Mat. verſ. 36. ſaith, that we ſhall giue an account of all this vaine talke, and idle words, that defile the care, and fill it with clattering and glauering from morning to euening, how much more ſhall a liar giue an account of his lies? So to conclude, all lying is ſinne of what ſort ſoeuer it be. Therefore vſe it not neither in ieſt nor earneſt.
            I am not ignorant (brethren) but this matter hath bin reaſoned of old euen by the learned to excuſe ſome kinde of lie, eſpecially this officious lie, that is for the good of their brother: they want not arguments, and eſpecially the examples of the Scripture. The Midwiues lied to Pharaoh, Exod. 2. Rahab the harlot lied to her owne towneſmen, to ſaue the ſpies, 1. Ioſu. chap. 2. Dauid to ſaue his owne life, being in the Court of the Philiſtines, hee lied, 1. Sam. 21. he fained himſelfe mad. Now, ſay they, we cannot ſay that theſe godly perſons ſinned in all this; ſeeing the Midwiues were highly rewarded: Rahab was ſaued, when all the towne was ſpoyled. This is an apparant argument. Now (brethren) grant this, that they lied (as it is doubted whether they lied or not) yet it followeth not that they ſinned not. I ſay to you, they ſinned in lying. The midwiues ſinned in lying; Rahab ſinned in lying; and Dauid in that counterfeiting; and it was not the lie, it was not the infirmitie, of the which the lie proceeded, that the Lord rewarded: no, the Lord forgaue the lie: but it was that pitie and feare of God, that was in the women, that the Lord rewarded. Therefore their lie is not ſet downe to thee for imitation, but that thou ſhouldeſt flie it. Doe the good they did, but by another meane; Doe not euill that good may come of it. No, doe the good, but vſe the lawfull meane. I doubt not but theſe women asked mercie for their lie; if thou be ſo ſtraited that thou lieſt, aske mercie; if it were that thy lie were to ſaue the whole countrie, aske mercie for it: for it is an offence to God. Now a queſtion, and ſo to go forward. We ſee here, if we haue concluded with the Apoſtle, that it is ſinne to lie in any ſort: ye will aske, is it a ſinne to conceale the truth, to hide the truth?

Sinneth the man that telleth not all the truth? I anſwere, there are two ſorts of truth, one of religion, and another of policie Of concealing a truth. concerning this preſent life. If thou aske about religion, I giue thee a diſtinction. If thou be vrged to giue a confeſsion of thy faith, thou art bound to conceale nothing; otherwiſe thou denieſt the Lord Ieſus; and as thou denieſt him, thou forſweareſt the truth, & ſo ſinneſt grieuouſly. Beware then of this, though the fire ſhould be ſet before thee for the telling of the truth, when thou art vrged thereunto, rather be content to goe to the fire, then thou ſhouldeſt conceale one iot of the truth of Ieſus; but tell all the truth then. But againe, if thou be not ſtraited with a confeſsion, it is lawfull to conceale; yea to caſt out the truth in euery place, and to euery perſon, it is to caſt pearles before ſwine. As for the matter of policie, I anſwere with a diſtinction alſo: If before a Iudge thou be charged to Confeſſion of the truth in religion and policie publike & priuate. depoſe the truth, thou art bound not to conceale a whit of it; and thou that concealeſt, and wilt not tell the truth, thou reſiſteſt the ordinance of God: for it is God that chargeth thee in the Magiſtrate. But if one priuate man haue to doe with an other, and ſtandeth not before a Iudge, it is lawfull to hide a part of the truth: for I tell you all the truth would not be told at all times to euery man: yea it is a ſinne to tell the truth at all times. Saith not the Apoſtle, Charitie couereth the multitude of ſinnes? Now I end it with this word: let no manner of lie proceed out of thy heart; let no man be deceiued by thinking that to lie, is a matter indifferent: no, no, alas we are ouer readie to thinke ſo. But I admoniſh thee, if thou vſe to lie in light things, thou wilt bee brought on to lie in the greateſt things; yea if it were in matters of ſaluation. Beware then of it.
            Now to goe forward: he returneth to his argument tending to mortification, and it is taken from the regeneration begun. There are two parts of it: the firſt part is in putting off: the ſecond is in putting on. The meaning is, ye haue begun to put off the old man, the euill affections of your nature: therefore continue in putting it off; otherwiſe it had bin better for you that ye had neuer begun the work of your regeneration. Then (brethren) the leſſon is, regeneration once begun would be

inſiſted in, vntill thou end it; begin once to be holy, thou muſt end it; begin once to put off this old man, thou muſt hold him off; and put him away, that thou ſee him no more. And beginning once to put on the new man, thou muſt hold him on Perſeuerance. ſtill; otherwiſe to begin and not to goe forward, is double iniquitie to thee. It is better neuer to begin, except thou make a progreſſe, vntill thou bee glorified. For hee or ſhe that beginneth, and then commeth backe againe, are in hazard if euer they come forward againe. It is eaſier to bring one forward, Relapſe. that neuer came forward, then it is to bring one that hath once begun, and then hath reuolted and made defection. Reade the Epiſtle to the Hebrues chap. 10. verſ. 26. of this apoſtaſie. But to marke the words: Seeing (ſaith he) ye haue put off the old man with his workes. The word is borrowed from cloathing, for properly the cloathing is put off. Therefore the word importeth, that this old man is a kinde of cloathing; and being a cloathing, Simile. ye ſee the thing neereſt man, is his cloathing. This old man it may ſit neere thee, and ſticke cloſe to thee; yea thy coate and ſhirt ſit not on thee ſo neere as this old man. The coate couereth thy outward skinne; but the old man cloatheth thy heart, and thy marrow; ſo that there is not one bit vncloathed of thee. Thou waſt borne without coate or ſhirt, Note of our corruption. but thou art bred with this old man, cloathed with this old man from top to toe. Then ſeeing this old man is a cloathing, he is not of thy ſubſtance, either of bodie or ſoule. Thy cloathing is not of thy ſubſtance, no more is this corruption; that is, thy old man of thy ſubſtance, and ſo it is a follie to ſay that originall ſinne is in a ſubſtance. But what is hee then? he is a corrupt qualitie, and ſitteth ſo faſt to thee, that all the Angels cannot get him off. No, all the drawings of the world ſhall not pull him off, except Ieſus come in and put to his hand, and pul him off. He onely is ſufficient to doe that turne; he hath taken it away, if thou beleeue in him. It is eaſie to thee to pull off thy skinne; but thou ſhalt not be able to pull off this ſinne. This for the word of putting off.
            Now what is it they haue put off? Seeing ye haue put off the old man. What is meant by this old man? Not to inſiſt in this matter, by this old man is vnderſtood this corruption, this

canker, this infection, this peſtilence that cleaueth ſo faſt to Originall ſinne. the ſoule and bodie of man; the which we haue ſucked out of the rotten loynes of old Adam, and euen commeth downe to vs through ſo many fathers, ſo many hundreth thouſand fathers, vntill it light vpon vs: it hath that force.Note. And look how old Adam is, this old man is as old; and therefore not without  good cauſe is he called the old man, and being ſo old, this old man that we beare about by nature, no wonder though he be wrinkly faced, for he was neuer well fauoured. But now being ſo old, O the wrinkles that are in his face! if thy conſcience were wakened to ſee that old face of him, it is the terribleſt face that euer thou ſaweſt: it would amaze thee, if thou were the ableſt yt euer went on two legs: if thou ſaw that old face, thou wouldeſt bee caſt downe; for the wrath of God is in his face: it would feare thee. Seeing then thou haſt put him off, put off this cankred corruption, hold him off, put him not on againe. But what more is meant by this old man? not onely this corruption and infection of nature, but alſo by him is meant his whole actions; and what are they? the foule thoughts within, the foule ſpeeches that ye heare, the foule actions that ye ſee. For howbeit he is an old man, yea as old as Adam, yet he runneth on me and thee, and euery one of vs hath a skarre of him; for all his age he ſleepeth not: yea when thou art moſt idle, hee is buſie. Sleepe as thou wilt, if he bee in thee, if it were in thy dreame he will be buſie; and when thy mouth is cloſed, he will be in thy affections; ſo he neuer ſitteth idle. An old man as he draweth to age, he loſeth actiuitie: but this old man, the elder he groweth, the more actiue is he. I tell thee, if he be not ſlaine, if thou were neuer ſo dead in thy old age, he ſhall be the quicker. An aged man that hath not this old man mortified, is the worſt man that euer is. For it is a ſure thing, this old man, the elder he be, he is the more actiue. I ſay a great word to you: Euery one of vs that is come of Adam, and ſo farre from him by ſo long a deſcent, there is not one of vs, but wee are wickeder then Adam was. Thinkeſt thou that he was the greateſt ſinner? No, was originall ſinne ſo great in him? no, it is greater in thee: for the old man, the longer he liue hee is the worſe. Ye ſee now that there is more euill in a

young one that is crept out of the ſhell, then was wont to bee in an old man. The ſonne is worſe then the father: ſo that this old man groweth worſe and worſe, and this wickedneſſe telleth vs that he raigneth in this land, and ſheweth that there is no mortification of him: And therefore hee hath dominion. Yet I ſee another thing, the old man and his actions are euer together. If he abide with thee, the actions be with thee; if he goe from thee, the actions will goe from thee. Therefore call not thy ſelfe a Chriſtian man, if thou be not renued by that ſpirit of Ieſus. And if an euill wicked deed be in thy hand, and filthie ſpeaking be in thy mouth, I ſay to thee, that thou art the old man yet, and hee ſticketh in thy ribbes, and thou and hee will die together. Therefore take heede to thy actions, and ſtriue to liue holily; there is no better warrant to thy conſcience, that the old man is dead within thee, then when thou feeleſt thy ſelfe well exerciſed. As by the contrarie, if thou commit ſinne with pleaſure; alas thou haſt no part of ſanctification: the old man as yet liueth within thee. Now this for the firſt part of regeneration.
            The ſecond part followeth: And ſeeing (ſaith he) ye haue put on the new. Then brethren, after the putting off of the old man, and his ſoule actions, there muſt be a putting on; thou muſt not ſtand vp naked; thou muſt be vncloathed of one thing, and thou muſt be cloathed with another. Thou muſt be cloathed with righteouſnes, euen with Ieſus Chriſt the Lord. The Lord muſt be the vpper garment, and thou muſt be ſprinkled ouer with the bloud of Ieſus; otherwiſe no appearing for thee in that day. Secondly, thou muſt be cloathed with inherent holines, and righteouſnes: for whoſoeuer is counted iuſt, muſt Inherent holines. be in ſome meaſure ſanctified in his owne perſon: For as it is ſaid in the Hebrues, chap. 12. verſ. 14. without holines no man ſhall ſee God: if thou wert the King, if thou haue not this holines, thou dareſt not looke on the face of God. But to come to the words. Ye haue put on. The words are borrowed. And therefore, as the old man was a kinde of cloathing; ſo is the new man a kinde of cloathing. And as the old man was neere thee, ſo this new man muſt be neere thee: hee muſt goe thorough thy skinne, and come to thy heart and cloathe it; yet hee is a

cloathing, and as hee is a cloathing, he is not of thy ſubſtance. Away then with that eſſentiall holines, for holines is accidentall: Eſſentiall holines. and howbeit it be not of thy ſubſtance, yet it ſticketh ſo faſt to thy ſubſtance, that all this world will not ſeparate thee and it. The difference then betweene the old man and the new is this: the old man may be put off, but the new man once put on truly cannot be put off againe; thou ſhalt neuer loſe him againe. The grace of Chriſt is vnchangeable, and the gifts of God are without repentance, Rom. chap. 11. verſ. 10. It neuer repenteth God that he hath giuen thee the grace of repentance and renouation, if thou be once truly renued. Seeing (ſaith he) ye haue put on the new man. What is meant by this new man? As the old man is the corruption of nature, ſucked out of the rotten ſtocke of Adam by a naturall propagation: euen ſo this new man is the vncorruption, 1. Cor. 5. or that holines drawne out, not of Adam, nor of father, nor mother; but out of Ieſus the greene tree; not by a naturall propagation, but by a gracious inſition, and ingrafting into Ieſus. For as thou ſuckedſt corruption and vncleannes and mortalitie out of thy former parents, Adam and Eue: euen ſo beleeuing in Ieſus, thou ſhalt draw out of him the ſappe of life and ſanctification. But the words following make the words plaine: What is meant by this new man? There are three things in the words following. Three things in the new man. There is firſt the making him new againe. Secondly, there is the nature, what it is wherein he ſtandeth. And thirdly, there is the paterne, according to the which hee is made: the Lord had made him according to a paterne. Firſt, it is ſaid, He is renued: That is, he is created a new againe. Then it muſt follow, that he was once made before, and that in the creation: and if he be made againe, hee was once loſt, and ſo it was. Now after this loſing, the Lord renueth him againe: and therefore ye ſee a wonderfull mercie of God, and it is the will of the ſpirit, that thou ſhouldeſt conceiue this in thy heart, and ſay, O that exceeding mercie of God! that the Lord of mercie hath ſhewed on thee this mercie. Looke to Paul Epheſ. chap. 2. verſ. 4. But God who is rich in mercie according to his great loue, wherewith he hath loued vs, euen when we were dead in ſinnes, hath quickened vs together in Christ. There he looketh in through the grate of renouation,

and therein hee ſeeth a wonderfull mercie in God. Ye ſhall finde the life of this in the Epiſtle to Titus. Alas wee want this eye, there is ſuch a dulnes in vs, that we cannot paſſe vp to ſee this mercy of God. Thou ſhouldeſt not ſo ſoone heare of mercie, but thou ſhouldeſt euer looke vnto God and his mercie, and thanke him for it. What Angell could euer haue thought that God would haue created that new man againe? They all wondred when they ſaw it. Alas it is long ere wee can wonder!
            Now what is his nature? Which is renued to knowledge. What is he? I anſwere, he is knowledge, the light of the minde; thou haſt a new minde; would ye know what is knowledge? Paul. Epheſ. chap. 2. telleth you that the eyes of your minde are opened. (O if the eye of thy minde bee cloſed! thou art yet in nature) Whereto? That ye may know that hope. Yet he goeth higher, and that riches of his grace. And yet he groweth higher, and that excellent greatnes. In a word, it is the ſight of faith, full of that glorie that ſhall be reuealed. I remember the Apoſtle to the Eph. chap. 4. verſ. 24. addeth to theſe two things, righteouſnes and holines: ſo that in all his members he is light to ſee God, Ieſus Chriſt, and all the glorie of heauen there. There is the renuing that is ſpoken of here; he is then ſincere in heart, in his body; and in hand, he is righteous in dealing with his neighbour. If thou haue this new man, he will cloathe thee within and without; if thou were cloathed with gold, and thou haue not this cloathing on thee, thou art but a lumpe of ſtinking dirt. The laſt thing is the paterne, hee is created to one paterne. Now what looketh God to in making of him? looketh he to an Angell, and ſaith, I will make this new man like an Angell? or looketh hee to the Sunne and Moone, to the beaſts and elements, or to any creature in heauen or earth? No, no, but hee looketh to his owne glorie, and maketh thee according to that forme; he looketh to that light that is in himſelfe, and maketh thy light like to his owne light, and thy holines like to himſelfe. Looke the firſt of Geneſis, when hee had created all things, the heauen, the earth and the reſt, ye ſhall not finde ſuch a word that he created any to his owne image. But when he commeth to man with a conſultation, ſaith elohim; Let vs
               
               make man like to our ſelues, Gen. chap. 1. verſ. 26. So then, O man there is thy firſt glorie! the Lord honored thee in thy creatiō, but thou haſt loſt it. And the renuing of this image, it is paſſing excellent: it is double more glorious then it was at the beginning. O that mercie that renued it! Thou deſeruedſt to be turned into a ſtone, or into the vileſt brute beaſt or vermin that is. Therefore it muſt be a paſſing great mercie, that in renuing thee, hee renueth thee in an higher meaſure, then hee created thee in. No, in the renuing of thee, in Chriſt he doubleth his image in thee. And if hee made thee like himſelfe at the firſt, now he doubleth it a thouſand times more. The glorie of Adam was great, but now that is farre greater which wee haue in Chriſt. If Adam had kept his glorie, yet it would haue bin nothing but an earthly paradize, yt he would haue bin in: but al the earth is not capable of one glorified bodie in Chriſt. So then, ſtriue to beleeue in him, and certainly the fall of Adam ſhall be ſo farre from thy heart, that thou ſhalt bleſſe the time that he fell, if thou getteſt this renued creature in thee, through the Lord Ieſus; otherwiſe thou ſhalt curſe the time that he fell. So beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt, and all things ſhall worke to thy good, felicitie and bleſſednes in Ieſus. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be honour and praiſe for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXVIII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 11.
               11 Where is neither Grecian, nor Iew, circumciſion, nor vncircumciſion, Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free: but Christ is all, and in all things.
               
            
            
               THis whole place is an exhortation to the mortifying of theſe earthly members, theſe ſinfull luſts and affections, and to the putting off of them (for we haue been ouer long cloathed with them) ſo that they be not put on again. Ye haue heard theſe daies paſt ſundrie ſorts of them, and likewiſe ſundrie arguments to moue vs to this mortification. To come briefly to the purpoſe. The laſt argument was from our regeneration begun in this life, ſtanding in two Coherence. parts, that is, firſt in putting off the old man, that is, corruption of nature, that we haue drawne not onely out of our mothers wombe, but haue ſuckt out of the loynes of old Adam: ſo that looke how hee is, it is as old. It ſitteth on and pearceth through the skinne to the heart, and there is none that is free from it. The ſecond part was, the putting on of the new man. For certainly as I ſhewed you, no man is able to ſtand naked before God; cloathed muſt thou be, or els there is no appearance for thee, being naked before that tribunall ſeate: all muſt be cloathed with that righteouſnes, and ſprinkled with the bloud of Chriſt; and then next with this new man, that

is, with that inherent holines that floweth out of the bloud of Chriſt. For he that is iuſtified by his bloud, muſt be ſanctified by his ſpirit.
            Ye heard a deſcription of this new man; he is new made againe. In the firſt creation he loſt the image of God, and Chriſt came and renued that image of God againe: for there was not one ſparke of the ſpirit of God left in man. Therefore hee muſt be renued againe. Then ye haue heard his ſubſtance: The chiefe point is knowledge of things heauenly, of God, and his glorie by faith. To this wee added two other things; holines and righteouſnes: So there is the new man. The knowledge in the minde; holines in the heart, iuſt dealing in all thy actions with thy neighbour: and ſo he couereth vs both inwardly and outwardly. There is not a part vncloathed; and happie is hee that is cloathed with this cloathing of Chriſt.
            Laſtly, ye heard the paterne whereunto hee is made: hee is not made to the paterne of Angels, nor of Sunne and Moone; but he is made to the paterne of the Lord. O that glorie that thou haſt in this thy renuing! and bleſſed is hee that hath it. Theſe things ſhall be perfited at that day, at the appearance of the ſonne of glorie; and then it ſhal appeare that we are made to his paterne, and that wee are the ſons of God. For it appeareth not as yet, as Iohn ſaith, 1. Epiſt. chap. 3. verſ. 2. yet it ſhall appeare in that day.
            Now to come to the text read. In the firſt verſe wee haue a certaine propertie of this new man ſet downe, and it is this. Where hee is, all theſe old things, theſe outward things which men moſt reſpect and make account of, as nation, kindred, bloud, honour, riches, bondage, freedome, beautie, deformitie, &c. where this new man commeth out, all theſe ceaſe: he hath no more regard to the King then to the beggar: he hath no more regard to the free, then to the ſlaue; but hee extendeth himſelfe alike to all. This is his propertie. But it ſhall appeare better in weighing the words of the text: therefore marke them with me. And to begin at the firſt word. Where he is, where this new man commeth, there is neither Grecian, nor Iew. That is to ſay, where he is, all theſe externall things, theſe carnall and old things, ſo the Apoſtle calleth them 2. Cor. 5. 17. all turne to

aſhes: he knoweth none of them. All theſe things that were wont to put a difference betwixt man and man, he is a King, he is a ſubiect, and the reſt; all theſe ceaſe to this new man. But to goe to particulars: There are ſundrie of theſe old and worne things reckoned vp. The firſt is the nation wherein wee are borne; as the nation of the Iew, the nation of the Grecian. The nation wherein a man was borne, was wont to put a difference betwixt man and man: but when Chriſt commeth, and this new man with him, there is no regard of nation; this new man reſpecteth not one more then another, all is alike to him. To be homely with you; Frenchman, Dutchman, Italian, Indian, Scottiſhman, Engliſhman, all is alike to him. The pooreſt nation that is, the new man wil account of it. This is plaine by experience: for if Chriſt had reſpected this nation, hee had neuer come this way. The ſecond particular of theſe outward things, that was wont to be accounted of, is of theſe outward markes that the Iew and Gentile had. The Iew had circumciſion; the Gentile had vncircumciſion; whereby they were diſcerned. But Chriſt when he commeth out, hee looketh not to theſe things; he putteth no difference betwixt the one and the other: he accounteth all alike to him. And to come home to our ſelues, wee were of the vncircumciſed number; and if Chriſt had had reſpect to this, Scotland had not been called to grace. The third particular is, the language. It put a difference betweene man and man. The Greeke had a trim and eloquent language: all others beſides the Grecians, had but barbarous languages. But when Chriſt commeth, and this new man with him, he reſpecteth not one more then another: but Grecian and Barbarian all is one to him. This pertaineth to vs all, we were Barbarians; ſo that if Chriſt had reſpected barbarouſnes and exempted it from grace, Scotland had not gotten grace. So wee ſhould draw comfort out of this, and ſay, grace pertaineth to me, as well as to the Iew or Grecian. The laſt particular is, the eſtate of men in policie; ſome are free; ſome are bond; ſome maſters; ſome ſeruants: This diuerſitie of eſtate put difference betwixt man and man: but Chriſt comming reſpecteth not one more then another, but all are alike to him. And ſo ſeruants haue to reioyce; for they are not ſecluded

from grace more then their maſters: otherwiſe ſlaues had been moſt miſerable creatures, and better had it been for them that they had bin made beaſts. Reade the Galat. chap. 3. verſ. 28. ye ſhall finde this matter handled. There is another particular reckoned vp there, male and female, that was wont to put a difference betwixt man and man; but all is alike to Chriſt, he reſpecteth not one more then another. The female is no more exempted from grace, then the male; but this new man extēdeth to al. Now I aſſure you, if God had had reſpect to the ſex, your eſtate of women had bin miſerable. So that there is not one word here, but it offereth conſolation to vs. Brethren, there be many other particulars; for theſe old things are infinite, and that that I haue ſpoken is to be vnderſtoode likewiſe of riches and pouertie: al is alike to Chriſt: his grace extendeth to all. Therefore our leſſon is, in the matter of ſaluation Obſerue. the Lord hath no reſpect to perſons, to men, to women, there is the generall; but all that will beleeue, all is alike to him, Iew and Gentile, male, female, rich, poore, honourable, vnhonourable. If thou beleeue in Chriſt, thy eſtate in grace is as good, as the Kings: thou art as high in grace as the greateſt Monarch that euer was. And to bee more plaine; in the matter of our Chriſtian calling, iuſtifying, glorifying, and ſanctifying, there is no difference, al is alike to him. I might proue this by Scripture, Rom. 8. verſ. 30. Whom he hath called, them alſo he hath iustified, &c. There ye ſee this Chriſtian calling to be vniuerſall. And in the Romanes chap. 3. verſ. 21. ſpeaking of iuſtification: hee ſaith, the righteouſnes of God is made manifeſt. Againe in this place of regeneration, there is no difference: ſo this abideth ſure; in the matters of ſaluation, and all poynts thereof, there is no difference of perſons, all is alike to him. It is to be noted that I ſay (in the matters of ſaluation) leaſt that I ſhould ſeeme to take away policie, and ſome wicked ſpirit hath brought in ſuch a concluſion, as the Anabaptiſts: but all is but vanity. For brethren, as in the matters of ſaluation there The Goſpell and Christian policie doe well agree. is no difference: euen ſo the Lord hath ordained a difference in policie: he hath ordained, that there ſhould ſome be kings, ſome ſubiects; ſome maſters, and ſome ſeruants: for otherwiſe an horrible confuſion ſhould follow. And the Goſpell is ſo far

from that, that by the contrarie it ſanctifieth policie. So that if any King before the Goſpell was ſetled, after the Goſpell he is better ſetled. And if a maſter of a houſe was ſetled before the Goſpell, he is now farre better ſetled after the Goſpell. And this is the rule of the Apoſtle 1. Cor. chap. 7. verſ. 17. 20. Let euery man abide in that vocation, wherein he is called. And then he ſaith, Art thou a ſlaue? art thou called to it? abide ſtill in it, vntill by lawfull meanes thou get freedome. Will ye haue example of this? There was Oneſimus that ranne from Philemon his maſter, Paul after that he had made him a Chriſtian man, hee ſendeth him againe to his ſeruice. So it is but vanitie to thinke that religion is enemie to policie, or maketh any alteration in policie; nay it rather eſtabliſheth all in policie. This one thing is to be marked. The ſecond is, ſeeing in matters of grace, the Lord hath no reſpect to the perſons of men, hee will not iuſtifie a King, becauſe he is a King; and denie it to a beggar, becauſe he is a beggar: but he will iuſtifie the one and the other, without all reſpect of perſons. Seeing then this is his doing, what ſhould we doe? Looke what Paul ſaith 2. Cor. 5. according to the fleſh, I will not account of one man more then of another; I will offer grace to the beggar as well as to the rich. And againe, in policie I giue thee leaue to account of the King, as much as thou wilt; and why ſhouldeſt not thou that art a ſeruant account of thy maſter? otherwiſe thou offendeſt. Thinke that thou art an inferiour to him, albeit thou be equall in grace with him. And ſo let euery one in policie, in commonweales and families, haue their owne place: let the King haue his place, the Lord his place in his own ranke and roume, and ſo foorth. And I ſay to thee if thou doe it not, thou haſt no grace. For if thou hadſt grace, thou wouldeſt be ſo ſanctified, that thou wouldeſt not faile in any wiſe to honour thy ſuperiours here on earth: and yet when the compariſon falleth out betwixt the gracious man or ſanctified man, and old things; count more of a regenerate man, then of all the prophane Kings of the world. What did Paul? hee had many of theſe outward things; as ye may reade in the Epiſtle to the Philippians chap. 3. I am an Hebrue (ſaith he) as ye are; O, but when Chriſt came in, all theſe aduantages became to me not onely domages,
               
but they became as dung. So all theſe externall things, are but as nothing in compariſon of regeneration. It is better to be a renued man being a beggar, then to be the greateſt Monarch in the world, wanting regeneration.
            Now laſtly in this place ye ſee, when Chriſt commeth, there is a ſtrange change in the world. Thinke ye he came in vaine, or for nothing? Is there not a great change, when a great Monarch commeth into the countrey? Thinke ye not but when Chriſt came there was a great change, ſuch as was neuer at the comming of all the Monarches in the world? Paul 2. Cor. 5. verſ. 17. ſaith, ſpeaking of this change; Whoſoeuer is in Chriſt is a new creature, all things are made new in him: but there is ſuch a ſtupiditie in men, that they cannot ſee this. Thou art euer harping on theſe old things: will ye heare him boaſt? it will be of theſe old things. O ſenſeles creature! thou ſheweſt thou art not renewed. O theſe braue Courteours! all their ſpeech is of theſe old things, by the which they teſtifie that they wote not what Chriſt meaneth. Yet in a word, ſome may doubt: Are all things ſo renewed, that theſe olde things haue no place? Is there no difference of nations, of riches, of honours? ſtand not theſe things, theſe old things, fleſhly things, notwithſtanding this innouation? I anſwere, they ſtand: but I adde this, if euer it be well with them, they muſt be renued; that old ſhape muſt be put off them. Thou that art a King, muſt be made a new creature; and thou that art a ſubiect, thou muſt be renewed againe, and obey thy Prince in the Lord. The Gentiles knew not this; thou yt art a ſeruant, thou muſt obey thy maſter in the Lord; and thou that art a maſter, thou muſt doe thy dutie to thy ſeruant in the Lord: ſo as theſe outward things muſt be renewed in Chriſt. I ſay more, the firſt comming of Chriſt made ſome change; but the next comming ſhall make it palpable. Thou ſhalt ſee it, and feele it: for there ſhall be no kings, but the kings of heauen: there ſhall be no ſuperiours or maſters, but all ſhall be glorified; there ſhall be ſuch an alteration then. And thou that wilt not ſee it now, thou ſhalt then be compelled to ſee it, nill thou will thou. This for the firſt part of this verſe: the next part followeth.
            In the firſt ye heard he hath taken away all reſpect of theſe

outward things: now it might haue been thought, if this new man hath caſt off all theſe outward things, what hath hee in ſteed of them? for it were a great loſſe if he gat not ſomething in ſteed of them. He anſwereth in a word, Chriſt is all, and in all things. There is the anſwere. So that the thing that graceth a new man is one onely thing, and what is it? Ieſus Chriſt the Lord is in ſteed of all: he ſupplieth the want of all theſe earthly things. So that if yee will aske of this new man, what is thy nation (ſuppoſing he be of the beſt nation on earth) he will anſwere, Chriſt is my nation. If thou aske, what is thy kindred, (let him come of Kings) he will ſay Ieſus Chriſt is my kindred. It is a wofull bloud thou art come of, if thou be nothing renewed in Chriſt. Wilt thou aske what is thy kingdome? He will anſwere, Ieſus Chriſt is my kingdome. An earthly bodie will ſay and anſwere, I am King of France, and I am King of Spaine, and I am Emperour, and will caſt his head vp. If thou wilt aske, what is thy riches, thy honour and eſtate? hee will anſwere, Chriſt is all things to me, and ſo there is no prerogatiue in this world. Hee will put Chriſt in the roume of all, whether he haue or want it. Ye remember Matth. 12. when the mother of Chriſt would haue come to him, and the Diſciples telling him that, ſaying: Behold thy mother, & thy brethren ſtand without, deſiring to ſpeake with thee: he anſwereth, Who is my mother, my brethren and ſisters? Euen they that doe my fathers will. Then generally he telleth: whoſoeuer will doe the will of his father, are his mother, brother, and ſiſters. Then turne it ouer: if thou be a faithfull man, thou art brother to him, and all: and againe, he is all to thee. Now certainly this meeting is much more worth to vs, then it is to him: for what haue wee but all of him? and ſo Chriſt is in ſteed of all; becauſe he is all: otherwiſe he could not be in ſteed of all. What is this that Chriſt is all? He hath ſaid in the firſt chapter of this Epiſtle, verſ. 19. that in him dwelleth all fulnes. And in the ſecond chapter he ſaith, in him dwell all the treaſures: and againe, in him dwelleth the Godhead bodily. And yet to come more particularly, 1. Cor. chap. 1. verſ. 30. hee ſaith, hee is made to vs wiſedome, and righteouſnes, and holines, and redemption. So, wanteſt thou theſe things? he is all to thee if thou beleeue in him; he is full of all.

Yet brethren, ſome will think, there wanteth yet ſomethings, I finde not all: I ſeeke ſaith the auaricious, riches; I would haue houſe and cheſts full: The ambitious ſaith, I want honour, I cannot get this in him: The leacherous ſaith, I cannot get my luſt, he is an enemie to me in that, and ſo forth, as man is inclined, he would haue Chriſt made thereafter to him. But vnderſtand this brethren, he ſpeaketh not of a foule old man, but of a new man; not of an auaricious man and ſuch others, but of a new ſanctified man; and this man findeth all in him: there is nothing that he wanteth, but he findeth it in his Chriſt. And I ſay, ſuppoſe thou get not theſe earthly things in that meaſure, that others get; yet thou getteſt better in him. What, and if thou get the better, what haſt thou loſt? Thou art a ſeruant, yet thou art a freeman of the Lord Ieſus. And yet thinke ye that the Lord Ieſus wanteth theſe earthly things? Think ye that riches are not at his diſpoſition? He that diuideth acres is aboue the earth, the Lords all are at his commaund, if it were to wring them in peeces. Therefore hee ſaith, Seeke firſt the kingdome of heauen. There is the firſt that wee ſhould be occupied about, if we would haue Chriſt: to wit, that we buſie our ſelues about heauenly things: and what ſhall follow? He maketh a faire promiſe, and all theſe earthly things ſhall be caſt to you. What are they worth? they are but bits that are caſt to thee. There is no compariſon betwixt them, they are but things Matth. 6. that are adiected. They are as it were additaments: and yee will not thinke when this kingdome is gotten, how ſmall a thing of this world wil giue cōtent to a creature. No, he will vſe it with greater contentation of mind, then any hauing all this world, wanting Chriſt, will doe. No, if thou haſt Chriſt, thou lackeſt nothing; all our want is, that we cannot get him: get him, and thou ſhalt find that thou haſt no want. Now it might be ſaid, Chriſt is all; but what is that to me? he is full of glorie, maieſtie, and power, what is that to me? He anſwereth, he is all to all, that is, his grace is thy grace, his abundance is thy abundance. In the ſecond chapter verſ. 9. when he had ſaid, that in him dwelleth all the fulnes of the Godhead bodily, he addeth, ye are full in him. 
               Note.It is to be marked that he ſaith not, Chriſt is all to  ſome, but to all. The riches that are in Ieſus extend not onely

to ſome, they are not contained within the compaſſe of one nation, within Iewrie: it could not hold them. No, tenne nations The riches of Christ common to all nations. could not hold the riches of Ieſus, but it behooued that they ſhould reach to the vtmoſt corners in the world: yea I ſay, if it were to tenne thouſand millions of nations, the riches of Ieſus is ſo infinite, that they are ſufficient to ſerue all. His glorie alſo is infinite, ſo that it would fill infinite worlds. All theſe things are but plain ſpeech, but would to God they were weighed. Againe hee ſaith, not onely to all, but in all, meaning Ieſus himſelfe is in vs firſt ere any thing of his be in vs. And as he ſaith to the Epheſians chap. 3. verſ. 17. he muſt dwell in thy heart firſt, or euer thou get any thing that is his: now where he is in proper perſon, there of neceſsitie thou haſt all his graces. Thou needeſt not to goe here and there to ſeeke grace. And this is the difference betwixt the ſufficiencie of the old and new man: if thou bee an old man, Ieſus nor his grace is not within thee. Where is the honour of the King? in his own boſome? No, it is out of him: if he want Chriſt, he will ſtand vp ſtript ſtarke naked of all things. Where is his riches and ſtrength? where is his dinner? all are without him, and he hath nought, if he be an old man; and hee will dye for hunger, if it be not giuen to him. But to come to the new man, where is his riches? in his boſome, in the heart of him. It will paſſe the power of all the Tyrants in the world to take that from him: ſo all his ſufficiencie is within him by faith. It is written that a certaine Philoſopher ſaid, Omnia mea mecum porto: Chriſt is his ſufficiencie. O the aduantage that a Chriſtian man hath, in reſpect of one that is not in Chriſt! for there is ſuch ſufficiencie in Chriſt, as no tongue can expreſſe.
            Now there are one or two things that I will ſpeake of. This is a great word; Chriſt is all in all; before that day of the great reſurrection. For looke 1. Cor. chap. 15. it is ſaid, that God ſhall not be all vntill then, at what time this ſhall come to paſſe. But the anſwere is eaſie. There are two eſtates of the elect, here they are called the faithfull, and in the life to come they are called the bleſſed. O that bleſsing, who ſhall abide to ſee it! In deede ſo long as we are the faithfull, Chriſt is not perfectly all in all: ſo long as we ſtand in the eſtate of faith only, he beginneth

in thee by faith to be all in all: and that is the Apoſtles meaning here. But in the eſtate of that celeſtiall bleſſednes, it ſhall be farre otherwiſe: then Chriſt ſhall be all in all in full perfection; there is the difference. Yet to make this more plaine. There are two things required to make Chriſt all in al. A perfection of grace, a perfection of glorie. Firſt there is required a perfection of grace. And ſecondly, there is required a perfection of glorie, that there be nothing but the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, when he is al in al. There is nothing but he, and the fulnes of his glorie. Theſe are the two things required, that Chriſt may be all in all. Now brethren, to applie this to the two eſtates. So long as wee abide in earth, howbeit there be no grace in Ieſus, but that we haue ſome ſhare of it; yet the perfection in the degrees of grace is not yet: thou art holie in him, but it is not perfected. Then in this life in the faithfull, Chriſt is not all in vs: for there is much ill ſtuffe beſides grace in vs. Goe thy way to thy heart, and thou ſhalt finde it thus, and thou ſhouldeſt thinke it a marueile, that one ſparke of grace ſhould abide within thee. But come to that life to come: In the reſurrection when faith ſhall goe away, Ieſus Chriſt ſhall be in thee in his full glorie. Then in that eſtate there ſhall be nothing but Chriſt. Al this vncleannes and vilenes ſhall be caſt away, and that heart of thine ſhall be inlightened, and ſhine in thy bodie. It ſhall not hold in thee, but it ſhall breake out in thy face, and make all glorious both thy hands and feete, and all this mortalitie ſhall be ſcoured out of thee, and then it ſhall be truly ſpoken, Christ is all in all.
            
            Now one thing and ſo I end. Comparing this place with that to the Galath. chap. 3. verſ. 28. I finde there one end of the comming of Chriſt, and of the new man in this word, that is not ſpecified here: and it is, that all might be made one in Ieſus Chriſt: for as long as hee is a Iew, and a Grecian, they are two; but when once this commeth, that they are new men, they are made one in Chriſt: ſo the words ſpoken import. For Chriſt being in all, who is one, of neceſsitie all muſt be one. And againe, if hee be all in all, it being but one, of neceſſarie force it muſt be one. Ye ſee the end of Chriſts comming into this world, & of the new man, it is this, to make all one, to put Communiō of Saints. away all this variance, and to ioyne all in one. There is much

adoe to ioyne altogether: wouldeſt thou haue thy bleſſednes to ſtand? it ſtandeth in ioyning thee firſt with thy head Ieſus Chriſt: and then in making thee a member of his bodie. If it were but one ioynt of his little finger, if thou be but one toe of that bodie, thou ſhalt be ſafe. Well, wanton men and women goe out from the Church. But O that terrible wrath, if thou be not found in that bleſſed ſocietie! make a ieſt of it as long as thou wilt, if thou be not of the militant Church, thou ſhalt not ſee the triumphant Church: and thou ſhalt not be of the number of them that ſhall be glorified.
            I might let you ſee the example, what danger it is to be cut off from this bodie of the Church. I aske, what is a mans arme worth when it is cut off? it ſerueth for nothing, it dieth and periſheth. Now it is euen as ſure if thou be cut off from this militant Church, thou ſhalt die and periſh, and thou ſhalt neuer haue part with thy head Ieſus Chriſt; if thou abide cut off, thou ſhalt die euerlaſtingly. Wherefore count it your bleſſednes, to be firſt conioyned with Chriſt; and then with his members. Now what is the bleſſednes of the true God? euen an vnitie in trinitie. So thou art bleſſed, when thou art one with the members of Chriſt, and all thy ioy is to be in the Lord Ieſus. Now the Lord graunt we may abide one, vntill we obtaine this vnitie in perfection in Ieſus Chriſt: to whom be all honour and praiſe now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXIX. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 12. 13.
               
                  12 Now therefore, as the elect of God holy and beloued, put on tender mercie, kindnes, humblenes of minde, meeknes, long ſuffering:
                  
                  13 Forbearing one another, and forgiuing one another, if any man haue a quarrell to another: euen as Chriſt forgaue you, euen ſo doe ye.
                  
               
            
            
               BEfore in this chapter, the Apoſtle hath exhorted the Coloſsians to mortifie, ſlay, and put away the members, affections, and actions of the old man, that is, of the ſinful and corrupt nature. Now becauſe it is not enough to put off the members of the old man (the actions of the ſinfull nature) except we appeare before God with other actions, (for we cannot ſtand naked before him) therfore in the ſecond roume, hee exhorteth vs to put on the members, actions, and affections of the new man: theſe are the actions, and this is the cloathing wherewith we muſt be clad to ſtand before God. Then to come to the words, and to weigh euery word as the Lord ſhall giue the grace. The firſt word is, Therfore put on, &c. He hath ſpoken immediatly before of the new man: now vpon the occaſion of this word (new man) he gathers his concluſion. Haue you put on the new man? Therefore put on all his actions. If ye be holie, cloathe your ſelues with holy actions. The obſeruation is ſhort. The new man, which conſiſts in holines

and righteouſnes, requires a new life, and new actions: for if the life be not yet renewed, but that the old life yet abide with the old actions, I ſay, you wot not what the new man meanes. This is but a vaine boaſting of regeneration, that is in the mouthes of men, to ſay, thou art renewed and made a new man; all is but vaine. Let me ſee thy life and thy actions, and I ſhall tell thee by them what thou art: otherwiſe, thou ſhalt neuer perſwade me that thou haſt put on the new man. Now the Apoſtle ſaith, Therefore put on, as it were a garment, or raiment neuer to be put off againe. I ſhewed you before, that when once thou haſt put on this new man, thou muſt not caſt him off againe, as thou wilt doe with thy coate at night when thou goeſt to bed, which thou wilt caſt off, and the morrow put it on againe; but this cloathing thou muſt goe in it, walke in it, lye downe with it, and riſe with it.
            Now the parts of the cloathing followe, Put on therefore the bowels of mercie, &c. Note then briefly: wherein ſtands this abiliment of the new man? It is made of ſundrie parts, it is like the coate of Ioſeph made of ſundrie colours. This coate is ſo pleaſant, that it is wonderfull to looke on. Mercie, a pleaſant ſight, Bountifulnes pleaſant, Modestie pleaſant, Meekenes pleaſant, Lenitie pleaſant; ſo there was neuer ſo pleaſant a garment put vpon the backe of man. Before hee comes to the parts of this garment, hee puts in by the way ſundrie arguments to moue them to put on this new man. The motiues are three: the firſt is election: the ſecond holines: the third, the loue of God towards vs. Ye are the choſen of God, the holy ones of God, the beloued of God: therfore put on this garment that is pleaſant in the eyes of God. But to examine theſe grounds: The firſt is their election, that is, the calling them out of this darknes into the light of God: ſo Peter defines it 1. Pet. 2. 9. a faire choiſe. This Goſpell that ye heare is the light of the world, and ſo this election whereof the Apoſtle ſpeakes here, is nothing els but that which we call commonly our vocation. For whom God hath elected from all eternitie, them in time he elects and chuſeth out from the reſt of mankinde, by effectuall calling. Then I make of this firſt ground a leſſon. This Chriſtian calling, it requires a faire rayment. You know the cloathing of euery man

and woman, ſhould be according to their calling; when thou goeſt aboue thy calling, thou ſinneſt: ſo the earthly raiment and cloathing, whatſoeuer it be, ſhould be according to thy vocation. This calling of God is an high calling, as Paul to the Philippians chap. 3. verſ. 14. ſpeakes. And as the calling of a King requires a faire apparell to ſet it foorth with: ſo this calling to the kingdome of God, craueth a higher apparell. Therfore remember thou art called to put on that faire apparell.
            The next argument is, Ye are holie. This holines is the effect of the other. For waſt thou blacke before? yet being called from darknes to light, the beames of the face of God ſhining vpon thee, now thou art whiter then ſnow. Ye ſee a man that walkes long in the Sunne, will be altered; ſo of neceſſitie, this ſonne of righteouſnes muſt make a chaunge, to wit, to make thee holie. And this is that which the Apoſtle 2. Cor. 3. 18. ſaith, Looking into the glorie of God, as it were in a mirrour, we are transformed from glorie to glorie; and therefore take pleaſure to look into it night and day, and thou ſhalt be changed from the dregges of the world, and made to ſhine. Marke then, as I ſaid of him that is called; ſo I ſay of him that is a Saint. A faire garment fits thee well: for the Saints ſtand night and day before God in his houſehold. Who will come before the eye of an earthly Prince ragged and bare? how much leſſe before that great maieſtie of God. If thou be not clad with holines, the very eye of God will ſtrike thorough thee to thy conſumption.
            Now the third argument is, the loue of God ſhewed to thē. This is that loue of God that he bare to vs, when we were enemies to him: when thou waſt wandring in thy vanitie, he gaue himſelfe for thee, and hee loued thee ere thou wiſt, and afterward he powres it into thee that thou feeleſt it. Nay thou neuer taſtedſt of ſweetnes, if thou neuer taſtedſt of the loue of God: and this is the loue of God that makes thee to loue him again. The beloued one of God craues a faire apparell. Who is he or ſhe among you, that will not trauell to be pleaſant in the eye of your louer? So the Lord loues thee, and neuer one loued thee ſo well. Therefore wilt thou not ſtudie to come pleaſantly clad before him? Then ye ſee they in whom the Lord delights,

come before him gloriouſly in faire apparell, that makes them to be pleaſant in his eye. Thus much for the arguments that he ſets down, which ſhould haue moued the Coloſsians to put on the new man.
            Now followes the vertues: The firſt vertue he termes, The bowels of mercies (that is the word in the firſt language) that is, pitie, mercie, and compaſsion: briefly, it is a vertue and grace, not growing of nature, but wrought in the heart by the ſpirit of Ieſus. Now it hath this force and effect, to pitie the miſerie of men and women: but there is little of it in theſe daies. When thou ſeeſt the members of Chriſt ſick or ſore, be ſorie for them: thou wilt be ſorie for thy hand when it is ſore; euen ſo thou ſhouldeſt be ſorie for the members of Chriſt. Againe, he calles it no mercie, but mercies in the plural number, to ſignifie that he that is mercifull, muſt haue many of them: for many miſeries require many mercies. He cals it not mercies, but the bowels of mercies, to ſignifie this intire loue: it muſt be within thee, and in thy bowels. Then this mercie it hath two properties: firſt thou muſt abound of it. Next, it muſt be in thy bowels, and thy bowels muſt bee looſed with pitie. Then brethren, ye ſee this faire garment, hee exhorts them to put on. Where begins it? It begins at thy bowels, the depth of thy heart; there is the firſt cloathing, and the cloathing is pitie and mercie: and wherefore mercie, and ſo many mercies? becauſe in this world there are many miſeries. Where ſhall the godly man turne to, but he ſhall ſee miſerie? Wilt thou looke vp to the King and his Court? a ſpectacle of miſerie. Wilt thou looke to the beggar? a ſpectacle of miſerie? And if euer there was any pitie to be had, this land hath neede of it.
            The next vertues, Kindnes, Bountifulnes. The firſt was the vertue that pities thy neighbour: this is the vertue that doth him a good deede: Mercie is in the bowels; Bountie is in the hand. And if thou pitieſt any bodie and haſt it to giue, put out thy hand, and giue him: otherwiſe it auailes not. Then yee ſee this vertue of the elect of God is Bountie. And wherefore is this bountie requiſite? becauſe there is ſo much neede in all eſtates, and a great ſcant of all things both earthly and heauenly: and therefore it is requiſite to haue bountifulnes, that

thou maiſt beſtow vpon one bodie, a benefit ſpirituall, and vpon another, a temporall.
            Now to come to the next vertue, which is the third in number, Low lines of minde, modestie. It is a vertue when men and women counts nothing of themſelues, and are not puffed vp in pride. So it hath theſe two properties: it counts nothing of themſelues, but much of others. Then this vertue is lowlines in the eye, and in the heart. If thou wouldeſt appeare in the ſight of thy God, put on modeſtie, come not haughtie, come not with raiſed vp neckes: the Lord is aboue thee, and he will giue thee ſuch a ſtroke, that hee will ſlay thee. For there was neuer a proud man, that raiſed vp his head againſt God, but he made him ſtoope. So the third peece of this garment is humilitie. Wilt thou looke to thy ſelfe, what haſt thou to glorie in? where thou haſt one thing, thou wanteſt tenne. Wilt thou looke to others? the grace thou ſeeſt in thy brother, thou ſhouldeſt account of it.
            Now the fourth peece of this garment is Meekenes, that is, excellently well matched with humilitie, euer the humble man is meeke; the proud euer churliſh, without meeknes, and mildnes, and ſo farre as in him lies renting the bodie of Ieſus. For where pride is, there is no ſocietie: for a man that hath pride hee cannot aſſociate himſelfe with another. Now this vertue is in thy mouth, and makes thee to giue to thy neighbour ſweete language. Now this fourth part is ſo neceſſarie, that there can bee no ſtanding of the Church without it: for ſuch is the nature of man, if it bee handled roughly, it is loſt, and if thou handle a ſinner thus, thou doeſt ouerthrow him. And therefore Paul euer recommends gentlenes: if thy rebukes ſmell of bitternes, and not of meeknes, thou wilt deſtroy him. Forthere is no ſinner, as the Apoſtle 2. Tim. chap. 2. verſ. 25. &c. ſpeakes, but he muſt be allured by peece and peece out of the bands of the diuell.
            Now followeth the fift part of this garment, which is Long ſuffering. The word following in the next verſe expounds it, when one beares iniuries done of another, that is long ſuffering. This long ſuffering is ſo requiſite, that the world cannot ſtand without it. What part is there in this land wherin wrong

exceedeth not; and wrong would not be met with wrong, nor iniurie with iniurie, but wrong with long ſuffering? and I ſay, if men were not diſpoſed to ſuffer, the world long ſince had eaten vp one another. It is the patient bodie that beares the iniuries, otherwiſe euery one had deuoured another. So this is a faire garment of the beloued and holy ones of God: but the vertue that followes is greater. Forgiuing one another. Long ſuffering may be without forgiuing, as a poore may yt ſuſtaines wrong, he muſt lie vnder the wrong, becauſe he is not able to reuenge it. Others againe (albeit they haue abilitie) will not reuenge, but will hold it in their heart till they get oportunitie. Then remiſsion is a greater vertue; it will not onely ſuffer the wrong, but it will put it away; it will forgiue thee that haſt done the wrong: or elſe if it will not altogether forgiue the man, it will call him before the Iudge. Remiſſion therefore, when it thinkes not expedient to forgiue, it will not put to the hand, as our men will doe, but it will call thee before a Iudge. The King ſhould reuenge all theſe wrongs. The Lord ſhould not ſlay, the Eſquire ſhould not ſlay, the Gentleman ſhould not ſlay: but in the meane time while he is pleading his cauſe before the Iudge, his anger ſhould be aboliſhed, and ſo God ſhall be glorified. But if the iniurie be done to thee by any man, and in the meane time thou haue anger in thy heart, albeit he be before the Iudge; yet thou art the ſlayer of him.
            So then, there is the ſixt part of this garment, free forgiuenes. This vertue is ſo needfull, that if men forgaue not wrongs, the world had periſhed long agoe. And let men thinke as they pleaſe, that runnes in reuenging; it is not they that hold vp the world, but the bleſſed ones of God. Now to moue them to this vertue, he vſeth an argument taken from the example of Chriſt, As Chriſt hath forgiuen you, ſo forgiue you one another. There was not a reaſon put to the reſt: what meanes this? He lets vs ſee it is a hard thing to fleſh and bloud to forgiue: if thou take counſell at fleſh and bloud, thou wilt neuer forgiue, admit thou wert dying. But fleſh and bloud will euer crye a vengeance; and ſo it is a hard thing to forgiue: And it is ſo neceſſarie, that except thou forgiue and ſtriue againſt thy nature, thou ſhalt neuer haue part with God in heauen, and it

ſhall debarre thee from that ſocietie of Ieſus Chriſt. For he that inclines not in no meaſure to forgiue a wrong, but is alwaies ſet to recompence the like for the like, he is not a member of Chriſt; and if thou bee not a member, thou haſt no life. And Chriſt himſelfe in Matth. 6. 14. 15. ſaith, If thou forgiue not thy brother in earth, thy heauenly father ſhall not forgiue thee. Then brethren, ye ſhall not finde any one more reſembling Chriſt in any vertue, then in mercie and compaſsion: and by the contrarie, there is none that more reſembles the diuell, then the merciles bodie: and iudge ye how many in this land bee like the diuell, and ſo few like Chriſt. Hee cannot bee ſatisfied, who hath put hand in man not once or twice, but he wil triple and quadriple it, and ſo this vice abounds in this land. Now to adde this to that that is ſpoken: I dare ſay a merciles heart neuer wiſt what the pitie of God was: if thou finde crueltie in thy heart, it is an argument thou art not his. Thou that haſt felt the mercy of God, his pitie and compaſsion powred out vpon thee, thou wilt powre it out vpon others. I ſee next in this example of Chriſt Ieſus, Chriſt is to be imitated, follow him in thy life. Would you haue leaders in the way? follow Ieſus, and put thy footſteps where his was: but it is to be taken heede to, in what things thou followeſt him. Ieſus wrought wonders in the world: follow him not in theſe; for if thou followeſt him ſo, thou putteſt thy ſelfe in Gods roume. Ieſus Chriſt wrought the worke of redemption, follow him not in that, becauſe it is the worke proper to the Creator. Will you reade the Scripture? you ſhall not finde the example of Chriſt propounded to follow him in wonders, or to follow him in forgiuing of ſinnes. But when euer we follow him, we ſhould follow him in meeknes, in lenitie, in gentlenes. To what end ſhould I ſpeake of the vaine dreames of the Papiſts? they will ſay, imitate Chriſt. Chriſt faſted fortie daies: therefore you muſt faſt al the Lent: but I leaue them to their vanitie, and they that are vncleane, let them be vncleane ſtill, and the Lord keepe vs with his truth. Now ye ſee in expreſſe termes, Ieſus Chriſt hath forgiuen vs our ſinnes, Epheſ. 4. 6. it is ſaid, that God in Chriſt hath forgiuen vs eur ſins. In the one place it is ſaid, God hath forgiuen

vs: in the other place that Ieſus Chriſt hath forgiuen vs. Then Ieſus Chriſt is God the redeemer of the world. So it followes of this place, Ieſus Chriſt is God bleſſed for euer, Amen. For why? it is proper to God to forgiue ſinnes; it is onely proper to the Creator: the creature hath no power to forgiue. Now in the other place, Ieſus Chriſt is the price of our redemption, through the which remiſsion of ſinnes is purchaſed, he is both the forgiuer of the ſinne and the price: if Ieſus had not been the price, there had been no redemption in the world.
            Now followeth the third. This benefit of our redemption was deerely bought by our Redeemer. It was not a word to ſay, forgiue, but it behooued him to die: and this benefit which he giues, he bought it by his owne bloud. Then marke a great difference betweene him and man: Ieſus he dies; but where thou forgiueſt, thou giueſt but a word. Looke what a doe the Lord hath with the world: and what trauell hee takes to get the offence done by thee, taken away: he dies for it. And therefore the thing we haue to preſſe to, is to feele his loue: all ioy and welfare is in the ſenſe of this loue. And therefore to this Lord be all honour and glorie now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXX. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 14. 15.
               
                  14 And aboue all theſe things put on loue, which is the bond of perfection.
                  
                  15 And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in one bodie, and be ye thankefull.
                  
               
            
            
               THe Apoſtle (brethren) after he had exhorted the Coloſſians to put off the cloathing of the olde man, which was made vp of foule affections, as peeces of his garment: he begins to exhort to put on the cloathing of the new man, which is made vp of ſundrie graces of Chriſt, vertues and holy affections. The laſt day we reckoned vp certaine pieces of this cloathing, Parts of the garment of the new man. namely ſixe: to wit, the 
                   bowels of pitie and compaſſion,  kindnes,  humblenes of minde,  meekenes,  long ſuffering, and laſtly, 
                   the forgiuing of offences. Now to come to the text wee haue in  hand: yet hee continues in this raiment and cloathing, and  reckons vp other parts of it.  The ſeuenth part of this garment,   he calles it Loue, charitie that one beares to another, neighbour  to neighbour. Among all the reſt of the peeces, he deſires  them to put on loue. And whereon ſhould they put this peece  of the garment? And aboue all theſe (ſaith he) put on loue, as the vppermoſt garment, they being vnder it, & it being aboue thē all, as a cloake aboue all the reſt of the cloathing. Now (brethren) Loue muſt be the vppermoſt garment. you know commonly the vppermoſt cloath is the faireſt, and the honeſteſt, the preciouſeſt cloath, becauſe it is in

the eyes of the world: therefore ſeeing hee craues that they ſhould put on charitie, as vppermoſt, it muſt follow, that it is the faireſt, comlieſt, and preciouſeſt peece of cloathing that is. I ſay more, when thou haſt put on all the reſt, as mercie, Obſerue. kindnes, humblenes, meekenes, long ſuffering, forgiuenes, if thou put not on loue aboue all, all is nought worth. It is but a garment of hypocriſie, and there is no ſinceritie in thy mercie; thou ſheweſt no ſinceritie in thy humblenes, nor in none other of thy vertues. Looke what the Apoſtle ſpeakes of thy vertues that can be giuen to a man, 1. Cor. 13. without charitie the gift of tongues is nothing; the gift of propheſie, of wiſedome, of faith, of doing miracles, of almes deedes, all is nothing, and laſtly, of long ſuffering, it is nothing without this charitie. It may well be thou profit others, but as for thy ſelfe, without charitie thou ſhalt get no profit. Therfore the Apoſtle ſaith (ſpeaking of theſe gifts and many more) they be not profitable, if I want charitie, and what auailes it if it be not profitable to me? So without charitie all is nothing, of no value? and if theſe vertues want charitie, I ſay to thee, they are but dead images of vertues. Thy mercie is but a dead image of vertue, if thou want loue, and ſo foorth in the reſt: for the life of all vertues is loue; if the heart be not with the hand, that is, the heart with the action, it ſhall neuer doe thee good.
            Then marke in euery good action there are two things to be conſidered. The firſt is the good action it ſelfe. The ſecond, is the manner of the doing of the action. O there is no ſmall reſpect to be had of the manner of doing, which is the very habite and cloathing of it! Now the action comes from the hand: O but the forme, the manner, the habit, which is the ornament of it, comes from the heart! now the heart of him doth the good deede; if it be euill affected, the action if it were neuer ſo good, it hath an euill habit on it; it is euill fauoured to the Lord: how pleaſant ſo euer it ſeeme in the eyes of man, yet it is not acceptable to the Lord: all is loſt, yea all good workes, if they want this loue, ſtinke in the ſight of the Lord, and thou ſhalt neuer get good of them. But if the heart be diſpoſed with loue, that comes of faith in Ieſus Chriſt, then thy action appeares before the Lord in a faire beautie, and hee

makes that deede thou doeſt to returne backe to thee to thy A good worke returnes back with much comfort to him which doth it. good, as it is good to him to whom thou doeſt it. Therefore let euery one ſeeke to be clad with al vertues and good offices; but looke to this, that euery one of them appeare before the Lord with loue and charitie, that thy heart and hand may goe together. Put not out thy hand alone, put out heart and hand together: otherwiſe thy action ſhall neuer be good to thee; for thou art commaunded aboue all things to put on charitie.
            Now to goe forward to the words following, he deſines this loue, and by it he lets vs ſee, that it is no ſmall grace: And firſt he calles it a Band. Loue is a band that binds things together. All the reſt of the graces are likewiſe bands; mercie, kindnes, humblenes, and the reſt binde vp the members of Ieſus Chriſt; but without charitie, all be but ſuperficiall bands, outward bands, binding the bodies of men, and not their hearts together. But loue is an inward band, and it comes from the heart, and meetes with another heart, and bindes vp heart with Loue is a band. heart, and ſo the knot of loue is knit: all the reſt giue outward things; but loue giues inward things, euen the heart of him which loueth; I ſay he that loues thee, giues thee his heart. The word in the originall language imports not onely a band, but a mutuall band, as my loue to thee, and thine to me: ſo that thy loue meetes my loue; for if loue be not met with loue againe, it will not auaile: for friendſhip cannot ſtand on one ſide. Therefore looke that charitie be mutuall, otherwiſe be not content with thy ſelfe. This for the firſt word. The next is the band of perfection. This is the effect of this band. It perfecteth the man in whom it is; for it bindeth thee vp with the bodie, it perfects thee ſo, that thou ſhalt want nothing, but al ſhall be ſupplied till thou beeſt perfected. Now there is no member of the bodie that hath all perfection. The Lord hath not diſpoſed ſo, neither was it meete it ſhould ſo be; but that euery member ioyned with another ſhould bee ſupplied. The eye cannot goe, therefore the foote comes in and carries the eye: the foote cannot ſee, but in comes the eye and lets the foote ſee and directs it: So in the bodie of man, there is not a member euen the vileſt and the fouleſt, but all the reſt be readie to couer that

member, and to ſupplie the want of it. It is euen ſo with the ſpirituall bodie of Ieſus (howbeit man cannot ſee it, yet it is as true) for euery member hath not all grace: no not the King, nor the Apoſtles, nor no man in any eſtate hath all graces; yet being vnited in that bodie of Chriſt, O thou lackeſt nothing! for all is communicated to thee. So that Paul had not a grace but it is mine, All is yours (ſaith the Apoſtle) and you are Chriſts, 1. Cor. 3. 21. 23. You may challenge all the graces that are in the bodie, that is a great benefit; yea the graces that are not in thee, thou maiſt challenge them being in thy brethren, members with thee of one bodie. Therefore enuie not any mans grace, but challenge it as thy owne. Euery one would haue al, who is he or ſhe that would not haue all graces and perfectiō? But I ſhall teach thee how thou ſhalt be perfect: Wilt thou ſtand vp thy ſelf alone like an A, per ſe, A; and ſay, I wil not be in any mans Common, and ſo ſeuer thy ſelf frō the body? I ſay thou ſhalt haue no perfection, thou ſhalt be as a rottē branch caſt into ye fire; if thou were a King, the Lord ſhall cauſe thee ſtinke and die in thine owne pollution. Away with a proude headed lowne, who cannot humble himſelfe to creepe in to the bodie. Then the way to be perfect, is to ſeeke to the body; for there euery member ſhall ſupplie thy want. Thus for this faire peece of garment Loue, or charitie. Goe to the reſt that followes.
            The eight peece of this garment is ſet down in theſe words: And let the peace of God beare rule in your hearts. So the eight 8 The eight part of the garment of the nevv man.
                peece of this garment, is vnitie of minde; concord followes vppon charitie: for he that loues muſt be a peaceable man. They will not be reſtles ſpirits, full of enmitie and ſtrife. I will not inſiſt much to ſpeake of this peace; onely this, I call this peace nothing els but a ſweete quietnes in the heart of man and woman, together with amitie and concord with thy neighbour; for when thy heart hath peace within thee, then thy heart is in Peace. vnitie with thy neighbour: and therefore it is oppoſed to that reſtleſneſſe of the affections of mens hearts. Alas, what pleaſure canſt thou haue when thy heart cannot reſt within thee? The peace of heart comes not of nature: no, no, by nature thy heart is troubled, and out of tune, and all is vnruly, reeling

and rumbling within thee. From whence comes it then? Of grace that God giues in Ieſus Chriſt. If thou haue a pacified heart, the Lord hath giuen it thee, and therefore it is called the peace of God: and it is not of one ſort: for there is a peace Note of the kinds of peace. that is with God himſelfe, and that is the firſt peace: there is another peace, that is with thy neighbour. The peace that thou haſt with God, is a pacified heart with God, ſo that thy Peace with God. heart is ſetled with him, that it ſtirres thee not vp to enmitie againſt God. When thou findeſt that thou art iuſtified by faith in Chriſt, O the peace of heart that thou ſhalt haue with God! thou wilt appeare before his tribunall with boldnes, Rom. 5. 1. For being iustified by faith, wee haue peace with God through our Lord Ieſus Christ.
            
            The peace with man is a pacified heart with man, when the affection is ioyned in loue with man. This peace comes of the other; for being at peace with God, thou art at peace with all the world: get once a ſetled heart towards God, of neceſſitie Peace with man. thou muſt be at vnitie and peace with all men. O then begin at God! What is the cauſe of all theſe variances & debates, and al theſe ſlaughters? It is the want of the peace with God. O murtherer! thou haſt no peace with God, thou haſt nothing to do with God, and therefore that wrath of God ſhall conſume thee. O murtherer! when thou fighteſt with man, thou haſt to doe with the great God. O reſtles ſpirit, that canſt not reſt till thou haue bathed thy ſelfe in thy neighbours bloud! thou art at warres both with thy ſelfe, and with the great God, who ſhall at one time, or other, meete with thee, and plucke off all thy harneſſe, and then thou ſhalt neuer get peace nor reſt.
            Now to come to this peace that is with man, that is ſpoken of here. This peace, it muſt beare rule in thee: it muſt be a commaunder of thee. She muſt ſit ouer thee, and hold downe thy foule affections, when they are fighting within thee. Where muſt ſhe ſit? In thy heart, and not in thy hand; for oftentimes when thy hand will be hindred to murther, thy heart will be perſecuting thy neighbour to death: therefore it muſt be in thy heart.
            Now marke the order. When hee hath required all good vertues, at laſt hee requires peace. Whereunto? To be commaunder

of thine affections. This teacheth thee, that except they be commaunded and put in order, looke not that thou Affections muſt be cō
                  manded. can doe any good turne in the world. Canſt thou, who art diſordred in thine affection, doe any good to thy neighbour? No, therefore minde not to doe any good without this peace. Then beſeech the Lord that hee will put this peace in thy heart, to put theſe affections into an order. For when enmitie poſſeſſeth the heart, what good canſt thou doe? Well is that bodie that can lie downe in peace with God and man. Therefore aske the peace of God, that thou maiſt reſt in peace with thy ſelfe, and liue in peace with thy neighbour. O villaine thou that lieſt downe with anger and a reſtles affection, and riſeſt vp, and goeſt out and ſtabſt thy neighbour, what diſorder is in thee? and what peace haſt thou with God? No, thou art in rage with God himſelfe, when thine affections be not ruled with loue to thy neighbour; and peace thou canſt not haue with thy neighbour, if thou haue not the firſt peace which is with God. And ſo thou in bearing hatred againſt thy neighbour, telleſt plainly, thou haſt no peace with God; and wanting this, thou telleſt plainly that thou art yet in thy ſinnes, and therefore vnder the wrath of God.
            Now, when hee hath exhorted them to this peace, hee ſubioynes the argument, To the which (ſaith he) ye are called in one bodie. They, who are in one bodie, ſhould liue in peace together. An argument to moue vs to peace. The firſt argument then is from our Chriſtian calling. It is a ſhame to a man not to be anſwerable to his calling: if thou be called to ſuch a thing, why ſhouldeſt thou not doe it? But aboue all, a Chriſtian man is called to this peace, and therefore woe is to him in that great day, if he bee one who hath wanted it! Now take the leſſon: As ye ſee a man is called to be a member in any citie, not to liue at variance or debate with his neighbours: no, no, he is called to peace, and to be a quiet man: an vnquiet man is an euill neighbour; a reſtleſſe ſpirit, a ſeditious and an vnpeaceable ſpirit, is an euill neighbour: euen ſo a man called to be a member in the citie of God, in the kingdome of Chriſt (for that is our calling) he is called to be a quiet and peaceable body. For (ſaith the Apoſtle) what is the kingdome of God? It is peace and ioy in the holie
               
               Ghoſt, Rom. 14. 17. So if thou be one of that kingdome, thou wilt be a peaceable bodie. Then the man that cannot liue in peace, but is full of variance, euer troubling and renting the members of the Common-weale, who will not ſay that that man is not to bee ſuffered in the towne, hee is not worthie to dwell in it? much more a reſtles ſpirit in the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt, Diſturbers of the peace of Church and Common wealth ſhould bee driuen out of the towne. Looke if our text ſpeakes not this: Theſe reſtles ſpirits that trouble not only the Common-weale, this whole kingdom, and haue ſtudied to the ſubuerſion of the whole land, but haue by their meanes gone about to trouble the whole kingdome of Chriſt, they ſhould haue no place neither in Church nor Common-weale; they are vnworthie of any calling either in Church, or policie: they haue pulled themſelues aſunder from both.
            The ſecond argument is from the body, wherein we are vnited. Were it not a monſtrous thing to ſee the hand ſtrike the face? if thou hadſt ſpiritual eyes, it would ſeeme as monſtrous a thing to thee to ſee a member of that body of Chriſt, to ſtrike another. Then briefly, as the ioyning of men in a citie requires a peaceable life, and that they ſhould liue in peace: much more this vnion of the members, not in a citie and Commonweale onely, but in a body: ſo that ſome of them are the hand, ſome the eye, ſome the foot, and ſo foorth. This vnion requires peace and quietnes, they ſhould not be reſtles ſpirits, nor full of variance: and therefore thou that art a reſtles ſpirit in the Church of God, and yet ſaiſt thou art of the Church, and wilt ſay thou beleeueſt: I ſay to thee thou ſheweſt plainly thou haſt nought to doe with the bodie. And as I ſaid before, theſe troubleſome men full of debate, I will affirme it againe, they neuer wiſt what that vnion with Chriſt is; for if they had that vnion with Chriſt, that grace of Chriſt would come downe from the head, and bind them with the bodie. So thou ſheweſt Such as loue not peace, haue nothing to doe with Chriſt nor his Church. plainly, that thou haſt not to doe, neither with the bodie, nor with the head. O murtherers! your hearts are full of diſſenſion; ye ſhall periſh in that great day, I giue you this doome, ye ſhall not eſcape. Thus much for the eight peece of this garment of regeneration and ſanctification.
            
               
In the end of this verſe, wee haue the ninth grace and peece of this garment, and it is this, Be thankefull, that is the force of The ninth part of the garment of the nevv man. the word; ſo it is thankfulnes that he requires. All the reſt before are offices, and graces that preuent a good deede done: As when a man begins to bee mercifull to any, or mercie bee ſhewen to him of that perſon, that is a good deede done, and ſo the former graces ſtand in doing. But this grace of thankfulnes, VVhat thankefulnes is. it is ſuch as ſtands in recompencing a good deede done: In rendring good for good. If thou wilt compare this grace with them that went before, it is leſſe then any of them: for it is a greater matter to be the beginner of any good deede, then to recompence a good deede done to thee. And thou art a wretched bodie that neither canſt doe good, nor when good is done to thee canſt not render thankes for it. There be three Three ſorts of good mē. ſorts of good men.  Firſt, he is a good man that can begin to do any good to another, not prouoked by any thing that is done  to him, which for Gods cauſe can bee beneficiall to his neighbour.  Secondly, he is a good man, that can render good for  good; and recompence the good done to him: but there can no true recompencing come without the ſpirit of grace.  Laſtly, he is the beſt man, that can render good for euill, that can  finde in his heart to meete an euill deede with any good. There be as many ſorts of euill men: he is an euill man that cannot ſhew mercie to another, nor begin to doe any good; but hath Three ſorts of euill mē. his heart locked vp. Againe, hee is farre worſe, that when hee hath gotten good cannot recompence it with good againe, eſpecially to them to whom he hath been moſt indebted, as to his parents. This countrie is full of ſuch: this man is a wretch, he is worſe then an Infidell. An Ethnick can render good for good, thou ſhameſt thy parents. What if this ingratitude were to common men? but it is to them to whom they are moſt bound to, and it is an argument that thou art vngratefull to the Lord. But the worſt of all is he, that for good repaies euill; and this land is full of ſuch alſo; yea they who haue done them moſt good, they will meete them with an euill turne. All theſe are vngratefull men; and when thou haſt called a man an vngratefull man, thou haſt called him all the euill in the world:

for ſuch a one is vnworthie to liue. Therefore ſtudie to be thankfull, and thou that getteſt any good done to thee by any man, at the leaſt meete him with thankfulnes. It is meruaile how a man can lie downe without this conſideration: for if thou ſuffer thy ſelfe to be oppreſt with ingratitude, thou ſhalt periſh.
            If the time would ſerue I would goe forward, I will marke onely this: All theſe graces are grounded vpon the word of Ieſus Chriſt, vpon this Goſpell. Wouldeſt thou be mercifull? let the word dwell in thee. Wouldeſt thou be kind? wouldeſt thou be humblie minded? and ſo foorth of the reſt of the graces; let the word of Ieſus Chriſt raigne in thee. This is the meane that ingenders theſe graces, and keepes them in thy heart, to wit, the word of Ieſus. So thou, who wouldeſt be gracious The Goſpell is Gods hand to fill vs vvith graces. and full of grace, be full of the Goſpell. For it is that word that purifieth the heart: neuer reſt til thou get thy heart full of the Goſpell. Thou thinkeſt that nothing can fill thee, but a bodily foode: no, no, the word of Ieſus is as effectuall to fill the heart, as ſenſible as euer thou foundeſt thy ſtomacke fed with foode. But conſider this: this fulnes of the heart is not gotten ſo long as we liue here. Therefore let our pleaſure bee euer in filling of our hearts with the Goſpel, as thou haſt pleaſure to fill thy ſtomacke with meate and drinke: ſo fill thy Simile. heart, thine emptie heart, that is full of nothing but winde, fill it with the Goſpell. Alas, if we could get an hunger of the word; for the ſoule that hungers for the foode of the word, it ſhall be filled, and it ſhall feele the ſweetnes of the word. But the heart is ſo filled with the filthines of nature, that it cannot hunger for the word, nor feele the ſweetnes of it: therefore emptie thy heart of this filth which is in it, that being emptied thou maiſt haue ſome greedines of ſpirituall things. Know you not the neceſſitie of this? If in ſome meaſure thou emptie it not, and fill it not with this word of grace, I giue thee this doome, looke not for a life to come. For there is no fulnes of glorie, except the fulnes of the word goe before in thee. So if thou be not filled with the word in this life, looke not to haue a life with Ieſus in that day. Seeing then it ſtands vpon ſuch a

paine, take pleaſure in this word, albeit he be but a baſe ſillie man that vtters it to thee: for it is the meane that the Lord hath vſed to fill thy ſoule with; and it hath pleaſed the Lord to put this iewell in earthen veſſels; therefore take heede to them 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. 20. and fill thy ſelfe: for els at that day, thou ſhalt repent the time that thou wouldeſt not take grace, when grace was offered, being offended at the baſenes of men in the Miniſterie. O let not the baſenes of Chriſts ſeruants be a let to thee, but be thou euer greedie to fill thy ſelf with the word. And woe be to them that would put this word away from thee, and ſtuffe in vanities in ſteede of it! woe to thee with thine Earldome, except the Lord conuert thee in time! The Lord in his mercie giue vs grace to keepe this word of Ieſus, and to feede thereupon. To this Lord, with the Sonne and holy Spirit, be all praiſe for euermore,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXXI. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 16. 17.
               
                  16 Let the word of Chriſt dwell in you plenteouſly, in all wiſedome, teaching and admoniſhing your owne ſelues in Pſalmes, and hymnes, and ſpirituall ſongs, ſing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord.
                  
                  17 And whatſoeuer ye ſhall doe inword or deede (doe) all in the name of the Lord Ieſus, giuing thankes to God, euen the father by him.
                  
               
            
            
               WE haue heard (brethren) heretofore of this ſpirituall araiment of the new man, or new creature, made by Ieſus Chriſt; and wee haue heard of ſo many parts and peeces of it, as haue been thus farre reckoned vp. Of mercie, kindnes, humilitie, mildnes, lenitie, forgiuing, charitie, peace, and laſtly thankfulnes for benefits receiued. Now in the beginning of this text, the Apoſtle recommends that meane, whereby theſe graces and all other ſuch like are gotten and wrought in the heart of man. The meane briefly hee Coherence. calles the word of Chriſt, the ſpeech of Chriſt. Let (ſaith hee) the ſpeech of Chriſt dwel in you plenteouſly. For without this word, which is the inſtrument of the ſpirit of Ieſus, wherby he works in the heart, and without the which, he workes not ordinarily; there can be no grace wrought in the heart. For to ſpeake The Gentiles had no ſpiritual grace. the truth, neuer Gentile had any of theſe graces, and for any

that they had, they were but dead images of vertues, without life: for where the word is not, there can be no grace, life, nor vertue in man.
            But to come to the words in particular: Let (ſaith he) the word of God dwell in you plenteouſly. Then the meane of all theſe graces, is the ſpeech or language (to take it generally) that comes out of the mouth. Well brethren, there is no little moment in ſpeaking, and it hath no ſmall force in the hearer either to good or euill. The language thou heareſt, will either do thee good or euill; for it enters not ſo ſoone into the eare, but Speech euer doth good or hurt. as ſoone it goes to the heart, and either will corrupt or ſanctifie the heart. Corrupt language will rot thy heart, Epheſ. 4. 29. if thou takeſt pleaſure to heare it, it will cauſe thy heart to ſtinke. Againe, ſo ſoone as we haue ſpoken a word of grace, by ſpeaking it, it will cleanſe the heart and put out vncleannes, for there is not a graine of it, but it is full of ſtinke. And therfore 1. Cor. 15. 33. When he hath recited the words of the Epicures, Eate (ſay they) drinke, let vs take our pastime: then the Apoſtle ſubioynes, be not deceiued: for (ſaith he) wicked ſpeaking corrupts good manners, foule ſpeeches, euil talke, will make thee an euill man. For firſt it defiles thy heart, and then thy actions. Againe, Epheſ. 4. 29. he giues expreſſe commandement, Looke (ſaith he) that no rotten ſpeech proceede out of thy mouth, vpon paine of thy life. Albeit thy heart thinke it (as thy heart is euil inclined to thinke it) yet keepe thy mouth cloſe; and vetter it Pro. 3. 24. Keepe the mouth cloſe, albeit the heart haue vncleane thoughts.
                not. Then he ſaith, recommending the talke that ſhould bee ſpoken: Speake that, that is to the edification of the hearer. Speake no ſpeech but that, that is gracious. I will not inſiſt in this: only keepe thy owne tongue firſt, that thou corrupt not thy ſelfe or thy neighbour: then take heede to thy neighbours tongue, leaſt in caſe thou lend thine eare to his talke, that thou get not a filthie heart by it.
            But to our purpoſe. Speech that ſtrikes in the eare it is of great force in the heart. But whoſe ſpeech muſt this be that workes theſe graces which are reckoned vp? Will euery ſpeech worke it? No: whoſe muſt it be then? Let (ſaith he) the ſpeech of Christ be in your hearts, dwelling in all plentie. Then it is Chriſts ſpeech: O it muſt be the ſpeech of a great perſonage that muſt

make this operation! It is his ſpeech that will pearce downe The ſpeech of Christ only, is the inſtrument of grace. to the ſpirit, becauſe he is a ſpirit, a diuine ſpirit, and is the maker of all ſpirits, and therefore it is he who pearceth downe to the heart, and all his words are ſpirit and life. This Peter ſaith, Whither ſhall we goe? thou hast the words of eternall life, Ioh. 6. 68. And therefore ſeeing he hath the ſpirit, if the Auditor were neuer ſo dead, he will make him heare. The time is come now (ſaith he) in Ioh. 5. 25. when the dead ſhall heare the voyce of the ſonne of God. O then heare the word of Chriſt! and it will giue thee life. Then the ſpeech of Chriſt is nought els but the Goſpell, which the Apoſtle to the Romanes, chap. 1. 16. calles the power of God vnto ſaluation to euery one who beleeues. Beleeue it, and thou ſhalt find this power in thee. For as concerning the Goſpell, it was Ieſus Chriſt who was the firſt ſpeaker of it; firſt in The Goſpel preached by Chriſt ſince the beginning. Paradice; and then to the Fathers in order; and laſtly in his owne perſon, in a full reuelation hee ſpake this word of life. Looke not then for life; let none from the King to the beggar thinke to be ſafe (account of the Miniſterie as thou pleaſeſt) if thou lay not thine eare to the Goſpell and beleeue.
            
               Let (ſaith he) the word of God dwell in you. (In you) that is in your hearts, not in your mouthes, and eares onely; but let it goe downe to the heart, and to the rootes and depth of the heart; and let it haue it reſidence there. It is not enough to haue it tinckling in thy eare, albeit ſome think it enough; but it muſt goe from the eare to the heart, and there the reſidence and lodging of it muſt be. So hee recommends not onely the hearing and reading, but hee recommends the meditation in Meditation. in the hart. the heart, thinking, muſing, turning it ouer and ouer againe and againe in the heart: for except the word be in the heart, it can haue no operation. It is not enough to ſit and heare a while, and no more, if there bee not a muſing in this word; thinke not that it can haue an operation in your heart: but the more thou heareſt, the more graceleſſe art thou, experience proues it. Then the word muſt be in the heart, but how long muſt it abide there? Muſt it abide the night, and away the morrow, as a pilgrime lodging here this night, and in another place the morrow? muſt it lodge with thee ſo? muſt thou muſe of it for this time, and then farewell till thou haue to doe with

it againe? and goe to thy drinking and paſtime? No, ſaith he, Let the word dwell, that is, haue a continual reſidence night and day within thee, and be a domeſticke or houſehold ſeruant of Pſal. 1. 2. thine (and not a ſtranger) to abide with thee for euer; and let there be a continuall meditation on it, ſo long as thy ſtrength can beare it. Troweſt thou, that the thinking of Ieſus will hinder thy occupation? No, it hath no grace but when thou art thinking of Ieſus, and it hinders thee nought; except the meditation of the word be ardent in thee night and day, as it was in Dauid, who had as weightie occupations as any man (O would to God Kings had a peece of meditation in this word as Dauid had, in all thoſe other affaires!) thinke not that grace will abide with thee. For looke how ſoone this word leaues thee, as ſoone grace goes from thee: ſo that of a mercifull man thou be commeſt a tyrant. What makes ſo many of our Noblemen ſo debaſed, but the contempt of this word? All our great men are very contemners of Gods word. See ye not the vengeance of God vpon them, their wiues, and children they would haue this word driuen out not onely out of this countrie, but out of the hearts of men. Well, well, for all that let the word haue reſidence, and continuall reſidence within you. O but in what meaſure and what quantitie? Some will ſay, if you know this, what behooues me to be ouer carefull to vnderſtand this word? let the Miniſters who liue by it, haue that care: If I haue the Lords Prayer, the Beleef, and the tenne Commandements, I need no more; I am a Lord, I am a Ladie, I am a Gentleman, what neede I to trouble my ſelfe with the Byble? I haue another occupation. But what ſaith the Apoſtle, Let the word dwell in you. How? In ſcarſitie? in a bit of it? leauing the reſt to others? No, but let the word dwell in you plenteouſly: let the word make you rich. The Apoſtle then requires a treaſure and a ſtore to be laid vp in the heart: he would that the riches of the word be in you, and not a pouertie of it. And I ſay to thee, thou, who wilt content thee with one part, and wilt not ſeeke the riches of the word; and as the Apoſtle to the Hebrues chap. 6. 1. that ſtriueſt not to be led forward to a perfection, but dwelleſt in the Elements and Cathechiſme: I ſay thou haſt nothing of it. He that will content himſelfe with the Pater noster and the

               Creede: I ſay he hath nothing. And if he haue any illumination by it, and cares not for a perfection, that light he hath gotten ſhall die out; if it grow not, it will vaniſh away. You ſee that if fire be not fed with new matter, it will goe out: It is as ſure We must grow in knowledge, or els vve haue no knowledge. of that knowledge and light that thou haſt of God, and that light that is kindled in thee, if it be not intertained ſo, that it grow on, it ſhall goe out. And O then, what danger art thou in? If thou ſpue out that light, it is impoſſible that thou ſhouldeſt be renewed by repentance: for it is called the ſinne againſt the 2. Pet. 3. 18 Heb. 6. 4. 6. holy Ghoſt. Therefore all ye that would ſee the light and the riches of heauen, ſtriue to be rich in this word, and be greedie in reading and meditating of this word, as the Lord will giue you grace.
            To goe forward, Let the word dwell in you, and in euery one of you; for that that is ſpoken to one, is ſpoken to all, and that aboundantly. It is the treaſure that thou ſhalt take vp with thee, and it ſhall not leaue thee in the graue, it ſhall ſerue thee in heauen. But what more? In all wiſdome: now in this text that Effects of the vvord. followes, we haue certaine faire effects of this word of Ieſus dwelling richly in vs. They are partly in the man himſelfe, in whom the word dwels; and partly in others that heare him ſpeake. He, who is rich in Chriſt, is not rich himſelfe onely, but he ſhall inrich others alſo with him: euery word that comes out of his mouth, is a lumpe of riches to thee. Then to come to the firſt effect, In all wiſdome and knowledge. The word of God dwelling richly in any, muſt not want the effect; it Wiſedome is a faire light. muſt haue an effect: and the firſt effect is a faire light. O that light, it is as it were a goodly torch light in a darke houſe, that enlightens the whole houſe. So thou by nature art a darke dungeon: there is not a ſparke of heauenly light in thee by nature. Thou haſt ſome light of nature, but what is that? It is to make thee inexcuſable. When this light of heauen comes, it lightens all thy darknes. What is the firſt effect of the light of the Sunne, or of a candle but illumination? So this word is the illumination of thy mind. It opens the hart, and enlightens it, Illumination. and it illuminates all the affections, and puts them in order. So the firſt effect is light. It hath this of the owne nature, 2. Tim. 3 15. Paul ſaith, The Scriptures are able to make thee wiſe; reade al

the bookes that are written, if thou couldeſt compaſſe heauen The Scriptures bring true wiſedome. and earth, if thou want the Scripture in thy heart, thou ſhalt neuer be wiſe. And ſeeing this is the true effect of the word, I beſeech you looke how you haue it. Some will clatter ouer Scripture, and yet they will be the vaineſt bodies that are. Therefore content not thy ſelfe with a rote rime of the word, except thou finde an illumination by it in thy minde, & wiſedome, and knowledge in thy heart. What good doth the repetition of certaine ſentences of the Scripture, if this be not? I ſay to thee thou abuſeſt them, and thou ſhalt be challenged for it.
            Now to come to the next effect, Teaching and admoniſhing 
               The ſecond effect of the word. 
               your owne ſelues with Pſalmes, hymnes and ſpirituall ſongs, with grace in the heart ſinging to God the Lord. So the next effect of this riches of the word, is in reſpect of others: hee that aboundeth himſelfe in the riches of the word, hauing a ſtore of it in his breaſt, he muſt redound and runne ouer, as a full veſſel that runnes ouer: he muſt not onely be a veſſell that is full, but he muſt be a full veſſell running ouer. So hee muſt runne ouer in Simile. graces to others, and there is none of theſe graces, that runne ouer that falles to the ground, but the hearers receiue them. We get not this grace to keepe it to our ſelues, and to hide it as a hoord in our owne breaſt, ſo that none other know of it: what auailes that hoord? Wherefore ſerues ſiluer if it be not imployed to the vſe of men? euen ſo what auailes wiſedome and knowledge, if it be not imployed to the vſe of men, and communicated to others? it will rot within thee, and neuer doe thee good. And thinkeſt thou that the more narrowly thou keepeſt it, that it will grow vp the more? No, no, if thou haue ſiluer and thou giue it not out, it will not grow; but if thou laiſt it out, thou keepeſt the ſtocke and receiueſt the profit: Euen ſo the word of God and the riches thereof, if thou giue it not foorth, it cannot grow; but if thou giue it out and communicate the ſame to others, it ſhall grow in thee. Concerning this matter, Paul 2. Tim. chap. 1. verſ. 14. ſaith, Keepe that faire thing that is committed in truſt to thee, meaning this word. Then in the chapter following in the beginning he ſaith, Theſe things thou haſt heard, what ſhalt thou doe with them?

               Cammunicate them to faithfull men. And what ſhall they doe To ſpeake much of the word to others. with them? that are able (ſaith he) to teach others. So the onely way to keepe this riches with a continuall increaſe, is euer to be ſpeaking of it, and communicating of it to others. VVhere thou ſeeſt an ignorant ſoule, giue to that ſoule one peece of that riches. I ſpeake not this to Miniſters onely, but to euery one of you who heare me: for wee and ye are bound to communicate this word one to another. And thou who art the firſt giuer of it, it ſhall grow the more with thee; for it growes through giuing of it. It is not like temporall riches, of which the more is giuen, the more they decreaſe: but theſe ſpirituall riches, the more they be giuen, the more they grow. Therefore be euer giuing of them, that thou maiſt bring many liuing ſtones vnto the houſe of God, and of Ieſus Chriſt; for thou ſhalt not be glorified till the whole bodie be glorified. Therefore as thou wouldeſt be glorified, ſeeke the reſt of the members to be glorified with thee, and be euer beſtowing of theſe riches vpon the members of Chriſt, as thou haſt receiued of him. Theſe are the two effects that this word hath in others. The firſt is in the minde. The ſecond is in the heart and affections of the hearers. In the minde the effect of the word is, when thou teacheſt the ignorant that hath no knowledge, by Teaching of minde. opening vp the word thou doeſt miniſter knowledge to the ignorant, and ſo it ſtands in doctrine. The effect that it works in the heart is by admoniſhing and comforting, rebuking as Admoniſhing and comforting the heart. occaſion ſerues. So I note the word of Ieſus workes in all the parts and powers of the ſoule of man, in the minde, will, and euery affection: it runnes through al the faculties of the ſoule. As for the word of a Philoſopher, that hath the knowledge of things earthly, it will informe thy knowledge, and it will let thee know the thing thou kneweſt not before; but it will not Pſalm. 19. 7. 8 reforme nor alter thine heart: it is onely Chriſts word that doth that. Men are inclined to reade good morall bookes, but I warne thee, except thou reade this word of Chriſt, nothing can reforme thy heart. Therefore ſeeke to this Goſpell. This is one thing I note, and another note is this. It is not enough for thee that haſt the word of Chriſt in thy hart in great plentie and aboundance, to informe the vnderſtanding of an ignorant,

no not in heauenly things: yea and it were to vnderſtand the whole Scriptures, thou haſt not done all thou ſhouldeſt do, to make a learned hearer, though it were in the whole Note of a true teacher. miniſterie of God: what ſhouldeſt thou do more? Thou muſt admoniſh, that is, thou muſt go to the heart of the hearer, and his affections, to ſee how he is diſpoſed. So that if thou ſee the affections to be out of rule, as they will appeare in the manners of men, thou muſt tune thy ſpeech according to the affections of them, and ſtriue to put them in order. And if they be ouer loftie, thou muſt bring them low downe; and if they be deiected, thou muſt cheere them vp againe, comfort and incourage them. In a word, thou muſt comfort, admoniſh, and rebuke, according as thou ſhalt finde the diſpoſition of the hearer: if he were a King, thou muſt rebuke him as thou findeſt Admonition hard. occaſion. The world cannot abide this. Speake to my vnderſtanding, ſay they, teach me Chriſt, what haue you more to doe? Make me and the people to vnderſtand, but ſpeake not to my affections. Let me and them bee together, meddle not with my affections, begin not to rebuke me, and to controule my affections, I wil not beare with it. But let men ſpeak as they pleaſe, this is the truth. Neither art thou a faithfull teacher, if thou wert but a priuate man, if thou rebuke not a priuate man: much more a Preacher cannot diſcharge his dutie in his Miniſterie, if he admoniſh and rebuke not the perſon whom he ſees, and knowes to offend. And therefore away with theſe Iniunctions, and rather cloſe thy mouth then receiue ſuch an Iniunction; otherwiſe thou canſt not doe thy dutie. What profits me all the light in the world, if mine affections be out of rule? My knowledge ſhall doe me no good, and hee Affections vnruly. who ſpeakes not to thy affections, hee ſhall doe thee no good, he muſt firſt inſtruct thy minde, and then ſpeake to thine affections. I will not inſiſt. But I affirme, there was neuer more neede to ſpeake to the affections of men, to admoniſh, and rebuke, then in theſe times.
            Now hee inſiſts in the ſecond thing, in raiſing vp the heart of the hearer, that is ouer farre caſt downe and heauie, ſo that it cannot ſpeake to God. To cheere it vp, I ſay, the meanes are Pſalmes, that is the firſt. The ſecond, is Hymnes. The third,

is Songs, Canticles: All ſtands in ſinging, melodie of the voyce. The ſad heart, that is ouer farre caſt downe, that it cannot riſe to glorifie God, requires to be raiſed vp with the melody of the voyce. I will not inſiſt: Pſalmes are ſongs in generall of what 1. Pſalmes.
                argument or purpoſe ſoeuer they bee. Hymnes are ſongs of 2. Hymnes.
                praiſes, a ſpeciall kinde of Pſalme. Canticles or Odes are a 3. Canticles
                certaine kinde of Hymnes compoſed and made after a more artificiall manner, as the ſong of Salomon. The Lord recommends theſe as meanes, to raiſe vp the heart of man to God that is ouer ſad. Then the leſſon is this: Among all the reſt of the meanes, whereby the heart is wakened and raiſed vp to God, ſinging is one. This melodie, this ſweete harmonie, whether it be naturall, or artificiall Muſicke, ſerues to raiſe vp the heart to glorifie God. And therefore the melodie of the voyce it ſhould be applied to the edifying of others. Looke how ye vſe your voyce ye that haue it; the Lord giues it to thee for the edifying of thy brother. If any haue a Canticle, vſe it to the edifying of thy brother: the greateſt part vſe it to the deſtroying of the hearer, and feeding of their foule affections to vanitie. Well, take heede you who haue voyces to ſing, for thou ſhalt giue an account, if it be not to the edifying of the hearer.
            In the words following, hee inſiſts in a large deſcription of theſe three. Firſt for the matter, as concerning it; it ſhould be ſpirituall and heauenly. All the matter of Pſalmes, Hymnes, and Canticles, ſhould be ſpirituall. For why? they come from the riches of the word in the heart. If thou haue this ſubſtance within thee, all thy ſongs will be of Scripture, of heauenly things, and all to glorifie thy God, and to edifie thy brother. Well, this that Paul ſpeaks, condemnes all theſe ſongs of vaine and filthie purpoſes. Fie vpon thee, who doeſt abuſe thy voyce in foule bawdrie matters, to corrupt and infect the affection of the hearer: It had bin better thou hadſt not gotten a voyce. Then he comes to the forme of ſinging, which is, it ſhould be gracious, that is, it ſhould haue ſuch gratiouſnes, and grauitie, as might conuey grace to the heart of the hearer. This condemnes all theſe light and wanton tunes that miſtune the affection of the hearer. Beſides this, it condemnes this chirming

and chaunting in the Papiſtical Church. This word grace condemnes all, becauſe by their broken notes of Muſicke they breake the words of the Scripture, and ſo they darken the ſentence, that the words cannot be vnderſtood, and feede not the heart with the words and ſentences of the Scripture, but feed the eare with a vaine tune, and ſo it condemnes all their ſinging; for al is graceleſſe: becauſe this ſinging which the Apoſtle requires ſhould be ſuch, as ſhould not breake the words of the Scripture, but ſhould make them more plaine and diſtinct. In the third place he comes on to the chiefe Organ, that is, the inſtrument wherewith they ſhould ſing. It is not with the Organs of the Papiſts, no not with thy tongue; but it is with the heart, and with the affection of a well ruled heart. Therefore as a fidler, or any that playes on an Inſtrument tempers his Simile. Inſtrument, that a ſweete harmonie may be heard of it: Euen ſo before thou ſing, temper thou thy heart; and let thy ſong riſe, not from thy throte, but from the depth of thine heart, that is, from thine affections ſet vpon God.
            Laſtly, he ſets downe to whom we be to make this muſicke, and whoſe eare we be to pleaſe in ſinging. He ſaith it is to the Lord: then it is the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to whom thou ſhouldſt direct thy ſong, and whoſe eare thou ſhouldeſt pleaſe. So that he or ſhe that ſings either Pſalmes, Hymnes, and Canticles, ſhould ſet themſelues to pleaſe the eare of Ieſus Chriſt. You ſee theſe vaine ſingers ſet themſelues to pleaſe the eares of men; but thou that wouldeſt ſing with grace to edification, ſet thy ſelfe to pleaſe Chriſt Ieſus, that hath pleaſed thee. O woe to thee that will not endeuour thy ſelfe to pleaſure. Whom? not fleſh, but him who hath pleaſured thee. Fie on thee, that ſhouldeſt pleaſe thy ſelfe, with the diſpleaſure of thy Lord! For what haſt thou won, whē thou haſt pleaſed al the world, with diſpleaſing of God? When thou ſingeſt to the pleaſure of God, thou giueſt grace to the heart of thy neighbour, and edifieſt the hearer. Thus much (brethren) of the meane whereby theſe graces are gotten.
            As for the verſe that followes, taking occaſion of the former, he ſets downe a generall rule of all thine actions, to wit, that in al, Ieſus Chriſt ſhould euer be before thy eye: Al ſhould

be done to his honour. Firſt he ſaith, Whatſoeuer you doe, doe all in the name of the Lord Ieſus. That is, by calling vpon his holy name, begin with him, and looke that thine eye be firſt on him: and ſay, Lord, mine eye is vpon thee, and all is for thy glorie. And in the end of the verſe, he will not giue thee leaue to thanke the Father without the Sonne: for he ſaith, Giuing thankes to God the Father euen by him. The leſſon is then; In all actions and ſpeeches, euer reſpect Ieſus Chriſt his honour and glorie: he is a maieſtie of maieſties. When thou art honoring God the Father, miſſe not Chriſt by the way (otherwiſe thou ſhalt haue no acceſſe to that tribunall of grace) and ſay, O my God, I thanke thee through my Mediatour Ieſus Chriſt. Lord haue mercie on me, for my Mediatour the Lord Ieſus ſake; for there is no mercie without Chriſt. The ground of this doing is, let be that he is God he hath alſo a Lordſhip ouer thee. Read Rom. 14. 8. 9. For this end hath hee died and riſen againe, that hee might be Lord both of the dead and of the quicke. So honour him as thy Lord. As Paul 2. Cor. 5. 15. Chriſt hath died and riſen to that end, that he who liues, liue no more to himſelfe, but to him who died for him, and roſe againe. Looke that that life of thine bee to him. Let all thy life, thy words and thy actions be to his glorie. Whereto ſhould I inſiſt to recommend this matter to you? experience teacheth it. What ioy hath a man in any action, be it neuer ſo faire? what ſweetnes hath any man? except in the meane time his eye be vpon the Mediatour the Lord Ieſus, except his conſcience tels him hee ſpeakes to the honour of the Lord Ieſus. I preſſe ye with experience, foundeſt thou euer any true ioy in thy heart, when thy hart & eye was not on Chriſt? No, no: there is no actiō if it were neuer ſo glorious, that will miniſter ioy to thy heart, except the eye & heart be on Chriſt. No, if it were a Preacher, if he haue not the eye of him on his Lord, his ſpeeches auailes not; they will not comfort the ſoule of him. Therefore haue euer thy eye vpon this Lord Ieſus, as euer thou wouldeſt haue pleaſure and ioy in thy heart, and benefit to thy ſelfe in the Lord Ieſus. To whom with the Father and bleſſed Spirit, be all honour and praiſe for euer,
            Amen
         
         
            
            THE XXXII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 18. 19.
               
                  18 Wiues, ſubmit your ſelues vnto your huſbands, as is comely in the Lord.
                  
                  19 Huſbands, loue your wiues, and be not bitter vnto them.
                  
               
            
            
               IN the text preceding the exhortation hath been generall, to wit, to mortification, pertaining to euery eſtate in the world. Now in this text he deſcends in particular to certaine ſpeciall eſtates of men and women, directing his exhortation particularly to them, and namely to three eſtates. The firſt is to husbands and wiues. The ſecond, is to parents and children. The third, is to maſters and ſeruants. To come then to the purpoſe. It is to be vnderſtood, that from the beginning of this world there hath euer been theſe three principall eſtates, and ranks of men and women in the world. The firſt is the eſtate of husbands and wiues: for ye know Adam ere euer he had children he had his wife. The next after Inequality in all eſtates. this, was the eſtate of parents and children; and then by proceſſe of time there became ſome maſters, and ſome ſeruants: ſo that this is the laſt in order and time. In theſe three eſtates all be not equall, but there is an inequalitie: ſome are ſuperiours, and ſome are inferiours. The ſuperiours he hath made to be Husbands, Parents, and Maſters: The inferiours he hath made to bee Wiues, Children, and Seruants. For if all were

equall, no policie could ſtand, nor order on the earth, but a confuſion. The Lord, who is onely wiſe, knew this, and therefore it pleaſed him to diſpoſe the world after this manner; ſo that a policie might be kept in it. Theſe being the three eſtates, the Scripture hath chiefe reſpect to them, and giues exhortations to theſe three. In all he begins firſt at the inferiours, as in this place he begins at the wiues, and then comes to the huſbands. The cauſe of this is, becauſe the eſtate of the inferiours is hardeſt, and therefore the ſpirit of God firſt informes the inferiours, that they ſhould take that burthen the Lord hath laid on them, and that they ſhould doe that, which they doe, willingly (for I will not giue a peny for thy ſeruice and ſubiection if it be compelled) for the ſubiection that is voluntarie is bleſſed, whether it be by wife, child or ſeruant; otherwiſe all is nothing worth; thou haſt loſt thy thankes. But to come to the words.
            Firſt he ſaith, Wiues ſubmit your ſelues vnto your huſbands. Few words, but pithie. Note foure things.In them ye ſhall marke foure things.  Firſt,  that dutie that is required of maried wiues, the dutie is ſubiection and obedience.  The ſecond is, to whom they owe this dutie,  not to euery one, but to their owne husbands.  The third, is   the manner of ſubiection, how it ſhall be done, to wit, in the Lord.  The fourth, is the argument to moue them, and it is taken  from that, that is comely. The dutie then is ſubiection: let vs weigh it. The firſt thing in it is obedience in deede and effect. This is the firſt part of ſubiection, as appeares in the firſt Epiſtle of Peter, chap. 3. where the Apoſtle making mention of the ancient women, brings in the example of Sara, and there he defines that ſubiection. Yet there is more in this ſubiection then ſimple obedience. The obedience muſt haue ioyned with it honouring of thy husband in word: As thou obeyeſt Subiection of wiues to the huſbands, and what required in it him indeede and effect; ſo thou muſt honour him in word: therefore in that ſame place it is ſaid, that Sara called her huſband Lord. Yet there is more then all this: there is feare and reuerence in the heart required, that is the ground of all. Paul Epheſ. 5. 33. ſpeakes expreſly of this: Looke that the wife feare and reuerence her husband in heart. So then there is this ſubiection in the whole parts thereof. In deed, it is obedience:

in word, it is honouring of him: in heart, it is feare and reuerence. Note. So that wife which will be ſubiect to her husband, muſt keepe theſe three points; or elſe ſhe faileth in ſubiection.
            Come to the ſecond: to whom this ſubiection ought to be giuen, not to euery one: To your owne huſbands. This ſubiection is commaunded, not to ſtrange men, but to your owne huſbands. The ſpeciall kind of ſubiection, wherein ſtands the dutie of the wife to the husband, is not to be communicated with any other man. It is true, the male kind hath a preferment aboue the female: it hath honour aboue the other. Looke Paul 1. Tim. 2. 13. 14. where he giues two reaſons of this preferment. The firſt is from the creation, Adam was firſt created, and then Eue. The ſecond is, from the tranſgreſſion, the woman fell firſt; and it is ſure, firſt in ſinne, laſt in honour. Notwithſtanding this, wiues are not commaunded to doe this dutie to euery man, but to their owne husbands. If you will mark the words narrowly, you ſhal perceiue there lurks an argument in them. The argument is taken from their propertie: they are your proper goods; thou haſt nothing ſo proper as thy husband: and therefore ſeeing thy husband is thy proper good, ſhouldeſt thou not doe a dutie to thy husband? But I leaue this, and I come to the manner. The manner of this ſubiection is bounded: In the Lord: the Lord Ieſus muſt be the rule of it. But to conſider the words. Wiues be ſubiect to your huſbands in the Lord, 
               The manner of the ſubiection. in theſe two reſpects.  Firſt, when you are ſubiect to your huſbands, be firſt ſubiect to Ieſus Chriſt; obey him, honour him;  there is the firſt dutie which is according to the law; diſcharge thy dutie to God firſt, otherwiſe thou art in a backward way. Begin neuer then at a man, though it were at a King, to ſhew and giue thy ſubiection; but begin firſt at God, and ſubiect thy ſelfe firſt to him.  Secondly, when thou haſt done thy dutie  to the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, then for the loue, and pleaſure and glorie of this Lord, thou ſhouldeſt ſubiect thy ſelfe to thy huſband. I will giue thee my counſell, let neuer wife be ſubiect to her husband, but for the cauſe of Chriſt, and not for thy huſbands cauſe. Firſt, if thou doe it ſo for the Lords cauſe, thou ſhalt haue great aduantage. The firſt aduantage is, thou ſhalt not obey thy husband, but in things lawfull, honeſt, agreeable

to the will of the Lord, though he ſhould commaund thee neuer Note well two aduantages by obeying in the Lord: firſt, they ſhall obey, but in that the Lord commands: ſecondly, the ſeruice Chriſt accepts as done to himſelfe. ſo much. And if thou obey him in things vnlawfull, thou ſhalt deerely buy it. And indeede, a faire aduantage to do nothing but that that is lawfull, honeſt, and agreeable to the Lords will. The ſecond aduantage is, Obeying in the Lord; all the ſeruice thou ſhalt doe to thy husband, thou ſhalt doe it to Ieſus Chriſt, Epheſ. 6. 5. Where there is another doing in the Lord ſet downe, what euer thou ſhalt do, do it in ſinglenes of heart, and not in doublenes. As there be many falſe wiues, who in obeying their husbands, haue a double heart, obeying them outwardly, not for any good will or liking they haue to them; but for ſome other cauſe and reſpect, while as in the meane time ſhe wil haue in her mind one euill or other againſt him. Yea while ſhe is ſhewing her ſelfe obedient to her huſband outwardly, her minde will be occupied on her harlotrie with another: this is no ſingle obedience, and the cauſe is, for as much as thine eye is not vpon the Lord, and it is impoſsible that thou canſt be ſincere in thy doing, except thine eye be vpon the Lord. Laſtly, doing all for his ſake, and in ſinceritie: Who ſhall reward thee? what benefit ſhalt thou get? ſhall it be a temporall thing, that he can beſtow vpon thee? No, no: the Lord Ieſus, whom thou preferreſt in the obeying of thy Great reward for ſeruing Chriſt. husband and ſeruice doing to him, he ſhall meete thee and reward thee with a crown of glorie. Woe were it for me & thee if in his ſeruice done in his name and for his ſake, wee looked for no more but for theſe earthly rewards, though it were to be made a King or a Queene: for wee and they both ſhall vaniſh away; for nothing is permanent here vnder the Sunne. Well, doe nothing, but for the Lord Ieſus ſake, and that that is agreeable to his will, & ſay: All that I do to my husband, O Lord, all is for thy ſake: otherwiſe all thy ſeruice ſtinkes, thou ſhalt loſe thy labour; for thou ſhalt receiue no reward of him. This for the manner of ſubiection and obedience vnto your husbands.
            Now followes the fourth thing to be conſidered, the argument to moue them to this dutie: In a word, It is comely: It is reaſonable: it is iuſt. Would you ſee this? It leanes vpon good grounds (neuer action had better.) Firſt, it is grounded vpon

the ordinance of God; firſt made before the fall, and after the The argument of ſubiection. fall renewed againe. Secondly, it is grounded vpon the law of nature: the Lord hath written it in thy heart at the firſt creation: Thou ſhalt be ſubiect to thy husband. Beſides this, ye that are wiues, you haue this conſcience of your owne infirmitie, you are the weaker veſſels: and therefore ye craue a head: ye craue to be vnder a Superiour. Thou who art diſobedient, who is it that thou haſt to doe with? Is it a man? Looke what breach of law is here. Firſt, thou breakeſt Gods law. Secondly, thou breakeſt the law of nature. And thirdly, thou doeſt againſt thy owne conſcience. Doubt yee that all theſe bands lies on you? I tell you Eue fell not ſo ſoone, but all theſe bands were laid on her. In the third chapter of Geneſis, verſe 16. Thy appetite ſhall be toward him, &c. And therefore marke it. This rebellion and wantonneſſe in many wiues, it is not ſo ſmall a ſinne as you thinke. It is a ſinne againſt God and his law. Secondly, it is againſt nature. Thirdly, it is againſt thy conſcience. This is not well knowne by many; therefore learne to know it in time. Ye haue now heard the wiues part.
            Now I come to the men, Huſbands loue your wiues; that is the thing he charges them to doe: then he ſaies, Be not bitter vnto them: that he forbids. The thing then he bids them doe, is Loue. So ſubiection in the wife ſhould be met with loue and care in things ſpirituall and temporall; this is generall, ſubiection in the inferiour ſhould be met with loue and care of the ſuperiour in things earthly and temporall, and in things ſpirituall. Superiours bound to duties as well as inferiours. For it is not the Lords will that the inferiour ſhould be bound to a dutie, and the ſuperiour ſhould goe free; but he is as faſt faſtened to doe a dutie to his inferiour, and more; the greater preferment the greater burthen: all the honours men get, are the greater burthens to them. Vnder the tearme of loue, is vnderſtood all kind of dutie belonging to the wife; prouiding it begin at the heart, and not at the mouth, nor hand. And therefore the word loue comprehends the moſt intire affection: wey it well, it is not a ſlender loue.Loue. 
                For firſt it   imports a great affection in the heart, and not a ſuperficiall affection.  Secondly, it imports ſuch an affection, as onely reſts vpon the wife, not a wandring luſt, for many eſteeme any woman

alike to them in filthy luſt.  Thirdly, this word imports an affection of loue, that is, holy and chaſt, not a harlots loue.  If thou haue a harlots heart, thou defileſt thy ſelfe and thy wife both. Theſe are the three properties of this loue: firſt, it is a deepe loue in the heart. Secondly, it muſt reſt only on thy wife. And thirdly, it muſt be chaſt. Epheſ. 5. 25. Paul ſaith, Huſbands loue your wiues. How ſhall ye loue them? He ſaith, As Christ loued his Church: Albeit he cannot attaine to the greatneſſe and quantitie of this loue: yet keepe the qualitie of it. How loues Chriſt the Church? Vnſpeakably. O the chaſtnes of the loue of Chriſt, that he keepes to his Church! He loues his owne Church, and he loues not an harlot Idolater. She is ſet vp before him as a chaſt virgin. Then take thy example of thy ſpouſe Chriſt. Looke how he loues thee, after the ſame manner loue thou thy wife. Whom ſhould they loue? Their owne proper wiues, no ſtrange woman; caſt not your fanſie vpon them. Ye know we are ſet to loue that, that properly pertaines to vs; but I ſay to you who are Husbands, ye haue not ſuch a property to any thing as to your wiues; yea your heritage, though you had a kingdome, is not ſo properly yours, as they are. And therefore ſeeing it is naturall to euery man to loue his owne, though it were ſo abiect, why ſhouldeſt thou not loue that, that is moſt proper to thee? I ſee a kind of meeting here: before he made men proper to their wiues; now he makes the wiues proper to the husbands: ſo that the man may ſay, thou art my proper portion: there is not ſuch a property in ſubſtance and riches, as this. For the riches cannot ſay to the man, thou art my propertie. Indeede there are many niggard Couetouſnes. hearted bodies, and to theſe men their goods may ſay; thou art mine as well as I am thine. O woe is thee, thou forgetteſt thy dutie! For what coniunction can there be betwixt thee and thy goods? There is not a coniunction like this betwixt man and woman; ſo that either is others property: and euery one of them may ſay to others, thou art my propertie. There is no ſuch coniunction except that coniunction which is betwixt the head and the bodie, and that coniunction that is betweene Chriſt and his Church, which is greater then both the other coniunctions. This coniunction betweene Chriſt and his

Church, is the greateſt coniunction that is; for all other coniunctions will ſeuer, but this betwixt Chriſt and his Church ſeuers neuer. A man may be ſeparated from his wife by adultery or death, a man may haue his head chopt off him, and a man may loſe his goods; but once conioyned with Chriſt, thou ſhalt neuer be ſeuered from him, nor he from thee: What ſhall ſeparate vs, ſaith Paul, from the loue of Christ, Rom. 8. 35. The ſecond coniunction is of the head with the body: the third Our coniunction with Chriſt inſeparable coniunction is of the man with the wife: euery one of theſe may claime other, as their proper goods; ſo ſtreight is the knot and bond that bindes them vp together.
            Now we haue in the end of the verſe the thing forbidden, and it is that that is contrarie to loue, to wit, bitternes. Loue and ſweetnes is commended: bitternes, rigorouſnes and crueltie is forbidden. There are many husbands, who are tyrants ouer their wiues; that ſhould not be: they ought not to vſe tyrannie though it were ouer a dog or cat. Brethren, we know all this, that there is nothing more naturall to man, then the deſire and ſeeking of preferment: and the pooreſt body would be a King. And yet notwithſtanding this ſinfull body cannot beare it, it cannot vſe it: the ſinfull man cannot beare preferment though it were but ouer his owne wife; the father ouer the child; the maſter ouer the ſeruant: if ye ſet him ouer beaſts, dogs and ſheepe, make him a ſheepe keeper, he ſhall vtter the bitternes of his heart, for giue him ouer to his owne nature, he ſhall degenerate into tyrannie. This is the tyrannie of man. Note well. What is the cauſe of all this? The higher he be lifted vp aboue others, the higher is his foule affection lifted vp aboue himſelfe: ſo the honour of this world doth no good to men, except the wicked affection be ſanctified by the ſpirit of Chriſt. Woe be to thee that art a King, if thy affection be not ſanctified! Wo be to thee that art a husband, if thy affection be not ſanctified in thy preferment! And therfore the ſpirit of God inioynes that they ſeeke not preferment, who haue not gotten their affection ſanctified. Thou that haſt not gotten a ſanctified affection, ſeeke not to be a King, ſeeke not to be a husband, ſeeke not to be a Parent, ſeeke not to raigne ouer a country, to be a Peere in a Land, a Magiſtrate; for thou ſhalt abuſe it to thy

damnation. Why ſhould men, whom the Lord hath caſt downe, be raiſed vp and put in preferment? ſhame ſhall betide them, who ſeeke to ſet them vp againe, if they repent not. Wilt thou ſet vp a man with a heart like a Viper? O ſie on thee, thou ſhalt feele the dint of this iniquitie. Yet to come againe to the word, Bitternes: looke that your loue turne not into gall. Bitternes. There be many, who haue bin louing in the beginning, but incontinent they haue turned their loue to gall. This bitternes muſt either be in the hart, or els in the behauiour: if it be in the hart, then fare ye well, he becomes a monſter to his wife. Is it lawful for a man to ſtrike his own fleſh? wil not euery one that The huſband not to ſmite his own wife. heares or ſees that, ſay; the man is mad, and worſe then a brute beaſt? For this doing comes of the bitternes of the heart againſt the wife, and thou ſheweſt that thy heart is alienated from her, when that thou ſets not by what becomes of her, and ſo thou art a monſter to her without affection either to loue thy wife or care for her. Bitternes in the behauiour, is either in word or deede. Indeede it is true, this bitternes in the behauiour it wil oftentimes proceed of the infirmities, that are in you women: therefore you ſhould take heed to your infirmities, and ſtir not vp that gall. But yet there is an euil ground in thee, who art the man. This bitternes of thine in behauiour proceedes of wanting of wit. It would beſeeme many a man better to be a wife, then a man. Who will count of them that cannot beare the infirmities of women, but they are degenerate men? Wiſedome and diſcretion requires that they bee borne withall. Beares not Chriſt with thy infirmities? Hath he euer broken the bruſed reede? Wilt thou not follow him, and beare with the infirmities of them, who are conioyned with thee? Yet this is not ſo ſpoken, that we ſhould let you go away altogether, but wee ſhould ſo beare with them, that wee ſhould goe about to amend them in lenitie, as Ieſus Chriſt beares with his ſpouſe the Church. And this is that honour Peter ſpeakes of in his firſt Epiſtle chap. 3. verſ. 7. giuing honour vnto your wiues as the weaker veſſels. I will not inſiſt in this. In al this dutie of the wife to the husband, and the husband to the wife, I ſee not a better way to diſcharge it, then to haue thine eye vpon Chriſt and his Church: Follow Ieſus, as he behaued

himſelfe to his Church; ſo behaue thy ſelfe to thy wife. Therefore as euer thou wouldeſt bee partaker with Ieſus and his Church, conforme thy ſelfe to Chriſt and his Church: for if thou wilt not doe this, thou knoweſt not Chriſt nor his Church. Thou bitter husband, thou knoweſt not Chriſt nor his Church. Thou, who art an euill wife, knowes not Chriſt: thou keepeſt not faith to Ieſus Chriſt; and not doing that, how canſt thou be ſafe? So brethren, and ſiſters be wiſe: the Lord giue the man wiſedome, the Lord giue the woman wiſedome: for there is an account that abides euery one of them. Therefore liue in feare, and mutuall dutie euery one to another, that yee may bee glorified with Chriſt your head and ſpouſe. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all praiſe and honour,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE XXXIII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 20. 21.
               
                  20 Children, obey your parents in all things: for that is well pleaſing vnto the Lord.
                  
                  21 Fathers, prouoke not your children to anger, leaſt they be diſcouraged.
                  
               
            
            
               HAuing ended the generall exhortation concerning all eſtates of men indifferently; the laſt day, as the Lord gaue grace, wee entred into the ſpeciall, concerning Three ſtates in a familie. euery eſtate of men. There are three eſtates in a familie. The firſt is the husband and the wife. The ſecond eſtate is

the parents and the children. The third eſtate is the maſter and the ſeruants. The laſt day we ſpake of the firſt eſtate concerning husbands and wiues; now this day we haue to ſpeake of the ſecond eſtate, to wit, of parents and children. The words are few, yet as the Lord giues grace we ſhall weigh euery one, and only ſhall ſet downe the doctrine properly, as the words ſhall affoord.
            The exhortation begins at the children the inferiour ranke, as before it began at the wife. I ſhewed you the laſt day the cauſe: The eſtate of the inferiour is moſt hard to be borne withall: therefore firſt hee directs his ſpeech to the inferiour eſtate, to inſtruct them that willingly they take vpon them that burthen, which otherwiſe they muſt beare, or els diſpleaſe God. To come to the words. Children obey your parents. The word childe, in it owne language is common both to the manchild, and to the womanchilde; both are comprehended indifferently vnder the name of children; and therefore this precept is directed indifferently to both. The word, if ye would marke the meaning of it, ſignifieth him or her, who are begotten What the word children meaneth. and borne of thoſe which are called parents: yet in the ſecond place it is directed to euery one which beares the name of ſonnes and daughters, whether they be daughters in law, or ſonnes in law. Ruth as ye reade, daughter in law to Naomi, ſhe tooke this precept to her: ſhe would not depart from her good mother; and as you reade, ſhe promiſed obedience to her in all things. Experience teacheth vs this day, that there bee few like theſe two. Then briefly this much for them, to whom this precept is directed. The next thing to be marked in the words, is the dutie commaunded, which is this.
            
               Children obey: this is the duty. This duty of obediēce, is a dutie yt pertaines to the whole man both ſoule and bodie; it muſt come inwardly frō the hart, and outwardly from the hand.  To let you ſee it better, in the ſoule it is reuerence, becauſe thy parents be thy ſuperiours; they be not thine equals; and therfore Obedience to parents. thou art bound to reuerence thy parents, as thy ſuperiours: for reuerence is nothing els, but an acknowledging of thy ſuperiours.   Next in the hart & ſoule it is loue, becauſe thou art boūd to thy parents by nature, and the band wherewith God hath

bound thee to thy parents, is loue. Thou takeſt ſubſtance and being of thy parents, al that thou haſt in this world vnder God thou haſt it of thy parents: therefore the bond of nature binds thee to thy parents, to loue them.  Thirdly, this obedience in  the ſoule and heart, is thankfulnes for the manifold benefits receiued, firſt by thy parents: thou art not the beginner of liberalitie, but thy parents they begin to be beneficiall to thee, and therefore thou art bound to be thankfull vnto them. And this much for the duties in the ſoule.
            To come to the obedience in the bodie, which is nothing els, but an outward teſtification of all thoſe things that are in Externall obedience to parents. thy ſoule, it ſtands  firſt in a reuerent ſpeech.  Secondly, in obeying the commaund of thy parents.  And thirdly, in compenſation  of the benefits receiued of thy parents. I reade in the  firſt Epiſtle to Timothie chap. 5. verſ. 4. he makes mention eſpecially  of the laſt, Let children (ſaith he) learne to ſhew godlineſſe firſt toward their owne familie, beginning at their father & their mother. If thou be not godly to them, thou canſt not be godly to another. And againe, verſ. 3. Thou that wilt not prouide for thy familie, art worſe then an Infidell. Thou that wilt not prouide for thy father and mother, thou haſt no faith. Well, ye who are children, learne of Ioſeph, what hee did to his father and brethren. It is ſaid he fed them, he fed his old father, and put meate in his mouth: but thou wilt wring it out of their mouth, if they haue but one mouthfull. Yea if thou haue wealth and they be in pouertie, thou wilt not know them, nor help them, but wilt begin to be aſhamed af them. Thou wilt not let them come within thy doores, and if they come at any time to thine houſe to be eaſed, thou accounts ſo lightly of them that thou canſt not abide their preſence at thy boord, or in thy hall, but away with them to the chimney corner. O villaine! thou art vnworthie to be called a ſonne, and as an vnthankfull bodie thou ſhalt finde thy reward to be worſe then the reward of the worſt Infidell in the world. Know ye not this to be true? yea ſome children when they come to yeares, will wring all from their parents, and ſend them to beg their meate. O Scotland, thou haſt many ſuch children within thee! but woe, yea double and treble woe be vpon them for euer! Then the dutie

commaunded, is obedience, and this commaundement lets vs ſee how naturally children are inclined to diſobedience. God Children naturally inclined to diſobediēce bound thee in the creation to obedience, and now the world is ſo degenerate, that there is nothing to be found in children for the moſt part but contempt, and diſobedience euery way. O the malicious lowne will not be ſo deſpitefull to any, as to his parents! So this commaundement lets thee ſee the ſtubborne nature of children againſt their parents. O but if this commandement enforce thee not to doe thy dutie to thy parents, thou ſhalt be reſerued in bonds to thine eternall damnation.
            But to goe forward, to whom ſhould this obedience bee ſhewed? Obey (ſaith he) Whom? not euery one, but thy parents, him and her that haue begotten thee and borne thee, of whom thou haſt thy being, and all that thou haſt vnder God: that is the force of the word. So in the word there lurkes a forcible argument from nature. Vnnaturall bodie, will not nature moue thee? art thou vnnaturall? thou art vngodly to God. For thou who breakeſt the bond of nature, thou breakeſt the bond of pietie. So the argument is from nature. It is wonderfull to ſee how Ethnicks children moued by the light of nature, haue obeyed their parents. There was a law made among the Athenians, that the child ſhould feede the old parent, or els be bound in fetters ſo long as hee liued. If this law were in Scotland, I thinke there ſhould bee many children bound in fetters; yea ſo many as there could be fetters made for them. Well, wilt thou goe to the beaſts? they may ſhame thee: thou maiſt reade of their gratitude to their parents, as for thee they may cal thee very wel mother-curſe and maliſon. If nature hath been ſo forcible in Ethnicks, Pagans, and brute beaſts; ſhall grace doe nothing in thee? Wilt thou ſay thou ſtandeſt in grace, and then wilt not doe the thing that nature requires of thee? It is ſhame to thee to ſtand vp and ſay with a braſen brow, that thou ſtands in grace, when nature hath no force in thee? Thou lieſt, thou haſt nothing to doe with grace, for that thou haſt loſt euen thy naturall affection.
            The next thing lets children ſ
                  ••
                in what thing they ſhould be obedient: apparantly the word hath no exception: Obey
               
(ſaith he) in all things. The word is either of one action, and in it is required a perfect and whole obediēce. (If thou wilt obey, if it were but in action, giue him whole obedience in doing of the ſame. Some will goe to worke with grudging and glonſhing: the lowne will goe with a backward looke, murmuring, and whiſpering, with a diuels pater noſter. This is but halfe obedience, and thou ſhalt get no thankes for it: therefore as thou wouldeſt haue thankes of God, let thy obedience be voluntarie and cheerefull, or els the Lord loues thee not.) Or this may be vnderſtood of ſundrie actions, Obey in all things whatſoeuer. You will aske; Are the children bound in euery thing to obey? Apparantly the Apoſtle meanes ſo. Brethren, there are three ſorts of actions, or things in the world:  the firſt that is Three ſorts of actions. plaine euill forbidden by God: when it comes to that action  obey him not: when the father of heauen countermaunds, obey not thine earthly father.  There is another ſort that is good,  commaunded of God: when thy father commands that, thou art bound to doe it; yea when he bids thee not, thou oughteſt to obey, becauſe God hath commaunded thee. And if God and thy father commaund, how dareſt thou diſobey?  The third ſort are indifferent actions, that are neither bidden, nor forbidden,  but may be done and not done according to circumſtances, which make them good or euill: when thy parents commaunds thee to doe them, thou oughteſt to obey, conſidering the circumſtances; yea thou art bound to obey thy parents euen in things that are grieuous to thee. The Lord hath bound thee ſo ſtreightly to thy parents, that if the Lord countermand not, thou art bound to obey him, I ſay, euen in that that is grieuous vnto thee. And briefly theſe are the things, in the which obedience is to be done to earthly parents.
            Now followes the argument to moue them to this obedience, for (ſaith he) that is well pleaſing to the Lord; he likes well of it: for in obeying them thou pleaſeſt not ſo much them, as the Lord Ieſus who lookes vpon the inward diſpoſition of the heart. Well are they that can pleaſe the Lord: ſet thy heart to pleaſe him; for there is no ioy, but when the heart thinkes True ioy. that the thing that it doth, pleaſeth God. Wherefore is it pleaſing to him? There is nothing pleaſing to him but that that is

iuſt: the iuſt Lord likes nothing but that that is iuſt. Therefore Epheſ. chap. 6. verſ. 1. hee ſaid, Children obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right, or iust. Wherefore is it iuſt? becauſe hee hath ſaid it is according to a law, and this is the law, Honour thy father and thy mother. But the word hath further. It is well pleaſing, that is, exceeding pleaſing and acceptable in an high degree. The Lord hath declared this, that this obedience to the parents is not only pleaſing, but in a high ſort it likes him wel. Looke in the order of the Commandements, begins he not in the ſecond table at this Commaundement? Honour thy father and mother, to ſerue them, that is the next commaundement of ſeruice he commaunds to be done; after him thou art bounden to thy earthly father; and more he hath declared, that it is pleaſing by that promiſe that is added to that commaundement, That thy daies may be long in the land &c. So this promiſe lets thee ſee that there is not a dutie vnder his owne worſhip more acceptable to him, then this dutie to parents is, and if To pleaſe parents is a dutie very acceptable vnto God. thou omit that dutie and diſhonour thy parents, although thou ſhouldeſt giue to others all thy goods, thou ſhalt neuer doe any thing pleaſing vnto the Lord. Well, you that are diſobedient to parēts, the Lord ſhall lay to your charge the breach of the whole law. This argument hath an higher ground: before it moue children to doe this dutie; firſt of all they muſt know the Lord Ieſus, they muſt ſtudie to pleaſe him; and then knowing him, and ſtudying to pleaſe him, out of queſtion they will be obedient to their parents. Becauſe my heart is ſet to pleaſe the Lord, therefore I will obey my father. And therefore you that are parents, take your leſſon; As you would haue your children obey you for the Lords ſake, ſo traine them vp in the Lord. Tell them what the Lord is, and what hee hath done for them, and what they are indebted to the Lord. If you Education. omit this, to inſtruct them, of the iuſt iudgement of God it may come to paſſe, that thine owne childe may be thy greateſt enemie. So woe to thee that wilt not let thy ſonne know the Lord Ieſus. Now you ſee this argument. What if the child obey? he hath here a faire offer, if you obey you doe that is acceptable to God; as by the contrarie, if thou diſobey, thou diſpleaſeſt not ſo much thy earthly father, as thou diſpleaſeſt

God. And thinkeſt thou that thou ſhalt doe that vnpuniſhed? Thy earthly parents cannot get an amends of thee, but thou canſt not paſſe away and eſchue Gods iudgements. Reade you not of the puniſhment threatned, Exod. 21? It is commaunded that the diſobedient to parents ſhould bee ſtoned to death. Deut. 27. Among the reſt of the curſes, he that curſeth his parents hath a ſpeciall curſe: and what is this curſe? is this curſe, in hell euerlaſting damnation? Is there no more? Prou. 30. verſ. 17. The eye that mockes the father (as there be many lownes that mocke their father) and deſpiſeth the inſtruction of his mother, let the Rauens of the valley picke it out, and the young Eagles eate it. Would you haue an example? Reade of Cham, the Scripture tels you what an eternall curſe he and his poſteritie got. Reade you not of the curſe of Abſolon and of Abimelech, Iudg. 9. he ſlew all the lawfull ſonnes of Gedeon, but the Lord reuenged it. We haue no neede to goe to farre examples; ſee we not daily examples of the iudgements of God vpon diſobedient children to their parents? Thus farre for the dutie of Children.
            Now followeth the dutie of the parents. Fathers (ſaith the Apoſtle) prouoke not your children to anger, the reaſon; leaſt they be diſcouraged. This commaundement to parents lets you ſee, euen as the children may faile in doing of their dutie to their Duties of parents to children. parents; ſo parents may faile in their dutie to their children: albeit the failing of the one be not ſo common, as the other: for the loue of the father is more entire to the child, then is the loue of the child to the father: and therefore his failing wil not be ſo oft, nor yet ſo great. And the parent that is outragious, he ſheweth himſelfe very vnnaturall: for his loue ſhould be greater, then the offence of the childe. Yet now adaies many are vnnaturall parents, for nature is greatly broken and almoſt Naturall affection much decayed. taken quite away: and therefore the end of the world is at hand; and I am ſure there is not ſo great hatred among the Ethnicks, as there is among parents and children this day in Scotland.
            But to come to the words: he ſpeaks to the fathers eſpecially, and not to the mothers, there is ſome cauſe of this. Fathers (ſaith he) prouoke not &c. This is becauſe this vice of bitternes,

and rigorouſnes in dealing with the childe in wrath, is found with the men chiefly; he will handle his childe ſo bitterly, as if he were a dog: as for the mothers they incline to a more intire loue to their childe; and if they faile, they faile in ouermuch bearing with them. Fathers (ſaith he) prouoke them not to wrath, as if he would ſay, they will be wrath, if you put ouer ſore to them: for why? thou haſt begotten thy childe like to thy ſelfe of a corrupt affection, and therefore blame them not if they be angrie at thee, if thou vrge them ouer much. And it is true, many euill diſpoſed parents will haue euill diſpoſed children; the canker that is in the child, is drawne out of thee: and therfore thou ſhouldeſt ſeeke to amend it. There be many waies to prouoke them to wrath: Firſt, when thou commaundeſt Many waies to prouoke children. them to doe that that is vngodly (as there are many that doe thus.) Secondly, when thou art outragious and deſpitefull, and wilt miſcall thy childe. Thirdly, when thou beginneſt to ſtrike without rime or reaſon. Theſe are the three waies wherby chiefly they are prouoked to wrath, as 1. Sam. 20. 30. Saul breakes off with deſpitefull talke to Ionathan, and calles him a harlots ſonne (wilt thou call thy ſonne whores ſonne? then thou haſt a harlot to thy wife) Then he ſaid, goe get me Dauid, for he ſhall ſurely die: he commaunded him to doe a thing vngodly: it greatly grieued him, that he was ſo miſcalled of his father, as alſo that his father commaunded him a thing vnlawfull. Therefore ye who are parents be not like Saul; abuſe not your children as Saul did Ionathan: for no queſtion, this abuſing of Ionathan was one part of his enditement: God will not let it ſlip vnpuniſhed: therefore haue thine eye to the Lord, that thou maiſt ſee what is pleaſing and diſpleaſing vnto him. O it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the Lord! therfore bleſſed art thou that ſtudieſt to pleaſe the Lord, for thou ſhalt raigne with him in glorie. Prouoke not to anger (ſaith he) Whom? who but your owne children, and bowels: thou art very vnnaturall, who wilt rent out thine owne bowels. In this word there lurkes an argument from nature, forcible in the very infidels and beaſts. See you not how beaſts will loue their owne young and handle them louingly? Well, if nature craueth this that thou ſhouldeſt not anger thine owne child,

what craueth grace? Thou doeſt challenge grace, and yet thou vttereſt no ſigne of grace in thee: if there be any in thee, thou ſhouldeſt vtter it towards thine owne. The argument is ſubioyned in the end of the verſe, Prouoke not (ſaith he) your children to anger, leaſt they be diſcouraged. Thou dulleſt them and makeſt them like dogges, by knocking and dinging ſtill on The argument. them. The argument is not taken from any mutuall miurie. I think if the Apoſtle had knowne our countrey, he would haue vſed this other argument, leaſt the childe meete thee with a double reuenge, and pluck the bit out of thy cheeke, and thou who art his mother hee ſtrike thee on the face, and ſhut thee out of doores, and cauſe thee begge thy bread, as wee ſee this day ſome doe to their father and mother. But the Apoſtle ſaw not ſuch things in his time; therefore hee takes not his argument from the euill of the ſonne to the father, but from the euil of the father to the childe. This diſcouraging is not ſo much by reaſon of the rigorous dealing, as by reaſon of the perſon that doth it. It is my father who ſhould doe me moſt good, yet it is hee who doth me moſt euill: for this generall is true, the neerer they be ioyned to vs who doe vs any wrong, our diſpleaſure is the greater. So this diſcouragement is not ſo much for the euill, as for the perſon that doth it.
            To conclude, of all others eſpecially the father by his doing is moſt effectuall either to winne or loſe his childe. There is none will loſe or winne thy child, ſo ſoone as thy ſelfe, and all becauſe of that coniunction that is betwixt thee and thy child. I reade of two waies to loſe thy child; but there is one way only Two waies to loſe a child. to winne him:  the firſt way to loſe him is this rigorous and deſpitefull dealing; thou dulleſt him and takes all ſpirit from  him.  The other way is ouermuch bearing with him, and if thou paſſe meaſure in this, thou ſhalt loſe him alſo; and it is no loue  to the child to doe ſo: for he who ſpareth the rod, hateth the child, Prou. 13. 24. Ely thought he loued his ſonnes when he corrected them not, when they offended: but I ſay to you he hated them, and was the wracke of his children vnder God: for the Lord had ſaid they ſhould die, yet hee vſed Elyes indulgencie for that purpoſe. Abſolon was loſt, becauſe hee was ouermuch borne with. As for the thing that will winne them, it is that

golden mediocritie; make not Gods of them, nor yet Diuels of them. And would you haue a warrant of this? Paul Epheſ. 6. verſ. 4. ſaith, Parents bring them vp: and how? by filling their bellies? No, no: but with instruction; inſtruct them in the true forme of religion, in the rudiments of the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt, tell them of God from the time they can begin to Catechiſing of children how ſoone. babble. See if you can get the holy ſpirit to poſſeſſe them, that they may feare God. This is that golden mediocritie, and if thou miſſe this way, all other waies ſhall be to loſe thine owne child. Goe get great heritages to him, and if thou bring him not vp to know God, thou doeſt nothing els but heape vp coales of fire to deſtroy him: and as oft as thou art in heaping vp of thy pelfe for him, thou doeſt but endeuour to burie him in deſtruction. The Lord open our eyes that wee may ſee the things that are offered to vs in Chriſt Ieſus: To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all praiſe now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXXIIII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 3. verſ. 22. 23. 24. 25. and Chap. 4. verſ. 1.
               
                  22 Seruants, be obndient vnto them that are your maſters according to the fleſh in all things, not with eye ſeruice as men pleaſers, but in ſinglenes of heart, fearing God.
                  
                  23 And what ſoeuer ye doe, doe it heartily, as to the Lord, and not vnto men,
                  
                  24 Knowing that of the Lord ye ſhall receiue the reward of the inheritance: for ye ſerue the Lord Chriſt.
                  
                  25 But he that doth wrong, ſhall receiue for the wrong that hee hath done, and there is no reſpect of perſons.
                  
                  1 Ye masters, doe vnto your ſeruants that which is iust and equall, knowing that ye alſo haue a master in heauen.
                  
               
            
            
               THeſe laſt daies (welbeloued brethren) we entred into the particular precepts & exhortations, concerning particular eſtates of men and women. And firſt we ſpake of the dutie of wiues to their husbands; and againe of the dutie of husbands to their wiues. Next we ſpake of the dutie of children to their parents; and againe of the dutie of parents to their children. Now the laſt eſtate in a familie is, the eſtate of maſters and ſeruants. Therefore wee haue to ſpeake of the dutie of the ſeruant to the maſter; and againe of the maſter to the ſeruant, becauſe there is a mutual dutie required: and they are ſo bound the one to the other, that they cannot be ſeparate.
            
               
To come then to the words: There is one precept giuen to ſeruants; Seruants (ſaith he) obey your masters. Then after hee inſiſts vpon this obedience, and deſcribes it largely. Firſt, hee ſets downe the matter of it, in what things they ſhould obey. Secondly, he comes to the forme of obedience, and deſcribeth it. Thirdly, he goes to the fountaine and ground of all dutie, which is the heart. Then laſtly, to moue ſeruants to this obedience, hee brings in two arguments. The firſt is, for that rich is the reward in heauen. And the ſecond is, for that recompence that God ſhall giue to maſters, who doe not their dutie to their ſeruants. To the words. Seruants, ſaith hee. In theſe daies when the Apoſtle directed this precept, properly here by ſeruants is vnderſtood ſuch as were in a hard eſtate, ſlaues, bought and ſold like beaſts, ouer whom the maſters had power Seruants in the Apoſtles time permitted by lawes to ſlay and ſaue them, as ouer beaſts: ſo their eſtate was hard and heauie. Secondly, you muſt vnderſtand, they were ſeruants conuerted to Chriſt, and their eſtate in that caſe was bleſſed. Thirdly, they were for the moſt part ſuch as had to their maſters Infidels, not yet conuerted to the faith of Ieſus Chriſt; and ſo were the more rigorous. For oh the crueltie of the Infidell ouer the Chriſtian! Now in reſpect of their eſtate, hearing of the libertie of the Goſpell, they miſtooke it, and began to think that Chriſt and his Goſpell came to deſtroy policie and lawes, that binds vp Common-weales. And therefore many of them began to turne grace into wantonnes, and began to leaue their maſters, thinking that the Goſpel made an equalitie of perſons, as the Anabaptiſts teach at this day. Therefore the Apoſtle perceiuing this, hee directs this precept to them, recommending obedience notwithſtanding of the Goſpell. Thou art a brother, and a ſiſter, and yet a ſeruant; therefore obey. Now howbeit properly and in the firſt roome, this precept bee directed to ſeruants that were ſlaues, bought and ſold; yet it is extended alſo to all kinde of ſeruants. It pertaines to you as well as to them.
            Come to the next: what is commaunded them? The dutie is obedience; Obey, ſaith he. Hee that is a ſeruant ſhould not rule, but obey. The whole dutie of the inferiour to the ſuperiour, is called in one word, Honour: ſo the Lord termes it. And

it hath two ſpeciall parts. Firſt, reuerence in words. The inferiour is bound to reuerence the ſuperiour in his talke. The ſecond Honour hath two parts. part is obedience in deede: he is bound not onely to reuerence him in words, but alſo to obey that hee commaunds. Both theſe muſt begin at the heart: otherwiſe thy reuerence and obedience auailes not. Now the Apoſtle eſpecially inſiſts vpon obedience. The dutie recommended to children is obedience; and the like is recommended here, becauſe of the two duties, obedience is the hardeſt. It is an eaſie thing to doe curteſie to thy maſter, to put off thy cap, and becke: but here is al the grauitie and weight of the matter, to obey. This the Apoſtle conſidering, he ſtickes moſt on it, howbeit vnder it all poynts of dutie be comprehended. This for the dutie. Now followes the perſons to whom it appertaines. Obey. Whom? not euery one, but your Lords and masters. Thoſe that God hath ſet ouer you. It pleaſes him to make thē ſuperiours, & you inferiours; therefore obey them. Yea, the name it ſelfe containes an argument to moue thee to do thy dutie: he is thy Lord and maſter, and thou ſhouldeſt thinke with thy ſelfe, he is my maſter, therefore I ſhould obey; I am bound to doe it, Let euery ſoule (ſaith Paul) be ſubiect to the ſuperiour powers. There is the commandement. The words that follow, be to the conſolation of Rom. 13. 1 the ſeruant, your master, ſaith he: but how? according to the fleſh. That is, according to things bodily, not according to the ſpirit and ſoule. This is thy comfort, that art a ſeruant; there is no maſter that is ſet ouer thy ſoule, no not a King is ſet ouer thy ſoule, to ſit on thy conſcience: for that were an abſolute power that commaunds, as well the ſoule as the bodie. Now (brethren) there is not a Lord that may commaund ſo, but onely the Lord of heauen and earth: that is, none that hath an abſolute power, but onely the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. It is ſhame to Chriſt the only Lord of the conſcience. the Monarch to take this name to him. It is a blaſphemie and a derogation to the name of Ieſus: no, there is none hath power ouer my conſcience or thine, but onely he. So if ye marke narrowly, ye may ſee that as there is one thing commaunded; ſo there is another thing forbidden them. Obey them in thy bodie, though it were to ſuffer iniurie: but as for thy ſoule and conſcience, it is forbidden thee to ſubiect it to their appetite:

if thou doe it, thou bereaues Chriſt of his right. Therefore Galath. 5. it is ſaid, be not made the ſeruants of men: if thou doe it, thou makes thy ſelfe a ſlaue to the foule appetite of fleſh and bloud. To be ſhort, there be two vices in ſeruice, and obediēce that is done to the ſuperiour whatſoeuer, which ſhould be eſchued, Two vices in ſeruice to be eſchued. and they are both in extremities; and betwixt them there is a gracious vertue. The one is, when the ſubiect refuſeth obedience in the bodie, howbeit he ſhould doe wrong to thy bodie; yea and hee ſhould hang thee, behead thee, thou muſt not refuſe obedience: there is a Lord will requite him. The other is as euill as the firſt, when thou giueſt all to him both in ſoule and bodie. Fie on thee, thou giueſt to him that which God hath forbidden. The Lord hath reſerued the ſoule to himſelfe, and yet thou wilt giue it to thy ſuperiour. Ye know the ſpeeches of the land, of what religion the Prince is, I will be of the ſame. Some of the Lords will ſay ſo, my religion depends vpon the commaundement of the Prince; but if the King did his dutie hee would ſtone thee for thy blaſphemie. Theſe are the two vices in ſeruice and obedience. Then comes the third point, the vertue, that is in mediocritie: the ſeruant muſt obey his maſter according the bodie, but not according to the ſoule. Thou art of two parts, of a bodie and of a ſoule: Giue thy maſter the bodie, but as for thy ſoule, keep it to the Lord. Though all the Angels ſhould claime right to my ſoule, I will not giue it them: it is reſerued to my Lord.
            Now to come to the ſecond part. The deſcription of this obedience, wherein the Apoſtle inſiſts, Obey them that are your masters according to the fleſh in all things, not in ſome things according to your appetite, but in all things according to their will and commaund. Then will ye ſay, ſhall wee obey them in all things vngodly, vnhoneſt, vnlawfull, and forbidden by the abſolute power of God? I anſwere, the word before immediatly, bounds your obedience; as their dominion is bounded, ſo is your obedience towards them bounded. So that if Obedience of ſeruants limited. with their commaund they would hurt thy conſcience, they paſſe their bounds, and thou art not bound to obey, but deny them obedience. For if thou wert a beggar, thou art as free in conſcience as the King: but yet ſeruants take heed, looke that

you make not the rule of your obedience your owne will, as there is ouer many this day who follow their froward will; whiſperers, that will doe things with a quiet (Pater noster). The rule of thine actions is not thy owne will, but the will of thy maſter. In ſuch ſort that if he commaund thee things grieuous, laborious, and weariſome, thou art bound to obey. The Lord himſelfe Luk. 17. 7. he ſets downe the eſtate of a ſeruant, Which of you hauing a ſeruant that hath been occupied all the day in labour and trauell, will ſay to him, come and ſit down? No, hee will not ſay that to him, but notwithſtanding all his painfull labour and weariſomnes, he will ſay, Goe make my ſupper readie, then reſt your ſelfe, there is the burden. Thinke not becauſe it is weariſome, therefore thou maiſt diſobey it; but if it ſtand with the will of the Lord, thou art bound to obey. This ſhortly for the matter, wherein ſeruants be bound to obey: now followes the manner, forme and faſhion of their obedience. Firſt he tels thee in what manner thou ſhouldeſt not obey (for it ſtands thee in no leſſe then the reward of death and life euerlaſting, if thou wert but a ſweeper of a houſe, or a caſter out of aſhes, thou haſt to doe with the Lord in doing of thy ſeruice.) The forme of not obeying is, to obey to the eye of thy maſter. This is a vice in thy ſeruice, when thou haſt not an eye lifted vp to heauen, but art ſet ſo on thy maſter, that without reſpect to the Lord, thou goeſt about to pleaſe him; yet more thou obeyeſt him with eye ſeruice, when thou ſetteſt not thy heart ſo much, as thy outward eye to pleaſe thy maſter; ſo that when he leaues thee, thou wilt goe to thy wantonnes againe, or els doe ſome euill; as there be many in Edenburgh this day, who in their maſters abſence ſit either idle, or els do euill in ſtealing of their maſters goods. Such ſeruice as this, is called eye ſeruice. The Lord compares theſe ſeruants to reprobates: what doe they? As ſoone as their maſter is abſent, they will begin to ſtrike their fellow labourers: and what more? they will ſit downe and drinke and be drunken. What will the Lord doe when he comes? he will cut them off, and giue them their portion with hypocrites, Matth. 24. 48. 49. &c. Then this is the forme forbidden, and he giues a reaſon, what manner of men are theſe eye pleaſers? they that doe ſuch ſeruice are

pleaſers of men, that is, they are flatterers, ſtudying to pleaſe men, when their heart will be farre from them. Well, he or ſhe, who ſets not their heart to pleaſe God, but ſeekes firſt of all to pleaſe the eye of man, ſhal neuer be a faithfull ſeruant to man: Falſe to God, neuer true to mā. for falſe to God, neuer true to man. But that man, who ſets his heart to pleaſe God, that is a true ſeruant; he will be as true behinde thy backe, as befor thy face: therefore thou, who wouldeſt make a choiſe of ſeruants, ſeeke them who are ſet to pleaſe God, and if thou get them with that marke, thou getteſt happie ſeruants. But on the contrarie, want he this marke, he ſhall be a curſe to thee, and the moſt thou ſhalt get of him, hee ſhall be an eye ſeruant: for if once thou ſhouldeſt turne thy backe, he ſhall be a waſter of thy goods, and an euill ſpeaker of thee behinde thy backe.
            The forme of ſeruice he craues is this, Obey with ſimplicitie and ſinglenes of heart. He oppoſeth this to eye ſeruice: for they are as contrarie, as light and darknes: and therefore where there is eye ſeruice onely, there is no ſinglenes of heart: for he that goes about to ſerue thee with eye ſeruice, hath a double and falſe heart. Againe, where the ſimplicitie of the heart is, O there is a bleſſed ſeruice; where there is ſuch ſeruice, there is fidelitie and faithfulnes; there is a faithfull ſeruant; there is no eye ſeruice: for he is not a ſeruant to thy eye onely, but a ſeruant behinde thy backe alſo. He ſhall be euery way faithfull. He laies downe the ground of this ſinceritie, fearing God. So he that feares God more then the eye of him who is his maſter, the King or Prince, that man ſhall be the faithfulleſt ſeruant. And by the contrarie, he that hath not the feare of God in his heart, that wretch will beguile thee; hee ſhall neuer bee faithfull to thee. Therefore thou, who wouldeſt haue a good ſeruant, I giue thee a token whereby thou maiſt know him. Looke if he haue the feare of God; and if hee feare God more then thee, for all thy ſcepter and ſword, thou ſhalt get a faithfull ſeruant and ſubiect. But on the contrarie, thou ſhalt receiue a curſe in thy houſe and familie, when thou ſhalt get any that wants this feare of God: for he ſhall neuer feare thee, but ſhall euer be falſe to thee. You that haue ſeruants, labour to put the feare of God in their hearts. Nay, it is no marueile

though ye haue theeues, and whores in your houſes and families, when as ye put not in this ground of ſincere ſeruice in their hearts, the feare of God.
            Now followes the fountaine of all ſeruice: What euer you do, doe it heartily. As if hee would ſay, begin not at the hand, or foote to doe thy ſeruice, but begin thou at thy heart: let it be The fountaine of good ſeruice. the ground of all thy ſeruice. All good actions ſhould begin at the heart. Therefore if thou wert but caſting out the aſhes, looke thou doe that turne with thy heart; ſo that thy heart be as well occupied as thy hand; otherwiſe it is but a counterfeit action: and I will not put a difference betwixt thy action and the action of an oxe drawing in the plough. Indeede thy maſter may be profited by thine action; yet if thy heart be not with it, thou haſt loſt thy trauell. The Lord that ſits vpon thy conſcience, ſhall turne thy action to thy damnation.
            In the next place the Apoſtle ſets downe, how they ſhall come to this way of ſeruice. It is no ſmall matter to get thy heart to ſerue thy maſter: for thou that getteſt a freedome to ſerue, thou haſt gotten thine hire in thy hand. It is a rare grace then, to get thy heart to concurre with thy action. The way is, How to ſerue heartily. 
               Doe it heartily, as to the Lord. As if hee would ſay, when ye are doing and labouring, think not with your ſelues, I am ſeruing man or woman, a creature though he were a King, in my ſeruice: but ſay, I am ſeruing my Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Then ye ſeruants, whatſoeuer thing ye doe, though it were but ſweeping the houſe, ſay, all this that I am doing, how vile ſoeuer it be, I am doing it to my Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Haue thy eye lifted vp when thy hand is downe. I ſhall tell thee how thou ſhalt get it: If thou haue a reſpect to his will, howbeit immediatly it be not done to him; yet if thou haue the knowledge that it is his will, that thou ſhouldeſt doe ſo, the Lord takes that ſeruice, rather done to himſelfe then to thy maſter. Therefore the Apoſtle ſaies, Seruing Chriſt and not men. Well is that ſeruant that can ſay, I doe this to obey thy bleſſed will: and then the Lord will ſay, I giue thee thy reward. Then the leſſon is, who is he that doth heartie ſeruice? None but the ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt. If thou be not his ſeruant, thou ſhalt neuer be a heartie ſeruant to man; nor a true ſubiect to the King. Looke then, if

your ſeruants can ſerue Chriſt; and if they cannot, it is an euill token they cannot ſerue thee: for there is not a faithfull ſeruant, but he that is the ſeruant of Chriſt, and in his ſeruice hath euer his eye to the will of Chriſt. And if thou haue ſuch a ſeruant, then thou ſhalt haue a bleſſing of that ſeruant, though it were but a kitchin laſſe. O bleſſed is that houſe, that hath a ſeruant that feares the Lord, and loues the Lord! Yea a greater bleſſing followes that ſeruant, then followes the maſter oftentimes.
            Now followe the arguments, to moue them to this holie Argumēts to moue ſeruants. ſeruice. The firſt is, from the reward that the faithfull ſeruant ſhall receiue, Knowing that of the Lord ye ſhall receiue the reward of the inheritance. The argument is taken not from an hire they get preſently, but from a promiſe of an hire. Now certainly thou art a wicked ſeruant, that wilt not doe a turne till thou get thy hire in thy hand; thou art a wicked ſeruant that wilt doe nothing till thou get heauen in thy hand: I tell thee, thou ſhalt neuer get heauen, if thou cannot depend vpon a promiſe of heauen. There is here then a promiſe of an hire, and a reward, From whom? The Apoſtle ſaies not your earthly maſters will pay you: no, but he ſaies your Lord of heauen ſhall reward you. Why ſpeakes he ſo? becauſe hee durſt not promiſe of earthly men: for all men are lyars, & they will oft times hold backe the hire of the ſeruant; but he promiſeth in the name of the Lord; for he is faithfull. And therefore ſeruants you ſhould reioyce in this: for howbeit thou want thy earthly hire, yet be faithfull in thy ſeruice, and thou ſhalt not want thy hire. What a reward is this? what ſhould hee haue? his hire in his hand, and ſo fare yee well? Indeede this is the faſhion of the world; but this reward the Apoſtle ſpeakes of, is a reward of an inheritance. O thou that wilt haue an eye to the Lord of heauen, hee will not reward thee like a ſeruant; thou ſhalt be a ſonne; and therefore an inheritour, Rom. 8. 17. And, Go ye (ſaies Chriſt) inherit that kingdom prepared for you, frō the foundation of the world, Matth. 25. 34. Yea, ſhall the kitchin laſſe be made a Queene, and a ſillie ſimple boy a King? Yes, the Lord will doe that, and will giue them a kingdome in heauen. So, firſt reioyce for the certaintie of your reward: next,

for the greatnes of it. It is not an hire and a bountie that is ſmal in value. Alas it may be, thou thinkeſt little of it, becauſe thou haſt it not in thy hand: but bleſſed art thou if thou cauſt waite vpon the promiſe, and beleeue it.
            Now to proue that they ſhall get this reward; firſt he takes an argument from their owne knowledge, Knowing. Know ye not? I appeale to your owne conſcience, if there be not a reward laid vp for thee, if thou ſerue faithfully: tels not thy conſcience thee this? I will ſerue, for I looke for a kingdome. It is not this ſmall hire. No, that Lord whom I haue ſerued from morning to night, hee will giue me a kingdome. Brethren, it is a thing impoſſible, that faith can beguile a man: hope then, I promiſe thee thy hope ſhall not beguile thee; yea hope for things thou haſt not ſeene, and thou ſhalt get them. It is impoſſible Note well. that thy faith and hope can be diſappointed. And lay this ground, thou haſt to doe with a faithfull Lord, that can not beguile thee. So cloſe thy eyes vpon all other things, and reſt in hope on Chriſt, and thou ſhalt ſee a ioyfull end. Bleſſed is that ſoule that reſteth in hope, for it ſhall receiue glorie.
            The ſecond argument is from the ſeruice done to Chriſt: Ye ſerue the Lord. Fie on thee that wilt begin to ſerue another maſter, and neglect thy dutie to him. So the argument is, becauſe thou ſerueſt the Lord Ieſus Chriſt; therefore thou muſt haue a reward of him: hee will giue thee an heritage, becauſe his hand, is the hand of an infinit God. What are the heritages on the earth? he thinkes it ouer little to giue them to thee: therefore hee will giue thee the kingdome of heauen. Then marke: neuer man ſerued Chriſt for nought. It is impoſſible, that he who ſerues Chriſt, can want a reward: thou who cauſt ſerue Chriſt with many croſſes, it is the very way to bring thee to a kingdome. So, bleſſed is that feruant, that ſerues Chriſt Ieſus: if thou get not this benefit to be a ſeruant in his houſe, though it were to be but a porter (for the vileſt ſeruant that ſerues Chriſt ſhall get a hire, euen a kingdome) woe ſhall be to thee. Therefore ſeeing now is the time to ſerue him, ſhew your ſelues faithfull ſeruants to Ieſus; for when all vantage failes thee, the Lord Ieſus will be thine aduantage: and therefore ſerue the Lord, and thou ſhalt not want a reward. And

thou muſt not thinke that this rewarde comes vnto thee through merit: it comes of grace; for when thou haſt done all that is commaunded thee, ſay I am an vnprofitable ſeruant, Luk. 17. 10. And ſo fie on the Papiſts that thinke their ſeruice ſhall merit ſuch an hire, as is the inheritance of heauen. This reward comes of grace onely, and of his faithfulnes that hath promiſed: otherwiſe hell would be thy reward. Therfore thou who lookes for a reward of thy ſeruice, thinke thou art ſeruing Chriſt: thinke againe, thou ſhalt get a reward; but beware of preſumption, to thinke this turne ſhall merit heauen. No, but the thing I doe ſhall not be the cauſe of my ſaluation; no, I am but an vnprofitable ſeruant, and in the meane time looke for a reward of mercie and grace, becauſe he is a faithful Lord that hath promiſed thee a reward; and in the end thou ſhalt get a kingdome purchaſed by the bloud of the Lord Ieſus.
            Now I come to the ſecond argument, to moue ſeruants to The ſecond argument. doe their dutie, contained in the laſt verſes of this chapter. Theſe ſeruants in old time were in hard condition: for they were ſlaues, liuing to the appetites of men, bought, ſold, beaten, and ſlame, at their pleaſure: for looke what power men had ouer beaſts, the like had they ouer their ſeruants. Therefore theſe ſeruants might haue ſaid, there is a faire reward abiding vs; but yet our preſent eſtate is intolerable; wee are intreated as beaſts, and we ſuſtaine great iniurie: he meetes with this, and in a word promiſeth a iuſt amends, and reuenge of the wrong done to them. Let no man abuſe his power ouer poore ones, what euer wrong is done to them, it ſhall be repayed. So the leſſon pertaining to the inferiour, and oppreſt by the mightie ones in this world, Maſters and Lords eſpecially, is this. Art thou a ſeruant? doeſt thou well? ſerueſt thou the Lord Ieſus Chriſt in thy ſeruice? is thine eye ſet to pleaſe him? thou ſhalt receiue the reward of thy weldoing, & that of an inheritance in heauen. In well doing ſuffereſt thou? getteſt thou wrong? art thou oppreſt roughly? handled with crueltie and ſeueritie? The Apoſtle anſwers, thou ſhalt haue an aſſiſement beſide the reward. What wouldeſt thou haue? The Lord ſhall oppreſſe them that oppreſſe thee. This generally appertaines

to all eſtates. Doeſt thou well? Thy reward ſhall be an eternal heritage. In well doing ſuffereſt thou wrong? The Lord promiſeth thee an aſſiſement and an acquittance of them that doe thee wrong. Brethren, it is marueilous to ſee the care and regard the Lord hath to his owne, if they were neuer ſo poore wormes, that the great folke will not vouchſafe themſelues once to looke to, it would ſeeme enough that a poore ſeruant ſhould get ſuch an heritage, howbeit his iniuries hee ſuffered were neuer reuenged. Who would thinke otherwiſe? O but the Apoſtle anſwers not after this manner! It may ſuffice, that you ſhall get a faire reward for the ſeruice ye doe: as for the reſt, what matters it? No, but hee ſaith in effect; as for the wrong done to you, it ſhal be auenged. So the Lord is not content to giue them a reward; but for the wrong they ſuffer, the Lord will be auenged on them that wrongs them, if they were the greateſt Monarchs in the world. Howbeit thou wouldeſt forgiue them, as Steuen did, Act. 7. and ſay, Lord lay not this to their charge; yet the Lords iuſtice will not ſuffer thee vnreuenged: the Lord ſhal take them that oppreſſe thee, and throw them into hell, if they continue impenitent: yea it comes to paſſe oft times, that oppreſſors of the poore and Church, before they goe out of the world, that the Lord in the ſight of the poore and oppreſſed, takes them and rents and riues them in ſuch ſort, as they are compelled to pitie them. O then, how terrible is the iudgement that abides oppreſſors and abuſers of their ſeruants whatſoeuer! Well then, there are two things, well doing, and ſuffering of wrong: well doing ſhall receiue an inheritance; ſuffering ſhall receiue a reuenge, & vengeance ſhall come vpon the oppreſſour. So let none be wearie in well doing in this world, nor be impatient in ſuffering; for it is all but for a moment we doe and ſuffer, in reſpect of that eternitie. The ſecond thing to bee marked is this: Who is this that ſhall reuenge the cauſe of the poore ſeruants? Hee ſaies not, your maſters haue maſters aboue them (as no doubt they had: for all ſuperiours haue Magiſtrates aboue them to take order with them if they doe wrong) alas if hee had anſwered ſo, it had been little comfort to them, as they found by experience: for they accepted of the perſons of men, they accounted of

the maſter, & not of the ſeruant, & they permitted thē by their lawes to abuſe their ſeruants. The Apoſtle knew how ſlacke the Iuſtices are to reuenge the cauſe of ſeruants: and therefore he promiſeth no amends at their hands, but at the hands of the Lord. So now ſpeaking of reuenge, he promiſeth it not to come of the Magiſtrate, but from the Lord: for hee knew the Lord would not beguile him. Ye may then ſee he hath truſted much to God, and depending on him, he promiſeth much in his name. What wouldeſt thou haue? a reward, a reuenge? the Apoſtle promiſeth both to thee, but at the Lords hand. The leſſon then is: the man that knowes God well, and is well acquainted with his mercie, with his iuſtice, with his power, and his wiſedom; it is wonderful what he will promiſe in his name, fleſh and bloud ſcarſely will beleeue it. Note.Againe, a poore bodie  and one oppreſt, one that knowes not this, when he heares of this, it is wonderfull, how he will ſwallow vp theſe promiſes: nay, thou neuer didſt eate meate with ſuch pleaſure, as this poore one will ſwallow them vp. And I ſay, a Paſtor ſhould not promiſe ought of God, except he knew him: & thou that art an hearer, if thou know him in his power, iuſtice, and the reſt, in deſpite of all the world thy heart will reſt on him. Therefore know him in Ieſus Chriſt: and pray night and day, O Lord, I lie in darknes, let me ſee thee in Ieſus Chriſt, and the glorie that is in thee, that my ſoule may reſt in thee. Now woe is that ſoule, that knowes not God in Ieſus Chriſt. Ye ſhall not abide here euer: therfore ſeeke to know this God with whom ye muſt liue foreuer. He giues the reaſon why God ſhould reuenge their cauſe, and wrong done againſt them, by pointing out the nature of God: He is a Iudge; not like the Iudges of this world. They reſpect the perſons of men; this is the corruption With God there is no reſpect of perſons▪
                of nature: but as for this Iudge, he reſpects no perſon; he will not looke to thee who art a King, more then to the begger. When thou appeareſt before him, come on with robe royall, he will not regard thee no more, then if thou appearedſt in a beggers cloake. Therefore looke to him now, as thou wouldeſt ſee him, when thou ſhalt appeare before his iudgement. And there is none of vs, but euen now we are before his tribunall; howbeit wee ſee it not. There is none of

theſe outward conditions or degrees (wee are all alike by nature) but wee get ſundrie degrees, hee of a King, and hee of a Lord (and ſo foorth) yet none of theſe outward qualities will be accepted before the Lord: no not the outward calling of a Chriſtian, if thou haue no more. A man may thinke this is a hard matter, for all to ſtand before his tribunall without theſe outward qualities. A King may ſay, ſhall not my kingdome ſtand me in ſteed when I come before that tribunall? And the Earle may ſay, ſhal not my Earldome helpe me when I come before God? And the rich man may ſay; ſhall not my riches helpe me? wherewith ſhall I cloathe me if I cloathe me not with theſe? Now I anſwere, indeed euery man hath this in his mouth, I cannot come naked before God: Indeede thou muſt not ſtand naked, thy ſhame muſt be hid, thou muſt haue a garment on thee; thou muſt be arayed, or els the wrath of the Iudge will deuoure thee. Now what a garment ſhall I get? It muſt bee a bloudie garment (no ſiluer, gold or precious ſtones) couering thee from the crowne of thy head to the ſole of thy foote: yea thou muſt be died with bloud. The high prieſt durſt not enter into the Sanctuary (for his life) without bloud: ſo on paine of thy life ſee that thou enter not into the preſence of God without bloud. Reade the Epiſtle to the Hebrues, ye ſhall finde this, that the high Prieſt of old durſt neuer enter into the Sanctuary, except firſt he had bin ſprinkled with bloud; and this was the bloud of Bullocks, the figure of Ieſus Chriſt. So except thou appeare died ouer with the bloud of Ieſus, no ſtanding for thee before God his tribunall. If ye would then haue a garment, ſeeke this garment; neuer reſt till thou get it. And if thou appeare in this garment, thou haſt this aduantage, howbeit thou be full of ſpots, the Lord hath no eye to thy ſinne; but accepts of thee in that bloudy raiment, and forgets all thy ſin, and thy actions are accepted in that bloud of Ieſus. But alas, the want of the knowledge of ſinne; this dead conſcience that lets vs not feele the weight and burthen A dead conſcience. of ſinne, is the cauſe why wee account not of this bloud of Ieſus.
            Now brethren, there is a place in the ſixt chapter to the Epheſians I would compare with this place, recommending the

dutie of maſters in the ninth verſe, he vſeth the ſame argument that is here: he vſeth it there as a terrible argument to the oppreſſors; but heere he brings it in as a comfort to the oppreſſed. Then ſhal an argument both be comfortable and terrible? Yes. Then marke the leſſon: That, that is in God terrible to the proud and oppreſſors in the world, the ſame thing to the poore oppreſſed ones that are Gods, it is ſo ſweete and comfortable, as no tongue can tell. The firie wrath of God, that will terrifie the Kings of the world, and which they are not able to looke on, will be ſo comfortable, as no tongue can tell to the poore ſillie bodie, that hee will creepe in vnder it, and lurke there: yea hee will ſeeke to the wrath of God to ſaue him, from the wrath of the tyrants of the world. So there is nothing in God but is comfortable to his children: as by the contrarie there is nothing in him, but the wicked abhorre it: yea euen his mercie; yea they would runne if it were foorth of the world to be out of his ſight, but they ſhall not eſcape Iob. 21. 22 his curſe. So then acquaint you with God, and cloathe you with that garment, that he may be comfortable euery way to you. This much for the dutie of ſeruants.
            Now we come to the dutie of maſters, which is ſet downe in 
                  Here begins the fourth chapter verſ. 1. the beginning of the fourth chapter, Ye masters (ſaith he) doe vnto your ſeruants that which is iust and equall. There is the precept. The thing he requires is doing; the word in the originall is giuing: Giue them that which is iuſt; as if hee would ſay, Maſters, when ye haue commaunded, and they haue obeyed, meete them with a dutie: giue them ſomething. This dutie is grounded partly on their poore eſtate; they labour and wearie themſelues for their hire; ſo they craue giuing: and partly it is grounded vpon the hardnes of maſters; for looke how faine the one would haue, as faine would the other keepe. The poore ſeruant would draw; the maſter holds. The Apoſtle comes in and ſaith, Maſters, let your hold goe, you are ouer holding, let your hold goe. Brethren, ye heard before a faire promiſe of rewarde made to the ſeruants: now what needes the Apoſtle (conſidering that reward) exhort the maſters to giue ſomething of this world, which is nothing but dirt, in reſpect of that that is promiſed; and ſome might haue

ſaid ſo. The Apoſtle anſwers: They ſerue and obey thee here, pining themſelues in working for thee: therefore thou who art a maſter, muſt giue them their hire: for that is a iuſt thing ſo to doe; they are men like vnto thy ſelfe, and muſt be ſuſtained of theſe earthly things for their labours ſake. And ſo the leſſon is, heauen and heauenly inheritance preiudiceth not a man of his part in this world, and worldly things: and therefore thou ſcorneſt God who ſaieſt; thou haſt an inheritance, whereto ſhouldeſt thou haue my poore hire; yea thou ſhouldeſt be rather moued to part thy pelfe to him; if thou knew him to be an inheritour of heauen, giue him the rather of thy goods of the earth: for an inheritour of heauen, is an inheritour of the earth: and if thou withhold it from them, woe to thee. Well, I ſee out of this place, that the Lord hath his ſeruants here, to whom he is offering that heauenly inheritance; yet ſo, that they ſhould haue their part of this earth alſo. The Miniſter hath his part of the earth, and the Lord allowes it him; and thou who pincheſt the belly of him, the Lord ſhall pinch thee in things heauenly: the Lord will haue an eye to him; beware therefore how thou dealeſt with them in this life. Then he ſaith, Giue them. What? That that is iuſt, that is, that, that thou haſt conditioned with them. Haſt thou conditioned for ſuch a hire? keepe thy condition: yea there is more, giue them, but giue them that that is equall: what is that? Haue they ſerued thee according to the rule that I preſcribed? haue they ſerued thee in all things? then be not ſo ſtreight with them, but giue aboue thy condition made to them, be more liberall and ſtand not with them in their hire. The Apoſtle 1. Pet. 2. 18. ſets downe two properties of a maſter, Iust, and liberall. Compare this with that that went before, when he ſpake of the reward of the Lord. There, there was not ſuch a modification, but a kingdome was promiſed: but turning to the dutie of maſters, he modifies a ſtipend: hee bids not giue all his inheritance, but giue him that that is iuſt and equall, that is, a part of it, according to their labour and condition, and that liberally, without niggardlines. This imports ſomething. This lets thee ſee a great difference betwixt God and man, in rewarding. The thing that man will giue thee is but a hire, a thing

meaſured: but the thing the Lord giues, is not modefied nor meaſured to thee: it is an inheritance: and all that is gotten here, is but an earneſt peny of thy reward. Of this followeth another difference.  The thing thou getteſt of thy maſter, it is  a debt to thee; thou merits it at his hand: but when thou commeſt to God, there is no debt there; and thy doing is no merit, but a thing giuen of beneuolence. It hath pleaſed God to giue thee a reward, and ſo to giue it by no debt; goe thy way with thy merits: for if thou ſticke to them thou ſhalt get no merit, but hell: Gods giuing to thee of any thing is of fauour.
            Now to end briefly: To moue the maſters to their dutie, he addes to an argument, Knowing that yee alſo haue a Lord in the heauens. What followes on this? There is ſomething ſuppreſſed, to wit, a Lord in the heauens, who if you giue that, that is iuſt and equall, ſhall giue you that, that is iuſt and equall: hee will doe iuſtice both to you and them; he will make all oddes euen: there is no reſpect of perſons with him. This is the office of the Lord, to make all oddes euen; neuer ſoule ſhall receiue wrong at his hands, but when thou gets puniſhment, thou gets thy due, puniſhment pertaines to thee, &c. The thing that I marke is this: It is the Lord that makes maſters, and that makes this inequalitie; that giues this preferment; that raiſeth vp and caſteth downe. When Adam was created, was there any preferment? No: as the Lord doth this, ſo the eye of that great Lord is neuer off him whom he hath preferred. Hath he made thee a Lord? or hath he raiſed thee to any preferment? his eye is vpon thee, and as his eye is vpon thee, ſo he ſtands aboue thee with mercie in the one hand, and iudgement and vengeance in the other. And the greater thou be, the greater mercie and iudgement is aboue thee. No, thy hand is not ſo readie to take vengeance of thy ſeruant, as his hand is readie to reuenge the wrong. And thy vengeance and his differs in this: thine is wrong; but his is neuer wrong, but al is right he doth. But yet brethren, to weigh the words, Knowing (ſaith he) there is the firſt word. The light of knowledge is the ground of dutie. Light of knowledge ground of dutie. What can a blind bodie doe that ſees nothing, if he were a King, a Iudge and a Maſter? The light then of knowledge is

the ground of dutie; as ignorance is the ground of all euill doing. Knowing. What? That ye alſo haue. Then the maſters that did not their dutie, they miſunderſtood the thing they had, and men know not that they haue if it were but this, wee haue a God, yet they know him not. The next word is, Ye haue a Lord. It is the ignorance of the Lord, that makes men miſknow their dutie: their eye is euer beneath, the eye of the King is vpon the ſubiect, but it is a rare grace to get an eye to looke to the Lord that is aboue him, and therefore he thinkes hee hath no more adoe, but with the poore ſubiects; and ſo hee cannot doe his dutie aright. Where is this Lord? In the heauen. Thou art in the earth though thou wert a King; but thy Lord is aboue thee, thou art farre beneath him: and therefore the iudgement and ſtroke that muſt fall from him, muſt be ſad and heauie, becauſe it is farre fetcht. The furtheſt ſtroke thou canſt bring will be from thy Crowne; but what is that to the ſtroke of God, fetched from the high heauens, yea from aboue Gods ſtroke all heauens, that muſt be a very ſore ſtroke, beware of it; for if it light on thee thou ſhalt neuer riſe againe.
            The laſt word alſo makes a compariſon betwixt the Lord and the ſeruants: you haue a Lord as they haue; as they are ſeruants, ſo are ye likewiſe ſeruants, yea to a greater Lord. Yea the more high the Lord is aboue you in compariſon, ye are the lower ſeruants then the ſweeper of your houſe is: Note.if ye were a  King, the very duſt is greater in compariſon then thou art. Thou canſt not make a pickle of duſt. Would to God Kings and Lords knew this. Abraham knew it, when he ſaid, What am I but duſt and aſhes? Gen. 18. 27. Now then, to make the maſters to doe their dutie, he brings them downe vnder the feete of the Lord of heauen: hee brings thee out of thy chaire; hee hurles the King out of his throne. It teacheth vs that there will be no dutie gotten of ſuperiours, except thou bee firſt humbled vnder thy God. If thou be not humbled vnder God, thou wilt not, nor canſt not doe thy dutie. Laſtly, I ſee a different dealing in the Apoſtle, when he deales with ſeruants he Note well. doth it comfortably: but comming to Lords and Maſters, he drawes vp their head to ſee that there is a Iudge ſitting aboue them: this is another manner of dealing. So marke his diſcretion:

hauing to doe with ſundrie eſtates and perſons, he vſeth ſundrie arguments. Our folke may not abide this forme of dealing; who bad him (ſay they) threaten Lords, and Kings? ſpeake to the Commons and poore people. Well, well, let not the mouth of the Goſpell be cloſed, which ſpeakes ſometimes comfortably, and ſometimes boyſterouſly, and lets men ſee an angrie God, and all to their ſaluation. Further, I perceiue this: all Superiours would be threatned; Maſters would be threatned, Princes would be threatned; and the higher, the greater matter of threatning. For ſuch is the nature of men, they cannot beare ſuperioritie: make thee a King, thou ſhalt be a ſlaue to thy affections. So it is profitable to them to be threatned, that they may keepe them within the bounds of their dutie. And I ſay, they that would euer giue them faire words, they are but flatterers; and if they would haue them wracked or vndone, let them euer ſpeake faire to them. Therefore let the Goſpell haue it owne freedome. Binde men as yee will, but binde not the word: if thou binde the Goſpell, O the band thou ſhalt finde in that day! Let euery man be contained within a dutie to other, that we may be partakers of the eternall kingdome, where there is onely true libertie in Ieſus Chriſt. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glorie now and for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXXV. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 2. 3. 4.
               
                  2 Continue in prayer, & watch in the ſame with thanke ſgiuing;
                  
                  3 Praying for vs, that God may open vnto vs the doore of vtterance, to ſpeake the mysterie of Chriſt, wherfore I am alſo in bands,
                  
                  4 That I may vtter it as it becommeth me to ſpeake.
                  
               
            
            
               WE heard brethren the laſt day (as God gaue the grace) certaine ſpeciall precepts of manners that were directed to particular eſtates of men, as to Husbands, and Wiues; Parents, and Children; Maſters, and Seruants: now in this text, we returne to the generall exhortations, that generally concernes euery eſtate in this world, whereof the firſt ſet downe here, is concerning prayer, which is a common dutie, that euery one that is borne oweth to God in Ieſus Chriſt. To come to the words. Continue in prayer, be inſtant in Prayer a common dutie. prayer, pray continually, all is one thing. To ſpeake of prayer, becauſe it is a common place, I will not inſiſt; but only ſo farre as the text will furniſh me: for the matter is ample, and therefore I will bound me within the text. As for the cauſes and neceſſitie of praier, I need not to ſpeake much, ye know the Lord giues a commaundement that we ſhould pray, and that in the name of Ieſus Chriſt; and if there were no more but this, it is a Motiues to prayer. cauſe ſufficient to moue thee to pray: The Lord commaunds thee. But there is more, to wit, a promiſe, the Lord hath promiſed 1. Charge.
                
               2. Promiſe.
               
               
to euery one that prayeth in faith, Aske, and ye ſhall receiue, 
               Luk. 11. 
               &c. this promiſe may allure the heart of euery one to pray. There is yet more, who is he that feeles not the neceſſitie 3. Neceſſitie.
                and wants that be in euery one of vs, ſo long as we liue? who is he that hath ſo much that he needes no more? Yea though he were a Monarch, hath he ſuch ſufficiencie that he needs not to ſeeke more at God? Beſides this, there be ſuch riches, plentie, and aboundance in God, through Ieſus Chriſt, that it is able to fill vp all the wants that be in vs. Therefore the very 4. Gods riches.
                riches that be in him, ſhould driue vs to deſire a portion of that fulnes which is in him. But (brethren) to leaue this, and to come to the words. If there were no more but this, that wee are commaunded to pray, it is a ſufficient argument, to euery one to aſſure them, that there is no merit in vs. Wee deſerue nothing of God; but all that wee get we get it of free mercie and grace, and that in Ieſus Chriſt. If thou come on with a deſeruing, and a merit of thy righteouſnes, thou ſhalt neuer get mercie: I ſeclude thee from God: for what is praying, but begging? not of worthines, but of the mercie of God in Ieſus Chriſt. And when thou haſt done all, ſay, fie on my workes, and aske mercie for that bloud of Ieſus Chriſts ſake.
            In the text there be two qualities of prayer ſet downe. The firſt is an inſtātnes without tyring. The ſecond, is watchfulnes. Two things in prayer: firſt, conſtancie: ſecondly, watchfulnes. For he who praieth ſhould not be a ſleeper, but watchfull both night and day. To come then to the firſt, hee ſaith, Be instant, perſeuer, continue, all is one thing. The thing that he requires is perſeuerance, ardentnes, continuance. I neede not to inſiſt vpon the cauſes of this. Needeſt thou not continually? Findeſt thou not that there is not an houre, wherein thou wanteſt not either things heauenly or earthly? (if thou wanteſt not earthly, indeede it may be that thou knoweſt not the want of heauenly things; but woe is that ſoule that findeth not the want of heauenly food) and ſo if thou needeſt continually, why ſhould not thy prayer be continuall? for it is prayer that ſupplies that want. Moreouer, there is none of you but ye finde this by experience: God will not heare a man at the firſt; but (crie as thou wilt) he will not ſeeme to heare, he will ſeeme to haue a Luk. 18. 1. 2. 3 deafe eare, and all to this end, that thou ſhouldeſt perſeuere in

prayer. For hee hath pleaſure to trie thy patience, faith, and prayer, which is the beſt exerciſe. And ſo ſuppoſing that thou get not that that thou askeſt; yet if thou get perſeuerance, Perſeuerance. Whatſoeuer thou getteſt without prayer is but ſtolen, and an argument of wrath. thou getteſt a greater gift, then if thou hadſt that, that thou askedſt at the firſt: yea, if thou get all the world without prayer (for all is giuen in wrath) if he ſhould aduance thee to a kingdome, it is but a bait to thy damnation, except thou get a heart to pray and to continue in prayer. Of all graces, a ſpirituall grace is beſt: a little bit of regeneration is better then all the kingdomes in the earth: howbeit thou ſet light by it now; yet when thou art driuen to the vtmoſt point, or at the laſt gaſpe, thou wouldeſt giue all the world to haue a bit of it. There is the firſt qualitie in prayer, perſeuerance.
            The ſecond is watchfulnes, watching in it. Watchfulnes is feruencie in prayer, when not the bodie onely, but when the ſoule and all the affections are waking and bent to heauen: when the Spirit is inſtant with God in Ieſus Chriſt. It is oppoſed to this coldnes that ouergoes vs all. Our prayer is in ſleeping, and when we are ſleeping we are praying; and ſo comes out a cold prayer out of a cold heart, and it is oppoſed to this ſluggiſhnes and deadnes in prayer, with yawning and gaping, halfe ſleeping, and halfe waking. Alas, our neceſſitie requires another earneſtnes, it ſtands vs in the loſing of heauen, and ſhutting of vs in hell and damnation. The diuell ſtands to catch vs (if wee could ſee our danger) and when thou thinkeſt thou art moſt ſure, he is buſieſt about thee: if thou knew this, thou wouldeſt watch better, and wouldeſt ſeek more feruently to God to keepe thee. But alas all are ſo blinded, and all are ſo ſyeled vp, that the greateſt part are lead to damnatiō blindfolded. So hee that can get this watchfulnes, hath gotten a great grace, and the more thy ſpirit is intended, the neerer is A good note of watchfulnes in praier. God to thee: for it is his preſence that wakens thee. There is nothing that likes him better, then an earneſtnes in ſeeking theſe heauenly matters. The Lord graunt we may feele theſe things; for it is no ſmall matter to haue this ſenſe.
            With prayer he ioynes thankſgiuing: whereby he teacheth vs, that the preſent neceſsitie ſhould not moue vs ſo to ſeeke preſent helpe, and ſupplie at God, that in the meane time wee

forget the old benefits: in praying with teares for a new benefit, remember the old, and thanke him for it. And if thou get any new thing, yea, if it be but a mouthfull of meate, neuer forget to thanke him for it: for it is of mercie thou haſt it, and not of thy heritage, and Charters. And if thou haue it in thy poſſeſſion, yea if thou hadſt it in thy hand, and on thy boord, and in thy mouth, aske it of God and deſire a bleſsing to it: otherwiſe thou haſt it with the curſe of God. It is the ſweeteſt exerciſe in the world to be euer praying and thanking God, if it were but for a A courſe eaten cake. gray bannocke, and drinke of cold water: for that bodie that doth this, hath greater ioy, then any in the world with their moſt daintie diſhes. Againe, howbeit thou get not, quarrell not with him, but thanke him for all that: for if he giue thee feruentnes with this delay, thou getteſt a ſpeciall grace, thou ſhouldeſt thanke him for it. Paul writing to the Philippians, chap. 4. verſ. 6. 7. teacheth thee that when thou caſteſt thy care on God, thou ſhalt get peace in thy ſoule: yea ſuppoſing thou ſought for life and gat it not, yet thanke him: for thou ſhalt get ioy and peace in thy ſoule, and in it thou ſhalt end. So what wanteſt thou? why ſhouldeſt thou quarrell with him? Therefore euer pray, and giue thankes to God.
            To goe to the next verſe (for I will not inſiſt in the generals) Praying for vs alſo: That is, for me Paul. So in particular he ſets downe that perſon, for whom eſpecially he would haue them powring out their praiers, and he recommends himſelfe to their praiers. He doth this not only here, but in the Epiſtle to the Epheſians, chap. 6. 18. 19. alſo, and in other places. Paul the choſen veſſell of God, a man who had ſuch a preſence of God, that was ſo familiar with God in his prayer, whoſe calling was to pray for others, as in the firſt chapter of the ſame Epiſtle is manifeſt: this man indued with ſuch graces, yet notwithſtanding all theſe graces, hee is earneſt to deſire the Coloſſians, who were but newly entred into Chriſtianitie, who in knowledge were nothing like to him; in Familiaritie. homelines with God, were nothing like in compariſon of him, to interpoſe their prayers for him to God. Well brethren, marke in Iob. 22. 21. 
               Paul a notable example of modeſtie (for all the graces hee Modeſtie in Paſtors.
               
had) to Paſtors, though they were beautified with neuer ſo many and faire graces; yet they ſhould begge the prayers of the meaneſt in their flocke: and alſo marke in the Coloſsians an example to all people of their mutuall dutie they owe to their Paſtor, to pray for him: for as he is bound to pray for you; ſo ye are bound to pray for him, and in generall euery one to pray for another, I for thee, and thou for me. The prayer of the ſimpleſt member may helpe the head. The toe may helpe the head: that is, the pooreſt in the world indued with grace in Ieſus, may helpe the greateſt, and him who hath moſt gifts of God: for there be none, but they haue acceſſe to the throne of grace. It is true, one hath gotten a greater grace then another; yet al are made Prieſts: through the prieſthood of Chriſt, all haue that kingly prieſthood. And therefore there is none, but by vertue of that calling, they haue that acceſſe to God to come and make interceſsion for themſelues and others, though it were the pooreſt for the greateſt; yea though it were for the King, that wil not know him in the gate, yet he hath acceſſe to God, and his prayer will be auaileable: for it 1.. Pet. 2. 9 is impoſsible that that calling of the Prieſthood can be vneffectuall. So euery one of vs may benefit another, and wee are bound thus to doe by vertue of that common calling to the Prieſthood in Chriſt. Pray for me (ſaith he) alſo. This is to be noted, that he ſaith, pray together, by which he meanes the order to be obſerued in prayer. Pray firſt for your ſelfe, and then Order in prayer. remember me: forget not thy ſelfe, for I aſſure thee, hee who forgets himſelfe, wil forget his neighbour, and thou that canſt not pray for thy ſelfe, canſt not pray for me, nor no other. A prophane man or woman like Eſau, that will ſell their birthright, and care not for their ſaluation, cannot haue care of the ſaluation of another. Hee who is vnprofitable to himſelfe, to whom can he be profitable? Therefore ſeeke not the prayers of prophane perſons. Paul ſaith in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinths, chap. 9. verſ. 27. I bring my bodie into ſubiection, leſt by any meanes after that I haue preached to other, I my ſelfe ſhould be reproued. If I ſhall preach to others, and be a reprobate my ſelfe, what ſhall it auaile me? It may well doe them good, to whom I preach: but if I be a prophane man and a reprobate, my

preaching ſhall not helpe me: if I haue no care for my owne ſaluation, the care for others auailes not: and therefore craue not the prayer of that body, that cannot be carefull of himſelf. What is the ſubiect of this prayer for him? He preſcribes the ſubiect of their prayer for him: Pray for me, that the doore of vtterance may be opened vnto me: there is the ſubiect. In a word generally, the effect of the prayer they ſhould make for him is, that his mouth might be opened, to vtter the Goſpell with libertie. The greateſt grace of a Paſtor, is libertie to vtter this grace in Ieſus Chriſt: A free heart and mouth, this is the greateſt of all graces. Paul accounted not ſo much of the gift of wonders, to heale the blind, and the lame, as he did of this faire Vtterance. grace of a free mouth and heart to vtter the Goſpell. No ſuch thing writes he to them, as pray for me that I may work wonders: pray for me, that I may ſhake off theſe bands, wherein I lie: he directs no ſuch thing to them, but pray that an open doore of vtterance may be permitted to me for the vttering of the Goſpell. Of the which marke this: It was a hard thing to Paul to get libertie in bands to preach the Goſpell. It is eaſie in calmenes to preach with libertie, but when wee are bound with bands it is hard to get libertie. And the word ſhewes that Doore of vtterance. it is as hard, as to breake through a doore cloſed vp. And therfore it is not for nought that he deſires their prayers, that God would open the doore to vtter this glorious myſterie of the Goſpell. As if he would ſay, your prayers ſhould be at al times for them that are ſet ouer you; but ſpecially when they are lying in bands. Say therefore to the Lord, howbeit Lord, he be bound in priſon, yet let his heart and mouth be free to vtter thy glorious Goſpell, that word of life. Againe note, howbeit hee was in bands at Rome where hee died; yet the ſubiect of the prayer he craues, is not that I may be relieued, but that the word of God be not bound; but that my tongue may be looſed to vtter the myſterie of the Goſpell. This is a leſſon to Paſtors: if thou wert lying bound, bee more carefull of the Goſpell that is committed to thee, then of thy bands, or of thy ſelfe. Firſt, that it be kept in freedome, giue all that thou haſt ere that libertie be impaired: be bound and bound againe ere through thy default the word bee bound: when thou art in

bonds, be not ſo carefull of thy bands, though it were in fire, as of this libertie. The Martyrs remembred this well. So the preciouſeſt thing to thee in the world ſhould be the libertie of the Goſpell. This ſhould be moſt regarded by Kings and Paſtors, that the word of God be not bound. Binde what ye will, but binde not the Goſpell in paine of thy life: thou ſhalt be bound, that binds it. Pray for me alſo (ſaith he) that God might open a doore of vtterance. He ſaith not, that the Emperor ſhould open my mouth, but that God that hath committed this myſterie to me, he might giue me this libertie. The leſſon is plaine: it is onely God that opens a mans mouth to deliuer the Goſpell with freedome; and if he doe it, all the Kings of the earth will not cloſe it. When thou haſt cut out the tongue of a man, the libertie ſhall abide in the heart of him: ſo all the world cannot cloſe it. Againe, if God cloſe the mouth and take away this freedome, all the world cannot open it againe. Learne this. For if our libertie depended on men, our mouthes ſhould be ſoone cloſed, but it depends on God: ſo that when the perſon is bound, hand and foote, the greater ſhall be the libertie of the man in the vttering of the Goſpell, and ſo it is but vanitie to ſtriue with God.
            To goe forward. That God might open. What? the priſon doore? No, no ſuch thing, he careth not for it: he tooke more care of his mouth opening. Open the doore of my mouth, ſaith he: for brethren, it is better to lie in bands with an open mouth to vtter the Goſpell, then it is to be a freeman in the forreſt, looſe and liuing with a cloſe mouth, and not to ſpeake with freedome of the Goſpell. Woe is that Miniſter that is ſet free by man, and then hath his mouth bound. No, make not that choiſe; chuſe rather to be bound in the body, then to haue thy mouth bound. And experience teacheth, yt there is more ioy in a mans hart, hauing freedom to ſpeake the Goſpel himſelf being bound, then there is in his hart that hath his mouth bound and his bodie free. And it is better for the people to haue a Miniſter bound, that is free in the libertie of the Goſpell to vtter it, then to haue him looſe and dumme: for God neuer opened a mans mouth in vaine; for of neceſsitie hee will open the heart of ſome of the hearers, as the heart of Lydia
               
was opened, Act. 16. 14. So it was neuer in vaine that the Lord opened the mouth of the Apoſtle.
            To goe forward, That God ſhould open the doore of vtterance. Whereto? That I may ſpeake. It is a great grace to ſpeake: And what? The beſt thing that euer was: Speake the mysterie of Chriſt. I will not inſiſt to ſpeake largely what this word myſterie meanes: In a word, it is a precious thing hid vp; ſo that it cannot be ſeene by nature. It is Ieſus Chriſt; and therefore it is called the myſterie of Ieſus Chriſt, folded vp from the eyes of men. It is the vnſearchable riches of Ieſus Chriſt hid vp. It is that wiſedome of God (as it is ſaid in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthes chap. 2. verſ. 17.) which hee hath appointed for the glorie of man, and in time hee hath vnfolded it. It is nothing els, but this Euangel of Chriſt, and all his graces which were hid vp, till hee came. The very name of it ſelfe is glorious. It containes an argument to moue them to pray for him, that his mouth might be opened, and to haue ſuch a libertie to vtter the Goſpell, as he craues. If there were no more but the name of myſterie, it is an argument ſufficient enough for thee to pray for that man to whom it is committed, that he may vtter it with libertie: for it is great pitie by any meanes to reſtraine the libertie of it; for this is to hide the light of God. It is a glorious thing, and therefore I ſay it ſhal not be without a iudgement, if thou reſtraine it: for as the libertie conuaieth a ioy to the hearers; ſo the binding of it is grieuous to them. Men in this land haue made a meane to reſtraine it: but haue yee not ſeene the iudgement? Alas, will not examples terrifie thee, to put out thy hand to reſtraine the Goſpell? No, I aſſure thee, whoſoeuer will doe it, a iudgement ſhall ouertake them. For the which I am bound. As if he would ſay: If I be bound for it, it is eaſie for thee to pray for it: how canſt thou denie it? For thou that canſt not pray for the libertie of the Goſpell, thou canſt not ſuffer for it. I might ſpeake in this place of them that cannot giue a good word for the Goſpell: let be to pray for the libertie of it. Well, I will leaue them to their owne Iudge. But I ſay, if there were no more but this ſuffering of the affliction of Paſtors, and other zealous Chriſtians, and this ſuffring of the Goſpell vnder the which it lies this day; theſe ſame

things teſtifie plainly the worthines of the matter, of the power, vertue and glorie of the Goſpell: for if there were not a power in this myſterie that vpholds men in affliction for it, they would not abide a moment in their affliction: and if there were not a power and a glorie to ouerſhadow the ſhame of the Goſpell, all the world would not make a man ſuffer for it. So if there were no other argument but this, it is ſufficient to tell thee, it is the power of God that vpholds this Goſpell, and they that ſuffer for it.
            In the laſt verſe, he makes plaine the thing he ſaid; he declares what a ſpeaking this is. That I may make it manifeſt, that is, that I may open it, and vnfould it as a piece of cloath. Take this myſterie, in the which Chriſt and his riches is incloſed, lay it open, and let the world ſee it cleerely. As to the ſpeaking of it: Moſes ſpake of it, but he left it foulded vp. Then the Prophets ſpake of it, but they vnfoulded it not; for they could not doe it, becauſe Chriſt was not yet come in the fleſh. Then come the Apoſtles, when Chriſt is crucified, and they open it, and as it is ſaid in the Epheſians chap. 3. They Euangelize. They A myſtery. make manifeſt the comming of Chriſt and his myſterie. In a word, that, which was a myſterie of old, they make an Euangell of it, and the myſterie and the Euangell is one in effect: for the myſterie is nothing els but a cloſed Euangell; and the Euangell is the myſterie opened vp. Then the leſſon is: wherein ſtands the ſpeaking of the myſterie of Chriſt? To wit, in opening vp of it. And therfore who euer thou be, that takes vpon thee to ſpeake of this myſterie, look thou be skilfull to handle it, that is, that thou cāſt vnfould it rightly, to let the world ſee Ieſus Chriſt, that was ſo long hid vp. Let them ſee Chriſt crucified and glorified: looke that thou canſt ſpeake with the demonſtration of a ſpirituall power, with euidence of the ſpirit, to make it plaine to the world; and take Ieſus Chriſt and paint The preaching of the Goſpell the vnfolding of a mysterie. him out to the eye of the people, and let them ſee him glorified in the heauen, and that life flowing out of his bloud. If thou inuolue it when thou ſhouldeſt lay it abroad, woe is thee: hold thy tongue and ſpeake not of him. Alas, then Miniſters haue need to take heed to themſelues. This Goſpell would not be handled with vnwaſhen hands.
            
               
The laſt words are, As it becommeth me to ſpeake, or as it is in the owne language, as it behooueth me of neceſſitie, whereby he meanes, that there was a neceſſitie impoſed vpon him: as in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinths, chap. 9. 16. and there hee ſaith, Woe is me if I preach not the Goſpell; in this place he means that ſame neceſsitie. Then briefly, the Apoſtle here acknowledgeth a neceſsitie impoſed vpon him to vtter the Goſpell of Chriſt. The leſſon is eaſie, weigh the eſtate of Paſtors and Miniſters. In a word, there is not a Paſtor nor Miniſter, that takes in hand to vtter Chriſt, but there is a neceſsitie laid on his necke (as an oxe yoked in a plough, and all the Kings of the earth ſhall not take it off) to vtter the Goſpell with libertie: To hide nothing of the myſterie, not to impaire it a whit, what euer the Lord requires in the Goſpell, in paine of thy life ſee thou impaire it not. If the Emperors of ye world ſhould lay an other yoke on thee, ſay with Paul, Woe is me if I preach not. In deede thou, who wouldeſt cloſe the mouth of a Paſtor, if thou couldeſt free him of the neceſsitie and yoke that God hath laid on him, thou wouldeſt doe ſomething: but woe to thee that wouldſt lay on thy yoke with the yoke of God! Wilt thou the poore mans periſhing? Lay on him what thou wilt, thou ſhalt not relieue him of the yoke of god, and woe to that Miniſter that conceales ought of the truth of God, for the pleaſure of man! Will not men conſider this neceſsitie? No, al the world ſhall not (with Gods grace) make me caſt off this yoke; yea, if it come to practiſe, ye ſhall finde men, who will be content to die for this. Woe to thee, who will impaire a iot of the Goſpell! Thou diſhonoureſt God and his Goſpell. Therefore the Lord giue vs grace to ſuffer all extremitie, and death it ſelfe, cre euer we impaire a iot of this Goſpell. The Lord work this for Chriſts ſake: for his yoke is ſweete and eaſie to be borne. Now to the Father, Sonne and holy Spirit be all praiſe, and honour,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXXVI. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 5.
               5 Walke wiſely towards them that are without, and redeeme the ſeaſon.
               
            
            
               HAuing ſpoken (brethren) of the particular admonitions that were giuen by the Apoſtle to particular eſtates of men and women, eſpecially dwelling in one familie and houſehold: wee returned againe to the generall exhortation, pertaining to men and women of all eſtates, high and low; poore and rich; Princes and ſubiects; maſters and ſeruants; and to all alike. The firſt generall wee heard the laſt day, and intreated of it as God gaue the grace: it was an exhortation to prayer and perſeuerance in prayer. It is not enough to pray, but thou muſt perſeuere in prayer: be ardent and earneſt in it night and day: for ſo thou haſt neede to doe if thou conſider thy wants. Vnto perſeuerance in prayer, he ioyneth watchfulnes; which is nothing els but feruentnes and earneſtnes to pray with an ardent deſire; otherwiſe thou ſcorneſt him, if thou deale with him for faſhion; and thou ſcorner Prayer. wilt be met with, and ſhalt finde thy prayer to be but fooliſhnes. Eccleſ. 2. 17. Then when he hath done this in generall, he comes in ſpeciall to himſelfe, and deſires them to pray together for him among the reſt; conſidering that there was none that needed more then he, becauſe he was lying in bands for the Goſpell: and therefore had an impediment to vtter with libertie that myſterie of Ieſus Chriſt, which is nothing els but the Goſpell

hid vp in a myſterie, to the conſolation and ſaluation of the world.
            Now to come to the text, here followeth the ſecond generall exhortation, and it is to walke, but with wiſedome: ſo in a word it is an exhortation to vſe wiſedom in their actions, and proceedings whatſoeuer. For what auailes it to doe ought, except it be done wiſely? But to weigh the words as the Lord will giue grace. Walke (ſaith he) You ſhall finde this oft recommended, you are neuer bidden ſleepe, or ſit idle, but euer walking: Walke. occupation, buſines, doing is recommended. This Chriſtian calling that wee haue in Chriſt Ieſus, it is not to ſit idle, to be ſluggiſh, to ſleepe and ſlumber, to ſit, to lie and to ſtand ſtill in one place; but it is to walke, to goe, to be on your iourney. Wee are pilgrims, and a pilgrime would euer be on his feet; and if he reſt, it would be ſhortly and ſpeedily diſpatched, and euer to the iourney. Our calling is to occupation, and labouring here, but thou ſhalt ceaſe from thy labour after this life. To whom is this promiſe made to ceaſe from your labour? but to thoſe who are diligently and earneſtly occupied here in the vineyard of the Lord, euer taking heede to their waies, that they offend not the great God of heauen: and therefore thou ſhouldeſt labour if thou wouldeſt reſt after this life. And I ſay (brethren) a true Chriſtian is not a ſluggard or The true Christian labours in a lawfull calling. an idle bodie, but a doing man, and of all ſorts of men he is the moſt actiue. Take the example of the Apoſtle, he ſaid not only that he walked with a ſlow pace, repoſing himſelfe in this world, but he ranne as a man in a race, the firſt Epiſtle Cor. 9. chap. with great ſpeed, and in that race he ranne ſo faſt, that he looked not behind him, to look ouer his ſhoulder, he took no time, but his eye was ſtill on the marke: for ſtanding in the race is the loſſe of time. Therefore ſit not downe to count what thou haſt done, but ouer thy ſhoulder with it, and ſtill goe forward. Well (ſaith he) walke, be occupied, be doing, it is not enough to be doing euery way, for it were better for ſome to be idle when they are doing. The greater part runs to miſchiefe, and are doing wickedly. How ſhould they walke? Wiſely. In the Epiſtle to the Epheſians fift chapter, he expreſſeth this in more words, Walke (ſaith he) circumſpectly, conſideratly, diligently,
               
               not as fooles, but as wiſe men: theſe are his words, then walking is commended. But how? with wiſedome. The Lord giues wiſedome to men: yea, walke ſo circumſpectly, that thou take heede to each footſtep, when thou lifts thy foote take heede where thou ſets it: The life of a Chriſtian is ſo preciſe: therefore looke about thee; for the world lookes vpon thee. Thou walkeſt in the light, walke then in a comely manner. Finally, in thy walking walke ſo wiſely, that thou let paſſe no circumſtance neither of time, place, nor perſon; but haue an eye to all, euen to all. Then to giue you the leſſon: Our honourable calling is to labour, walking and occupation, but with al wiſdome, conſideration and diſcretion; and a Chriſtian man or woman muſt be wiſe as they are laborious. They muſt not be fooles, ruſhing and rumbling, running headlong to euery thing without taking any regard, which is a ſhaming of themſelues oftentimes. Thou muſt not walke ſo: this is common to euery Chriſtian, but eſpecially to thoſe whom God hath ſet ouer others it chiefly appertaines; I meane the miniſters: they muſt bee moſt circumſpect. The eyes of the world are vpon them; they are vpon the mountain, nothing can eſcape them; but all is marked: therefore this wiſedome is ſpecially required of them. Paul in the ſecond Epiſtle to Timothie chap. 2. he Miniſters muſt pray they may walke circumſpectly. ſaith, conſider theſe things, then with a prayer he ſayth, The Lord giue thee wiſedome in all things. The Lord giue a Miniſter wiſedome in all things: for there was neuer more neede then there is now. And Ieſus Chriſt ſaith, Be prudent and wiſe like Serpents, and ſimple like doues. So this wiſedome that he craues is not the wiſedome of this falſe double world, but wiſedome that is in the ſimplicitie of the heart. The Lord ſaue vs from the wiſedome of theſe politike heads; it is not that wiſedome Serpentine wiſedome with ſimplicitie. that the Lord commends to vs. The Lord ſhall iuſtifie our wiſdome, when their wiſedome ſhall be counted falſe policie in that great day. Would ye haue example of both theſe wiſedomes, of the wiſedome of the Serpent, and of the wiſedome of ſimplicitie like the Doue? To make that plaine, I ſhall let you ſee both in the 23. of the Acts. Paul is accuſed, he is ſtanding before Ananias the high Prieſt, making his defence: The firſt word he vtters, he ſaith, In all good conſcience I haue ſerued
               
               my God to this day. This is the preface, here appeares not the wiſedome of Serpents, but the ſimplicitie of a doue, laying out before them that life hee had led in a good conſcience before God. We muſt follow him, and muſt in all delations and accuſations ſtand vp and proteſt before that God that ſeeth all, that in a good conſcience we haue ſtriuen in al things to ſeeke the glorie of God and his ſeruice. Then Ananias hearing this proteſtation, he commaunds to ſtrike the man on the mouth. Alas, the world cannot abide to heare that the ſeruant of God keepes a good conſcience! Then he ſaith, O whited wall, the time 
               1 The ſimplicitie of a doue in Paul.
                
               will come when the Lord ſhall ſtrike thee: ſo the Apoſtle ſtands ſtiffe in defence of his good conſcience before God, and will not hold his tongue of that, but foretels to Ananias the iudgement that was to come vpon him. Well, ſhould wee holde our tongues here? No brethren, ſo long as the Lord opens our mouthes to ſpeake, I ſay, we were traytors aboue all traytors to King, Church, and Countrey, if we foretold not that heauie iudgement that ſhall follow vpon ſuch proceedings; nay, if we ſhould hold our tongue, the earth, and the walles ſhall crie out that a iudgement ſhall come vpon ſinners. Then hitherto he hath vttered his ſimplicitie, and fooliſh ſimplicitie, as they 2 The wiſedome of a Serpent in Paul.
                eſteemed it. The foreſt enemies that then purſued him were the Phariſies and Sadduces: then the Lord giues him the wiſedome of a Serpent, and he ſhewes that he is a Phariſie, and the ſonne of a Phariſie, and that hee was brought there in iudgement for the hopes ſake he had of the reſurrection of the dead, and in this he ſpeakes no lye, but ſpeakes the trueth, as it was. The Phariſies hearing that, they fell by the eares with the Sadduces, and ſo he eſcapes. The Lord giue vs this wiſedome and ſimplicitie in the like danger.
            
               Walke wiſely. In the Epiſtle to the Epheſians chap. 5. verſ. 15. he deſires this wiſedome, and he makes it to be the vnderſtanding of the will of God. Wiſedome then what is it? The vnderſtanding of Gods will. The wiſe man what is he? He that vnderſtands Wiſedome what it is. Gods will, the rule of our actions. What is our owne will? Nothing but crooked, and backward, and makes an ouerthwart and backward action: but Gods will is ſtraight,

and makes all our actions that are done after his will, ſtraight and euen. Who is the wiſe man? not he that followes his own will, wit and reaſon, but he who in all his doings followes the rule of Gods will, and renounceth his owne reaſon. Take thy reaſon and thy will and binde them, and either conforme them to the will of God, or elſe they ſhall carrie thee to damnation, Naturall reaſon and will. and thou who wouldſt be wiſe, be a foole. There was neuer mā that followed his owne wit and will from the firſt to the laſt, but in the end (howbeit it was plauſible for the time) he hath lamented miſerably, and hath found that hee hath run without a rule or marke, and that he was a foole. Nay, if thou follow thine owne will, it ſhall miſcarie thee, and thou ſhalt find that thou haſt wraſtled with thine owne ſhadow, and it ſhall diſappoynt thee of thy proceedings. Would to God that men could conſider this.
            To goe forward: Walke wiſely. Toward whom? Toward them that are without, that is, without that bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, that are ſtraungers from that folde, ſuch as were the Gentiles in thoſe daies: for all the Coloſsians were not conuerted at that Eph. 2. 12 time. This is the eſtate of this world, there are ſome within and domeſtickes in the houſe of God, through Ieſus Chriſt; and there are ſome without, as ſtraungers that want the faith of Ieſus as yet. This is the diuiſion of the whole world. For the Church of God is compared to a citie that is placed in the middeſt of a naughtie and crooked generation: within this The Church like a citie. are the faithfull, at the leaſt they that profeſſe the faith; without are the faithleſſe. They that are within, are as many lights holding out the light of life; and they that are without, are in darknes, without Chriſt; aliants from the Common-wealth of Iſrael, without the life of God, yea, without God. This is their miſerie. Woe is them that are without! Now wiſedome ſhould be vſed in reſpect of both, but eſpecially in reſpect of the ſtraungers, and that for ſundrie cauſes:  Firſt, in reſpect of the enemies themſelues, that wee giue not them iuſt offence to abide  out of the Church: for who delights to ſee men keepe away from Chriſt? And I proteſt, I wiſh that thoſe men that haue gone back, that they creepe in againe into the Church of God.

Our walking with wiſedome ſhould be, that we giue them not iuſt offence to keepe backe.  Next, it ſhould be in reſpect of  our ſelues: Thou that haſt adoe with prophane men, beware of thy ſelfe; forthou that wilt eate and drinke with them, and make merchandiſe with them, to ſpeake with them, I will aſſure thee they are able to make thee prophane. Beware then, there are ſome that care not what company they haunt: Companie. well, knowes thou of what mettall thou art? thy bodie is no more readie to receiue the peſtilence, and to be infected with Note. it, then thy ſoule is to receiue the peſtilence of idolatrie and ſinne. Woe worth euill companie, as many haue ſaid at the place of their execution. Be not deceiued (ſaith the Apoſtle) euill ſpeeches corrupt good manners, 1. Epiſtle to the Corinthians chap. 15. verſ. 33. T  he third is in reſpect of this Goſpell, that  the enemie that is readie to blaſpeme the Goſpell, get no occaſion to ſpeake euill of it, that ſhould be our chiefe reſpect. Make much of this glorious Goſpell, account of the myſterie of Ieſus Chriſt, eſteeme it the moſt precious pearle that euer was. For I ſhall tell you what they are doing, thy eye is not ſo vpon others, as their eye is vpon thee to marke thy doings, ſeeking occaſion to diſgrace thee, and through thy ſides to ſmite Chriſt in blaſpheming his Goſpell.
            
                To goe forward: This wiſedome here commended ſtands  eſpecially in taking opportunitie of well doing, when it is offered. And therefore the Apoſtle makes mention of this circumſtance, that he that would be wiſe ſhould take the opportunitie. He is neuer to be accounted wiſe, who when God offers the occaſion, miſſeth the opportunitie; and he is the wiſe man that takes the opportunitie when it is offered. For the Lord in that counſell, as he hath ordained things to be done, ſo hee hath preſcribed the opportunitie and time when each thing ſhould be done. Nay, if it were but a ſtraw or a haire to fall to the ground, hee hath appoynted the time of it. Behold the prouidence of God, for as he hath ordained the action, ſo hath he preſcribed the time of the action in ſuch ſort, that if men loſe the time to doe well and ſpeake well, they ſhall loſe Take time when it is offered. their turne: for let time goe by thee, then adiew, thou ſhalt

neuer lay hold of it againe. Time is painted with a balde hinder part of the head: thou canſt not draw it backe againe: All the Kings of the world haue no power to bring time once paſt backe againe. The worldly wiſe men conſider this, when opportunitie is offered, O how they wil take hold of occaſion! and will condemne themſelues if they let it ſlip. If this be the wiſedome of the world, what ſhould be our wiſedome? for this houre, wherein I am ſpeaking, is the acceptable time, wherein Ieſus Chriſt is offered. It is the day of grace, and ſo long as you heare this ſaluation, vnderſtand it. It is the time of grace, therfore lay hold of this time, let not an houre eſcape you; and when thou heareſt this Goſpel, take hold of grace, and let thy prayer be ardent. Mercie is offered, Lord giue me the hand to receiue mercie. Now (brethren) this day is paſsing, it is going, ſo they who would be ſaued, let them take hold of grace this day: for it will not alwaies be with you. And be aſſured, when it ſhall goe away, many ſhall periſh; and if it goe away, many in Scotland ſhall goe to hell. Therefore foreſlow not your time, apprehend grace while it may be had.
            Now brethren, it is hard to get this ſeaſon; for it is ſayd in the Epiſtle to the Epheſ. chap. 5. verſ. 16. that the daies are euill, and euill daies will ſtand vp betwixt thee and this time of grace, therefore (ſaith he) redeeme the time. It will not come to thy hand, but many impediments ſhall ſtand vp betwixt thee and it; yea death it ſelfe: therefore thou muſt redeeme it. The word is borowed from Merchants, who when they ſee opportunitie of merchandiſe, they will goe ſpeedily to it, and let all other things goe, to get their gaines of it: Euen ſo a good Chriſtian man and woman, when they ſee occaſion of well doing, they muſt hazard and if it were their life, to get a grip of that occaſion. And I ſay rather then wee ſhould loſe this occaſion of the Goſpell, if it were to the loſſe of our life, wee ſhould not be ſlouthfull in it. What ſhould we loſe thereby? nay nothing, but we ſhall be reſtored a thouſand folde. So the good Chriſtian will bee buſie and vigilant to redeeme the time, and will buy the firſt occaſion to doe well, becauſe it is not at his hands. Paul ſaith, there is a doore opened to me, &c.
               
but there be many impediments: ſo if thou be a merchant in Chriſts cauſe, thou ſhalt neuer repent thee, buy the occaſion to glorifie God, if it were with thy life. This lieth not in the hand of fleſh and bloud, but it muſt come of God. Paul ſaith, be partakers of afflictions, &c. And ſeeing it lieth not in thy hand to buy this occaſion, but that it muſt come of God, therefore be earneſt to ſeeke power of him. Now the Lorde ſtrengthen vs in theſe dangerous daies, and grant vs grace to keepe this time and occaſion of the Goſpell, that we hold vp the light of it before the faces of men. Now the Lord heare vs for his ſonnes ſake Ieſus Chriſt, to whom with the Father and holie Ghoſt, be aſcribed, as moſt due is, all power and praiſe for euer and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXXVII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 6.
               6 Let your ſpeech be gracious alwaies, and poudred with ſalt, that ye may know how to anſwere euery man.
               
            
            
               THis is another generall ſentence or exhortation (brethren) pertaining, as the former, to all ſorts and degrees of men & women in the world, none being ſo great or ſo high, that they are to be exempted frō it; nor any being ſo meane or ſmall, as that they can be freed frō it: for as God is the cōmon God of al, but ſpecially of thē that beleeue: ſo doe the doctrines that he deliuereth commonly concerne all, but chiefly his Saints and ſeruants in this world. So that men may as well reiect and caſt off God himſelfe, as refuſe the doctrines that are deliuered in this and ſuch like places. His purpoſe and drift is, to teach mē to take heed to their tongues. And this is not vnfitly ioyned to the former ſentence or verſe, wherein he admoniſhed them to walke warily, generally towards all, but ſpecially towards them that are without, as well becauſe they knew not how to beare with incircumſpectiō in others, as not hauing learned that dutie of charitie, as alſo becauſe more regard is to be had of gaining them, then of thoſe that be ranged into the Church. And in as much as by the ſpeech or tongue, men bewray their retchleſnes and indiſcretion, as well as by acts or deeds, he therefore prouoketh them euen in

that reſpect, to haue a ſpeciall eye to their words, as well as to their works. So that it may ſeeme, in ſome ſort to, to be an illuſtration of the generall by ſome particulars. Whatſoeuer it be this is certaine, he would haue vs to be warie, that we giue no offence to others, nor bewray inconſideratiō in our ſelues, by our words, but rather, that we ſhould manifeſt much goodnes in our ſelues, and ſet it out vnto others, for their good and Gods glorie.
            Now two things are to be conſidered in this verſe: the one is a precept or commaund, in theſe words, Let your ſpeech be gracious alwaies, and poudred with ſalt: by which he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that it is no arbitrarie matter ſuch as we may doe or leaue vndone, as we liſt, but that it is profitable, yea neceſſarie. The ſecond, is the end that hee aimeth at in their obedience, in theſe words, that ye may know how to anſwere euery man: which is the good of others, as well as their owne comfort in the graces they had receiued, becauſe whatſoeuer wee haue receiued, wee haue receiued it for other mens benefit as well as for our owne, and therefore ſhould referre it to the fame ends.
            In the ſpeech that hee commendeth vnto vs, he requireth two properties: firſt, that it ſhould be gracious, or with a grace, as we ſay. Secondly, that it ſhould be poudred or ſeaſoned with ſalt. That ſpeech is or may be iuſtly called gracious, which as in reſpect of the ſpeaker, proceedeth from ſome grace that God hath vouchſafed vnto him: for howſoeuer to ſpeake be a naturall thing, & as reaſon hath yeelded vs conceits to ſpeake of, ſo nature hath affoorded vs inſtruments to ſpeake by, as the tongue, the teeth, the lips and ſuch like, yet to ſpeake the ſpeech that the Apoſtle commendeth and commaundeth vnto vs in this place, cannot be but by grace from God. And as in regard of the hearer, bringeth with it ſome grace to them to whom it is directed: which thing the Apoſtle plainly expreſſeth, Epheſ. 4. verſ. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the vſe of edifying, that it may miniſter grace to the bearers. By which wee learne, that it is no eaſie thing to ſpeak well, nor eaſie matter to heare good things and to profit by them. Our nature is backward,

both to the one and the other: for as it is a burthen to heare a foole ſpeake, meaning by foole a wicked man, becauſe he ſpeaketh nothing but that which is euill; ſo a naturall man, that is to ſay, a wicked man, can deliuer nothing but ſpeake like to himſelfe, becauſe out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh. And therefore me thinketh that the ſpeaker in this caſe, ſhould pray as the Prophet Dauid doth, that God would ſet a doore before his lips, and guide the tongue of his mouth. And this hee ought to doe if hee be but a common Chriſtian, and ſpeake to his euen Chriſtian, becauſe there is matter of corruption in him, that may cauſe him to ouerſhoote himſelfe or ere he beware, both as in regard of the naughtines of his mind and mouth generally, and as in reſpect of the blindnes of his heart particularly; yea and that many times when we deliuer good things, becauſe in the multitude of words or ſpeech there is tranſgreſſion, as Salomon ſaith: And the hearer alſo ſhould intreate God to boare his eares, and to open his vnderſtanding, yea and to incline his heart, that nothing might ſteale away his affection from that, which ſo directly concerneth other mens good, Gods glorie, and his owne ſpirituall comfort: which dutie of inuocation and praier, whileſt men as in other reſpect, ſo in this behalfe regard not, it falleth out, that both God is robbed of his glorie, men of their ſpirituall good, and themſelues of Chriſtian comfort. Nay, I will ſay more, whileſt they doe not onely neglect this good dutie; but imagine as the wicked did in Dauids time, that their tongues are their owne, they will ſpeake, who is Lord ouer them? or who ſhall controule them? they doe not onely loſe their labour, as water ſpilt vpon the ground, which is pitifull, but increaſe their diſobedience to God, and manifeſt their want of charitie towards men, which is vngodly. And if this be the ſtate of them, that ſpeak not of good things, with an honeſt hart & to godly edification: what muſt their condition be, that deliuer lewd and wicked things, bewraying not onely the vncleannes of their owne mindes, but at the leaſt intiſing, if not corrupting others, to runneriot with them to the ſelfeſame exceſſe of ſinne. And of this ſort are thoſe ribaulds and filthie perſons, who can neuer be merrie, or thinke themſelues well occupied, till they blaſpheme God

with their mouthes, and ſtrike or curſe mē with their tongues, I meane the bitter and lewd words they doe deliuer. But theſe are to be ſharply reproued, and muſt needes haue the dung of their filthines and corruption caſt into their faces. And this muſt we doe (brethren) if either we reuerence God, or loue his glorie, or hate euill, or deſire their ſaluation: and they themſelues muſt bee contented to heare it with patience, and to beare it with profit; or elſe the meanes vſed vnto them do but increaſe their ſinne and their condemnation by meanes therof. But the other ſort, as not ſinning in ſo high degree, muſt be otherwiſe melt withall, namely admoniſhed in the ſpirit of loue, to leaue that ſinne, though it might be as deare and precious to them as their right hand, or their right eye; and to ſtriue by godly communication & words, both to ſtrengthen them that do ſtand, and to help the weak hearted, and to gain others with whom they haue to deale. And if this belongs to euery Chriſtian, as his common dutie: then how much more doth it concerne the publike Miniſter, not onely as in regard that he is Gods ſubſtitute on earth, who propoundeth nothing, ſaue that which is good to edifie all, but alſo in reſpect that he ſpeaketh, or ſhould ſpeake Gods word onely, according as S. Peter ſaith, Let him that ſpeaketh ſpeake as the words of God. And yet the more is the pitie, nothing more trifling, nothing more vnſound, then that which ſome take vpon them, either as Gods miniſters, or in ſteed of them, to deliuer in the chaire or pulpit. But wee will leaue them, and proceede in the text.
            The ſecond thing that hee requireth in our ſpeech is, that it ſhould be poudred with ſalt. Theſe are metaphors or borrowed kinds of ſpeeches, and therefore had need of a good interpretation, both for the cleering and doctrine of them. That the ſpeech ſhould be gracious, which the Apoſtle had required before, it muſt of neceſsity be ſeaſoned with ſalt, becauſe in a hearers heart, there cannot bee effected any grace, but by ſuch ſpeech as is poudred or ſeaſoned. And wherewith muſt it be ſeaſoned? The Apoſtle anſwereth: it muſt bee with ſalt. The ſalt wherewith our words muſt be ſeaſoned, is true ſanctitie or holines. Of neceſsitie there muſt be holines in the heart, before

there can bee any ſalt or ſauour in the mouth or words. Nay, I will ſay more, that ſanctitie muſt poſſeſſe all the affections of the heart, or elſe there wil not, there cannot flow from it ſeaſoned ſpeech. Yea this holines muſt ſpread and ſtretch it ſelfe vnto all the outward parts and members, and to all the outward actions and operations of the parts and peeces of mens bodies, or elſe there can bee no ſalt or ſeaſoning of any thing that is ſaid or done. For if the heart be holy, and all the affections thereof ſanctified, then the hand ſhall worke, the foote ſhall walke, the eye ſhall ſee, and the tongue ſhall ſpeake holily. For if the heart be it that ſetteth the whole man, and euery ſeuerall part of him, on worke (as that is ſo ſure and certaine, as no man that knoweth no more, then the light of nature can affoord him, will or can denie it) then it muſt needes follow, that according to the frame and diſpoſition thereof, all in the whole and euery part of it muſt be ordered: and if euery part follow the diſpoſition of the minde, then doth the mouth alſo. Which alſo our Sauiour himſelfe ſignifieth when he ſaith, that out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh: and S. Iames expreſſeth it likewiſe by a ſimilitude, when he telleth vs, that no fountaine can ſend out at one and the ſelfe ſame place or hole, ſweete and bitter waters. But yet for the cleering of this point, we muſt a little looke into the nature of ſalt. It hath two ſpecial or chiefe vſes. One to make meat that is ſauourie, more ſweete to be eaten, and better pleaſing the palate or taſte. The other, to preſerue euery thing almoſt, from ſtinking and corruption. So that firſt, ſanctitie is it that maketh ſpeech gracious, delightfull, and fit to edification; and therefore meete alſo and fit to bee directed to the eares, yea to the vnderſtanding of the hearer. Secondly, it purgeth the very ſpeeches themſelues, and preſerueth them from all impuritie, ſtinch, rottennes, corruption, &c. whereas otherwiſe without this ſanctitie, the ſpeech it ſelfe will be in it ſelfe filthie and corrupt indeed, and as it were with a certaine kinde of putrifaction, corrupt the minds of the hearers, which the Apoſtle expreſſely forbiddeth, Epheſ. 4. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceede out of your mouth. By which we may learne one ſingular poynt, and that is this, that as filthie and fooliſh ſpeech bewraieth

want of true ſanctitie in him that vſeth it, or taketh delight in the ſpeaking or hearing of it: ſo it is one ſpeciall meane, I meane lack of true holines, which neither good ſpeeches of good things, are ſo powerfull in him that ſpeaketh them, nor ſo profitable in them to whom they are directed, as otherwiſe they might be, if there were true ſanctitie and holines in the hearers and ſpeakers, as there ought to be. And that therfore no man ſhould ſpeak to himſelf or to others, or heare others ſpeake of good things, but that they ſhould ſtriue, firſt to purge themſelues from all filthines of the fleſh and the ſpirit, and then to fit and fill themſelues with all puritie and pietie, that ſo there being an analogie and proportion betweene inward holines, and outward holy things propounded, the holy and good things of God might be more profitable then they haue been. And ſo wee may ſee one ſpeciall cauſe, why good things ſpoken either in publike or in priuate, profit ſo ſmally; no man, neither ſpeaker nor hearer, hath conſcience or care to cleanſe their hands, or to purge their hearts, but as though that they were cleane enough alreadie, if not too cleane; or as though their impuritie could ſtand with the holines of good things, ſo do we goe on. But beware (brethren) of this conceit, for a net is ſpread, by Satans malice and our own corruption, to catch our feete faſt, and to hold vs in ſin at their pleaſure.
            But we will paſſe from this, and proceed in the text, wherein yet one word, contained in this ſentence of framing and faſhioning our ſpeech, is worthie of animaduerſion, and that is the aduerbe alwaies. By which hee giueth vs plainly to vnderſtand, that it is not ſufficient for vs now and then, or ſometimes as we ſay, to haue our talke, communication and ſpeech holy and gracious, for that will but make vs more and more without excuſe, as hauing a light raiſed vp in vs, to teſtifie againſt vs, that we haue ſeene, and affected for a while the beſt things, but haue in a daily courſe followed the worſt. But wee muſt continually looke to our ſelues: in ſo much that when we are to ſpeake, wee muſt either ſpeake holily, and vnto the benefit and edification of others, or elſe ſpeake not at all. For euen in this ſinne there are theſe degrees. To ſpeake wickedly

or filthily, is to corrupt other men, becauſe as the Apoſtle ſaith out of the Poet, Euillwords marre good manners: and this is properly indeed to deſtroy men. But if we be ſilent we ſinne not againſt them that way, though wee muſt anſwere this to God and men, that wee aduaunce not in them the worke of grace and goodnes. But men are of another minde: they think that if now and then they ſpeake well and holily, they then haue for a great while after the greater licenſe and libertie in prophane ieſtings, filthie and fooliſh talkings, idle and vnprofitable words. For which our Sauiour himſelfe, and the bleſſed ſpirit in the Apoſtle Paul, will haue them to be ſo farre, that Chriſt telleth vs, we ſhall anſwere for euery idle word; yea the Apoſtle will haue no filthie ſpeech to come out of our mouth, Epheſ. 4. 29. And in another place of that Epiſtle, will not haue ſuch things to be ſo much as once named amongſt vs, but rather giuing of thankes, Epheſ. 5. 3. Hitherto for the exhortation or doctrine.
            Now to come to the end of it, That ye may know how to anſwer euery one. By the word anſwering, which is but a part of our ſpeech or words, he vnderſtandeth all our ſpeech of what ſort or nature ſo euer. Properly in our language, it implieth a queſtion or demaund going before, and ſhaping an anſwere therto. But here it is put a part for the whole, and vſed according to the Hebrue phraſe, which many times ſignifieth to begin and to continue ſpeech, without any occaſion miniſtred thereof by a precedent demaund. And ſo is it that in the latter end of the 11. of Matthew it is ſaid, that Ieſus anſwered and ſaid, when yet there went not before any demaund or queſtion. But to the poynt. The meaning of the Apoſtle is to ſhew, that by continuall cuſtome and courſe of ſpeaking holily and graciouſly, men attaine to ſpirituall wiſdome and diſcretion, and thereby are inabled fitly and to good purpoſe, to anſwere to euery one, that ſhould demaund his iudgement in any thing, ſpecially appertaining to Gods religion and his Chriſtian profeſsion. And whereas he ſaith, euery one, wee are to ſee what he meaneth thereby. Men to whom wee direct our ſpeech, or with whom wee haue that way to deale, may be reduced into two ſorts. For either they are ſuch as are without, or elſe they

are our brethren, and of the houſehold of faith. And either of theſe againe are of two ſorts. The firſt are either perſecutors, or ſuch as are not of ſo cruell a diſpoſition: with theſe we muſt deale in ſuch ſort, as if it bee poſſible wee may winne them to Chriſt; or at the leaſt, not giue them occaſion to blaſpheme, by our ſpeech: we know, that as their hearts are ready to conceiue euill againſt vs and our cauſe; ſo vpon any ſurmiſe or ſuſpition from vs, their mouthes will be open to ſpeake euill alſo. And therefore wee ſhould carefully endeuour to auoyd all occaſions, and to ſtop their mouthes, if we could tell how. On the other ſide, our brethren are either ſtrong or weake. For the weake, wee muſt take heede that wee offend them not in our ſpeech, becauſe Chriſt ſaith, Woe be to the man, by whom offence commeth: but rather wee muſt doe our beſt to confirme and ſtrengthen them in the faith, as who, by reaſon of weaknes in themſelues, and bad examples in the world, had neede to be animated in all well doing. And as for the ſtrong, wee muſt more and more protect them, to mutuall comfort, and godly edification, and the rather becauſe he that knoweth any thing, knoweth yet nothing as he ought to know: and none is ſo forward, but ſtill he had need to be prouoked and pricked on. From which rightly knowne and vnderſtood wee may learne two things: firſt, that in all our cariages generally, and particularly in our ſpeeches, wee ſhould haue good reſpect, what, when, and where it is that we ſpeake. For if the light of nature haue taught men to looke to themſelues, what they ſay, and of whom, the grace and worke of the ſpirit ſhould much more not onely inlighten vs herein, but inable vs thereto. Secondly, that if wee ſpeake well, there is much power and efficacie in our ſpeech, and that not onely as in regard of the hearers heart, to haue it affected, either to ſanctitie and inſtruction, if our words be pure and holy; or to corruption and naughtines if they be vnſound and vnſauourie: but euen as in reſpect of the partie ſpeaking, whoſe minde ſhall be the better framed to, and the more plenteouſly indued with ſpiritual wiſedome, if hee can walke well and wiſely as in this behalfe, both reſpecting the perſons with whom hee talketh, or to

whom hee ſpeaketh: and alſo in expreſsing his minde, by a good choiſe of words, both which are powerfull meanes to manifeſt grace in himſelfe, and to communicate it to others. But our age is euery way full of corruption. Some care to ſpeake nothing, but that which is as themſelues corrupt. Otherſome care not how they vtter any thing ſo they ſpeake a good matter. Otherſome haue good words, but deliuer vnholeſome things. And ſome ſpeake the trueth, with ſuch ſmoothnes, that many times it is ſuſpected of falſehood. Hee that can auoide theſe extreames, and ſpeake when, where, and what he ſhould, doth not onely ſhew that hee hath receiued grace from God, but that he ſhall haue growth in this goodnes; becauſe the lips of the righteous will euer be ſpeaking of good things, and in all other mercies from God through Ieſus Chriſt: to whom with the holie Spirit, three perſons, and but one eternall God, bee all glorie and praiſe, with thankes and power both now and for euermore. So be it.
         
         
            
            THE XXXVIII. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 7. 8. 9.
               
                  7 Tychicus our beloued brother, and faithfull miniſter, and fellow ſeruant in the Lord, ſhall make knowne vnto you all my matters:
                  
                  8 Whom I haue ſent vnto you for this very purpoſe, that he might know your matters, and might comfort your hearts,
                  
                  9 With Oneſimus a faithfull and a beloued brother, who is one of you. Therefore they ſhall declare vnto you all things that are done here.
                  
               
            
            
               THe Apoſtle paſſeth from generall matters vnto particular things, that is, from thoſe duties which indifferently concerned the whole Church and euery particular ſound member of it, to ſuch as did belong to himſelfe and others in ſpeciall. And in theſe three verſes is contained (if you remember it) the third part of the chapter, and the ſixt part of the whole Epiſtle. In which hee handleth, both his owne priuate affaires, aſſuring himſelfe that the Coloſſians were deſirous to know and vnderſtand the ſame, and alſo teſtifieth his deſire to know and vnderſtand how matters went with them. For the better declaration whereof, hee had ſent ſome to ſee in what condition they were, and to certifie them alſo in what condition his buſines ſtood. He herein expreſſeth both his great loue and care to them, and alſo ſheweth that as

he would not haue them to beleeue vncertaine rumours and reports touching his owne eſtate: ſo he would not credit euery flying tale, concerning their condition: for fame, as he well knew, and we finde by daily experience, increaſeth by going; and as men are minded, either in good will or euil will, ſo they adde too and diminiſh, as they either loue or hate. And therefore for the auoyding of theſe inconueniences, and the more full vnderſtanding of the truth in theſe cauſes, he ſendeth Tychicus, and ſome other with him, in preſence faithfully to relate all things on both ſides, that is, both to cauſe the Coloſſians to conceiue in what caſe Paul and his affaires were, and to certifie the Apoſtle how things went with the Church there: and more particularly, that by theſe faithfull and honeſt meſſengers, hee might comfort and confirme the Coloſſians hearts.
            The firſt of theſe is called Tychicus, who being borne in Aſia, willingly accompanied Paul going thither, to preach the Goſpell there, as you may reade Acts 20. 4. Neither followed he him in that labour of the Miniſterie alone, as a thing very profitable for himſelfe: but euen then when Paul was priſoner at Rome for the Goſpel, he was with him there, and miniſtred vnto him, and was ſent from thence by Paul, as with this Epiſtle to the Coloſſians, ſo with that which hee wrote to the Epheſians, as appeareth chap. 6. 21. 22. and alſo 2. Tim. 4. 10. where he ſaith that he ſent Tychicus to Epheſus.
            
            Another of thē is named Oneſimus, who is the very ſame that Paul cōmendeth to Philemon in the epiſtle he wrote vnto him: where we ſhall finde that he was Philemons vnthriftie ſeruant, and did runne away from his maſter for ſome great offence: but yet being touched with conſcience for that ſinne, and vnfainedly turned vnto God, euen by Paul himſelfe, whileſt hee was priſoner at Rome, Paul thought it meete vpon his vnfained amendment to commend him to his maſter againe. And he ioyneth them both together as it were in commiſſion in this cauſe, that in the mouth of two or three witneſſes, al truth concerning cauſes on both ſides, might bee eſtabliſhed. For further credit whereof alſo, hee doth adorne them with good and gracious titles.
            
               
And firſt for Tychicus, to the end that the dignitie of the perſon might procure more authoritie and credit to his teſtimonie among the Coloſſians, and from them to the Apoſtle himſelfe, he deſcribeth him by three titles or adiuncts: but they may be reduced vnder two ſorts or kinds. The one ſuch as is common to all Chriſtians, when hee termeth him, beloued brother: the other peculiar to them that trauaile in the Church cauſes, as Miniſters and ſuch like. And theſe are two in number: the firſt is, faithfull miniſter: the ſecond is, fellow ſeruant in the Lord. From all which there are many good inſtructions affoorded vnto vs: as in the firſt: that if any man be a true Chriſtian, and therefore our brother, wee are bound euen in that reſpect ſo much the more tenderly to imbrace and loue him. For, though euery one, yea that is not a Chriſtian, muſt be loued in his meaſure and manner, becauſe he is the creature of God, and the excellent workmanſhip of his owne hands, and the rather becauſe he is indued in ſome ſort and ſenſe with the image of God, yet there is a ſpeciall loue due to ſuch a ſound hearted Chriſtian, as is a member with vs of the ſelfeſame holie bodie. Neither indeed, ſpecially in ſpirituall conſideration, is he ſo much another man differing from vs, as one and the ſelfeſame with vs. For all true Chriſtians are members of one and the ſelfeſame bodie, growing vp together with vs to the conſtituting of that bleſſed bodie of our Sauiour Chriſt, and to the framing and faſhioning, yea making vp of that very man, the head whereof is Chriſt, and the bodie are all faithfull Chriſtians. Concerning which, ſee what the Spirit ſaith, Eph. 2. 15. Hitherto for his generall or common title.
            Now he deſcribeth him by his ſpecially calling: in which if we reſpect Chriſt, he was his miniſter and ſeruant, in the work, miniſterie and preaching of the Goſpell, and ſeruing him therin, not in outward ſhew onely, or for filthie luere ſake, but in all fidelitie and ſyncere vprightnes: and therefore he is called in this place not onely a miniſter, but a faithfull miniſter. And if we conſider or reſpect the Apoſtle, he was his fellow-ſeruant in the Lord, becauſe both the one and the other of them, Paul I meane and Tychicus, did ſerue the ſelfeſame God euen the father, and the ſelfeſame Lord Ieſus Chriſt in the holie miniſterie,

walking in it with all fidelitie, as became them that had receiued grace from God, not onely to beleeue his trueth, but to walke in the obedience of it that way eſpecially. And this doth teach vs that by example, which the Apoſtle preſcribeth in an other place by precept and rule: Let him that hath an office, attend vpon his office, Rom. 12. And againe, What is required of ſtewards (which al Gods miniſters are) but that they ſhould be found faithfull? And Chriſt ſaith, Who is a faithfull and wiſe ſeruant? euen ſuch a one as his master ſetteth ouer his houſehold, to giue them their iuſt proportion of meate in due ſeaſon, Matth. 24. What careleſnes, yea what vnfaithfulnes is there in all callings? yea Eccleſiaſticall as well as ciuill? Who thinketh that the place he hath is from God? or that he muſt render an account vnto him? If Magiſtrates conſidered this, they would not be ſo furious and cruell, as many of them are. If Preachers did weigh it, they would not be ſo cold and careleſſe, ſo negligent and idle, in the execution of their duties, and in gaining men to God, as commonly they are. I will tell you my mind, there are few found in this function, to whom we may rightly attribute the adiuncts and titles that the Apoſtle giueth here to Tychicus, that they are faithful miniſters, and fellow ſeruants in the Lords worke: for feare many times and flatterie, bleareth out, if it doe not vtterly kill, their fidelitie and integritie: and corrupt reſpects, of priuate profit, honour and ſuch like, maketh them goe a way by themſelues, and to withdraw from the reſt of their brethren. Wee haue too much experience of this in the Courtlike preachers of our kingdome here, and other reformed Churches abroad, taſte and ſmacke too much of it, this being one bitter fruite that the Hierarchie hath left behinde it amongſt vs. And thus farre for Tychicus and his titles.
            Now concerning Oneſimus, Paul ſetteth him out and commendeth him to the Coloſſians, firſt by his common calling, by which being through faith grafted into Chriſt, he became a faithfull and beloued brother vnto him in Chriſt. The ſelfeſame man that is here termed a faithfull & beloued brother, is named in the Epiſtle to Philemon verſ. 10. his ſon whom he begot in his bonds. How can this be? can one man haue two titles? Yea wel enough, if we conſider diuers reſpects and ſtates wherein they

are, through Gods grace and goodnes. Such as the Miniſters beget by the Goſpell, and bring vnto Chriſt and his Church, they are, as in regard of that worke of begetting them in the faith, and may be iuſtly called ſonnes: and this is that which the Apoſtle ſaith in the Corinthians, that though they had many teachers, yet they had but one father which was himſelfe, who alſo had begotten them vnto God through the Goſpell, 1. Cor. 4. 14. But when that worke hath increaſed in them, and that they are become ſtrong men in Chriſt, then hee doth euery where, and ſo may wee acknowledge all ſound beleeuers to be our brethren, as who are indeede the ſonnes of one and the ſelfeſame father, to wit God, in and by Chriſt, the firſt begotten brother of vs all, and in whom the whole familie is named both in heauen and earth. Secondly, he commendeth Oneſimus vnto them by theſe termes, that he was one of them, that is as wee would ſay, their countriman, and had the fellowſhip of the ſame countrey or nation with them, and that not onely generally as Grecians, neither yet more particularly as people of Phrygia, wherein Coloſſe ſtood, but it may be of the ſelfeſame towne and citie. Whatſoeuer it be, we may learne here many good leſſons and doctrines. And firſt, that no mans ſinne, which hee hath truly repented of before God and the Church, ſhould be any diſparagement to him in ſubſequent times, no more then Oneſimus fraud and flying from his maſter was to him: nor wee thinke neuer a whit the worſe of him, nor haue him in leſſe eſteeme, then Paul had Oneſimus: for ſeeing God hath forgiuen it, as repentance is a true pledge thereof, and the Church hath receiued him, as it ought vpon vnfained amendment, what reaſon that priuate and particular perſons, ſhould refuſe them, or thinke euill of them? vnleſſe they will be more wiſe and iuſt then God, or more ſeuere then the Church, and I think neither the one nor the other is fit for priuate men. And yet we ſee amongſt vs, men ſo peeuiſhly pettiſh and wayward towards (I will not ſay offending parties, howſoeuer they offended, but) repenting perſons, that after a ſinne is once diſcouered, they will neuer be ſatisfied, but alwaies ſuſpicious, hauing for a ground of their ſurmiſes a maxime of the Ciuil law, He that is once found to be euill, is alwaies ſuppoſed to be euill:
               
but forgetting the rule of the Apoſtle, 1. Cor. 13. that charitie is not ſuſpicious, and that they proceede by another rule towards offending, yea repenting perſons, then Iwis, they would haue practiſed towards them, if they were in the like caſe. But let vs caſt away from vs this and all other corruptions, that ſo wee may walke more religiouſly towards God, and more charitably towards his ſeruants.
            Secondly obſerue, that Paul, not thinking it enough to haue commended Oneſimus, for his brotherly loue and coniunction that he had with him in Chriſt, but adding alſo that hee was of the ſame nation, countrey, yea it may be citie with them: in which reſpect alſo he ſpeaketh afterwards of Epaphras, verſ. 12. of this chapter: and of this very Oneſimus, in his Epiſtle to Philemon verſ. 16. he declareth, that hee ſhould be ſo much the more deare to Philemon, becauſe he had been his ſeruant: Obſerue (I ſay) and gather from hence, that theſe naturall and ciuill familiarities and friendſhips, in which men partake one of them with another, as for example, conſanguinitie, affinitie, nation, countrey, citie, &c. ſhould be vnto them, which through faith are ingrafted into Chriſt, more ſtrict cauſes and occaſions of mutuall loue one of them towards another in the Lord. We denie not, but that that ſpirituall fellowſhip and communion which we haue in Chriſt, is indeed very neceſſarie, becauſe by it wee are all in him made brethren one with another, yea that without it there can be no true or ſound loue, although men otherwiſe may be very ſtrictly ioyned together. The reaſon is, that whatſoeuer is in men without him, is but naturall and humane. And indeede to ſay truth, there cannot be any ſynceritie of the heart without Chriſt: and yet notwithſtanding, if vnto that ſpirituall coniunction, there be added ſome naturall or politicall coniunction, there will alſo be a greater degree and further ſtep of loue: in ſo much that the faithful people may more tenderly loue and regard them, which both in faith and fleſh are linked to them, then thoſe that are knit to them onely in the fellowſhip of the ſame religion. Which as the Apoſtle himſelfe meaneth, 1. Timoth. 5. 8. ſaying: If any man prouide not for his owne, and ſpecially for them that are of his houſehold, he hath denied the faith, and is worſe then
               
               an Infidell: ſo it is not obſcurely ſignified in that rule, Galat. 6. Do good vnto all, ſpecially to thoſe that are of the houſehold of faith. And if nature muſt giue place to religion: then religion and it being ioyned together, men are and muſt be more ſtrictly tyed. And yet we ſee that vnder the colour of kinred, religion is deſtitute: and ſome vnder pretext of relieuing the religious, deſtitute their owne fleſh. The truth is, that both muſt be performed, if God himſelfe giue abilitie: and when we lack power to doe to all alike, then to preferre them that concerne vs in fleſh and faith. And let this ſuffice for the perſons, as they are diſtinctly commended to the Coloſſians.
            Now a little of them coniunctly. He ſaith, that he ſent Tychicus to them: and with him Oneſimus. There are two cauſes (as it ſhould ſeeme) for which hee ſent them. For though verſ. 8. hee ſeemeth to ſpeake of Tychicus onely, yet he expreſſely mentioneth Oneſimus, verſ. 9: and laieth almoſt the ſame burthen vpon him, ſpecially as in regard of priuate affaires, that he doth vpon Tychicus. I ſay therefore, as I ſaid, there are two cauſes of this miſſion or legation. One, that hee might by them vnderſtand in what termes the affaires of the Coloſſians ſtood, ſpecially for their Church cauſes: for otherwiſe though hee wiſhed them well in the world, yet he medled not much with their worldly buſines. The other, that knowing how weake and faint good mens hearts be, he might, by the comming and preſence of theſe two, comfort and incourage the Coloſſians. Which though moſt properly it were the worke of Tychicus, as of the miniſter of the word, yet no doubt Oneſimus, as a particular member of the Church, might in his meaſure performe it, yea and did in his meaſure. To theſe two cauſes he addeth a third, and the ſame of no leſſe moment then the former, namely to cauſe the Coloſſians to vnderſtand in what ſtate he and his matters were. Becauſe as the good condition of the Coloſſians would make the Apoſtles heart glad: ſo the Apoſtle being well, who had been their gracious and good teacher, they could not but reioyce. From all which wee may obſerue, that though Paul were in his enemies hands, and were faſt bound in chaines, as we ſay, yet he thought it not enough, by writing this preſent Epiſtle to the Coloſſians, to confirme and ſtrengthen

them in the faith, but alſo ſendeth Tychicus vnto them, and together with him Oneſimus, whom notwithſtanding hee might haue detained with him, the better to miniſter vnto him in the bands, that he indured for the Goſpell. And all this he doth, that by them hee might the better declare vnto the Church his own particular eſtate, and be the better informed in the knowledge of their affaires. All which he doth not in a looſe minde, as in regard of himſelfe, babling out his owne matters, he careth not how, nor where, nor to whom: nor with a curious minde as in reſpect of their buſineſſes, being as too many are now adaies, too much occupied in other mens affaires, and careleſly neglect their owne, but of a very carefull heart for them and their good. Which care of his, amplified as you ſee, and being ſo great as it was indeede for the Churches of Chriſt, whoſe benefit and good edification in Chriſt, neglecting as it were his owne life and health, hee had alwaies before his eyes, ſhould teach vs what we ſhould doe. Which yet that he might the better perſwade vs vnto, he mentioneth it, yea hee diſcourſeth vpon it in many places, and namely 2. Cor. 11. verſ. 28. 29. where hee ſaith: Beſides thoſe things that come from without, that feare and trouble that daily riſeth vp in me, forceth me ſtill, I meane, care for all Churches. Who is afflicted, and I am not afflicted? who is offended, and I burne not? But what ſhall we ſay, ſinne and Satan, and the intiſements of this preſent wicked world, haue daſeled mens eyes, and beſotted their vnderſtandings, and plainly doe expreſſe the palpable, yea the deplorable calamitie of theſe naughty daies and bad times, in which a man ſhall hardly find any man, amongſt the members of the Church, that hath conſcience or care of the performance of this dutie. And can we maruaile at it, that the poore people know it not, or feele it not, ſith you ſhall hardly find one, amongſt many thouſand of the miniſters & preachers of Gods holy word, who doth not more care for his own health and welfare, then for the incolumitie of any other, yea of the whole Church beſides? And is it not manifeſt by this, that if a man be brought into ſome perill and hazard, hee will with the neglect of the Church, prouide for one, and imagineth, that if it goeth well with him, it goeth well withall. So ſtrongly

doth the world, and worldly things, and ſelfe loue, and all other corruption beare ſway: and ſo truly may wee ſay, as the Apoſtle Paul doth, 2. Tim. 4. 10. Demas hath forſaken me, and hath imbraced this preſent world. But indeed, if there were at this day ſuch fidelitie and zeale in the hearts of them that exerciſe and execute the miniſterie of God, as there was in Paul, and in other of Gods faithfull ſeruants in his time, they would eſteeme as nothing all the dangers of this life, and they would account as durt and dung all worldly pleaſures and profits, in compariſon of Chriſts glorie, and the Churches good. And of this let vs aſſure our ſelues, that till men, yea miniſters be come ſo farre, they are but the ſhadowes of Chriſtians, and vizards or counterfeits, in compariſon of Gods faithfull ſeruants and miniſters. To amend this geere is not in vs, howſoeuer we may ſpeake of it, and wiſh it: God onely muſt work it. To him therefore let vs goe with cheerefulnes and earneſtnes, and beſeech him to worke this care in the hearts of all faithfull miniſters that belong to him, and are imployed in his Church. Which he graunt for Chriſt Ieſus ſake: to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be giuen all praiſe and power, both now and at all times, of vs and all people,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XXXIX. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 10. 11.
               
                  10 Ariſtarchus my priſon fellow ſaluteth you, and Marcus Barnab as couſin (concerning whom, yee haue receiued commaundements: If he come vnto you, receiue him)
                  
                  11 And Ieſus which is called Iuſtus, who are of the Circumciſion. Theſe only being helpers with me in the kingdome of God, haue been comfort vnto me.
                  
               
            
            
               IF you remember (brethren) the things that haue been ſpoken before, you may perceiue, that in theſe verſes and the reſt following, there is contained, as wee may ſay, the ſeuenth part of the whole Epiſtle, and the fourth part of this particular chapter. And conſiſteth principally of ſalutations or greetings, which ſome that were with Paul, whē he wrote this Epiſtle, ſent to the Church of Coloſſe, and with commendatiōs alſo, which the ſaid Church was in Pauls name (and it may be in the name of diuers that were preſent with him) to do to another Church, & ſome particular members of it. The firſt ſort of theſe two ſalutations, are comprehended in theſe verſes that we haue read, and ſo on in the 12. 13. and 14. The other is contained in the fifteenth verſe. And wee are to mark, for the more cleere vnderſtanding of the text, that theſe greetings are ſent from two kinds of people, according as the world it ſelf was diuided, and as God was pleaſed out of them to gather a Church vnto himſelfe: that is to ſay, they were ſent, partly from the circumciſed, meaning thereby the Iewes,

becauſe that ſigne was in ſome vſe among them at that time: and partly from the vncircumciſed, that is from the Gentiles, who were not clogged, or to be clogged with that ceremonie. Of theis latter he ſpeaketh verſ. 12. 13. 14. and of the former in theſe two verſes, yet ſo as we muſt vnderſtand that one of thē alſo was a Gentile, namely Aristarchus, as we ſhal better perceiue anone. And this I would haue further to be marked, that hauing begun in ſome of the foregoing verſes to treate of priuate and particular affaires, hee holdeth on here in theſe and the reſt following, that ſo all and euery one of the Church might vnderſtand, that he was both carefull for, and mindfull of the whole, and euery one of them, and of al their good, ſpecially ſpirituall, which ſhould cauſe thē likewiſe to affect him.
            Thoſe three perſons that are mentioned in theſe two verſes, are after a double manner deſcribed here. For either he doth by ſome particular deſcription commend them to the Coloſſians, and of this ſort are, my fellow in bands, attributed to Ariſtarchus; Barnabas kinſman, attributed to Marke; Iustus attributed to Ieſus: with ſome cōmon title, common I meane either to two of them; and that is that they were of the Circumciſion: or els to all three together, that they onely helpe him in Gods kingdome, and were ſingular comforts vnto him. The firſt of theſe is named here Aristarchus. He was of Theſſalonica in Macedonia, and was conuerted by Pauls miniſterie and preaching, and accompanying him in moſt of his iourneys, he was taken with him, as alſo was Gaius, in the tumult that was made at Epheſus againſt him, which being pacified, hee accompanied Paul going into Aſia, and was caried priſoner together with Paul vnto Rome. If you would ſee theſe things more at large, look Act. 19. 28. & 20. 4. & 27. 2. Mention alſo is made of him in Pauls Epiſtle to Philemon, where among others named in that place, hee is ſaid to be Pauls helper: as in this text hee is counted and called his priſon fellow. All tending to this end, not onely to ſhew the manifold graces that God had vouchſafed to ſhew to Ariſtarchus, which were manifeſted by ſound fruits euen from the time of his conuerſion to that preſent houre, and particularly his zeale and conſtancie in the truth, that by no tumults or trials did ſhrinke from it, and his care

and loue towards the Apoſtle, with whom he ſtood foorth and abode euen in bonds: but the better to moue the Coloſſians, with godly ioy and loue to receiue a man of ſuch worthie parts, and to credit him in what he ſhould ſay, or in any thing they ſhould ſend by him. And this teacheth vs, whom wee ſhould beſt eſteeme, like of or credit, euen thoſe that haue bin moſt faithfull and faſt to God, his trueth and miniſters. For as we moſt miſlike, or ſhould miſlike them that are moſt wicked, as the Prophet ſaith Pſal. 139. Doe not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? yea I hate them right ſore, as though they were mine enemies: ſo ſhould we moſt dearely eſteeme, and carefully commend the moſt godly and faithfull, that ſo we might ſay of our ſelues, as the Prophet Dauid doth, Pſal. 16. My goodnes reacheth not vnto thee, O God, but to the Saints that are on the earth: all my delight is in them.
            
            The ſecond mentioned here is named Marke, whom ſome interpreters make the ſecond amongſt them that were circumciſed, and are mentioned in this place. I will not greatly contend about this, though I haue before expreſſed my minde touching the ſame. To me it ſeemeth, that becauſe Ariſtarchus was a Gentile, and we reade nothing of his circumciſion, that it is manifeſt to thinke Marke to be the firſt of them, who as it ſhould ſeeme was a Iew, or at leaſtwiſe deſcended of ſome Iewiſh parents and kinred, and therefore likely yea certaine, that he was circumciſed. Who this man was, and what he was, the holie hiſtorie will ſufficiently declare: and particularly wee may reade of him, Act. 12. 12. and 13. 5. 13. and 15. 27. and in other places. It ſhould ſeeme he had two names, Iohn & Mark, but this latter being his ſurname, as appeareth Acts 12. 12. where alſo it appeareth that he was the ſonne of one Mary a godly woman, which likewiſe is manifeſted by this, that the Church met in her houſe, and that Peter after hee was deliuered out of priſon, came to the ſame place. This man, when Paul and Barnabas returned from Ieruſalem, was taken into their companie, and miniſtred vnto them all their iourney, euen vntill they came to Perga a citie of Pamphilia, where departing from them he returned to Ieruſalem, by meanes whereof there aroſe that great controuerſie betweene Paul and Barnabas,
               
mentioned in the Acts, and that after they came from the Synod or Councell held at Ieruſelem, Act. 15. through which contention, Paul and Barnabas were ſeuered, and Barnabas tooke Marke who went with him into Cyprus. But theſe iars and diuiſions notwithſtanding, Mark was reconciled to Paul, and was with him when he was priſoner at Rome, and miniſtred vnto him in his bands, as appeareth both in this place, and alſo in the epiſtle to Philemon verſ. 24. and 2. Timot. 4. 11. where hee ſaith: Take Marke and bring him with thee, for he is profitable vnto me to minister. And hee is deſcribed here by two adiuncts, as I may ſay: the firſt is his affinitie with Barnabas, whoſe couſin he is ſaid to be. From whence we learne, that affinitie amongſt great men in the Church, ſpecially if they be godly and faithfull indeed, ſhould make them more eſteemed among the Saints, and ſhould worke a greater eſtimation of them in our hearts, euen for their kinreds ſake, by whom the Lord hath inlarged the glorie of his name amongſt vs. Otherwiſe wee ſhould ſhew our ſelues to be ſuch as would not be moued, neither by the graces of God in their callings, nor by the gift of nature in their kinred & fleſh, God hauing ioyned both together as it were in one perſon, that by all meanes wee might learne to draw nigh vnto him, and to ſay indeede, amongſt our ſelues, O how beautifull are the feete of them that bring glad tidings, euen the glad tidings of the Goſpell! Secondly, he is ſet foorth as a man furniſhed with commandements from Paul and others, in theſe words: concerning whom ye haue receiued commaundements. Theſe commandements touching him, were directed vnto diuers Churches, and amongſt the reſt to that of Coloſſe. The tenour or effect of the commaund was, that if he came vnto them, they ſhould receiue him reuerently, intertaine him kindly, and purſue him with due honour, as we would ſay, as the true and faithfull ſeruant of Chriſt Ieſus. There might be many cauſes of this commaund: but two eſpecially worthie to be conſidered. Men are backward to good workes generally, and particularly to religious intertainment of the Saints. This iniquitie Paul laboureth to preuent in the Coloſſians, by this good caueat. Againe, becauſe Paul had before refuſed to take him with him, and that for this reaſon, becauſe

he departed from Paul and Barnabas in Pamphilia, and refuſed to be their companion in that worke and labour of the Lord: and thereupon men might ſuppoſe, that Paul caried that hard conceit of him ſtill, and particularly the Coloſsians might happily deeme, that if hee ſhould come vnto them, hee was not meete to be admitted. But the Apoſtle hauing proued his repentance, and ſeene his ſyncere care to promote the Goſpell, did againe commend him to the Church. And from hence we ſhould learne, that no former offences ſhould be remembred or thought vpon, after the heart is truly touched for them, and men are mutually reconciled: but that as God forgetteth and forgiueth whatſoeuer is paſt, when men haue No vpbraiding with paſt tranſgreſſions after repentance vnfainedly repented; ſo ſhould his Saints and ſeruants doe vpon earth, neuer remembring other mens paſt iniquities, much leſſe vpbrayding them with them, ſpecially when they haue ſhewed ſure ſignes of amendment. And therefore wee may ſee how much they are out of the way and miſlead by Satans malice, and their owne corrupt heart, that will vpon euery light occaſion hit men in the teeth with their former falles, plainly manifeſting by this, that they neuer felt ſin in themſelues, nor vnfainedly remitted the ſame in others: for had they done ſo, theſe and ſuch like corruptions could not haue caried ſway in them, as we ſee it doth.
            It followeth in the text. And Ieſus, which is called Iuſtus. Of this man being the ſecond, I take it of the circumciſed mentioned here, as we haue ſaid before, I finde no mention in any other place of the New Teſtament but in this: and therefore cannot ſay much. Euen here he hath two names: the one Hebrue, that is Ieſus: the other Latin, that is Iuſtus. Both his names imply and ſignifie good things, by which alſo it ſhould ſeeme he was a good man. But becauſe we haue no more certaintie of his life and qualities, this ſhall be ſufficient that hath been generally ſpoken.
            Now it followeth, to ſee what the Apoſtle ſaith of all theſe together. Theſe onely are my workefellowes vnto the kingdome of God, which haue been vnto my conſolation. This is a general commendation of them, and in it concerning them he affirmeth two things. The firſt, that they were fellow-labourers or workmen

with him, in aduauncing the kingdome of God, they all ioyning hearts and hands together in ſetting forward that excellent A good thing when faithfull men ioyne together in well doing. worke. The ſecond, and it doth in part proceed from the former, namely that they were no ſmall comfort vnto him, meaning thereby, not onely as in regard of aduauncing the worke of the miniſterie, but alſo yeelding him ſound conſolation in his impriſonment and bands, and that made me to ſay before, in part proceeding from the former. By the kingdome of God in this place, omitting the diuers acceptions of the word in the Scriptures, ſpecially of the New Teſtament, is meant the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt, by which, as it were by What is meant by the kingdome of God. a ſtanderd lifted vp, God gathereth a Church vnto himſelfe, and thereby manifeſteth to men a meanes, whereby they may haue entrance into the ſaid Church: yea by which he guideth and gouerneth, both the Church it ſelfe, and all thoſe that are gathered thereinto: the Goſpell ſeruing not onely to begin and beget faith and a good conſcience, but to hold men on in the ſame, and to cauſe them to grow therein. And yet this double commendation of them, is amplified by theſe words in the text, that theſe were they alone of the Circumciſion, who holpe him in promoting Chriſts kingdome at Rome, and did much comfort him, as before hath bin ſhewed. And that word onely would be marked, becauſe that from it we may probably conclude, either that Peter was neuer at Rome at all: or elſe that if he were there, he was not ſo good and faithfull a head to Peter not at Rome. the Church, nor ſo comfortable a companion to his fellow Apoſtle, as the Romane Catholikes do make him. For if he were at any time at Rome, I would faine know what time we ſhould rather thinke him to haue been at Rome, then a little before that time, which they themſelues aſſigne to his paſſion or ſuffering there, which in their owne opinion is the very ſelfeſame time in which this Epiſtle was written, they affirming that both Peter and Paul ſuffered and were crucified at Rome in one and the ſelfeſame yeere. But it appeareth by this which is ſaid here, that Peter was not then at Rome, when from thence he wrote this Epiſtle. And beſides, how can it be credible, that if hee had been then at Rome, hee ſhould not haue furthered Paul in aduauncing Chriſts kingdome? or ſhould not haue

yeelded him comfort in his bands? To ſay or thinke the firſt, is at the leaſt to make him a diſſembler of his religion, or a denier of Chriſt, as once he had done before: but they hold, that after he had receiued the holie Ghoſt, he was freed from all error, ſpecially in faith, though they forget his fall mentioned in the Galathians, & remember not, that if that intituled him into not erring, the reſt of the Apoſtles had as great a priuiledge that way as he, becauſe they al equally receiued the ſpirit. And to affirme the other, is to make him vncharitable, and to note him to be a forſaker of the brethren, and not a fellow ſufferer with them in their bands and afflictions. So that whileſt they goe about to bring him to Rome, they haue ſpunne a fayre threed, in that they pull vpon him, and by conſequent vpon themſelues, theſe inconueniences at the leaſt. But the truth is, hee was not there. And for the further ſtrongthening of vs therein, we are to be perſwaded, that if he had been there, the Apoſtle, who is ſo carefull, yea ſo curious as it were, both in this and other Epiſtles of his written from Rome, mentioning ſo many men of meane note in the Church, and the names of ſo many faithfull teachers alſo, as then were preſent with him there, and yet maketh no mention at all of Peter, whom yet notwithſtanding in another place, he calleth the Pillar of the Church, Galath. 2. verſ. 9. But to leaue this and to proceed to another point.
            In that the Apoſtle is ſo carefull to giue charge and order touching Marke and the receiuing of him, we may ſee firſt that Marke was a good man, and ſo learne by that, who ſhould be deare and precious vnto vs, euen the Saints that are vpon the 
               Whom Gods people ſhould moſt affect. 
               earth, as the Prophet ſaith Pſal. 16. and find in our ſelues thereby, the true note, that wee are ſound members of the Church militant, and therfore ſhall be gathered to the Church triumphant, in that a vile perſon is deſpiſed in our eyes, but wee make much of them that feare the Lord, Pſal. 15. But the world is quite and cleane contrarie, for it loueth her owne, and hateth the godly. So that wee may ſay as the Prophet ſaith: He that frameth himſelfe vnto righteouſneſſe, maketh himſelfe a pray. And ſurely, if it bee a great ſinne to condemne the generation of the iuſt, then it cannot but be a tranſgreſſion alſo, not to commend

and eſteeme the godly: for beſides that, God accounteth the fauours done to them, as done to himſelfe: and on the other ſide reckoneth the indignities offered them, as accompliſhed againſt his own Maieſty, the very graces yt he hath ſhed abroad into their hearts, ſhould make vs to eſteeme thē. So that if we would not behold their perſons, yet we ſhuld acknowledge his mercies & graces in thē, and accordingly reuerence and regard thē. Secondly, in this act of Paul, what great care & diligence the Primitiue Church had, in giuing teſtimonies vnto men. No doubt the cauſe mouing them thereto was, many ſeducers and falſe brethren went abroad, and they To whom the Church ſhould veeld teſtimonie. would not willingly haue had the godly and faithfull deceiued by them, which ſinne no doubt they might the more eaſily haue fallen into, if the Church had not kept this good courſe, in yeelding faithfull teſtimonie to the holie profeſſors, yea preachers it may bee of Chriſts Goſpell. It there were at this day the like diligence and care, amongſt ſuch Chriſtians as dwell in diuers regions and parts of the world, or amongſt them that liue in one and the ſelfeſame kingdome, countrey and Church: theſe vagrant men, that ſo much runne vp and downe from place to place, and from countrey to countrey, and trauaile ſo ſore to ſeduce and carrie men away from Chriſt, could not ſo much preuaile as they doe. Which I doe not meane onely of Ieſuites and Seminarie Prieſts, though I take them to be the moſt daungerous enemies of the Church, but others both of corrupt life and corrupt doctrine alſo, who hauing ſpued themſelues by their euil dealing, labour by running vp and downe, in propounding poyſonfull doctrine, and bad example of life, to leaue a miſerable yea infectiue ſtinch behind them whereſoeuer they come. Theſe ſhuld the Church and Magiſtrates haue great regard to repreſſe, as on the other ſide to exalt the godly and faithfull. But ſith they are cold and careleſſe both in the one and the other, and wee know that God regardeth his owne vineyard, let vs intreate him that is the Lord of the vineyard, not onely to thruſt foorth workmen into his harueſt, Matth. 9. but alſo to repreſſe rouers and wanderers, which ſeeke nothing but their owne bellies, and the ſupplanting

of the truth of doctrine, and honeſtie of life: which he vouchſafe to bring to paſſe euen for Chriſt Ieſus his ſake, to whom be praiſe in the Church for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE XL. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 12, 13, 14.
               
                  12 Epaphras the ſeruant of Chriſt, who alſo is one of you, ſaluteth you, ſtriuing alwaies for you in prayers, that ye may ſtand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
                  
                  13 For this I teſtifie of him, that he burneth in a great deſire of you: and of them of Laodicea, and of them of Hierapolis.
                  
                  14 Luke the beloued Phyſition greeteth you: and ſo doth Demas.
                  
               
            
            
               THe Apoſtle hauing begun to name ſome, who ſaluted the Church of Coloſſe, as you haue heard, in ſome of the former verſes; holdeth on in theſe verſes to doe the like: and nameth particularly two or three, as Epaphras, Luke, and Demas: all which it is very probable, if not certaine, that they were Gentiles. And two of them, that is Epaphras and Luke he diuerſly deſcribeth, contenting himſelfe with the bare naming of Demas. Touching euery one of them, as they lie in the text. Epaphras is the firſt, & he deſcribeth him by diuers adiuncts:  as firſt that he was one of thē, by which what  he meaneth, hath bin expounded alreadie, when we treated of Epaphras commended. the 9. verſe of this chapter, where Oneſimus hath the ſame title

giuen vnto him. But the Apoſtle alleageth it here, to tell them that euen in that reſpect hee ſhould be the more deare vnto them, and the better accepted of them, notwithſtanding that our Sauiour ſaith; and we finde it euery where true in the world, that a Prophet is not without honour, but in his owne countrey and his fathers houſe. 
                Secondly, hee is ſaid here to be the ſeruant of Chriſt, whom alſo he had mentioned before, chap. 1. verſ. 7. where he is called a faithfull miniſter of Chriſt for the Coloſſians. By which we may ſee, that he hath this title of the ſeruant of Chriſt, by reaſon of the ſpeciall calling that God had committed vnto him, in which he ſerued Chriſt, by the preaching of his glorious Goſpell.  Thirdly, he is deſcribed by the earneſt and continuall prayers that he powred foorth vnto  God, as on the Coloſſians behalfe: as alſo from the hartie and vnfained affection that he bare to the Coloſſians, and to diuers other faithfull people beſide. His continuall prayers are mentioned in the latter end of the 12. verſe, and his ſyncere heart is deſcribed in the 13. verſe.
            The ſecond that the Apoſtle mentioneth here, that greeteth Luke commended. the Church, is Luke: whom the Apoſtle deſcribeth here  firſt by the vocation that he had and exerciſed, before he was  called to the office and function of the Miniſterie, in preaching or writing the Goſpell of Chriſt, that is, he was a Phyſition. 
                Secondly, that he was beloued: vnder which terme hee is  commended, from that loue the Apoſtle caried towards him, as a very Chriſtian man, and very familiar and inward with the Apoſtle. So that hee ſignifieth that if they loued him himſelfe, they could not chuſe but affect Luke: becauſe that the loue of Chriſts Apoſtle, and the familiaritie that hee had with Luke, could not but much commend him to the Church.
            
                The third man mentioned is Demas, who hath no title of  commendation giuen vnto him here or elſewhere, for ought I Demas. know, which to me may ſerue to argue, that hee caried not himſelfe ſo well as others did, and that the Apoſtle had ſome ſuſpition of him, or elſe hee would not haue been ſo ſparing: And of all theſe the Apoſtle ſpeaketh verſ. 14. But wee will treate of them ſeuerally as they lie in the text.
            Concerning many of the termes or titles attributed to Epaphras,
               
we ſhall not neede to ſay much, becauſe they haue been ſundrie times expounded alreadie. Such as haue not been declared let vs ſomewhat deale with. And firſt for his prayers, three things are expreſſely marked therein by the Apoſtle:  Firſt, the manner that hee vſed therein, contained in theſe Things obſerued in the Apoſtles praiers words, ſtriuing alwaies, meaning thereby earneſtnes and feruencie in powring them foorth.  Secondly, the perſons for whom he prayed ſo heartily, namely the Coloſſians, who no  doubt had great neede of that dutie, comprehended vnder theſe termes, for you. 
                Thirdly, the very matter or grace hee prayed for, as on their behalfe, which was not light but graue  and gracious, expreſſed in theſe words, that ye may ſtand perfect and complete, &c.
            
            When he expreſſeth the manner of his prayers, by the word ſtriuing, we muſt not thinke that he meaneth any carnall combat or bodily conflict, but ſuch a one as was ſpirituall, and had indeed hand to hand with the ghoſtly enemies of our ſaluation, the world, the fleſh and the diuell. Which as they are alwaies readie to hinder all the good motions of the ſpirit in our Hinderers of the praiers of the Saints. minds; ſo ſpecially doe they exerciſe their force and their fraud, in oppoſing againſt our prayers, ſometimes caſting ſtumbling blockes in our waies, to hinder vs from the doing of that duty, as diſturbing our paſſions and affections, of loue, hatred, feare, anger, and ſuch like: and ſometimes when they ſee that theſe will not preuaile to let or hinder our prayers, they aſſay by all meanes to make them cold, faint, few: and leaſt by continuing our prayers wee ſhould conceiue hope to be heard, they ſet before vs one while our owne, another while other mens ſinnes, for whom ſometimes wee pray as for our ſelues. All which things are not obſcurely ſignified and ſet out in the third chapter of the prophecie of Zechariah, vnder the perſon and practiſe of Iehaſhua the high Prieſt, mentioned there, and matters contained therein. But what ſhall we doe? content our ſelues with the knowledge of theſe things? No, that is diſcomfortable. But wee muſt reſiſt and ſtriue againſt, Weapons to withſtand our ſpirituall enemies by being fenced and armed with the weapons of the holy Ghoſt, that is, with faith and hope, and other good graces expreſſed and plainly put downe Epheſ. 6. Neither may we at any hand

ſuffer our enemies to be more powerfull in hindring our praiers, then the might of the ſpirit to further them in vs. For the firſt of theſe is, to giue place vnto Satan: and the latter were to quench and coole the ſpirit, and both be euill, and therefore wee ſhould auoidthem.
            But he addeth in the doing of this dutie: alwaies, in ſinuating thereby that as he did it often and earneſtly, ſo we ſhould not doe it for a time onely as many doe, but that this combate and conflict of ours, in and about prayer, muſt bee perpetuall and continuall, euen as our prayers themſelues ought ſo to be. Whereunto the better to bee prouoked, wee muſt remember theſe two things: firſt, that whether we pray for our ſelues or Two things furthering perſeuevance in prayer. for others, wee haue daily need of ſome new benefit and increaſe of Gods grace in vs. Secondly, that wee ſhould euery moment and minute forgoe the grace that we haue receiued from God, except God, who hath giuen it vs, did preſerue the ſame both in our ſelues and in others. To which we may adde the third, that we can neuer come to praier, but that Satan our common aduerſarie, will ſet himſelfe againſt vs, and do what hee can to hinder our prayers: and that therefore he being alwaies oppoſite, we ſhould alwaies pray.
            The next thing he telleth vs of in this ſeruice of prayer, is, the parties for whom we muſt pray: for you. True it is, that we muſt powre foorth prayers, and ſtriue in our ſupplication for all men: according to which the Apoſtle ſaith, 1. Timoth. 2. 1. I exhort therefore, that aboue all things, ſupplications, prayers, interceſſions and thankeſgiuings be made for all men: yet we are more ſpecially bound to pray for them that are linked vnto vs in Whom we ſhould chiefly pray for. the ſame fellowſhip of the bodie of the Church, then for others not ſo ſtraitly ioyned with vs. Again, amongſt the faithfull, we are more obliged to pray for them that are of kin vnto vs in the fleſh and touch vs in our bloud, then thoſe that are further remoued. For euen this naturall coniunction worketh in them, that otherwiſe are ioyned together in Chriſt, ſome more great and excellent degree of loue. The reaſon is, becauſe the more bands we haue to tye vs together, ſo much the more great ought to be our loue and care for our and others ſaluation. And this doth Paul profeſſe Rom. 9. 2. 3. ſaying, that
               
               he was eſpecially carefull for the Iſraelites, his kinſmen according to the fleſh. And Philip. 2. 26. he commendeth Epaphroditus, that he was much troubled and grieued, by reaſon of the ſorrow of the Philippians, from whom he was ſent, as it ſhould ſeeme, to the Apoſtle.
            Now wee come to the matter, for which he prayeth, as on the behalfe of the Coloſſians, in theſe words: that ye may ſtand perfect and complet, &c. He doth not pray for this onely that they might be perfect, but that they might ſtand perfect, that What it is to ſtand perfect. is, that they might conſtantly perseuere and goe forward in that perfection, which God had vouchſafed vnto them. For the word of ſtanding, ſignifieth conſtancie and perſeuerance, yea ſuch a conſtancie and perſeuerance, as hath courage of heart ioyned therewithall. Our perfection ſtandeth in the knowledge of God, in righteouſneſſe, holines, &c. And this is two-fold. One imputed vnto vs, that is, that perfect righteouſneſſe Two ſorts of perfection. and ſatisfaction of Chriſt, which God imputeth vnto vs, that through faith beleeue in Chriſt, and in which hee doth euen think vs as perfect, as if we were altogether iuſt and holie in our ſelues. The other is inherent in vs, when the holie Ghoſt worketh in our mindes the knowledge of God and of his will, and in our hearts holines and righteouſnes, and wholy purgeth vs in the inward man from ſinne and natural corruption. The firſt of theſe is wholy and altogether perfect, and that euen in this life, and indeed is the true cauſe of that perfection that is inherent in vs: which wholy floweth from, or conſiſteth in our coniunction and fellowſhip with Chriſt: without which indeede there could be no perfection at all in vs. But as for that other, namely that inherent perfection, which is wrought in vs by the holie Ghoſt regenerating vs, it cannot be abſolute and in euery reſpect perfect in vs in this life, by reaſon of ſome darkneſſes that we carrie about with vs in our minds, for we know in part, and prophecie in part, as the Apoſtle ſaith, 1. Cor. 13. 9. and by reaſon of the remainders of ſinne and filthines of corruption, which ſhall neuer be vtterly and altogether aboliſhed in vs, vntill that by the ſpirit of Chriſt dwelling fully in vs, we be perfectly freed from impuritie, and all manner of pollution, which ſhall be brought to

paſſe in that other life that is to come, when wee ſhall be altogether preſent with the Lord. Notwithſtanding wee muſt endeuour and ſtriue continually, that we may be comefully perfect, and daily attaine to greater perfection, Chriſt ſo commanding vs, Matth. 5. 48. Be ye perfect: for vnleſſe wee daily proceed in perfection in this life, wee ſhall neuer haue it altogether perfect and abſolute in that which is to come. And this indeed is it which the Apoſtle ſaith, Epaphras prayed for, as on the behalfe of the Coloſſians, that they might in an vnwearied courſe perſeuere and hold on till they came to be perfect.
            He addeth, In all the will of God. In which words he doth after a ſort as it were limit, this perfection. And it is the ſame with that which he wiſheth to the Epheſians, that they might be filled with all that fulnes of God, Epheſ. 3. 19. for all that fulnes of God, which he mentioneth there, is nothing elſe but al that fulfilling, in all the will of God, which he ſpeaketh of here. And in both places the Apoſtle adding an vniuerſall terme, he thereby declareth, that it is not enough for perfection and filling, that in ſome one or ſundrie things wee ſtudie to pleaſe God, but that it is neceſſarie that in all things we ſhould be conformed In all things we muſt ſiudie to pleaſe God. to his will: which then is brought to paſſe, when the eyes of our minds are inlightened, that we may both know and acknowledge him and his will; and that our hearts and all the affections thereof are ſanctified vnto his obedience, and all our actions both outward and inward are framed according to his law, which is the moſt exact rule of righteouſnes, religion, and whatſoeuer elſe.
            In the next verſe, to wit the 13. the Apoſtle declareth, that theſe earneſt prayers, which the Apoſtle ſheweth Epaphras made for the Coloſſians, did proceede not onely from a great care and godly zeale that hee bare towards them, but alſo towards their neighbours, the Laodiceans, and them of Hierapolis: for whom certes euen as for the Coloſſians, hee did in prayer euen as it were ſtriue with the Lord. For wee cannot earneſtly powre forth prayers vnto God for any, vnleſſe that our hearts be ſeized before hand with an earneſt affection towards them. And it would bee marked, that to the end this great care and loue of Epaphras towards them might be the

more aſſuredly manifeſt, and they the better perſwaded of it, he confirmeth it by his owne teſtimonie, which conſidering what great authoritie and credit, ſpecially as an Apoſtle, hee ought to haue amongſt them, ſhould at no hand be counted either light or deceitfull: and that cauſeth him to ſay and deliuer it in this forme, This I teſtifie of him.
            
            It followeth in our text, namely verſ. 14. of this chapter, Luke the beloued Phyſition ſaluteth you, &c. Theſe are ſtill ſalutations and greetings ſent them, and indeed comefrom ſundrie of the Gentiles, as diuers of thoſe before did. This Luke that is mentioned here, was Pauls continuall companion in all his troubles and trauailes, as appeareth in the Acts of the Apoſtles, which hee himſelfe wrote: and hee remained with Paul, euen then when other being ſent away from him, Demas forſooke him alſo: which alſo the Apoſtle ſheweth, ſaying, Onely Luke is with me, 2. Timoth. 4. 11. And in Pauls Epiſtle to Philemon, verſ. 24. he is called Pauls helper, that is, a labourer or worker with him in the Miniſterie. Now Paul deſeribeth him here, firſt by the calling which he had before God put him a part to preach the Goſpell, hee was a Phyſition: from whence wee may learne, that no politike or ciuill calling or occupation, can hinder Gods calling vnto the miniſterie of Nothing can hinder Gods calling of men to the holie miniſterie. Chriſt, but hee will call whom hee will, and of what ſort of people pleaſe him. He calleth Matthew from the receipt of cuſtome to be an Apoſtle. He calleth Peter, Andrew, Iohn and Iames, who were buſied about catching of fiſhes, and he maketh them fiſhers of men. He choſe Amos from being a heardman, to be a Prophet: and the like may we reade in many other. And ſo he maketh Luke the Phyſition to become an Euangeliſt. For as God is moſt free in himſelfe, ſo is he not tyed to any condition or calling of men whatſoeuer, but chuſeth whom he will, & as he will, to do his worke, alwaies notwithſtanding induing them with gifts fit for the execution of their duties, according to his good pleaſure. Secondly, hee ſetteth him out by this adiunct, beloued: in which terme the Apoſtle commendeth him, for that great loue which he bore towards him as a Chriſtian man, and one that was very inward with him, and familiar vnto him. For the loue that Chriſts Apoſtle,

and the friendſhip that was betweene them, did not a little commend the man. By which wee may ſee, that it is no ſmall To be beloued of them that loue God. matter, but indeed of good worth, both to our ſelues and to others, to be beloued of them, that either loue God, or are loued of him. To our ſelues, as a teſtimonie of good comfort; and to others, as an argument of good credit.
            To him he adioyneth Demas. This was he of whom the Apoſtle complaineth, that he was forſaken, ſaying, 1. Tim. 4. 10. Demas hath for ſaken me, and imbraced this preſent world. In the Epiſtle to Philemon he is called Pauls helper: from whence we may with good probabilitie gather, that at that time he was a miniſter of the Goſpell, but afterwards forſaking his calling he fell away, and gaped after gaine. From whence wee may ſee, that the loue of this preſent world cannot ſtand with the The loue of the world and the ministerie of the Goſpell cannot ſtand together. miniſterie of the Goſpell. For no man (ſaith Chriſt) can ſerue two maſters: for either he ſhall hate the one and loue the other, or cleaue to the one and forſake the other. Ye cannot ſerue God and Mammon, Matth. 6. 24. If the mind once be caried away with the carefulnes of worldly things, it cannot be wholy occupied in ſeeking Chriſt and his glorie, but will eaſily preferre the world before Chriſt himſelfe. And thus farre concerning theſe verſes, and the true and naturall meaning of them, with other neceſſarie matter, in ſort and manner as you haue heard.
            Now to ſome obſeruations out of them. And firſt in that Epaphras did alwaies ſtriue for them in his prayers, wee may gather that it is not ſo eaſie a matter to make prayers vnto God, No eaſie matter to pray well. as commonly men account it, but rather indeede very hard and of great labour. Which may appeare by this, that if a man doth but once ſettle himſelfe to it, ſpecially if hee doe it earneſtly, hee ſhall finde a thouſand lets and hindrances ſet before him, if not vtterly to pull him away from prayer, yet to ſtay him much therein, or to make his prayers more cold and faint. Sometimes Satans malice, ſometimes his own corruptiō will ſtand vp againſt him: ſometimes other mens examples of neglect, or of cold performance of prayer. And though Hindrances to pray. theſe were not, but that men thought ſtill they prayed, yet ſhall men, if they would ſift and ſound their hearts well, perceiue yt this is one cauſe why in prayer, or to prayer, men find

no hindrance, becauſe they are content with a certaine forme of words which flow from the mouth, but haue no ſeate in the heart, and ſo praying without true faith indeede, or any ſerious affection of the minde, or any vnfained reuerence of God, or any ſound feeling of their owne miſeries, or any heartie deſire to bee reconciled to the Lord, &c. their prayers are Things neceſſarie to him that would pray well. lip-labour, yea loſt labour. Neither will Satan much ſet himſelfe againſt ſuch praiers (if we may call them praiers) becauſe he knoweth they will not much hurt him and his kingdome. But hee will mightily oppoſe againſt the heartie praiers of Gods people, and reſiſt them, by obiecting and caſting in their way all the temptations that poſſibly he can, becauſe he well knoweth, that by meanes thereof his kingdome ſhall, if not be ouerthrowne, yet greatly diminiſhed.
            Secondly, in the perſon and practiſe of Epaphras, learne, that it is the Paſtors dutie, not onely to teach and to inſtruct his The Paſtors dutie in preſence and abſence. flocke in the doctrine of the Goſpell, whileſt he is preſent with them, but euen as it were to carrie them about with him in his heart, and to take himſelfe continually bound and tyed to zeale and care for them, and with earneſt requeſts and ſupplications to wiſh for and procure their ſaluation, and continually to pray for them to almightie God. And great reaſon, they are their fathers, they are their teachers. Fathers are vnnaturall, if they remember their children whileſt they are preſent with them onely. Teachers are negligent, or at leaſtwiſe ſhort of their dutie, if they remember their ſchollers onely whileſt they are in the ſchoole with them. The doctrine of the word is not eaſily receiued: neither doth it quickly bring forth fruite. Prayer is a worthie meane to helpe forward the one and the other, ſpecially the prayers of the paſtor and teacher. And if in other caſes, the prayers of a righteous man are much auaileable, ſpecially if they be feruent, ſo ſaith S. Iames; then the ſupplications of a godly and faithfull miniſter are likewiſe piercing.
            Laſtly obſerue, that the Apoſtle highly, yea and as it were before others, commendeth Epaphras to the Coloſſians, and particularly for this that he was their miniſter, and preached the Goſpell vnto them: yea and he giueth him this teſtimony,

that he had a certaine feruent affection and earneſt deſire towards them. He doth the like vnto Timothie, whom he purpoſed to ſend to the Philippians. He doth in like manner commend Epaphroditus vnto them, Phil. 1. 19. Obſerue therefore I ſay and gather from hence, that it is very neceſſarie, that in any, yea in euery particular congregation, there ſhuld amongſt all be a reuerend regard of the paſtor that liueth and teacheth The Paſtor of the Church ſhould be reuerently eſteemed. in the ſame: yea all ſhould be well perſwaded, not onely generally of his honeſtie, pietie, faith, charitie, learning, conſcience, and other graces, neceſſarie and fit for the Miniſterie, but alſo of his ſingular affection and loue towards them, yea ſpecially of his deſire and care to doe them good, ſo that hee may as it were poſſeſſe the hearts of his people, and haue them moſt ſtrictly conioyned to him. For ſo hee ſhall more eaſily bring them vnto Chriſt, whileſt they are willing, and commit themſelues to the faith and truſt of their Paſtor. But where this perſwaſion is not of their Paſtor, his labour, to & amongſt the flock, though it be neuer ſo great & good, ſhould do ſmall good. And therfore we may ſee, that we are not only to pray, as our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth vs, Matth. 9. to pray the Lord of the harueſt to thruſt foorth workmen into the harueſt, but alſo to intreate him ſo to linke the hearts of the Paſtor and the people together, that the work of his glorie in them and their ſaluation, may bee euery day more then other aduanced. But where ſhall a man finde ſuch people? where ſhall he find ſuch Paſtors? A man may goe from the Eaſt to the Weſt, from the North to the South, and finde very few: which ſhould bee ſo farre off from diſcouraging vs from this dutie, that it ſhould prouoke vs more carefully to performe it. And that I ſay to you, I ſpeake to mine owne heart. Let vs therefore trauaile againe and againe with God, to work ſuch a mutual coniunction betwixt the Paſtor and the flocke, as his glorie may be daily aduanced thereby, and the worke of eternall life furthered through Chriſt. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, be all power and praiſe, with thanks and glorie now and for euermore,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XLI. LECTVRE VPON THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE Coloſſians.
            
               COLOS. Chap. 4. verſ. 15, 16, 17, 18.
               
                  15 Salute the brethren which are at Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his houſe.
                  
                  16 And when this Epiſtle ſhall be read among you, cauſe that it be read alſo in the Church of the Laodiceans: as that ye likewiſe reade the Epiſtle which was written from Laodicea.
                  
                  17 And ſay to Archippus, Looke to this, that thou fulfill the miniſterie which thou haſt receiued from the Lord.
                  
                  18 The ſalutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bands. Grace be with you. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               THe firſt of theſe foure verſes belongeth to the laſt treatie, touching ſalutations. And therefore we will deale with it by it ſelfe, before we come to the other. Hauing ſhewed before what worthie perſons ſaluted them: Now he intreateth the Church to ſalute and greete from him and them, ſome others. Thoſe that are to be greeted are of two ſorts. Firſt, the brethren which are at Laodicea, and the rather he intreateth this, becauſe hee would haue this Epiſtle read amongſt them. Secondly, a certaine man named Nymphas, together 
               The members of the church ſpecially to be regarded in our ſalutations. 
               with the Church that was in his houſe. From whence wee may perceiue, that amongſt them of Laodicea, he would only haue thē to be greeted that were brethren. By which name he meaneth them that were ſonnes of one father, to wit God, and

adopted into that grace, being ingraffed into Chriſt through faith. The reaſon whereof is plaine, becauſe with them alone and with no other we are conioyned, and as it were made one in Chriſt. And as for ſalutations and greetings, they are certaine meanes that God hath appointed, to preſerue and maintaine that vnitie and coniunction, that the members of Chriſt haue among themſelues. Which howſoeuer as in reſpect of the bodie they are diſtinguiſhed and ſeparated one from another in this preſent life, yet feele they here the communion of Saints, and haue hope in their hearts of inſeparable coniunction with their head Chriſt, and with that whole holy bodie of the Saints in the life to come.
            Another thing that we may learne hence is in the perſon of Nymphas: who being the father of a familie, or maſter of a houſehold, teacheth vs what is the dutie of ſuch as be in that calling, namely ſo to gouerne their families and houſeholds, Parents and houſeholders dutie. and ſo to inſtruct them in the knowledge of Chriſt and ſaluation, that they may be well inured with integritie of life and ſanctimonie, and ſo haue them, particular congregations as it were, famous and worthie commendation amongſt all the godly, for faith and holines. But what man is he, I will not ſay, that ſtriueth to this, but that thinketh of it, at the leaſt carefully? From whence it floweth, that not onely people proceede to prophanenes, but the Churches are not increaſed: which cannot be, till ſpeciall families, which make particular congregations, be well and throughly reformed. But wee will leaue this and proceed to that which followeth.
            The two next verſes containe in them the fift part of this fourth chapter. And they doe containe in them certaine ſpeciall points which he giueth in charge to the Coloſſians, concerning partly their owne benefit, and partly the good of the Laodiceans. The firſt thing he chargeth them withall, is, that after this Epiſtle had been read among the Coloſſians themſelues, they would cauſe it to be read alſo in the Church of Laodicea, From whence it ſhould ſeeme we may well inferre, that this Epiſtle was chiefly ſent to the Gouernours and Elders of the Church, and therfore the Apoſtle would firſt haue it read publikely in the Church of Coloſſe, that it might be

knowne and vnderſtood of all the Saints there. Next, that he would haue the whole Church of Laodicea acquainted therewithall. The reaſon why he would haue this Epiſtle communicated with the whole Church, both of Coloſſe and Laodicea, was the great profit which it containeth in it, by meanes wherof it might profit all the faithfull euen vnto eternall life. From whence wee may gather, that it is not enough that Paſtors, Teachers, Elders and others, know the holie Scriptures, wherof this worthie Epiſtle of Pauls is an excellent part, but that they muſt of neceſſitie acquaint common Chriſtians and all faithfull people therewith. And therefore are the Church-Rulers bound to reade them both publikely and priuately, and muſt propound and interpret them in the aſſemblies of the congregation, yea muſt turne them into vulgar tongues, that ſo the common people may reade them and vnderſtand them: and in a word, they muſt carefully prouide, that that booke may not be to the common people as if it were a book cloſed and ſhut vp, into which no man muſt looke but they alone. But how farre are the Doctors of the Popiſh Church from this holie minde? They forbid lay men, as they call thē, from reading the holie Scriptures, yea they ſtrictly enioyne that tranſlations of the vulgar tongues, ſhould not bee vſed. Wherein, what greater furtherance can they giue to the kingdome of Satan? who knowing how needfull the Scriptures are to ſaluation, doth wholy by himſelfe and his ſupporters ſtriue vnto this, and laboureth nothing more, then to hinder the ſcriptures from comming into mens hands, or once appearing in their ſight.
            Another thing worthie obſeruation is this, that though Pauls Epiſtles, as almoſt all the reſt of the bookes of the holie Scripture were written to ſome certaine Church, or to ſome certaine perſon, that yet notwithſtanding they doe indifferently appertaine to all Chriſtians, becauſe they containe in them a perpetuall doctrine, and ſuch as is common for all Chriſtians, and were no leſſe committed to writing for our inſtruction and comfort, then for theirs to whom they were namely written. For looke what the Apoſtle ſaid, touching the bookes and writings of the Prophets, Rom. 15. 4. Whatſoeuer
               
               things were written before hand, were written for our learning, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might haue hope, that ſame may wee affirme of all the holie Canonicall bookes of the Bible: and the rather becauſe the holie Ghoſt ſaith: Euery Scripture giuen by diuine inſpiration, is profitable to teach, to rebuke, to correct, and to inſtruct, in righteouſnes &c. 2. Timoth. 3. 16. And why ſhould we doubt of it? ſith they come all from one God, were penned and indited by one ſpirit, and tend all to one end, the glorie of God, either in pledging vp ſaluation to them that are appointed to euerlaſting life, or damnation to them that are put apart againſt the day of wrath?
            But it followeth in the text. And that ye likewiſe reade, &c. This is the ſecond ſpeciall point, wherein he commandeth the Coloſſians to reade that epiſtle, which was written frō Laodicea. What this epiſtle was, it is very hard to determine, we may with ſome probabilitie, and without any impietie ſay, that though it were not ſuch a one as Paul himſelfe wrote, yet that it is likely, yea more then that, certaine, that he approoued of it, or elſe he would neuer haue had it read: from whomſoeuer it came, or was written to himſelfe, whether it were from the whole Church of Laodicea, or from the paſtor of the ſaid Church, yet he tooke the reading of it to be neceſſarie for the Coloſſians, becauſe the ſtate of the neighbour Churches was not vnlike theirs. From whence alſo wee may obſerue, that though the holy Scripture be abundantly ſufficient, for the eſtabliſhing of the points of Chriſtian religion, and for framing and faſhioning vs to holie life, and that nothing be wanting therein, that is neceſſarie to ſound doctrine, and to true ſanctitie, that yet it is profitable, and that euen to edification, to reade good mens holy writings, though they be of farre different authoritie from the word of God. For if we may be edified and builded vp, by gracious and good ſpeeches, which do proceede from the faithfull members of Chriſt, and alſo may be aduanced in goodnes by their holie life; both which caſes are plaine in the holie Scriptures, and euen in the Apoſtles owne epiſtles: why ſhould not alſo their holie writings, agreeing with the word of God, tend alſo in ſome ſort to our godly

edification? And therfore as men are and ought to be ſharply reproued, for that they neglect to reade the holy Scriptures or word of God: ſo are they alſo much too blame, for neglecting to reade good and holie books. Wherein I marueile what men can alleage for themſelues, that can allow themſelues ſo much time and leiſure, to purſue profits and pleaſures, yea to follow ſinne, and haue no ſpare houre to be occupied in reading of Gods holy word, and other good workes? Surely all that they can ſay for themſelues is but figge leaues, and neither will giue peace to our owne hearts, nor ſtand vs in ſtead before God and good men.
            He addeth in the 17. verſe: And ſay vnto Archippus, &c. This is the third ſpeciall point that he chargeth the Church withal, and it concerneth the admoniſhing of Archippus, or putting of him in minde touching his dutie. It ſhould ſeeme that hee Archippus what he was. was a miniſter or a preacher of the Goſpell in the Church of Coloſſe, and was a collegue, as we may ſay, with Epaphras, who was then at Rome with Paul. Whereupon alſo in Pauls epiſtle to Philemon verſ. 2. he is called Pauls fellow ſouldier, that is to ſay, his fellow labourer and helper in preaching of the Goſpell of Chriſt. But whatſoeuer he was, it is very probable that he was ſomewhat ſlacke and negligent in doing his dutie: and therefore he willeth, yea he commaundeth the Church, to admoniſh and put him in minde thereof. From whence wee may obſerue, that it is a part of the Churches dutie, when it ſeeth any of the miniſters or officers thereof, either not ſufficiently The Churches dutie towards the negligent. diligent, or any whit ſlacke in accompliſhing of their calling and charge, to admoniſh them and call vpon them, for greater care and more conſcience in the faithfull performance thereof. And good reaſon: for if priuate men as members, may, yea ought to admoniſh one another, and prouoke to good workes whilest it is called to day; then the bodie of the Saints may as well doe it to the priuate members, yea and publike miniſters and officers thereof, if you will, vnleſſe you will ſay, either that they cannot faile in doing their dutie, or auerre, that mens places exempt and free them from other mens charitable ouer ſight, and carefull admonitions. Yet in this there muſt be great reſpect had: namely, that it be done with ſuch reuerence and

modeſtie, as becommeth the flock towards their paſtor, whom Cautions to be obſerued in the Churches admoniſhing of ministers. they ought to honour and eſteeme, as ſent from God vnto them for their good. For if that rule of the Apoſtle 1. Tim. 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a father, hold and be true ſtill, towards them that be of great yeers, then muſt it in proportion be true in the Miniſters and Elders of the Church, in whom their place and calling, this way foorth, is as much to be reſpected, as yeeres in others. And the Paſtor himſelfe, ſhould not in regard of his great place, and excellent graces aboue others, contemne or lightly eſteem theſe admonitions, as the manner of ſome is, but ſhould ſet them to heart, and be prouoked by them, the more faithfully to execute the charge and function that God and the Church haue impoſed vpon him: which what it is, the Apoſtle ſheweth by the words following, when he ſaith, Looke to this that thou fulfill the ministerie which thou haſt receiued from the Lord. This is a very graue, and yet withall a very modeſt forme, that the Apoſtle would haue the Church to vſe in admoniſhing their paſtor. And it ſeemeth to ſtand vpon two ſpeciall points, or to containe two things, which hee would haue the Church to admoniſh their paſtor of.  The firſt, that hee ſhould well conſider and regard the miniſterie which God had committed vnto him, both  Two things principally required in a faithfull pastor or minister. what manner office it is, and of what great weight, and alſo how graue, laborious and excellent the vocation is, looking into it generally, and carefully conſidering all the parts of it, and omitting nothing, that is of neceſſitie required, to the faithfull & full performance of his paſtoral dutie.  The ſecond,  that after he doth once exactly know his office and charge, he faithfully fulfill the ſame, that is, diligently accompliſh, and faithfully execute all the parts of that his office: ſo that nothing may be found defectiue or wanting in him, which appertaineth to the full diſcharge of his dutie and office. And theſe two things muſt of neceſſitie be ioyned together, not onely in doing miniſteriall duties, but in euery other calling whatſoeuer, I meane the knowledge of an office, and the execution thereof: for this is not ſufficient that a man know what his dutie is, vnleſſe he alſo execute and performe the ſame; A very ſtrong reaſon. becauſe as the Apoſtle ſaith, to him that knoweth how to doe well
               
               and doth it not, to him it is ſinne. And againe wee know, that no man can execute his office, and diſcharge it in faith and a good conſcience, vnleſſe he firſt vnderſtand what he is bound by the vertue and power of his calling to accompliſh: becauſe that experience teacheth vs, that as of an vnknowne thing there is no deſire; ſo there cannot be any accompliſhment, no man being able to doe that which he knoweth not or vnderſtandeth not.
            Now though out of theſe words we may learne many good leſſons, yet for the time, and becauſe wee are to haſten to an end, wee will obſerue onely two. The firſt, that for the better ſtirring vp of Archippus, to fulfill his miniſterie, he taketh an argument drawne from God the author of the miniſterie, ſaying, which thou haſt receiued from the Lord. 
                From whence wee may learne: that the conſcience of our callings, ſpecially then  when we are ſure they are from God, ſhould be no ſmal ſpurre Conſcience, that the ministerie is from God, ſhall make men to walke faithfully in it. to prouoke vs to faithfull execution of them, in the place wherein God hath put vs, whether it be Magiſtracie, Miniſterie, or any other, ſpecially the miniſterie of the Church: So Paul when he exhorted the Elders of the Church of Epheſus, to looke to themſelues, and to the whole flocke, and ſo to feed the Church of God, draweth and taketh his argument from the holie Ghoſt, who had called them to the ouerſight of the Church of Epheſus: In which (ſaith he) the holy Ghoſt hath made you ouerſeers: thereby declaring, that nothing can more effectually moue and ſtirre vp men to the doing of their duties, then to conſider that wee haue receiued our miniſterie from God, before whom wee as other men, muſt render an account of all things that we haue done in the fleſh: before whom alſo the miniſter muſt ſtand, as an approued workman that neede not be aſhamed, 2. Tim. 2. 15. Which whileſt good men haue ſeriouſly thought of, and carefully practiſed as became them, they haue had the peace of a good conſcience in themſelues, and great approbation before God and men. Whereas others, either not knowing this, or not walking in the obedience of it, haue runne riot to much exceſſe, and drawne many after them and with them into perdition. And I would to God, that we here in our land had not taſted of the ſmacke of this: yea I wiſh with all my

heart, that wee could learne by that which is paſt, to be wiſer for that which is to come, or at the latter end, as we ſay: then ſhould we ſee God more honoured, the miniſterie more faithfully diſcharged, the people better inſtructed, and all good fruites abound. Whereas now through ignorance and careleſnes of this, ſinne and ſuperſtition ouerfloweth all, and nothing but a floud of iudgement readie to ouerwhelme. But we will leaue this point, and proceed on to the other.
            
                The ſecond point is this: that if a man will well and faithfully  execute his office in the miniſterie, it is not enough that he trauaile in one part of it alone, as for example, that he teach The miniſterie is not performed, when ſome one point or dutie of it is accompliſhed. onely, exhort onely, or ſo foorth, but he muſt of neceſſitie diligently execute all and euery part thereof, that ſo hee may be found faithfull in all the houſe of God as Moſes was, Hebr. 3. 2. and in all the parts of his calling too, keeping backe from them none of Gods counſels, that ſo he may be free from the bloud of all, as the Apoſtle was, Acts 20: for that indeede is to fulfill the miniſterie. And great reaſon indeede of this, and that as well, becauſe the whole and euery part of the miniſteriall function is from God, and wee know that no imperfect or defectiue thing will either pleaſe him or be good to our ſelues, ſith he commaundeth vs to doe all that he enioyneth vs, and not to goe aſide from it, neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Deuter. 12. as alſo becauſe it is ſo preſcribed in the word of truth. For the Apoſtle writing vnto Timothie, in his ſecond Epiſtle and in the end of the third chapter, and reckoning vp the principall vſes of the Scripture, and namely, that it is profitable to instruct, to reprooue, to correct, and to teach euen vnto righteouſnes (which are as it were ſo many parts and peeces of the Eccleſiaſticall miniſterie, and in which indeede conſiſteth that ſame right diuiding of the word, whereof he ſpeaketh in the ſame Epiſtle, chap. 2. 15.) preſently in the beginning of the fourth chapter, with a graue obteſtation vrgeth Timothie, that in all theſe things hee would be earneſt and vigilant, ſaying, I beſeech thee therefore, before the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who ſhall iudge the quicke and the dead, in that his glorious appearance and in his kingdome: preach the word, be earneſt in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, improue, rebuke, exhort with all long
               
               ſuffering and doctrine. And afterwards verſ. 15. But watch thou in all things. But what ſhall we thinke of theſe careleſſe men, that will not labour in any part, much leſſe in euery part, carefully to diſcharge their dutie? or thoſe that thinke labouring now and then, in ſome peece of their calling, the ſame to bee more then a ſufficient diſcharge of it before God? or of otherſome, who as though their generall and particular vocation in the Miniſterie and parts thereof were not troubleſome and burthenſome enough, doe take and lay burthens vpon them in Magiſtracie, in policie, and I cannot tell what. But wee leaue them to God, to whom they muſt one day anſwere for al theſe corruptions, and will goe forward in that which followeth: which is the laſt verſe, both of this chapter, and of the whole Epiſtle.
            
               The ſalutation by the hand of me Paul. After he had put down other mens ſalutations to the Church, he doth in the laſt place mention his owne: adding thereto, that as he deſireth them to be mindfull of his bands, ſo he cannot but wiſh them all grace and goodnes from God. Concerning this and ſuch like ſalutations, the Apoſtle vſeth them for two ſpeciall reſpects: firſt to teſtifie vnto them, his great care, loue and good will that he caried to them, being alwaies mindfull of them for good: then to expreſſe the prayers and the wiſhes he made for them, by which hee deſired grace and all good things to bee vouchſafed vnto them, for whom he prayed. And concerning the ſalutation, hee proteſteth that hee wrote it with his owne Pauls care to preuent counterfeit writings. hand, and that to this end and purpoſe, that it might be as a ſigne and ſeale, with which he ſhut vp after his vſuall manner all his Epiſtles, as he profeſſeth 2. Theſſal. 3. 17. for it ſeemeth, that Paul in writing of all his Epiſtles, at the leaſt in moſt of them, did vſe the helpe of a Scribe or Secretarie, till ſuch time as he came towards the end, or ſhutting of them vp, or as wee may ſay, the greetings in the end, but that hee wrote with his owne hand, and that to this end, that all might know by that his handwriting, that it was Pauls owne Epiſtle, and not one that was adulterous, or foyſted in in ſteed thereof. For there were euen in the Apoſtles time ſome, as appeareth 2. Theſſ. 2. 2

who diſſembling Pauls name ſpread many errors abroad, and all for the corrupting of that ſound and holeſome doctrine which he had deliuered. And ſhould wee marueile at this, ſeeing wee know that this is an old ſleight of Satan, to obtrude vnto the Church forged and baſtardly writings in ſteede of true, and all that he might corrupt the Church? But as Satans malice was great herein, ſo did Gods care and loue to his Church appeare, in prouiding ſo for his Church, that he hath by certaine infallible notes diſtinguiſhed the writings of the Prophets and Apoſtles, from all other writings of men whatſoeuer. And though it be certaine, that Pauls naturall and true Epiſtles, be to be diſcerned from all baſtardly and counterfeite ones, by ſetting thereto his owne hand, yet the authenticall Scriptures of God, haue certaine other notes and marks more ſure in my minde, and the ſame alſo perpetuall. As for example, the diuine maieſtie that ſhineth therein, though otherwiſe the ſpeech vſed in it be very ſimple and plaine. Againe, the heauenly puritie and ſanctimonie, that euery where is manifeſted in it: the ſpiritual grace that appeareth therein, as well in the words as in the matters thereof: the certaintie of the things being before foretold, and accompliſhed in their times: the inward reuerence that is in mans heart towards them, aboue all writings whatſoeuer, with ſundrie ſuch like, of Should be ſtrong in vs, to deteſt popiſh perſwaſiōs and Atheiſticall opinions. which we may not ſpeake at this preſent. Onely this wee are to know, that if we feele this in truth and peace, it will effectually arme vs, againſt Papiſts, Atheiſts, and other corrupters: ſome not onely deprauing the credit of the word, and bringing in many baſtardly writings beſides, to the end they might equall with, or aduaunce their traditions before Gods word, which is the ſinne of the Romiſh Catholikes: and otherſome diſgracing and diſcrediting the ſame, that they might perſwade men there is no heauen or hell, God, diuell, word, &c. and prouoke them to liue as bruit beaſts: and theſe are Atheiſts: but both lie vnder iudgement: the firſt, for their groſſe ſuperſtition and idolatrie; and the latter for their horrible blaſphemie. But to go from this point, to ſome other following.
            
               
The Apoſtle addeth: Remember my bands. Before he come to put downe his wiſh or prayer for them, he commendeth vnto them the memorie of his bands or impriſonment, which he ſuffered for the defence of the Goſpell.  And of this one precept Three reſpected in one precept. there are many vſes; and that both as in regard of Paul himſelfe, the Coloſſians and others. For it behoueth them in reſpect of Paul to thinke vpon them, and him in them, that ſo they might in earneſt prayer commend him and the cauſe, for  which he ſuffered, into Gods hand, and that not onely for his owne ſake, that he might ſtand faſt, notwithſtanding all his troubles, but that the Goſpell alſo might flouriſh more and more thereby.  And as in regard of themſelues it was meete they ſhould doe it, not onely that by his example of patience,  they might bee the more incouraged, valiantly and comfortably to beare all perſecution for the truth of the Goſpell, but alſo for this, that they commed him earneſtly in their praiers to God, and that not only for his owne cauſe, but for the Goſpels, for which he was bound, as appeareth both in the third verſe of this preſent chapter, and alſo Epheſ. 6. 19.  And if we reſpect others, we ſhal ſee there was good cauſe to moue them to doe this dutie; and namely their teſtification of their care  and loue for their brethren, and their earneſt deſire for the glorie of God, both which were much to be aduaunced, in the Apoſtles patient carying of himſelfe in his impriſonment, and in his conſtant vndergoing and ouercomming of the ſame.
            There remaineth the laſt words: Grace be with you. Wherein the good thing that he wiſheth to the Coloſſians is grace. Which word firſt ſignifieth the free fauour of God towards them in Chriſt: next, all ſpirituall bleſſings eſpecially, which What things are ſpecially ſignified by the word grace. from that free fauour proceede and flow to them that he loueth: of which ſort are, forgiuenes of ſinnes, iuſtification, ſanctification, and many others in this life, and eternall glorification in that which is to come. When hee ſaluted them in the beginning of this Epiſtle, he wiſhed this grace vnto them, from God the father, and from the Lord Ieſus Christ. And now in the latter end, yea in the laſt words thereof, he wiſheth them

not any other good thing, then the very ſame grace: neither indeede needeth he to pray for any other thing for them, becauſe he that hath this grace, hath all goodnes. Whence wee may ſee alſo, that it is an vſuall and ordinarie thing with the Apoſtle, almoſt in all his Epiſtles, to begin with grace, and to end with it as wee ſay. From whence alſo wee may ſafely gather, that nothing in this life, more excellent and more to bee Nothing more excellent or more to be wiſhed for thē grace. deſired, can be giuen to any man, then this great goodnes of Grace: which as the Apoſtle ſignifieth, in ſo praying for it, as on the behalfe of the Church. So Dauid doth not obſcurely declare it, when hee prayeth, Lord lift thou vp the light of thy countenance vpon vs, Pſal. 4. ſhewing that that ſhould be farre better then the increaſe of Corne, Wine, Oyle, or all other worldly things whatſoeuer: whereof alſo me thinketh we may render this reaſon. For what can a man imagine, that may be either profitable or neceſſarie to this life preſent, or to that which is to come, which wee haue not, and enioy, when once this grace is committed vnto vs in Chriſt? The Apoſtle telleth vs, 1. Timoth. 4. 8. that godlines is profitable to all things, as which hath the promiſes of this life preſent, and of that which is to come. But from whence proceedeth godlines, but from this grace? Nay I will ſay more: what good thing is there any Grace and opinion of mans merit cannot ſtand together. where, that in any caſe may ſteed vs, that can come from any other cauſe or ground, then frō this great grace? Whereupon wee may conclude, that the conceit of mans merit hath no place, in procuring any good for vs, from or before God. The Apoſtle himſelfe in this very Epiſtle, and namely chap. 1. commendeth the Coloſtians for their faith and charitie towards all Saints. But doth he for all that, wiſh or pray that God would vouchſafe them a recompence or reward, as due from God, in the name of debt, as wee would ſay, for thoſe fruites and workes of their charitie? None at all: neither is there any thing, though neuer ſo ſmall, that he inſinuateth that way, either there or elſewhere in his writings. Nay rather, the thing that hee wiſheth vnto them and prayeth for as on their behalfe, is wholy and altogether grace, that ſo wee might learne

ſtedfaſtly, and in euery reſpect wholy to depend of Gods grace, and to aſcribe all thereto, that ſo in all the good things which are communicated to the Church, and beſtowed therevpon, God might haue the praiſe and glorie of his owne grace through Chriſt Ieſus. Which to performe, the Lord of his owne goodnes vouchſafe vs the grace, for his deare Sonnes ſake Ieſus Chriſt: to whom with the Father, and the bleſſed Spirit, be aſcribed and giuen, all glorie and praiſe, with ſtrength and maieſtie, of all people and in all places, but ſpecially of and in the Church, both now and for euer. So be it.
            FINIS.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   