
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  HVMORS ORDINARIE.
                  Where a man may be verie merrie, and exceeding vvell vſed for his Sixe-Pence
                  
                  AT LONDON, Printed for William Firebrand, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Popeshead Pallace, right ouer againſt the Tauerne doore.
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  TO THE GENTLEmen Readers.
                  
                     
                        
                           HVmours, is late crown'd king of Caueeleres,
                        
                           Fantaſtique-follies, grac'd common fauour:
                        
                           Ciuilitie, hath ſerued out his yeares,
                        And ſcorneth now to waite on good-behauiour.
                        
                           Gallants, like Richard the Vſurper ſwagger.
                        That had his hand continuall on his dagger.
                     
                     
                        
                           Faſhions is still conſort with new 
                              •
                           ound ſhapes,
                        And feedeth daylie vpon ſtrange diſguiſe:
                        We ſhew our ſelues imitating Apes
                        Of all the toyes that Strangers heades▪ deuiſe;
                        For ther's no habit of hell-hatched ſinne,
                        That we delight not to be cloathed in.
                     
                     
                        Some ſweare, as though they Stares from heauen could pu
                              ••
                           
                        
                        And all their speech is pointed with the ſtabbe,
                        When all men know it is ſome coward gull,
                        That is but Champion to a Shordich drabbe.
                        Whoſe feather is his heades lightnes-proclaimer,
                        Although he ſeeme ſome mightie monſter-tamer.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Epicurisme, cares not how he liues,
                        But ſtill purſueth brutiſh Appetite:
                        
                           Diſdaine, regardes not what abuſe he giues,
                        Careleſſe of wrongs, and vnregarding right,
                        
                           Selfe-loue, (they ſay) to ſelfe-conceit is wed,
                        
                           By which baſe match are vgly vices bred.
                     
                     
                        
                           Pride, reuells like the royſting Prodigall,
                        Stretching his credit that his purſe ſtrings cracke,
                        Vntill in ſome diſtreſfull gaile he fall,
                        Which wore of late a Lordſhip on his backe:
                        Where he till death muſt lie in pawne for debt:
                        "Griefes night is neare, when pleaſures ſun is ſet.
                     
                     
                        
                           Vaunting, hath got a mighty thundring voyce,
                        Looking that all men ſhould applaude his ſound,
                        His deedes are ſingular, his words be choyce;
                        On earth his equall is not to be found,
                        Thus Vertu's hid with Follies iugling miſt,
                        And hees no man that is no humoriſt.
                     
                     
                        Samuel Rovvlands.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO POETS.
                  
                     
                        GOod honeſt Poets let me craue a boone,
                        That you would write, I do not care how ſoon
                        Againſt the baſtard humors howrely bred,
                        In euery mad, braind wit-worne, giddy head:
                        At ſuch groſſe follies doe not ſit and winke,
                        Belabour theſe ſame Gulls with pen and inke:
                        You ſee ſome ſtriue for faire hand-writing fame,
                        As Peter Bales, his ſigne can proue the ſame,
                        Gracing his credit with a golden Pen:
                        I would haue Poets proue more taller men:
                        In perfect letters reſted his contention,
                        But yours conſiſts in Wits choiſe rare inuention.
                        Wil you ſtand ſpending your inuentions treaſure,
                        To teach Stage Parrets ſpeak for penny pleaſure?
                        Whlle you your ſelues like muſick-ſoūding Lutes
                        Fretted and ſtrung, gaine them their ſilken ſutes.
                        Leaue Cupids cut, womens face-flattring praiſe,
                        Loues ſubiect growes too threed-bare now adais.
                        Change Venus Swans, to write of Vulcans Geeſe,
                        And you ſhall merit golden Pennes a peece.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        MIrth pleaſeth ſome, to others t'is offence,
                        Some wiſh 
                              •
                           'haue follies told; ſeme diſlike that:
                        Some commend plaine conceits, ſome profound ſenſe:
                        And moſt would haue, themſelues they know not what.
                        Then he that would pleaſe all, and himſelfe too,
                        Takes more in hand then he is like to doo.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  SATIR.
                  
                     EVen like the chalking Vintners at the barre,
                     That bids all welcome, what ſo e're they are:
                     So they paſſe quiet, in and out a doore,
                     And make no ſwaggering to diſcharge their ſcore
                     I Satir, ſtand at entrance of this booke,
                     And each kind gueſt may for my welcome looke:
                     All pleaſant humours I inuite come here,
                     And with theſe Epigrams make thē good cheere:
                     Let Melancholie walke moſt dogged by,
                     All ſprightly Poets doe the ſame defie,
                     To feaſt with wit he neuer had good taſt,
                     I ſcorne to haue him at our Table plaſt.
                     Let him goe plod for leaſes, buy and ſell,
                     And day by day his bags of money tell,
                     And grudge to giue himſelfe a pint of Wine,
                     Out arrant Aſſe, he is no guest of mine.
                     But all mirths friends, I doe embrace moſt kind,
                     Better I wiſh, pray take ſuch as you find.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  EPIGRAMES.
                  
                     EPIG. 1.
                     
                        
                           MOnſieur Domingo, is a skillfull man,
                        For much experience he hath lately got,
                        Prouing more Phiſike in an Ale-houſe Can
                        Then may be found in any vintners pot,
                        Beere he proteſts is ſodden and refin'd,
                        But this he ſpeakes, being ſingle peny lin'd.
                     
                     
                        For when his purſe is ſwolne but ſixpence bigge,
                        Why then he ſweares; now by the Lord I thinke
                        All Beere in Europe is not worth afigge:
                        A cup of Claret is the onely drinke,
                        And thus his praiſe from Beere to Wine doth go,
                        Euen as his Purſe in pence doth ebbe and flow.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 2.
                     
                        Who ſeekes to pleaſe all men each way,
                        And not himſelfe offend:
                        He may begin his worke to day,
                        But God knowes when he'le end.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 3. BOREAS.
                     
                     
                        HAng him baſe Gul, Ile ſtab him by the Lord,
                        If he preſume to ſpeake but halfe a word:
                        Ile paunch the villaine with my Rapiers point,
                        Or hew him with my Fauchon ioint by ioint,
                        Through both his checkes my Ponniard hee ſhall haue,
                        Or mincepie-like Ile mangle out the ſlaue.
                        Aske who I am, you whorſon frieſ-gown patch?
                        Call me before the Conſtable, or watch?
                        Cannot a Captaine walk in the Kings high-way?
                        Swouns, who de ſpeak to? know ye villaines, ha?
                        You drūken peſants, runs your tongs on wheels?
                        Long you to ſee your guts about your heeles?
                        Dooſt loue me Tom? let goe my Rapier then,
                        Perſwade me not from killing nine or ten:
                        I care no more to kill them in brauado,
                        Then for to drinke a pipe of Trinidado:
                        
                        My minde to patience neuer will reſtore me,
                        Vntill their blood do guſh in ſtreams before me.
                        Thus doth Sir Launcelot in his drunken ſtagger,
                        Sweare, curſe & raile, threatē, proteſt, & ſwagger:
                        But being next day to ſober anſwer brought,
                        Hee's not the man can breede ſo baſe a thought.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 4.
                     
                        WHen Thraſo meetes his friend, he ſweares by God,
                        Vnto his chamber he ſhal welcome be:
                        Not that hee'le cloy him there with roſt or ſod,
                        Such vulgar diet with Cookes ſhops agree:
                        But hee'le preſent moſt kinde, exceeding franke,
                        The beſt Tobacco that he euer dranke.
                     
                     
                        Such as himſelfe did make a voyage for,
                        And with his own hands gather'd frō the ground:
                        All that which others fetch he doth abhor,
                        His grew vpon an Iland neuer found.
                        Oh rare compound, a dying horſe to choke,
                        Of Engliſh fier, and of India ſmoke.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 5.
                     
                        
                           DIogenes one day through Athens went,
                        With burning Torch in Sun-ſhine: his intent
                        Was (as he ſaid) ſome honeſt man to finde:
                        For ſuch were rare to meete; or he was blinde.
                        One late, might haue don wel like light t'haue got,
                        That ſought his wife, met her, and knew her not:
                        But ſtay, cry mercy, ſhe had on her maske,
                        
                           How could his eyes performe that ſpying taske?
                        T'is very true, t'was hard for him to doo
                        By Sun and Torch, let him take Lant-horne too.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 6.
                     
                        ALas Delfridus keepes his bed God knowes;
                        Which is a ſigne his worſhip's very ill:
                        His griefe beyond the grounds of phiſicke goes,
                        No Doctor that comes neare it with his skill:
                        Yet doth he eate drinke, talk, & ſleepe profound,
                        Seeming to all mens iudgements healthful ſound.
                     
                     
                        Then geſ
                              •
                           e the cauſe he thus to bed is drawne,
                        What, thinke you ſo; may ſuch a hap procure it?
                        Well, faith t'is true, his hoſe is out at pawne,
                        A breechleſſe chance is come he muſt indure it:
                        His Hoſe to Brokers Iayle committed are,
                        His ſingular and onely veluet paire.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 7.
                     
                        SPeake Gentlemen, what ſhall we doe to day▪
                        
                        Drink ſome braue health vpō the dutch carous,
                        Or ſhall we to the Globe and ſee a play,
                        Or viſit Shore-ditch for a bawdy-houſe?
                        
                           Let's call for Cardes or Dice, and haue a game;
                        To ſit thus idle, is both ſinne and ſhame.
                     
                     
                        This ſpeakes ſir Reuill, furniſht out with faſhion,
                        From diſh-crownd hat, vnto the ſhooes ſquare toe,
                        That haunts a whore-houſe but for recreation,
                        Playes but at dice to cunny-catch, or ſo;
                        Drinks drunke in kindnes, for good fellowſhip:
                        Or to the play goes but ſome purſe to nip.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 8.
                     
                        SIr Gall-Iade is a Horſe-man eu'ry day,
                        His Boots, and Spurs, and legs do neuer part:
                        He rides a horſe as paſsing cleane away,
                        As any that goes Tiburne-ward by Cart:
                        Yet honeſtly he payes for Hackneys hire:
                        But hang them Iades, he ſells them when they tire.
                     
                     
                        He liues not like Diogenes on rootes,
                        But proues a mince-pie gueſt vnto his Hoſt:
                        He ſcornes to walke in Pauls without his bootes;
                        And ſcores his diet on the Vitlers poſt:
                        And whē he knowes not where to haue his dinner,
                        He faſts, and ſweares, a glutton is a ſinner.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 9. Drude.
                     
                     
                        THis Gentleman hath ſerued long in France,
                        
                        And is returned filthy▪ full of French,
                        In ſingle combat being hurt by chance,
                        As he was cloſely foyling at a Wench:
                        Yet hote alarm's he hath indur'd good ſtore,
                        But neuer in like pockie heate before.
                     
                     
                        He had no ſooner drawne and ventred nie her,
                        Intending onely but to haue a bout,
                        When ſhe his 
                              •
                           laske and touch box ſet on fire;
                        And till this houre the burning is not out.
                        Iudge▪ was not valour in this mortall wight,
                        That with a ſpit-fire Serpent thus durſt fight:
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 10. In Meritricem.
                     
                     
                        FAith Gentlemen you moue me to offence,
                        In comming to me with vnchaſte pretence.
                        Haue I the lookes of a laſciuious Dame,
                        That you ſhould deeme me fit for wantons game?
                        I am not she will take luſts ſinne vpon her;
                        Ile rather die, then dimme chaſte glorious honor.
                        Tempt not mine eares, an grace of Chriſt I meane
                        To keepe my honeſt reputation cleane.
                        
                           My hearing lets no ſuch lewd ſound come in,
                        My ſenſes loath to ſurfet on ſweete ſinne.
                        Reuerſe your minde, that goes from grace aſtray,
                        And God forgiue you, with my heart I pray.
                        The gallant notes her words, obſerues her frowns
                        Then drawes his purſe, & lets her view his crowns,
                        Vowing, that if her kindnes grant him pleaſure,
                        She ſhall be Miſtris to command his treaſure.
                        The ſtormes are calm'd, the guſt is ouer-blowne,
                        And ſhe replies with; Yours, or not her owne.
                        
                        Deſiring him to cenſure for the beſt,
                        T'was but her tricke to trie if men doe ieſt:
                        Her loue is lockt where he may picke the truncke.
                        Let Singer iudge, if this be not a puncke.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 11.
                     
                        
                           GAllus will haue no Barber prune his beard,
                        Yet is his chin cleane ſhauen and vnhear'd:
                        How comes he trimmed, you may aske me than:
                        His wenches doe it with their warming-pan.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 12.
                     
                        POlitike Peter meetes his friend a ſhore,
                        That came from ſeas but newly tother day:
                        
                           And giues him French embracements by the ſcore;
                        Then followes: Dicke, haſt made good voyage, ſay?
                        But hearing Richards ſhares be poore and ſicke:
                        
                           Peter has haſte, and cannot drinke with Dicke.
                        
                     
                     
                        Well, then he meetes an other Caueleere,
                        Whom he ſalutes about the knees and thighes,
                        Welcome ſweete Iames, now by the Lord what cheer?
                        N'ere better Peter, we haue got rich prize.
                        Come, come (ſaies Peter) euen a welcome quart,
                        For by my faith weele drinke before we part. Or thus,
                        
                        Faith we muſt drinke, that's flat, before we part.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 13.
                     
                        SOme doe account it golden lucke,
                        They may be widdow-ſped, for mucke:
                        Boyes on whoſe chinnes no downe appeares,
                        Marry old Croanes of threeſcore yeares:
                        But they are fooles to widdowes cleaue,
                        Let them take that which Maides doe leaue.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 14.
                     
                        FIne Phillip comes into the Barbers ſhop,
                        Where's nitty locks muſt ſuffer reformation:
                        
                           The chaire and cuſhion entertaine his ſlop:
                        The Barber craues to know his worſhips faſhion:
                        His will is, ſhauen, for his beard is thin,
                        It was ſo lately baniſh'd from his chin.
                     
                     
                        But ſhauing oft will helpe it, he doth hope,
                        And therefore for the ſmooth-face cut he calles:
                        Then fie, theſe cloathes are waſht with common ſope,
                        Why doſt thou vſe ſuch ordinary balles?
                        I ſcorne this common trimming like a Boore:
                        Yet with his heart he loues a common whoore.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 15. Signieur Fantaſticke.
                     
                     
                        I Scorne to meete an enemy in field,
                        Except he be a ſouldier (by this light)
                        I likewiſe ſcorne my reaſon for to yeeld;
                        Yea further, I doe wel nigh ſcorne to fight.
                        Moreouer, I doe ſcorne to be ſo vaine,
                        To draw my Rapier, and put vp againe.
                     
                     
                        I 
                              ••
                           ke do ſcorne to walke without my man,
                        Yea, and I ſcorne good morrow and good den:
                        I alſo ſcorne to touch an Alehouſe Can;
                        Thereto I ſcorne an ordinary queane.
                        Thus doth he ſcorne, diſdainfull, proud and grim,
                        All but the Foole, onely he ſcornes not him.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 16.
                     
                        AMorous Auſtin ſpends much balletting,
                        In riming Letters, and loue Sonnetting.
                        She that loues him, his Ink-horn ſhal bepaint her,
                        And with all Venus titles hee'le acquaint her:
                        Vowing ſhe is a perfect Angell right,
                        When ſhe by waight is many graines too light:
                        Nay, all that doe but touch her with the ſtone,
                        Will be depos'd, that Angel ſhe is none.
                        How can he proue her for an Angel then,
                        That proues her ſelfe a diuell, tempting men,
                        And draweth many to the fiery pit,
                        Where they are burned for their entring it?
                        I know no cauſe wherefore he tearmes her ſo,
                        Vnleſſe he meanes, ſhee's one of them below,
                        Where Lucifer chiefe Prince doth domineere:
                        If ſhe be ſuch, then (good my harts) ſtand cleere,
                        Come not within the compaſſe of her flight,
                        For ſuch as doe, are haunted with a ſpright.
                        This Angel is not noted by her wings,
                        But by her taile, all full of prickes and ſtings.
                        And know this luſt-blind Louer's vaine is led,
                        To praiſe his diuel in an Angels ſted.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 17.
                     
                        WHen Ca
                                 •
                              alero Rake hell is to riſe
                        Out of his bed, he capers light and heddy:
                        Then wounds he ſwears, you arant whore he cries,
                        Why what's the cauſe that breakfaſt is not reddy?
                        Can men feede like Camelions on the ayre?
                        This is the maner of his morning prayer.
                     
                     
                        Well, he ſweares on vntill his breakfaſt comes;
                        And then with teeth he falls to worke apace,
                        Leauing his boy a banquet all of crummes.
                        Diſpatch you Rogue: my Rapier: that's his grace.
                        So forth he walkes, his ſtomacke muſt goe ſhift,
                        To dine and ſup abroad, by deed of guift.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 18.
                     
                        AWofull exclamation late I heard,
                        Wherewith Tobacco takers may be feard.
                        One at the point with pipe and leafe to part,
                        Did vow Tobacco worſe then Deaths blacke dart:
                        And prou'd it thus: you know (quoth he) my frinds
                        Death onely ſtabbes the heart, and ſo life ends:
                        But this ſame poiſon, ſteeped India weede,
                        In head, hart, lungs, doth ſoote & cobwebs breede.
                        With that he gaſp'd, & breath'd out ſuch a ſmoke.
                        That all the ſtanders by were like to choke.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 19.
                     
                        
                           CA
                                 ••
                              s would gladly drink, but wants his purſe,
                        Nay, wanteth mony, which is ten times worſe
                        For as he vowes himſelfe, he hath not ſeene
                        
                           In three daies ſpace the picture of the Queene.
                        Yet if he meete a friend neare Tauerne ſigne,
                        Straight he intreats him take a pint of wine:
                        For he will giue it, that he will; no nay.
                        What will he giue? the other leaue to pay.
                        He calleth: Boy, fill vs the tother quart;
                        I will beſtow it euen with all my hart.
                        Then doth he diue into his ſlops profound,
                        Where not a poore Port cullice can be found.
                        Meane while his friend diſcharges all the wine:
                        Stay, ſtay (quoth he) or well, next ſhall be mine.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 20.
                     
                        
                           FRancke in name, and Francke by nature,
                        
                           Francis is a moſt kinde creature:
                        Her ſelfe hath ſuffered many a fall,
                        In ſtriuing how to pleaſure all.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 21.
                     
                        
                           SOto can proue, ſuch as are drunke by noone,
                        Are long liu'd men: the pox he can as ſoone.
                        Nay, heare his reaſon ere you doe condemne,
                        And if you finde it fooliſh, hiſſe and hem.
                        He ſaies; Good bloud is euen the life of man:
                        I grant him that (ſay you) well, go-to than:
                        More drinke, the more good bloud. O thats a lie:
                        The more you drinke, the ſooner drunke, ſay I.
                        Now he proteſts, you doe him mighty wrong;
                        Swearing a man in drinke, is three men ſtrong:
                        And he will pawne his head againſt a penny,
                        
                           One right mad-drunk, wil brawle & fight with any.
                        Well, you reply; that argument is weake,
                        How can a drunkard brawle, that cannot ſpeake?
                        Or how can he vſe weapon in his hand,
                        Which cannot guide his feete to goe or ſtand?
                        Hark what an oath the drunken ſlaue doth ſweare
                        He is a man by that, a man may heare:
                        And when you ſee him ſtagger, reele, and winke,
                        He is a man and more; I by this drinke.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 22.
                     
                        WHen ſignieur Sacke & Suger drink-drown'd reeles,
                        He vowes to hew the ſpurs from's fellowes heeles;
                        When calling for a quart of Charnico,
                        
                        Into a louing league they preſent grow:
                        Then inſtantly vpon a cup or twaine,
                        Out Poniards goes, and to the ſtab againe.
                        Friends vpon that, they drinke, and ſo embrace:
                        Straight bandy daggers at each others face.
                        This is the humour of a mad-drunke foole,
                        In Tauerne pots that keeps his Fencing-ſchoole.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 23.
                     
                        
                           COrnutus was exceeding ſicke and ill,
                        Paind as it ſeemed chiefly in his hed:
                        He call'd his friends, meaning to make his will;
                        Who found him drunk, with hoſe & ſhooes abed.
                        To whom he ſaid. Oh good my Maiſters ſee,
                        Drinke with his darthath all beſtabbed me.
                        
                           I here bequeath, if I doe chance to die,
                        To you kinde friends, & boone companions all,
                        A pound of good Tobacco, ſweete and drio,
                        To drinke amongſt you at my E
                              ••
                           erall:
                        Beſides, a barrell of the beſt ſtrong Beere,
                        And Pickle-herrings, for to domineere.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 24.
                     
                        VVE men, in many faults abound;
                        But two in women can be found:
                        The worſt that from their ſexe proceedes,
                        Is naught in words, and naught in deedes.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 25.
                     
                        BIdme goe ſleepe? I ſcorne it with my heeles,
                        I know my ſelfe as good a man as thee.
                        Let goe mine arme I ſay, leade him that reeles;
                        I am a right good fellow: dooſt thou ſee?
                        I know what longs to drinking; and I can
                        Abuſe my ſelfe as well as any man.
                     
                     
                        I care no more for twenty hundred pound;
                        (Before the Lord) then for a very ſtraw:
                        Ile fight with any he aboue the ground;
                        Tut, tell not me whats what, I know the law.
                        Rapier and dagger: hey, a kingly fight;
                        Ile now try falles with any, by this light.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 26.
                     
                        BE hold, a moſt accompliſh'd Caualeere,
                        That the worlds Ape of faſhions doth appeare,
                        
                           Walking 
                              〈…〉
                            his humours to diſcloſe,
                        In the French Doublet, and the Germane hoſe:
                        The Muffes, Cloake, Spaniſh Hat, Tolledo blade
                        Italian ruſſe, a Shooe right Flemiſh made.
                        Like Lord of miſ-rule, where he comes heele reuel
                        And 
                              ••
                            for w
                              •
                           g
                              •
                           is, with the lying'ſt diuel.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 27.
                     
                        ASke Humors what a Feather he doth weare.
                        It is his humor (by the Lord) heele ſweare.
                        Or what he doth with ſuch a horſe-taile locke:
                        Or why vpon a whore he ſpends his ſtocke.
                        He hath a 
                              〈◊〉
                            doth determine ſo
                        Why in the ſtop-thro
                              ••
                            faſhion doth he goe,
                        With ſcarfe about his necke, 
                              •
                           at without band?
                        It is his humor
                              •
                            ſweete Sir vnderſtand.
                        What cauſe his p
                              ••
                           ſ
                              •
                            is ſo extreame diſtreſt,
                        That often times 
                              ••
                            ſcarcely pe
                              •••
                           y bleſt?
                        Onely a humor. If you queſtion why?
                        His tongue is nere vnfurniſht with a lye.
                        It is his humor too he doth proteſt.
                        Or why with Sergants he is ſo oppreſt,
                        That like to ghoſts they haunt him e'rie day?
                        A raſcall humor doth not loue to pay.
                        Object, why bootes and ſpurres are ſtill in ſeaſon?
                        His humor anſwers; Humor is his reaſon.
                        If you perceiue his wits in wetting ſhrunke.
                        It commeth of a humor to be drunke.
                        When you be hold his looks pale, thin, and poore,
                        Th'occaſion is, his humor, and a whoore.
                        
                           And euery thing that he doth vndertake,
                        It is a vaine, for ſenceleſſe Humors ſake.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 28.
                     
                        THree high-way ſtanders hauing cros-leſſe curſe,
                        did greet my frind with, Sir giue vs your purſe
                        Though he were true man, they agreed in one,
                        For purſe and coine betwixt them foure was none.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 29.
                     
                        A Gentlewoman of the dealing trade,
                        Procur'd her owne ſweet picture to be made:
                        Which being done, ſhe from her word did ſlip,
                        And would not pay full due for workmanſhip.
                        The Painter ſwore, ſhe nere ſhould haue it ſo:
                        She bad him keepe it, and away did go.
                        He chollcricke, and mighty diſcontent,
                        Straight tooke his Penſill, and to worke he went:
                        Making the dog ſhe held, a grim cats face,
                        And hung it in his ſhop, to her diſgrace.
                        ſome of her friends that ſaw it, to her went,
                        In ieſting manner, asking what ſhe ment
                        To haue her picture hang where gazers ſwarme,
                        Holding a filthy cat within her arme?
                        She in a ſhamefull heate in haſte did hie,
                        The Painter to content and ſatisfie:
                        Right glad to giue a French Crowne for his pain,
                        To turne her Cat into a Dog againe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 30.
                     
                        VVHen Tarlton clown'd it in a pleaſant vaine,
                        And with conceits did good opinions gaine ſlop:
                        Vpon the ſtage, his merry humors ſhop,
                        Clownes knew the Clowne by his great clowniſh
                        But now th'are gulld; for preſent faſhion ſayes,
                        
                           Dicke Tarletons part, Gentlemens breeches playes:
                        In euery ſtreete where any Gallant goes,
                        The ſwagg'ring ſlop, is Tarltons clowniſh hoſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 31. To Lutius.
                     
                     
                        ONe newly practiz'd in Aſtronomie,
                        That neuer dealt in weather-wit before;
                        Would ſcrape (for ſooth) acquaintance of the skie,
                        And by his Art, goe knocke at heauen dore.
                        Meane while a ſcholler in his ſtudie ſlips,
                        And taught his wife skill in the Moones eclips.
                     
                     
                        Next night that friend perſwades him walk alone
                        Into the field, to gather ſtarres that fell,
                        To mix them with Philoſophers rare ſtone,
                        That begets gold: he likt the motion well:
                        And went to watch, where ſtars dropt very thin,
                        But raine ſo ſhowr'd, it wet his foole-caſe skin.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 32.
                     
                        VVHat gallant's that whoſe oaths flie through mine eares?
                        How like a lord of Plutoes court he ſweares:
                        How braue in ſuch a bawdy-houſe he fought;
                        How rich his empty purſe is outſide wrought;
                        
                           How dutchman-like he ſwallows down his drink,
                        How ſweete he takes Tobacco till he ſtinke:
                        How lofty ſprited he diſdaines a Boore,
                        How faithfull hearted he is to a ( )
                        How cocke: taile proud he doth himſelfe aduance,
                        How rare his ſpurres doering the morris-dance.
                        Now I proteſt by Miſtris Suſans fan.
                        He and his boy, will make a propper man.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 33.
                     
                        LAugh good my Maiſters if you can intend it;
                        For yonder comes a foole that will defend it.
                        Saw you a verier Aſſe in all your life,
                        That makes himſelfe a pack-horſe to his wife?
                        I would his noſe where I could with were warme▪
                        
                        For carrying Pearle ſo pretty vnder's arme,
                        Pearle, his wiues dog, a pretty ſweet-fac'd curre,
                        That barkes a nights at the leaſt fart doth ſturre;
                        Is now not well, his cold is ſcarcely broke,
                        Therefore good husband wrap him in your cloke:
                        And ſweet-hart, prethee helpe me to my maske;
                        Hold Peatle but tender, for he Hath the ſaske:
                        Here, take muffe, and doe you here good man,
                        Now giue me Pearle, and carry you my fanne.
                        Alacke poore Pearle, the wretch is full of paine,
                        Husband take Pearle, giue me my fanne againe:
                        See how he quakes; faith I am like to weepe:
                        Come to me pearle, my ſcarfe good husband keep
                        To be with me I know my Puppy loues;
                        Why Pearle I ſay: Husband, take vp my gloues.
                        
                           Thus goodman Idiot thinks himſelfe an Earle,
                        That he can pleaſe his wife, and carry Pearle:
                        But others iudge his ſtate to be no higher:
                        Then a dogs yeoman, or ſome pippin ſquier.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 34.
                     
                        WHat's he that ſits and takes a nap,
                        Faced like the North winde of a map:
                        And ſleeping, to the wind doth nod?
                        T'is Bacchus cooſen, belly-god.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 35.
                     
                        
                           SEuerus is extreame in eloquence,
                        In perfum'd words, plung'd ouer head & eares,
                        He doth create rare phraſe, but rarer ſence,
                        Fragments of Latine all about he beares.
                        Vnto his Seruing-man, alias his boy,
                        He vtters ſpeech exceeding quaint and coy.
                     
                     
                        Deminitiue, and my defectiue ſlaue,
                        Reach my corps couerture immediately:
                        My pleaſures pleaſure is the ſame to haue,
                        T' inſconce my perſon from frigiditie.
                        His man beleeues all's Welch his Maiſter ſpoke,
                        Till he railes Engliſh; Roague, go fetch my cloke.
                     
                  
                  
                     EPIG. 36.
                     
                        WHy ſhould the Mercers trade a ſattin ſute,
                        With Cookes greaſe be ſo wickedly polute?
                        The reaſon is, the ſcandall and defame
                        Grew, that a greaſie ſlouen wore the ſame.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     EPIG. 37.
                     
                        AN honeſt Vicker, and a kind conſort,
                        That to the Alehouſe friendly would reſort,
                        To haue a game at Tables now and than,
                        Or drinke his pot as ſoone as any man:
                        As faire a gamſter, and as free from braull,
                        As cuer man ſhall neede to play withall:
                        Becauſe his Hoſteſſe pledg'd him not carouſe,
                        Raſhly in choller did for ſweare her houſe.
                        Taking the glaſſe, this was the oath he ſwore,
                        Now by this drinke, Ile nere come hither more▪
                        
                        But mightily his Hoſteſſe did repent,
                        For all her gueſts to the next Alehouſe went,
                        Following their Vickers ſteps in euery thing.
                        He led the pariſh euen in a ſtring.
                        At length his ancient Hoſteſſe did complaine
                        She was vndone, vnleſſe he came againe:
                        Deſiring certaine friends others and his,
                        To vſe a pollicy, which ſhould be this:
                        Becauſe with coming he ſhould not for ſwere him;
                        To ſaue his oath, they on their backs might beare 
                              •
                           him.
                        Of this good courſe the Vicker wel did think,
                        And ſo they alwaies carried him to drinke.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Your Sceane is done, depart you Epigrammes:
                     
                     Enter Goat-footed Satyrs, but like Rammes:
                     Come 
                           •••
                        bly forth; Why ſtand you on delay?
                     O-ho, the Muſicke taning makes you ſtay.
                     Well, friske it out nimbly: you ſlaues begin,
                     For now me thinks the Fidlers bands are in.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  SATYRS.
                  
                     SATYR. 1.
                     
                        VVHo haue we here? be hold him & be mute;
                        Some mighty man Ile warrant by his ſute.
                        If all the Mercers in Cheap-ſide ſhew ſuch,
                        Ile giue them leaue to giue me twice as much.
                        I thinke the ſtuffe is nameleſſe he doth weare:
                        But what ſo ere it be, it is huge geare:
                        Marke but his gate, and giue him then his due.
                        Some ſwaggering fellow I may ſay to you.
                        It ſeemes Ambition in his big lookes ſhroudes;
                        Some Centaure ſure, begotten of the cloudes.
                        Now a ſhame take the buzard; is it hee?
                        I know the ruffian, now his face I ſee:
                        On a more gull the Sun did neuer ſhine:
                        How with a vengeance comes the foole ſo fine:
                        Some Noblemans caſt ſute is fallen vnto him;
                        For buying Hoſe and Doublet would vndoo him.
                        But wot you now whither the buzard walkes?
                        I, into Pauls forſooth, and there he talkes
                        Of forraine tumults, vttring his aduice,
                        And prouing warres euen like a game at dice:
                        For this (ſaies he) as euery gamſter knowes,
                        Where one ſide winnes, the other ſide muſt loſe.
                        Next ſpeech he vttors, is his ſtomacks care,
                        Which ordinaric yeelds the cheapeſt fare:
                        Or if his purſe be out of tune to pay,
                        
                           Then he remembers tis a faſting day:
                        And then he talketh much againſt exceſſe,
                        Swearing all other Nations eate farre leſſe
                        Then Engliſhmen: experience you may get
                        In France and Spaine: where he was neuer yet.
                        With a ſcore of figges, and halfe a pint of wine,
                        Some foure or fiue will very hugely dine.
                        Me thinks this tale is very huge in ſound,
                        That halfe a pint ſhould ſerue fiue to drink round,
                        And twenty figges could feede them full and fat:
                        But trauellers may lye? who knowes not that?
                        Then why not he that trauells in conceit
                        From eaſt to weſt, when he can get no meat?
                        His iourney is in Pauls in the backe Iſles,
                        where's ſtomack counts each pace a hūdred miles
                        A tedious thing, though chance will haue it ſuch▪
                        
                        To trauell ſo long baitleſſe, ſure tis much.
                        Some other time, ſtumbling on wealthy chu
                              ••
                           es
                        Worthy gulling: then he ſwaggers all in hu
                              ••
                           es,
                        And tells them of a prize he was at taking,
                        wil be the ſhip-boyes childrens children making:
                        And that a mouſe could finde no roome in hold,
                        It was ſo peſtered all with pearle and gold:
                        Vowing to pawne his head, if it were tride,
                        They had more Rubies then wold paue Cheapſide
                        A thouſand other groſſe and odious lies
                        He dares auou
                              •
                           h, to blind dull Iudgements eyes:
                        Not caring what he ſpeake, or what he ſweare,
                        So he gaine credit at his hearers care.
                        Sometimes into the Royall Exchange hee'l drop,
                        Clad in the ruines of a Brokers ſhop:
                        
                           And there his tongue runs byas on affaires,
                        No talke but of commodities and wares▪
                        
                        And what great wealth he lookes for 
                              •
                           rie wind,
                        Frō God knowes where, the place is hard to find.
                        If newes be harkened for, then he preuailes,
                        Setting his min
                              •
                            a worke to coyne falſe tales.
                        His tongs-end is be
                              •
                           ipt with forged chat,
                        Vt
                              •
                           ing rare lyes to be admired at:
                        Heele tell you of a tree that he doth know,
                        Vpon the which Rapiers and Daggers grow,
                        As good as Fleetſtreet hath in any ſhop,
                        Which being ripe, downe into ſcabbards drop.
                        He hath a very peece of that ſame chaire,
                        In which Caeſar was ſtabb'd: Is it not rare?
                        He with his feete vpon the ſtones did tread,
                        That Sathan brought, & bad Chriſt make thē bread.
                        His wondrous trauells challenge ſuch renowne,
                        That Sir Iohn Maundiuell is quite put downe.
                        Men without heads, and Pigmies hand-bredth hie,
                        Thoſe with one leg that on their backes doe lie,
                        And doe the weathers iniurie diſdaine,
                        Making their legges a penthouſe for the raine,
                        Are tut, and tuſh: not any thing et all.
                        His knowledge knowes, what no mans notice ſhal
                        This is a mate vnmeete for euery groome,
                        And where he comes, peace, giue his lying roome.
                        He ſaw a Hollander▪ in Middleborow,
                        As he was ſ
                              •
                           aſhing of a browne laofe thorow,
                        Whereto the haſt of hunger had inclin'd him,
                        Cut himſelf through, & two that ſtood behind him.
                        Beſides, he ſaw a fellow put to death,
                        
                           Could drinke a whole Beere barrell at a breath.
                        Oh this is he that will ſay any thing,
                        That to himſelfe will any profit bring.
                        Gainſt whoſoere he doth ſpeake he cares not:
                        For what is it that ſuch a villaine dares not?
                        And though in conſcience he doth not denie,
                        The All-commander ſaith, Thou ſhalt not lie.
                        Yet he will anſwer, (careleſſe of ſoules ſtate)
                        Truth-telling is a thing obtaineth hate.
                     
                  
                  
                     SATYR. 2.
                     
                        A Man may tell his friend his fault in kindnes:
                        To winke at folly, is a fooliſh blindnes.
                        God ſaue you Sir; ſaluteth with a grace,
                        One he could wiſh neuer to ſee his face.
                        But doth not he vſe meere disſimulation,
                        That's inſide hate, and outſide ſalutation?
                        Yes as I take it, yet his anſwer ſayes,
                        Faſhions and cuſtomes vſe it now adayes.
                        A Gentleman perhaps may chance to meete
                        His Liuing-griper face to face in ſtreete:
                        And though his lookes are odious vnto ſight,
                        Yet will he doe him the French congès right,
                        And in his heart wiſh him as lowe as hell,
                        When in his words hee's glad to ſee him well.
                        Then being thus, a man may ſoone ſuppoſe,
                        There is, God ſaue you Sir, ſometimes twixt foes.
                        Oh ſir▪ why that's as true as you are heere,
                        With one example I will make it cleere:
                        And farre to fetch the ſame I will not go,
                        But into Houns-ditch to the Brokers row:
                        
                           Or any place where that trade doth remaine,
                        Whether at Holborne Conduit, or Long lane:
                        If thither you vouchſafe to turne your eye,
                        And ſee the pawnes that vnder forfaitlye,
                        Which are forth comming ſir, and ſafe enough,
                        Saies goodman Broker, in his new print ruſſe:
                        He will notſtand too ſtrictly on a day,
                        Encouraging the party to delay,
                        With all good words the kindeſt may be ſpoke,
                        He turnes the Gentleman out of his cloke:
                        And yet betweene them both at euery meeting,
                        God ſaue you Sir, is their familiar greeting.
                        This is much kindnes ſure, I pray commend him,
                        With great good words he highly doth defend him:
                        It is a fauour at a pinch indeed,
                        A pinching friendſhip, and a pinching deed.
                        The ſlaue may weare his ſuites of ſattin ſo,
                        And like a man of reputation go,
                        When all he hath in houſe, or on his backe,
                        It is his owne by forfaitures ſhipwracke.
                        See you the brooch that long in's hat hath bin?
                        It may be there, it coſt him not a pin:
                        His ſundry ſorts of diuers mens attire,
                        He weares them cheape, euen at his owne deſire.
                        Shame ouertake the peſſant for his paine,
                        That he ſhould pray on loſſes, to his gaine:
                        In drawing wardrops vnder his ſubiection,
                        Being a knaue in manners and complexion:
                        Iumpe like to Vſurie, his neareſt kin,
                        That weares a mony bag vnder his chin:
                        A bunch that doth reſemble ſuch a ſhape,
                        
                           And haired like a Parris-garden Ape,
                        Foaming about the chaps like ſome wilde Boore▪
                        
                        As ſwart and tawnie as an Indian Moore:
                        With narrow brow, and Squirrill eyes, he ſhowe
                              •
                           
                           ▪
                        
                        His faces chiefeſt ornament is noſe,
                        Full furniſhed with many a Clarret ſtaine,
                        As large as any Codpiece of a Dane.
                        Emboſſed curious, euery eye doth iudge:
                        His Iacket faced with Moath-eaten Budge:
                        To which a paire of ſattin ſleeues he weares,
                        Wherein two pound of greaſe about he beares.
                        His ſpectacles doe in a copper caſe,
                        Hang dangling about his piſsing place:
                        His breeches and his hoſe, and all the reſt,
                        Are ſutable: his gowne (I meane his heſt)
                        Is full of threeds, intitl'd right threed bare;
                        But wooll thereon is wondrous ſcant and rare:
                        The welting hath him in no charges ſtood,
                        Being the ruines of a caſt French-hood.
                        Exceſſe is ſinfull, and he doth defie it,
                        A ſparing wherſon in attire and diet,
                        Onely exceſſe is lawfull in his cheſt,
                        For there he makes a golden Angels neſt;
                        And vowes no farder to be found a lender,
                        Then that moſt pretious mettall doth engender:
                        Begetting daily more and more encreaſe:
                        His moneys ſlaue till wretched life ſurceaſe.
                        This is the Iew alyed very neare
                        Vnto the Broker: for they both doe beare
                        Vndoubted teſtimonies of their kinne:
                        A brace of Raſcalls in a league of ſinne.
                        
                           Two filthy Curres that will on no man fawne,
                        Before they taſt the ſweetneſſe of his pawne.
                        And then the ſlaues will be as kind forſooth,
                        Not as Kind-hart, in drawing out a tooth:
                        For hee doth eaſe the patient of his paine,
                        But they diſeaſe the borrower of his gaine.
                        Yet neither of them vſe extremitie,
                        They can be villaines euen of charitie.
                        To lend our Brother it is meete and fit,
                        Giue him roſtmeate and beate him with the ſpit
                        Vſerie ſure is requiſite and good,
                        And ſo is Brokeage, rightly vnderſtood:
                        But ſoft a litle, what is he ſayes ſo?
                        One of the twaine (vpon my life) I know.
                     
                  
                  
                     SATYRE. 3.
                     
                        OH, let the Gentlewoman haue the wall,
                        I know her well, tis Miſtris, what d'ye call.
                        It woulde be ſhee both by her Mask and Fanne:
                        And yet it ſhould not, by her ſeruing-man;
                        For if mine eyes do not miſtake the foole,
                        He is the Vſher of ſome Dauncing Schole:
                        The reaſon why I do him ſuch ſuppoſe,
                        Is this; Mee thinkes he daunceth as he goes.
                        An actiue fellow, though he be but pore,
                        Eyther to vault vpon a horſe, or &c.
                        See you the huge bum Dagger at his backe,
                        To which no Hilt nor Iron hee doth lacke,
                        Oh with that blade he kepees the queanes in awe
                        Brauely be hacked, like a two-hand Saw,
                        Stamps on the ground, and by teth both his thoms
                        
                           Vnleſſe he be comaunder where he comes
                        You damned wheres, where are you? quicke cōe here,
                        Dry this Tobacco, Fill a doſen of beere:
                        Will you be brife? or long you to be bang'd?
                        Hold take this Match, goe ligh it and be hang'd.
                        Where ſtay theſe whores when Gent. do call?
                        Heer's no attendaunce (by the Lord) at all.
                        Then downe the ſtaires the pots in rage he throws
                        And in a damned vaine of ſwearing growes:
                        For he will challinge any vnder heau'n,
                        To ſweare with him, and giue him ſixe at ſeuen.
                        Oh, he is an accompliſh'd Gentleman,
                        And many rare conceited knackes he can:
                        Which yeld to him a greater ſtore of gaine,
                        Then iuggling Kinges, hey Paſſe ledger demaine:
                        His witt's his lyuing: one of quaint deuice,
                        For Bowling-allies. Cockpits, Cards, or Dice,
                        To thoſe exployts he euer ſtands prepar'd:
                        A Villaine excellent at a Bum card.
                        The Knaue of Clubbes he any time can burne,
                        And finde him in his boſome, for his turne.
                        Tut, he hath Cards for any kind of game,
                        Primero, Saunt, or what ſoeuer name:
                        Make him but dealer, all his fellowes ſweares
                        If you doe finde good dealing, take his eares.
                        But come to Dice: why thats his only trade,
                        Michell Mum-chaunce his owne invention made.
                        He hath a ſtocke whereon his liuing ſtayes,
                        And they are 
                              •
                           ullams and Bardquarter-trayes:
                        His Langrets, with his Hie men, and his low,
                        Are ready what his pleaſure is to throw.
                        
                           His ſtopt Dice with Quick-ſiluer neuer miſſe.
                        He calles for come on fiue, and there it is:
                        Or elſe heele haue it with fiue and a reach,
                        Although it coſt his neck the Halter ſtreach.
                        Beſides all this ſame kinde of cheating art,
                        The Gentleman hath ſome good other part,
                        well ſeene in Magicke and Astrologie,
                        Flinging a figuer woundrous handſomlie:
                        Which if it doth not miſſe, it ſure doth hit.
                        Of troth the man hath great ſtore of ſmall wit:
                        And note him whetherſoeuer he goes,
                        His booke of Characters is in his hoſe.
                        His dinner he will not perſume to take,
                        Ere he aske counſell of Almanacke.
                        Heele finde if one proue falſe vnto his wife,
                        Onelie with Oxe blood and a ruſtie knife.
                        He can transforme himſelfe vnto an Aſſe,
                        Shew you the Diuell in a Chriſtall glaſſe:
                        The Diuell ſay you? why I, is that ſuch wonder:
                        Being conſortes, they will not be a ſunder.
                        Alcumie in his braines ſo ſure doth ſettle,
                        He can make golde of any copper ket'le;
                        With in a three weekes ſpace, or ſuch a thing,
                        Riches vpon the whole world he could bring,
                        But in his one purſe one ſhall hardly ſpie it,
                        Witneſſe his Hoſteſſe, for a twelue-months diet:
                        Who would be glad of gold or ſiluer neither.
                        But ſweares by chalke, & poſt, ſhe can get neither.
                        More, he will teach any to gaine there loue,
                        As thus (ſaies he) Take me a turtle Doue,
                        And in an Ouen let her lye and bake
                        
                           So dry that you may powder of her make:
                        Which being put into a cup of wine,
                        The wench that drinks it will to loue inclinee
                        And ſhall not ſleepe in quiet in her bed
                        Till ſhe be eaſed of her maiden-head.
                        This is p
                              •
                           obatum, and it hath bin tride,
                        Or elſe the Cunning-man cunningly lide:
                        It may be ſo, a lye is not ſo ſtrange,
                        Perhaps he ſpake it when the Moone did change?
                        And thereupon no doubt th'occaſion ſprung,
                        Vnconſtant Luna ouer-rul'd his tongue.
                        Aſtronomers that traffique with the skie,
                        By common cenſure ſometime meete the lie:
                        Although indeede their blame is not ſo much.
                        When Stars and Planets faile, and keep not tutch,
                        And ſo this fellow with his large profeſsion,
                        That ends his triall in a faire digreſsion:
                        Philoſophers be queathed him their ſtone,
                        To make gold with, yet can his purſe hold none.
                     
                  
                  
                     SATYR. 4.
                     
                        MEllfluuius ſweete Roſe-watred eloquence,
                        Thou that haſt hunted Barbariſme hence,
                        And taught the Goodman C
                              •
                           bbin at his Plow,
                        To be as eloquent as Tullie now:
                        Who nominates his bread and cheeſe a name,
                        (That doth vntruſſe the nature of the ſame)
                        His ſtomacke ſtayer. How dee like the phraſe?
                        Are Plough-men ſimple fellowes nowadaies?
                        Not ſo my Maiſters: what meanes Singer then
                        And Pope the Clowne, to ſpeake ſo Booriſh, when
                        
                           They counterfait the Clownes vpon the Stage?
                        Since Country fellowes grow in this ſame age
                        To be ſo quaint in their new printed ſpeech,
                        That cloth will now compare with Veluet breech
                        Let him diſcourſe euen where and when he dare,
                        Talke nere ſo Inkhorne, learnedly, and rare,
                        Sweare, Cloth breech is a peſſant (by the Lord)
                        Threaten to draw his (wrath-venger) his ſword:
                        Tuſh, Cloth-breech doth deride him with a laugh,
                        And lets him ſee Bone-baſter, thats his ſtaffe:
                        Then tels him, brother, friend, or ſo forth, heare ye,
                        Tis not your Knitting-needle makes me feare ye.
                        If to aſcention you are ſo declinde,
                        I haue a reſtitution in my minde:
                        For though your beard do ſtand ſo fine muſtated,
                        Perhaps your noſe may be transfiſticated.
                        Man, I dare challenge thee to throw the ſledge,
                        To iumpe or leape ouer a ditch or hedge,
                        To wraſtle, play at ſtoole ball, or to runne,
                        To pitch the barre, or to ſhoote off a gunne.
                        To play at loggets, nine-holes, or ten pinnes,
                        To try it out at foote-ball by the ſhinnes:
                        At tichtacke, Iriſh, noddy, maw, and ruffe,
                        At hot-cockles, leap-frog, or blindman-buffe,
                        To drinke halfe pots, or deale at the whole can,
                        To play at baſe, or pen and ink-horne, ſir Than:
                        To dance the morris, play at barly breake,
                        At all exploits a man can thinke or ſpeake,
                        At ſhoue-groat, venter point, or croſſe and pile,
                        At beſhrew him thats laſt at yonder ſtile,
                        At leaping ore a midſommer bone-fier,
                        
                           Or at the drawing Dun out of the myer:
                        At any of theſe, or all theſe preſently,
                        Wag but your finger, I am for you, I.
                        I ſcorne (that am a youngſter of our towne)
                        To let a Bow-bell cockney put me downe.
                        This is a gallant farre beyond a gull,
                        For very valour fills his pockets full.
                        wit ſhowers vpon him wiſedomes raine in plenty,
                        For heele be hang'd, if any man finde twenty
                        In all their pariſh, whatſoere they be,
                        Can ſhew a head ſo pollitike as he.
                        It was his fathers lucke of late to die
                        Vnteſtate; he about the Legacie
                        To London came, inquiring all about,
                        How he might finde a Ciuil-villaine out:
                        Being vnto a Ciuill-lawyer ſent,
                        Pray ſit (quoth he) ase you the man I meant,
                        That haue a certaine kinde of occupation,
                        About dead men that leaue things out of faſhion:
                        Death hath done that which t'anſwer he's not able
                        My father he is dyed deſtable:
                        I being his eldeſt heire, he did prefer
                        Me ſir, to be his executioner:
                        And very briefly my requeſt to finiſh,
                        Pray how may I by law, his goods diminiſh:
                        Was this a Clowne? tell true, or was a none?
                        You make fat Clownes, if ſuch as he be one:
                        A man may ſweare, if he were vrg'd to it,
                        Fooliſher fellowes, haue not ſo much wit.
                        Oh ſuch as he, are euen the onely men,
                        Loue-letters in a Milke-maides praiſe to pen:
                        
                           Lines that will worke the curfteſt ſullen ſhrow,
                        To loue a man whether ſhe will or no.
                        Being moſt wonderous patheticall,
                        To make Siſse out a cry in loue withall:
                        He ſcornes that maſter ſchoolmaiſter ſhould think
                        He wants his ayde in halfe a pen of incke:
                        All that he doth, it commeth euery whit.
                        From Natures dry-fat, his owne mother wit. Or thus:
                        Thou hony ſuckle of the hawthorne hedge,
                        Vouchſafe in Cupids cup my heart to pledge:
                        My hearts deare blood ſweete Siſse, is thy carouſe
                        Worth all the Ale in gammer Gubbins houſe:
                        I ſay no more, affaires call me away,
                        My fathers horſe for prouender doth ſtay.
                        Be thou the Lady Creſsit-light to me,
                        Sir Trollololle I will proue to thee.
                        Written in haſte: farewell my Cowſlippe ſweete,
                        Pray lets a Sunday at the Ale-houſe meete.
                     
                  
                  
                     SATYR. 5.
                     
                        TIs a bad world, the common ſpeech doth go,
                        And he complaines that helpes to make it ſo:
                        Yet euery man th'imputed crime would ſhunne,
                        Hypocriſie with a fine threed is ſpunne.
                        Each ſtriues to ſhew the very beſt in ſeeming,
                        Honeſt enough, if honeſt in eſteeming,
                        Praiſe waites vpon him now with much renowne,
                        That wraps vp vices vnder Vertues gowne:
                        Commending with good words religious deedes,
                        To helpe the poore, ſupply our neighbours needs:
                        
                           Do no man wrong, giue euery man his owne,
                        Be friend to all, and enemie to none,
                        Haue charitie, auoid contentious ſtrife.
                        Oft he ſpeakes thus, that 
                              •
                           ere did good in's life.
                        Diuiſion hath an ore in euery boate,
                        In's neighbours eye he quickely ſpies a 
                              •
                           oate:
                        But the great beame thats noted in his own,
                        He lets remaine, and neuer thinks thereon.
                        Some doe report he beares about a ſacke,
                        Halfe hanging forwards, halfe behinde at's backe,
                        And▪ his owne faults, (quite out of ſight & minde)
                        He caſts into the part that hangs behinde:
                        But other mens he putteth in before,
                        And into them he looketh euermore.
                        Contempt comes very neare to th'others vaine,
                        He hates all good deſerts with proud diſdaine.
                        Raſhneſſe is his continuall walking mate,
                        Coſtly appareld, loftie in his gate:
                        Vp to the eares in double ruffes and ſtarch,
                        God bleſſe your 
                              •
                           y
                              •
                           ight when you ſee him march
                        Statutes and lawes, he dare preſume to breake,
                        Againſt ſuperiors cares not what he ſpeake.
                        It is his humors recreation fits,
                        To beate Conſtables, and reſiſt all writs:
                        Swearing, the ripeſt wits are childiſh young,
                        Vnleſſe they gaine inſtructions from his tongue.
                        Theres nothing done amongſt the very beſt,
                        But hee'le deride it with ſome bitter ieſt.
                        It's meate and drinke vnto him alwaies, when
                        He may be cenſuring of other men.
                        If a man doe but toward a Tauerne looke,
                        
                           He is a drunkard hee'le ſweare on a booke:
                        Or if one part a fray of good intention,
                        He is a quarreller, and loues diſſention.
                        Thoſe that with ſilence vaine diſcourſes breake▪
                        
                        Are proud fantaſtickes, that diſdaine to ſpeake.
                        Such as ſpeake ſoberly with wiſedomes leaſure,
                        Are fooles, that in affected ſpeech take pleaſure.
                        If he heare any that reproueth vice,
                        He ſaies, theres none but hypocrites ſo nice.
                        No honeſt woman that can paſſe along,
                        But muſt endure ſome ſcandall from his tongue.
                        She deales croſſe blowes her husband neuer feeles,
                        This Gentlewoman weareth capering heeles.
                        There minces Mall, to ſee what youth will like her,
                        Her eyes doe beare her witnes ſhee's a ſtriker.
                        Wonders, a wench new dipt in beauties blaze▪
                        
                        She is a maide, as maides go nowadaies.
                        And thus Contempt makes choyſeſt recreation,
                        In holding euery one in deteſtation:
                        His common gate is of the ietting ſize,
                        He hath a paire ofeuer-ſtaring eyes,
                        And lookes a man ſo hungry in the face,
                        As he would eate him vp, and nere ſay grace.
                        A little low, crownd hat he alwaies weares,
                        And fore-horſe like therein a feather beares:
                        Goodly curld lockes, but ſurely tis great pitty,
                        For want of kembing▪ they are beaſtly nitty.
                        His doublet is a cut caſt ſattin one,
                        He ſcorns to buy new now, that nere bought none
                        Spotted in diuers places with pure fat:
                        Knowne for a right tall trencher-man by that.
                        
                           His breeches that came to him by befrending,
                        Are deſperate like himſelfe, & quite paſt mending
                        He takes a common courſe to goe vntruſt,
                        Except his ſhirt's a waſhing; then he muſt
                        Goe woollward for the time: he ſcornes it he,
                        That worth two ſhirts his Laundreſſe ſhould him ſee.
                        The weapons that his humors doe afford,
                        Is bum-dagger, and basket-hilted ſwoard:
                        And theſe in euery Bawdy houſe are drawne
                        Twice in a day, vnleſſe they be at pawne.
                        If any fall together by the eares,
                        To field cries he, why zownes (to field) he ſweares
                        Shew your ſelues men: hey, ſlaſh it out with blowes
                        Let one make tothers gut garter his hoſe:
                        Make ſteele and yron vmpires to the fray,
                        You ſhall haue me goe with, to ſee faire play▪
                        
                        Let me alone, for I will haue a care
                        To ſee that one doe kill the other faire,
                        This is Contempt, thats euery ones diſdainer,
                        The ſtrife purſuer, and the peace refrainer:
                        Hates thunderbolt, damn'd: Murders larum-bell,
                        A neare deare kinſman to the diuell of hell:
                        And he whom Sathan to his humor brings,
                        Is th'only man for all deteſted things.
                     
                  
                  
                     SATYR. 6.
                     
                        TOm's no good fellow, nor no honeſt man:
                        Hang him, he would not pledge Raph halfe a can:
                        But if a friend may ſpeak as he doth thinke,
                        Will is a right good fellow by this drinke.
                        Oh William, William, th'art as kinde a youth
                        As euer I was drunke with, thats the trueth.
                        
                           Tom is no more like thee then chalk's like cheeſe,
                        To pledge a health, o
                              •
                            to drinke vp-ſe freeſe:
                        Fill him his beaker, he will neuer flinch,
                        To giue a full quart pot the empty pinch.
                        Hee'le looke vnto your water well enough,
                        And hath an eye that no man leaues a ſnuffe:
                        A pox of peece-meale drinking (William ſaies)
                        Play it away, weele haue no ſtops and ſtaies:
                        Blowne drinke is odious, what man can diſgeſt it?
                        No faithfull drunkard but he doth deteſt it.
                        I hate halfe this; out with it, and an end,
                        He is a buzard will notpledge his friend,
                        But ſtands as though his drinkes malt-ſacke were cloſed
                        With, Here'st'yee Sir Againſt you are dispoſed?
                        How ſay my friend, and may I be ſo bold?
                        Blowing on's beere like broth, to make it cold,
                        Keeping the full glaſſe till it ſtand and ſower
                        Drinking but halfe a mile an hower:
                        Vnworthy to make one, or gaine a place,
                        Where boone companions gage the pots apace.
                        A mans a man, and therewithall an end,
                        Good fellowſhip was bred and borne to ſpend:
                        No man ere ſaw a pound of ſorrow yet,
                        Could be alowd to pay an ounce of debt.
                        We may be here to day, and gone to morrow,
                        Call me for ſix pots more, come on, hang ſorrow,
                        Tut, lacke an other day, why tis all one,
                        When we are dead, then all the world is gone.
                        Begin to me good Ned, what, haſt gone right?
                        Is it the ſame that tickled me laſt night?
                        We gaue the Brewers diet-drinke a wipe,
                        
                           Braue Malt-Tobacco in a quart pot pipe:
                        It netled me, and did my braines inſpire:
                        I haue forſworne your drinking ſmoke and fier:
                        Out vpon Cane and leafe Tobacco ſmell,
                        Diuells take home your drinke, keepe it in hell.
                        Carowſe in Canon Trinidado ſmoake,
                        Drinke healths to one an other till you choake,
                        And let the Indians pledge you till they ſweate,
                        Giue me the element that drowneth heate:
                        Strong ſodden water is a vertuous thing,
                        It makes one ſweare and ſwagger like a King,
                        And hath more hidden vertue then you thinke:
                        For Ile maintaine, good liquor's meate and drink:
                        Nay, Ile goe further with you, for in troth
                        It is as good as meate, and drinke, and cloth:
                        For he that is in Malt-mans Hall inrolde,
                        Cares not a point for hunger nor for colde.
                        If he be cold, he drinketh till he ſweate,
                        If he be hot, he drinkes to lay the heate:
                        So that how ere it be, cold or hot,
                        To precious vſe he doth apply the pot:
                        And will approue it phiſically ſound,
                        If it be drunke vpon the Daniſh round,
                        Or taken with a pickle-herring or two,
                        As Flemmings at Saint Katherines vſe to do:
                        Which fiſh hath vertue, eaten ſalt and raw,
                        To pull drinke to it, euen as leate doth ſtraw,
                        Oh tis a very whetſtone to the braine,
                        A March beere ſhewer puts downe A prill raine;
                        It makes a man actiue to leape and ſpring,
                        To dance and vault, to carowle and to ſing.
                        
                           For all exploits it doth a man enable,
                        T'outleape mens heads, and caper ore the table:
                        To burne ſacke with a candle till he reeles,
                        And then to trip vp his companions heeles:
                        To ſing like the great Organ-pipe in Poules,
                        And cenſure all men vnder his controules:
                        Againſt all commers ready to maintaine,
                        That deepeſt wit is in a drunken braine.
                        I marry is it, that it is he knowes it,
                        And by this drinke, at all times will depoſe it.
                        He ſayes, that day is to a minute ſhrunke,
                        In which he makes not ſome good fellow drunke:
                        As for nine worthies on his Hoſtes wall,
                        He knowes three worthy drunkards paſſe them all
                        The firſt of them in many a Tauerne tride,
                        At laſt ſubdued by Aquauitae, dide.
                        His ſecond Worthines date was brought to fine,
                        Feaſting with Oyſters and braue Reniſh wine.
                        The third, whom diuers Dutch men held ful deare
                        Was ſtabb'd by pickeld herrings & ſtrong beere:
                        Well, happy is the man doth rightly know,
                        The vertue of three cups of Charnico,
                        Being taken faſting, th'onely cure for fleam,
                        It worketh wonders on the braine, extreame
                        A pottle of wine at morning, or at night,
                        Drunke with an apple, is employed right,
                        To rince the Liner, and to purifie
                        A dead ſicke heart from all infirmitie.
                     
                  
                  
                     SATYR. 7
                     
                        LIu'd the Philoſopher Heraclitus
                        In Troynouant, as once in Epheſus.
                        
                           Were not Democrites liue, s-date full done,
                        But he with vs an's glaſſe ſome ſand to runne?
                        How would the firſt, dry-weepe his watry eyes?
                        And th'others laughter eccho through the skies?
                        For while they in this world were reſident,
                        Heraclitus for vertues baniſhment,
                        Perform'd a penſiue teare complaining part:
                        Democrites, he laugh'd euen from his hart,
                        Spending his time in a continuall ieſt,
                        To ſee baſe Vice ſo highly in requeſt.
                        Weepe Vertues want, and giue ſad ſighes to boote:
                        Vice rides on horſedacke, Vertue goes on foote:
                        Yet laugh againe as faſt on th'others ſide,
                        To ſee ſo vile a ſcumme prefer'd to ride.
                        But what wilt helpe to figh on flinty ſin?
                        T'will not be mollifide as it hath bin:
                        Tis farre more highly fauour'd 
                              •
                           hen before,
                        Sin's no beggar ſtanding at the dore,
                        That by his patches doth his want diſpute,
                        But a right welcome Sir, for's coſtly ſute:
                        And maske about with ſuch an oſtentation:
                        World ſaies; Vice-haters loues no recreation.
                        You ſhall haue ſmooth-fac'd neate diſsimulation,
                        A true What lacke ye? by his occupation:
                        Will (I in trueth, yes truely) ſhew you ware,
                        All London cannot with his ſtuffe compare:
                        Nay, if you match it (go from him to any)
                        Take his for nothing, pay him not a penny.
                        At this, my ſimple honeſt Country-man
                        Takes Trueth and Truely for a Puritan;
                        And dares in's conſcience ſweare he loues no lying
                        
                           But that they deale for, he giues him the buying.
                        To let him haue a pe
                              ••
                           worth he is willing,
                        Yet for a groates worth makes him pay a ſhilling;
                        Giues goodman Trollop one thing for an other,
                        And ſaies, hee'le vſe him as he were his brother:
                        But while his eares with brothers tearms he feeds,
                        He proueth but a Cooſen in his deedes:
                        Brotherhood once in kindred bore the ſway,
                        But that dates out, and Cooſnage hath the day.
                        The foregone ages that are ſpent and donne,
                        The old time paſt, that calls time preſent, Sonne;
                        
                           
                              •
                           aw better years, & more plaine meaning howers
                        Then preſently, or future following ours.
                        The world is naught, and now vpon the ending,
                        Grows worſe & worſe, & fardeſt off frō mending
                        Seuen grand diuels bred and borne in hell,
                        Are grac'd like Monarchs on the earth to dwell:
                        where they comand the worlds whole globy roūd
                        Leauing poore Vertuous life no dwelling ground.
                        Pride is the firſt, and he began with Eue,
                        Whoſe cogniſance ſtill's worne on womens ſleeue
                        He fits the humors of them in their kinde,
                        With euery moneth, new liueries to their minde:
                        A buske, a maske, a fanne, a monſtrous ruffe,
                        A boulſter for their buttockes, and ſuch ſtuffe:
                        More light & toyiſh then the wind blowne chaffe
                        As though they meant to make the diuell laffe.
                        The next that marcheth is the roote of euill,
                        Call'd Couetouſneſſe, a greedy raſcall deuill:
                        To fill old yron barred cheſts, he rakes,
                        great rents for little Cottages he takes:
                        Hordeth vp corne, in hope to haue a yeere,
                        
                           Fit for hit cut-thro at humor to ſell deſre.
                        Then is there a notorious hawdy feend,
                        Nam'd Lech
                              •
                           rie, who all his time doth ſpend,
                        In two wheeld Coach, and baſon occupation
                        Making a vaulting houſe his recreation,
                        Vnto his doore in ſummer howerly marches,
                        And euery Tearme looke for him in the Arches.
                        Enuie's the fourth, a Diuell dogged ſprighted;
                        In others harmes he chiefly is delighted:
                        His heart againſt all charity is ſteeld,
                        His frownes are all challenges to the field:
                        Though nothing croſſe him, yet he murmers euer
                        He langhes at ſomemans loſſe, or els laughs neuer.
                        Wrath is the next, that ſwaggers, fights, & ſweares,
                        In Fleetſtreete brauely at if by the eares:
                        Parboild in rage, pepperd in heate ofire,
                        Hot liuerd, and as chollericke as fire.
                        Vitlers and Sergants are beholden to him,
                        Till halter deſtenie, of life vndo him.
                        Sixe lubberly got belled deuill great,
                        Is Gluttony, ſwolne with exceſſe of meate:
                        His belliſhip containes th'inſatiate gut,
                        Paunch'd liquor proofe, an'twere a Malmſie-but,
                        Dulled with drinke: this is his vſuall phraiſe,
                        Yet one quart, and a morſell more, he ſaies.
                        The laſt is Sloth, a lazie diueliſh cur,
                        So truſt in Idlenesse, he ſcarce can ſtur:
                        Lumpiſh and heauy thoughts, of Sathans giuing,
                        That rather begs, then labours for his liuing.
                        Theſe ſeuen are feends come forth of Hells darke
                        On earth ſeducing ſoules, miſguiding men.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   