
      
         
            
            
            To the Honourable Ladyes of ENGLAND.
            
            
               LAdyes, in Elder times your sexe did neede,
               Knight-hoods true valour to defend your rights,
               Of admirable actions wee doe reede,
               Haue beene atchiu'd in cruell bloody Fights.
               Fell vgly Serpents were destroy'd and slaine,
               Strange mōsters mangled, Gyants hew'd in twaine.
            
            
               But who deseru'd more in such enterprise,
               Then worthy English, bred where wee are borne?
               Such as did ease and idlenes despise,
               For Armour more then Silke by them was worne.
               These were the Champions that for Ladyes good,
               Would bleede as long as they had drops of blood.
            
            
               Such was Sir Guy, whose story heere wee tell,
               Valours renowned honourable man:
               He lou'd your kinde (in heart) exceeding well,
               How can you chuse but loue his legend than?
               Bestow the Reading of it if you please:
               Gainst melancholy, that same dull disease.
            
            
               S. ROVVLANDS,
            
         
         
            
            The Argument.
            
               GVy of Warwicke (Sonne to Earle Rohands Steward) in blooming youth of Natures spring, fell in Loue with the Earles faire Daughter Phelice, whose disdaining of him, in that hee was but a meane Gentleman, and not by Birth answerable to her Honourable estate, did afflict his cormented minde with most distressed passions, till in a vision Cupid presents her with the Picture of Mars, inioyning her to loue Guy as the admired Champion of Christendome: Vpon this shee yeeldeth affection, on condition of Aduentures: which to atchiue hee departs into France, and shortly returnes with Trophes of victory and prizes of Honour: But Phelice not satisfied therewith, he leaues England againe, performing in forraine Countryes wonderfull acts: then returning, marries his Loue, whom after Forty dayes hee leaues, departing on Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, effecting in that Iourney many strange things: Then supposed to bee Dead, comes backe disguised and out-worne to memory, and Fights a combate for King Athelstone, killing Colbrond the Gyant of Denmarke, freeing thereby the Kingdome from inuasion. After that, liues obscurely in a Caue, and comes for Almes to his owne Castle, not reuealing himselfe till the houre of his Death, and then hee sent his Lady a Ring, by which token shee knewe her Husband, and came most wofully to close vp his eyes, dying her selfe shortly after him for very griefe and extreame sorowe.
         
      
      
         
            The Famous History, of Guy Earle of VVARWICKE.
         
            
               
                  In Natures greene vnmellowed yeares,
                  
                     Cupid tormenteth Guy,
                  
                  Inthrals his heart to Phelice Loue
                  By obiect of the eye.
               
            
            Canto. 1.
            
               WHen dreadfull Mars in Armour eu'ry Day,
               Lou'd stately Iuno and Bellona best,
               Before hee knew the Court where Venus lay;
               For then hee tooke himselfe to ease and rest.
               When all his thoughts, vnto the proofe were steeld,
               And all his actions manag'd for the Field.
            
            
               A Knight of his (a worthy Englishman,)
               That went like him, clad in an Yron Coate,
               In Warwicke with the worlds applaude began,
               To bee a man of admirable note.
               Such was the Valour hee ascended by,
               That Pagans trembled at the Name of Guy.
               
            
            
               
               This man compos'd of courage full of spright,
               Of hard aduentures, and of great designes,
               To fight with Gyants tooke a chiefe delight,
               Or search some Caue that Monster vndermines,
               Meete with a Bore to make a bloody fray,
               Or Combate with a Dragon, by the day.
            
            
               Yet e're hee entertain'd his Loue to armes,
               He grew deuoted to the Queene of Loue:
               Attempting Beauties fort with fierce allarmes,
               The victory of such a prize to proue,
               As elder times before could ne're inioy,
               A sweeter face then lost olde Priam Troy.
               
            
            
               Faire Phelice, equall match to Cupids Mother,
               A curious Creature, and the Kingdomes pride,
               All spacious Brittaine had not such another,
               For glorious Beauty, and good partes beside,
               Twixt her and Vulcans wife no ods were knowne,
               But Venus had a mole, and shee had none.
            
            
               For most directly shee had Venus haire,
               The same high fore-head, and attractiue eye,
               Her cheekes of Roses mixt with Lillies faire,
               The very lippes of perfect Corall dye,
               Iuory teeth, a dainty rising Chin,
               A soft touch-pleasing, smooth, and silken skin.
            
            
               
               With all perfections make a pearelesse Creature,
               From head to foote, shee had them eu'ry one,
               Mirrour shee was of comelinesse and feature,
               An English Phenix, supreme faire alone,
               Whom gazing people censures thus would grace,
               Beauty liues no where but in Phelice face.
            
            
               In Phelice face (this obiect of Guyes sight)
               Were lookes of Loue, and glaunces of disdaine,
               From thence sometimes his eyes attracts delight,
               From thence anon his heart deriueth paine,
               One while sweet smiles doe giue encouragement,
               Another time, sterne lookes worke discontent.
            
            
               Thus on Loues Seas, tost by the stormes of terrour,
               Twixt present calme, and sodaine furious blast,
               Resoluing Loue, yet finding loue in errour,
               In freedome chayn'd, in liberty bound fast,
               Hee sighes that Fortune doth so strangely deale,
               To giue a wound that Beauty will not heale.
            
            
               That Beauty will not heale (quoth he) fond man,
               Thou wrongst thy selfe, and thy faire Goddesse too,
               By lookes to know a Womans heart, who can?
               And looke on her is onely all I doe,
               Ile take another course more resolute,
               To speake, to write, my honest meanings suite.
            
            
               
               But if I should doeso, what hope haue I,
               That shee will heare my wordes or reade my Lines?
               Shee is Earle Rohands heyre, and borne too hye,
               To condiscend vnto my poore designes,
               Though Ia Gentleman by Birth am knowne,
               Earledomes I want, and Lordships I haue none.
            
            
               Oh! Women are ambitious out of measure,
               They mount aloft vpon the winges of Pride,
               And often match more for this worldly Treasure,
               Then any louing cause on earth beside.
               Which makes some wish, rather there were no Golde,
               Then Loue for it, should base bee bought and solde.
            
            
               If such she bee (as not be such be rare)
               What will my wordes, or sighes, or teares preuaile?
               I enter then a Laborinth of care,
               And striue against both winde and tyde to Sayle,
               A restlesse Stone with Scisiphus I roule,
               And heape continuall torments on my soule.
            
            
               Then I attempt to flye with waxen winges,
               Where Phoebus Chariot burnes in brightest flame,
               And shall bee censur'd that in Childish thinges
               As Loue, I haue begot eternall shame,
               Reiected and dispisde in base esteeme,
               To th'enuious world, I shall no better seeme.
            
            
               
               But cease Loues coward, banish thoughts of feare▪
               
               Bee resolute, and good accesse attend thee:
               
                  Phelice of force a louing heart must beare,
               If he that shootes loues Darts of golde, befriend
               And by no reason hee can be thy Foe,
               Because thou lou'st his Mothers picture so.
            
            
               I am resolu'd, goe on to Phelice Bower,
               And from as true a heart as Flesh can yeeld,
               Intreat her heare me in a blessed houre,
               And with kinde pitty all my sorrowes shield,
               To looke vpon me with remorse of minde,
               That holdes my life, as her Loue is inclinde.
            
            
               This said, to Warwicke Castle hee repaires,
               Where the rich Iewell of his heart remained:
               Earle Rohand bids him welcome, and prepares
               With Hunting sports, to haue him entertained,
               But thereunto vnwilling eare hee lends,
               And sodaine Sicknesse for excuse pretends.
            
            
               The Earle much grieued at this alteration,
               Sent his Physition for to doe him good:
               Who tolde Guy, that his onely preseruation,
               Consisted in the present letting Blood,
               And that his Body in distemprature,
               Was difficult and very hard to Cure.
            
            
               
               Doctor (quoth Guy) 'tis true, I know as much,
               I finde my selfe to bee exceeding ill,
               But ther's a Flower, which if I might but touch,
               Would heale me better then my Physickes skill.
               'Tis called by a pretty pleasing name,
               And Felix soundeth somewhat neare the same.
            
            
               Quoth the Physition, Sir I know it not,
               Nor in the Herball reade of such a Flower,
               Yet in this Castle is it to bee got
               Said Guy, it growes not farre from yonder Tower,
               Ile finde it out my selfe, Doctor refraine,
               
                  Gallen had ne're the Art to cure my paine.
            
            
               Left in his passions to conuerse with moane,
               As in a Window hee did sighing lye:
               In a delightfull Garden all alone,
               The Empresse of his thoughts hee did espy,
               Which to his soule did such reioycing bring,
               Feare was depos'd, and Hope was crowned King.
            
            
               Now is the time (quoth hee) faire Fortunes sun,
               Shines fauourable on my gloomy cares,
               Now may I end the griefe that Loue begun,
               And boldly aske good hap, how well shee fares:
               Now will I enter yonder pleasant shade,
               To court the worlds admired beautious Mayde.
            
            
               
               
                  Pheltce I come, assist me Cupid now,
               Prepare an Arrow ready for my Bowe,
               I neuer went a wooing: teach mee how
               Good action with good speech I may bestow,
               But aboue all thinges, gentle Cupid moue her:
               That shee beleeue me, when I sweare I Loue her.
               
            
            
               With speed vnto the Garden then hee goes,
               Where one of Phelice Damsels lets him in,
               And in a curious Arbor of repose,
               Findes Citherea with her siluer skin.
               Whom hee salutes with grace and maiesty,
               Beholding her with Loues inchaunting eye.
            
            
               Fairest (quoth hee) of all the workes of Nature,
               Whose equall neuer breath'd this common ayre,
               More wonderfull than Earth can yeeld a creature,
               For euery part belonging vnto faire,
               Immortall creature of Coelestiall frame,
               Eternall honor still attend thy Name.
            
            
               I come to thee about the like poore suite,
               That once Leander came to Hero with:
               Hoping to reape thereby more liuely fruit,
               Then Mars attain'd when hee deceiu'd the Smith,
               'Tis onely Loue that I with heart present,
               'Tis onely Loue must giue my soule content.
            
            
               
               Incline sweet Lady to mine humble motion,
               Compassionate the griefe that I endure:
               Regard my life that rests at thy deuotion,
               With pitty take my dying heart in cure,
               O let it not in groaning torments swell,
               And breake in twaine, because it loues thee well.
            
            
               Great Princes loue thee, this I knew before,
               And deedes of Honour for thy Name haue done▪
               
               But neither King, nor Prince, can loue thee more,
               Then doth poore Guy thy Fathers Stewards Son,
               His Loue to thee is so inestimable,
               To counteruaile it, all they are not able.
            
            
               
                  Phelice thus interrupts his protestation;
               No more of Loue, cease gentle youth (quoth shee)
               I haue a minde fram'd of another fashion,
               Virginity shall liue and dye with mee,
               Loue is compos'd of Idlenes and play,
               And leades to vaine delights, delights that stray.
            
            
               Besides, it ill beseemes thee be so bolde.
               Inferiour and vnfit for my Degree:
               And if vnto my Father this were tolde,
               I knowe it would procure reproofe to thee,
               The Prouerbe in this point might make thee wise,
               
                  That Princely Eagles, scorne the catching Flyes.
               
            
            
               
               And with this answer shee departeth thence,
               Leauing poore Guy worse vexed then before:
               For now in deepe dispaire of recompence,
               Hee neuer doth expect Loues comfort more,
               But vnto sorrow, sighes and teares doth giue,
               Wishing each day the last hee had to liue.
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Guy, in strange passions for his Loue,
                  Great torments doth endure:
                  Till Phelice sees a vision, and
                  Doth yeeld her patient cure.
               
            
            Canto. 2.
            
               VVIth tyred thoughts remaines this wofull wight
               Distracted in his melancholy minde,
               Pertaking nothing that containes delight,
               All thinges are harsh, distastfull, out of kinde.
               
                  Phelice denyes him Loue, whose sound of breath,
               Is like the Iudge that doom
                     •
                  s a man to Death.
            
            
               Like to Orestes in his franticke fits,
               Hee tare the golden tresses from his head:
               Or mad Orlando quite depriu'd of wits,
               From whom the vse of sence and reason fled,
               So fares it with this Loue-tormented man,
               Whose raging thoughts into disorder ran.
            
            
               
               Society hee shunnes, and keepes alone,
               Accusing Desteny, and cursing Beauty,
               Hee hates himselfe and is a friend to none,
               Beyond the limits of all Loue and Duty:
               
                  Venus (quoth hee) how are thy lawes forgot,
               Thus to afflict him that offends thee not?
            
            
               What is the cause I am reiected thus?
               Who interrupts my Loue to Beauties mirrour?
               I'le drag him hence, to roaring Erebus,
               
               There to bee plunged in Eternall terrour,
               Ile to Ioues Court, and there with shoutes and cryes,
               Make such a clangor as shall rent the skyes,
            
            
               Shall I bee cousen'd as Orpheus was?
               Assist me Theseus to reuenge this wrong,
               Where's Rhadamant that Iustice cannot passe?
               Euridice is solde euen for a Song:
               Fiends, Furies, Goblins, Hidraes, for a fall,
               I am prepar'd to manage with you all.
            
            
               Ile mount vpon the backe of Pegasus,
               
               And in bright Phoebus flames my selfe will wrape:
               Then will I tumble windy Eolus,
               
               To sleepe in Thetis watery Christall lap.
               From thence Ile post vnto the torrid Zone,
               
               To finde which way faire Phelice Loue is gone.
            
            
               
               
                  Iason had lucke to winne the Golden-fleece,
               I like the Skin, but for the Hornes I care not:
               Faire Hellen was a waggish wench of Greece,
               
               Bolde Mars will venture, bashfull Venus dare not.
               Trust a faire face? Not I, let him that list,
               What's Hercules without a Club in's fist?
            
            
               Thus for a time his sences were depriued,
               Being left by Loue as blinde as Cupids eyes,
               Till reason to perfections state reuiued,
               And extreame passions ceast to tyrannize:
               For in a Vision Phelice did descry,
               The power of Loue, and yeelds her heart to Guy.
               
            
            
               By Morpheus possest of quiet sleepe,
               In dead of night when Visions doe appeare,
               The heart tormenter, hee that pierceth deepe,
               And maketh Louers by their bargaiues deare,
               Sends from his bowe a shaft with golden head,
               And woundeth Phelice in her Mayden bed.
            
            
               Before her hee presents a Martiall wight,
               Clad all in Armour, for encounters fit,
               And sayes; sweet Virgin Loue this man of might,
               
               Giue him thy Heart, for hee doth merit it,
               For Valour, Courage, comely shape, and Limme:
               The world hath not a Champion like to him.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Faire Phelice in a Vision,
                     Entertaines the Loue of Guy,
                     
                     Jnioyning him Aduentures strange,
                     His manly force to try.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Great honour Lady thou shalt gaine hereby,
               T'adorne thy Noble and renowned Birth:
               Hee shall aspire vnto such Maiesty,
               His Name will bee a terrour on the Earth,
               He shall become a Champion vnto Kinges,
               And by the Sword performe admired thinges,
            
            
               Bee not ambitious that thou art high borne,
               Be not disdainfull of a meane estate,
               Be not defiled with the brand of scorne,
               Be not too proude that thou art Beauties mate,
               For 'tis in vaine to striue against my Bowe,
               If I say Loue, it must and shall bee so.
            
            
               Fixe not thy thoughts basely on worldly wealth,
               (Coyne should not be foundation vnto Loue)
               Corrupted hearts it drawes away by stealth,
               These money-matches cannot happy proue,
               For as the goods of Fortune doth decay,
               So loue which they beget consumes away.
            
            
               I know how Plutoes golden Treasure swayes,
               By deuillsh and accursed false illusion:
               I know how Womens humours now a dayes,
               Run after riches to their owne Confusion,
               I see the Peassant of most abiect life,
               With Golde enough can buy a dainty Wife.
            
            
               
               But Phelice if thou knew'st asmuch as I,
               How base the Gods esteeme of such abuses,
               When Beauty selles, and Riches comes to buy,
               Which are not made for one anothers vses,
               Thou wouldest scorne that Maydens should be solde,
               As Cattell are, for Siluer and for Golde.
            
            
               Loue must bee simple, harmeltsse, pure and plaine,
               And take originall from true affection,
               It must reciprocall returne againe,
               Or else it doth discouer imperfection.
               Loues inward thoughts concurre with outward deeds
               Such as from loyalty and truth proceeds.
            
            
               Thy louer comes not for aduancement to thee,
               In that thy Father is a worthy Earle,
               It is not Dowry that can cause him woo thee,
               Had'st thou th' Arabian Golde, or Indian Pearle:
               But as great Iupiter to Leda came
               For a sweet Face, His purpose is the same.
            
            
               Therefore kinde Virgin vse him kindly well,
               Make much of Guy, imbrace him for thine owne:
               Affoord him Loue-roome in thy Heart to dwell,
               Let him no longer liue in pensiue moane,
               But the next time thou doest behold his face,
               Giue him encouragement, with kinde imbrace.
            
            
               
               And with that worde (imbrace) hee shot, and hit
               The very center of her tender heart:
               Feeling the wound, she starts awake with it,
               Being taught thereby to pitty Louers smart,
               For Cupid drew his Arrow to the head,
               Because hee would be sure shee should be sped.
            
            
               With that shee fetch'd a sigh, a grieuous one,
               And from her eyes a shower of teares did fall:
               Where is (quoth shee) the gentle Loue-god gone,
               Whose power I finde is powerfull vnto all?
               Oh call him backe, my fault I doe confesse:
               I haue in Loue beene too too pittilesse.
            
            
               Sweet Boy, solicite for mee to thy Mother,
               And at her Alters I will sacrifice:
               From this day foorth, I will adore no other,
               No Goddesse shall bee gracious in mine eyes,
               But shee that hath imperious rule and might,
               To leade obdurate hearts to kinde delight.
            
            
               Compassion now hath worthy conquest made,
               Of that strong fort which did resistance make,
               One shaft had bin sufficient to perswade,
               A league for Life, a truce till Death doe take:
               
                  Guy more then Life doth Phelice Loue prefer,
               
                  Phelice affects Guy deare, as hee doth her.
            
            
               
               But vnto him her loue is yet vnknowne,
               Though his be made apparant long before:
               Hee vnderstands not that shee is his owne,
               Hee feeles no salue apply'd vnto his sore,
               Till forc'd by passions, and constrain'd laments▪
               
               A second suite, hee boldly thus presents.
            
            
               
                  Phelice, I was arraigned long agoe,
               And now I looke for Iudgement at thy hand:
               I haue beene Prisoner in a Iayle of woe,
               So long, that speedy sentence I demaund,
               Oh speake vnto mee, either Life or Death:
               For I am tyred with my vitall breath.
            
            
               If kindnesse dwell in that faire shape of thine,
               Expresse it with (I Loue:) if none there bee,
               Then say, I cannot vnto Loue incline,
               
               And so thou mak'st a quicke dispatch with mee,
               Censure me sodaine, either smile or frowne,
               I will not liue thus for this Kingdomes Crowne.
            
            
               
                  Phelice reply'd, 'tis not at my dispose,
               To fashion Loue without my friends consent,
               What would you wish me to bee one of those,
               That are to Parents disobedient?
               Shall fond affection ouer-rule the will,
               And doe you good to bee accounted ill?
            
            
               
               You know my Fathers greatnes in the Land,
               And if he should (as there's no other like)
               The loue of one too mean for me withstand,
               How could we beare the stroke, disgrace would strike
               Nothing but death could make my sorrow sweete,
               And shame would wrap me in a winding-sheete.
            
            
               Doubt not of Father in this case (quoth he)
               For Warwicks Earle (that honourable man)
               Shall see such deedes of valour done by me,
               To haue dislike he neither will nor can:
               Inioyne me what aduentures thou think'st good,
               That wounds and scars, may let my body blood.
            
            
               Why then (quoth shee) Guy make thy valour shine
               Through-out the world, as glorious as the Sunne,
               My heart, my soule, my life, my loue, is thine,
               When deedes of honour by thy hand are done.
               Make thy selfe famous by a martiall life,
               And then take Phelice for thy lawfull wife.
            
            
               I aske no more (said he) to gaine thy Loue,
               I shall esteeme it bought at easie rate:
               Oh that I were at worke my taske to proue,
               With Hercules or some such churlish mate!
               
                  Phelice farewell, this kisse thou giuest mee,
               Shall make a number kisse the ground for thee.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  From England Guy to France doth goe,
                  Where deedes of Annes are done:
                  And thence returnes Tryumphantly,
                  With all the Prizes wonne.
               
            
            Canto. 3.
            
               INlarg'd from sorowes thraldome, by Hopes bayle,
               
                  Guy armes his thoughts with Honours enterprize:
               Imbarkes himselfe, and into France doth sayle,
               Leauing faire England, where his comfort lyes:
               Hee seekes for enemies, hee longs for foes,
               And now desires to bee a dealing blowes,
            
            
               In Normandy arriu'd, hee vnderstands,
               That there was Warlike busines to bee doue
               For valiant Knightes, of diuers Christian Lands,
               The race of Valour did intend to runne,
               A great aduenture was propounded there,
               Which newes was musique to his greedy eare.
            
            
               The Prize that drew them all vnto that place,
               Was Daughter to the Almane Emperour,
               Faire Blaunch, with such a wondrous heauenly face,
               It had attractiue Beauty, full of power.
               In her, such graces did vnite together,
               The Worthyes of the world came posting thither.
            
            
               
               Who wonne the Damsell (it was thus decreed)
               By manly Courage and victorious might,
               Should haue her mounted on a milke-white Steed,
               Two Gray-hounds and a Faulcon all as white▪
               
               This was his Lot that could attaine the Day,
               To beare the Honour and the Mayde away.
            
            
               Our English Knight prepares him for the Field,
               Where Kinges were present, Princes did repaire,
               Where Dukes and Earles a great assembly held,
               About the Face that was so wondrous faire,
               Though onely one must speed, and hundreds misse,
               Yet each man there imagin's Blaunch is his.
            
            
               The spacious Field where they assembled were,
               Hardly affoorded roome, for Armed crowdes,
               The golden glittering Armour that was there,
               Did dart the Sun-beames backe vnto the Clowdes.
               The pamper'd Horses proudly stampt the ground,
               To heare the clangor of the Trumpets sound.
            
            
               A Germaine Prince of an vndaunted sprite,
               A first and very fierce Encounter gaue
               Vnto an Earle, whose Valour did requite,
               With blow for blow, as resolutely braue,
               Till by a stroake the Earle receiu'd on's head,
               Hee was vn-horst, falling to ground for dead.
            
            
               
               Then Guy came foorth with courage to the Prince,
               And deales with him as Hercules would doe:
               Like force hee neuer felt before nor since,
               Such hard extreames hee ne're was put vnto.
               Iust where himselfe had layde the Earle in swound:
               There downe comes he, both horse & man to ground.
            
            
               Duke Otton seeing this, was in a rage,
               And desp'rate humour did incense him so,
               Hee vowed by Heauens nothing should asswage
               His fury, but the Death of the proude foe.
               Prepare thee Fight to breath thy last (quoth hee)
               Monster, Deuill, or whatsoe're thou bee.
            
            
               They ioyne together by a dreadfull fight,
               The spinters flye, and clattering Armous sounds:
               The dust ascendeth vp▪ and blindes their sight,
               The blood allayes it streaming from their wounds:
               Both their Swords brake, they light, and on his backe,
               
                  Guy threw the Duke, that euen his bones did cracke.
            
            
               Duke Ranier would reuenge his Cousen then,
               And for encounter hee prepareth next:
               Quoth Guy, I finde y'are wretches and no men,
               That with a blowe or fall so soone be vext,
               But come and welcome, I am for you all,
               Wee say in England, The weakest must to wall.
               
            
            
               
               They rush together that the ground did shake,
               While animating Trumpets sound allarme,
               In Raniers shoulder Guy a wound did make,
               Whereby he lost the vse of his right arme,
               Yeelding himselfe as others did before,
               Vnable once to wield his weapon more.
            
            
               Then for a while all stood amaz'd at Guy,
               
               And not a man was forward to proceed,
               Till Louaines Duke his Fortunes went to try,
               Hauing good hope that hee should better speed,
               Well mounted, and well arm'd, hee faire did sit,
               On a proude Steed, that ill indur'd the bit.
            
            
               I thinke (quoth hee) thou some Inchanter art,
               That hast the force of Magicke in thine arme,
               Ile teach thee to beleeue e're wee depart
               Quoth Guy, for thou shalt feele that I can charme,
               Ile coniure thee euen with an Yron spell:
               My Sword shall send thee vnto Heeuen or Hell.
            
            
               With that hee lent him such a cruell stroake,
               That th'other did returne a weake reply,
               With second and a third his Helmet broake,
               Hold, hold (quoth he) Ile rather yeeld then dye.
               Fight for a Woman! Hee that list for mee:
               I thinke the Deuill cannot deale with thee.
            
            
               
               Then Guy came foorth with courage to the Prince,
               And deales with him as Hercules would doe:
               Like force hee neuer felt before nor since,
               Such hard extreames hee ne're was put vnto.
               Iust where himselfe had layde the Earle in swound:
               There downe comes he, both horse & man to ground.
            
            
               Duke Otton seeing this, was in a rage,
               And desp'rate humour did incense him so,
               Hee vowed by Heauens nothing should asswage
               His fury, but the Death of the proude foe.
               Prepare thee Fight to breath thy last (quoth hee)
               Monster, Deuill, or whatsoe're thou bee.
            
            
               They ioyne together by a dreadfull fight,
               The spinters flye, and clattering Armous sounds:
               The dust ascendeth vp; and blindes their sight,
               The blood allayes it streaming from their wounds:
               Both their Swords brake, they light, and on his backe,
               
                  Guy threw the Duke, that euen his bones did cracke.
            
            
               Duke Ranier would reuenge his Cousen then,
               And for encounter hee prepareth next:
               Quoth Guy, I finde y'are wretches and no men,
               That with a blowe or fall so soone be vext,
               But come and welcome, I am for you all,
               Wee say in England, The weakest must to wall.
               
            
            
               
               They rush together that the ground did shake,
               While animating Trumpets sound allarme,
               In Raniers shoulder Guy a wound did make,
               Whereby he lost the vse of his right arme,
               Yeelding himselfe as others did before,
               Vnable once to wield his weapon more.
            
            
               Then for a while all stood amaz'd at Guy,
               
               And not a man was forward to proceed,
               Till Louaines Duke his Fortunes went to try,
               Hauing good hope that hee should better speed,
               Well mounted, and well arm'd, hee faire did sit,
               On a proude Steed, that ill indur'd the bit.
            
            
               I thinke (quoth hee) thou some Inchanter art,
               That hast the force of Magicke in thine arme,
               Ile teach thee to beleeue e're wee depart
               Quoth Guy, for thou shalt feele that I can charme,
               Ile coniure thee euen with an Yron spell:
               My Sword shall send thee vnto Heauen or Hell.
            
            
               With that hee lent him such a cruell stroake,
               That th'other did returne a weake reply,
               With second and a third his Helmet broake,
               Hold, hold (quoth he) Ile rather yeeld then dye.
               Fight for a Woman! Hee that list for mee:
               I thinke the Deuill cannot deale with thee.
            
            
               
               Then not a man that would encounter more,
               They all were terrified and stood in feare:
               And in a rage amongst themselues they swore,
               What, shall a Stranger all the Honour beare
               Of this great Day? what cursed fortune's this,
               That all the glory of the Field is his?
            
            
               Amongst themselues his happinesse they curst,
               In enuyes heate, not knowing what to doe,
               They could haue kild him, but that no man durst,
               Put his owne life in hazard thereunto.
               If wishes might haue done it, hee had dyde,
               But fight with him, not any could abide.
            
            
               The Emperour, for Guy, a Knight did send,
               Asking his Name and Birth-place, which hee tolde:
               Then said his Maiesty, I much commend
               Thy haughty Courage, resolutely bolde,
               Braue English-man, that art thy Countryes pride,
               In Europe liues not such a man beside.
            
            
               I doe admire thy worth, thy Valour's great,
               To speake thy praise my tongue will not suffice,
               Ascend to Honours iust deserued seate,
               That art a second Hector in mine eyes,
               This Day thy worthy hand hath showne mee more,
               Then in my Life I euer sawe before.
            
            
               
               Come and receiue thy due desert from mee,
               My Daughters Loue is free at thy dispose,
               The Gray-hounds, Steed, and Faulcon, take to thee,
               Thy worthines doth merit more then those.
               Holde, heer's a Iewell, weare it for my sake:
               Which I a witnes of my Loue doe make.
            
            
               
                  Guy thank'd his Highnes for his gracious fauour,
               And vow'd him seruice while his life did last,
               Then to the Princesse with a milde behauiour,
               A reuerent, humble, modest looke hee cast:
               Saying faire Lady, Fortune is my friend,
               That doth such Beauty to my Lot extend.
            
            
               Madame accept your loyall English Knight,
               To doe true seruice when you please commaund it,
               Who while hee hath a drop of Blood, will fight
               In your behalfe, against who dare withstand it.
               To bee your Husband is degree too hye,
               'Tis grace sufficient, call me seruant Guy.
               
            
            
               In England doth my marriage Loue remaine,
               To whome I must and will be true for euer:
               About whose face Nature hath tooke such paine,
               I durst haue sworne flesh could haue match'd it neuer,
               But now I finde (that curiously haue ey'd her)
               There is a Phenix in the world beside her.
            
            
               
               And that's your selfe: I, dare the world deny it,
               But which is fairest, eyes cannot decide,
               No humane Iudgement in the world can try it,
               Who hath most beauty, Blaunch or my faire bride:
               I dare be bolde to call you beautyes twinnes,
               And Venus, black-amoore to both your skinnes
            
            
               Oh Phelice heere's thy picture in this Princesse,
               Me thinkes tho' art present in her lonely looke▪
               
               Thou that of my soules faculties art Mistris,
               Recorded in Times brasen-leaued booke,
               To thee if I proue false or be misled,
               
                  Ioues fearefull vengeance light vpon my head.
            
            
               Quoth Blaunch, thy constancy (and sighed deepe)
               Is highly to be praised, thou dost well:
               He that Loues-promise will not faithfull keepe,
               In horrour and in torments let him dwell.
               But I suppose thy vowes are yet to make,
               And so what thy sword won, thy heart may take.
            
            
               What I auouch is truth the heauens knowes,
               My protestations are aboue the skyes:
               Madam, the Sunne declines, day ancient growes,
               Ile take my leaue of you in humble wise,
               My body is vnto repose inclinde,
               Although no rest be in my troubled minde.
            
            
               
               My troubled minde's in Warwicke Castle now,
               Although my Body bee in Normandy:
               
               Heere I make others bend, there doe I bow,
               And lowly as the humble ground doe lye,
               Euen at Loues feete I cast my selfe to ground,
               Though victory my temples heere hath Crown'd.
            
            
               I cannot stay, I must to England backe,
               My minde mis-giues mee Phelice is not well,
               Like my sad thoughts my Armour shall bee blacke,
               Ile suite mee in a mournfull Yron shell:
               For where the minde meetes with suspitious cares,
               Distrust is euer dealing doubtfull shares.
            
            
               Yet I haue much good Fortune on my side,
               That knowe the meanes how to attaine my blisse:
               For Phelice Loue is to conditions tyed,
               And I doe trust shee is mine owne by this,
               By this shee may, but if she more require,
               There's nothing in the world I will deny'er.
            
            
               With hasty iourney hee is homeward bound,
               Leauing the vulgar to their Nine dayes wonder:
               Arriuing safely on the English ground,
               Posting to her, suppos'd too long a sunder,
               Whome with more ioy his chearfull lookes behold
               Then can by Pen, or Lines of Incke bee tolde.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     In France all Knights of Christendome,
                     To winne a Princesse, meete:
                     
                        Guy Conquers all and winnes the Prize,
                     Then doth his Goddesse greete.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  With the rewards of Victory,
                  
                     Guy doth his Loue present:
                  But Phelice is not satisfied,
                  Him forth againe shee sent.
               
            
            Canto. 2.
            
               IN the supposed Hauen of repose,
               Hope casteth Anchor for his Barke to ride,
               With kinde salute vnto his Loue hee goes,
               Who giues imbracements and all thinges beside
               Befits affection, all such complements,
               As Loue can looke for, gracious shee presents.
            
            
               Faire soe (quoth Guy) I come to challenge thee,
               For there's no men that I can meete, will fight,
               I haue beene where a crew of Cowards bee,
               Not one that dare maintaine a Ladyes right,
               Good proper fellowes of their tongue and tall,
               That let me winne a Princesse from them all.
            
            
               
                  Phelice, this Sword has won an Emperours Daughter,
               As sweet a wench as liues in Europes space:
               At price of blowes, and bloody wounds I bought her,
               Well worth my bargaine; but thy better face
               Hath made mee leaue her to some other Lot,
               For I protest by Heauens I loue her not.
            
            
               
               This stately Steed, this Faulcon and these Hounds,
               I tooke, as in full payment of the rest:
               For I will keepe my Loue within the bounds
               That doe enclose the compasse of my brest,
               My Constancy to thee is all my care,
               Leauing all other Women as they are.
            
            
               But sweet heart tell mee shall I haue thee now?
               Wilt thou consent the Priest shall doe his part▪
               
               Art thou resolued still to keepe thy vow?
               Is none but I halfe with thee in thy Heart?
               Canst thou forsake the world, change Mayden life,
               And helpe thy faithfull Louer to a Wife?
            
            
               Quoth Phelice, worthy Knight, my ioyes are great,
               To vnderstand thy honourable deedes:
               It seemes some were in such a bloody sweate,
               Their Valour, Fame, and reputation bleedes,
               I giue thee humble thankes that for my sake,
               Such hard aduentures did'st vouchsafe to take.
            
            
               To winne a Princesse was a precious prize,
               But sure mee thinkes if I had beene Sir Guy,
               
               Shee should haue found more fauour in mine eyes,
               Then take a Horse and turne a Lady by,
               What, is a Horse, a Faulcon, and a Hound,
               More worthfull then a Lady so renown'd?
            
            
               
               Perhaps you'le say 'tis done for Loue of mee
               I doe imagine; nay beleeue it so:
               And though I jest, I will doe more for thee,
               Then thou or any but my selfe doth know,
               Ile neuer marry while Lifes Glasse doth runne,
               But onely thee: Thee, or Ile dye a Nunne.
            
            
               But giue me leaue to speake my minde (deare Loue)
               Let me locke vp my secrets in thy brest,
               I had a Vision did affliction moue,
               
                  Cupid came to mee in my quiet rest,
               And did commaund me in his Mothers name,
               To Loue thee: thus perswading to the same.
            
            
               An armed man (iust as I see thee now)
               Hee set before me speaking to me thus:
               
                  Phelice bee gentle-hearted, yeelding, bow,
               Doe not oppose against the power of vs.
               But all thy Loue, thy loyalty and truth,
               Bestow it freely on this matchlesse Youth.
            
            
               Throughout the world his Fame shall be admired,
               And mighty men shall tremble at his wrath:
               To end Kinges quarrels hee shall be required,
               His worthines shall tread no common path,
               But actions to bee fear'd he shall effect,
               Matters of moment, thinges of great respect.
            
            
               
               This (in effect) hee did to mee relate,
               And I haue beene obedient to his will,
               Now if I would, I knowe not how to hate,
               Of perfect kindnes I am taught the skill:
               Beleeue mee Guy, for if it were not so,
               This secret of my heart thou shouldst not know.
            
            
               But now my Loue, before thou must possesse
               Thy constant Phelice in her Marriage bed,
               Thou must doe deedes of greater worthinesse,
               Then winning of a Lady with her Steed,
               Ile euer Loue thee, though thou ne're doe more,
               But will not graunt the vse of Loue before.
            
            
               Not graunt mee vse of Loue (quoth he) faire friend?
               Why then of force I must abroad againe,
               I will content thee or Ile make an end
               One way or other; slay or else bee slaine,
               E're I returne againe into this Realme,
               Thou shalt confesse I haue fulfild thy Dreame.
            
            
               Assist me Heauens as I meane vpright,
               For I protest by all the powers Deuine,
               No vniust quarrell shall procure mee fight,
               To wrong the wronged I will ne're incline,
               But stand for those that by oppression fall,
               Is Honours venture, bee it life and all.
            
            
               
               Come my Bellona doe thou gird my Sword,
               Imbrace my Armour in thy Yuory armes,
               And such kinde kisses as thou canst afford,
               Bestow vpon me in the stead of Charmes,
               I thinke vpon Vlisses louing Wife,
               How thou art now to imitate her life.
            
            
               Farewell my Phelice, health and happinesse
               Attend thee euer to thy hearts desire,
               And I beseech God graunt thee like successe,
               As I resolue my Loue to thee entire.
               At my returne, when Mars his busines ends,
               My comfort is, Hymen will make amends.
            
            
               And so vnto Earle Rohand hee repaires
               And tels him, hee is come to take his leaue:
               Hee must seeke out where Honour dealeth shares,
               To purchase that which worthy men receiue
               At home (sayes hee) my honourable Lord,
               I finde that Valour, nothing will afford.
            
            
               Therefore Ile search abroad what's to bee done,
               From Countrey vnto Kingdome Ile resort,
               By Natures course my glasse hath much to runne,
               I well may spare some yeares for fighting sport,
               Of Idlenes there's nothing comes but euill,
               I hate a Coward as I hate the Deuill.
            
            
               
               
                  Guy (quoth the Earle) thou mak'st me grieue at this,
               The newes is more then I can well indure,
               Thy wished Company so soone to misse,
               When I did make account I had beene sure
               Possest of thee, at thy late trauailes end,
               And dost thou now Iourneyes of new intend?
            
            
               Remaine with me, trust not to Fortunes power,
               Though now shee haue so well and kindly delt,
               Shee may alot thee an vnlucky houre,
               That instantly her fauours so haue felt,
               Her curtesies are most vnconstant thinges,
               Beleeue her not, shee dealeth false with Kinges.
            
            
               Tryumphant on her wheele thou now dost sit,
               And with Fames Trumpe thy glory doth remaine▪
               
               Oh doe not ouer-rashly hazard it,
               Lost Honour is not easie got againe,
               May not one cursed and vnhappy blow,
               Betray thy life to thy insulting Foe?
            
            
               May not a Monster or a sauage Beast,
               At vnawares depriue thee of thy breath?
               May not a Tyrant when thou thinkest least,
               Cut off thy course by an vntimely death?
               May not a thousand dangers on thee light,
               Where but thy selfe, thy wronged selfe mustright?
            
            
               
               (Quoth Guy) my Lord, danger hee may not feare,
               That to aduentures doth himselfe dispose,
               Hee must a minde of resolution beare,
               And thinke himselfe too good for all his foes.
               Ile neuer dread I shall bee ouer-man'd,
               While I haue hands to Fight, and legs to stand.
            
            
               Therefore in humble sort I leaue your Honour,
               Wishing all health vnto your happy State,
               If Fortune take a frowning moode vpon her,
               Why, shee shall see I will disdaine her hate,
               What Starre soeuer sway'd when I was borne,
               I beare a minde will laugh mishap to scorne.
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Guy to the Duke of Louaine goes,
                  And ioynes with him in strength:
                  Against the Emperour Reynere,
                  
                  Then makes his Peace at length.
               
            
            Canto. 5.
            
               NOw Guy expects a fauourable gayle,
               Which to his hearts desire hee doth attaine,
               And with a speedy passage he doth sayle,
               To seeke Aduentures out, in France againe,
               Where finding none, from thence away hee hyes
               To Louaine, where in siege the Emperour lyes.
            
            
               
               For Segwin Duke of Louaines hap was such,
               At Turnament a Noble man to kill,
               The Emperours Cousen, whom hee loued much,
               And tooke the Death of him exceeding ill,
               So that a quarrell thereupon arose,
               And warre ensu'de betwixt two mighty Foes.
            
            
               Thither goes Guy to lend the Duke his ayde,
               But in the way an accident befell:
               For by Duke Otton hee wos false betray'd,
               And's life in question, which he free'd well.
               
                  Otton in France before disgrac'd by Guy:
               
               Had vow'd where ere he met him hee should dye.
            
            
               And to that end, Sixteene appointed were,
               To lye in Ambush and surprize him so,
               All men of resolution, voyde of feare,
               That in a Forrest did themselues bestow,
               And set on Guy, onely with three Knights more:
               The like distresse hee ne're was in before.
            
            
               Now Gentlemen and louing friends (quoth he)
               Shew your selues English-hearted, rightly bred:
               Heere is some ods, sixteene vnto you three,
               But I the fourth will stand you in good sted▪
               
               You three shall combate sixe, that's two for one,
               And with the other Ten let me alone.
            
            
               
               Wherewith hee drew his Sword and laide about,
               That ratling Armour Eccho'd in the Sky:
               Dealing so resolute amongst the route,
               That downe they drop on euery side and dye.
               Heere lyeth one that hath no legs to stand,
               And there another wanting head and hand.
            
            
               
                  Guy quickly made dispatch with his halfe score,
               Hee was not long in ridding them away,
               But then remained halfe a dozen more,
               Which two of his most worthy Knights did slay,
               When hee perceiu'd them fall, he stampt the ground,
               And vtter'd forth this fearefull angry sound.
            
            
               Ah Villaines, how my soule abhorres his sight,
               For these how my reuenging passions striues!
               This bloody deed, with blood I will requite,
               You dye for it had each a thousand liues,
               Two slaine out-right and Heraud wounded too,
               Is the last cursed act that you shall doe.
            
            
               With force (as 'twere exceeding humane strength)
               Hee layes vpon them, blowes to stagger vnder,
               And brings them breathles to the ground, at length
               C
                     •
                  t all in piece-meale (for the Crowes) a sunder:
               There lye (quoth he) and feast Fowles of the ayre,
               Or feede tho
                     •
                  e sauadge Beasts that will repaire.
            
            
               
               But these sweet Gentlemen that haue resign'd
               Their dearest liues, euen for the Loue of me,
               And came from England as their Loue inclin'd,
               Companions in my hardest haps to be,
               I will enterre in Honourable wise.
               With best Solemnity I can deuise.
            
            
               From thence vnto a Hermit dwelling nye,
               He rode and did commit that charge with care,
               Who did performe the office carefully,
               And Heraud home vnto his Cell he bare,
               Who was not dead, though Guy suppos'd him slaine,
               But by the Hermit was restor'd againe.
            
            
               Now foorth goes Guy, pensiue, perplexed, sad,
               Grieuing that Destiny so cruell delt,
               For left alone no company he had,
               To ease the torments that in heart he felt.
               Till trauailing along, at last he found,
               A place for Honour, very much renown'd.
            
            
               There did he meete with Tilt and turnament,
               And entertain'd both glory and delight,
               There Fortune yeelded him her full consent,
               To winne the best of euery valiant Knight,
               Of all the Worthy men that did resort,
               Not one could match him in Duke Raniers Court.
            
            
               
               Then to the Duke of Millaine he repaires,
               Where by his worth he is admir'd of all:
               And vnderstanding that some great affaires,
               Twixt Segwin Duke of Louaine did befall,
               And th'Emperour, Millaine he doth forsake,
               And towards Louaine doth his Iourney take.
            
            
               As he doth passe vpon the way, he meetes
               A Pilgrim, that with trauaile seemed faint:
               Who in all humane curtesie he greetes,
               And with some newes intreats him to acquaint,
               His longing eare, hee with a sigh or two,
               Said sir, with newes I little haue to doe.
            
            
               One thing in all the world is all my care,
               And onely that, and nothing else I minde:
               I seeke a man, and seeke him in dispaire,
               Because I long haue sought and cannot finde,
               A man more dearely to my soules-loue tide,
               Then all the men are in the world beside.
            
            
               Why what art thou (quoth Guy) or who is hee?
               Of kindnes bee so kinde as tell in briefe?
               I am an English-man of Knights degree,
               (Quoth Heraud) and the subiect of my griefe,
               Is losse of one Sir Guy, my Countrey-man:
               
                  Guy with ioyes teares lights to imbrace him than.
            
            
               
               And art thou liuing Heraud my deare friend,
               (Quoth he) and kindly tooke him in his armes?
               Then chearfully let sorrowes all take end,
               And let me know, who cur'd thee of thy harmes?
               The good olde Hermit by his skill did saue me,
               With wholsome medicines, and salues he gaue me.
            
            
               
                  Guy did reioyce, and Herauds ioyes abound,
               At this so good and happy accident:
               No angry Starre in opposition found,
               But each was owner of his owne content.
               So poasting with good Fortune on their side,
               Vnto the Duke of Louaine they doe ride.
            
            
               The Citty in distresse besieg'd they finde,
               And very small resistance could be made,
               But Segwin was right ioyfull in his minde,
               That worthy Guy was come vnto his ayde.
               For now (quoth he) boldly presume I can,
               We haue an Honourable valiant man.
            
            
               Aduise me warlike Knight, what's to be done,
               To free the present danger wee are in:
               My Lord (quoth Guy) there's freedome to be wonne
               Euen by a course, my selfe will first begin,
               Let's issue forth vpon them presently,
               Our courages will make the Cowards flye.
            
            
               
               Ile giue consent to any thing thou wilt,
               Thy proiect willingly I doe approue:
               Let limbe be lost, let Life and blood be spilt,
               All followes thee that comes to me in Loue.
               Open the Gates, lets beate them from our walles:
               
                  Hee lyes no lower then the ground, that falles.
               
            
            
               Then sodainly the Citty they forsake,
               And on the Almaines resolutely set,
               Where such a bloody slaughter they did make,
               That many thousand liues payde Death his debt,
               Of thirty Thousand that in Siedge there lay,
               Scarce thirty Hundred that escap'd away.
            
            
               The Emperour at this was much agrieu'd,
               And with new Forces gaue a new assault:
               Knowing the Citty could not be relieu'd,
               And then their strength would weaken by default,
               So comes vpon them with a fresh supply,
               Thinking at length to famish them thereby.
            
            
               
                  Guy and the Duke vpon the walles appeare,
               And tels him he shall neuer winne their Towne:
               For they can spare his Soldiers much good cheare,
               Throwing them Victuals in aboundance downe.
               Intreating them if they want more then that,
               To speake, they shall haue store to make them fat.
            
            
               
               But now (quoth Guy) your bodyes are well fed,
               How doe you feele your stomacks to goe fight?
               I am afraid you are not rightly bred,
               But dunghils that will sooner crowe then bite:
               For still when Cowards doe begin a fray,
               Looke ere it end to see them runne away.
            
            
               And so your selues haue lately done wee see,
               Your tongs were heard, but hands ther's no man feeles,
               Most hote to brabble and contend you bee,
               But wondrous quicke and nimble at your heeles,
               We did suspect when you came heere to forage,
               We should haue bin encumbred with your courage.
            
            
               But 'tis not so, alas y'are not the men,
               Vnlesse perhaps asleepe you should vs catch:
               For waking weele encounter one to ten,
               And neuer wish to haue a better match,
               Haue at you once againe, sit fast, wee come,
               March on my hearts, sound Trumpets, strike vp Drum.
            
            
               Vpon the sodaine, with the Foe they bee,
               Fighting as men that laugh'd pale Death to scorne:
               Resolued now they would their Citty free,
               Or neuer liue to see the next day morne.
               Much blood was shed, great store of Liues it cost,
               And on the Almaines side the Field was lost.
            
            
               
               The Duke and Guy pursues their foes in chase,
               Who like so many Hares away doe flye:
               Wishing that they had wings to mend their pace,
               So sweet is life to them that feare to dye,
               But Fortune in an angry doome decreed,
               Their glory, honour, fame and life should bleed.
            
            
               The victors to the Citty then retired,
               With Trophes of tryumphant glory wonne,
               And all that heard the Action much admired,
               The great Exploit so resolutely done:
               But vnto Guy, the Duke all thankes did yeeld,
               For thou (quoth he) art Caesar of our Field.
            
            
               My Lord (quoth Guy) I ioy not halfe so much,
               That we haue wrought a freedome by the Sword,
               As I should glory if my hap were such,
               Twixt you and th'Emperour to make accord.
               Giue me but leaue I will endeauour it,
               And put good-will to a blunt Soldiers wit.
            
            
               The Duke consents with thankes, and doth intreat
               Him take a guard of Soldiers forth the Towne,
               Danger that seemes but little, may proue great,
               I would not haue thee wrong'd for Raniers Crowne,
               Goe Honourable man, what thou shalt doe,
               Ile set my hand, my Heart, my Life thereto.
            
            
               
               
                  Guy goes vnto the Emperour, speakes thus:
               High Maiesty, all health vnto thy Grace,
               And Peace to thee, if thou say Peace to vs,
               And Loue to thee, if Loue thou wilt imbrace:
               As we are Christians let vs warre no more,
               But fight 'gainst such as will not God adore.
            
            
               We sue not to thee in a seruile manner,
               As dreading any power or force thou hast,
               For Victory doth now display his Banner,
               And warre yeelds vs a sweet and pleasing tast:
               No cause doth moue it, but a Conscience cause,
               To bring the Heathens to religious Lawes.
            
            
               Speake Raynier, and resolue what wilt thou doe,
               VVith Soldiers breuity my message ends:
               Giue me an answer euen as briefe thereto,
               Shall we be Christian foes, or Christian friends?
               Shall we among our selues that Name deuide?
               Or challenge those that haue the same denide.
            
            
               Braue English-man, hadst thou spoke thus before,
               Thousands (quoth he) had liu'd, which now are slaine,
               Earth should haue wanted of that slaughtered store,
               VVhich in her vastie bowels doe remaine.
               Thou hast preuail'd with me, heere warre shall cease,
               And I imbrace thee as a friend of Peace.
            
            
               
               Thy motion tends to Honour (honours Knight)
               And thou shalt liue in Fames immortall praise:
               When thou art buryed in eternall night,
               Thy Name shall last the longest length of dayes▪
               
               Thou dost the Worthyes of the world exceed:
               Blest be the Countrey did thy person breed.
            
            
               Come goe my Liege (quoth Guy) vnto the Towne,
               And with Duke Segwin there a League renue:
               Our ends shall be to pull the Pagans downe,
               That vnto CHRIST'S Religion are vntrue.
               My greatest ioy will be to heare it said,
               This is the best dayes worke that e're Guy made.
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Guy with a Thousand chosen men,
                  Against the Pagans goes:
                  And makes them curse that ere they felt
                  The force of Christians blowes.
               
            
            Canto. 6.
            
               THe power of peace hath vanquish'd stubborn war,
               And mighty Princes worthily conclude,
               The Sword shall rust in sheath before it Iarre,
               To be with blood of Innocents imbrew'd:
               Christians in Name and Action to vnite,
               'Gainst vnbeleeuing Infidels to fight.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     uy with a Thousand men doth take his leaue,
               so hearken further after Martiall newes,
               And doth a true intelligence receiue,
               That barb'rous Pagans, Sarazens, and Iewes,
               
               
                  Turkes and the like, of Mahomets blinde crew,
               In most confused warre each other slew.
            
            
               To them he goes, partiall on neither part,
               (His Sword did fauour euery side alike)
               They all were odious to him in his heart,
               Which arm'd his hand with vigour for to strike,
               And worke amazement vnto their contending,
               Comming so roughly to their quarrels ending!
            
            
               (Quoth they amongst themselues) what fellow's this,
               Thae layes about him like a mad-man thus?
               Of certainty more then a man hee is,
               For humane force would feare to fight with vs,
               But if he bee as seemeth by his shape,
               Had he ten thousand liues he could not scape.
            
            
               Then did a haughty Pagan step to Guy,
               
               And said to him, If valour in thee rest,
               Let's haue a little sport 'twixt thee and I,
               Onely to see which of our Swords cut best,
               Thou hast a weapon there is like a Reede,
               Me thinkes it is too blunt to make one bleed.
            
            
               
               Too blunt (quoth Guy) and in his anger grones:
               
                  Pagan I like thy humour passing well,
               Ile whet it ere we part, vpon thy bones,
               And then another tale thou wilt me tell,
               If it should faile me now, it were a wonder,
               Such Lubbers it hath often hew'd a sunder.
            
            
               Bat come, art ready? bid thy friends adew,
               And say thy prayers vnto thy Pagan Gods,
               For I doe meane to vse thee like a Iew,
               
               Because with Christians thou doest liue at ods,
               Looke that thy head be set on sure and fast,
               Or mortall man, Ile proue thee but a blast.
            
            
               Then did they lend each other lusty knockes,
               That sparkes of fire from their Helmets flye,
               The partiall multitude about them flockes,
               Expecting all the end and Death of Guy,
               
               For Coldran whom he fought withall was strong,
               And had beene Champion to the Pagans long.
            
            
               At length Guy lent him such a speeding blow,
               That downe comes Coldran & his strength to ground▪
               
               
                  Pagan (quoth he) is my Sword sharpe or no?
               With which euen now so blunt a fault you found,
               Rise quicke, for if thy legs thou canst not feele:
               Off goes thy head as true as this is Steele.
            
            
               
               Forthwith he made him shorter by the Head,
               And that vnto the Emperour he sent:
               The Infidels grewe all astonished,
               For they in Coldran were so confident,
               They durst haue venter'd goods, and life and limbe,
               On any Combate that was fought by him.
            
            
               Then Heraud (to giue Guy some breathing space)
               Challeng'd a Pagan called Elmadant,
               
               And dar'd him and defi'd him to his face:
               (For valiant Heraud did not Courage want)
               The Pagan somewhat hot, with fury fild
               Did combate, being quickly cool'd and kild.
            
            
               Presently Guy vnto another comes
               Call'd Morgadour, and soundly with his blade
               Layes on him, and his sences so benummes,
               He tumbles head-long like a tyred Iade.
               The Pagans seeing their Champions thus goe downe,
               Forsooke the Field, retyring to the Towne.
            
            
               Where a most bloody Tyrant bare the sway,
               Who hearing what had hapned; full of Ire
               Went armed to the Tent whereas Guy lay,
               And did a Combate at his hands require,
               Villaine (quoth he) whom like a Dog I scorne,
               Ile make thee curse the time when thou wast borne.
            
            
               
               Know runagate I come to fetch thy Head,
               For to a Lady I haue promis'd it:
               My Curres shall with thy English flesh be fed,
               They must deuoure thy body eu'ry bit,
               Come, I haue vow'd by Mahomet thou dy'st,
               Thou canst not scape by trusting in thy Christ.
               
            
            
               And hast thou giuen away my Head (quoth he)
               Vnto a Lady? 'tis a braue intent:
               An honest man will his wordes master be,
               And neuer promise more then he hath meant.
               Come on thy wayes and take it quickly off,
               Or else the Lady will suppose you scoffe.
            
            
               With proud disdaine together then they rush,
               Laying it on as fast as both could driue:
               But Eskeldart, Guyes sword did so becrush,
               That for his Head he durst no longer striue.
               But on the sodaine for to saue his owne:
               Put's spurres to Horse, and in all post is gone.
            
            
               
                  Guy then returnes to Heraud, and declares
               What a bolde fellow came to fetch his Head:
               Who smiling at it, merrily prepares,
               To tell of his Aduentures, how he sped,
               VVith a false Coward called Adelart,
               
               That wounded him with an inuenom'd Dart.
            
            
               
               And being hurt most dangerously so,
               Was intercepted ere hee could retire,
               By Estellard a proude insulting Foe,
               Compos'd of Cruelty and deuillish Ire.
               But (quoth Sir Heraud) e're our fray was done,
               I made them wish, it ne're had beene begun.
            
            
               For Adellart I wounded in the side,
               And Estellard I curtail'd by the knees:
               Then left them lying, Death to be their guide,
               Vnto the Iayle where wormes doe clayme their fees,
               So when those two were seene to fall downe dead,
               All th'other Pagans with amazement fled.
            
            
               Why then (quoth Guy) all's quiet I perceiue
               These miscreants like vnto Foxes flye,
               But gentle Heraud ere wee take our leaue,
               One Combate more I am resolu'd to try,
               The Generall of this accursed route,
               Shall bee the man I meane to single out.
            
            
               They tearme him mighty Souldan: friend I long
               To make a proofe if hee deserue the Name,
               I am in doubt they doe him mighty wrong,
               If might be wanting to auouch the same,
               Titles of worth become base Cowards ill,
               Ile try what's in him, hap what euer will.
            
            
               
               Nay Heraud leaue me, preethee doe forbeare,
               I will be speedy; tarry in this Wood:
               Goe to yon grassie banke, repose thee there,
               And with this Balsome, stay those drops of blood,
               Ere Phoebus in the Occident decline,
               Death shall conclude the Souldans life or mine.
            
            
               Said Heraud, since thou wilt not let me goe,
               But doest appoint this bed of Earth to beare me,
               Till thou returne I will conuerse with woe,
               And will not suffer any Bird sing neare me.
               With longing eyes, and carefull list'ning eares:
               Ile spend thy absent time, in pray'rs and teares.
            
            
               
                  Guy poasts with speed, and doth the Souldan finde,
               And thus hee speakes: Art thou the man of might
               
               
                  Surnamed so by Tongues, and peoples winde?
               
               
                  Heere is a Christian come to dare thee Fight,
               
               
                  Both Mahomet and thee I doe defie,
               
               
                  And heer's a Sword I will maintaine it by.
               
            
            
               The Souldan with a staring looke, replyes;
               
                  Thou Christian Slaue, Ile chastice thee with Steele:
               
               
                  Thou art an odious Creature in mine eyes,
               
               
                  And thy presumption shall my Fury feele.
               
               With that at Guy he ranne with all his force:
               Their Launces brake, and each forsooke his Horse.
            
            
               
               Then by the Sword the Victor must preuaile,
               Which manly force makes deadly wounds withall,
               Cutting through Armour, mangling shirts of Male,
               That at the last, downe did the Souldan fall,
               Sending blasphemous Curses to the Sky,
               And casting handfuls of his blood at Guy.
               
            
            
               Who presently tooke Horse and then retir'd
               To Heraud, whom he found in slumber layde,
               Rise friend (quoth he) the time is now expir'd,
               An end with mighty Souldan I haue made.
               VVith that he rose with joy, and loues imbrace,
               And forth they trauaile to another place.
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Guy takes a Princely Lyons part,
                  And doth a Dragon kill:
                  Then frees faire Osile from mishaps,
                  That else had fared ill.
               
            
            Canto. 7.
            
               PAssing the Deserts now, where shady Trees,
               Embrac'd each other in their green-leau'd armes,
               VVhere Lady Ecchoes dwelling best agrees,
               And little Birds sing fearelesse of their harmes:
               They chanc'd to find a pleasant siluer Spring,
               VVhich water to them was a welcome thing.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     His Lady sends him forth againe,
                     Whose will hee doth obay:
                     And manfully a Dragon kils,
                     To part a cruell Fray.
                  
               
            
            
               
               There with the Christall streams they coole their heat
               And slake the thirst they had endured long,
               There did they make the hearbes and roots their meat,
               To satisfie for Natures hungry wrong,
               But on the so daine at the noyse they wonder,
               A Lyon roar'd as if great Loue did Thunder.
            
            
               
                  Heraud (quoth Guy) to Horse let's bee prepar'd,
               And leaue our Dinner till another day:
               Heere is a sound I neuer was so scar'd,
               Ile seeke it out; it comes from yonder way:
               Some Monster or some Deuill makes this noyse,
               For on my life it is no humane voyce.
            
            
               So forth he rides, and vnderneath a Hill
               He findes a Dragon, with a Lyon met:
               Braue sport (said he) I pra'y fight out your fill,
               And then vpon the strongest I will set,
               Which of the twaine that first aside doth start:
               I am a friend that will maintaine his part.
            
            
               The Dragon windes his crooked knotted tayle,
               About the Lyons legs to cast him so:
               The Lyon fastens on his rugged scale,
               And nimbly doth auoyde that ouerthrow.
               Then toooth and nayle, they crewell teare and bite▪
               
               Maintaining long, a fierce and bloody fight.
            
            
               
               At last, the Lyon faintly turnes aside,
               And lookes about, as if hee would be gone:
               Nay then (quoth Guy) Dragon haue at your hide,
               Defend your Deuils face, Ile lay it on.
               With that couragiously to worke he goes,
               And deales the Dragon very manly blowes.
            
            
               The vgly Beast (with flaggie winges display'd,
               Comes at him mainely with most dreadfull pawes,
               Whose very lookes might make a man affray'd,
               So terrible seemed his deuouring jawes.
               Wide gaping, grisly, like the mouth of Hell:
               More horrible then Pen, or Tongue can tell.
            
            
               His blazing eyes did burne like liuing fire,
               And forth his smoaking gorge came sulpher smoke,
               Aloft his speckled brest, hee lifted hyer
               Then Guy could reach at length of weapons stroke.
               Thus in most irefull moode himselfe he bore,
               And gaue a cry, as Seas are wont to rore.
            
            
               With that, his mortall sting he stretched out,
               Exceeding farre the sharpest point of Steele,
               Then turnes and windes his scaly tayle about
               The Horses legs, more nimbly then an Eele,
               With that, Guy hewes vpon him with his blade,
               And three mens strength to euery stroke he layde.
            
            
               
               One fatall blowe he gaue him in the side,
               From whence did issue streames of swarty blood,
               The Sword had made a passage large and wide,
               That deepe into the Monsters gore Guy stood:
               Then with a second wound he ouertooke him,
               Which made the Dragon turne, to haue forsooke him.
            
            
               Nay then (quoth he) thou hast not long to liue,
               I see thou faintest, at the point to fall,
               Then such a stroake of death he did him giue,
               That downe comes Dragon crying out withall,
               So horrible, the sound did more affright
               The Conqueror, then all the dreadfull fight.
            
            
               Away hee rides, and lets that Hell-hound lye,
               But looking backe, espies behinde his Horse
               The Lyon comming after, very nye,
               Which makes him light, to manage manly force,
               But when the Beast beheld his weapon drawne,
               He came to him, and like a Dog did fawne.
            
            
               Like to that gratefull Lyon which did free
               
                  Androdus life, for pulling out a Thorne,
               When for offence he should by Lawes decree
               Within the Theater by Beasts be torne.
               The Lyon came and lick'd him very kinde,
               Bearing (as seem'd) an olde good turne in minde.
            
            
               
               Euen so this gentle creature deales with him,
               For that same benefit which hee had done:
               Although by Nature cruell, sterne and grim,
               Yet like a Spaniell by his Horse did runne.
               Continuing many dayes, with great desire,
               Till extreame hunger, forc'd him to retire.
            
            
               Now towards the Sea, Guy doth his Iourney take,
               Imbarques for France: but by contrary winde
               Arriues in Almaine, where the Nobles make
               Great Tryumph for him and with ioyfull minde,
               The Emperour reioyceth he is come:
               And bids him welcome into Christendome.
            
            
               There he is entertain'd with Turnament,
               With Kingly banquets, Princely reuelling:
               And multitudes to giue their eyes content,
               Attend him with their throngs, still wondering,
               At all his worthy acts Report hath spred,
               Wherewith their eares most strangely hath bin fed.
            
            
               From thence he trauailes toward his louing friend,
               The Duke of Louaine, whom he long'd to see:
               But ere he came vnto his Iournyes end,
               A wronged Lady hee did worthy free:
               Which violently was from her Loue bereft,
               And he at point of Death, sore wounded left.
            
            
               
               Thus it befell, Terry a valiant Earle,
               With his deare Loue, surnam'd Osile the faire,
               (His precious Iemme, inestimable pearle)
               Into a Forrest went to take the ayre,
               Whereas a plot was layde to take his life,
               And make his beautious Loue, anothers wife.
            
            
               Vpon the sodaine sixteene Villaines came
               Vnto the Earle, and did him grieuous wound:
               Sirra, (quoth one) thou hast a wench wee clayme,
               She must with vs, lye thou there on the ground,
               And the next passenger that thou doest see,
               Intreat him make a Graue, to bury thee.
            
            
               
                  Guy finding Terry thus, hearing his plaint,
               Doth comfort him in kindest sort hee can:
               Who with the losse of blood doth weakely faint,
               With face of deadly colour, pale and wan,
               Courage (quoth he) Ile fetch thy Loue againe:
               Or say that Guy is but a Coward swaine.
            
            
               When Terry heard that name, he did reuiue,
               For vnto him Guyes worthy deedes were knowne:
               And lifting vp himselfe from ground, did striue
               For to embrace him in deepe passions groane,
               Thanks gracious heauens (qd. he) with soule and heart
               For sending thee, to take my wronged part.
            
            
               
               Which is the way (quoth he) those Villaines went?
               That pathe said wofull Terry by yon Oke:
               Haue after them, this deed they shall repent,
               As I am Christian Knight: and as he spoke,
               He heard a shrike, which was the Ladyes cry,
               So by that sound, he did them soone descry.
            
            
               Comming vnto them wretched slaues (quoth he)
               What doe you purpose with this Lady heere?
               In large her presently, and set her free,
               You haue done wronges, that will be rated deere.
               Her Husband wounded, shee vsde violent,
               Will cost you liues a peece incontinent.
            
            
               With that they laugh'd, & said what foole's this same,
               Or rather mad-man in his desp'rate minde,
               That meanes by wilfull Death, to get a name,
               And haue the world report he hath bin kinde?
               The fellow sure is in some franticke fit,
               And meanes to fight, without both feare or wit
            
            
               Like so (quoth he) the fit that's on me now.
               You all shall finde to bee a raging one:
               With that he showes them Mars his angry brow,
               And bids the Lady cease her pensiue mone,
               Saying, good Madam vnto ioy incline:
               For sodainly these Rascals will be mine.
            
            
               
               Then with a courage admirable bolde,
               At euery blowe some one or other dyes:
               Which when the gentle Lady did beholde,
               Oh pitty, worthy Knight she cryes!
               These mortall woundes I can no longer see,
               Be not so bloody, in reuenging me.
            
            
               Vpon my knees I doe intreate thee stay,
               This is to me a terrifying sight:
               Oh, with their liues thou takest mine away,
               If one dye more, I fainting yeeld my sprite,
               Thou worthily mine honour hast defended,
               Let the reuenging of my wrongs be ended.
            
            
               Lady (quoth he) I cease at thy request,
               Depart base Rascals, all but two be gon:
               But villaines you did binde her for the rest,
               And stroake them with his sword (the scabard on)
               That downe to ground they fell, making this scuse
               My Lord, we onely kept her to thy vse.
            
            
               Then on his steed, he lets the Lady ride,
               To seeke her Lord, whome she had left distrest:
               And Guy vnto the place became her guide,
               Where comming they did finde him, carefull drest:
               For in their absence came a Hermit by:
               Which to his bleeding woundes, did salue apply.
            
            
               
               
                  Terry and Osile, in their ioyes abound,
               And gracefully to Guy all thankes doe giue:
               Be thou said they, in Life, and death renown'd,
               Whom we will Honour while we breathing liue.
               Holde, heer's my hand (quoth Terry) worthy Guy
               
               In fight for thee, I would bee proude to dye.
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     Guy takes Earles Terryes Fathers part,
                  And kills the Duke his Foe:
                  Destroyes a cruell sauage Bore,
                  Preuenting dangers so.
               
            
            Canto. 8.
            
               NOw Titans Horses, with his fiery Carre,
               Had brought the Day to darknes in the West:
               And Vesper, that same siluer shining Starre,
               Which doth adorne the sky at Euening best,
               Appear'd as bright as Cynthia in her Sphaere,
               To welcome sable Nights approaching neare.
            
            
               When Terry, Guy, and Osile, wanting guide,
               Didst stray about the vnfrequented Wood,
               Hearing the saluage noyse on eu'ry side,
               Of Beasts that thirsted after humane blood,
               As Bores, and Beares, and Lyons, and the like:
               Which to their hearts did some amazement strike.
            
            
               
               On euery side they cast a heedfull eye,
               Still doubting on the sodaine some surprize:
               At length two Armed men they did espy,
               That also listen to those fearefull cryes.
               Each had his sword in hand, being ready drawne,
               Knowing that place, did yeeld no Dogs would fawne.
            
            
               Comming more neare, Sir Heraud was the one;
               The other euen as dearely Terryes friend;
               Who with imbracements made their gladnes knowne
               And then the Earle demaunded to what end
               His louing Cousen pass'd the Defert so?
               My Lord (quoth he) to bring thee newes of woe.
            
            
               Thy noble Father is besleged now,
               In this strong Castle, by Duke Ottons power:
               Who hath protested by a solemne vow,
               About his eares, he will pull downe the Tower,
               In a reuenge that thou his Loue hast got:
               He sweares thy Fathers life escapeth not.
            
            
               His Loue (quoth Terry!) preethee Osile speake,
               Acquaint this Worthy man with thy soules thought,
               Haue I procur'd thee any Faith to breake?
               Or bin the instigater vnto ought
               That is vniust in righteous Heauens sight?
               Neuer (quoth Osile) thou hast bin vpright.
            
            
               
               That wretched man, would force my Loue away,
               In clayming that, I ne're intend to giue:
               I will bee thine vntill my dying day,
               Thou shalt inioy me, all the howers I liue,
               
                  And when I alter this determination,
               
               
                  Let Gods, and men, holde mee in detestation.
               
            
            
               Well spoke (said Guy,) Lady be constant euer,
               And Honours blemish then, thou needst not doubt,
               Keepe Loues foundation firme, alter it neuer,
               It is for Loue, I raunge the world about,
               And doe expose my Life, to mortall danger,
               In this exiled state, an vnknowne Stranger.
            
            
               But Terry, wherefore are thy lookes so sad,
               That hast thy Loue in person to imbrace?
               As farre as England mine is to be had,
               And many yeares I haue not seene her face,
               It were enough to bring my hopes to end,
               But that my Patience is a trusty friend.
            
            
               My Lord (said Terry) know you not my griefe?
               And heard this Messenger relate the cause?
               Oh my distressed Father wants reliefe,
               I were a rebell vnto Natures lawes,
               Not to condole with him in his extreame,
               Making his troubles. my true sorrowes Theame,
            
            
               
               If that be all (quoth hee) thou art too blame,
               There is no cause to spend a sigh thereon:
               Ile terrifie Duke Otton with my Name,
               Let him but heare I come, and he'le be gon,
               Something betweene vs may not be forgot,
               He felt my Sword in France, but lik't it not.
            
            
               Since that, against my life a plot hee layde,
               By villaines that surpriz'd me in a Wood,
               But treachery, with vengeance was repayd,
               Who euer knew a Traytors end proue good?
               Accursed haps attend them euermore,
               In brasen Bull, Perillus first did rore.
            
            
               I will goe with thee, to defend thy Father,
               (For the oppressed I haue vow'd to right)
               And reason moues me to it, so much rather,
               Mine owne abuses, therewith to requite.
               This oportunity weele not omit,
               In that occasion falleth out so fit.
            
            
               Let's hasten on with speed vnto the place,
               Preuenting mischiefe ere too farre it runne:
               Take holde of Time, before he turne his face,
               Good proueth best when it is soonest done,
               Goe like Eneas with a filiall ioy,
               To fetch thine olde Anchises out of Troy.
               
            
            
               
               Couragious Knight (quoth Terry) thy bolde hart
               Cannot be daunted I perceiue with feare:
               Compos'd of Mars his element thou art,
               Of powerfull limbes, to mannage sword and speare:
               My melancholy thou hast banish'd hence,
               And with strong hope, arm'd me in recompence.
            
            
               Now all in poste, they speede themselues away,
               And in short time vnto the Castle come;
               Whereas Duke Otton with his forces lay,
               Relying on his Soldiers ample somme.
               But when the Captaines of Guyes comming knew
               They fled by night, and neuer bad adew.
            
            
               This was discouragement to all the rest,
               To see their Leaders thus giue ground and flye:
               Yet did the Duke most resolute protest,
               If each man in the Castle were a Guy,
               
               He would not leaue it basely, and retire:
               Though life be deare, yet honours place is hyer.
            
            
               
                  Terry (said Guy) we must not tedious bee,
               Experience often hath my tutor bin:
               And taught, that when aduantage I doe see,
               To fasten on occasion, and begin,
               The enemie by feare, himselfe subdues,
               Adde force to that, and victorie ensues.
            
            
               
               We will not make our Prison of this place,
               As long as there is Field-roome to be got:
               Tis my desire, to meete the Dukes good grace,
               And combate him, because he loues me not,
               If that you will not leaue this house of stone,
               Ile leaue you all and goe my selfe alone.
            
            
               And with those wordes Heraud and he depart,
               Which when the Castle-soldiers did perceiue,
               They gaue a showte, our Generall thou art,
               Thy Honourable steps we will not leaue,
               Wee are resolued to attend thee still:
               Let Fortune vse vs, euen as Fortune will.
            
            
               And thus most Valiant they doe march along,
               Giuing the onset, fearelesse to their Foe,
               Making those multitudes that seem'd so strong,
               Retire themselues, with slaughtered ouerthrow.
               But when the Duke perceiu'd his Soldiers flye:
               Perish (quoth he) base villaines, heere Ile dye.
            
            
               Where is this English-man that haunts my Ghost,
               And thus pursueth me from place to place?
               I challenge him to come and leaue the Host,
               And meete with resolution, face to face.
               Let equall enuy make this equall match,
               All controuersies wee will soone dispatch.
            
            
               
               Agreed (quoth Guy) proude Foe, I yeeld consent,
               Repent thy wrongs, and make thy Conscience cleare,
               For thou hast liu'd to see thy honour spent,
               Which worthy men of all thinges holde most deare.
               The noble minded censure him with shame,
               That liues to see the Death of his good name.
            
            
               Then toward each other they did mainely make,
               And brake their Launces very violent,
               Which being done their Swords in hand they take,
               Fighting vntill great store of blood was spent.
               For Enuy did the Duke's keene weapon whet:
               And on Guyes sword, Reuenge an edge did set.
            
            
               At length through losse of blood, the Duke fell downe
               And said, Now fond felicity farewell,
               I am betray'd by Fortunes angry frowne,
               And this experience to the world doe tell,
               There's nothing constant, that the earth containes,
               Death deales with Monarchs, as with simple Swaines▪
               
            
            
               Bewitching Vanities, seducing blinde vs,
               Greatnes hath great accounts thereon depending,
               As Death doth leaue vs, so shall Iudgement finde vs;
               There is no peace vnto a happy ending,
               My Dying houre, yeelds more repentant Grace,
               Then in my Life I euer could imbrace.
            
            
               
               Th'immortall soule doth with these words depart,
               And leaues the breathles Body did containe it:
               While wofull passions doe afflict Guyes heart,
               Now wishing to himselfe he had not slaine it,
               
                  For true Humanity, compassion showes:
               
               
                  To see Afflictions, ouer-burden Woes.
               
            
            
               
                  Guy sheath'd his Sword, and said, remaine thou there,
               Vntill I doe arriue on Englands shore:
               No further quarrell to the world I beare,
               For Loue of Phelice, I will bleed no more,
               From her I haue beene too too long away,
               And will returne to challenge Soldiers pay.
            
            
               So thence he rode to finde Sir Heraud out,
               Making his Iourney through a Desart place,
               Which was obscure, enuiron'd round about
               With shady Trees that hid bright Phoebus face;
               Where sodainly he met the hugest Bore,
               That euer mortall eye beheld before.
            
            
               The beast came at him most exceeding fell,
               Which he preuenting stands vpon his guard,
               And doth auoyde those dreadfull Tuskes right well,
               Laying vpon the Swinish head, so hard,
               That dead hee left him who had many slaine,
               For forth that Wood, no man came backe againe.
            
            
               
               When this was done, Heraud hee ouertakes,
               And tels him what a Christmas Brawne he slew,
               Then with his purpose him acquainted makes,
               Which was to bid all Forraigne parts adew,
               And see the heauenly obiect of his heart:
               
                  Heraud consents, and they forthwith depart.
            
         
         
            
               
                  To England comes Victorious Guy,
                  
                  And doth faire Phelice wed:
                  At Yorke presenting Athelstone,
                  
                  A dreadfull Dragons head.
               
            
            Canto. 9.
            
               ASsisted now by nimble winged Time,
               
                  Guy shapes his course for England, and doth leaue,
               The bolde aduentures of each Forraigne climbe,
               Loues iust reward from Phelice to receiue.
               As Hercules twelue Labours being past,
               Found time for Dianiraes Loue at last.
            
            
               
                  Heraud and Guy no sooner doe arriue,
               But newes thereof vnto the King was brought,
               Who heard of all before they did atchieue,
               Which made him much desirous in his thought,
               To see such Subiects matchlesse men alone,
               In honouring England, and King Athelstone.
               
            
            
               
               To Yorke they goe, for there the King was then,
               To whome they did most humble duty show;
               Welcome (quoth he) renowned Martiall men,
               My Princely loue vpon you I bestow,
               Your fortunate successe contentment breeds:
               Fame came before, and brought vs home your deed▪
               
            
            
               
                  Guy thou hast layde a heauy hand we heare
               Vpon the neckes of Pag
                        •
                     n Infidels,
               And sent them home by fatall Sword and Speare,
               To horrours vault, where vnbeleeuers dwels.
               Deuouring Beasts thou likewise hast destroy'd,
               That humane Creatures, fearefull haue anoy'd.
            
            
               Yet worthy man, I thinke thou ne're didst slay,
               Of all those Monsters, terrible and wilde,
               More cruell Creature, then at this same day,
               Destroyes what ere it meetes, Man, Woman, Childe,
               Cattell and all, which no man dare withstand:
               A dreadfull Dragon in Northumberland.
               
            
            
               I speake not this to animate thee on,
               And hazard Life at setting foote a shore,
               For diuers to destroy this Beast haue gone,
               But to their friends, neuer returned more,
               No, I expresse how happy thou hast bin,
               To free like feares that other men were in.
            
            
               
               Dread Lord (quoth Guy) as I am English Knight,
               And faithfull vnto God, true to my King,
               I will goe see if that same Beast dare bite,
               For to your Grace his Head I meane to bring.
               I found his fellow with a Lyon fighting,
               But made him leaue both scratching, and his biting.
            
            
               And as I dealt with him, Ile deale with this,
               Onely I doe beseech your Royall grace,
               Command me some direction where he is,
               And to your Court Ile bring his vgly face,
               Or your milde fauour neuer let me see:
               Dragon or Deuill, what so e're he bee.
            
            
               So taking humble leaue, away he rides,
               Vnto Northumberland to finde that Beast:
               Hauing a dozen Knights which were his guides,
               And brought him where the Dragon held his feast
               Like Canniball, that feeds on flesh of men:
               Behold (quoth they to Guy) you Caue's his Den.
            
            
               It is enough said hee: doe you remaine,
               And leaue me to goe finde out Hidra's head,
               That neuer shall deuower man againe,
               Who with so many bodyes hath bin fed,
               Heere Gentlemen if you will please to stay,
               Sit on your Horses and behold our fray.
            
            
               
               Comming vnto the Caue, the Dragon spyes him,
               And forth he stalkes with lofty speckled brest,
               Of dreadfull forme: assoone as ere Guy eyes him,
               His Launce he speedy set into his rest,
               Then spurres to Horse and at the Dragon makes:
               That bearing ground, at the encounter shakes.
            
            
               Then very lightly Guy retires his Horse,
               And comes vpon him with redoubled might:
               The Dragon meets him with resisting force,
               And like a reede his Launce in two did bite,
               Nay then (quoth Guy) if to such bites you fall,
               I haue a toole to picke your Teeth withall.
            
            
               Then drew his Sword (a keene and massie blade)
               And fiercely stroke with furious blowes, so fell,
               That many wide and bloody woundes he made,
               Which causde the Dragon yawne, like mouth of Hell,
               Roaring with a most fearefull hideous sound,
               And with his Clawes all rent and tore the ground.
            
            
               Impatient of the smart hee did sustaine,
               He thought with winges to raise himfelse aloft,
               But with a stroake Guy brought him downe againe,
               And ply'd him with the edge of Steele so oft,
               That downe he fell in durty blood beray'd,
               And forth his wide deuouring Ouen bray'd.
            
            
               
               A flake of fire seem'd to issue thence,
               While Guy was hewing off his vgly Head,
               Now Fiend (quoth he) thou hast thy recompence,
               For all the humane blood thy Iawes haue shed,
               Vpon a part of this same broken Speare,
               Thy filthy face vnto the King Ile beare.
            
            
               The Knights with (ioy exceeding) take a view,
               Of that same fearefull creature, strange of shape:
               Admiring at his vgly forme of hew,
               With wonderment that mortall man could scape,
               Those teeth and clawes, so dreadfull, sharpe and long,
               Compos'd by Nature in a Beast so strong.
            
            
               When they had fix'd the Head vpon a Speare,
               And measur'd out the bodyes length direct:
               Vnto the King at Lincolne they it beare,
               Who Guyes returne with longing did expect,
               God shield (quoth he) and saue me from all euill:
               Heere is a face may well out-face the Deuill.
            
            
               What staring eyes of burning glasse be those,
               That might (aliue) to flaming Beacons seeme?
               What scales of harnesse arme that crookee Nose,
               And Teeth? none such had Cerberus I deeme:
               What yawning mouth and forked Tongue is there,
               That being Dead, may make the Liuing feare?
            
            
               
               Victorious Knight, thy Actions we admire,
               And place thee highly in our Kingly loue,
               Throughout the spacious Orbe by Fame aspire,
               More lofty then the supreme Spheare doth moue▪
               
               To the succeeding Ages of this Land,
               I will remember thy Victorious hand.
            
            
               Which shall be thus: the Monsters picture wrought
               On cloath of Arras artificiall well,
               And vnto Warwicke wee will haue it brought;
               There to remaine, and after ages tell,
               That worthy Guy, a man of matchlesse strength,
               Destroy'd a Dragon Thirty foote in length.
            
            
               And place his Head heere on the Castle wall,
               For memory, till yeares doe ruine it:
               And Nobles make tryumphant Festiuall,
               Affoord our Knight all honour doth befit.
               
                  Troy's Hector's dead and can no more atchieue:
               But Englands Hector still remaines aliue.
            
            
               By this Report the onely Linguist liuing,
               Had beene with Phelice for to make her glad:
               Such fame and glory to her Louer giuing,
               As neuer greater any Worthy 
                     •
                  ad.
               Tels all the deedes of wonder he hath done,
               From the first action that his hand begun.
            
            
               
               
                  Phelice impatient of his wished sight,
               Speeds towards Lincolne, like light Salmacis:
               
               Where ioyfully she entertaines her Knight,
               With Iunoes kinde imbrace, and Venus kisse.
               
                  Guy with requitall makes his gladnes knowne:
               And in his armes he now inioyes his owne.
            
            
               Forgetfull Loue, and too too slowe (quoth she)
               I fear'd thou didst not minde thy dearest friend:
               What, seeke a Dragon, ere thou looke for me,
               And hazard life before thou come, or send
               To know if I remaine in happy state!
               Some jealous woman, would suppose 'twere hate.
            
            
               But sure I doe not, though I speake my heart,
               And wish I had bin first thou saw'st on shore:
               
                  Guy welcome to thy Phelice now thou art,
               Thou neuer shalt goe forth a Fighting more,
               No, thou hast fought too much, thy lookes bewray
               Sterne countenance, hath stolne thy smiles away.
            
            
               But Loue, will learne thee (loue) to change thy face,
               And frame it, as at first when I did chuse it:
               Thou hast almost forgotten to imbrace,
               I like that well; it seemes thou did'st not vse it
               In Forraigne parts abroad, where thou hast bin,
               But that lost lesson, thou must new begin.
            
            
               
               I will (quoth he) deere Loue, and ply my Booke,
               And kisse my Lesson on thy Corall lip:
               Tell me but onely when I am mistooke,
               In reading rashly, if I ouer-skip,
               Or be too negligent in taking paine,
               Why turne me backe, to conne my geere againe.
            
            
               But Lady, one exception I will make,
               What line soeuer you doe put me to,
               The Horne-booke of all other Ile forsake,
               For willingly, I would not haue to doe
               With that Crosse-rowe, crosse vnto many, when,
               Women doe teach it vnto Married men.
            
            
               Kinde Sir (quoth she) content, Ile neuer chuse it,
               It fits two sorts, a Curtezan, a Childe:
               Once, as the latter, simply I did vse it,
               But for the other, rather, be beguilde
               Then to deceiue, the second Horn-booke's naught:
               Teach it not me and it shall ne're be taught.
            
            
               
                  Guy smil'd and said, come let vs Warwicke see,
               Of all the world the place that I loue best:
               Because it had the bringing vp of thee,
               And there, first with thy Beauty I was blest,
               I loue the Castle, and the Garden ground,
               Where e'rst thy Venus-face alone I found.
            
            
               
               Let's hasten on to heare this Sacred voyce,
               
                  I Guy take Phelice to my wedded wife:
               
               And thou repeate, I likewise am thy choyse,
               
               
                  Till Death depart vs, euen so long as Life.
               
               And then the next will bee, God giue vs Ioy,
               
               
                  And send thy Fathers Heyre, agallant Boy.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  The Marriage is Solemnized,
                  But after Forty dayes:
                  
                     Guy Pennance vowes, and Pilgrim like,
                  From England goes his wayes.
               
            
            Canto. 10.
            
               THe happy Day (that Louers long expect)
               Is now attayn'd to giue desire rest:
               And all the honours Hymen can effect,
               He franke bestowes to grace the wedding Feast.
               For Athelstone and his renowned Queene:
               At this great Nuptiall, in their pompe were seene.
            
            
               The Nobles rich and costly in Attire,
               With worthy Knights and Gentlemen beside:
               Ladyes of Honour (as their Loues require)
               Attend vpon the beautious faire fac'd Bride.
               There wanted nothing (wit of man could finde)
               To please the eye, or to content the minde.
            
            
               
               Maskes, midnight-Reuels, Tilt and Turnament,
               Acting of ancient Stories, stately showes,
               Banquets, might giue great Iupiter content,
               Where cuppes of Nector plentious ouer-flowes,
               Aboundant all thinges, with a plentious hand:
               As if a King himselfe, should feast a Land.
            
            
               Soone after all these thinges were consummate,
               Earle Rohand (Phelice worthy Father) dyes:
               And to his Sonne bequeathes the whole estate
               Of Earledomes, Lordships, all his Land is Guyes.
               
               Who is created Earle of Warwicke then,
               In Honours rancke, with Englands Noble-men.
            
            
               But in the glory of this high applaud,
               Enioying all that did partake delight,
               When euery tongue his Fame and Fortunes laude,
               Himselfe conuerts his sun-shine dayes to night,
               Bethinking what the world may iust be thought:
               And deeming all but vaine, that he had sought.
            
            
               Oft would hee sit and meditate alone,
               In looking backe what steps his youth had trod:
               Then to himselfe with sighes, and grieuous grone,
               Cry pardon me, thou iust incensed God,
               I haue done nothing for to purchase Grace:
               But spent my time about a Womans face.
            
            
               
               For Beauty, bloody through the world I ran,
               In pride of heart preferring Phelice feature:
               For Beauty I haue ended many a man,
               Hating all other, for one mortall Creature,
               For Beauty I haue pawn'd my vtmost power,
               But for my sinnes not spent one weeping hower.
            
            
               My Nunquam sera I will now begin,
               And vowe to spend the remnant of my dayes,
               In contrite Pennance for my former sinne,
               That God may pardon all the erring wayes,
               Which flesh and blood, vainely deceiued by,
               Vnto the world I will goe learne to dye.
            
            
               Let me be censur'd, euen as mortals please,
               Ile please my God in all things may be done:
               Ambitious pride hath beene my youths disease,
               Ile teach age meeknes, ere my Glasse bee runne,
               And change my choyse: wealth, beauty, world farwel:
               To purchase Heauen, I would passe thorow Hell.
            
            
               
                  Phelice perceiues his melancholy state,
               And comming to him, doth most mildely woo:
               My Lord (quoth shee) why are you chang'd of late?
               As I share ioy, let mee beare sorrow too,
               If I in ought haue mou'd you to offence:
               I will with teares performe due recompence.
            
            
               
               No my deare Loue (quoth Guy) no cause in thee,
               Tis with my selfe I discontented striue:
               By light of Grace, my Natures faults I see,
               That am as dead, although I seeme aliue.
               
                  Phelice, my sinnes, my countlesse sinnes appeare:
               Crying, Repent thy guilty Conscience cleere.
               
            
            
               I must deale with thee, as Bauarus delt
               (A Prince of Rome) with Sygunda his Wife,
               Who (from a deepe impression hee felt)
               Vow'd Chastity perpetuall all his life.
               Entreating thee (euen as thou lou'st my soule)
               To pardon me, not vrging my controule.
            
            
               Hast thou not heard what Ethelfrida did
               (A Christian woman) sometime Englands Queene?
               Is Edelthrudis acte of Chaste life hid,
               A Princesse likewise rare and matchlesse seene?
               The first with Childe, no more of lust would taste:
               The second caus'd two Husbands both liue chaste.
            
            
               And canst not thou (the Phoenix of a Realme)
               By immitation, winne immortall praise?
               Leauing thy vertues an admired Theme
               To the succeeding Age, of Yron dayes?
               I know thou canst, thy greater part's Diuine:
               Where most is Carnall, 'twill to flesh incline.
            
            
               
               Thou didst procure (although I doe excuse it)
               My pride, by Conquests to attaine thy Loue:
               God gaue mee Valour, I did vaine abuse it,
               My heart and thoughts, aspired farre aboue
               The Crownes and Scepters of most potent Kings,
               I held their Diadems, inferiour thinges.
            
            
               But now I gather in a totall somme,
               Such follies, and condemne them all to dye:
               A man of other fashion ile become,
               Some better Trauailes for my soule to try,
               Not as before, in Armour on my Steed:
               But in a Gowne of gray, a Palmers weed.
            
            
               Obscure my Iourney, for ile take no leaue,
               But onely leaue my endles Loue to thee:
               Heere is my Ring, this memory receiue,
               And weare the same, to make thee thinke on me.
               Let me haue thine, which for thy sake ile keepe:
               Till Death close vp these eyes, with his dead sleepe.
            
            
               When this was spoke, how she did wring her hands,
               With sighes and teares, may well be deemed much:
               Yet wondrous meekly, nothing countermaunds,
               For the Deuotion of that age was such,
               To holde them blessed, could themselues retire:
               To solitude, and leaue the Worlds desire.
            
            
               
               Now is the Princely cloathing layde away,
               Wherein he gitter'd like the glorious Sun,
               And his best habite, homely Countrey gray,
               Such as the poore plaine people tearme home-spun,
               A Staffe, a Scrip, a Scallop-shell in's hat,
               Not to be knowne, or once admired at.
            
            
               And thus with pensiue heart, and dolefull teares,
               He leaues the fairest Creature England had:
               Who in her face a map of sorrow weares,
               A countenance compos'd all mournfull, sad,
               Like vnto one had banish'd all delight:
               Wishing for slumbers of eternall night.
            
            
               
                  Guy journeyes toward that Sanctified ground,
               Whereas some times the Iewes faire Citty stood,
               In which, our Sauiours sacred Head was Crown'd,
               And where for sinfull man he shed his Blood,
               To see the Sepulcher, was his intent:
               The Tombe that Ioseph vnto Iesus lent.
            
            
               With tedious myles he tyr'd his weary feete,
               And passed Desart places, full of danger:
               At last, with a most wofull wight did meete,
               A man that vnto sorrow was no stranger.
               For hee had fifteene Sonnes made Captiue all
               To slauish bondage, in extreamest thrall.
            
            
               
               A Gyant called Amarant, detayn'd them,
               Whome no man durst encounter for his strength,
               Who in a Castle which he held had chayn'd them,
               
                  Guy questioned where? and vnderstands at length
               The place not farre: lend me thy Sword (quoth he)
               Ile lend my manhood, all thy Sonnes to free.
            
            
               With that hee goes and layes vpon the doore,
               Like him that sayes; I must and will come in:
               
               The Gyant neuer was so rouz'd before,
               For no such knocking at his Gate had bin,
               So takes his Club and Keyes, and commeth out:
               Staring with irefull countenance about.
            
            
               Sirra (quoth he) what busines hast thou heere?
               Art thou come to feast the Crowes about these walles▪
               
               Didst neuer heare, no ransome can him cleere,
               That in the compasse of my fury falles?
               For making mee to take a Porters paines,
               With this same Club I will dash out thy braines.
            
            
               Gyant (quoth Guy) y're quarrelsome I see,
               Choler and you seeme very neere of kin:
               Dangerous at the Club be like you bee,
               I haue bin better arm'd, though now goe thin,
               But show thy vtmost hate, enlarge thy spight:
               Heere is the weapon that must doe me right.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     A Gyant called Amarant,
                     
                     
                        Guy valiantly destroyes:
                     Wherby wrong'd Ladyes, captiue Knights
                     Their liberty enioyes.
                  
               
            
            
               
               So drawes his sword, salutes him with the same
               About the head, the shoulders, and the side:
               While his erected Club did death proclaime,
               Standing with huge Colossus spacious stride,
               Putting such vigor to his knotty beame:
               That like a furnace, he did smoake extreame.
            
            
               But on the ground he spent his stroakes in vaine,
               For Guy was nimble to auoyde them still:
               And euer ere he heau'd his Club againe,
               Did brush his plated Coate against his will,
               At such aduantage he would neuer fayle:
               To bang him soundly in his shirt of Mayle.
            
            
               At length through thirst, Amarant feeble grew,
               And said to Guy, as th'art of humane race,
               Showe it in this: giue Natures wants their dew,
               Let me but goe and drinke in yonder place,
               Thou canst not yeeld vnro a smaller thing,
               Then grant life that, is giuen by the spring.
            
            
               I grant thee leaue (quoth Guy) goe drinke thy last,
               To pledge the Dragon and the saluage Bore:
               Succeed the Tragedies which they haue past;
               But neuer thinke to taste colde water more,
               Drinke deepe to Death, and after that carouse,
               Bid him receiue thee, in his earthen house.
            
            
               
               So to the Spring he goes and slakes his thirst,
               Taking the water in extreamely, like
               A wracked Ship that on some Rocke is burst,
               When forced bulke against the stones doe strike,
               Scooping it in so fast with both his hands,
               That Guy admiring to behold it stands.
            
            
               Come on (quoth he) let vs to worke againe,
               Thou art about thy liquor ouer-long:
               The Fish that in the Riuer doe remaine,
               Will want hereby, thy drinking doth them wrong,
               But I will see their satisfaction made:
               With Gyants blood, they must and shall be paide.
            
            
               Villaine (quoth Amarant) Ile crush thee straight:
               Thy life shall pay thy daring Tongues offence,
               This Club (which is about some hundred weight)
               Is Deaths commission, to dispatch thee hence.
               Dresse thee for Rauens dyet I must needs:
               And breake thy bones, as they were made of reeds.
            
            
               Incensed much by these bolde Pagans boastes,
               Which worthy Guy could ill indure to heare,
               He hewes vpon those big surporting poasts,
               That like two Pillars did the body beare,
               
                  Amarant (for their wounds) in choller growes:
               And desp'ratly at Guy his Club hee throwes.
            
            
               
               Which did directly on his body light,
               So violent and weighty therewithall,
               That downe to ground on sodaine came the Knight▪
               
               And ere he could recouer from the fall,
               The Gyant got the Club againe in's fist,
               And strucke a stroake that wonderfully mist.
            
            
               Traytor (quoth Guy) thy falshood ile repay,
               This Coward acte, to intercept my blood:
               Sayes Amarant, Ile murther any way,
               With enemies all vantages are good.
               Oh could I poyson in thy Nostrils blow:
               Thou shouldst be sure, I would dispatch thee so.
            
            
               Tis well (said Guy) thy honest thoughts appeare,
               Within that beastly bulke doe Deuils dwell:
               Which are thy Tenants while thou liuest heere,
               But will be Landlords when thou com'st in Hell.
               Vile miscreant, prepare thee for their Den,
               Inhumane monster, hatefull vnto men.
            
            
               But breath thy selfe a time while I goe drinke,
               For flaming Phoebus with his fiery eye,
               Torments me so with burning heate, I thinke
               My thirst would serue to drinke an Ocean dry.
               Forbeare a little, as I dealt with thee:
               Quoth Amarant, thou hast no foole of mee.
            
            
               
               No silly wretch, my Father taught more wit,
               How I should vse such enemies as thou:
               By all my Gods I doe reioyce at it,
               To vnderstand that thirst constraines thee bow,
               For all the treasuee that the world containes,
               One drop of water shall not coole thy veynes.
            
            
               Releeue my foe? why twere a mad-mans part,
               Refresh an aduersary to my wrong?
               If thou imagine this, a Childe thou art,
               No fellow, I haue knowne the world too long
               To be so simple; now I know thy want,
               A minutes space of breathing Ile not grant.
            
            
               And with these wordes, heauing aloft his Club
               Into the ayre, he swings the same about:
               Then shakes his lockes and doth his temples rub,
               And like the Cyclops in his pride did strout,
               Sirra (said he) I haue you at a lift:
               You now are come vnto your latest shift.
            
            
               Perish for euer with this stroake I send thee,
               (A medicine will doe thy thirst much good)
               Take no more care for drinke before I end thee,
               And then weele haue carouses of thy blood:
               Heer's at thee with a butchers downe-right blow:
               To please my fury with thine ouerthrow.
            
            
               
               Infernall, false, obdurate fiend (Guy said)
               That seem'st a lumpe of cruelty from Hell:
               Ingratefull Monster, since thou hast denay'd
               The thing to me wherein I vsde thee well:
               With more reuenge then ere my Sword did make,
               On thy accursed head, Reuenge Ile take.
            
            
               Thy Gyants longitude shall shorter shrinke,
               Except thy Sun-scorcht skin, be weapon proofe,
               Farwell my thirst, I doe disdaine to drinke,
               Streames keepe your water to your owne behoofe,
               Or let wilde Beasts be welcome thereunto,
               With those pearle drops I will not haue to doe.
            
            
               Holde tyrant, take a tast of my good will,
               For thus I doe begin my bloody bout:
               You cannot chuse but like the greeting ill,
               It is not that same Club will beare you out.
               And take this payment on thy shaggie crowne:
               A blow that brought him with a vengeance downe.
            
            
               Then Guy set foote vpon the Monsters brest,
               And from his shoulders, did his Head deuide:
               Which with a yawning mouth did gape, vnblest,
               No Dragons jawes were euer seene more wide,
               To open and to shut, till life was spent:
               So Guy tooke's Keyes and to the Castle went.
            
            
               
               Where many wofull Captiues hee did finde,
               That had bin tyred with extremities:
               Whom he in ftiendly manner did vnbinde,
               And reason'd with them of their miseries:
               Each tolde a tale with teares, and sighes, and cryes,
               All weeping to him with complaining eyes.
            
            
               There tender Ladyes, in darke dungeon lay,
               That were surprized in the desart Wood:
               And had no other dyet euery day,
               Then flesh of humane Creatures for their food.
               Some with their Louers bodyes had bin fed,
               And in their wombes their Husbands buryed.
            
            
               Now he bethinkes him of his comming there,
               T'inlarge the wronged bretheren from their woes,
               And as he searcheth, doth great clamours heare,
               By which sad sounds direction, on he goes
               Vntill he findes a darksome obscure Gate,
               Arm'd strongly ouer, all with Yron plate.
            
            
               That he vnlockes and enters, where appeares,
               The strangest obiect that hee euer saw;
               Men that with famishment of many yeares,
               Were like Death's picture, which the Painters draw,
               Diuers of them were hanged by each thumbe,
               Others head downe-ward, by the middle some.
            
            
               
               With diligence hee takes them from the walles,
               Where liberty their thraldome to acquaint:
               Then the perplexed Knight their Father calles,
               And sayes, receiue thy Sonnes though poore & faint,
               I promist you their liues, accept of that;
               But did not warrant you they should be fat.
            
            
               The Castle I doe giue thee, heer's the Keyes,
               Where tyranny for many yeares did dwell:
               Procure the gentle tender Ladyes ease,
               For pitty-sake, vse wronged Women well,
               Men easily may reuenge the deedes men doe,
               But poore weake Women, haue not strength thereto.
            
            
               The good olde man euen ouer-ioy'd with this,
               Fell on the ground and would haue kist Guyes feet,
               Father (quoth he) refraine so base a kisse,
               For Age to honour Youth I holde vnmeete,
               Ambitious pride hath hurt me all it can,
               I goe to mortifie a sinfull man.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     Guy on his Iourney doth proceede,
                  With painefull Pilgrim life:
                  While Warwick Countesse liues in tears
                  A Chaste and loyall Wife.
               
            
            Canto. 11.
            
               BEhold the man that sought Contentions out,
               Whose recreation was in angry armes,
               And for his Venus raung'd the world about
               To finde out dreadfull Combats, fierce allarmes,
               From former disposition allienate:
               Shun's all occasions may procure debate.
            
            
               In his owne wrongs, by vow he will not strike,
               Let iniury impose what strife can doe:
               Abuses shall not force him to dislike,
               For he hath now fram'd Nature thereunto,
               And taken Patience by the hand for's guide,
               To leade his thoughts where meeknes doth abide.
            
            
               No worldly ioy can giue his minde content,
               Delights are gone, as they had neuer bin;
               His onely care is how hee may Repent
               His spending youth about the seruing sinne,
               And fashion age, to looke like contrite sorrow:
               That little time to come, which life doth borrow.
            
            
               
               His lookes were sad complexion, pale and wan,
               His dyet of the meanest, hard and spare:
               His life he led, like a Religious man,
               His habite poore and homely, thin and bare.
               His Dignities and Honour were forgot:
               His Warwicke Earledome he regarded not.
            
            
               Sometime he would goe search into a Graue,
               And there finde out a rotten dead-mans Scull;
               And with the same a conference would haue,
               Examining each Vanity at full.
               And then himselfe would answer for the Head,
               His owne obiections in the Dead-mans stead.
            
            
               If thou hast bin some Monarch, where's thy Crowne?
               Or who in feare of thy sterne lookes doe stand?
               Death hath made conquest of my great renowne,
               My golden Scepter in a fleshly hand,
               Is taken from me by another King,
               And I in dust am made a rotten thing.
            
            
               Hast thou bin some great Counsailer of state,
               Whose potent wit did rule a mighty Realme?
               Where is the pollicy thou hadst of late?
               Consum'd and gone euen like an idle dreame,
               I haue not so much wit, as will suffice:
               To kill the Wormes, thar in my Coffin lyes.
            
            
               
               Perhaps thou wast some beautious Ladyes face,
               For whom right strange aduentures haue bin wrought
               Euen such, as (when it was my louing case)
               For my deere kindest Phelice I haue fought.
               Perhaps about this Scull there was a skin,
               Fairer then Hellens was inclosed in.
            
            
               And on this scalp, so wormy eaten bare,
               (Where nothing now but bone we may behold)
               Were Natures ornaments, such lockes of Hayre
               As might induce the eye to deeme them golde.
               And christall Eyne in these two hollow caues:
               And heere such Lips, as Loue for kissing craues,
            
            
               But where's the substance of this Beauty spent?
               So louely, precious in the sight of men?
               With powerfull Death, vnto the dust it went,
               Grew loathsome, filthy, came to nothing then.
               And what a Picture of it doth remaine?
               
                  To tell the wise all Beauty is but vaine.
               
            
            
               Such memories hee often would preferre,
               Of mortall frailty, and the force of Death:
               To teach the Flesh how apt it is to erre,
               And post repentance off till latest breath,
               Thus would he in the worlds contempt reproue
               All that seduc'd the soule from Heauenly loue.
            
            
               
               Now for a while reuerse your view of woe,
               For one sad subiect, to behold another:
               To see new sorrow, backe to England goe,
               And to long absent yeares commit the tother,
               Leaue dolefuil Guy, to aged griefe and cares:
               And looke on Phelice, how his Lady fares.
            
            
               Like to a Widdow, all in blacke attire,
               She doth expresse her inward dolefull minde,
               A Chamber-prison is her chiefe desire,
               Where she to passions wholy is inclin'd.
               She that of late was pride of English Court,
               With Maiesty no longer will consort.
            
            
               But liues a life, like one despisde lifes being,
               And euery day vnto the world did dye:
               With iudgements eyes, farre into folly seeing,
               And noting well how fast false pleasures flye.
               Leauing for eu'ry taste of vaine Delight,
               A huger heape of Cares, then Pen can write,
            
            
               Her thoughts ranne after her departed Lord,
               And trauail'd in conceipt more fast then he:
               What place (quoth she) can rest to me afford,
               That Pilgrim like, hath thus forsaken me?
               Oh sad laments! my soule your burden beares,
               To thinke deere Guy, remembers me in teares.
            
            
               
               Me thinkes he sits now by a Riuers side,
               And swels the water with his weeping eyes:
               Me thinkes that Phelice, Phelice lowde he cry'd,
               And charged Eccho beare it through the Skyes,
               Then rising vp, he runnes with might and maine,
               Saying sweet Eccho bring my Loue againe.
            
            
               Then comes he to a Cypresse Tree, and sayes
               
                  Syluanus, this was once the louely Boy,
               Whom thou for feature, to the Cloudes didst praise,
               But heer's thy sencelesse and transformed ioy.
               Tis nothing now but boughes, and leaues and Tree:
               And made to wither as all Beauties be.
            
            
               And then me thinkes he sits him sadly downe,
               And on his bending knee, his elbow stayes
               With head in hand, saying, farewell Renowne,
               Vanish vaine pleasures of my youthfull dayes.
               My true Repentance doe you all displace,
               A happy end, brings sinfull soules to Grace,
            
            
               Ah worthy man that thus canst mortifie
               The rebell Flesh, to conquer Adams Nature!
               And for the gaining of Eternitie,
               Dost liue on Earth, as if no earthly Creature,
               Dead, and aliue: olde, and new borne againe,
               True valiant George, that hath the Deuill slaine.
            
            
               
               As thy aduice was when thou did'st depart,
               That I should liue a Vestall virgins life,
               Although when I was Mayde (by louers arte)
               Thou did'st perswade me to become a Wife,
               I vow by Heauens, and all the powers Diuine,
               To keepe my thoughts, as constant, chaste as thine.
            
            
               My Beauty I will blemish, all I may
               With teares and sighes, and dolefull lamentation:
               By abstinence I will attaiue the way
               To ouercome the force, of sinnes temptation,
               This sentence I haue often read, and seene:
               
                  A womans Chastity, is vertues Queene.
               
            
            
               
                  Ceres and Bacchus I will carefull shun,
               Foes to Diana, friends to Venus euer:
               Vnto licentious life they teach vs run,
               And with sobriety assotiate neuer.
               Spare dyet shall become my dayly fare,
               The soule thriues best, to keepe the body bare.
            
            
               The Courtly ornaments I wore of late,
               In honour of King Athelstones faire Queene,
               Euen all those Iewels and those Robes of state,
               Wherein so often I was glorious seene,
               Shall with their price and value now supply,
               Those naked poore, that in the streets doe lye.
            
            
               
               The Golde and Siluer that I doe possesse,
               About good workes, shall all imployed be:
               The purchase of eternall happinesse,
               Is of all wealth most precious vnto me,
               All that in want to Warwicke Castle come,
               And craue reliefe; I will affoord them some.
            
            
               For hault and Lame, and Blinde, I will prouide
               Some Hospitall, with Land to be maintained:
               For Widowes, and poore Fatherlesse beside,
               That their necessities may be sustayned.
               For young beginners their estates to raise:
               And for repayring of decay'd High-wayes.
            
            
               This I account to be the Heau'nly thrift,
               Lay vp your Treasure where it cannot rust:
               And giue the Riches, we receiue by guift,
               As each good Steward is inioyn'd he must,
               That after this short stinted life's decay,
               We may haue life and euerlasting day.
            
            
               Reiected world thus doe I take my leaue,
               With thee and all thinges thou dost most esteeme:
               Thy showes are snares, and all thy hopes deceiue,
               Thy goodnesse is but onely good to seeme.
               Of thy false pleasures I as much haue seene,
               As shee that beares the title of a Queene.
            
            
               
               Oh that I were in such vnknowne disguise,
               (Attending on my Guy, where ere he be)
               As once the kinde Sulpitia did deuise,
               Her Lentulus in banishment to see!
               Or Hipsicraca-like in mans attire,
               Following her exil'd King, through Loues desire.
            
            
               Twould something ease my sorrow wounded-heart,
               So to deuide the burthen of vnrest:
               For where affliction takes afflictions part
               In hard extreames, some comfort is exprest.
               Misery is more easie to abide:
               When friend with friend their crosses doe deuide.
            
            
               But all in vaine I wish, would God I were,
               Or thus, or thus, it naught auailes my woe:
               Though straying thoughts doe wander here and there
               My poore weake body knowes not where to goe.
               Vnto the Holy Land I heard him say,
               God send me thither, at my dying day.
            
            
               I will about my Vowes and see them pay'd,
               To doe the good that Charity requires:
               When grace, to workes of vertue doth perswade,
               Tis blessednesse to further such desires.
               And while on earth I doe a sinner dwell:
               Ile striue to please my God, with liuing well.
            
            
               
               In this resolue, that life shee entertaines,
               Performing all the course she had propounded,
               And such seuerity therein explaines,
               Her sexe with wonder rest amaz'd confounded,
               To see so rare a Beauty, rich, high-borne,
               Holde all worlds pleasures in contempt and scorne.
            
            
               For no perswading friend that she would heare,
               Which motion'd company, or recreation,
               Vnto their speech, she would not lend an eare,
               That sought to alter her determination.
               But such as came and of compassion spake,
               She did releeue, for blessed Iesus sake.
            
            
               Her wandring Lord from Land to Land repaires,
               To seeke out places Pilgrims doe frequent▪
               
               By carefull yeares, turn'd into siluer hayres,
               Exceeding chang'd with griefe and languishment,
               For sorrow giues a man more ancient looke,
               Then elder time, which lesser cares hath tooke.
            
            
               His olde acquaintance in those Forraigne parts,
               That had before most worthy actions seene,
               Right bolde aduentures of his long deserts,
               Had lost Sir Guy, as he had neuer beene.
               Those that in Armour knew his martiall face▪
               
               Did not expect him in a Fryers case.
            
            
               
               Amongst the rest to whome he had bin knowne,
               He met Earle Terry banish'd to exile:
               Each vnto other being strangers growne,
               Through sorrow, which the sences doth beguile,
               They had forgot that ere they saw each other,
               Yet Guy was Terryes, Terry Guyes sworne Brother.
            
            
               Hauing related how their trauailes grewe,
               One's voluntary, tothers by constraint:
               In taking leaue with curtesies adew,
               Oh English-man (said Terry sighing faint)
               I had a friend, a Countrey-man of thine:
               Was Iustice Champion to great wrongs of mine.
            
            
               Tyrannie, to the face he durst defie,
               And stampe his foote vpon Oppressions necke:
               Tell me deare friend, hast thou not heard of Guy,
               
               That had a hand to helpe, a Sword to checke?
               I haue (quoth he) and knowne him many yeares:
               
                  Guy Warwickes Earle, is one of Englands peeres.
            
            
               What is thy Name? Terry (quoth he) I hight,
               Greater by Birth then Fortunes make me seeme:
               
                  Terry said he, I vow to doe thee right
               In what I may, my poore good-will esteeme.
               To humane thoughts my Nature doth agree,
               Thou lou'st my friend, I must of force loue thee.
            
            
               
               Direct me to the man exil'd thee thus,
               Ile take thy part, as farre as strength extends:
               If Guy himselfe were heere to ioyne with vs,
               He could but say, Ile venture life with friends.
               And be assured though I simple bee,
               I oft haue had as good successe as hee.
            
            
               
                  Terry with louing thankes, his loue requites,
               And brings him to his foe, whom he defies:
               And valiant with the aduerse Champion fights,
               Till mortall wounded, at his feete he dyes,
               Yet 'twas a man suppos'd of matchlesse worth:
               That for the Combate they had singled forth.
            
            
               When this was done, the Earle demaunds his Name,
               Pardon (quoth he) that were against a Vow.
               To no man liuing, Ile reueale the same,
               For I haue changed Name and Nature now,
               Natures corruptions, I doe striue to leaue:
               A new Regeneration to receiue.
            
            
               Farewell my friend, euen as my soule would fare,
               If we ne're meete on Earth, Heauen be the place:
               For idle howers, I haue no time to spare,
               My hayres looke gray, they turne to white apace,
               I haue great losse, in short time to redeeme,
               A minutes sorrow is of much esteeme.
            
            
               
               So he departs towards Iudea ground,
               
                  Samarta, and Galile, to see▪
               
               Those parts, by Christian Pilgrims so renown'd,
               Because their Sauiours choyse was their to bee.
               Where he did suffer to redeeme our losse:
               Euen from the Cratch, vnto the bloody Crosse.
            
            
               Much time he spends, and many yeares bestowes,
               From place to place, about this Holy Land:
               That all his friends in England doe suppose,
               Now Death of him had got the vpper-hand,
               For no reporter came, that could relate,
               His Life, his being, or his present state.
            
            
               This put the world to silence, men were mute
               Concerning Guy, they knew not what to say:
               The dreadfull Champion in the armed sute
               Was neither knowne nor fear'd in simple Gray.
               But did endeauour all that ere he might;
               Neuer to be reueal'd to any wight.
            
            
               For vnto none he would his Name disclose,
               Nor tell direct what Countrey-man he was▪
               
               Nor of his Noble minde make any showes,
               But striue in all thinges most obscure to passe,
               Vntill by natiue loue, his minde was led,
               To come and lay his bones, where he was bred.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     Guy after many yeares comes home,
                  To England for his Graue:
                  Kils Colbron that great Gyant, and
                  Dyes poorely in a Caue.
               
            
            Canto. 12.
            
               EVen as the brightest glorious shining Day,
               Will haue a Night of darknes to succeed:
               Which takes the pride of Phoebus quite away,
               And makes the Earth to mourne in sable weed.
               Presenting vs with drowsie heauy sleepe,
               Death's memory, in carefull thoughts to keepe.
            
            
               So Youth, the day of Natures strength, and beauty
               Which hath a splendor like faire Heauens eye:
               Must yeeld to Age, by a submissiue duty,
               And grow so darke, that life of force must dye.
               When length of yeares, brings ancient euening on
               Irreuocable time is posting gone.
            
            
               This cogitation in Guyes brest appeares,
               By his returning from the Holy Land:
               He findes himselfe, to be a man in yeares,
               And that his Glasse had but a little sand
               To runne, before his date of life expire,
               Therefore to England, he doth backe retire.
            
            
               
               There to be buryed where he had bin borne,
               Was all the cause that did induce him backe:
               To end his euening where he had his morne,
               In dolefull colours of a dead-mans blacke,
               And let that body rest in English ground,
               which through the world no resting place had found.
            
            
               When he arriued on his Natiue shore,
               He found the Countrey in extreame distresse:
               For through the Kingdome armed troupes great store
               Against the Foe were all in readinesse.
               The King of Denmarke whose destroying hand,
               A mighty Army did securely land.
            
            
               And marched from the Coast with deuastation,
               Destroying Townes, Villages set on fire:
               Working such terrour vnto all the Nation,
               King Athelstone was forced to retire
               To Winchester, which when the Danes once knew,
               Towards that Citty, all their strength they drew.
            
            
               Which was too strong for Speare and shield to win,
               (Inuincible our walles of Stone were then)
               They wanted Cannon-keyes to let them in,
               Hell's pick-locke powder was vnknowne to men.
               The Deuill had not taught such murdering smoke,
               A Soldiers honour, was his manly stroke.
            
            
               
               Beholding now how they repulsed were,
               That Winchester by no meanes could be wonne▪
               
               They doe conclude to summon parley there,
               And with a Challenge haue all quarrels done,
               An Englishman, to Combate with a Dane,
               
               And that King loose, that had his Champion slaine.
            
            
               Wherewith a huge great Gyant doth appeare,
               Demaunding where the Foxes all were crept?
               Saying, if one dare come and meete me heere
               That hath true valour for his Countrey kept,
               Let him come forth, his man-hood to disclose,
               Or else the English are but Coward foes.
            
            
               Why very crauens, on their dunghils dare
               Both crow and strike, before they runne and cry,
               Is English courage now become so rare,
               That none will fight because they feare to dye?
               Then I pronounce you all faint-hearted fooles,
               Affraid to looke, on manly Martiall tooles.
            
            
               What slaunders I haue heard in forraigne Lands,
               Of these poore men for deeds which they haue done,
               Most false they are belyed of their hands,
               But he sayes true, that sayes their feete can runne,
               They haue a Prouerbe to instruct them in,
               
                  That 'tis good sleeping in a sound whole skin.
               
            
            
               
               Thus did he vaunt, in tearmes of proude disdaine,
               And threw his Gantlet downe, saying ther's my gloue:
               At length great Guy no longer could refraine,
               Seeing all straine curt'sie to expresse their loue,
               But comes vnto the King, and sayes dread Lord,
               This Combate to thy vnknowne Knight afford.
            
            
               Although in simple habite I am hid,
               Yeelding no showe of that I vndertake:
               I ne're attempted ought but what I did,
               An end of Colbrond (on my soule) Ile make.
               Palmer (quoth Athelstone) I like thy sprite:
               God sent thee hither, and hee ayde the right.
            
            
               His pow'rfull hand lend vigor to thy blowes,
               And grant thy foote vpon the foe may treade:
               
                  Amen quoth Guy, and with great courage goes,
               Forth Winchesters North-gate vnto Hide-meade.
               
               Where that same Monster of a man hee found,
               Treading at eu'ry step two yardes of ground.
            
            
               Art thou the man (quoth Colbrond) art thou he,
               On whom the King will venter Englands Crowne?
               Can hee not finde a fitter match forme,
               Then this poore Rascall in a thred-bare Gowne?
               Where's all his Knights and worthy Champions now
               I doe disdaine so base a Slaue as thou.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        Guy fights to free all Englands feares,
                     With Colbrond Gyant Dane:
                     
                     And in Hide-mead at VVinchester,
                     
                     Was that Goliah slaine.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Gyant (said Guy) man-hood should neuer rayie,
               To beate the ayre with blasts of idle winde:
               A Soldiours weapon, best can tell his tale,
               Thy destiny vpon my Sword I finde:
               Twill let thee blood while thou hast drops to bleed,
               And spell thy Death for all the Danes to reed.
            
            
               Thus I begin, and on his Armour layd,
               That Colbronds coate was neuer cudgel'd so:
               Who with his Club, did watch to meete his blade,
               Intending to haue broke it with a blowe.
               But Guy was sure his Sword would holde out play,
               It had bin trusty many a cruell fray.
            
            
               And therefore boldly he presumes thereon,
               Laying about, as fast as he could driue,
               Vntill the Lubbers breath was almost gone,
               (For with a weighty Club did Colbrond striue)
               Which lighting on the ground made earth giue ways
               As if some Deuill did about him lay.
            
            
               So long they held this sterne and irefull fight,
               That the beholders knew not what to deeme:
               Yet still some wounds to Colbronds share did light,
               Which to the English did great comfort seeme.
               Besides, their Champion gaue encouragement,
               By actiue cariage, danger to preuent.
            
            
               
               Quoth Colbrond, English-man wilt thou forbeare,
               And sue for mercy, let the Fight alone?
               Villaine (quoth Guy) I scorne thy Coward feare,
               Ile haue thy Life, or it shall cost mine owne,
               Weele neuer part, till one be soundly sped,
               The King hath ventur'd England on my Head.
            
            
               For twenty Denmarkes (if they might be found)
               And all the wealth that on the Ocean swimmes,
               I will not yeeld an inch of English ground,
               Thou shalt finde mettall in these aged limmes,
               Although thy bodyes height be more then mine:
               I haue a heart bigger by oddes then thine.
            
            
               Thinke on thy ancient grand-fire Gogmagog,
               
               Whom Cor
                        •
                     neus delt withall at Douer,
               
               How that same Lubber like a timber-log,
               Was by the worthy Brittaine tumbled ouer.
               For his bolde Challenge, he had such a checke,
               There was no Surgeon could amend his necke.
            
            
               Thou art deceiu'd in me poore silly sot,
               I am vntaught to bend submissions knees,
               Holde me no Christian if I fayle a iot,
               (And for the world that tytle Ile not leese)
               Betake thee to thy tooles, honour thy King,
               Vpon thy man-hood lyes a mighty thing.
            
            
               
               And thus I doe encounter thee afresh,
               With that he lent him such a powerfull stroke,
               It made wide rupture in the Gyants flesh,
               And did his furious Choller much prouoke,
               Laying about him in most cruell rage,
               Till the next wound did all his heate asswage.
            
            
               It was so mortall that it brought him downe,
               To lye and groane vpon the bloody ground,
               Forthwith a showte was heard from out the Towne,
               That all the Sky did Eccho to the sound,
               Great ioy was made by euery English heart:
               And all the Danes with extreame griefe depart.
            
            
               King Athelstone sent for his Champion then,
               To doe him Honour for his famous deede,
               Who was receiued by the Clergie men,
               With all solemnity for such high meede,
               Embraced by the Nobles, and renown'd,
               With Martiall musicke, Drum and Trumpets sound.
            
            
               But little pleasure Guy conceiues herein,
               Refusing Iewels, costly Ornaments,
               Saying with these he out of loue hath bin
               For many yeares: by true experiments.
               Onely thankes God that blest him with an hower,
               To free his Countrey from inuading power.
            
            
               
               And so intreates that hee may passe vnknowne,
               To liue where pouerty regards not weahh:
               And be beholden to the helpe of none,
               Seeing the world but now and then, by stealth.
               
                  For true Content doth such a Treasure bring,
               
               
                  It makes the Begger richer then the King.
               
            
            
               With true Content (saith hee) I will abide,
               In homely Cottage, free from all resout,
               For I haue found, Content cannot be spide,
               To make abode within a Monarchs Court,
               No, there's ambition, pride, and enuy seene,
               And fawning flatt'ry stepping still betweene.
            
            
               Yet gentle Palmer (said the King) agree,
               Where euer thou resoluest to remaine:
               Acquaint thy Name in priuate vnto me,
               And this is all thy Sou'raigne will obtaine,
               Tell me but who thou art, I will conceale it:
               As I am Englands King Ile not reueale it.
            
            
               Why then (quoth he) your Grace shall vnderstand,
               I am your Subiect, Guy of Warwicke named,
               That haue these many yeares not seene your Land,
               But bin where Youth, by auncient Age is tamed.
               Yea, where experience taught me wit (dread Prince)
               The world of many follyes to conuince.
            
            
               
               And now am come to bring my bones to Graue,
               Within the Kingdome where I first tooke life:
               Yet shall no Creature else the notice haue
               Of my arriuall, not my dearest Wife,
               Till sicknes come and doth my Death foretell,
               Then Ile acquaint her with my last farewell.
            
            
               The King with ioy embrac'd him in his armes,
               And with great admiration answers thus:
               Most worthy Earle, freer of Englands harmes,
               It grieues my soule thou wilt not liue with vs,
               Oh were thy resolutions, thoughts but now,
               That my perswasions might preuent thy Vow.
            
            
               But 'tis too late, they are growne ripe I see,
               Thou art too setled in determination,
               Well Honourable man, yet this ioyes mee,
               Thou bringest thy bones, vnto thy dearest Nation,
               Where Monuments of thy great deeds shall last,
               Till after Ages of the world be past.
            
            
               In Warwicke Castle, shall thy Sword be kept,
               To witnes to the world what thou hast bin:
               And least forgetfull time should intercept,
               A President, I present will begin.
               The Castle-keeper shall receiue a fee:
               To keepe thy Sword in memory of thee.
            
            
               
               Thy Armour likewise, and the martiall Speare,
               That did thee seruice, in thy high designes,
               Shall be preserued very carefull there,
               That all such men as haue distrustfull mindes,
               May thinke (if from a truth this did not grow)
               A King would scorne, to cousen people so.
            
            
               And in thy Chappell (distant thence a mile)
               A bone shall hang of that most cruell Beast,
               Which neare to Couentrey remain'd long while,
               Whose Rib by measure is sixe foote at least,
               Destroying many that did passe that way,
               Vntill thy man-hood did the Saluage slay.
            
            
               That by tradition men may speake and tell,
               This was Guyes Armour, this his massie Blade,
               These bones of murdering Beasts which men did quell
               And this the Tombe, wherein his Corpes was layde,
               This the true Picture of his shape at length,
               And this the Speare, did oft expresse his strength.
            
            
               For sure I holde it an vngratefull thing,
               (When thou by Natures course in dust shalt lye)
               No Memory should cause some Muse to sing,
               The Worthinesse of matchles English Guy,
               
               Thy Countrey-men would proue too farre vnkinde,
               When out of sight, they leaue thee out of minde,
            
            
               
               This said in humble duty (wondr'ous meeke)
               
                  Guy reuerenceth the King, and so departs,
               Some solitary den or Caue to seeke,
               Which he vnto his mansion house conuerts.
               And so liues poorely in the hollow ground,
               Making his meate, of rootes and hearbes he found.
            
            
               Sometimes he would to Warwicke Castle goe,
               And craue an Almes at his deere Ladyes hand:
               Who vnto Pilgrims did more bounty show,
               Then any Noble woman in the Land.
               And she would aske all Palmers that came there,
               If at the Holy Land they neuer were?
            
            
               Or in their trauels if they had not seene
               An English-man, was Lord of that same Tower?
               Who many yeares away from thence had beene,
               A Knight ne're conquer'd yet by humane power,
               But there's a Tyrant whom I onely feare,
               They call him Death that murders euery where.
            
            
               If he haue met him, (O my dearest Lord)
               I neuer shall behold thy face againe,
               Till that same Monster doe asmuch afford,
               Vnto my heart and so release all paine.
               Which gracious Heauens grant, if Guy be dead,
               Vpon this earth let me no longer treade.
            
            
               
               Thus did he often heare his Wife enquire,
               With deep complaints from extream passions flowing
               Yet by no meanes would grant her kinde desire,
               The comfort of a hopefull word bestowing.
               But looke vpon her as his heart would breake,
               Then turne away for feare his tongue would speake.
            
            
               And so depart with weeping to his Cell,
               Setting a dead-mans Head before his eyes:
               Saying, with thee I shortly come to dwell,
               This sinfull Flesh I constantly despise.
               My soule is weary of so bad a guest:
               And doth desire to bee at home in rest.
            
            
               My feeble limbes; weakenes doth sore possesse,
               And sicknes gripes doe touch about my heart,
               I feele I am not farre from happines,
               But am in hope my foe and I shall part,
               This aduersary, which I long haue fed,
               By whome my soule hath bin so much misled.
            
            
               To my deare Phelice, I will send my Ring,
               Which I did promise for her sake to keepe:
               I may no longer time deferre the thing,
               For feare that Death preuent me with his sleepe.
               I feele his Messenger approach apace,
               And poore weake Nature must of force giue place.
            
            
               
               So call'd a Heardsman as he passed by,
               And said, good friend doe me a speciall fauour:
               Euen in a matter that concernes me nye,
               (My hope relyes vpon thy kinde behauiour.)
               To Warwicke Castle speedily repaire,
               And for the Countesse aske, with trusty care.
            
            
               Deliuer this Ring to her-owne hand,
               And say the ancient Pilgrim sent the same,
               That lately at her Gate with Scrip did stand,
               To beg an Almes in blessed Iesus Name.
               And if shee aske thee where I doe remaine?
               Direct her hither she'le requite thy paine.
            
            
               Sir (quoth the Heardsman) I shall be asham'd,
               That ne're dust speake to Lady in my life:
               Nay more and 't please you, I may much be blam'd,
               To carry Rings to such a great mans Wife.
               Besides if I should loose it by the way,
               Why what would you, and Madam Phelice say?
            
            
               Pre-thee (said Guy) frame not such idle doubt,
               No preiudice can light on thee at all:
               The acte is honest which thou goest about,
               And for it none can thee in question call.
               A curteous eare the Lady will thee lend,
               Vpon my warrant feare you nothing friend.
            
            
               
               With that he goes and mannerly betakes
               The token to the Countesse, which she seeing,
               Most admirable wonder at it makes!
               Ah friend (quoth she) where is my husbands being?
               Husband (said he) that newes I doe not bring:
               From an olde Begger I receiu'd the Ring.
            
            
               His house was made of neither Wood nor Stone,
               But vnder ground into a hole he went:
               And in my Conscience there he dwels alone,
               And neuer payes his Land-lord quarters rent,
               Ah 'tis my Guy (she said) showe me his Cell,
               And for thy paines I will reward thee well.
            
            
               So he directs Warwicks faire Countesse thither,
               Who entring in that melancholly place,
               Her Lord and shee embracing, weepe together,
               Vnable to pronounce a word long space,
               Long time they two had not a Tongue to speake,
               Till Guyes discretions sorrowes doore did breake.
            
            
               
                  Phelice (quoth he) now take thy leaue of Guy,
               
               That sent to see thee ere his sight decay:
               Within thine armes I doe intreat to dye,
               And breath my sprite, from thy sweet soule away,
               Thou gau'st me almes at Warwicke Castle late:
               
                  Tis blessednes to pitty poore mens state.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        Guy in repentance poorely liues,
                     Obscurely in a Caue:
                     Reueal'd to Phelice by a Ring,
                     When Death had digg'd his Graue.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Looke not so strange, bewayle not so my Deare,
               Ah weepe not Loue, I doe not want thy teares:
               I haue shed plenty since my comming heere,
               Of true remorse, my Conscience witnes beares.
               Thou weep'st not now, because I wept no more,
               But to behold me friendlesse, helplesse, poore.
            
            
               Wife, I haue sought the place that all desire,
               Though few endeauour for, eternall rest:
               The soule which to that Heauen doth aspire,
               Must leaue the world, and worldly thinges detest.
               Tis full of Deuils that on soules doe wayte,
               And full of snares: in euery place some bayte.
            
            
               Ah Phelice I haue spent (and then he wept)
               Youth, (Natures day) vpon the Loue of thee:
               And for my God, olde rotten Age haue kept,
               The night of Nature, Christ forgiue it me,
               
               Sorrow lyes heauy on my soule for this:
               
                  Sweet Sauiour Iesus, pardon my amisse.
               
            
            
               In that I had destroy'd so many men,
               Euen for one Woman, to inioy thy Loue,
               Therefore in this most solitary Den,
               I sought my peace with that great God aboue,
               Gainst whome by sinne I haue bin more misled,
               Then there be hayres, vpon my hoary head.
            
            
               
               The other day, feeling my body ill,
               And all the partes thereof opprest with paine,
               I did compose a Testament and Will,
               To bee the last that euer I ordaine.
               
                  Loe heere it is Ile reade it if I can,
               
               
                  Before I cease to bee a liuing man.
               
            
         
         
            HIS WILL.
            
               EVen in the Name of him whose mighty pow'r,
               Created all, in Heauen and Earth contained,
               As one to dye; this very instant hower,
               I leaue the world and all therein vnfained.
               My soule I giue to him that gaue it mee:
               Receiue it Jesus, as I trust in thee.
               I owe a debt of Life, is due to Death,
               And when 'tis payde him, he can aske no more:
               A very vapour of a little breath,
               Would he had had it many yeares before,
               But heer's my comfort, though he come or stay,
               Tis ready for him (if hee will) to day.
               I owe the world the stocke of wealth it lent,
               When I did enter traffique with the same:
               Lesse would haue giuen Nature more content,
               "Tis happinesse to want a Rich mans name,
               World, leaue mee naked as I did begin,
               I aske but one poore Sheet to wrap me in.
               I doe bequeath more sinnes then I can number,
               My dayly euils, in a countlesse summe:
               Euen from my cradle, vnto Death's dead slumber,
               Those past, these present, all that are to come,
               To him that made them loades to burthen mee,
               Sathan receiue them, for they came from thee.
               I giue good thoughts and eu'ry vertuous deed,
               That euer grace hath guided me vnto,
               To him from whom all goodnes doth proceed,
               For onely euill Natvre taght me doe,
               I was Conceiued, bred and borne in sinne:
               And all my Life, most vaine and vile hath bin.
               
                  I giue to Sorrow all my sighes and cryes,
               Fetch'd from the bottome of a bleeding heart:
               I giue Repentance teares and watery eyes,
               The signes vnfained of a true conuert.
               Earth yeeld a Graue, or Sea become a Tombe:
               
                  Jesus vnto my soule graunt Heauen-roome.
               
                  Phelice, I faint, farewell true loyall Wife,
               Assist me with thy prayers, thy Husband dyes:
               I trust to meete thee in a better life,
               Where teares shall all be wip'd from weeping eyes,
               Come blessed Spirits come in Jesus Name,
               Receiue my soule, to him conuay the same.
               And with these words his quiet sprite departs,
               While mournfull Phelice well-nye dead for woe,
               Her sences all to sorrowes vse conuerts,
               And too aboundant doth her teares bestow,
               Beating her brest, till brest and heart be sore:
               Wringing her handes, till she could striue no more,
               Then sighing said, ah Death my sorrowes cause,
               That hast depriu'd mee of my dearest Lord:
               Since loathsome ayre my vitall spirits drawes,
               This fauour for thy tyrannie afford,
               Doe me a good to recompence thy ill,
               And strike the stroke, that all my cares can kill.
               Let me not liue to see to morrowes light,
               But make me thus, colde, bloodlesse, pale and wan,
               As this dead Carcasse doth appeare in fight,
               This true discription of a mortall man,
               Whose deedes of wonder past and gone before,
               Haue left him now at Deaths darke prison doore.
               Kissing his face, with a farewell ef teares,
               Shee leaues the body for the Graue to claime,
               And from that place as 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  oule shee beares,
               As euer Woman that the world can name.
               Liuing but Fifteene dayes after his Death:
               And then through extreame sorrow yeelded breath.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   