
      
         
            
            SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY, OR THE POYSONED KNIGHTS COMPLAINT.
            
               
                  
                     
                        TIME REVEALEH·TRVTH
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        REVENGE.
                        IVSTICE·WIL·RIGHT AL·WRONGS·
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        POYSONED.
                     
                  
                  
                     Within this houſe of Death, A dead man lies,
                     Whoſe blood like Abels vp for vengeance cryes:
                     Time hath reuealed what to trueth belongs,
                     And Iuſtice ſword is drawne toright my wrongs:
                     You poyſoned mindes did me with poyſon Kill,
                     Let true Repentance purge you from that ill.
                  
               
            
            
               GReat powerfull God, whom all are bound to loue,
               How graceleſſe bad, doth Man (thy Creature) proue?
               Thy Supreame Creature ouer all the reſt,
               (In number numberleſſe to bee expreſt,)
               To whom thou gaueſt grace to bee his guide,
               Reaſon with Vnderſtanding, and beſide,
               Thy Law to be direction for his wayes,
               Which vnto Sinners view, thy Iudgements layes,
               Thoſe fearefull plagues pronounc'd for vgly Sinne,
               Which with the firſt created, did beginne,
               Who by the Law of Nature vnderſtood,
               To make a difference of bad deedes and good.
               By which enlightening, that is giuen vs,
               No Nation Heatheniſh, and Barbarous,
               (Fartheſt remote from true religions light)
               But can diſtinguiſh betwixt wrong and right,
               Thoſe that to Chriſt did neuer yet belong,
               Can tell they do amiſſe, when they do wrong,
               And that there is a Iuſtice to be done,
               And ſhamefúll actions, which they are to ſhun,
               Yet neuer age, ſince Nature firſt began,
               Wherein man was not Deuill vnto man,
               In practiſing moſt oppoſite to kinde,
               Inhumane actions out of bloody minde.
               Behold the firſt that in the VVorld was borne,
               VVith his reiected Sacrifice of Corne,
               Becauſe his Brothers gifts more grace did yeeld,
               Lift vp his hand againſt him in the field,
               And with a cruell hart obdurate ill,
               Did innocent pure-thoughted Abell kill.
               VVhen Ioab ſent for Abner (as a friend)
               Hee came to Hebron, for a peacefull end,
               VVhere, as in armes hee lent a cheerefull ſmile,
               He gaue his heart a mortall ſtab the while.
               Gods holy Hiſtory hath many more
               Humane records, Innumerable ſtore,
               What intercepting hath there bin of liues,
               By Piſtolls, Stabbing, Powder, Daggers, Kniues:
               Drowning and Hanging, and ſtrange murthering?
               As ſecond Edward, ſometimes Englands King,
               Whom an incarnate Diuell did torment,
               With red hot Spit into his fundament.
               Some in their beds haue acted tragick Scenes,
               As thoſe two Princes, which by Gloſters meanes,
               (Their cruell Vncle, Fathers vnkind Brother)
               Villaines betweene the ſheetes to death did ſmother.
               Some in vnwonted manner done to death,
               As George the Duke of Clarence loſt his breath,
               When with heeles vpwards he was ſtrangely put,
               To ſuffer drowning in a Malmeſey But.
               Yet beſides all theſe damned plots to kill,
               And thouſands more from Hell tranſported ſtill,
               The Diuell hath a poyſon working Art,
               In which of late I ſhar'd a mortall part.
               A Rapier drawne, and at thy heart aim'd iuſt,
               May be put by and made a broken thruſt:
               A Dagger offer'd for anothers paine,
               Hath bin return'd into the ſtabbers braine:
               A Piſtoll ſhot with an intent to kill,
               Hath miſt the marke, and party liuing ſtill:
               But this life-killing poyſon, cureles foe,
               The bodies hopeles, helples ouerthrowe:
               Brings with it nothing but pale deaths command,
               Depriuing life with a remorſeles hand.
               Oh ſacred Iuſtice! euermore renound
               In thy vprightnes of reuenge late found:
               Proccede with vengeance as thou didſt begin,
               To puniſh Caines moſt bloody crying ſinne:
               Let not a murtherer remaine conceal'd,
               Nor breath aliue when being once reueal'd:
               This is the ſuite wrong'd Innocents doe craue,
               This is the Iuſtice that the Heauens will haue.
            
            
               Samuel Rowlands.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for Iohn VVhite.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   