
      
         
            
            
            A Terrible Battell betweene the two conſumers of the whole World: TIME, and DEATH.
            
            By Samuell Rowlands.
            
               depiction of Time and Death
            
            Printed at London for Iohn Deane, and are to be ſold at his ſhop 
                  〈…〉
               
            
         
         
            
            To the wiſe and well accompliſht Gent: M. George Gaywood, health and happineſſe.
            
               SIR, the great and good report which my beloued friend (the bearer hereof) hath giuen of you, hath made me more then halfe in loue with you, which makes me thinke in ſome ſort (as the rude and rusticke phraſe is) to ſcratch acquaintance of you. But ſir beleeue it to be thus, for you ſhall finde it ſo, that this is not done of purpoſe to draw from you any bounty or rewarde to me, for my Penne neuer was, nor neuer ſhalbe, (God ſaying Amen,) Mercinarie: but to let you know that the bringer hereof, who doth acknowledge himſelfe to be more indebted to you then his poore eſtate or deiected life can make ſatisfaction for) hath ſome friends, that will in ſome meaſure giue you thankes for the more then fatherly kindneſſe you haue ſhewed to him. This vnſpeakable loue and kindneſſe of yours extended to him, hath made me to dedicate this ſillie work vnto you, which by the generall report of your worthineſſe, I thinke vnworthie your acceptance. But if it pleaſe you to call back againe ſome of the loue which you haue heretofore borne him, and withall to conſider that this is ſent to you, but as a gratulation from me for him, then I make no doubt but you will accept it for his ſake, if not, yet ſtill I will reſt your friende and Wel-willer, made ſo by my friends report.
            
               S. R
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A bloudy Battell betwixt Time and Death.
            
               Time.
               
                  
                     DRead potent Monſter, mighty frō thy birth,
                  Gyant of ſtrength, againſt al mortal power,
                  Gods great Earle Marſhall ouer al the earth:
                  Taking account of each mans dying houre,
                  
                     Landlord of Graues, and Toombs of Marble ſtones,
                  
                     Lord Treaſurer of rotten dead-mens bones.
               
               
                  Victorious conſort, Slautering Caualier,
                  Mated with me, to combat all aliue,
                  Know worthy Champion, I haue met thee here,
                  Only to vnderſtand how matters thriue:
                  As our affayres alike in nature be,
                  So let vs loue, conferre, and kind agree.
               
               
                  
                  Great Regeſter of all things vnder Sunne,
                  Gods ſpeedy poaſt, that euer runs and flyes,
                  Ender of all that euer was begun,
                  That haſt the Mappe of life before thine eyes:
                  And of all Creatures ſince the worlds creation,
                  Haſt ſeene the finall duſty conſumation.
               
            
            
               Death.
               
                  Let me entreat thee pardon me a while,
                  Becauſe my buſineſſe now is very great,
                  I muſt go trauayle many a thouſand mile,
                  To looke with care that Wormes do lacke no meat:
                  Theres many crawling feeders I maintaine,
                  I may not let thoſe Cannibals complaine.
               
               
                  I muſt ſend murtherers with ſpeed to Hell,
                  That there with horror they may make abode,
                  I muſt ſhew Atheyſts where the Deuils dwell,
                  To let them feele there is a powerfull God:
                  I muſt invyte the Glutton and the Lyer,
                  Vnto a banquet made of flambes of fire.
               
               
                  
                  I muſt bring PRIDE where Faſhions are inuented,
                  [You ydle headed Women, quake and feare]
                  Your toyiſh fooleries will be preuented,
                  A ſhute of crawling Serpents you ſhall weare:
                  You that endeuor onely to go braue,
                  What Hel affoords, you ſhal be ſure to haue.
               
               
                  I haue the ſwagring Ruffian to diſpatch,
                  That moth and canker of the common wealth,
                  The graceles Theefe, that on the pray doth watch,
                  The dronkard a carrowſing of his health:
                  And of all ſinners ſuch a damned rowt,
                  As full of worke as Death can ſtir about.
               
            
            
               Time.
               
                  This lawfull buſ'nes I do well allow,
                  But in my abſence how wilt thou proceede?
                  I muſt be preſent too as well as thou,
                  Before Time come thou canſt not doe the deed·
                  My Sythe cuts downe; vpon thy dart they die,
                  Thou haſt an houre glaſſe, and ſo haue I.
               
               
                  
                  Looke my kinde Death, here is ſome ſand to run,
                  [What do I bid thee look that haſt no eies]
                  Let's ſuffer their laſt minute to be don,
                  Some man repents the inſtant when he dies:
                  As one example I remember chiefe.
                  Of him that died a Saint, and liu'd a Theefe.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  Thou ſpeak'ſt it true, that penitent indeede
                  Had neuer happy houre till his laſt,
                  But of like ſecond ſinner who can read?
                  From ſuch a helliſh life to heauen paſt,
                  But one, to keepe pore ſinners from diſpaire,
                  And from preſumption, one, and he moſt rare.
               
               
                  Thou knowſt all fleſh that is of woman borne,
                  Corruptly vnto ſin giues full conſent.
                  Seruing the Diuell with the fineſt corne,
                  Their pleaſure, youth, and ſtrength, on him is ſpent:
                  And when the night of age brings painfull grones,
                  Then in Gods diſh they caſt their rotten bones.
               
               
                  
                  Who would not cenſure him a fooliſh man,
                  To loyter out the ſpring and ſommer tide?
                  And when another reapes, make ſeede time than
                  Expecting what the ſeaſon had deni'de,
                  Yet ſuch bad husbands hell affourds good-cheap
                  Will vndertake to ſow, when others reape.
               
               
                  Some make my picture a moſt common thing,
                  As if I were continual in their thought,
                  A Deaths h
                           •
                        d ſeale vpon a great gold ring,
                  And round about Memento Mori wrought:
                  Which memory with gold cannot agree,
                  For he that hates the ſame beſt thinks on me.
               
               
                  I onely am a welcome frend to ſuch
                  As know by me they enter vnto reſt,
                  And that no ſecond death their ſoules can touch,
                  The peace of conſcience harbors in their breſt,
                  And with the diuell, fleſh and world, ſtill ſtriue,
                  Vntill at Canaan they doe ariue.
               
               
                  
                  But Time for tother thou ſhalt witneſſe be,
                  How moſt vnwilling thoſe ſame wretches die,
                  Their ends thou daily doeſt behold and ſee,
                  And can'ſt enforme the world I do not lie,
                  With horror, griefe, and anguiſh diſcontented,
                  In ſoule, and body, furiouſly tormented.
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Surely they are, their ſtates cannot be told,
                  We apprehend but outward things in ſight,
                  Moſt fearefull are thoſe obiects to behold,
                  That curſe their birth and time they ſaw the light;
                  Sinne hath no ſalue but mercy, that they craue-not,
                  
                     Repentance, findeth grace, and that they haue-not.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  I came to kill a Vſurer of late,
                  And ſtaying by his bed a while for thee,
                  His ſpeech was all of mony-bags and plate,
                  But not a word of God: nor thought of me▪
                  
                  Quicke, fetch a ſcriuener, let a bil be drawne,
                  Sirrha, your day is broke, ile keepe your pawne.
               
               
                  
                  Intreat me not: you ſhould haue kept time better,
                  Thou ſhalt buy wit, a foole muſt feele the ſmart,
                  Get me a Seriant, to areſt a debter,
                  And with that word, my mace went through his heart,
                  Thus died the wretch, with Mony, Bond, and Bill,
                  And if God haue him, t'was againſt his will.
               
               
                  When this bad fellowes date was thus croſt out,
                  I do remember we came to a place
                  Where laye a Diues groning of the gowte,
                  Crying Lord, Lord, methought he ment for grace:
                  Vntill I heard the burden of his ſong,
                  Was, Lord where may this Doctor ſtay ſo long.
                  
               
               
                  Sir (quoth his wife) twere good haue a Diuine;
                  Thou art a foole (ſaid he) I need him not,
                  I haue a hart as perfect ſounde as thine,
                  What is there not a Doctor to be got?
                  A Doctor with al expedition wife,
                  My legges wil make me weary of my life.
               
            
            
               
               Time
               
                  This miſers anſwere I haue noted frend,
                  In ſicknes men on Doctors moſt relie
                  Vnto Apothicaries ſhops they ſend
                  Till phiſicke giues them ouer, they muſt die:
                  And when they ſee there is no way but one,
                  Fetch a Diuine, God ſhal be thought vpon.
               
            
            
               Death.
               
                  T'is true indeede, but weele giue pilland potion
                  To ſuch as whole on outward meanes depend,
                  And come to god for want, more then deuotion,
                  As forc'd vnto it at their helples end,
                  For ere the doctor could a drinke prouide
                  I ſtab'd my dart, thus deepe into his ſide.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  From him thou know'ſt we to a lawyer went,
               
            
            
               Time.
               
                  Tis right, we found him arguing of caſes,
                  This is (quoth he) the very lawes intent,
                  With that the golden fees came in by braces▪
                  
                  Wher's your inſtructions, and his declaration?
                  I cannot anſwere thee, till next vacation.
               
               
                  
                  Come thou in Tearme thy matter ſhal be heard,
                  Sir I remember'd you the other day,
                  The bill you wot off, I haue now preferd,
                  With that ſtept I and ſaid, frend Lawyer ſtay:
                  An execution gainſt your life I haue,
                  You muſt vnto my Iaile, is cald the Graue.
               
               
                  Leauing him to the Sexton and the bels,
                  We came vnto a Marchant in this towne
                  That mighty bags of money ouer-tels,
                  Wrapt very orderly in his night gowne,
                  Sirra (quoth he) is not the poſte come yet?
                  Make ſpeed and ſumme me vp this bill of debt.
               
               
                  There can no ſhips come yet, Ile raiſe my price,
                  Oh that the winde would hold but thus a while;
                  There comes into my head an odde deuice,
                  The very thought thereof doth make me ſmile▪
                  
                  Some ſhal be ſure to pay if this geare hold,
                  The plot is pretious, and muſt yeeld me gold.
               
               
                  
                  Thus he ſat plotting till I ſpoild his braine,
                  With Oh I feele my ſelfe exceeding ſicke,
                  
                  I gaue his hart a gripe, it grond againe,
                  By this, on price of wares he would not ſticke
                  But lay a gaſping, while the bell did towle,
                  And there his body lies without a ſoule.
               
               
                  Next doore to him, we found a London dame
                  Vpon her bed, with finger aking laide,
                  And there moſt bitterly ſhe did exclaime
                  Againſt the miſdemeanors of her maide,
                  Baſe queane (quoth ſhe) how doſt thou make me fret?
                  To ſee my ruffe of that ilfauord ſet.
               
               
                  Your manners huſwife you haue quite forgot,
                  As ſure as death ile make your ioynts to bow,
                  You whore, the poking yron is too hot,
                  Durſt thou preſume to vex thy miſtris now,
                  If I were well thou queane I would not miſſe
                  To had my fiſts about thine eares ere this,
               
               
                  
                  Let me not riſe, for if I doe; no more:
                  Few wordes are beſt, I thinke you will repent it,
                  Ile make you feele your ſides this fortnight ſore,
                  Except Death croſſe my purpoſe and preuent it:
                  With that I ſtept betweene to part the Fray,
                  The Mayd ſcapt blowes, and Miſtris brake her day.
               
               
                  A Muskie-Gentle, we did viſit then,
                  A Silken Gallant, very curyous fine,
                  That kept a ſwaggring crew of Seruingmen,
                  Whoſe rapyer-hylts embrued with gold did ſhine,
                  And for he would from all contention ceaſe,
                  He wiſely bound his weapons to the Peace.
               
               
                  One that would ſend his challenge to his Foe,
                  And braue him out with paper in diſgrace,
                  But to the fielde, he alwaies ſcornd to goe,
                  For he kept men, that would ſupply the place:
                  He would preſerue his life, yet ſend his Gloue,
                  His perſon muſt attend on Ladies loue.
               
               
                  
                  Well this ſame ſigneur with the tender skin,
                  That dedicateth all his daies and houres
                  To dauncing, drunkenneſſe, and Venus ſinne,
                  Neuer reſpecting Time and Deaths ſterne powers
                  Was met by me thinking his life ſecure,
                  I killed the knaue to keepe my hand in vre.
               
               
                  Where went we then, doeſt thou remember Time?
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Yes very well, we viſited a Poet,
                  That tyrd inuention day and night with rime
                  And ſtill on Venus ſeruice did beſtow it:
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  Tis true indeed a Poet was the next,
                  With fooliſh idle loue extreamely vext.
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  All that he did endeuour to deuiſe,
                  Was onely Venus praiſe, and Cupids power,
                  Within his head he had a mint of lyes,
                  On truth he neuer ſpent, in's life an houre:
                  His fictions were to feed thoſe in their pride,
                  Who take delight to heare themſelues belide.
               
               
                  
                  For ſlaunder, women to haue vertues many,
                  Admird their beauties, when they lack good faces,
                  Say they haue wit at will, not ſeeing any,
                  Tell them their empty minds are full of graces:
                  Why then they thinke you loue them paſt compare,
                  And euery toy they weare becoms them rare.
               
               
                  This Poet thus a ſonneting we found,
                  Riming himſelfe euen almoſt out of breath,
                  
                     Cupid (quoth he) thy cruell Dart doth wound,
                  Oh graunt me loue, or elſe come gentle Death:
                  
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  I heard him ſay, come gentle death in Ieſt;
                  And in good earneſt graunted his requeſt.
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Leaue him a rotting, then we march'd along
                  Vnto a Godly reuerent graue deuine,
                  Whoſe faith on Chriſt was grounded firme and ſtrong,
                  And all his hope to heauen did he incline;
                  At prayer deuout, we found him on his knees,
                  And with theſe words he ſpake, his hart agrees.
               
               
                  
                  The wounds that IESVS ſuffred for my ſinne,
                  Are mouthes that cry, O loue him with thy hart,
                  
                  The thornes that pierced thorow his fleſh and skin,
                  Are tongues, (pronouncing) Loue is his deſart,
                  
                  The torturing whips, that did to anguiſh moue him,
                  Are Ecchoes ſounding, Wretched Sinner loue him.
                  
               
               
                  With Peters ſinnes in greatneſſe mine abound,
                  Who by his oathes and curſſes Chriſt denied,
                  And with the woman in Adultry found,
                  The filthineſſe of ſinne in me doth bide:
                  With Magdalens in multitudes they be,
                  Her ſeauen Deuils, haue infected me.
               
               
                  The ſhame of ſinne vpon my ſoule doth fall,
                  That on the wretched Publican did light,
                  The cruelty of ſinne I haue with Paul
                  To proſecute the holy and vpright:
                  And with the Theefe, that all his life did ill,
                  Vnto my graue, my ſinnes attend me ſtill.
               
               
                  
                  Oh come ſweet Ieſus, for thy ſeruant coms,
                  I doe beleeue, Lord helpe my vnbeliefe:
                  My debt of ſinnes amount to mighty ſums,
                  Of Mercies treaſure onely thou art chiefe:
                  Though ſinnes be red as ſcarlet, yet I know,
                  Thy precious blood can waſh them white as ſnow,
               
               
                  To be diſſolued, greatly I deſire,
                  This world doth paſſe, the things thereof are vaine,
                  To be with Chriſt, I onely do require,
                  And ſee the Citty where his Saints do raigne,
                  He is my life, Death is a gaine to me,
                  With that his ſoule aſcends where Angels be.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  A happy ſoule, one that had learn'd to die,
                  And rightly vnderſtood his earthly ſtate,
                  Whoſe conſtant faith enfor'cd the Deuill fly,
                  That ſtill aſſaulteth men with deadly hate,
                  For thou know'ſt Time how that ſame hel-hound ſtriues
                  About the hower that men yeeld vp their liues.
               
               
                  
                  For in mans ſicknes Sathan doth conceiue,
                  It may be mortall, that diſeaſe may end-him,
                  And therefore no temptation he will leaue,
                  That to eternall torment he may ſend-him:
                  Tis time (ſaith he) to do my moſt endeuor,
                  If now I looſe his ſowle, tis loſt for euer.
               
               
                  Firſt then heele tempt him to impatient mind,
                  To grudge and to repine, at Gods correction,
                  Whereto with paine and griefe he ſeemes inclin'd,
                  But finding grace preuenteth that infection,
                  He ſeekes to draw him to a pride of hart,
                  To thinke himſelfe a man of great deſart.
               
               
                  And one in whome perfection doth abound,
                  That conſtantly aduerſities can beare,
                  For his good workes deſeruing to be crownd,
                  And that of ſin he need not ſtand in feare:
                  If this cannot his ſowle for hell prepare,
                  He labors then to driue him to deſpaire.
               
               
                  
                  Compares Gods iudgements and his ſins together,
                  And bids his conſcience looke vpon the law,
                  Where damned ſoules remain, he muſt go thither,
                  No mercy ſuch a ſinner euer ſaw;
                  It ſtands not with Gods iuſtice for to ſaue-him,
                  The Deuils come, and onely he muſt haue-him.
               
               
                  Thus plots that foe, and thus he oft preuailes,
                  And doth enlarge his kingdome wondrous thus;
                  
                     Millions of ſowles go hel-ward with theſe gales,
                  When men from memory do baniſh vs:
                  "To count thee precious all men haue great reaſon:
                  "To thinke on me, is neuer out of ſeaſon.
               
            
            
               Time.
               
                  
                     Death, it is true but that ſame monſter ſin,
                  That brood of hell, that Deuils eldeſt childe,
                  Which with the fall of Adam did begin,
                  And all his off-ſpring odious hath defil'd:
                  That Viper of the ſoule doth ſtill appeare,
                  To all thoſe ſinners entertaine it heere.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Sinne, the deſpiſing of Gods Maieſty,
                  And the contempt of his Eternall power,
                  The death of Vertue, Graces enemy,
                  Canker of true felicities faire flower,
                  The obſcure darkenes of mans vnderſtanding,
                  
                     Rebell to all the lawes of Gods commanding.
               
               
                  
                     Sinne, the director vnto all miſhap,
                  The fetters of th'eternall vault of hell,
                  The tempters net he vſeth to intrap,
                  The price wherewith the Deuils buy and ſell,
                  The ſeed of Sathan daily by him ſowne
                  In thoſe hard harts which are become his owne.
               
               
                  
                     Sinne, euerlaſting poiſon, cureleſſe killing,
                  The imitation of the evill ſprites,
                  Folly of men, to vvhich the world runs willing,
                  Pleaſing deſtruction, fil'd with loath'd delights,
                  Soules peſtilence, from darke infections Den,
                  The cauſe of all Gods plagues that light on men.
               
               
                  
                  Hath ouer man ſuch rule and Empire got,
                  And generally on earth beares ſuch a ſway,
                  That ther's not one doth good and ſinneth not,
                  The righteous falleth ſeuen times a day:
                  This is the cauſe the Lyon roares about,
                  And heauens narrow way, is hard found out.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  True time: Well, then we went with expedition
                  (Killing about ſome hundred by the way)
                  Vnto the manſion of a rare phiſition,
                  That with my ſubiects bare a mighty ſway,
                  Of ſicke, and lame, and gowty, cry ſort,
                  Gaue all of him a wonderfull report.
               
               
                  Within his hand he held a vrinall,
                  Which after he had view'd a little ſpace,
                  This party (quoth he) very ſhortly ſhall
                  Be perfect well, and in a healthy caſe:
                  There is no daunger, do as I haue wild,
                  Yet that ſame perſon I had newly kild.
               
               
                  
                  To many he gaue notes, what they ſhould take,
                  Some pill, ſome potion, others muſt let blood,
                  And diuers compounds ſome with ſpeed muſt make,
                  And on his life this phiſicke would do good,
                  Quoth I, Phiſitian cure thy ſelfe fond man,
                  
                  Thou dieſt this howre, preuent it if thou can.
               
               
                  About this time much worke I had to do,
                  As wofull London did both feele and ſee,
                  A dreadfull plague began ſix hundred two,
                  Which did continue out ſix hundred three,
                  The bloody buſines I had then in hand,
                  Became a terror vnto all the land.
               
               
                  Deadly deſtruction was in e'ry ſtreet,
                  A daily mourning and a daily dying,
                  Great vſe of Coffin, and of winding Sheet,
                  From empty houſes many hundreds flying:
                  Each faculty, profeſſion, and degree,
                  Tooke counſell with their legs to run from me.
               
               
                  
                  But how they ſped experience can declare,
                  How many left their liues vpon the way,
                  Poore mortals in my hands are brittle ware,
                  Like Vapor, Buble, Flower, wither'd Hay;
                  Where can they run, but I am ſtill behind-them?
                  Where can they liue ſecure, but I will find-them?
               
               
                  The Cittizens that out of plague time, euer
                  Are entertain'd with welcomes in all Townes,
                  To ſhun like Serpents, each man did endeuor,
                  Amongſt the ruſticke rude vi
                        •
                     ciuill Clownes,
                  The name of Londoner, that very breath,
                  Had power to terrifie as much as death.
               
               
                  Let him be friend or kinſman, what he will,
                  Maiſter, or ſeruant, husband, or the wife:
                  You muſt keepe out, ſaies Iobſon with his bill,
                  The plagu's about him neighbors on my life:
                  Heere is no meat and drinke for horſe or man,
                  Starue if thou wilt, or get it where thou can.
               
               
                  
                  God which deteſted cruelty ſeeing this,
                  Gaue vs commiſſion ouer all the land,
                  That fleſh and blood might know the plague was his,
                  And he had power to ſtrike or hold his hand:
                  Then we his officers to worke did go,
                  And make the Country taſt of Citties wo.
               
               
                  How could they ſhun their owne infection now?
                  That held the Londoners contagious foes,
                  What vertue can their worm-wood ſmels allow,
                  To charme the plague, for comming neare their noſe
                  
                     Angellica is but a rotten root,
                  Hearbe-grace in ſcorne, I trample vnder-foot.
               
               
                  
                     Vnicorns horn's not worth a marrow-bone,
                  Though men eſteeme ſo precious of the duſt,
                  
                     Bugell is euen as good as Beazer ſtone,
                  If I but ſay, Sirrha away you muſt:
                  
                     Prepare thy ſoule, repent the guilt of ſin,
                  
                  
                     Coffin, and ſheete, attend to take thee in▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  I wonder what men thinke that daily ſee,
                  Their friends and kindered carried to the graue,
                  How they can count themſelues ſecure to be,
                  That not an howers time, of life-time haue;
                  That find they are but tenants heere at will,
                  Yet liue, as they could liue free-holders ſtill.
               
               
                  Where's old Methuſelah that long liu'd man?
                  Whers's al the fathers ſaw ſo many daies?
                  Their liues were but the length of Dauids ſpan,
                  A vapor that moſt ſodainly decaies:
                  Th'are borne, grow ſtrong, wax old, fall ſicke; and die,
                  So other do: and others them ſupply.
               
               
                  Where's that ſtrong man that did ſo many kill?
                  And admirable things by valour did,
                  That carried Aſah gates to Hebron hil,
                  And rent a Lyon like a tender Kyd:
                  Looke in the graue where this great man doth lie,
                  There's no ſtrength left, to kil a ſilly flie.
               
               
                  
                  Wher's that moſt rare and comely ſhaped prince,
                  That would haue puld his Father from his throne?
                  Whoſe like no age hath ſeene for feature ſince,
                  Nor any age before his age had known:
                  Not a locke left of all his goodly haire,
                  Hundreds ago, his ſcull was bald, and bare.
               
               
                  Wher's Hector gone, and Hercules become?
                  What newes with Pompey and Achilles now?
                  Where marcheth Alexander with his drum,
                  To Caeſars ſcepter who doth yeeld or bow:
                  Where are theſe great and mighty conquering ones,
                  
                     Time, ſhew an ounce of duſt of all their bones.
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  
                     Death preethy ſtay, let this diſcourſe ſtand by,
                  And make me anſwere vnto one requeſt,
                  Some doubt and difference is twixt thee and I,
                  Which to reſolue in my conceit were beſt,
                  And this it is; The world exclaimes on me,
                  For diuers actions that are done by thee.
               
               
                  
                  If thou ſtab children in their mothers wombe,
                  Or kill a king as ſoone as he is crown'd,
                  Or make the bloodie field the Souldiors tombe,
                  Or in the Seas cauſe thouſands to be drown'd,
                  Why preſentlie what will the people ſay?
                  
                     Their Time was come: thus Time beares blame awaie.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  If this be all, let it not greeue thy hart,
                  To heare thy ſelfe abuſed now and then,
                  But ile reuenge, I vow it with my dart,
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  I marry wilt thou, but I preethy when:
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  To ſoone by many daies ile meet with ſome,
                  If thou but ſay, ſtrike for their Time is come.
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  I thats another matter, now you ſpeake:
                  By my glaſſe all thy tragedies are acted,
                  The priſon of mans ſoule thou canſt not breake,
                  With wals of fleſh and blood, and bones compacted;
                  Nor giue the ſame enlargement to go free,
                  Before my hand, to thy commiſſion be.
               
               
                  
                  Thou knowſt Time is Gods agent in affaires,
                  And hath bin ſo, euer ſince the creation,
                  Thou knowſt he ſeateth Monarchs in their chairs,
                  Admitting kings vnto their corronation:
                  If long they raigne, Time giues their yeares the length,
                  If ſhort they rule, Time cutteth off their ſtrength.
               
               
                  The ornaments of heauen, ſun, and Moone,
                  With al the glittering brauery of ſtars,
                  Are taught by me, their morning, night, and noone,
                  I order them, which elſe diſorder mars:
                  Their motions, reuolutions, and aſpects,
                  
                     Time with his iuſt proportion, due directs.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  Why what a bragging and a coile do'ſt keepe?
                  Beſt take my dart, be Time, be Death and al,
                  Ile into graues, and there go lie and ſleepe,
                  And anſwere thou when Gods affaires do cal:
                  Be Lord of Coffin, Pickaxe, Sheet, and ſpade,
                  And do my worke, with thoſe in ground are laid.
               
               
                  
                  Thou art for kings, and thou doſt this and that,
                  And without thee, ther's nothing to be done,
                  To crowne, depoſe, and do I know not what,
                  Nay thou art buſie with the Moone and Sunne:
                  Thou haſt an ore in e'ry bodies boate,
                  Vpon my conſcience thou begin'ſt to dote.
               
               
                  I haue bin Death almoſt ſix thouſand yeares,
                  Yer neuer heard thee vaunt ſo vaine before,
                  Thou coun'ſt thy ſelfe my better it appeares,
                  But if thou doeſt, thy aime is wide a ſcore;
                  I tell thee Time, thou doeſt inſence me now,
                  Knowing my ſelfe a better man then thou.
               
               
                  At leaſt thy ſelfe knowes I am full as good,
                  Being Gods ſteward, ſinnes reward to pay,
                  He that denies it I will ſee his blood,
                  Be he the greateſt Monarch liues this day;
                  If he were Caeſar of the earths whole Globe,
                  Ile make him poorer then the Deuill made Iob.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The mony-bag whoſe Idols in his cheſt,
                  Whoſe Gods his gold, whoſe golds his priſoner,
                  Whoſe thoughts are euer haunted with vnreſt,
                  And loues that beſt, becomes his murderer:
                  I take him ſodaine from huge heapes of treaſure,
                  The ſlaue was ſcraping all his life times leiſure.
               
               
                  Wounds, hart, and blood, that wil not ſell his ſwearing
                  To him would giue him forty pound a yeare,
                  That vowes a tale is dull and harſh in hearing,
                  Vnleſſe by oaths the matter be made cleare:
                  Oft when the tempter chiefely doth prouoke-him,
                  His mouth being fil'd with bitter oaths, I choake him.
                  
               
               
                  The ſwaggering Ruffian in his heady braules,
                  Whoſe hand is euer on his ponyard hilt,
                  That bloody fraies his recreation cals,
                  Chiefely delighted with foule murders guilt:
                  Whoſe thoughts are onely for the ſtab pretence,
                  I haue a tricke for him and all his fence.
               
               
                  
                  The quaintly ſuted Courtier in attyre,
                  Whoſe lookes are fixt no lower then the sky,
                  Is croſt by me, in height of his deſire,
                  And vnder ground I make his carrion lie:
                  He ſcorn'd the earth, and that I make his bed,
                  Wrapt in a rotten ſheet, from foot to head.
               
               
                  And whereſoeuer, or what ere he be,
                  For countenance, for credit and condition,
                  Dignity, calling, office, or degree,
                  Peſſant, or prince, patient, or els Phiſition:
                  Euen from the Crowne and ſcepter to the plow,
                  I make all looke as I my ſelfe do now.
               
               
                  Perhaps thou think'ſt becauſe thy beard is gray,
                  I owe officious reuerence to thine age,
                  And muſt beleeue whatſoeuer thou ſay,
                  Applauding thee chiefe actor on earths ſtage:
                  Ile neuer do it, Time expect it not,
                  For at my hand ther's nothing to be got.
               
               
                  
                  But prethee tell me, what is he feares Time?
                  Not one vpon my life that doth expect thee,
                  For all the ſinful brood of Adams ſlime,
                  Do euery day, and euery hower neglect thee:
                  To vſe time well, who is not ſlow and ſlacke?
                  But with their euils, al men loade thy backe.
               
               
                  Pyrats and theeues take Time to fit their turne,
                  
                     Time muſt aſſiſt them ere they can preuaile,
                  The fawning flatterer doth Time ſubborne,
                  To give him leiſure for his lying tale;
                  The luſtfull Letcher borrowes thee by night,
                  And makes Time pandor to his ſinnes delight.
               
               
                  The ſcatter good, in Time conſumes the wealth,
                  That might ſuſtaine both him and his ſucceſſor,
                  The drunkard takes his Time to pledge a health
                  Till drinke, to wit and fence be an oppreſſor;
                  Nay not an euill ſince the world begun,
                  But Time was acceſſary till twas done.
               
            
            
               
               Time.
               
                  Well preethy ſlander on, ile heare thee out,
                  And thy vntruths, with truth I will confute,
                  Touching the wronging me, thou goeſt about,
                  Thou art not able for thy life diſpute:
                  
                     Death, th'art a lying fellow in this caſe,
                  I ſcorne thee I, for vſing Time ſo baſe.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  What (Father gray-beard, doth your choler riſe?
                  Can you ſo ill digeſt to heare your crimes?
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Why goodman bone-face, with your vaulty eies,
                  What i'ſt to me if men abuſe their Times?
                  
                  Where learnd your dry and empty pate the skil,
                  That Time ſhould anſwere for mens doings il.
               
               
                  Man is ordaind by th'almighty maker,
                  To ſpend his Time of earthly pilgrims ſtate
                  So holy, that he proue foule ſinnes forſaker
                  And with faire vertue finiſh out his date:
                  I being the Time and limmit for that vſe,
                  My il imployment, is the worlds abuſe?
               
               
                  
                  What ſimple reaſon hath thy braine in ſtore,
                  That doſt all ſence ſo vtterly forget?
                  Shal I be charg'd to anſwere ſinners ſcore,
                  That neuer paſt my word to pay their debt:
                  Proue that, and let all that is good deteſt me,
                  Th'art a leane knaue: Take witnes and areſt me.
                  
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  By my darts point, (I ſwore not ſo this yeare,
                  Ile fight with thee, next time we meet in field,
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Why if thou haſt a ſtomacke try it heere,
                  I feare thee not, my ſith is newly ſteeld:
                  And take this warning ere the fray begins,
                  Looke to your legs, ile cracke thoſe rotten ſhins.
               
               
                  My ſhins you whorſon vglie prating ſlaue,
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  Sirrha ile keepe you at the point aloofe,
                  For dotard know ther's not a bone I haue,
                  But tis compoſ'd of ſtuffe, full cannon proofe,
                  Laie on my legs an houre by thy glaſſe,
                  Als one, to hew a pillar made of braſſe.
               
            
            
               
               Time
               
                  Peace bragging foole, I laugh thy vaunts to ſcorne,
                  Thy tongue inclines to much vnto thy lying,
                  Feare children with thy force but newly borne,
                  And terrifie the ſicke that lie a dying:
                  I know the houre when God did firſt begin thee,
                  Thy mold and making, and how much is in thee.
               
               
                  Thy office is to murder and to kill,
                  Stabbing of men, is ſolace to thy hart,
                  Thou goeſt about and carrieſt with thee ſtil,
                  A Spade, and Pickaxe, Hower-glaſſe, and Dart:
                  VVith one toole, thou doſt giue a cowards wound
                  Vnſeene, and with tother turne men vnder ground.
               
               
                  Thou lookeſt like the inſide of a tombe,
                  All rotten bones, with ſinnews bound togither,
                  Thy guts are gone, for they lacke belly roome,
                  And al thy fleſh is lighter then a feather:
                  Thy head is like an empty drie oile iarre,
                  VVhere neather teeth, nor noſe, nor eies there are.
               
               
                  
                  From eare to eare thou haſt a mouth vnſhut,
                  With armes and hands like to a Gardners rake,
                  Thy ribs ſhew like a leather Ierkin cut,
                  Thy voice reſembles hiſſing of a ſnake:
                  Thy legs appeare a paire of Crane-ſtilts right,
                  And al thy formes more vgly then a ſprite.
               
               
                  Thy picture ſtands vpon the Ale-houſe wall,
                  Not in the credit of an ancient ſtory,
                  But when the old wiues gueſts begin to braule,
                  She points, and bids them read Memento mori:
                  
                  Looke, looke (ſaies ſhe) what fellow ſtandeth there,
                  As women do, when crying Babes they feare.
               
               
                  No memory of worth to thee belongs,
                  To call thee famous is condemned error,
                  And though ſometime th'art baletted in ſongs,
                  Thy names imploide vnto no vſe but terror,
                  Thy companie both rich and poore defie,
                  Loathſome to eare, moſt vgly to the eie.
               
            
            
               
               Death
               
                  
                     Time, I perceiue thou art diſpoſ'd to raile,
                  So am not I, my head is not ſo vaine,
                  Thy tearmes are very baſe, moſt ſcuruy ſtale,
                  And th'art a teſtie old foole, for thy paine:
                  What needſt thou vſe this ſpeeches vnto me,
                  A man ſo hanſome thou wilt neuer be.
               
               
                  Beſt ſhapen forme, by natures powerfulneſſe,
                  And ſweeteſt face on which loues eies do fawn,
                  The chiefeſt ſtature, praiſ'd for comlineſſe,
                  Are but my picture when the Curtaines drawne:
                  Remoue the veile of fleſh and blood away,
                  Tis Death's true picture all the world wil ſay.
               
               
                  But what art thou, a foule miſhapen monſter,
                  Behind all bald, a locke elle long before,
                  With clouen feet, whereby a man may conſter,
                  
                     Caron from hell hath brought thee late a ſhore,
                  Which if he did, thy ſwiftnes doth declare,
                  Thou ranſt away and neuer paid his fare.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Actaeons feet, (I would thou hads his hornes)
                  Wing'd like an Owle, a Cat hath lent thee eies▪
                  
                  A fugitiue that neuer backe returnes,
                  One that will run with Titans horſe in skies:
                  Neuer to be intreated, ſtopt, or ſtaid,
                  For whom repoſe and reſt was neuer made.
               
               
                  And doſt thou thinke ile pocket vp diſgrace,
                  Of ſuch a paltry ruſticke peaſant boore,
                  Nay rather I defie thee to thy face,
                  Thou knowſt me honeſt, though thou knowſt me poor:
                  I care for no man, all that liue feare me,
                  A figge for the whole world. A ruſh for thee.
                  
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Well art thou now reueng'd? preethy haue done?
                  Thou ſtriu'ſt to haue the laſt word I dare ſweare it,
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  Why ſhould I not as long as you begun,
                  Fie, fie, I am aſham'd that any man ſhould heare it:
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  For were it knowne, we two were at contention,
                  The world would laugh, and terme it Mad diſcention.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Death
               
                  Giue me thy hand, imbrace, let choler paſſe:
                  For my part I do beare thee no ill-will,
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Take heed (good Death) thy bones will crack my glaſſe,
               
            
            
               Death.
               
                  I would be loath to do thee ſo much ill:
                  Lay downe thy ſith, as I lay downe my dart:
                  Shake hands, and ſo be friends before we part.
               
            
            
               Time
               
                  Where goeſt thou now, Marry harke in thine eare:
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  I haue a Lady preſently to kill:
                  One thats at dice, and doth no daunger feare?
                  But haue at al ſhe ſaies, come ſet me ſtil:
                  She is at paſſage, paſſing ſound and wel▪
                  
                  And little thinketh on the paſſing-bel.
               
               
                  And then I go to baile an honeſt man,
                  Lies in the Counter for a little debt,
                  Whom's creditor in moſt extreames he can
                  Doth deale withal, now he is in the net;
                  He ſweares heele keepe him there this dozen yeare,
                  Yet the knaue lies, this night ile ſet him cleare.
               
               
                  
                  And then I go to ſee two fellowes fight,
                  (With whome there is no reaſon to be had)
                  About a cup of wine they dranke laſt night,
                  One ſwore twas good, and tother vowd twas bad;
                  Ile giue one that, no Chirurgeon's like to heale,
                  And with the tother let the hangman deale.
               
               
                  And hundreds more, come Time with ſpeed along,
                  About our buſines we haue ſtood heere now:
                  Till Prieſt, and Clarke, and Sexton haue the wrong,
                  More dead worke for their profit lets alow:
                  My dart is dry, ther's no freſh blood thereon,
                  VVe ſuffer ſicke to ly too long and grone.
               
               
                  Harke a monſtrous rich fellow a Cittizen.
               
            
            
               Time.
               
                  VVeele take him with vs euen in the way,
                  (Preethy be thou a quiet man a while)
                  Some hower, by my glaſſe he hath to ſtay,
                  Before the date be come of his exile;
                  And then in ſuch a hole he ſhal be plac'ſt,
                  He is not like be ſeene againe in haſt▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  The villains rich, exceeding rich indeed,
                  And loues a bag of gold moſt dearely well,
                  His wife is of a proud and dainty breed,
                  And for imbraſing faſhions doth excell:
                  She married him for pure loue to his wealth,
                  But hath a friend for tother thing by ſtealth.
               
               
                  His children long, as miſers children do,
                  To be a ſharing, ery months a yeare,
                  They hope heele dy, their minds conſent thereto,
                  And then their gallant humors wil appeare,
                  The angels kept in darknes by his might,
                  Shalby their power approach and come to light.
               
               
                  Vintners make welcomes ready for they come,
                  Let them not want (I praie) Potato pies,
                  And Cheaters with falſe dice looke out for ſome,
                  No little profit to your ſnares will riſe:
                  But Bawds and whores haue you a ſpecial care,
                  To fit them penni-worths with your pocky ware:
               
               
                  
                  As the oppreſſer got it wicked in,
                  The prodigal wil ſend it vainly out,
                  One wickednes requites anothers ſin,
                  If vengeance haue a plague to bring about:
                  For what is got by rapine and by wrong,
                  The Deuil wil be doer in't ere long.
               
               
                  Let them haue Lord-ſhips, and be Lords of Towns,
                  Let them inioy the world, at wit and wil,
                  Let them bequ
                        •
                     ath fiue hundred mourning gownes,
                  And proſper al their daies in doing il:
                  Giue backe their goods when life is almoſt ſpent,
                  As Iudas when to hange himſelfe he went.
               
               
                  VVhat of al this, it warrants not from hel?
                  The wicked getting is not iuſtifyed,
                  Becauſe the rich diſpoſeth riches wel,
                  Wrong gotten, and wel giuen when he died:
                  For tis like him, ſteales from anothers ſtore,
                  And of that coine giues almes vnto the poore.
               
               
                  
                  The vſurer whom God forbids as plaine,
                  Take any intreſt, as the theife from ſtealing,
                  And yet wil venter ſoule for mony gaine,
                  Opreſſing al that vndergo his dealing,
                  Thinks it inough to make an honeſt wil,
                  How ere he got his goods, that ſhal not skil.
               
               
                  Thus men delude, deeeiue, beguile, betray
                  Themſelues, their ſowles, their hope, their happines:
                  Running the common beaten paſſage way,
                  That leads to hel, the haunt of al diſtreſſe:
                  And like the fooliſh Virgins knocke too late,
                  When ther's no entrance in at heauens gate.
               
               
                  One builds a houſe, and titles that his owne,
                  Giues it his name, to keep his name in ſound,
                  When preſently a graue with one ſquare ſtone,
                  Wil ſerue his bodies turne to ly in ground,
                  Ten thouſand pounds his coſtly houſe requires,
                  A coffin of a crowne's al death deſires.
               
               
                  
                  Another fals to purchaſing of land,
                  Heele haue it out of Orchard, field, and wood,
                  And onely with his humor it doth ſtand,
                  To get much in his hand, and do no good:
                  This Mole that in the earth is moiling thus,
                  With ſix foot ground is ſatisfied by vs.
               
            
            
               Death
               
                  No more, away, looke heere my glaſſe is out,
                  Thou art to tedious Time in telling tales,
                  Our bloody buſineſſe let vs go about,
                  Thouſands are now at point of death, breath failes:
                  To worke, to worke, and lay about thee man,
                  Let's kil as faſt, as for our liues vve can.
               
               
                  
                     Harke, liſten Time, I pray giue eare,
                  
                  
                     What bell is that a towling there?
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   