
      
         
            
            
            Prologue,
            AN odde dayes worke Diogenes once made,
            And t'was to seeke an honest man he saide,
            Through Athens with a Candle hee did goe,
            When People sawe no cause hee should doe so.
            For it was day-light, and the Sunn did shine,
            Yet hee vnto an Humour did incline:
            To check mens manners with some od-crost i
                  •
               st,
            Whereof hee was continually possest.
            Full of reproofes, where hee abuses found,
            And bould to speake his minde, who euer sound,
            Hee spake as free to ALEXANDERS Face:
            As if the meanest Plow-man were in place,
            T'was not mens persons that he did respect,
            Nor any calling: Vice hee durst detect▪
            
            Immagin, you doe see him walketh estr
                  •
               etes,
            And euery ones a knaue, with whom hee meetes.
            Note their Discription; which good censure craues
            Then Iudge i
                  •
                hee haue cause, to count them knaues.
            
               SAMVEL ROVVLANDS.
            
            FINIS
         
      
      
         
            
            
            DIOCENES In his Lanthorne Humour.
            
               
                  NOW fie vpon seeking honest men in knaues Skins: I am euen as wearie as euer was PLATOES Dog. Not a Stréete Lane, or Alley in all the Cittie of Athens, but I haue trode it, and cannot méete a man worthy the giuing of the good morrow too: Why? What Rascalls be these? Haue they banisht honest men out of the towne puite? Alas poore Vertue, What hast thou done to deserue this contempt? base is thy attire, as 
                  •
               hridbare in thy Apparel as my Gowne: thy Company out of request, for thou hast walked so long alone: that thou art euen walked away with thy selfe: ther's no goodnes to bée found, All's set vpon villany. Younder walkes Briberie, taken for an honest substanciall graue Cittyzen, I marie is he, pray, make him one of your common Counsell.
            There goes Crueltie and Extortion, put off your Hattes all to him: tis well done, he is one of the principall and best in the Parish, he hath borne all offices and neuer did good: a most abhominable rich fellow, But how the Diuel came he by his wealth? Widdowes, Widowes, thrée or fower olde rusty Golde begetting Widowes haue crown'd him with their wealthes, and that

wicked Mamnion is déerer v
                  •••
                him then his owne soule: Nay, if he had Fiue Thousand Soules, hée would sell them all for fiue thousand duckets of golde.
            Stay let me sée, what's hee? Oh tis Prodigalitie and his whore, a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman, they are walking towordes the Suburbs of a Baudie house for their recreation, Yonder rides the Bawde in her Coach before, and they two come leysurely with the pox) behinde but will all meete together anon to make worke for the Chirurgion, who will answeare their loose bodie with the Squirt.
            Now Ile assure you though I laugh but sildome, I must needes: make merry with yonder Asse, why hee is trapt for all the world like Alexanders Horse, such a feather in's head, so begarded, and the very same Trot: I haue knowne his Father well, hee was a most graue Senator (in regard of his gray beard) and did much little good in the Cittie, got wealth. and pild vp golde euen as they pile vp Stock-fish in Island, and now his Sonne (the second part of a 
                  •
               oole) has all all: marrie what doth he with it? stay, (let me snuffe my Candle and Ile tell you) euen like one of Signeour Scatter-goods politicians hee deuides it into partes: A greate portion for Dicing: a good some for Drinking, a parceil for whoring, a moitie for pride, a third for dauncing six shares and a halfe for swaggering, and all the remainder for begger
                  •
               e. Walke along knaue, walke along.
            Who haue we next comes creeping with the palsey in his ioynts, a great leather pouch by his side as large as a Gammon of Bacon, long stockings and a side coate crosse-bard with veluet to his knees? stay (light, light) let me see: oh I knowe the damned 
                  •
               la
                  •
               e tis Mounsiur Vsurie, what a lea
                  •
               e lanke thin gut it is: hee lookes maruailous like a long omtie Cats-skinn purs
                  •
               e, I

would I had his skinne to make me a summer paire o
                  •
                Buskins.
            O what a blessednes is it to me, that I neuer came into such villaines clutches what does hee, pray, as hee goes his Chaps walke so? fast No, the Rogue is ruminating vpon his pawnes, hée chawes the Cud in contemplation of Bands and Billes, I dare be sworne hée neuer champs so much vpon his dinner or Supper, for his panch cries out on him, and all the gutts in his Pudding-house, rumple. and grumble at their slender allowance, He obiectes the old prouerbe to his belly, Many a sacke is tyed vp before it be full. I would I had the dyeting of him some month with my Rootes, I would send him deeper vnder Ground then ere they grew: the Caniball should neuer feede more vpon poore men, and play the D
                  •
               ce-maker with their bones hang him rogue, hang him
            how now thou drunken knaue, Canst not sée but réele vpon me? I would I had béene ware of thee, thou shouldst haue borne me a good bange with my Staffe: what slaue's this? as I liue I was almost downe
            Looke how his cloake hangs, one side to his ankles and th'other side to his elbow: his steps take the Longitude and the latitude, hoise, hoise: This fellowe is now (in his owne conceit) mightely strong, for hée dares fight with any men: he is exceeding rich, scornes money, and ca
                  •
               es not for twentie thousand pound: hee is maruailous wise, and 
                  •
               ut, tell not him, for he knowes more then any man whatsoeuer. What's hee that dares refuss to pledg him 
                  •
                as sure as death if he could feele or finde his dagger, stabbes would be dealt: harke how the villaine sweare, there's all his hostesse hath in pawde for his score, Yet hee's a passing good Customer for vttrance, about a barrell aday goes downe his gutter, So take him in there at the red 
                  •
               attice. hee has cast anchor at the blewe Anchor for this day. Fill

him of the best, for he is euen one of the best Ghuestes that euer tooke vp sodden water with Chaulke-credit on a Post. Out vpon him, out vpon him, Ile read his destinie: Dye in a Ditch knaue, or end in an Hospitall Rascall chuse whether thou wilt.
            How lookes yonder fellow? what's the matter with him trow? has a eaten Bull-biefe? there's a lofty slaue indeede hee's in the alitudes: Oh, ist you Maister Ambition? I would be glad to see you hang'de a while for an old acquaintance
                  •
                a great man with the Emperor: ile assure you, a great man with yt Emperor: his voyce is heard in the Court now, and his Fathers voyce was wo
                  •
               nt to be heard in the Cittie: For I haue heard him many a time and often, cry Brpomes in Athens: a good plaine honestman, and dealt much with old Shooes: I heare him once tell this proud knaue being then a boy) a good discourse of Iustice out of a Broome: Sirra (said hee) heer's byrch to correct you in Child-hood, and when you grow to be a great Lubber, heer's a staffe for to be labour you wt all: Yf that will not serue to a-mend you, why then hecres euen a good With to hang you vp: Amen saide I hee's growing towards it apace 
                  •
               aspiring to rise hie plotting to be mightie: and what tooles has he out of the Dwells shop for his worke? Treason, Treason he will ascend by Treason though he climbe the gallowes for it and cruck his neck in comming downe againe. I
                  •
                I salute him and put off my cappe I would my Lanthorne were in my Belly. Vertue scornes him, I know him not: strout a-long Sirra, for thou hast not long to strout it.
            More knaues abroad yet? Yonders Boasting & Presumption I holde my life as olde as I am ile take his Kapiet from him with my walking staffe, hee's all sound and breath tongue and talke; feares no man, cares for no man beholding to no man: but trie his valour put him to it, see whats in him, dare him to the proofe and

there's mine emtie fellowe like a water bubble flyling in the ayre till a puffe cracke him: I neuer knew (since I knew reason) a wordie fellow prooue a worthie fellow: a man must set his hand to his man-hood, and finger it, twill not bée had with wounds and blood, heart and nailes, as euery rascally knaue makes account: when two curres meete, all the while they barke they haue no leysure to byte: Alexander had a bragging Souldier that swore he had kild fiue hundred men with fillips, yet this fellow sware the peace against a woman that had broken his head with his owne dagger: and tother day, I followed a couple of notorious braggarrs into the field, one sware hée would imbrew his Kapies hilts in the bowels of his foe, the other vowed to make him eate yron and stéele like an Estridge: when they came to the place ap
                  •
               inted, both drew their weapons, laide them presently downe and went to bussels for a bloodie nose, which I séeing ran to the towne and cry'd murder, murder and so brought thrée hundred people together to laugh at them. I could tell many like examples of S
                  •
               ignior Feather cappe and his fellow, but that I spie another knaue comming, that puts me out
            Tis Contention (nay, ile goe l
                  •
               w enough to the 
                  •
               ennell, thou shalt not iustle me for the wall) loo
                  •
               e how hee stares: see how a frownes, hee has had a poore man in Lawe this three yeere, for bidding his Dog Come out Cuckolds curre, yet if the Dog could speake, hee would beare witnesse against his Master for Horne worke that hee had seene wrought by his M
                  •
               stris in her Chamber to make her husband night-caps of.
            Oh, striffe is the summe of his 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  •
               is the 
                  ••
               lace of his soule hee is neuer well at hearts 
                  〈◊〉
                he be not wran
                  •
               ling with one or other: ile trie it by the law sayes hee) the lawe shall iudge it: ile co
                  •
               e to no agreement but lawe: ile pinch him by the lawe: I haue a hundred pound to spend at law: and all law, law: yet hee himselfe

is altogether voide of equitie: héele neither take wrong nor doe right: bites his poore neighbours doggedly by the backe, scornes his superiour, tramples vpon his inferior, and so hée may bée wrangling, cares not with whom it be, to keepe his hand in vre. He neuer went to bed in charitie in his life, nor neuer wakes without meditating shrewde turnes. Oh he loues wonderfully to be feeding on the bread of s
                  •
               rife and imitates the Camels which del
                  •
               ght to dr
                  •••
               e in
                  •••
               ubled pooles. well hee shall 
                  •
               o
                  •
               ne no neighbour-hood with mee for it: my Tunn stands farre inough off from his house: I had rather haue a Beare to my next neighbour, then such a brabling rascall: goe walke a knaue in the horse fayre, I haue nothing to say to thee but farewell and behang'd and when thou art going that iourney, take all thy fellowes with thee.
            Well met, or rather ill met Hipocrisie: Ah thou smooth face villaine with the fawning tongue art thou b
                  •
               come a citizen too, then looke about you plaine fellows, you shall be sure to want no deceit: he hats swearing so doe I: tis well done to hate it, but he loues lying and will ouer-reach you in a bad bargaine, or with 
                  •
               alse waight and measure: Yes indeed: I truly will he Héele sigh and say there's no conscience now adayes, and then makes his owne actions beare witnesse to it' by yea and nay, if he can he will deceiue you.
            Looke to his hands hearken not to his tongue, and say I haue giuen you faire warning, for a Philosopher hath béene co
                  •
               sned by him. I had rather haue it said, Diogines was deceiued, then so heare it reported hée is a deceiuer. I paid for a better cappe then I weare, and my gowne is scarce worth halfe the mony it cost me marry what remedie? nothing: I haue 
                  •
               earned by it onely, A knacke to knowe a kna
                     •
                  e: and while I liue, ile looke better to Yes truely, and I indeed: Hipocrisie shall neuer fell me good wordes againe while hee liu
                  •
               s: ile neuer 
                  •
               ell me good wordes againe while hte liues: ile

neuer buy breath more for mony. If a théefe should méete me going home, and taking away my purse, I would say I met with an honester man, then hée that cusned me in the buying of my gowne, for the théefe would prooue a man of his worde, and tell mée what I should trust to in the peremptorie tearms of Stand, Deliuer your purse.
            
            But my Gowne-brother, he promist me good stuffe, truely, a great penni-worth indeede, and verily did gu
                  •
               l me. But let me take my leaue of my purse, hées's a villaine, an arrant villaine, and I could euen finde in my heart to eat his liuer fride with par
                  •
               ley to morrow morning to breakefast.
            How now, whats the matter; whether goes all this hurly burley? heer's a clutter indéed. Now I sée, now I see, Coson
                     •
                  ge the Swaggerer is carried to Prison. I heare the people say hee hath stab'd the Constable, beate the watch, broke the Tapsters head, and layn with his Hostesse.
            Heere is no villaine: pray search his pockets: I 
                  •
               ol
                  •
               e you as much, false heart, false hand and false dice: what crooked tooles are those in's tother Pocket: Pick-lockes pick-lockes: This fellow liues by his wittes, but yet belongs not to Wits Common wealth▪ he swires he is a Gentleman, but of what house? Marry Cheters Ordinarie: an ingenious flaue, that workes a liuing out of hard bones, and has it at his fingers ends: euery man with him is a very Roh
                  •
               e and a base Gull: he threatens stabs and death, with heart wounds & blood, yet a bloody nose hath made him call for a Chir
                  •
               rgion, He scornes to dwell in a sute of appahell a weeke: this day in Sattin, to morrow in Sackloth, one day all new, the next day all seam-rent: now on his backe, anon at the brokers, and this by his reckoning is a gentlemans humour Sure I cannot denie but if it may be so, but I pray then what humor is the geltleman in? he is neuer

(in my opinion) like to prooue gentlemen be the humor.
            Away with him, away with him, make sure worke, chaine and kennell him vp in tatle, make him a Knight of the douiorous Castle.
            He will doe better farre tied vp then loose at libertie, let him not play the wandring Pilgrim in any case, there's no remedie for such wilde fellowes, but to tame them in the d
                  •
               nger
                  •
                of 
                  〈…〉
                follow him close watchman with your Ha
                  ••
               erts, least he shew you a new dance cal'd runne-awaies galliard So, s
                  •
               , by this time he lies where hee's like to prooue lowsie if the
                  •
               e be not some speedy remedie vser, with a medicine made of Hempseed to kill his itch.
            Who haue we next pray? I should know him by his vilanous scuruie lookes, a makes a wry mouth, and has a grinning countenance, for all the world like Detaction: why tis he indeed, a rope stretch him, has not the Crowes pickt out his eyes yet: See how hee laughs to himselfe, at yonder piaine Gentlewoman in the old fashion, because shee has not the trash and trumperie of Mistris Loose-legges about her.
            Dost thou deride Ciuilitie, Knaue? is decencie become rediculous? looke vpon thy selfe the
                  •
                Rascall, looke vpon thy selfe, whom all the wisemen in the worlde may laugh to scorne indeed.
            Thou hasse nothing in thee, (if thy inside were turned outward worthy of the least 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               nta
                  ••
               en, and yet such villaines will euer be scoffing (deriding and detracting, from those of the best spirits and worthiest endéuours) learned mens workes, industrious mens trauailes, gr
                  ••
               t mens counsels, 
                  〈◊〉
                mens vertues, and wise mens arts, Detraction will spit 
                  •
               enome at: nothing is well done that flowes not from his durtie inuention: he has scoffes for them he knowes not, and iestes for them he neuer sawe, what a worlds this, when a foole shall censure a Philosopher? a doult an 
                  •
               deot, one

that hath wit in's hcele and head alike, to condemne and depraue natures miracles for wit and wisedome.
            This is he that can mend euery thing that is readie made to his hand detracting from the wortinesse of euery mans worke: tis a villaine, a right villaine bred and borne, he came not long since along my Tub-house, and scoffing at me, asked me why I made it not a tap-house? marry (quoth I) I haue determined so to do but I want such arogue as thou art to make a signe 
                  〈◊〉
               : with that cald he me Dagge, Said I, thou didst neuer heare mee barke, but thou shalt seele mre bite, and so thrust my Pike-st
                  •••
               e through his chockes, that I made his teeth chatter in his head, like a Uiper as he is.
            Nay then we shall neuer hau
                  •
                done, looke where Ielosie is as, yellow as if hee had the yellowe Iaund
                  •
               ce: his wife's an honest woman (in my conscience) loyall and true in we
                  •
               locke: but because he like a fornicating rascall vses common Cur
                  •
               ozuns, hee thinkes her cartesies and theirs are all alike to euery man come who will: his eyes followe her feete wheresoeuer shee goes: if any friend salute her, shee dares not reply, but must passe stranger-like without any showe of Curtesie: hee sweares thee is a
                  •••
               hore, and himselfe alarge horned Cuckolde, able to runne But with all Cuckoldes in the Towne.
            Nay, hee is growne to such outrage, that hee is euen fr
                  •
               nticke with 
                  •
               ealosie, sometimes offering to lay wagers that no Bu
                  •
               l dare
                  •
                encoun
                  •
               er with his head, and that his hornes are more preti
                  ••
               s then any U
                  •
               icorne. the ha
                  •
               erda
                  •
               her cannot 
                  •
               it h
                  •
               m with a hate wide enough: The Barbor cannot t
                  ••
               me his fore-heade close enough, and yet the pore hath made his be
                  •
               rd th
                  ••
                enough▪ hee sayes hee thinkes there's 
                  •
               ot an honest woman 
                  〈◊〉
                to his knowledge, and the re
                  •
               son is, he is 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                with none but whor
                  •
               s. A Bawdie-house is for his bodily ex
                  •
               ercise, and hee can not liue without

his lecherie, be hath whores of all complexions, whores of all fizes, and whores of all diseases: and this is the cause that the villanous fellow déemes all to be whores. But maisters marke the end of him that hath béene laid f
                  •
               iue times of the Poxe, if he be not throughly Frenche fide and well prepared for his venerie, then will I for seuen yeares eate Hay with a Horse: well, ile crosse the way to tother side the stréete, be fore hée come too nigh mee, I dare not indure him, tis good sléeping in a sound Skin? I would not be in his coate for Alexanders ri
                  •
               h gowne, out stinking Knaue out Houlde off thy cart Knaue, wilt ouer-runn me? thy horse hath more honestie in him then thou, for he auoides 
                  ••
               e, and thou drawest vppon me. So villaine so, curse the creature that gets thy liuing, and see how thou wilt thriue by it Thou blinde Knaue, Porter, doost rush vpon me with thy basket, and then sayest, by your leaue? belike thou meanest to
                  •
               iustle me againe, for thou didst aske no leaue the first time before hand, what brutish slaues doe I meet with? my staffe shall meete with some of you a none: Take thou that knaue, for crying, broomes so lowd in mine eares, heeres a quoile indeede, your Cittie shuflings rumling, and tumling, is not for my humor. What a filthy throte has that Oyster wife, I thinke twill echo in my braue panne this houre. This is the raging streete of our cries, ile out walke is with all the speede I can.
            Hetherto haue I met with neuer an honest man, well ile burne out my candles-end, and then make an ende and get me home. So, that is good to begin with all: Had your street neuer a Knaue to encounter my first entrance but Discord? Malum Omen, Mulcum Omen, This is hee that sets Countries and Kingdomes together by the eares, breedes Citties mutunes, and domesticall contetions, Prince against Prince, Nation against Notion, Kindred, Neighbour, Friend all at variance.

This is he that calles Peace with her palme free, idle huswife, and soundes defiance throughout the whole world: you are wrong'd (sayes hee) put not vp such a vile indignitie: this disgrace no man-hood can indure, your valour and reputation is in state of preiudice, tis wounded by such a one, and you cannot in any wise put it vp for the whole world takes notice of it, and all men will censure you
            This is the rascall that made me fall out with Plato, call him proude fellow, and trample vpon his bed, because it was somewhat handsomer and better deckt then mine. In all his life-time, (and ile assure you tis an old, gray, leane, dry, rotten-bon'd villaine) did hée neuer showe chéerefull countenance but at the sight of some mischiefe: hee would rather bite his tongue thorow, then bid any man good morrow. So, so, now it workes, hee's got amongst a crue of scoldling Fishwiues, off goes her head-tyre, haue at tothers throate, to her greene Waste-coate: why now it workes like waxe.
            Thrust in Cut-purse for there's good peniworths to bee had amongst them, the Trade is like to be quicke by and by, customers come apace, make a priiue s
                  •
               arch without a Constable, ile stay no longer with you, a rope tid you all. Now fie vpon thee s
                  •
               ouenly Knaue, when didst thou wash thy face? Heere's Sloth right in his kinde: the hat he weares all day, at euening becom
                  •
               h his night-cap his frieze gowne sconse, wherein hee in trenches himselfe is at least thirtie thousand strong: garter thy hose beast, garter thy hose, or will the Poxe indure no Garters?
            This fellow I remember comming to a sig-tree being so extreeme lasie that bee could not stretch his arme out to gather any, laide himselfe downe vpon his backe and gaping, cryed:

                  
                     
Sweet 
                        •
                     igs drop downe in yeelding wise
                  For Lazie will not let me rise.
               
            
            This is hee that riseth late, and goes earely to bed, vp to eate and downe to sleepe, scornes to labour, for he is as sti
                  ••
               e iointed as the Elephant, and rather then hee would indure halfe an houres labor, hee would willingly choose a whole houres hanging. I know no vse in the world for him, except to keepe the citie bread from moulding, and the towne liquor from sowring.
            This is he, that lying at ease vpon his backe, where: a Cart was to passe, intreated the Carman to draw easie ouer him, for he could not rise yet, till his lasie fit was past this is he that could rather be lowsie then indure to haue his shirt washed, and had rather goe to bed in hoose and shooes, then stoope to pull them off. Hee is fitted with a wife euen pat of his owne humor, for tother day heating broth for her husbands breakfast, the Cat cri'd new in the porridge pot: Wife (said he) take out poore Puise alas how came shee there? With that shee tooke out the Cat by the eare, and stroking off the Porredge from her into the pot, they two wen louingly to breakfast with it.
            A shame take them both for filthy companions. for their broth is abominable: who, then wee shall neuer haue done: heeres hell broke loose, swarming together. Derision, he goes before and scoffes euery man hee meets doost laugh at my Lanthorne, knaue, because I vse Candle-light by day? Why villaine tis to seeke such as 
                  •
               on'le neuer be: Honest men.
            
               Violence he walkes with him, heel'e do iniurie to his owne Father (if he can) all that he weares on his backe and all that hee puts in his belly, is got by oporesion, wrong and crueltie: he cares not how hee gets it, so hee gets it, nor from whence he take it, so he haue it.
            
               Ingratitude makes one in their Consort, and inhueman

and vnciuill sauage, if a man should doe him a thousand good turnes in a day, he would neuers giue a thousand good wordes in a yeare for them.
            
               Impatience is a nother of their sraternitie: a raging knaue, an vnquiet turbulent rogue, hée'le allow time for nothing, al's at a minnits warning that he calls for, or hée'le rage, raile, curse and sweare, that a wiseman would not for ten pound be within ten myles of him.
            Who's the other hold vp thy head knaue: O tis Dulnes, the most notorious blook-head that euer p
                  •
               st: instruct him till your tongue ake he has no eares for you: theres nothing in him but the 
                  •
               sses vertue, thats dull melancholy: how l
                  •
               mpish a lookes▪ out rascalles out: Now a murraine take you all, I did ne
                  •
               er make a worse dayes worke in my life then I haue done to day: heere's a Cittie well blest, is well prouided I wa
                  •
               rant you If a man should neede a honest-mans help, where should he 
                  •
               ind him? Well, farewell Athens I and my Tubbe scornes thee and thy Citizens.
            
               
                  Diogenes lost labour.
                  
                  
                     PHilosopher, thy labour is in vaine,
                  Put out thy candle get thee home againe,
                  I
                        •
                      company of honest men thou lacke,
                  They are so scarce thou must alone go backe,
                  But if thou please to take some knaues along,
                  Giue but a beck and store will stock and throng.
                  He that did vomit out hie house and land,
                  Euen with a wincke will ready come to hand.
                  And he of whome thou didst ten shillings craue
                  As thinking ne
                        •
                     e againe his almes to haue,
                  
                     
Because he was prodigall in waste,
                  And to vndoe him-selfe made wondrous haste.
                  If thou hast roome to stoe him in thy Tunne,
                  He will be ready both to goe and runne,
                  Or those same drunken fidlers, thou didst finde
                  A tunening wood, when they themselues were blinde
                  Whom thou didst with thy staffe belabour wel:
                  Thei'l sing about the Tub where thou dost dwell.
                  All those that were presented to thy sight,
                  When thou sought'st honest men by Candle-light,
                  Make a step back, they in the Cittie be
                  With many hundreds which thou didst not sée.
                  Houses of Rascalls▪ shops euen full of knaues,
                  Tauarne and Ale-house fild with druken slaues.
                  Your Ordinaries and your common Innes.
                  Are whole sale war-houses of common sinnes.
                  Into a baudie house thou didst not looke,
                  Nor any notice of their capering tooke.
                  Bawds with their puncks, and Panders wt their straps,
                  Whores with their feathers in their veluet caps,
                  Those Sallamanders that doe bathe in fire.
                  And make a trade of burning lusts desire.
                  That doe salute them whom they entertaine,
                  With A pox take you till we meete againe
                  
                  Nor those which dayly Nouices entice,
                  To lend them mony vpon on cheating dice.
                  And in the bowling-allies r
                        ••
                     ke with betting.
                  By three, and foure to one most basely getting
                  All these vnséene appeare not to thy face,
                  With many a Cut-purse in the market place,
                  That searches pockets being siluer linde,
                  If Countersets about men he can finde.
                  And hath Commission for it so to deale
                  Under the hang-mans warrant, hand and seale
                  
                     
Innumerable such I could repeate,
                  That vse the craft of Coney▪catch and cheate,
                  The Citties vermin, worse then Rats and Mice:
                  But leaue the Actors, to reward of vice:
                  He that reproues it, showes a destation,
                  He that corrects it, workes a reformation,
                  Who doe more wrongs and iniuries abide,
                  Then honest men that best are qualified?
                  They that doe offer least abuse to any,
                  Must be prepared for induring many.
                  But heres the comfort that the vertuous finde
                  Their Hell is first, their heauen is behinde.
               
               
                  Diogenes Morrall
                  A Cock stood crowing proud,
                  Fast by a Riuer side,
                  A Goose in water hist at him
                  And did him much deride:
                  The Cock in choller grew,
                  Uowing by him that made him,
                  That he would fiight with that base goose,
                  Though all his Hennes disswade him,
                  Come but a shore quoth he,
                  White liuerif thou dare,
                  And thou shalt see a bloody day,
                  Thy throate shall soone be bare,
                  Base crauen said the goose,
                  I scorne to beare the minde,
                  To come a shore amongst a crew
                  Of scraping dunghill kinde?
                  Thy Hennes will back thee there,
                  Come hether chaunting slaue,
                  
                     
And in the water hand to hand,
                  A combat we will haue
                  Heer's none to interrupt,
                  I chalenge thee come heere.
                  If there be valour in thy combe,
                  Why let it now appeere.
                  Enter the watry field,
                  Ile spoile thy crowing quight:
                  Why dost not come? oh now I see
                  Thou hast no heart to sight.
                  With that the Cocke replide,
                  There was no want in him:
                  But sure the wa
                        •
                     er was so bad,
                  It would not 
                        •
                     et him 
                        •
                     wi
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Morrall
                  IThappens alwaies thus,
                  When cowards doe contend:
                  With wrangling wordes they doe begin,
                  And with those weapons end.
                  Nothing but vau
                        •
                     ts are vsd'd,
                  Till triall should be made:
                  And when they come to action,
                  Each of other are affraid.
                  Then for to keepe Skines whole,
                  It is a common vse:
                  To enter in some dranken league,
                  Or make a cowards scuse.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A Great assembly met of Mice,
                  Who with themselues did take aduice,
                  What plot by policie to shape,
                  Now they the bloody Cats might scape
                  At length, a graue and auntient mouse,
                  (Be like the wisest in the house)
                  Gaue counsell (which they all lik'd well)
                  That eu'ry Cat should weare a Bell:
                  For so (quoth he) we shall them heare,
                  And flie the danger which we feare,
                  If we but heare a Bell to ting,
                  At eating chéese, or any thing,
                  When wee are busie with the nippe,
                  Into a hole wée straight may skippe
                  This aboue all they liked best:
                  But quoth one mouse vnto the rest,
                  Which of vs all dares be so stout,
                  To hang the Bel Cats Necks about,
                  If héere be any let him speake:
                  Then all replide we are to weake.
                  The stoutest Mouse, and tallest Rat,
                  Doe tremble at a grim-fac'st Cat.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  THus fares it with the weake,
                  Whome mightie men doe wrong
                  They by complaint may wish redresse.
                  But none of force so strong,
                  To worke their owne content:
                  For euery one doth feare,
                  Where cru
                        •
                     ltie doth make abode,
                  To come in presence there.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THe Owle being wearie of the night,
                  would progresse in the Sunn
                  To sée the little birds delight,
                  And what by them was done.
                  But comming to a stately groue.
                  A dornd with gallant greene
                  where yeares proud Summer season stroue,
                  Most beautious to be seene
                  He lights no sooner on a tree,
                  That Summers liuerie weares:
                  But all the little birdes that be
                  Were flock'd about his eares.
                  Such wondring and such noise they kept,
                  Such chirping and such péeping:
                  The Owle for anger could haue wept,
                  Had not shame hindred wéeping
                  At lengh he made a solemne vow.
                  And thus vnto them speake:
                  You haue your time of pleasure now,
                  An Owle of me to make.
                  But ere to morrow light appeare,
                  In dawning of the East,
                  Fiue hundred of you that are héere,
                  I will dispatch at least.
                  If that I crush you not most rare,
                  Why then Ioue let me die:
                  A Titimouse I will not spare,
                  Nor the least Wren doth flie.
                  And so at night when all was hash,
                  The Owle with furious minde:
                  Didst search and prye in euerie bush.
                  With sight when they were blinde.
                  He rent their flesh and bones did breake
                  Their Feathers flew in th'are:
                  
                     
And cruellie with bloodie beake
                  Those little creatures teare.
                  Now am I well reuengd (quoth he)
                  For that which you haue done:
                  And quitted all my wrongs by Moone
                  Were offered in the Sunne.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  GAiust mightie ones, the weake of strength
                  May not themselues oppose:
                  For if they doe, t'will proue at length,
                  To wall the weakest goes
                  The little shrubs must not contend,
                  Against the taller trees:
                  Nor meaner sort seeke to offend,
                  Their betters in degrees
                  For though amongst their owne consorts
                  Superiors they deride:
                  And wrong them much by false reports,
                  At length, Time turnes the Tide.
                  There comes a change, the wills they wrought
                  In selfe conceit thought good:
                  May be in the'nd too deerely bought,
                  Euen with the price of blood.
               
            
            
               
                  ACobler kept a scuruie Crowe,
                  A Bird of basest kinde,
                  And paines inough he did bestowe,
                  To worke her to his minde.
                  At length he taught her verie well,
                  
                     
To speake out very loude:
                  
                     God saue the King and troth to tell,
                  The Cobler then grewe prowde.
                  She was to good to hop about
                  Upon his ould-shooe stall;
                  But he vnto the Court would stout,
                  His bird should put downe all
                  Their painted parrats: So he went
                  To Caesar with lack-daw,
                  
                  And said to him, he did present
                  Best bird that ere he saw.
                  The Monarch gratious mind did shewe
                  For Coblers poore good will:
                  And made a Courtier of the Crowe,
                  Where he remain'd, vntill
                  He standing in a windowe, spide
                  His fellowes flie along:
                  And knewe the language which they cryed,
                  Was his one Mother song.
                  Away goes he the way they went,
                  And altogether flie,
                  A poore dead Horse to teare and rent
                  That in a ditch did lie.
                  When they had shar'd him to the bone
                  Not a crowes mouthfull left:
                  To a Corne-field they flye each one
                  And there they fall to theft.
                  This life the Coblers Crowe did chuse,
                  Pick's liuing out of strawe:
                  And courtly dyet did refuse
                  Euen like a foolish Dawe
                  
               
               
                  
                  Morrall
                  HEE that from basenes doth deriue,
                  The roote of his descent:
                  And by preferment chance to thriue,
                  The way that Iack-dawe went
                  Where in Court or Common-wealthe
                  In Cittie and in towne
                  How ere he pledge good f
                        •
                     rtunes health,
                  Heele liue and die a clowne.
                  Dawes will be dawes, though grac'd in Court,
                  Crowes will to carraine still,
                  Like euer vnto like resort
                  The bad imbrace the ill,
                  And though euen from a Coblers wall,
                  He purchase land what then,
                  With Coblers heel'e conuerse with all
                  Rather then better men.
               
            
            
               
                  The Lyon in an humor once
                  as with his pleasure stood,
                  Commaunded that on paine of death,
                  Horne beastes should voide the wood.
                  Not any one to tarry there,
                  That had an armed head,
                  This was no sooner publish'd
                  But many hundreds fled,
                  The Heart the Bucke the Vnicorne,
                  
                  Ramme, Bull, and Goate consent,
                  With haste post-hast to runne away,
                  The 
                        ••
                     ngers to preuent.
                  
                     
With this same crew of Horned kinde
                  That were perplexed so,
                  A beast consorts, vpon whose head,
                  Onely a Wen did grow.
                  The Fox met him, and said thou foole,
                  Why whether dost thou runne?
                  Marry (quoth hee) to saue my life,
                  Hear'st thou not what is done?
                  Horne creatures all haue banishment,
                  And must auoide the place,
                  For they are charg'd vpon their liues,
                  Euen by the Lyons grace.
                  True (saide the Fox) I knowe it well,
                  But what is that to thée
                        •
                     
                  
                  Thou hast no Horne thy wen is flesh,
                  Tis euident to sée
                  I graunt quoth hée) 
                        •
                     is so indéed,
                  Yet nere the lesse Ile fly
                  For if't be taken for a horne,
                  Pray in what case am I?
                  Sure (saide the Fox) it'stwisely done,
                  I blame thée not in this,
                  For many wrongs are dayly wrought
                  By taking things a misse.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  Wise men will euer doubt the worst,
                  in that they take in hand,
                  And seeke that free from all suspect,
                  Then may securely stand,
                  Remoouing euery least offence,
                  That may a danger b
                        •
                     eede
                  
                     
For when a man is in the pit,
                  It is to late, take heede.
                  If mightie men doe censure wrong,
                  How should the weake resist?
                  It is in vaine to contend with him,
                  That can doe what he list:
                  The bell and most reposed life,
                  That any man can finde,
                  Is this; to keepe a conscience free,
                  From spot
                        •
                     ed guiltie minde
               
            
            
               
                  A Sauage creature chaunc'd to come▪
                  
                  Where 
                        〈◊〉
                      people dwelt,
                  Whom they did kindly entertaine,
                  And curteous with him delt:
                  They fed him with their choisest fare,
                  To make his we
                        •
                     come knowne,
                  And diuers waies their humaine loue
                  Was to the wilde-man showne:
                  At length (the weather being colde)
                  One of them blew his nailes,
                  The Sauage ask'd why hée did so?
                  And what hi
                        •
                      fingers ailes:
                  Marry (quath he) I make them warme
                  That are both cold and numme,
                  And so they set them downe to boorde
                  For supper time was come,
                  The man that blew his nailes before,
                  Upon his broth did blow:
                  Friend, saies ye Sauage what meanes this,
                  I préethée let me know?
                  My broth (saide he is ouer hot,
                  And I doe coole it thus
                  
                     
Farewell (quoth hee) this deed of thine,
                  For euer parteth vs.
                  Hast thou a breath blowes hot and colde,
                  Euen at thy wish and will?
                  I am not for thy company,
                  Pray keepe thy Supper still.
                  And heate thy hands, and coole thy broth,
                  As I haue seene thee doe,
                  Such double dealers as thy selfe,
                  I haue no minde vnto,
                  But will retire vnto the woods,
                  Where I to-fore haue bin,
                  Resoluing euery double tongue
                  Hath hollow heart within.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  A Heedefull care wee ought to haue
                  When wee doe frends elect,
                  The pleasing 
                        •
                     est
                        •
                     ure and good wordes
                  Wee are not to respect,
                  For curteous carriage oftentimes,
                  May haue an ill intent:
                  And gratious wordes may gracelesse prooue,
                  Without the hearts consent▪
                  
                  Let all a voide a double tongue,
                  For in i
                        •
                      there's no trust,
                  And banish such the company,
                  Of honest men meane iust:
                  A counter
                        •
                     ei
                        •
                     s societie,
                  Is neuer free from danger,
                  And that man liues most happie life,
                  Can liue to such a stranger.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  VVHen winters rage and cruell stormes,
                  Of euery pleasant tree,
                  Had made the bowes sta
                        •
                     ke naken all,
                  As bare as bare might bee,
                  And not a slower left in fielde,
                  Nor gréene on bush or bryer:
                  But all was robd in piteous plight,
                  Of Summers rich a tire,
                  The Grasse hopper in great distresse,
                  Unto the Ant did come
                  And saide deere friend I pine for foode,
                  I prethee giue me some.
                  Thou art not in extreames with me,
                  I know thine euer-care
                  For winters want, hard and distrsse,
                  In summer doth prepare,
                  Know'st thou my care reply'd the Ant?
                  And doest thou like it well?
                  Wherefore prouidest not thou the like?
                  Pray thee Grass hopper tell?
                  Marty (said hee) the Summer time,
                  I pleasantly doe passe,
                  And sing out most merily,
                  In the delightfull grasse:
                  I take no care for time to come,
                  My minde is on my song,
                  I thinke the glorious Sunn-shine daies,
                  Are euerlasting long.
                  When thou a
                        •
                     t hording vp thy foods,
                  Against these hungry daies,
                  Inclined vnto prouidence,
                  Pleasure I onely praise,
                  This is the cause I come to thee
                  To help me with thy store:
                  
                     
Thou art deceiu'd friend said the Ant,
                  I labourd not therfore.
                  Twa's not for you I did prouide:
                  With tedious toile-some pai
                        •
                     es:
                  But that my selfe of labours past
                  Migh haue the future gaines.
                  Such idle ones must buy their witt,
                  Tis best when déerely bought:
                  And note this lesson to your shame:
                  Which by the Ant is taught.
                  If Summer he your winning time,
                  When you doe merry make:
                  Let winter be your wéeping time,
                  When you must pennance take.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  Neglect not time, for pretious time,
                  Is not at thy comaund.
                  But in thy youth and able streng
                        ••
                     ,
                  Giue proidence thy hand.
                  Repose not trust in others help,
                  For when misfortun's fall,
                  Thou maiest complaine in want
                  But friends will vanish all,
                  Theile heap reproofe vpon thy head,
                  And tell thy follies past:
                  And all thy actes of neglygence,
                  Euen in thy teeth will cast.
                  Thou might'st haue got, thou might'st haue gain'd
                  And liueed like a man:
                  Thus will they speake, filling thy soule,
                  With 
                        •
                     x 
                        ••
                     ame p
                        •
                     ssion th
                        •
                     n:
                  
                     
Preuent this foolish after-wit,
                  That comes when t'is to late:
                  And trust not ouer much to frends,
                  To help thy hard estate.
                  Make youth the summer of thy life,
                  And therein loyter not:
                  And thinke the Winter of olde age
                  Will spend what summer got
               
            
            
               
                  A Lustie begger that was blinde.
                  But very strong of lime:
                  Agreed with one was lame of legges'
                  That he would carrie him.
                  An other was to guide the way,
                  (For he had perfect sight:)
                  Upon condition, all they got,
                  Should still be shar'd at night.
                  So as they chaunc'd to passe along.
                  The Cripple that had eyes,
                  Sitting vppon the blinde mans backe,
                  On ground an Oyster spies.
                  Stoope take that Oyster vp (quoth hée)
                  Which at thy féete lies there:
                  And so he did and put it in,
                  The scrip which he did weare.
                  But going on a little way,
                  Saies Cripple, to the blinde:
                  Giue me the Oyster thou tookst vp,
                  I haue thereto a minde
                  Not so said tother by your leaue.
                  In vaine you doe intreat it:
                  For sure I kéepe it for my selfe,
                  And doe intend to eate it.
                  
                     
Ile haue it sir the Cripple swore,
                  Who spide it, thou or I?
                  If that I had not séene, and spok,
                  Thou wouldst haue passed by.
                  It is no matter saide the blinde,
                  Thou know'st it might haue lyen,
                  Had I not stoopt and tooke it vp,
                  Therefore it shall be mine.
                  And so they hotly fell at wordes,
                  And out in choller brake,
                  With thou lame rogue, and thou blind knaue
                  Not caring what they spake,
                  At lengh it happened one came by,
                  And heard them thus contend,
                  And did intreat them both, that hée,
                  Might this their discord end.
                  They yéeld and say it shall be so,
                  Then hée inquiring all,
                  Did heare their league, and how about
                  An Oister they did brall.
                  Saide hée, my maisters let me s
                        •
                     e,
                  This Oyster makes such strife,
                  The blindeman foorth with gaue it him,
                  UUho present drew his knife,
                  And opening it, eat vp the same,
                  Giuing them each a shell
                  And said good fellowes now be friendes,
                  I haue your fish farewell
                  The beggers both deluded thus,
                  At their owne folly smilde
                  And said one subtill craftie knaue,
                  Had two poore fooles beguilde,
               
               
                  
                  Morrall
                  VVhen men for trifles will contend,
                  And vainely disagret,
                  That o
                        •
                     t for nothing friend and friend
                  At Daggers drawing be.
                  When no discretion there is vsce,
                  To qualifie offence:
                  But reason is by will abus'd,
                  And anger doth incense.
                  When some in furie seeke there wi
                        •
                     h,
                  And some in mallice swelles,
                  Perhaps some Lawyer takes the fish,
                  And leaues his chence shell,
                  Then when theire folly once appeares,
                  They ouerlate complaine:
                  And wish the wit of fore-gon yeares
                  Were now to buy a gaine.
               
            
            
               
                  WIthin a groue a gallant groue,
                  That wore greene Summers suite,
                  An Oxe an Asse an Ape, a Fox
                  Each other kind s
                        •
                     lute.
                  And louingly like friends embrace,
                  And much good manners vse:
                  At length saies th' Oxe vnto the Asse,
                  I pray thee friend what newes?
                  The Asse look'd sad and thus replied,
                  No newes at all (quoth he)
                  But I growe euer discontent.
                  When I doe meete with thee,
                  
                     
The Dxe look'd strange, and stepping back:
                  Quoth hee deere neighbour Asse.
                  Haue I wrong'd thee in all my life,
                  Mouthfull of Hay or grasse?
                  Assure thy selfe if that I had,
                  T'would greeue me very much:
                  No kind bedfellow sai
                        •
                     e the Asse,
                  My meaning is not such.
                  On Iupiter I doe complaine,
                  Tis he wrongs me alone:
                  In arming thee with those large hornes:
                  And I poore wretch haue none.
                  Thou wearst two weahons on thy head,
                  Thy body to defend,
                  Against the stoutest dogge that barkes,
                  Thou bouldly dar'st contend.
                  When I haue nothing but my skinne,
                  With two long foolish eares.
                  And not the basest goose that liues,
                  My hate or furie feares,
                  This makes me sad, and dull, and slowe,
                  And of a heauie pace?
                  When eu'ry scuruie shephards curre,
                  Doth braue me to my face,
                  Sure quoth the ape, as then art greeu'd,
                  So I hard dealing finde;
                  Looke on the Fox, and looke one me,
                  Pray view vs well behinde.
                  And thou wilt swe
                        •
                     re, I know thou wilf,
                  Except thy eye-sight failes:
                  That nature lack'd a paire of eyes,
                  When shee made both our tailes,
                  I wonder what her reason was,
                  To alter thus our shapes?
                  
                     
There's not a Fox but hath a taile,
                  Would serue a dozen apes,
                  Yet wée thou séest goe bare-arst all,
                  For each man to deride:
                  I tel thée brother Asse I blush,
                  To sée my owne backside,
                  I must indure a thousand iestes,
                  A thousand scoffes and scornes,
                  Nature deales bad with me for taile,
                  And hard with thée for hornes.
                  With this the ground began to stirre,
                  And forth a little hole.
                  A créeping 
                        •
                     orleg'd creature came,
                  A thing is ca
                        •
                     d a Mole,
                  Quoth he my maister I haue hard:
                  What faults you two do sinde:
                  But Tailes and Hornes pray looke on mee
                  By nature formed blinde:
                  You haue no cause thus to comeplaine,
                  Of your, and your defect,
                  Nor vse dame Nature hard with wordes,
                  If me you doe respect,
                  The thing for which you both comeplaine,
                  Are vnto me denide:
                  And that with patience I endure,
                  And more am blind beside.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  WE ought complaine, repine and g
                        •
                     udg,
                  at our dissikt estate:
                  and deeme our selues (our selues not pleas'd)
                  
                     
                        •
                      obe vnfortunate
                  
                     
None mark'd with more extreame then we,
                  None plung'd in sorrow so:
                  When not by thousand parts of want,
                  Our neighbours griefe
                        •
                      we know.
                  M
                        •
                     st men that haue sufficiencie,
                  To serue for natu
                        ••
                     s neede:
                  Do
                        •
                      wrong the god of 
                        •
                     ature,
                  And vn
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ful
                        •
                     y pr
                        •
                     ceede,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  When thousand
                        •
                      wanting what they haue▪
                  
                  Contented doe remaine.
               
            
            
               
                  TH'A
                        •
                     tr
                        •
                      nomore by night did walke,
                  (He and his globe together)
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      busines with the star
                        •
                     es,
                  About the next yeares wheather.
                  He did examine all the 
                        •
                     k
                        •
                     e,
                  For 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     pests wind and raine:
                  And what deseases were to come,
                  The p
                        •
                     anets tolde him plame,
                  The disposition of the Sprlng,
                  The state of Summer tide▪
                  
                  The Naruest fruite and Winter fr
                        •
                     st,
                  Most p
                        •
                     am
                        •
                     ly he espide,
                  He did conferre with Iupiter,
                  
                     Satu
                           •
                        ne and al the Seau
                           •
                        n;
                  
                  And grew exceeding buisie with
                  Twelue houses of the heauen.
                  But while with sta
                        •
                     ing eyes he lookes,
                  What newes the star
                        •
                     es could tell:
                  Upon the sodaine downe he comes
                  Headlong into a well.
                  
                     
Helpe, helpe, he calls, or else I drowne,
                  Oh helpe, hee still did cry:
                  Untill it chaunc'd some passengers,
                  Came very early by.
                  And hearing him, did helpe him out,
                  In a drownd mouses case:
                  Then question'd with him how he come,
                  In that same colde wet place?
                  Marry (quoth hee) I look'd on hie,
                  Not thinking of the ground:
                  And tumbled in this scuruy Well,
                  Where I had like bin drownd.
                  Which when they hard and knew his art
                  They smyling said. Friend straunger:
                  Willt thou fore-tell things are to come,
                  And knowest not present danger?
                  Hast thou an eye for heauen, and
                  For earth so little wit
                        •
                     
                  
                  That while thou gazest after starres,
                  To tumble in a pit?
                  Wilt thou tell looking ore thy head)
                  What weather it will be?
                  And deadly danger at thy foote,
                  Thou hast no eyes to see:
                  Wee giue no credit to thy Art,
                  Nor doe esteeme thee wise?
                  To tumble headlong in a well,
                  With gazing in the skies.
               
               
                  Morrall
                  Many with this Astronomer,
                  Greate knowledge will pretend:
                  
                     
Those gifts they haue, their haughtie pride
                  Will to the skies commend.
                  Their lookes must be a spiring,
                  For ampition aimes on hie,
                  Fortunes aduancements makes them dreame,
                  Of Castles in the skie:
                  But while bewitching vanitie,
                  Deludes them with renowne:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      sodaine altera
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     n, with
                  A vengance pulles them downe.
                  And when the meanest sort of men,
                  Whom they do abiect call:
                  Will stand in scorne; and point them out.
                  And censure of there fall.
               
            
            
               
                  GReat Alexander came to see,
                  My Mansian being a tunne:
                  And stood directly opposite,
                  Betweene me, and the Sunne
                  Morrow (quoth he) Philosopher,
                  I yeeld thee time of day:
                  Marry (said I then Emperor,
                  I prethee stand away,
                  For thou depriuest me of that,
                  Thy power hath not to giue:
                  Nor all thy mightie fellow kings,
                  That on earths foote-ball liue:
                  Stand backe I say and rob me not
                  To wrong me in my right
                  The Sunne would shine vpon me,
                  But thou tak'st away his light.
                  With this he stept aside from me,
                  And 
                        〈◊〉
                      did 
                        〈…〉
                     :
                  
                     
That I would be a Courtier,
                  For hee like'd my conceit,
                  Ile haue thy house brought 
                        •
                     ie my court,
                  I like thy 
                        •
                     aine so well:
                  A neighbour verie neare to me,
                  I meane to haue thee dwell
                  If thou bestow that paine (quoth I)
                  Pray whe
                        •
                      the worke is done,
                  Re
                        ••
                     ooue thy Court and carry that
                  A good way from my Tunne.
                  I care not for thy neighbour-hood,
                  Thy Teasure, trash I hold:
                  I doe esteeme my 
                        •
                     anterne horne,
                  As much as all thy golde.
                  The costlyest cheere that earth affords,
                  (Take Sea and a
                        •
                     re to boote)
                  I make far
                        •
                     e lesse account theereof,
                  Then of a carret roote,
                  For all the robes vpon thy backe.
                  So costly, rich, and strange:
                  This pla
                        ••
                     e poore Gowne, thou seest me weare,
                  Thred bare I will not change
                  For all the pearle and precious stones,
                  That is at thy commaund:
                  I will not giue this little Booke,
                  That heere is in my hand,
                  For all the c
                        •
                     ttles, countries, Townes,
                  And kingdomes tho
                        •
                      hast got:
                  I will not giue th
                        •
                     s e
                        ••
                     tie Tunn,
                  For I regard them not:
                  Nay 
                        ••
                      thou would
                        •
                     t exchange thy crown
                        •
                     ,
                  For this some cap I weare:
                  Or giue thy 
                        ••
                     epter for my Saffe,
                  I would do't I 
                        •
                     weare.
                  
                     
Doest sée this t
                        •
                     b? I tell thée man,
                  It is my comman wealth:
                  Doest see you water? tis the Wine,
                  Doth keepe me sound in health.
                  Doest see these rootes that grow about,
                  The place of my abode?
                  These are the dainties which I eate,
                  My back'd, my roste my sod,
                  Doest sée my simple three-foote stoole?
                  It is my chaire of state▪
                  
                  Doest see my poore plaine wooden dish;
                  It is my siluer plate,
                  Do'st see my wardrope then beholde,
                  This patched seame-rent gowne:
                  Doest see you mat and bull rushes?
                  Why th'are my bed of downe.
                  Thou count'st me poore and beggerly,
                  Alas good carefull King,
                  When thou art often sighing sad,
                  I cheerefull sit and sing.
                  Content dwelles not in pallaces,
                  And Courts of mightie men,
                  For if it did, assure thy selfe,
                  I would turne Courtier then.
                  No Alexander the' are deceiu
                        •
                     d,
                  To cencure of me so:
                  That I my sweete contented life,
                  (For troubles) will forgoe:
                  Of a reposed life tis I,
                  Can make a iust report:
                  That haue more vertues in my Tun,
                  Then is in all thy Court.
                  For what yeelds that but vanities
                  Ambition, Enuy, Pride
                  
                     
Oppression, wrongs and crueltie.
                  Nay euery thing beside.
                  These are not for my company,
                  Ile rather dwell thus odds.
                  
                     Who euer walkes amongst sharp thornes,
                  
                  
                     Had neede to goe well shode.
                  
                  On mightie men I cannot fawne,
                  Let 
                        •
                     latterie crouch and eréepe:
                  The world is naught, and that man's wise,
                  Least league with it doth kéepe.
                  A crowne is heauie wearing, King,
                  It makes thy head to ake,
                  Great Alexander, great accounts
                  Thy greatnesse hath to make.
                  Who séeketh, rest and for the same
                  Doth to thy court repayre:
                  Is wise like him that in an Egge
                  Doth séeke to finde a Hare.
                  If thou hadst all the worlde thine owne,
                  That world would not suffice:
                  Thou art an Egle (mightie man)
                  And Egles catch no flies.
                  I like thée for thy patience well,
                  Which thou doest shew, to beare me:
                  Ilk teach thée somewhat for thy paines,
                  Draws but a little neare me:
                  Some honest prouerbes that I haue,
                  Upon thée ile bestowe:
                  Thou didst not come so wise to me,
                  As thou art like to goe.
               
            
            
               
                  HE that performes not what the ought,
                  But doth the same neglect
                  Let him be sure not to receiue,
                  The thinge he doth expect.
               
               
                  
                  When once the tall and l
                        •
                     ftie Tree,
                  Vnto the ground doth fall:
                  Why euery peassont hath an Axe
                  To hew his b
                        •
                     ughes withall.
               
               
                  He that for vertue merrits well
                  And yet doth nothing clayme:
                  A double kind of recompence
                  Deserueth for the same.
               
               
                  Acquaint me but with whome thou goest,
                  And thy companions tell,
                  I will resolue thee what thou doest▪
                  
                  Whether ill done or well.
               
               
                  He knowes enough that knoweth nought,
                  If he can silence keepe:
                  The tongue oft makes the hart to sigh,
                  The 
                        •
                     yes to waile and weepe.
               
               
                  He takes the best and choy
                        •
                     -est course,
                  Of any man doth liue:
                  That takes good counsell, when his friend▪
                  
                  Doth that rich Iewell giue.
               
               
                  Good horse and bad, the Rider sayes,
                  Must both of them haue Spu
                        •
                     re
                        •
                     :
                  And he is sure to rise with Fleaes,
                  That lies to sleepe with cur
                        •
                     es.
               
               
                  He that more kindnes sheweth the
                        •
                     
                  
                  Then thou art vs'd vnto,
                  Eyther already hath deceiu'd,
                  Or shortly meanes to do.
               
               
                  
                  Birds of a feather and a kind,
                  Will still together flocke:
                  He'dneede be verie streight himselfe,
                  That doth the crooked mock.
               
               
                  I haue obserued diuers times,
                  Of all sorts olde and young▪
                  
                  That he which hath the leslet heart:
                  Hath still the bigger tongue.
               
               
                  He that's a bad and wicked man,
                  Appearing good to the' eye:
                  May doe thee many thou and wrongs,
                  Which thou can neuer spie,
               
               
                  In present want, deferre not him,
                  Which doth thy helpe requi
                        •
                     e:
                  The water that is farre off fetch'd
                  Quencheth not neighbours sire.
               
               
                  He that hath money at his will,
                  Meat, Drinke, and leasure takes:
                  But he that lackes, must mend his pace
                  Neede a good Foote-man make
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  He that the Office of a friend,
                  Vprightly doth respect:
                  Must firmely loue his friend profest,
                  With fault and with defect.
               
               
                  He that inioyes a white Horse, and
                  A faire and daintie wife:
                  Must needes finde often cause, by each
                  Of discontent and strife.
               
               
                  
                  Chuse thy companions of the good.
                  Or else conuerse with none:
                  Rather th
                        •
                     n ill accompained,
                  Far
                        •
                      better be alone,
               
               
                  Watch ouer wordes, for from the mouth,
                  There hath much euill spring,
                  Tis better stumble with thy feete,
                  Then stumble with thy tongue.
               
               
                  Not outward habit, vertue tis
                  That doth aduance thy fame:
                  The golden brinle betters not,
                  A lade that weares the same,
               
               
                  The greatest ioyes that euer were,
                  At lengh with sorrow meetes?
                  Taste hony with thy fingers end.
                  And surfet not on sweetes.
               
               
                  A Lyer can doe more then much,
                  Worke wonders by his lyes:
                  Turn
                        •
                      mountaines into mole-hills,
                  And Elephants to flies.
               
               
                  Children that were vnfortunate,
                  Their parents alwaies praise:
                  And attribute all vnthriftinesse,
                  Vnto their foregone daies.
               
               
                  When sicknes enters healths strong holde,
                  And life begins to yeelde.
                  Mans forte of flesh to parley comes,
                  And death must win the field.
               
               
                  
                  The flaterer before thy face,
                  With smiling lookes will stand:
                  Presenting hony in his mouth.
                  A Rasor in his hand.
               
               
                  The truly noble minded loues.
                  The base and seruile, feares:
                  Who euer tels a foole a tale,
                  Had neede to finde him eares.
               
               
                  To meddle much with idle things,
                  Would vexe a wise mans head:
                  Tis labour and a wearie worke,
                  To make a dog his bed.
               
               
                  The worst wheele euer of the Cart,
                  Doth yeelde the greatest noise,
                  Three women make a market, for
                  Tehy haue sufficient voice.
               
               
                  First leafe all fooles desire to learne
                  With stedfast fixed eyes:
                  In this, All other Idiots are,
                  And they exceeding wise.
               
               
                  When once the Lyon breathlesse lyes,
                  Whom all the forrest feard,
                  The very Hares presumpu
                        •
                     usly,
                  Will pull him by the beard.
               
               
                  Cease not to doe the good thou oughst,
                  Though inconuenience growe:
                  A wiseman will not Seede-time loose,
                  For seare of euery Crowe.
               
               
                  
                  One man can neuer doe so well,
                  But some man will him blame:
                  Tis vaine to seeke, please euery man,
                  
                     
                        •
                     oue cannot doe the some.
               
               
                  To him that is in miserie,
                  Doe not affliction adde:
                  With sorrow to 
                        •
                     oade sorrowes backe,
                  Is most extreamely bad.
               
               
                  Show me good fruite on euill tree.
                  Or Rose that growes on Thistle,
                  Ile vndertake at sight thereof.
                  To drinke to thee and whistle.
               
               
                  Censure what conscience restes in him,
                  That sweare he Iustice loues:
                  And yet doth pardon hurtfull Crowes,
                  To punish simple Doues.
               
               
                  Th-re's many that to aske might haue,
                  By their owne silence crost:
                  What charge is speech vnto thy tongue,
                  By asking pray whats lost;
               
               
                  He serues for nothing tha is iust,
                  And faithfull in his place:
                  Yet for his duetie well perform'd,
                  Is not a whit in grace.
               
               
                  He makes himselfe anothers slau
                        •
                     
                  
                  And feares doth vnder goe:
                  That vnto one being ignorant,
                  Doth his owne secrets show
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                  
                  And yet though yeares be so,
                  For one wise-man with hoary heyres,
                  Three dozen fooles I knowe.
               
            
            FINIS
         
      
   