
      
         
            
            
            HVMORS
LOOKING
Glaſse.
            
               LONDON,
Imprinted by Ed. Allde for VVilliam Ferebrand
and are to be ſold at his Shop in
the popes-head Pallace, right ouer againſt
the Tauerne-dore.
1608.
         
         
            
            
            To his verie Louing Friend-Maſter
George Lee.
            ESteemed friend, I pray thee take it kinde,
            That outward action beares an inward minde,
            What obiects heere theſe papers do deliuer,
            Beſtow the viewing of them for the giuer.
            I make thee a partaker of ſtrange ſights,
            Drawne antique works of humours vaine delights.
            A mirrour of the mad conceited ſhapes,
            Of this our ages giddy-headed apes,
            Theſe faſh'on mongers, ſelfe beſotted men
            Of kindred to the fowle that wore my pen,
            Are at an howers warning to appeare,
            And muſter in ſixe ſheetes of Paper heere.
            And this is all at this time I beſtow,
            To euidence a greater loue I owe.
            
               Yours SAMVEL ROWLANDS.
            
         
         
            
            Reader.
            AS many antique faces paſſe,
            From Barbers chaire vnto his glaſſe,
            There to behold their kinde of trim,
            And how they are reform'd by him,
            Or at Exchang where Marchants greete,
            Confuſion of the tongues do meete,
            As English, French, Italian, Dutch,
            
            
               Spanish, and Scot'sh, with diuers ſuch.
            So from the Preſſe theſe papers come
            To ſhow the humorous ſhapes of ſome.
            Heere are ſuch faces good and bad,
            As in a Barbers ſhop are had,
            And heere are tongues of diuers kindes,
            According to the ſpeakers mindes.
            Beholde their faſhions, heare their voice,
            And let diſcretion make thy choice.
            
               SAMVELL ROWLANDS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Epigram.
            SOme man that to contention is inclin'de,
            With any thing he ſees, a fault wil finde,
            As, that is not ſo good, the ſame's amiſſe,
            I haue no great affection vnto this.
            Now I proteſt I doe not like the ſame,
            This muſt be mended, that deſerueth blame,
            It were farre better ſuch a thing were out,
            This is obſcure, and that's as full of doubt.
            And much adoe, and many words are ſpent
            In finding out the path that humours went,
            And for direction to that Idle way
            Onely a buſie tongue bears all the ſway.
            The diſh that Aeſope did commend for beſt,
            Is now a daies in wonderfull requeſt,
            But if you finde fault on a certaine ground,
            Weele fall to mending when the fault is found,
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            PRa'y by your leaue, make moūſieur humors roome
            That oft hath walk'd about Duke Humphries tombe
            And ſat amongſt the Knights to ſee a play,
            And gone in's ſuite of Sattin eu'ry day,
            And had his hat diſplay abuſhie plume,
            And's verie beard deliuer forth perfume.
            But when was this'aske Frier Bacons head
            That anſwered Time is paſt, O time is fled▪
            
            Sattin and ſilke was pawned long agoe,
            And now in canuaſe, no knight can him knowe.
            His former ſtate, in darke obliuion ſteepes,
            Onely Paules Gallarie, that walke he keepes.
         
         
            Epigram.
            CRoſſe not my humor, with an ill plac'd worde,
            For if thou doeſt, behold my fatall ſworde:
            Do'ſt ſee my countenance begin looke red?
            Let that fore tell ther's furie in my hed.
            A little diſcontent will quickely heate it.
            Touch not my ſtake, thou wert as good to eate it,
            Theſe damned dice, how curſed they deuoure:
            I loſt ſome halfe ſcore pound in halfe an houre,
            
               
A bowle of wine, ſirha: you villaine, fill:
            Who drawes it Raſcall? call me hether Will.
            
            You Rogue, what ha'ſt to Supper for my dyet?
            Tel'ſt me of Butchers meate? knaue I defie it.
            Ile haue a banquet to enuite an Earle,
            A Phoenix boyld in broth diſtil'd in Pearle.
            Holde drie this leaſe, a candle quickly bring,
            Ile take one pipe to bed, none other thing.
            Thus with Tabacco he will ſup to night:
            Fleſh-meate is heauie, and his purſe is light.
         
         
            Epigram.
            TWo Gentlemen of hot and fierie ſprite,
            Tooke boate, and went vp Weſtward to goe fight
            Imbarked both, for Wenſ-worth they ſet ſaile,
            And there ariuing with a happie gaile,
            The Water-men diſcharged for their fare,
            Then to be parted, thus their mindes declare.
            Pray Ores (ſaid they) ſtay heere and come not nie,
            We goe to fight a little, but heere by.
            The Water-men with ſtaues did follow then,
            And cryd, oh holde your hands good Gentlemen,
            You know the danger of the law, forbeare:
            So they put weapons vp and fell to ſweare.
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            ONe of theſe Cuccold-making Queanes
            did graft her husbands head:
            who arm'd with anger, ſteele and horne
            would kill him ſtain'd his bed.
            And challeng'd him vnto the field,
            Vowing to haue his life,
            Where being met, ſirha (quoth he,)
            I doe ſuſpect my Wife
            Is ſcarce ſo honeſt as ſhe ſhould,
            You make of her ſome vſe:
            Indeed ſaid he I loue her well,
            Ile frame no falſe excuſe.
            O! d'ye confeſſe? by heauens (quoth he)
            Had'ſt thou dem'de thy guilt,
            This blade had gone into thy guts,
            Euen to the verie Hilt.
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            OCeaſion late was miniſtred for one to trie his friend,
            Ten pounds he did intreat him yt of all loue he would
            His caſe was an accurſed caſe, no comfort to be found, (lēd
            Vnles he friendly drew his purſe & bleſt him with tē poūd
            He did proteſt he had it not, making a ſolemne vow,
            He wāted means & money both, to do him pleaſure now.
            Thē ſir (quoth he) you know I haue a Gelding I loue wel,
            Neceſſitie it hath no law, I muſt my Gelding ſell,
            I haue bin offered twelue for him, with ten ile be cōtent,
            Well I will trie a friend (ſaid he,) it was his cheſt he ment.
            So fectch'd the money preſently, tother ſees Angels ſhine
            Now God amercy horſe (quoth he) thy credit's more then mine.
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            
               DIce diuing deepe into a Ruffians purſe,
               Leauing it nothing worth but ſtrings and leather:
               He preſently did fall to ſweare and curſe,
               That's life and money he would looſe together,
               Tooke of his hat, and ſwore, let me but ſee
               What Rogue dares ſay this ſame is blacke to me?
            
            
               Another loſt, and he did money lacke,
               And thus his furie in a heate reuiues:
               Where is that Rogue denies his hat is blacke?
               Ile fight with him, had he ten thouſand liues.
               Oh ſir (quoth he) in troth you come too late,
               Choller is paſt, my anger's out of date.
            
         
         
            Epigram.
            A Kinde of London-walker in a boote,
            (Not George a Horſe-backe, but a Gerge a foote,)
            On eu'ry day you meete him through the yeare,
            Fot's bootes and ſpurs, a horſe-man doth appeare.
            Was met with, by an odde conceited ſtranger,
            W
                  ••
                friendly told him that he walk'd in danger.
            
               
For Sir (in kindenes no way to offend you)
            There is a warrant foorth to apprehend you.
            Th'offence they ſay, you riding through thee ſtreete,
            Haue kil'd a Childe, vnder your Horſes feete.
            Sir I proteſt (quoth he) they doe me wrong,
            I haue not back'd a horſe, God knows how long,
            What ſlaues be theſe, they haue me falſe bely'd?
            Ile prooue this twelue-month I did neuer ride.
         
         
            Epigram.
            VVHat feather'd fowle is this that doth approach
            As if it were an Eſtredge in a Coach?
            Three yards of feather round about her hat,
            And in her hand a bable like to that:
            As full of Birdes attire, as Owle, or Gooſe,
            And like vnto her gowne, her ſelfe ſeemes looſe.
            Cri' ye mercie Ladie, lewdnes are you there?
            Light feather'd ſtuffe befits you beſt to weare.
         
         
            
            A deafe eare, in a iuſt cauſe.
            A Poore man came vnto a Iudge & ſhew'd his wronged state,
            Entreating him for Ieſus ſake to be compaſſionate,
            The wrōgs were great he did ſuſtaine, he had no help at al
            The Iudge ſat ſtil as if the man had ſpoken to the wall.
            With that came two rude fellows in, to haue a matter tride
            About an Aſſe, that one had let the other for to ride:
            Which Aſſe the owner found in field, as he by chance paſt
            And he that hired him a ſleepe did in the ſhadow lye.
            For which he would be ſatisfied, his beaſt was but to ride:
            And for the ſhadow of his Aſſe, he would be paid beſide.
            Great raging words and damned othes,
            theſe two aſſe-wrangles ſwore,
            Whē preſently the Iudge ſtart vp, that ſeem'd a ſleep before
            And heard ye follies willingly of theſe two ſottiſh men,
            But bad the poore man come againe, he had no leaſure thē.
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            A Iolly fellow Eſſex borne and bred,
            A Farmers Sonne, his Father being dead,
            T'expell his griefe and melancholly paſsions,
            Had vowd himſelfe to trauell and ſee faſhions.
            His great mindes obiect was no trifling toy,
            But to put downe the wandring Prince of Troy.
            Londons diſcouerie firſt he doth decide,
            His man muſt be his Pilot and his guide.
            Three miles he had not paſt, there he muſt ſit:
            He ask't if he were not neere London yet?
            His man replies good Sir your ſelfe beſturre,
            For we haue yet to goe ſixe times as farre.
            Alas I had rather ſtay at home and digge,
            I had not thought the worlde was halfe ſo bigge.
            Thus this great worthie comes backe (thoewith ſtrife)
            He neuer was fo farre in all his life.
            None of the ſeauen worthies: on his behalfe,
            Say, was not he a worthie▪ Eſſex Calfe?
         
         
            
            The Humors that haunt a Wife.
            A Gentleman a verie friend of mine,
            Hath a young wife and ſhe is monſtrous fine,
            Shee's of the new fantaſtique humor right,
            In her attire an angell of the light.
            Is ſhe an Angell? I: it may be well,
            Not of the light, ſhe is a light Angell.
            Forſooth his doore muſt ſuffer alteration,
            To entertaine her mightie huge Bom-faſhion,
            A hood's to baſe, a hat which ſhe doth male,
            With braueſt feathers in the Eſtridge tayle.
            She ſcornes to treade our former proud wiues traces.
            That put their glory in their on faire faces,
            In her conceit it is not faire enough,
            She muſt reforme it with her painters ſtuffe,
            And ſhe is neuer merry at the heart,
            Till ſhe be got into her leatherne Cart.
            Some halfe amile the Coach-man guides the raynes,
            Then home againe, birladie ſhe takes paines.
            My friend ſeeing what humors haunt a wife,
            If he were looſe would lead a ſingle life.
         
         
            
            A poore Mans pollicy.
            NExt I will tell you of a poore mans tricke,
            Which he did practiſe with a polliticke,
            This poore man had a Cow twas all his ſtocke,
            Which on the Commons fed: where Catell flocke,
            The other had a ſteere a wanton Beaſt,
            Which he did turne to feede amongſt the reſt.
            Which in proceſſe although I know not how,
            The rich mans Oxe did gore the poore mans Cow.
            The poore man heereat vexed waxed ſad,
            For it is all the liuing that he had,
            And he muſt looſe his liuing for a ſong,
            Alas he knew not how to right his wrong.
            He knew his enemie had pointes of law,
            To ſaue his purſe, fill his deuouring mawe,
            Yet thought the poore man how ſo it betide,
            Ile make him giue right ſentence on my ſide.
            Without delay vnto the Man he goes,
            And vnto him this fayned tale doth gloze,
            (Quoth he) my Cow which with your Oxe did feede,
            Hath kild your Oxe and I make knowne the deede.
            Why (quoth my Politique) thou ſhouldſt haue helpt it rather,
            Thou ſhalt pay for him if thou wert my father.
            
               
The courſe of law in no wiſe muſt be ſtayde,
            Leaſt I an cuill preſident be made.
            O Sir (quoth h
                  •
               ) I cry you mercy now,
            I did miſtake, your Oxe hath gorde my Cow:
            Conuict by reaſon he began to brawle,
            But was coutent to let his action fall.
            As why? (quoth he) thou lookſt vnto her well,
            Could I preuent the miſchiefe that befell?
            I haue more weightie cauſes now to trie,
            Might orecomes right without a reaſon why.
         
         
            Epigram.
            ONe of the damned crew that liues by drinke,
            And by Tobacco's ſtillified ſtink,
            Met with a Country man that dwelt at Hull:
            Thought he this peſant's fit to be my Gull.
            His firſt ſalute like to the French mans wipe,
            Wordes of encounter, pleaſe you take a pipe?
            The Countrie man amazed at this rabble,
            Knewe not his minde yet would be conformable.
            Well, in a petty Ale-houſe they enſconce
            His Gull muſt learne to drinke Tobacco once.
            
               
Indeede his purpoſe was to make a ieſt,
            How with Tobacco he the peaſant dreſt.
            Hee takes a whiffe, with arte into his head,
            The other ſtandeth ſtill aſtoniſhed.
            Till all his ſences he doth backe reuoake,
            Sees it aſcend much like Saint Katherins ſmoake.
            But this indeede made him the more admire,
            He ſaw the ſmoke: thought he his head's a fier,
            And to increaſe his feare he thought poore ſoule,
            His ſcarlet noſe had been a firie cole.
            Which circled round with ſmoak, ſeemed to him
            Like to ſome rotten brand that burneth dim.
            But to ſhew wiſdome in a deſperat caſe,
            He threw a Can of beere into his face,
            And like a man ſome furie did inſpire,
            Ran out out of doores for helpe to quench the fire.
            The Ruffin throwes away his Trinidado,
            Out comes huge oathes and then his ſhort poynado,
            But then the Beere ſo troubled his eyes,
            The countrieman was gone ere he could riſe,
            A fier to drie him he doth now require,
            Rather then water for to quench his fire.
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            COme my braue gallant come, vncaſe, vncaſe,
            Nere ſhall obliuion your great actes deface,
            He has been there where neuer man came yet,
            An vnknowne countrie, I, ile warrant it,
            Whence he could Ballace a good ſhip in holde,
            With Rubies, Saphiers, Diamonds and golde,
            Great Orient Pearles eſteem'd no more then moates,
            Sould by the pecke as chandlers meaſure oates,
            I meruaile then we haue no trade from thence:
            O tis too farre it will not beare expence,
            T'were far indeede, a good way from our mayne,
            If charges eate vp ſuch exceſsiue gaine,
            Well he can ſhew you ſome of Lybian grauell,
            O that there were another world to trauell,
            I heard him ſweare that hee (twas in his mirth)
            Had been in all the corners of the earth.
            
               
Let all his wonders be together ſtitcht,
            He threw the barre that great Alcides pitcht:
            But he that ſaw the Oceans fartheſt ſtrands,
            You poſe him if you aske where Douer ſtands.
            He has been vnder ground and hell did ſee,
            
               Aeneas nere durſt goe ſo farre as hee.
            For he has gone through Plutoes Regiment,
            Saw how the Fiendes doe Lyers there torment.
            And how they did in helles damnation frye,
            But who would thinke the Traueller would lye?
            To dine with Pluto he was made to tarrie,
            As kindly vs'd as at his Ordinarie.
            Hogſheades of wine drawne out into a Tub,
            Where he did drinke hand-ſmooth with Belzebub,
            
            And Proſerpine gaue him a goulden bow,
            Tis in his cheſt he cannot ſhew it now.
         
         
            
            Of one that couſned the Cut-purſe.
            ONe toulde a Drouer that beleeu'd it not,
            What booties at the playes the Cut-purſe got,
            But if twere ſo my Drouers wit was quicke,
            He vow'd to ſerue the Cut-purſe a new tricke.
            Next day vnto the play, pollicy hy'd,
            A bag of fortie ſhillings by his ſide,
            Which houlding faſt he taketh vp his ſtand,
            If ſtringes be cut his purſe is in his hand.
            A fine conceited Cut-purſe ſpying this,
            Lookt for no more, the for ſh
                  •
               llings his,
            Whilſt my fine Politique gazed about,
            The Cut-purſe feately tooke the bottom out.
            And cuts the ſtrings, good foole goe make a ieſt,
            This Diſmall day thy purſe was fairely bleſt.
            Houlde faſt good Noddy tis good to dreade the worſe,
            Your monie's gone, I pray you keepe your purſe.
            The play is done and foorth the foole doth goe,
            Being glad that he couſned the Cut-purſe ſoe.
            He thought to iybe how he the Cut-purſe dreſt,
            And memorize it for a famous ieſt.
            But putting in his hand it tan quite throw
            Daſh't the conceite, heele neuer ſpeake on't now,
            You that to playes haue ſuc
                  •
                delight to goe,
            The Cut-purſe cares not, ſtill deceiue him ſo.
         
         
            
            A drunken fray.
            
               DIcke met with Tom in faith it was their lot,
            Two honeſt Drunkars muſt goe drinke a pot,
            Twas but a pot, or ſay a little more,
            Or ſay a pot tha
                  •
               's filled eight times ore.
            But being drunke, and met well with the leeſe,
            They drinke to healthes deuoutly on their knees,
            
               Dicke drink, to Hall, to pledge him Tom relects,
            And ſcornes to doe it for ſome odde reſpects
            Wilt thou nor pledge him tha
                  •
               't a gill, a Scab,
            Wert with my man-hood thou deſerueſt a ſtab,
            But tis no matter drinke another bout,
            Weele intot'n field and there weele trie it out.
            Lets goe (ſaies Tom) no longer by this hand,
            Nay ſtay (quoth Dicke (lets ſee if we can ſtand.
            Then forth they goe after the drunken pace,
            Which God he knowes was with a reeling grace,
            
               Tom made his bargaine, thus with bonnie Dicke
            If it ſhould chance my foote or ſo ſhould ſl
                  •
               p,
            How wouldſt thou vſe me or after what Size,
            Wouldſt bare me ſhorter or wouldſt let me riſe.
            Nay God forbid our quarrells not ſo great,
            To kill thee on aduantage in my heat.
            
               
Tuſh we'le not fight for any hate or ſoe,
            But for meere loue that each to other owe.
            And for thy learning loe Ile ſhew a tricke,
            No ſooner ſpoke the worde but downe comes Dicke,
            Well now (quoth Tom) thy life hangs on my ſworde,
            If I were downe how wouldſt thou keepe thy worde?
            Why with theſe hilts I'de braine thee at a blow,
            Faith in my humor cut thy throate, or ſoe,
            But Tom he ſcorne to kill his conquered foe,
            Lets Dicke ariſe, and too't againe they goe.
            Dicke throwes downe Tom or rather Tom did fall,
            My hilts (quoth Dicke) ſhall braine thee like a maull,
            Is't ſo (quoth Tom) good faith what remedie,
            The Tower of Babell's fallen and ſo am I.
            But Dicke proceedes to giue the fatall wound,
            It miſt his throate, but run into the ground.
            But he ſuppoſing that the man was ſlaine,
            Straight fled his contrie, ſhip himſelfe for Spaine,
            Whilſt valiant Thomas dyed dronken deepe,
            Forgot his danger and fell faſt a ſleepe.
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            VVHat's he that ſtares as if he were afright;
            The fellowe ſure hath ſeene ſome dreadfull ſpright
            
            Maſſe rightly gueſt, why ſure I did diuine, 
            Hee's haunted with a Spirit feminine.
            In plaine termes thus, the Spirit that I meane,
            His martiall wife that notable curſt queane,
            No other weapons but her nailes or fiſt,
            Poore patient Idiot he dares not reſit,
            His neighbor once would borrow but his knife,
            Good neighbor ſtay (quoth he) ile aske my wife.
            Once came he home inſpired in the head,
            He found his neighbor and his wife a bed,
            Yet durſt not ſturre, but hide him in a hole,
            He feared to diſpleaſe his wife poore ſoule.
            But why ſhould he ſo dreade and feare her hate,
            Since ſhe had giuen him armor for his pate?
            Next day forſooth he doth his neighbor meete,
            Whome with ſterne rage thus furiouſly doth greete,
            Villaine ile ſlit thy noſe, out comes his knife,
            Sirra (quoth he) goe to Ile tell your wife.
            Apaled at which terror, meekely ſaide
            Retire good knife my furie is allaide.
         
         
            
            Proteus.
            TIme ſeruing humour thou wrie-faced Ape,
            That canſt transforme thy ſelfe to any ſhape:
            Come good Proteus come away a pace,
            We long to ſee thy mumping Antique face.
            This is the fellow that liues by his wit,
            A cogging knaue and fawning Parraſit,
            He has behauiour for the greateſt porte,
            And hee has humors for the raſcall ſorte,
            He has beene great with Lordes and high eſtates,
            They could not liue without his rare conceites,
            He was aſſociat for the braueſt ſpirits,
            His galland carriage ſuch fauour merrits.
            Yet to a Ruiffin humor for the ſtewes,
            A right graund Captaine of the damned crewes,
            With whome his humor alwayes is vnſtable
            Mad, melancholly, drunke and variable.
            
               
Hat without band like cutting Dicke he goe's,
            Renowned for his new inuented oathes.
            Some times like a Ciuilian, tis ſtrange
            At twelue a clocke he muſt vnto the Change,
            Where being thought a Marchant to the eye,
            He tels ſtrange newes his humor is to lie.
            Some Damaske coate the eflect thereof muſt heare,
            Inuites him home and there he gets good cheare.
            But how is't now ſuch braue renowned wits,
            We are ragged robes with ſuch huge gaſily ſlits,
            Faith thus a ragged humor he hath got
            Whole garments for the Summer are too hot.
            Thus you may cenſure gently if you pleaſe,
            He weares ſuch garments onely for his eaſe.
            Or thus his credit will no longer waue.
            For all men know him for a prating knaue.
         
         
            Epigram.
            A Scholer newly entred marriage life,
            Following his ſtuddie did offend his wife,
            Becauſe when ſhe his company expected,
            By bookiſh buſines ſhe was ſtill neglected:
            Comming vnto his ſtuddy, Lord (quoth ſhe)
            Can papers cauſe you loue them more then mee:
         
         
            
            Epigram.
            I would I were tranſform'd into a Booke
            That your affection might vpon me looke,
            But in my wiſh, withall be it decreed,
            I would be ſuch a Booke you loue to reede,
            Husband (quoth ſhe) which books form: ſhould I take,
            Marry (ſaid hee) were beſt an Almanacke,
            The reaſon wherefore I doe wiſh thee ſo,
            Is, 
                  •
               uery yeare wee haue a new you knowe.
         
         
            Epigram.
            SIra, come hether boy, take view of mee,
            My Lady I am purpoſ'd to goe ſee:
            What doth my feather flouriſh with a grace,
            And this ſame doo bleſe
                  •
               e become my 
                  •
               ace,
            How desc
                  •
               nt doth this doubl
                  •••
                fo
                  •
               m
                  •
                appeare
            (I would I had my ſute in houns-
                  ••
               itch heere)
            Do not my ſpurs pro
                  •
               ounce a 
                  〈◊〉
                sounde?
            Do's not my hole circumference profounde?
            Sir th
                  •
               se are well, but there is one thing i
                  •
               l,
            Your Tai
                  •
               our with a ſheete of paper b
                  •
               ll,
            Vowes heel'e be paid and S
                  •
               r
                  •
               ants he had feed,
            Which 
                  •
               a
                  ••
               e your commng forth to do thy deede:
            Boy god-amercy 
                  〈◊〉
                my Lady ſtay,
            Ile ſee no counter for her 
                  •
               a
                  •
               e to day.
         
         
            
            Much a doe about chuſing a wife.
            
               AWiddower would haue a wife were old,
               Paſt charge of children to preuent expence
               Her cheſts and bagges cram'd till they crake with gold,
               And ſhe vnto her graue poſt quickly hence,
               But if all this were fitting to his minde,
               Where is his leaſe of life to ſtay behinde?
            
            
               A Batcheler would haue wife were wiſe,
               Faire, Rich and Younge, amaiden for his bed,
               Not proude, nor chutliſh but of faut les ſize,
               A country houſewife, in the Citty bred.
               But hees a foole and longe in vaine hath ſtaide,
               He ſhoulde be ſpeake her, there's none ready made
            
         
         
            
            The taming of a wilde Youth.
            OF late a deare and louing friend of mine,
            That all his time a Gallantyouth had bene,
            From mirth to melancholy did decline,
            Looking exeeding pale, leane, poore, and thin,
            I ask'd the cauſe he brought me through the ſtreete,
            Vnto his houſe, and there hee let me ſee,
            A woman proper, faire, wiſe and diſcreete
            And ſaid behould, heer's that hath tamed mee,
            Hath this (quoth I,) can ſuch a wife do ſo?
            Lord how is he tam'd then, that hath a ſhrow:
         
         
            
            A straunge ſighted Traueller.
            AN honeſt Country foole being gentle bred,
            Was by an odde conceited humor led,
            To trauell and ſome Engliſh faſhions ſee,
            With ſuch ſtrange ſights as heere at London be.
            Stuffing his purſe with a good golden ſome,
            This wandring knight did to the Cittie come,
            And there a ſeruingman he entertaines,
            An honeſter in Newgate not remaines.
            He ſhew'd his Maiſter ſights to him moſt ſtrange,
            Great tall Pauls Steeple and the royall-Exchange:
            The Boſſe at Billings-gate and London ſtone,
            
            And at White Hall the monſtrous great Whales bone,
            Brought him to the banck-ſide where Beares do dwell
            And vnto Shor-ditch where the whores keepe hell,
            Shew'd him the Lyons, Gyants in Guild-Hall,
            King Lud at Lud-gate the Babounes and all,
            At length his man, on all he had did pray,
            Shew'd him a theeuiſh trick and ran away,
            The Traueller turnd home exceeding ciuill,
            And ſwore in London he had ſeene the Deuill.
         
         
            
            Three kinde of Couckoldes,
One, And None
            
               FIrſt there's a Cuckolde called One and None,
               Which foole, from fortune hath receiu'd ſuch
               He hath a wife for beutie ſtands alone,
               Grac'd with good carriage, and moſt ſweete behauiour fauour
               Nature ſo bounteous hath her gifts extended.
               From head to foote ther's nothing to be mended.
            
            
               Beſides, ſhe is as perfect chaſt, as faire,
               But being married to a iealous aſſe,
               He vowes ſhe hornes him, for he feeles a paire
               Haue bin a growing euer fince laſt graſſe,
               No contrary perſwaſions hee'l indure,
               But's wife is faire and hee's a Cuckolde ſure.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond.
            None, and One.
            
               THe ſecond hath a wife that loues the game,
               And playes the ſecret cunning whore at plaiſure.
               But in her husbands ſight ſhees wondrous tame,
               Which makes him vow, he hath Vliſſes treaſure.
               sheele wiſh al whores were hang'd, with weeping teares
               Yet ſhe her ſelfe a whores cloathes dayly weares▪
               
            
            
               Her husbāds friends report how's wife doth gull him
               Wi
                     •
                  h falſe d
                     •
                  ceitful and diſſembling ſhowe
               And that by both his hornes a man may pull him,
               To ſuch a goodly length they daylie growe,
               He ſayes they wrong her, and he ſweares they lye,
               His wife is chaſte, and in that minde hee'le dye.
            
         
         
            
            The Third,
One, and One.
            
               THe third is he that knowes women are weake,
               And therefore they are dayly apt to fall,
               Words of vnkindneſſe their kind hearts may breake,
               They are but fleſh and therefore ſinners all,
               His wife is not the firſt hath trod a wry,
               Amongſt his neighbours he as bad can ſpye.
            
            
               What can he helpe it if his wife do ill,
               But take it as his croſſe and be content,
               For quietneſſe he lets her haue her will,
               When ſhee is old perhaps ſhe will repent,
               Let euery one amend their one bad life,
               Th'are knaues and queans that medle with his wife.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   