
      
         
            
            
            
            
            HELL'S BROKE LOOSE.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON Printed by W. W. and are to be ſold by G. Loſtus in Popes-head Allie neare the Exchange. 1605.
         
         
            
            An Aduertiſement to the wiſe and diſcreete
            REader; hee that in diſcription of a wicked man, doth perſonate him, is to ſpeake as that wicked man, no
                  •
                beſeeming a good man; or elſe he cannot aptly deliuer him in his kinde, ſo odious as hee is: In reſpect whereof, let not any ſpeach herein be miſconſtrued, which is onely ſet downe as ſpoken by the rebellious Heretiques, the more truely to explaine them as notorious as they were. Vale.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               
                  IN this vn-weeded Garden of the World, hath ſprung vp through al ages of the ſame, moſt innumerable euen of all ſorted kindes, that haue been oppoſite to Vertue, and purſuers of Vice; Such as haue with great trauell and labour taken paynes to goe to Hell, and runne the broade way path with Hindes feete, in all poaſting ſpeede that the Diuell could employ them. Amongſt the reſt of this fearefull race runners (of their variable qualities) here is a deſcription of the moſt notorious Rebels and Heretiques of Europe, certaine Germane Anabaptiſtes, ſuch as would haue all things common, and all men at freewill and libertie to do what they liſt, without controwle of any Authoritie: euery mans Will Law▪ and euery ones Dreame Doctrine.
            Before the comming of our Sauiour Chriſt; Theudas, and Iudas Galilaeus, two ſeditious fellowes of factious ſpirit, ſeduced the Iewes: The firſt of them ſaying, that hee was a Prophet ſent from God for mans g
                  •
               od; and that by his owne powerfull word, hee could deuide the waters of Iordan in as admirable

ſort, as Ioſhua the ſeruant of the Lord had done. The other, did earnestly promiſe to enlarge the Iewes from the ſeruitude and yoke of the Romans: both of them by theſe meanes, drawing after them great multitudes of people; and both of them comming vnto deſerued deſtruction: For Fatus the Gouernour of Iury ouertooke Theudas, and ſent his head as a monument to Ieruſalem: and Iudas likewiſe periſhed, and all his following confederates were diſperſed.
            After our Sauiour Chriſt, in the time of his bleſsed Apoſtles, Elimas the Sorcerer mightely withſtood the proceeding of Paule & Barnabas, ſowing the ſeed of Hereſie in the minde of Sergius Paulus Deputie: but the iudgement of God ouertooke him, and he was ſtrucken with blindneſſe. Not long after him, in the raigne of Adrian the Emperour, aroſe an other called Bencocha
                     •
                  , that profeſſed himſelfe to be the Meſsias, & to haue deſcended from Heauen in the likenes of a Starre, for the ſafetie & redemption of the people: by which fallacie, he drew after him a world of ſeditious people; but at laſt, hee and many of his credulous route were ſlaine, and was called by the Iewes (in contempt) Bencozha (that is) the Sonne of a lie.
            
               Manes, of whom the Maniches tooke their name and firſt originall, forged in his fooliſh braine a fiction of two Gods,

and two beginners; and reiecting the old Teſtament, and the true God, which is reuealed in the ſame; publiſhed a fift Goſpell of his owne forgerie, reporting himſelfe to be the Holy Ghoſt: When he had thus with diuulging his diueliſh Hereſies and Blaſphemies infected the world, being purſued by Gods iuſt iudgement, hee was for other wicked practizes taken, and his skinne pulled ouer his eares aliue.
            
               Montanus that notorious blaſphemous wretch, of whom the Montaniſts tooke their ofspring, denyed Chriſt our Sauiour to be GOD, ſaying: Hee was but Man onely, like other men, without any participation of Diuine eſsence: Hee called himſelfe the Comforter, and Holy ſpirit, which was promiſed to come into the world; and his two Wiues Priſcilla and Maximilla, he named his Propheteſſes, and their writings Propheſies: yet all their cunning could not preuent nor foretell a wretched and deſperate end which befell him; for after he had of long time deluded the world, in imitation of Iudas, hee hanged himſelfe.
            Infinite are the examples that may be collected out of the registers of foregone ages, touching the lamentable euilles, ſlaughters, blood, and death, that haue enſued from the damnable heriticall Inſtruments of the Diuel
                  •
               ; and how the people

(affecting Nouelties, and Innouations) haue concurred from time to time, with the pl
                  •
               tters endeuours, Hiſtories are full of their memories. Moſt Rebellions 
                  〈◊〉
                pretende Religion for them ſelues: No Villaine but dare turne a good outſide to the eye, though the inſide be as bad, as heart can imagine.
            Theſe infamous Rebels and Heretiques in Germanie, pretended Religion; they would be reformer
                  •
                of the Church, and State: new Doctrine of their owne frantick
                  •
                conceites: no Childred ſhould be Baptized: all thinges ſhould be common, & no Magistrate to gouerne, but euery man at his owne libertie to do
                  •
                what he liſt; take whatſoeuer he ſtood in need of, without pa
                  •
               : pluralitie of Wiues: no recouerie of wrongfull d
                  •
               tayned Goodes, and ſuch like villanous roguiſh ſtuffe, that neuer a The
                  •
               fe in the world would refuſe to ſubſcribe vnto it.
            This was no ſooner taught by Iohn Leyden, alias Yoncker Hans a Dutch Taylor, Tom Mynter a pariſh Clarke, Knipp
                     •••
                  ulling a Smyth, and Crafteing a Ioyner; but it was imbraced by thouſandes of the Boores, and vulgar illiterate Clownes, who in great companies dayly reſorted vnto them fo
                  ••
               th o
                  •
                all Townes and Villages: A moſt rude raſcall companie that regarded neither Gods feare, nor mans fauour, euen HELLE BROKE LOOSE.
            
               In their outragious madnes, they attempted much villanie, omitting to put nothing in practize that ſtood with their humours lyking; as good Commons Wealths men, as Iacke Straw, Watt Tyler, Tom Myller, Iohn Ball, &c. in the raigne of Richard the 2. and as ſound Diuines for Doctrine, as Hackets Diſciples, that preached in Cheapeſide in a Peaſe-cart: Yet they found of their owne fraternitie to mannage the Diuels affayres; and muſtering themſelues togeather, all compoſed of the ſcumbe and waſte worſer-ſort could be raken vp, they proceeded ſo farre, that they tooke the Towne of Munſter, and there for a time, domineerd as if they had been Electors apeece to the Emperour; vntill beeing beleagerd by the Duke of Saxon, they were taught to taſte how Extremitie did ſauour, finding the bitterneſſe of their raſh and graceleſſe attemptes, to puniſh them moſt ſeueerely in the end: For when Cattes, Dogges, Rattes and Myce, grew ſcarce and daintie, (No common diſh, but choyce dyet for Iohn Leyden, and the Lordes of his counſaile Knipperdulling the Smyth, Crafteing the Ioyner, and Tom Mynter the Clarke;) They were conſtrayned to frie old greaſie Buſſe leather Ierkins, and Parchments, Coouers of Bookes, Bootes in Steakes, and Stew-pottes of old Shoes, till in the end being famiſhed as leaue as dryed

Stock-fiſh, they were ſubdued: and Leyden (who had tearmed himſelfe King of Munſter) with his Nobles, made of Smyth, Ioyner, and Pariſh Clarke, were according to the iuſt reward of all Rebels, put to death, with great torture: and being dead, their bodyes were hang'd in Iron Cages vpon the toppe of the high Steeple in Munſter, called S. Lamberts Steeple, for an example to all of Rebell race: Their Confederates in great multitudes hauing periſhed with the Sword and famine, may togeather with all Traytors witneſſe to the world throughout all enſuing ages, how GOD with vengeance rewardes all ſuch State-diſturbers, and factious Rebels.
         
         
            
            THE GHOST OF IACKE STRAW. Prologue.
            I That did act on Smythfeildes bloodie Stage,
            
               In ſecond Richards young and tender age:
            And there receiu'd from Walworths fatall hand,
            The ſtabb of Death, which life did countermand:
            Am made a Prulogue to the Tragedie,
            Of LEYDEN, a Dutch Taylors villanie.
            Not that I ere conſorted with that ſlaue,
            My raſcall rout in Hollenſhed you haue:
            But that in name, and nature wee agree,
            An Engliſh Traytor I, Dutch Rebell hee.
            In my Conſort, I had the Prieſt Iohn Ball;
            
               Mynter the Clarke, vnto his ſhare did fall.
            Hee, to haue all things common did intend:
            And my Rebellion, was to ſuch an end.
            Euen in a word, wee both were like apoynted,
            
               To take the Sword away from Gods Anoynted:
            And for examples to the worlds laſt day,
            Our Traytours names ſhall neuer weare away:
            The fearefull Path's that hee and I haue trod,
            Haue bin accurſed in the ſight of God.
            Heere in this Regiſter, who ere doth looke,
            (Which may be rightly call'd The bloody Booke)
            Shall ſee how baſe and rude thoſe Villains bee,
            That do attempt like LEYDEN; plot like mee.
            And how the Diu'll in whoſe name they begon,
            Payes them Hells wages, when their worke is don:
            "Treaſon is bloodie; blood thereon attends:
            "Traytors are bloodie, and haue bloodie ends.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT.
            FRom darke Damnations vault, where Horrours dwell,
            Infernall Furies, forth the lake of Hell
            Ariu'd on earth, and with their damned euils
            Fill'd the whole world full of Incarnat Deuils:
            For all the ſinnes that Hells vaſt gulfe containes,
            In euery age, and euery kingdome raignes:
            Murder, and Treaſon, Falſe diſloyall plots,
            Sedition, Hereſie, and roguiſh knots:
            Of trayt'rous Rebels; Some of higheſt place,
            And ſome of meanest ſort, moſt raſcall bace:
            Of which degree, behold a curſed crue,
            Such as Hells-mouth into the World did ſpue:
            IOHN LEYDEN, but a Taylor by his trade,
            Of Munſter towne a King would needes be made:
            A Parriſh Clarke, a Ioyner, and a Smyth,
            
            His Nobles were, whom hee tooke counſell with:
            To theſe adioyned thouſands, Boores and Clownes,
            Out of the Villages, and Germane Townes:
            Whereof great loſſe of blood greeuous enſew'd,
            Before that Campe of Hell could be ſubdew'd.
            
               S. R.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF IOHN LEYDEN.
            
               WHen nights blacke mantle ouer th'earth was laide,
               And Cinthias face all curtaine-drawne with clouds:
               When viſions do appeare in darkſome ſhade,
               And nights ſweet reſt, dayes care in quiet ſhrowds;
               About the hower of twelue in dead of night,
               A mangled Corſe appeared to my ſight.
            
            
               Skin torne, Fleſh wounded, vgly to behold:
               A totterd Body peece-meale pull'd in ſunder:
               Harken (quoth hee) to that which ſhall be told,
               And looke not thus amaz'd with feare and wonder:
               Though I am all be ſtabbed, flaſh'd, and torne,
               I am not Caeſar, him, an's ghoſt I ſcorne.
            
            
               
                  Icke bin Hans Leyden; vnderſtandſt thou Dutch?
               
                  IOHN LEYDEN King of Munster, I am hee,
               That haue in Germanie bin feard as much,
               As any Caeſar in the world could bee:
               From the firſt houre that I armes did take,
               I made the Germaine Gallants feare and quake.
            
            
               
               By facultie at firſt, I was a Taylour,
               
               But all my minde was Kingly eue'ry thought:
               For e'en with Cerberus, Hels dogged Iaylour,
               A combat hand to hand I durſt haue fought:
               Then with my trade, what's hee that hath to doot
               Old Father Adam was a Taylour too:
            
            
               Hee made him Fig leaue Breeches at his fall,
               And of that ſtuffe his Wife a Kirtle wore:
               Then let both Needle, Threed, my Sheares and all,
               Keepe with the trade; a Noble minde I bore:
               And let this Title witnes my renowne,
               
                  IOHN LEYDEN Taylour, King of Munſter towne.
               
            
            
               My Councellers were theſe, a valiant Smyth,
               
               As tall a man as euer ſtrooke a heate,
               Call'd Knipperdulling; wondrous full of pith:
               
                  Crafting the Ioyner, one of courage great:
               
                  Tom Mynter, a madd Rogue, our Parriſh Clarke,
               
               Whoſe doctrine wee with diligence did marke.
            
            
               
               Hee taught on topp of Mole-hill, Buſh, and Tree,
               The Traytors text in England; Parſon Ball
               
               Affirming wee ought Kings apeece to bee,
               And euery thing be common vnto all:
               For when old Adam delu'd, and Euah ſpan,
               Where was my ſilken veluet Gentleman?
            
            
               Wee Adams Sonnes; Hee Monarch of the Earth,
               How can wee chuſe but be of Royall blood?
               Beeing all deſcended from ſo high a birth?
               Why ſhould not wee ſhare wealth, and worldly good?
               Tuſh Maiſters (quoth Tom Mynter) reaſon binds it,
               Hee that lacks Mony, take it where he finds it.
            
            
               Why, is not euery thing Gods guift, we haue?
               Doe Beaſtes and Cattell buy the Graſſe they eate?
               Shall that be ſould, which Nature freely gaue?
               Why ſhould a Man pay Mony for his Meate,
               Or buy his Drinke, that parboyld Beere and Ale,
               The Fyſhes broth, which Brewers do retayle?
            
            
               
               Pray who is Landlord to the Lyons den?
               Or who payes Houſe-rent for the Foxes hole?
               Shall Beaſtes enioy more priuiledge then Men?
               May they feed dayly vpon that is ſtole,
               Eating and drinking freely Natur's ſtore,
               Yet pay for nought they take, nor goe on ſcore?
            
            
               Do not the Fowles ſhare fellow like together,
               And freely take their foode eu'en where they pleaſe,
               A whole yeeres dyet coſtes them not a Fether?
               And likewiſe all the Fyſhes in the Seas,
               Do they not franckly feed on that they get,
               And for their victu'als are in no mans debt?
            
            
               And ſhall Man, being Lord of all the reſt,
               (Vnto whoſe ſeruice theſe were all ordayned)
               Of meate, nor drinke, nor clothing, be poſſeſt,
               Vnleſſe the ſame by Mony be obtayned?
               Pay Houſe-rent, buy his foode, and all his clothing,
               When other Creatures haue good cheare for nothing?
            
            
               
               Wee'le none of that (quoth I, to my conſorts.)
               No (quoth Tom Mynter) frends, it ought not bee:
               Come Libertie, and Wealth, and Princely ſports:
               
               Why, Kings are made of Clay; and ſo are wee:
               Wee'le ayme our thoughts on high, at Honors marke:
               All rowly, powly; Taylor, Smyth, and Clarke.
            
            
               Wee are the men will make our Valours knowne,
               To teach this doting world new reformation:
               New Lawes, and new Religion of our owne,
               To bring our ſelues in wondrous admiration:
               Let's turne the world cleane vpſide downe, (mad ſlaues)
               So to be talk'd of, when w'are in our Graues.
            
            
               Braue Knipperdulling, ſet thy Forge on fire.
               It ſhall be done this preſent night (quoth hee,)
               
                  Tom Mynter, leaue Amen vnto the Quier.
               Quoth Tom, I ſcorne hencefoorth a Clarke to bee,
               
                  Cornellis, hang thy woodden Ioyners trade,
               For Noble-men apeece you ſhall be made.
            
            
               
               And fellow mates; Nobles and Gallants all,
               To Maieſtie you muſt your mindes diſpoſe:
               My Lord Hans Hogg, forſake your Butchers ſtall.
               
                  Hendrick the Botcher, ceaſe from heeling Hoſe.
               
                  Claſſ
                        •
                     
                   Chaundler, let your Weick and Tallow lye,
               And Peeter Cobler, caſt your old Shooes by.
            
            
               For you my valiant Lords, are men of witt,
               And farre too good for baſe and ſeruile trades,
               Your Martiall power may be compared fitt,
               Vnto the ſtrength of our ſtrong Germane Iades:
               Who if they had but knowledge to their force,
               What whiſtling Car-man could commaund his Horſe?
            
            
               Your guifts are rare, and ſingular to finde,
               Beeing full of courage, reſolute, and wiſe:
               Yet to behold theſe parts you haue bin blinde.
               Oh could you ſee your Valour with mine eyes,
               You would exclame that Ignoraunce ſo long,
               Hath done ſo worthy Men, ſuch open wrong.
            
            
               
               But now my Lyon-harted Caualiers,
               Let vs march after war-like Mars his Drome,
               Your Prentiſhips are out of ſubiect yeeres;
               Now let vs ſhow the Houſes whence wee come:
               For wondrous matters there are to be done,
               Crownes muſt be conquerd, Kingdoms muſt be wonne.
            
            
               
                  Tom Mynter, goe and preach vnto the Bootes
               All Libertie, all Freedome, Eaſe, and Wealth:
               And if they will, alow them Queanes and Whores:
               Bid them Drinke free, and pledge Good-fellows health:
               Say Goods are common, each man to ſuffize,
               The Rich-mans purſe, is Poore-mans lawfull prize.
            
            
               Tell them, they need not ſtand on honeſt dealing,
               To borrow Mony, and to pay againe:
               And thoſe that haue occaſion to be ſtealing,
               May take a Purſe, if need do ſo conſtraine:
               Poore Men muſt haue it: Gentlemen muſt liue:
               Good-fellowes cannot ſtay till Miſers giue.
            
            
               
               There's none of vs (my Maiſters) but may want,
               Our Purſes may haue emptie ſtomackes all,
               But he ſhall finde his dyet to be ſcant,
               Whoſe credit's ſcord vpon an Ale-houſe wall,
               I owe a debt my ſelfe onely for Beere,
               Amounts to more then I haue earnd this yeere.
            
            
               And let me come to a baſe Tapſters houſe,
               Where I but owe ſome twentie dooſen of Beere,
               The raſcall will not giue me one carowſe,
               But tels me ſtraight how eu'ery thing is deere:
               Tis a hard wo
                     •
                  ld, the Brewer muſt be pay'd:
               Thus on my emptie Purſe the Villaine play'd.
            
            
               This is his ſtate, whoſe Purſe is lyned thin,
               And goes on truſt, b
                     •
                  holding for his ſhot,
               With, By your leaue, hee muſt come creeping in:
               I pray you Brother, let vs haue a Pot,
               How does all heere? pray is mine Hoſtes well?
               Curſſe not your debtors: How doeſt honeſt Nell.
               
            
            
               
               This ſhaking humor, I do much deteſt,
               Which emptie Purſes do inflict on ſome:
               I can not be beholden, I proteſt,
               Mony muſt make mee welcome where I come:
               If Siluer in my Pockets do not ring,
               All's out of tune with mee in eu'ry thing.
            
            
               What extreame griefe doth Monyes want procure?
               How madd and franticke doth it make the minde?
               Againe, how chearefully can Mony cure?
               When Phiſicke comes in Gold, and Siluer's kinde,
               To thinke on this, what's hee, that would not craue it,
               And fight himſelfe out of his skin to haue it?
            
            
               Thus my braue Caualiers, you plainely ſee,
               Vpon what golden ground wee ſet our foote,
               Courage Dutch bloods, I ſay couragious bee,
               Wee will haue Wealth, and Libertie to boote:
               Let vs goe forward as we haue begone.
               And wee'le make bloody ſport before ti's done.
            
            
               
               
IOHN LEYDEN, TOM MINTER, KNIPPERDVLLING, and their conſortes; the firſt inuentors of the Dreames and Dotages of the heriticall Anabaptiſts in Germanie.
            
               THere neuer was ſo odious a pretence,
               Not any Act ſo wicked and ſo vile,
               But ſome would take vpon them a defence
               To colour it; the eaſier to beguile
               The ſimple ſort, which haue vnſtayed mindes,
               Whoſe haſtie Iudgment Errour eaſly blindes.
            
            
               So theſe leawd wretches, ſprung from Villain race,
               That had all Pietie in deteſtation:
               A Raſcall ſort, that were eu'en ſpent of Grace,
               Would take on them Religions reformation:
               And in the fore-front of their villanie,
               
                  Tom Mynter vtters new fond Herezie.
            
            
               
               Deare Friends (quoth he) that wee may haue ſucceſſe,
               In this our honorable enterpriſe:
               Which you ſhall ſee the very heau'ens will bleſſe,
               I
                     •
                   from a Chriſtian zeale it do ariſe,
               Let's mende the Church in matters are amiſſe,
               Eſpecially in one thing; which is this,
            
            
               
                  Chriſt gaue commiſsion to the twelue, ſaying: Goe
               
               
                  Into all Nations; Preach, and there Baptize.
               
               So that you ſee the very wordes doe ſhowe,
               And from the ſubſtaunce of them doth ariſe,
               Wee firſt muſt be of yeeres to vnderſtand,
               Before wee take that Sacrament in hand.
            
            
               Therefore wee'le haue no Babes to be Baptized,
               Vntill thy come to yeeres of ripe diſcretion,
               That of the Fayth they may be firſt aduiſed,
               And yeeld the world accompt of their profeſsion:
               For you may ſee, vnleſſe your ſight be blinde,
               
                  Beliefe is firſt, and Baptiſme comes behinde.
            
            
               
               And yet (my Maiſtars) you may dayly ſee,
               In any Country where ſo ere you come,
               Such ſtore of little Children chriſtned bee:
               T'is infinite for one to count the ſumme:
               But let vs take another courſe, I pray;
               Thoſe forward Sucklings ſhall hereafter ſtay.
            
            
               What ſay you to it? are you all agree'd,
               That this ſame doctrine ſhall be our chiefe ground?
               It ſhall (ſayd Leyden) and I haue decreed,
               That it be helde for holſome, good, and ſound:
               And for example I haue thought it beſt,
               To be new Chriſtned heere, before the reſt.
            
            
               Let's haue a Baſon, and ſome Water ſtraight,
               With all the preſent ſpeed it may be brought:
               For I perceiue this matter is of waight,
               My Chriſt'ning when I was a Child, is nought:
               Surely I thinke I am no Chriſtian yet,
               A Booke good honeſt Mynter quickly get.
            
            
               
               Well ſayd, ar't readie? Shall wee need God-father▪
               
               Yes: take you Harman Cromme, or any other:
               I haue a minde to Knipperdulling rather:
               And Tannekin may ſerue to be God-mother,
               Or Knipperdulling ioyn'd with Harmon Cromme:
               Let it be ſo: ſome water; quickly come.
            
            
               Thus on they goe, with errours foule defil'd,
               In rude prophaning Holy ordinaunce:
               And Mynter a
                     •
                  keth, Who doth name the Child?
               Call him (quoth Knipperdulling) Yoncker Hans,
               
               His noble minde, and nature do agree,
               And therefore hee a Yoncker Hans ſhall bee.
            
            
               Now (quoth Tom Mynter) let mee make a motion,
               To which I do beſeech you all incline:
               Let euery man that's heere, with one deuotion,
               Come follow mee to drinke ſome Renniſh wine;
               
                  
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   inward loue, let outward deedes reueale it,
               And to the Tauerne let vs goe and ſ
                     •
                  ale it.
            
            
               
The Rebels dayly increaſing in great multitudes of the rude Boores, and illiterate Clownes, propounded vnto themſelues diuers monſtrous abſurdities, confirmed by their Captaines Yoncker, Hans, and Knipperdulling: which by them are Intituled Twelue Articles of Chriſtian Libertie.
            
               WHat is it from the Cocatrice doth paſſe,
               But ſuch a natur'd Serpent as him ſelfe?
               What ſees an Ape within a Looking glaſſe,
               But a deformed, and ill fauour'd elſe?
               What Good fruite commeth from an euill tree?
               Or how ſhould Villains ought but Villains bee?
            
            
               Like deſper'at mad-men, voyde of Reaſons vſe,
               They run to any outrage can be thought:
               And Libertie is ma
                     •
                  e the Rebels ſcuſe,
               Which now by Dreames and Fancies ſo hath wrought,
               That Yoncker Hans vnto his rable rout,
               Twelue Articles of Libertie giues out.
            
            
               
               And firſt ſets downe: They need not ſtand in feare
               Of Magiſtrate or Ruler, for offence:
               But they themſelues might cauſes freely heare,
               And ſo end matters; ſauing much expence
               Of Coyne in Fees, which vnto Lawyers fall:
               For wee'le (quoth Yoncker Hans) be Lawyers all.
            
            
               If that a wrong to any man be done,
               Let him repaire to mee, and my two Lords,
               Wee'le end the ſtrife ſo ſoone as ti's begone:
               For halfe a doozen of Beere, in quiet words,
               And make them drinke together, and be friends,
               Shake hands, and like good fellowes make amends▪
               
            
            
               Next, if a man's diſpoſed for to ride,
               And hath no Horſe, nor doth intend to hire,
               Hee may take one vpon the high-way ſide,
               To ſerue, as his occaſion doth require,
               All-wayes prouided, when his Iournye's don,
               H
                     〈…〉
                   to turne him looſe, and let him run.
            
            
               
               Alſo, if any Woman chaunce to marrie,
               And that her Husband prooue not to her minde,
               Shee ſhall be at her choyce with him to tarrie,
               Or take an other whom ſhe knowes more kinde:
               Wee thinke it meete no Woman ſhould be bound,
               To him in whom no kindnes can be found.
            
            
               For if ſhee match for Wit, and hee turne Clowne,
               Or any way her bargaine prooueth ill,
               Shee may ſtay with him till her wedding Gowne
               Be worne, and then be at her owne free-will,
               To take another, and exchange the Lout:
               This Law of our's, ſhall ſerue to beare her out.
            
            
               Yea, further (which ſhould haue bin ſayd before)
               That man which hath not Wife enough of one,
               Why, let him (if he pleaſe) take halfe a ſcore:
               Wee'le be his warrant, or to builde vpon:
               Wee in our wiſedomes do alow it ſo,
               For good 
                     •
                  ound reaſons that wee haue to ſhow.
            
            
               
               For ſay, you meete with ſuch, as moſt men do,
               Of this ſame proud, and i
                     •
                  le huſwife brood,
               Shrewiſh and toyiſh; fooliſh, queaniſh 
                     •
                  o:
               
                  
                     •
                  ull of 
                     〈◊〉
                   f
                     •
                  ults, 
                     〈…〉
                   that's good:
               What ſhould me
                     •
                   do wi
                     •
                  h ſuch v
                     〈…〉
                  ous wives?
               Turne them to gr
                     •
                  ſſ
                     •
                  , and ſo the 
                     〈…〉
                  ues.
            
            
               Beſides, Tenants ſhall need to pay 
                     〈…〉
                  nt,
               
                  The Earth's the Lords, and all that 
                        〈◊〉
                      therein:
               
               Land-lords may hang them-ſelues with one conſent;
               And if they pleaſe, next Quarter day begin:
               Wee will not be indebted vnto any,
               But be Free-holders, paying not a penny.
            
            
               All B
                     •
                  nds and Bils, ſhall be of no effect:
               And hee that will not pay his Debt, may chuſe:
               This Hand, and Seale, no man ſhall need reſpect:
               Day of the month; and toyes that Scriueners vſe:
               Sheepe-skins, a
                     •
                  d Waxe, ſhall now no more preuayle,
               To bring a man into the dolefull Iayle.
            
            
               
               All Priſons ſhall be preſently pul'd downe,
               For wee will haue good Fellowes walke at large:
               A paire of Stocks ſhall not appeare in Towne:
               This in our names, wee very ſtraightly charge:
               What reaſon is it when the hands haue ſtole,
               To put the Legs into a wodden hole?
            
            
               No man ſhall need obay any Areſt,
               Let th'action be what t'will, treſpaſſe or debt:
               All Surety-ſhip, ſhall be an idle ieſt:
               No Creditor thereby ſhall vantage get:
               All Beaſts and Cattell, Oxen, Sheepe, and Kine,
               Shall be his that wi
                     •
                  l haue them: yours, and mine.
            
            
               All Forreſts, Parks, and Chaſes, ſhall be free
               For each man that delighteth in the game:
               Orchards and Gardens likewiſe common bee:
               A
                     •
                  l Fruites and Hearbs, let him that will come clayme:
               And euery thing that any man ſhall need,
               According to his will, let him proceed.
            
            
               
               Who will not draw his weapon in this cauſe,
               And fight it out, as long as he can ſtand?
               Which of you all will diſalow theſe Lawes,
               And will deny our Articles his hand?
               Then all cry'd out, This Doctrine wee'le defende,
               And liues a peece about it wee will ſpende.
            
            
               Our Will's our Law; our Swordes the ſame ſhall pen,
               What wee decree, let's ſee who dare reſiſt?
               Wee care not for the Lawes of other men,
               But will without controule do what wee liſt:
               Wee are growne ſtrong; and wee are very wiſe,
               My honeſt Gentlemen, let this ſuffize.
            
            
               With courage now let vs our ſelues addreſſe,
               Attempting on the ſodaine Munſter Towne:
               Let euery one be in a readines,
               Kind Fortune ſmyles: regard not who doth frowne:
               At euery Church wee'le hang a Tauerne ſigne,
               And waſh our Horſes feete in Renniſh-wine.
            
            
               
The Rebels in a furious reſolution, enter the Towne of Munſter: wherewith inſolent proude audatiou
                  •
                Spirits, they inflict moſt iniurious wronges vpon the inhabitants, taking greateſt glorie in acting villanie.
            
               WIth deſp'rat Reſolution, mad-braine heat,
               
                  Munſter they enter like to ſauage Beares:
               The Cittizens no fauour could entreat,
               For all their goods are common, Leyden ſweares
               Catch that catch may; hee bids his Souldiers ſhare,
               Deuide the ſpoyle, and take no further care.
            
            
               Freely ſupply your wants, who euer lackes:
               Chearely my harts; cate▪ drinke, and domineere,
               Ryfell the rich and wealthy Marchants packes:
               Make all things cheape that heeretofore were deere:
               And where you finde an Vſurer, be bold
               To cut his throat, and take away his gold.
            
            
               
               Adorne yourſelues in princely braue attire,
               Put downe with State the Emperours of Roome:
               And giue the fooliſh world cauſe to admire,
               And ſay, wee paſſe, each baſe and common Groome:
               Though ſome of you (my Lords) came from the Plow,
               Wee'le make them ſtoope, that haue diſdaind to bow.
            
            
               Haue you not heard that Scythian Tamberlaine
               
               VVas earſt a Sheepheard ere he play'd the King?
               Firſt ouer Cattell hee began his raigne,
               Then Countries in ſubiection hee did bring:
               And Fortunes fauours ſo mayntain'd his ſide,
               Kings were his Coach-horſe, when he pleaſ'd to ride.
            
            
               Do you not ſee our valorous ſucceſſe,
               How eaſily wee haue attayn'd this Towne?
               VVhat thinke you then 
                     〈◊〉
                   time wee ſhall poſſeſſe,
               VVhen Greatnes comes to backe vs with renowne?
               VVhy ſure I thinke our ſhares will ſo increaſe,
               That wee ſhall let ou
                     •
                   Kingdomes by the leaſe.
            
            
               
               Fill Bowles of VVine, and let vs drinke a health:
               Carowſe in Glaſſes that are fiue foote deepe:
               You worthy members of the Common-wealth,
               
                  Munſter is ours, and Munſter wee will keepe:
               Boone-fier the ſtreetes; ſet Bells a worke to ring
               For ioy a Taylour is become a King.
            
            
               Bring foorth all Pris'ners preſently to mee,
               And let the Magiſtrates ſupply their place;
               Priſons for true-men now ſhall only bee:
               Braue Theeues, with many fauours wee will grace,
               Such men as they, with courage do proceed,
               And of their ſeruice wee ſhall ſtand in need.
            
            
               For Theeues (you know) of feare make no account,
               They'le hazard hanging, for a little gaine:
               And though vnto the Gallowes top they mount,
               Both Halter and the Hang-man they disdaine,
               How many die at Tyburne in a yeere?
               VVould make vs gallant Souldiers, were they heere.
            
            
               
               Ile tell yee Maiſters, I haue knowne men die,
               That haue out-brau'd the Hang-man to his face:
               Such as would giue an Emperour the lie,
               And valiant take a Purſe in any place,
               Bid a man ſtand vpon the hige-way ſide,
               When he hath had exceeding haſte to ride.
            
            
               As full of courage as their skins could hold,
               Spending as franckly as they freely got:
               Scowring the ruſt from Siluer and from Gold,
               That Miſers hoorded vp and vſed not:
               As honeſt men as wee, in all their dealing,
               And yet are hang'd for nothing but for ſtealing.
            
            
               Example to you of a friend Ile make,
               And I beſeech you all, to note the thing:
               Who being to be married, went and ſpake
               Vnto a Goldſmith for a wedding Ring,
               And comming for it when he ſhould be wed,
               The dores were ſhut, and c'ry one abed:
            
            
               
               Hee had no reaſon ſtand and knocke all day,
               But brake the wind
                     •
                  wes open, in a ieſt,
               Taking all Rings he found, with him away,
               To chuſe his owne the better, from the reſt:
               Meaning to put the Gold-ſmith but in feare,
               In making him ſuppoſe ſome Theefe were there.
            
            
               Well, this poore fellow hee was apprehended,
               Brought to the Barr, and as a Fellon try'd,
               And yet you ſee hee 
                     •
                  eſtingly offended,
               Hauing good reaſon for it on h
                     •
                  s ſyde:
               But all his proteſtations were in vaine,
               For he was hang'd in earneſt for his paine.
            
            
               Another honeſt fellow as hee went,
               Did draw a Halter after him along,
               Thinking no hurt, nor hauing an intent
               To off
                     •
                  r any kind of creature wrong:
               One comes behind him was the Hang-mans frend,
               And tyde a Horſe vnto the Halters end.
            
            
               
               The owner met him leading of his beaſt,
               And charged him with felony (poore man)
               Although in this ſame matter he knew leaſt,
               There is no remedie, ſay what he can
               To priſon, hang him for an arrant thiefe.
               How ſay my maiſters is not this a griefe?
            
            
               But wee'le take order for ſuch matters now,
               For theeues and Gentlemen ſhall be all one,
               To take a purſe, or horſe, we will allow,
               And let him boldly do it that hath none:
               Take any thing that any man ſhall lacke,
               To fill the belly and to cloth the backe.
            
            
               If any finde himſelfe here with agreeued,
               Let him be whipt and baniſht forth the towne,
               With rich mens goods we meane to haue releeued
               The very pooreſt meane and baſeſt clowne,
               Weele haue it ſo my Lords, it ſhall be thus,
               Lets ſee who dare but ſtand on tearmes with vs.
            
            
               
               
                  Tom Mynter, prethe ſearch the towne with ſpeed,
               Chuſe out the fayreſt of the female kinde,
               Some luſtie wenches of the Germane breede,
               For to the fleſh I feele my ſelfe inclinde:
               Some halfe a doſen wiues for me prouide,
               And ſtocke me with ſome Concubines beſide.
            
            
               Go to the Goldſmithes in my princely name,
               Will and commaund them preſently forthwith
               They ſend ſuch chaynes and Iewels as I clayme
               By Knipperdullings mouth, my Lord the Smith,
               Without demaunding any thing therefore,
               I neither meane to pay, nor go on ſcore.
            
            
               Let others to the Mercers ſhops repayre,
               And tell them we do ſilke and veluet lacke,
               Our ſeame-rent Souldiers are exceeding bare,
               Scant any tatters hanging on their backe.
               Rich Taffata and Veluet of three pile,
               Muſt ſerue our vſe to ſwagger in a while.
            
            
               
               Commaund the Marchants to ſupply our Court
               With all abundance of the choy
                     •
                  eſt Wine:
               Vnto the Butchers likewiſe make reſort,
               Bid them p
                     •
                  ouid vs Oxen, Sheepe, and Swine:
               Charge Brewers to preſent vs with their trade,
               And that their Beere be ſomewhat ſtronger made.
            
            
               The Baker in his office to appeere,
               His Mealy-worſhip wee do greatly want:
               And ſtore of Cookes let vs haue likewiſe heere,
               To dreſſe our diſhes, that they be not ſcant:
               All things in plentie, and abundant ſtore,
               Bee merry, eate, and drinke, and call for more.
            
            
               This for a Reſolution wee ſet downe,
               And do ordaine that it continue ſtill:
               All is our owne that is within the Towne,
               And wee are men that haue the world at will:
               Fill Bowles of Wine, carowſe a 
                     •
                  igh-Dutch round,
               For Cares lye conquerd, and our Ioyes are croun'd,
            
            
               
               Munſter being beſeiged by the Duke of Saxonie, the Rebels indure great myſerie, and extremitie by famiſhment; but conſtrained in the end to yeelde: their principall Captaines Leyden, Knipperdulling, and Mynter, are tortur'd and put to death, for example to all of Rebellious damned diſpoſition, ending as deſperate, as their liues were diueliſh.
            
               
                  AMbitions wheele, which Traytors do aſpire,
               Hath brought the Rebels to their altitude:
               And now declining, downe-ward they retire,
               By iuſt Re
                     •
                  enge a downe-fall to conclude,
               From top o
                     •
                   Treaſon, thus they turne about:
               For now behold, their curſed date run out.
            
            
               The Martiall Duke layd ſeige vnto them now,
               Preuenting them of needfull wants ſupply,
               With dungers ſharpeſt ſword, to make them bow▪
               
               No expectation but reſolue to dye,
               Their length of life was meaſur'd by their ſtore,
               Which could not be enlarg'd acrum the more.
            
            
               
               Yet moſt extreame hard cruell ſhift they made,
               Holding the towne beſieg'd aboue a yeere,
               In which ſharpe time their paunches were betraide
               Of all their former feaſtes and belly cheere,
               For each mans ſtomack deem'd his throat was cut,
               There was ſuch emptineſſe in ery gut.
            
            
               When wholeſome foode was all conſumde and gone,
               After a hard allowance they had paſt,
               Horſes and Dogges they lickt their lips vpon,
               Then Rats and Miſe grew daintie meate at laſt,
               Olde ſhooes they boyld, which made good broth beſide,
               Buffe-lether Ierkins cut in Steakes they fride.
            
            
               Not an olde payre of Bootes did walke the ſtreete,
               Their bellies could not ſpare their legs the lether,
               But ſtew'd they were, and hunger made them ſweete,
               For with that ſauce they ſhar'd alike together.
               Couers of Bookes were in like maner dreſt,
               And happie he was ſuch a diſhes gheſt.
            
            
               
               The Chaundlers crawling tallow vtt'red well,
               It ſeru'd Hans Leyden and his Lords owne table,
               There was no fault found with the taſte nor ſmell,
               Their onely griefe was this, they were not able
               To maintaine that good cheere, which grew ſo ſcant,
               O
                     •
                   filthie kitchin ſtuffe they found great want.
            
            
               When they had eaten vp the Chaundlers trade,
               As likewiſe all the ware Shoomakers had,
               The Scriueners ſhops for parchment they inuade,
               And ſeize vpon it euen hunger mad,
               Cancelling with their teeth both bond and bill,
               Looke after debts and pay them he that will.
            
            
               In theſe extreames (quoth Leyden to the reſt)
               What ſhall we doe in this accurſed caſe?
               Aduiſe me now Tom Mynter what were beſt,
               What's to be done in this ſame hungry place?
               Speake Knipperdulling lets haue thy aduice,
               There's no prouiſion left of Rats and Mice.
            
            
               
               Why, fire the Towne, as late I did my Forge,
               (Quoth Knipperdulling) I do thi
                     •
                  ke it meete,
               Leaſt Saxon imitate Engliſh Saint George,
               
               And trample vs like Dragons vnder feete:
               Like Troy, let flame and ſmoake aſcend the skyes▪
               
               Wee burne like Phenix, that in fier dyes.
            
            
               Or let vs on a ſodaine iſſue out,
               And ruſh vpon thoſe raſcals keepe vs in:
               Moſt deſperat in that wee go about,
               As not reſpecting if wee loſe or win:
               Be as it wi
                     •
                  l, wee haue but liues to ſpend,
               A puffe of breath, and therewithall an end.
            
            
               In this eſtate deſpayring of their liues,
               
                  Iohn Leyden plots in his fantaſtique hed,
               To ſend out of the Towne one of his Wiues
               Vnto the Duke, to tell him ſhee is fled
               From thoſe accurſed Rebels, to his grace,
               To ſignifie the Citties weakeſt place.
            
            
               
               Thou muſt (quoth hee) play Iudiths part for all,
               And free vs from this ſame Aſsirian hoſt:
               Bring Holefernes head vnto the wall,
               That thus againſt Bethulia doth boſt:
               I had a Viſion did appeare to mee,
               Which ſignified thou ſhould'ſt our Iudith bee.
            
            
               And by thy meanes deliueraunce procure,
               Sauing out l
                     •
                  ues, to thy immortall prayſe:
               Then holy woman put this worke in vre,
               Thou ſee
                     ••
                   we die, if wee indure delayes:
               Thou haſt rare beautie, on with rich attire,
               And good ſucceſſe incline to thy deſire.
            
            
               This ſilly Woman eaſily deluded,
               Prepares her ſelfe vnto the enterpriſe:
               Departs the Towne as Leyden had concluded,
               Vnto the Duke, attyred in diſguiſe,
               As if ſhee had by ſecret made eſcape,
               Taking on her an Hipocrites true ſhape.
            
            
               
               Deliuers all the cunning ſhe was taught,
               To gaine her credit, and to free ſuſpect.
               The Duke miſdoubts her practize to be nought,
               And by examination findes direct
               The plot, and all the drift why ſhee was ſent,
               And thus to worke with this falſe Iudith went.
            
            
               A Scaffold was erected in the fight
               Of all the Rebels, that they might perceiue
               Their Gentlewoman playd not Iudith right:
               Becauſe her h
                     •
                  ad behind her ſhe did leaue:
               "For Treaſon neuer is ſo well contriu'd,
               "But ſtill the plotter is the ſhorteſt liu'd.
            
            
               Then did the Duke aſſault them very ſtrong,
               Who being weake, vnable to reſiſt,
               Tir'd out with Famine they endured long,
               And did ſubdue them euen as he h
                     ••
                  :
               Such leane Anotamies they ſeemed all,
               Like thoſe dry bones in the Chirurgeons hall.
            
            
               
               And heere ends LEYDENS kingdome and his raigne,
               His counterfayted tytle's out of date,
               Hee is Iohn Leyden Taylor now againe:
               And thoſe that were his Noble-men of late,
               Are eu'en reſtored to their firſt degree,
               
                  Smyth, Clarke, and Ioyner, arrant Knaues all three.
            
            
               To their deſerued deaths they are appoynted,
               For all their villanies, and extreame wrongs:
               Drawne through the Cittie ſtreets, and then disioynted,
               Their fleſh torne from the bones with fiery tongs:
               And as then liues did to all miſcheife tend,
               So did the deſp'rat vnrepentant end.
            
            
               Being dead▪ there were three Iron Cages made
               For ſtrength and ſubſtaunce to endure and laſt,
               And into them their bodyes were conueyd,
               And on the Citties higheſt Steeple plaſt,
               
                  Leyden 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ing higheſt, 
                     ••
                  o expreſſe his pride,
               
                  Mynter, and Knipperdulling, on each ſide.
            
            
               
               The like reward, be like offenders due.
               Let T
                     •
                  aytors ends be violent, and euill:
               And as theſe paſt, ſo all that ſhall enſue,
               Let them receiue their wages from the Deuill:
               Hee ſets a worke, and ſtirres them to aſpire,
               And is to pay them veng
                     •
                  aunce for their hire.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   