
      
         
            
               
               
THE LETTING OF HVMOVRS BLOOD IN THE HEAD-VAINE.
            VVith a new Moriſſco, daunced by ſeauen Satyres, vpon the bottome of Diogines Tubbe.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by W. White for W. F. 1600.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS.
            
               
                  HVmours, is late crown'd king of Caualeeres.
               
                  Fantaſtique-follies, grac'd with common fauour:
               
                  Ciuilitie, hath ſerued out his yeeres,
               And ſcorreth now to waight on Good be hauour.
               
                  Gallants, like Richard the vſurper, ſwagger,
               That had his hand continuall on his dagger.
            
            
               
                  Faſhions is ſtill conſort with new fond ſhapes,
               And feedeth dayly vpon ſtrange diſguiſe:
               We ſhew our ſelues the imitating Apes
               Of all the toyes that Strangers heades deuiſe:
               For ther's no habite of hell-hatched ſinne,
               That we delight not to be clothed in.
            
            
               Some ſweare, as though they Stars from heauen could pull▪
               
               And all their ſpeach is poynted with the ſtabbe,
               When all men know it is ſome coward gull,
               That is but champion to a Shorditch drabbe:
               Whoſe feather is his heades lightnes-proclaymer,
               Although he ſeeme ſome mightie monſter tamer.
            
            
               
               
                  Epicuriſme cares not how he liues,
               But ſtill purſueth brutiſh Appetite.
               
                  Diſdaine, regardes not what abuſe he giues;
               Careleſſe of wronges, and vnregarding right.
               
                  Selfe-loue, (they ſay) to ſelfe-conceite is wed,
               By which baſe match are vgly vices bred.
            
            
               
                  Pride, reuels like the royſting Pródigall;
               Stretching his credite that his purſse ſtrin
                     ••
                   cracke,
               Untill in ſome diſtresfull Iayle he fall,
               Which wore of late a Lordſhip on his backe:
               Where he till death muſt he for debt,
               
                  "Griefes night is neare, when pleaſures ſunne is ſet,
            
            
               
                  Vaunting, hath got a mightie thundring voyce,
               Looking that all men ſhould applaude his ſounde:
               His deedes are ſinguler, his wordes be choyce;
               On earth his equall is not to be founde.
               Thus Vertu's hid with Follies iuggling miſt,
               And hee's no man, that is no Humouriſt.
            
            
               S. R.
            
         
         
            
            TO POETS.
            GOod honeſt Poets, let me craue a boone,
            That you would write, I do not are how ſoone,
            Against the baſtard humours howerly bred,
            In euery mad brain'd wit-worne giddie head:
            At ſuch groſſe follies do not ſit and wincke,
            Belabour theſe ſame Gulles with pen and incke.
            You ſee ſome ſtriue for faire hand-writing fame,
            As Peeter Bales his ſigne can proue the ſame, P. B. by writing won a golden Penne.
            
            Gracing his credite with a golden Pen:
            I would haue Poets proue more taller men:
            In perfect Letters reſted his contention,
            But yours conſiſt's in Wits choyce rare inuention.
            Will you ſtand ſpending your inuentions treaſure,
            To teach Stage parrats ſpeake for pennie pleaſure,
            While you your ſelues like muſicke ſounding Lutes
            fretted and ſtrunge, gaine them their ſilken ſutes.
            Leaue Cupids cut, Womens face flatt'ring praiſe,
            Loues ſubiect growes too thredbare now adayes.
            Change Venus Swannes, to write of Vulcans Geeſe,
            And you ſhall merite Golden Pennes a peece.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            EPIGRAMS.
            
               Mirth pleaſeth ſome; to others ti's offence:
            Some wiſh t'haue follies tolde; ſome diſlike that:
            Some cōmend plaine conceites, ſome profound ſence
            And moſt would haue, themſelues know not what.
            Then he that would pleaſe all, and him ſelfe too,
            Takes more in hand, then he is like to doo.
            
               
               EPIG. 1.
               
                  
                     MOnſieur Domingo is a skilfull man,
                  For much experience he hath lately got,
                  Prouing more Phiſick in an Alehouſe ca
                        •
                     
                  
                  Then may be found in any Vinthers pot.
                  Beere he proteſtes is ſodden and refin'd,
                  But this he ſpeakes being ſingle penny lyn'd.
               
               
                  For when his purſe is ſwolne dut ſix-pence bigg
                  Why then he ſweares; now by the Lorde I think
                  All Beere in Furope is not worth a figge.
                  A cuppe of Claret is the onely drinke.
                  And thus his praiſe from Beere to Wine doth go
                  Euen as his Purſe in pence doth ebbe and flowe.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 2. BOREAS.
               
               HAng him baſe gull; Ile ſtabbe him by the Lord,
               If he preſume to ſpeake but halfe a word:
               
                  
                     •
                  e paunch the villaine with my Rapiers poynt,
               
                  
                     •
                  r heaw him with my Fauchion ioynt by ioynt.
               Through both his cheeks my Poniard he ſhal haue
               
                  
                     •
                  r Mince-pie-like Ile mangle out the ſlaue.
               
                  
                     •
                  ske who I am, you whorſon friſe-gowne patch?
               
                  
                     •
                  all me before the Counſtable, or Watch?
               
                  
                     •
                  annot a Captaine walke the Queenes high-way?
               
                  
                     •
                  vones, who de ſpeake to? know ye villains, ha?
               
                  
                     •
                  ou drunken peſſants, run's your tongs on wheeles?
               
                  
                     •
                  ong you to ſee your guttes about your heeles▪
               
               
                  
                     •
                  oeſt loue me Tym? let go my Rapier then,
               
                  
                     •
                  erſwade me not from killing nine or ten:
               
                  
                     •
                  are no more to kill them in braueado,
               
                  
                     •
                  hen for to drinke a pipe of Trinedado.
               
               
                  
                     •
                  ly minde to patience neuer will reſtore-me,
               
                  
                     •
                  ntill their blood do guſh in ſtreames before-me,
               
                  
                     •
                  hus doth Sir Launcelot in his drunken ſtagger,
               
                  
                     ••
                  eare, curſe & raile, threaten, proteſt, & ſwagger
               
                  
                     •
                  ut being next day to ſober anſwere brought,
               
                  
                     •
                  e's not the man can breede ſo baſe a thought.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 3.
               
                  When Thraſo meets his friend, he ſweares by God,
                  Vnto his Chamber he ſhall welcome be:
                  Not that hee'le cloy him there with roſt or ſod,
                  Such vulgar diet with Cookes ſhops agree:
                  But hee'le preſent moſt kinde, exceeding franke,
                  The beſt Tabacco, that he euer dranke.
               
               
                  Such as himſelfe did make a voyage for,
                  And with his owne hands gatherd from the ground
                  All that which other fetch he doth abhor,
                  His, grew vpon an Iland neuer found,
                  Oh rare compound, a dying horſe to choke,
                  Of Engliſh fier, and of India ſmoke.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 4.
               Who ſeekes to pleaſe all men each way,
               And not himſelfe offende,
               He may begin his worke to day,
               But God knowes when hee'le end.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 5.
               
                  Alas Delfridus keepes his bed God knowes,
                  Which is a ſigne his worſhip's verie ill;
                  His griefe beyond the grounds of Phiſicke goes,
                  No Doctor that comes neere it with his skill,
                  Yet doth he eate, drinke, talke, and ſleepe profoun
                        •
                     
                  
                  Seeming to all mens Iudgments healthfull ſound.
               
               
                  Then geſſe the cauſe he thus to bed is drawne,
                  What? thinke you ſo; may ſuch a hap procure it?
                  Well; faith tis true, his hoſe are out at pawne,
                  A Breetchleſſe chaunce is come, he muſt indure it
                  His hoſe to Brokers Iayle committed are,
                  His ſinguler, and onely, Veluet paire.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 6.
               
                  Diogines oneday through Athens went,
               With burning Torch in Sun-ſhine: his intent
               Was (as he ſaid) ſome honeſt man to finde:
               
                  
                     •
                  or ſuch were rare to meete, or he was blinde.
               
                  
                     •
                  ne late, might haue done wel like light t'haue got
               
                  
                     •
                  hat ſought his wife; met her, and knew her not:
               
                  
                     •
                  ut ſtay, cry mercy, ſhe had on her maske,
               
                  
                     •
                  ow could his eyes performe their ſpying taske?
               
                  
                     •
                  is verie true, t'was hard for him to doo,
               
                  
                     •
                  y Sunne, and Torch; let him take Lant-horne too.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 7.
               
                  Speake Gentlemen, what ſhall we do to day?
                  Drinke ſome braue health vpon the Dutch carouſ
                  Or ſhall we to the Globe and ſee a Play?
                  Or viſit Shorditch for a bawdie houſe?
                  Lets call for Cardes or Dice, and haue a Game,
                  To ſit thus idle, is both ſinne and ſhame.
               
               
                  This ſpeakes Sir Reuell, furniſht out with faſhion,
                  From diſh-crownd Hat, vnto the Shoo's ſquare to
                  That haunts a Whore-houſe but for recreation,
                  Playes but at Dice to conny catch or ſo.
                  Drinkes drunke in kindnes, for good fellowſhip.
                  Or to Play goes but ſome Purſe to nip.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 8.
               
                  Sir gall-Iade, is a Horſe man e'ry day,
                  His Bootes and Spurres and Legges do neuer part;
                  He rides a horſe as paſſing cleane away,
                  As any that goes Tyburne-warde by cart.
                  Yet honeſtly he payes for hacknyes hyer,
                  But hang them Iades, he ſell's them when they tire.
               
               
                  He liues not like Diogines on Rootes,
                  But proues a Mince-pie gueſt vnto his Hoſt.
                  He ſcornes to walke in Paules without his Bootes,
                  And ſcores his diet on the Vitlers poſt:
                  And when he knowes not where to haue his dinner
                  He faſtes, and ſweares, A glutton is a ſinner.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 9. Drudo.
               
               
                  This Gentleman hath ſerued long in Fraunce,
                  
                  And is returned filthy full of French,
                  In ſingle combat, being hurt by chaunce,
                  As he was cloſely foyling at a Wench:
                  Yet hot alarmes he hath endur'd good ſtore,
                  But neuer in like pockie heate before.
               
               
                  He had no ſooner drawne and ventred ny-her,
                  Intending only but to haue about,
                  When ſhe his Flaske and Touch-boxe ſet on fier,
                  And till this hower the burning is not out.
                  Iudge, was not valour in this Martiall wight,
                  That with a ſpit-fir Serpent ſo durſt fight.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 10. In Meritricem.
               
               FAyth Gentleman, you moue me to offence.
               In comming to me with vnchaſt pretence.
               Haue I the lookes of a laſciuious Dame?
               That you ſhould deeme me fit for wantons game?
               I am not ſhe will take luſtes ſinne vpon her,
               He rather die, then dimme chaſt glorious honor.
               Tempt not mine eares; an grace of Chriſt I meane
               To keepe my honeſt reputation cleane:
               My hearing lets no ſuch lewd ſound come in,
               My ſenſes loath to ſurfet on ſweet ſinne,
               Reuerſe your minde, that goes from grace aſtray,
               And God forgiue you, with my hart I pray.
               The Gallant notes her words, obſerues her frowns
               Then drawes his purſe, & lets her view his crowns
               Vowing that if her kindnes graunt him pleaſure,
               She ſhall be Miſtris to command his treaſure.
               The ſtormes are calm'd, the guſt is ouer-blowne,
               And ſhe replies with: Yours or not her owne.
               
               Deſiring him to cenſure for the beſt,
               Twa's but her tricke to try if men do ieſt:
               Her loue is lock'd where he may picke the trunck
               Let Singer iudge if this be not a puncke.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 11.
               
                  Pollitique Peeter meetes his friend a ſhore,
                  That came from Seas but newly tother day:
                  And giues him French embracements by the ſcore
                  Then folowes: Dicke, Haſt made good voyage, ſay?
                  But hearing Richards ſhares be poore and ſicke,
                  
                     Peeter ha's haſte, and cannot drinke with Dicke.
                  
               
               
                  Well, then he meetes an other Caualeere,
                  Whom he ſalutes about the Knees and Thighes:
                  welcome ſweet Iames, now by the Lord what cheere
                  Ne're better Peeter, We haue got rich prize.
                  Come, come (ſayes Peeter) eu'en a welcome quart,
                  For by my fayth, weele drinke before wee part:
               
               
                  Or thus:
               
               Fayth-we muſt drinke, that's flat, before we part.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 12.
               
                  Fine Phillip comes vnto the Barbers ſhopp,
                  Wheer's nittie lockes muſt ſuffer reformation.
                  The Chayre and Cuſhion entertaine his ſloppe:
                  The Barber craues to know his worſhips faſhion.
                  His will is ſhauen; for his beard is thin,
                  It was ſo lately baniſh'd from his chinne.
               
               
                  But ſhauing oft will helpe it, he doth hope,
                  And therefore for the ſmooth-face cut he calles:
                  Then, fie; theſe cloathes are waſht with common ſope.
                  Why doſt thou vſe ſuch ordinary balles?
                  I ſcorne this common trimming like a Boore,
                  Yet with his hart he loues a common whoore.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 13. Signieur Fantasticke.
               
               
                  I ſcorne to meete an enemie in fielde,
                  Except he be a Souldier: (by this light)
                  I likewiſe ſcorne, my reaſon for to yeelde:
                  Yea further, I do well nigh ſcorne to fight.
                  Moreouer, I do ſcorne to be ſo vaine,
                  To draw my Rapier, and put vp againe.
               
               
                  I eke do ſcorne to walke without my man,
                  Yea, and I ſcorne good morrow and good deane:
                  I alſo ſcorne to touch an Ale-houſe cann,
                  Thereto I ſcorne an ordinarie Queane.
                  Thus doth he ſcorne, diſdainfull, proude, and grim,
                  All but the Foole onely, he ſcornes not him,
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 14.
               Some do account it golden lucke,
               They may be Widdow-ſped for mucke,
               Boyes on whoſe chinnes no downe appeares,
               Marry olde Croanes of threeſcore yeares:
               But they are fooles to Widdowes cleaue,
               Let them take that which Maydes do leaue.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 15.
               Amorous Auſtin ſpendes much Balletting,
               In rimeing Letters, and loue Sonnetting.
               She that loues him, his Ynckehorne ſhall be paint her,
               And with all Uenus tytles hee'le acquaint her:
               Vowing ſhe is a perfect Angell right,
               When ſhe by waight is many graines too light:
               Nay all that do but touch her with the ſtone,
               Will be depoſ'd that Angell ſhe is none.
               How can he proue her for an Angell them?
               That proues her ſelfe a Diuell, tempting men,
               And draweth many to the fierie pit,
               Where they are burned for their en'tring it.
               I know no cauſe wherefore he tearmes her ſo,
               Vnleſſe he meanes ſhee's one of them below,
               Where Lucifer, chiefe Prince doth domineere:
               If ſhe be ſuch, then good my hartes ſtand cleere,
               Come not within the compaſſe of her flight,
               For ſuch as do, are haunted with a ſpright.
               This Angell is not noted by her winges,
               But by her tayle, as full of prickes and ſtinges.
               And know this luſtblind Louer's vaine is led,
               To prayſe his Diuell, in an Angels ſted.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 16.
               
                  Gallus will haus no Barbour prune his beard,
               Yet is his chin cleane ſhauen and vnh'ear'd.
               How comes he trimmed, you may aske me than?
               His Wenches do it with their warming-pan.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 17.
               
                  When Caualero Rake-hell is to riſe
                  Out of his bed, he capers light and heddy.
                  Then wounds he ſweares: you arant whore he cries
                  Why what's the cauſe that breakfaſt is not reddy?
                  Can men feede like Camelions, on the ayre?
                  This is the manner of his morning prayer.
               
               
                  Well, he ſweares on, vntill his breakfaſt comes,
                  And then with teeth he falles to worke a pace:
                  Leauing his boy a banquet all of crummes.
                  Diſpatch you Roague: my Rapier, thats his grace.
                  So foorth he walkes, his ſtomacke muſt goe ſhift,
                  To dine and ſuppe abroad, by deed of guift.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 18.
               A wofull exclamation late I heard,
               Wherewith Tabacco takers may be feard:
               One at the poynt with pipe and leafe to part,
               Did vow Tabacco worſe then death's blacke dart:
               And prou'd it thus You know (quoth he) my friends
               Death onely ſtabbes the hart, and ſo life endes:
               But this ſame poyſon, ſteeped India weede,
               In head, hart, lunges, doth ſoote & copwebs breede.
               With that he gaſp'd, and breath'd out ſuch a ſmoke
               That all the ſtanders by were like to choke.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 19.
               
                  Cacus would gladly drinke, but wants his purſe,
               Nay wanteth money, which is ten times worſe:
               For as he vowes himſelfe, he hath not ſeene
               In three dayes ſpace the picture of the Queene.
               Yet if he meete a friend neare Tauerne ſigne,
               Straight he intreates him take a pint of Wine:
               For he will giue it, that he will, no nay.
               What will he giue? the other leaue to pay.
               He calleth: Boy, fill vs the tother quart,
               I will beſtow it euen with all my hart.
               Then doth he diue into his ſloppes profound,
               Where not a poore Port-cullice can be found.
               Meane while his frind diſcharges all the Wine:
               Stay, ſtay (quoth he) or well, next ſhalbe mine.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 02.
               
                  Francke in name, and Francke by nature,
               
                  Frauncis is a moſt kind creature:
               Her ſelfe hath ſuffered many a fall,
               
                  
                     •
                  n ſtriuing how to pleaſurs all.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 21.
               
                  Soto can proue, ſuch as are drunke by noone,
               Are long-liu'd men; the pox he can as ſoone.
               Nay, heare his reaſon ere you do condemne,
               And if you finde it fooliſh, hiſſe and hemme.
               He ſayes, Good blood is euen the life of man;
               I graunt him that: (ſay you) well go-to than.
               More drinke, the more good blood▪ O thats a lie;
               The more you drinke, the ſooner drunke, ſay I.
               Now he proteſtes you do him mightie wrong,
               Swearing a man in drinke, is three men ſtrong:
               And he will pawne his head againſt a pennie,
               One right madd drunke, wil brawle and fight with anie.
               Well, you reply▪ that argument is weake,
               How can a drunkard brawle, that cannot ſpeake?
               Or how can he vſe weapon in his hand.
               Which can not guide his feete to goe or ſtande?
               Harke what an oath the drunken ſlaue doth ſweare
               He is a man by that, a man may heare.
               And when you ſee him ſtagger, reele, and winke,
               He is a man and more; I by this drinke.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 22.
               When ſigneur Sacke & Suger drinke droun'd reeles,
               He vowes to heaw the ſpur's from's fellows heeles
               When calling for a quart of Charnico,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  nto a louing league they preſent grow:
               Then inſtantly vpon a cuppe or twaine,
               Out Poniards goe, and to the ſtabbe againe.
               
                  
                     •
                  rendes vpon that, they drinke and ſo imbrace:
               Straight bandy Daggers at each others face.
               This is the humour of a madd drunke foole,
               
                  
                     •
                  n Tauerne pots that keepes his Fenceing-ſchole.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 23.
               
                  
                     Cornutus was exceeding ſicke and ill,
                  Pain'd as it ſeemed chiefly in his hed:
                  He cal'd his friends, meaning to make his will,
                  Who found him drunke, with hoſe & ſhooes a bed
                  To whom he ſayd: Oh good my Maiſters ſee,
                  Drinke with his dart hath all be ſtabbed me.
               
               
                  I here bequeath, if I do chaunce to die,
                  To you kinde friendes, and bon companions all,
                  A pound of good Tabacco, ſweete and dry,
                  To drinke amongſt you, at my funerall:
                  Beſides, a barrell of the beſt ſtrong Beere,
                  And Pickle-herrings, for to domineere.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 24.
               We men, in many faultes abound,
               But two in women can be found:
               The worſt that from their ſex proceedes,
               Is naught in wordes, and naught in deedes.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 25.
               
                  Bid me go ſleepe? I ſcorne it with my heeles,
                  I know my ſelfe as good a man as thee.
                  Let go mine Arme I ſay, lead him that reeles,
                  I am a right good fellow; doſt thou ſee?
                  I know what longes to drinking, and I can
                  Abuſe my ſelfe as well as any man.
               
               
                  I care no more for twentie hundred pound,
                  (Before the Lord) then for a very ſtraw.
                  Ile fight with any he aboue the ground.
                  Tut, tell not me whats what; I know the law.
                  Rapier and Dagger: hey, a kingly fight.
                  Ile now try falls with any, by this light.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 26.
               Behold, a moſt accompliſh'd Caualeere,
               That the world's Ape of faſhions doth appeare,
               VValking the ſtreetes, his humors to diſcloſe,
               In the French Doublet, and the Germane hoſe:
               The Muffes cloake, Spaniſh Hat, Toledo blade.
               Italian ruffe, a Shooe right Flemiſh made,
               Like Lord of Miſrule, where he comes hee'le reuel
                     •
                  
               
               And lie for wagers with the lying'ſt diuell.
            
            
               
               Epig. 27.
               Aske Humors why a Feather he doth weare?
               It is his humor (by the Lord) heele ſweare.
               Or what he doth with ſuch a Horſe-taile locke?
               Or why vpon a Whoore he ſpendes his ſtocke?
               He hath a Humor doth determine ſo.
               Why in the ſtop-throate faſhion doth he go,
               With Scarfe about his necke? Hat without band?
               It is his humor, ſweete ſir vnderſtand.
               What cauſe his Purſe is ſo extreame diſtreſt,
               That often times t'is ſcarcely penny bleſt?
               Onely a Humor: If you queſtion why?
               His tongue is nere vnfurniſh'd with a lye:
               It is his Humor too he doth proteſt.
               Or why with Serjants he is ſo oppreſt,
               That like to Ghoſtes they haunt him erie day?
               A raſcall Humor, doth not loue to pay.
               Obiect, why Bootes and Spurres are ſtill in ſeaſon?
               His Humor anſweres; Humor is his reaſon.
               If you perceiue his wittes in wetting ſhrunke,
               It commeth of a humor, to be drunke.
               When you behold his lookes pale, thin, and poore,
               Th'occaſion is, his Humor, and a Whoore:
               And euery thing that he doth vndertake,
               It is a vaine, for ſenceleſſe Humors ſake.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 28.
               Three high-way ſtanders, hauing cros-leſſe curſſe,
               Did greet my friend with, Sir giue vs your purſſe,
               Though he were true-man, they agreed in one:
               For purſſe & coyne betwixt them foure was none.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 29.
               A Gentlewoman of the dealing trade,
               Procur'd her owne ſweete Picture to be made:
               Which being done, ſhe from her word did ſlippe,
               And would not pay full due 
                     〈…〉
                   manſhippe.
               The Painter ſwore ſhe ne
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   haue it ſo,
               She bade him keepe it, and 
                     〈…〉
                   go.
               He chollericke, and might 
                     〈…〉
                   content,
               Straight tooke his Pencell and to worke he went:
               Making the Dogge ſhe helde, a grim Cattes face,
               And hung it in his ſhoppe to her diſgrace,
               Some of her friendes that ſaw it to her went,
               In ieſting maner, as king what ſhe ment,
               To haue her picture hang where gazers ſwarme,
               Holding a filthy Catte within her arme?
               She in a ſhamefull heate in haſte did hie,
               The Painter to content and ſatisfie:
               Right glad to giue a French Crowne for his paine
               To turne her Catte into a Dogge againe.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 30.
               When Tarlton clown'd it in a pleaſant vaine
               With conceites did good opinions gaine
               Vpon the ſtage, his merry humours ſhop.
               Clownes knew the Clowne, by his great clowniſh ſlop
               But now th'are gull'd, for preſent faſhion ſayes,
               
                  Dicke Tarltons part, Gentlemens breeches plaies:
               In euery ſtreete where any Gallant goes,
               The ſwagg'ring Sloppe, is Tarltons clowniſh hoſe.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 31. To Lutius.
               
               
                  One newly practiz'd in Astronomie,
                  
                  That neuer dealt in weather witt before:
                  Would ſcrape (forſooth) acquaintance of the skie.
                  And by his art, go knocke at heauen dore,
                  Meane while a Scholler in his ſtudie ſlippes,
                  And taught his Wife skill in the Moones eclippes.
               
               
                  Next night that friend perſwades him walke alone
                  Into the field, to gather ſtarres that fell:
                  To mix them with Philoſophers rare ſtone
                  That begets gold: he likt the motion well,
                  And went to watch, where ſtarres dropt very thin,
                  But raine ſo ſhour'd, it wet his foole-caſe skin.
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 32.
               What gallant's that whoſe oaths flie through mine eares?
               How like a lord of Plut
                        •
                     es court he ſweares
               How braue in ſuch a baudie houſe he fought,
               How rich his emptie purſe is outſide wrought,
               How Duchman-like he ſwallows down his drinke
               How ſweete he takes Tabacco till he ſtinke:
               How loftie ſprited he diſdaines a Boore,
               How faythfull harted he is to a ( )
               How cocke-taile proude he doth his head a duance
               How rare his ſpurres do ring the morris-daunce.
               Now I proteſt, by Miſtris Suſans fanne,
               He and his boy, will make a proper man.
            
            
               
               Epig. 33.
               Laugh good my Maiſters, if you can intend it,
               For yonder comes a Foole that will defend it:
               Saw you a verier Aſſe in all your life,
               That makes himſelfe a pack-horſe to his wife?
               I would his noſe where I could wiſh, were warme,
               For carrying Pearle, ſo prettie vnder's arme.
               Pearle his wiues dog, a pretty ſweete-fac'd curre,
               That barkes a nightes at the leaſt fart doth ſturre,
               Is now not well, his cold is ſcarcely brooke,
               Therefore good Hisband wrap him in thy cloake:
               And ſweet hart, preethee helpe me to my Maske,
               Hold Pearle but tender, for he hath the laske.
               Heere, take my Muffe: & do you heare good man?
               Now giue me Pearle, and carry you my Fanne.
               Alacke poore Pearle, the wretch is full of paine,
               Hisband take Pearle, giue me my Fanne againe:
               See how he quakes; fayth I am like to weepe:
               Come to me Pearle; my Scarfe good hisband keepe
               To be with me I know my Puppie loues.
               Why Pearle, I ſay: Hisband take vp my Gloues.
               Thus goodman Idiot thinkes himſelfe an Earle,
               That he can pleaſe his wife, and carry Pearle:
               But other iudge his ſtate to be no higher,
               Then a Dogges yeoman, or ſome pippin Squier.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 34.
               What's he that fits 
                     •
                  nd takes a nappe,
               Fac'd like the North wind of a mappe:
               And ſleeping, to the wind doth nod?
               Tis Bacchus cooſen, Bellie-god.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 35.
               
                  
                     Seuerus is extreame in elloquence,
                  In perfum'd wordes, plung'd ouer head and eares,
                  He doth create rare phraſe, but rarer ſence,
                  Fragments of Latine, all about he beares.
                  Vnto his Seruingman, alias his Boy,
                  He vtters ſpeach exceeding quaint and coy.
               
               
                  Deminitiue, and my defectiue ſlaue,
                  Reach my corpes couerture immediately:
                  My pleaſures pleaſure is, the ſame to haue,
                  T'inſconce my perſon from frigiditie.
                  His man beleeues all's Welch, his Maiſter ſpoke,
                  Till he railes Engliſh: Roage go fetch my cloke,
               
            
            
               
               EPIG. 36.
               Why ſhould the Mercers trade, a Satten ſute,
               With Cookes greaſe be ſo wickedly polute?
               The reaſon is, the ſcandall and defame
               Grew, that a greaſie ſlouen weares the ſame.
            
            
               
               EPIG. 37.
               An honeſt Vicker and a kind conſort,
               That to the Alehouſe friendly would reſort,
               To haue a game at Tables now and than,
               Or drinke his pot as ſoone as any man.
               As faire a gamſter, and as free from braull,
               As euer man ſhould need to play withall:
               Becauſe his hoſteſſe pldg'd him not carouſe,
               Raſhly in choller did forſweare her houſe.
               Taking the glaſſe, this was the oath he ſwore,
               Now by this drinke, Ile nere come hither more
               But mightely his Hoſteſſe did repent,
               For all her gueſtes to the next Alehouſe went,
               Following their Vickers ſteps in euery thing,
               He led the parriſh euen by a ſtring.
               At length his auncient Hoſteſſe did complaine,
               She was vndone, vnleſſe he came againe,
               Deſiring certaine friendes of hers and his,
               To vſe a pollecie, which ſhould be this:
               Becauſe with cōming he ſhould not forſweare him,
               To ſaue his oath, they on their backes might beare him
               Of this good courſe the Vicket well did thinke,
               And ſo they allwaies carried him to drinke.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            SATYRES.
            
               Your Sceane is done, depart you Epigrammes:
            
            Enter Goat-footed Satyres, butt like Rammes:
            Come nimbly foorth, Why ſtand you on delay?
            O-ho, the Muſique-tuning makes you ſtay.
            Well, friske it out nimbly: you ſlaues begin,
            For now me thinkes the Fidlers handes are in.
            
               
               1.
               WHo haue we here? Behold him and be mute,
               Some mightie man Ile warrant by his ſute.
               If all the Mercers in Cheapſide ſhew ſuch,
               Ile giue them leaue to giue me twice aſmuch:
               I thinke the ſtuffe is nameleſſe he doth weare,
               But what ſo ere it be, it is huge geare.
               Marke but his gate, and giue him then his due,
               Some ſwaggring fellow, I may ſay to you:
               It ſeemes Ambition in his bigge lookes ſhroudes,
               Some Centaure ſure, begotten of the Cloudes,
               Now a ſhame take the buzard, is it he:
               I know the ruffaine, now his face I ſee.
               On a more gull the Sunne did neuer ſhine,
               How with a vengance comes the ſoole ſo fine?
               Some Noble mans caſt Sute is fallen vnto him,
               For buying Hoſe and Doblet would vndo him.
               
                  
But wote you now, whither the buzard walkes?
               I, into Paules for ſooth, and there he talkes
               Of forraine tumults, vttring his aduice,
               And prouing Warres euen like a game at dice:
               For this (ſayes he) as euery gamſter knowes,
               Where one ſide winnes, the other ſide muſt looſe
               Next ſpeach he vtters, is his ſtomackes care,
               Which ordinarie yeeldes the cheapeſt fare:
               Or if his purſſe be out of tune to pay,
               Then he remembers tis a faſting day:
               And then he talketh much againſt exceſſe,
               Swearing all other Nations eate farre leſſe
               Then Engliſhmen; experience you may get
               In Fraunce and Spaine; where he was neuer yet.
               With a ſcore of Figges and halfe a pint of Wine,
               Some foure or fine will very hugely dine.
               Mee thinkes this tale is very huge in ſound,
               That halfe a pint ſhould ſerue fiue to drinke round
               And twentie Figges could feed them full and fat:
               But trauellers may lye; who knowes not that,
               Then why not he, that trauels in conceit,
               From Eaſt to Weſt, when he can get no meate?
               His Iorney is in Paules in the backe Iſles,
               
                  
Wher's ſtomacke counts each pace a hūdred miles.
               A tedious thing, though chaunce will haue it ſuch,
               To trauaile ſo long baytleſle, ſure tis much.
               Some other time ſtumbling on wealthy Chuffes,
               Worth gulling: then he ſwaggers all in huffes,
               And tels them of a prize he was at taking
               Wil be the ſhip-boyes childrens childrens making:
               And that a Mouſe could finde no roome in holde,
               It was ſo peſterd all with pearle and golde:
               Vowing to pawne his head if it were tride,
               They had more Rubies then wold paue Cheapſid
               A thouſand other groſle and odious 
                     •
                  ies,
               He dares auouch to blind dull Iudgements eyes,
               Not caring what he ſpeake or what he ſweare,
               So he gaine credite at his hearers care.
               Sometimes into the Royall Exchange hee'le droppe
               Clad in the ruines of a Brokers ſhoppe:
               And there his tongue runs by as on affaires,
               No talke but of commodities and wares:
               And what great wealth he lookes for ery wind,
               From God knowes where, the place is hard to find.
               If newes be harkend for, then he preuailes,
               Setting his mynt a worke to coyne falſe tales.
               
                  
His tongues-end is betipt with forged chat,
               Vttring rare lyes to be admired at,
               Heele tell you of a tree that he doth know,
               Vpon the which Rapiers and Daggers grow,
               As good as Fleetſtreete hath in any ſhoppe,
               which being ripe, downe into ſcabbards droppe.
               He hath a very peece of that ſame Chaire.
               In which Caeſar was ſtabb'd: Is it not rare?
               He with his feete vpon the ſtoones did tread,
               That Sathan brought, & bad Chriſt make thē bread
               His wondrous trauels challenge ſuch renowne,
               That Sir Iohn Maundiuell is quite put downe.
               Men without heades, and Pigmies hand-bredth hie
               Thoſe with one legge that on their backes do lie,
               And do the weathers iniurie diſdaie,
               Making their legges a penthouſe for the raine:
               Are tut, and tuſh: not any thing at all.
               His knowledge knowes, what no mans notice ſhall
               This is a mate vnmeete for euery groome,
               And where he comes, peace, giue his lying roome
               He ſaw a Hollander in Middleborow,
               
               As he was flaſhing of a browne Loafe thorow,
               Where-to the haſte of hunger had inclyn'd him.
               
                  
Cut himſelfe through, & two that ſtood behind him
               Beſides, he ſaw a fellow put to death,
               Could drinke a whole Beere barrell at a breath.
               Oh this is he that will ſay any thing,
               That to himſelfe may any profite bring.
               Gainſt whoſoeuer he doth ſpeake he cares not,
               For what is it that ſuch a villaine dares not?
               And though in conſcience he cannot denie,
               The All-commaunder ſaith, Thou ſhalt not lie,
               
               Yet will he anſwere (careleſſe of ſoules ſtate)
               
                  Trueth telling, is a thing obtaineth hate.
               FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               2. SATYRE.
               A Man may tell his friend his fault in kindnes:
               To winke at folly, is a fooliſh blindnes.
               
                  God ſaue you ſir, ſaluteth with a grace,
               One he could wiſh neuer to ſee his face.
               But doth not he vſe meere disſimulation,
               That's inſide hate, and outſide ſalutation?
               Yes as I take it; yet his anſwere ſayes,
               Faſhions, and Cuſtomes, vſe it now a dayes.
               A Gentleman perhaps may chaunce to meete
               His liuing-griper face to face in ſtreete:
               And though his lookes are odious vnto ſight;
               Yet will he doe him the French congés right,
               And in his hart wiſh him as low as hell,
               When in his wordes, hee's glad to ſee him well:
               Then being thus, a man may ſoone ſuppoſe
               There is, God ſaue you ſir, ſometimes twixt foes.
               
                  
Oh ſir, why thats as true as you are heere,
               With one example I will make it cleere,
               And farre to fetch the ſame I will not goe,
               But into Heunds-ditch, to the Brokers row:
               Or any place where that trade doth remaine,
               Whether at Holborne Conduit, or Long-lane:
               
               If thyther you vouchſafe to turne your eye,
               And ſee the Pawnes that vnder forfayte lye,
               Which are foorth comming ſir, and ſafe enough
               Sayes good-man Broker, in his new print ruffe:
               He will not ſtand too ſtrictly on a day,
               Encouraging the party to delay;
               With all good wordes, the kindeſt may be ſpoke,
               He turnes the Gentleman out of his Cloake.
               And yet betweene them both, at euery meeting,
               
                  God ſaue you ſir, is their familiar greeting,
               This is much kindneſſe ſure, I pray commend him,
               With great good words, he highly doth befrend him
               It is a fauour at a pinch in neede:
               A pinching friendſhip, and a pinching deede.
               The ſlaue may weare his ſuites of Sattin ſo,
               And like a man of reputation go,
               When all he hath in houſe, or on his backe,
               
                  
It is his owne, by forfaytures ſhipwracke.
               See you the Brooch that long ins Hat hath bin?
               It may be there, it coſt him not a pin:
               His ſundry ſorts of diuers mens attyre,
               He weares them cheape, euen at his owne deſire.
               Shame ouer take the peſſant for his paine,
               That he ſhould pray on loſſes, to his gaine,
               In drawing Wardrobes vnder his ſubiection,
               Being a knaue in manners and complexion,
               Iumpe like to Vſurie, his neareſt kinne;
               That weares a money bagge vnder his chinne:
               A bunch that doth reſemble ſuch a ſhape,
               And hayred like to Paris garden Ape,
               Foaming about the chaps like ſome wilde Boore,
               As ſwart and tawnie as an India Moore:
               With narrow brow, and Squirrell eyes, he ſhowes,
               His faces chiefeſt ornament, is noſe,
               Full furniſhed with many a Clarret ſtaine,
               As large as any Codpice of a Dane,
               
               Emboſſed curious; euery eye doth iudge,
               His lacket faced with motheaten Budge:
               To which a paire of Satten ſleeues he weares,
               Wherein two pound of greace about he beares.
               
                  
His Spectacles do in a copper caſe,
               Hang dangling about his piſſing place.
               His breeches and his hoſe, and all the reſt
               Are ſutable: His gowne (I meane his beſt)
               Is full of threeds, Intitul'd right threed-bare:
               But wooll there on is wondrous ſcant and rare.
               The welting hath him in no charges ſtood,
               Beeing the ruines of a caſt French hood.
               Exceſſe is ſinfull, and he doth defie it,
               A ſparing whorſon in attire and diet.
               Only exceſſe is lawfull in his Cheſt,
               For there he makes a golden Angels neſt:
               And vowes no farder to be found a lender,
               Then that moſt pretious mettall doth engender:
               Begetting dayly more and more encreaſe,
               His monyes ſlaue, till wretched life ſurceaſe.
               This is the Iew alied very neere,
               vnto the Broker, for they both do beare
               Vndoubted teſtimonie of their kinne:
               A brace of Raſcals in a league of ſinne.
               Two filthy Curres that will on no man fawne,
               Before they taſt the ſweetneſſe of his pawne.
               And then the ſlaues will be as kinde forſooth,
               
                  
Not as Kind-hart, in drawing out a tooth:
               For he doth eaſe the Patient of his paine,
               But they diſeaſe the Borrower of his gaine.
               Yet neither of them vſe extremitie,
               They can be villaines euen of charitie.
               To lend our brother it is meete and fit:
               Giue him roſt meate and beat him with the ſpit.
               
                  Vſerie ſure is requiſite and good,
               And ſo is Brokeage, rightly vnderſtood:
               But ſoft a litle, what is he ſayes ſo?
               One of the twaine (vpon my life) I know.
               FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               3. SATIRE.
               OH, let the Gentlewoman haue the wall,
               I know her well; tis Miſtris, What d'ye call.
               It ſhould be ſhee, both by her Maske and Fanne:
               And yet it ſhould not, by her Seruing-man;
               For if mine eyes do not miſtake the foole,
               He is the Vſher of ſome dauncing Schole,
               The reaſon why I do him ſuch ſuppoſe,
               Is this, Mee thinkes he daunceth as he goes.
               An actiue fellow, though he be but poore,
               Eyther to vault vpon a Horſe, or &c.
               See you the huge bum Dagger at his backe,
               To which no Hilt nor Iron he doth lacke.
               Oh with that blade he keepes the queanes in awe,
               Brauely behacked, like a two-hand Saw.
               Stampes on the ground, & byteth both his thumbs
               Vnleſſe he be commaunder where he coms.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
You damned whores, where are you? quicke come heere,
               Dry this Tabacco. Fill a doſen of Beere:
               Will you be briefe? or long you to be bang'd?
               Hold, take this Match, go light it and be hang'd.
               Where ſtay theſe whores when Gent. do call?
               Heer's no attendaunce (by the Lord) at all.
               Then downe the ſtaires the pots in rage he throws
               And in a damned vaine of ſwearing growes,
               For he will challenge any vnder heau'n,
               To ſweare with him, and giue him ſixe at ſeuen.
               Oh, he is an accompliſh'd Gentleman,
               And many rare conceited knackes he can;
               Which yeeld to him a greater ſtore of gaine,
               Then iuggling Kings, hey Paſſe, ledgerdemaine.
               His witt's his lyuing: one of quaint deuice,
               For Bowling-allies, Cockpits, Cardes, or Dice,
               To thoſe exploytes he euer ſtandes prepar'd:
               A Villaine excellent at a Bum card.
               The Knaue of Clubbes he any time can burne,
               And finde him in his booſome, for his turne.
               Tut, he hath Cardes for any kind of game,
               
                  Primero, Saunt, or whatſoeuer name:
               Make him but dealer, all his fellowes ſweares,
               
                  
If you do finde good dealing, take his eares.
               But come to Dice, why that's his onely trade,
               
                  Michell Mum-chaunce, his owne inuention made.
               He hath a ſtocke, whereon his lyuing ſtayes,
               And they are Fullams, and Bard quarter-trayes:
               
               His Langrets, with his Hie men, and his low,
               
               Are ready what his pleaſure is to throw:
               His ſtopt Dice with Quick-ſiluer neuer miſſe.
               He calles for, Come on fiue; and there it is:
               Or elſe heele haue it with fiue and a reach,
               Although it coſt his necke the Halter ſtretch.
               Beſides all this ſame kind of cheating art,
               The Gentleman hath ſome good other part,
               Well ſeene in Magicke and Aſtrologie,
               
               Flinging a Figure wondrous handſomly,
               Which if it do not miſſe, it ſure doth hit:
               Of troth the man hath great ſtore of ſmall witt.
               And note him whereſoeuer that he goes,
               His Booke of Characters is in his hoſe.
               His dinner he will not preſume to take,
               Ere he aſke counſell of an Almanacke.
               Heele finde if one prooue falſe vnto his wife,
               Onely with Oxe blood, and a ruſtic knife.
               
                  
He can transforme himſelfe vnto an Aſſe,
               Shew you the Deuill in a Chriſtall glaſſe:
               The Deuill ſay you? why I, is that ſuch wonder?
               Being conſortes, they will not be a ſunder.
               
                  Alcumie in his braines ſo ſure doth ſettle,
               He can make golde of any copper kettle;
               Within a three weekes ſpace or ſuch a thing,
               Riches vpon the whole worlde he could bring.
               But in his owne purſe one ſhall hardly ſpie it,
               Witneſſe his Hoſteſſe, for a twelue-moneths diet:
               Who would be glad of golde or ſiluer either,
               But ſweares by chalke, & poſt, ſhe can get neither.
               More, he will teach any to gaine their loue,
               
                  
                     •
                  s thus (ſaies he) take me a Turtle Doue,
               And in an Ouen let her lie and bake
               
                  
                     •
                  o dry, that you may poulder of her make;
               Which being put into a cup of wine,
               The wenche that drinkes it will to loue incline:
               
                  
                     •
                  nd ſhall not ſleepe in quiet in her bed,
               Till ſhe be eaſed of her mayden-head.
               This is probatum, and it hath bin tride,
               Or elſe the cunning man cunningly lide.
               
                  
                     •
                   may be ſo, a lie is not ſo ſtrange,
               
                  
Perhaps he ſpake it when the Moone did change
               And thereupon (no doubt) th'occaſion ſprunge,
               Vnconſtant Luna, ouer rul'd his tongue.
               
                  Astronomers that traffique with the Skie,
               By common cenſure ſometimes meete the lie:
               Although in deede their blame is not ſo much,
               When Starres & Plannets faile, & keepe not tutch.
               And ſo this fellow with his large profeſſion,
               That endes his triall in a farre digreſſion:
               
                  Philoſophers be queathed him their ſtone,
               To make gold with, yet can his purſe hold none.
               FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               4. SATIRE.
               
                  Melflunious, ſweete Roſe-watred elloquence,
               Thou that haſt hunted Barbariſme hence,
               And taught the goodman Cobbin at his plow,
               To be as elloquent as Tullie now:
               Who nominic ates his Bread and Cheeſe a name,
               (That doth vntruſle the nature of the ſame)
               
                  His stomacke stayer. How dee like the phraſe?
               Are Plowmen ſimple fellowes now a dayes?
               Not ſo my Maiſters: What meanes Singer then?
               And Pope the Clowne, to ſpeake ſo Booriſh, when
               They counterfaite the clownes vpon the Stage?
               Since Countrey fellowes grow in this ſame age,
               To be ſo quaint in their new printed ſpeech,
               That cloth will now compare with Veluet breech
               Let him diſcourſe euen where, and when he dare,
               Talke nere ſo Ynk-horne learnedly and rare,
               Sweare Cloth breech is a peſſant (by the Lord)
               
                  
Threaten to draw his wrath-venger, his ſworde:
               Tuſh, Cloth-breech doth deride him with a laugh,
               And lets him ſee Bone-baster, thats his ſtaffe:
               Then tels him brother, friend, or ſo foorth, heare ye
               Tis not your knitting-needle makes me feare ye.
               If to aſcention you are ſo declinde,
               I haue a reſtitution in my minde:
               For though your beard do ſtand ſo fine muſtated,
               Perhaps your noſe may be transfiſtic ated.
               Man, I dare challenge thee to throw the ſledge,
               To iumpe or leape ouer a ditch or hedge,
               To wraſtle, play a ſtooleball, or to runne,
               To pitch the barre, or to ſhoote off a gunne,
               To play at loggets, nine holes, or ten pinnes,
               To trie it out at foot-ball by the ſhinnes;
               At Ticktacke, Iriſh, Noddie, Maw, and Ruffe:
               At hot-cockles, leape-frogge, or blindman-buffe.
               To drinke halfe pots, or deale at the whole canne:
               To play at baſe, or pen-and Ynk-horne ſir Ihan:
               To daunce the Morris, play at barly-breake:
               At all exploytes a man can thinke or ſpeake:
               At ſhoue-groate, venter-poynt, or croſſe and pile.
               Atbeſhrow him that's laſt at yonder ſtile,
               
                  
At leaping ore a Midſommer bon-fier,
               Or at the drawing Dun out of the myer:
               At any of theſe, or all theſe preſently,
               Wagge but your finger, I am for you, I.
               I ſcorne (that am a youngſter of our towne)
               To let a Bow-bell Cockney put me downe.
               This is a Gallant farre beyond a Gull,
               For very valour filles his pockets full.
               Wit ſhowers vpon him Wiſedomes raine in plent
               For heele be hangd, if any man finde twenty
               In all their pariſh, whatſoere they be,
               Can ſhew a head ſo polleticke as he.
               It was his fathers lucke of late to die
               
                  Unteſtate; he about the Legacie
               To London came, inquiring all about,
               How he might finde a Ciuill-villin out,
               Being vnto a Ciuill Lawyer ſent,
               Pray Sir (quoth he) are you the man I meant:
               That haue a certaine kind of occupation,
               About dead men, that leaue things out of faſhion
               Death 
                     •
                  ath done that which t'anſwere he's not ab
               My father he is dyed deteſtable:
               I being his eldeſt heire, he did prefer
               
                  
Me Sir, to be his Executioner:
               And verie breifly my requeſt to finniſh,
               Pray how may I by law, his goods diminniſh?
               Was this a Clowne? tell true, or was a none?
               You make fatte Clownes, if ſuch as he be one:
               A man may ſweare, if he were vrg'd to it.
               Fooliſher fellowes, haue not ſo much wit.
               Oh ſuch as he, are euen the onely men,
               Loue letters in a Milke-maydes praiſe to pen:
               Lines that will worke the curſteſt ſullen ſhrow,
               To loue a man whether ſhe will or no.
               Being moſt wonderous patheticall,
               To make Ciſse out a cry in loue withall:
               He ſcornes that maiſter Scholemaiſter ſhold think
               He wants his aide in halfe a pen of ynke:
               All that he doth it commeth euery whit,
               From natures dry-fat, his owne mother wit.
               As thus:
               Thou Honnyſuckle of the Hawthorne hedge,
               Vouchſafe in Cupids cuppe my hart to pledge,
               My hartes deare blood ſweete Cis, is thy carouſe,
               Worth all the Ale in Gammer Gubbins houſe:
               I ſay no more, affaires call me away,
               
                  
My Fathers horſe for prouender doth ſtay,
               Be thou the Lady Creſsit-light to mee,
               Sir Trollelolle I will proue to thee.
               Written in haſte: farewell my Cowſlippe ſweete,
               Pray lets a Sunday at the Ale-houſe meete.
               FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               5. SATYRE.
               TIs a bad world, the common ſpeach doth go,
               And he complaines, that helpes to make it ſo:
               Yet euery man th'imputed crime would ſhunne,
               Hipocriſie with a fine threed is ſpunne.
               Each ſtriues to ſhew the very beſt in ſeeming,
               Honeſt enough, if honeſt in eſteeming.
               Praiſe waites vpon him now with much renowne
               That wrappes vp Uices vnder Uertues gowne:
               Commending with good wordes, religious deede
               To helpe the poore, ſupply our neighbours neede
               Do no man wrong, giue euery man his owne,
               Be friend to all, and enemie to none;
               Haue charitie, auoyde contentious ſtrife,
               Oft he ſpeakes thus, that nere did good in's life.
               
                  Deriſion hath an ore in euery Boate,
               In's Neighbours eie he quickly ſpies a moate,
               
                  
But the great beame that's noted in his owne,
               He lets remaine, and neuer thinkes thereon.
               Some do report he beares about a ſacke,
               Halfe hanging forwards, halfe behind at's backet
               And his owne faultes (quight out of ſight & minde)
               He caſtes into the part that hanges behinde:
               But other mens, he putteth in before,
               And into them, he looketh euermore.
               
                  Contempt comes very neere to th' others vaine,
               He hates all good deſerts with proud diſdaine:
               
                  Raſhneſſe is his continuall walking mate,
               Coſtly apparreld, loftie in his gate:
               Vp to the eares in double ruffes and ſtartch,
               God bleſſe your eieſight when you ſee him march:
               
                  
                     •
                  atutes, and lawes, he dare preſume to breake,
               Againſt ſuperiors cares not what he ſpeake.
               
                  
                     •••
                   his humours recreation fittes,
               To beare Counſtables, and reſiſt all writtes,
               
                  
                     •
                  wearing the ripeſt wits are childiſh young;
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   leſſe they gaine inſtructions from his tongue.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   hers nothing done amongſt the very beſt,
               
                  
                     •
                  ut he'le 
                     •
                  eri
                     •
                  e it with ſome bitter ieſt.
               
                  
                     •
                  's meate and drinke vnto him alwayes, when▪
               
               
                  
He may be cenſuring of other men.
               If a man do but toward a Tauerne looke,
               He is a drunkard heele ſweare on a Booke:
               Or if one part a fray of good intention,
               He is a quarreller, and loues diſſention.
               Thoſe that with ſilence vaine diſcourſes breake,
               Are proud fantaſticks, that diſdaine to ſpeake.
               Such as ſpeake ſoberly with wiſedomes leaſure,
               Are fooles, that in affected ſpeach take pleaſure,
               If he heare any that reproueth vice,
               He ſayes, thers none but hipocrites ſo nice.
               No honeſt woman that can paſſe along,
               But muſt endure ſome ſcandall from his tongue.
               She, deales croſſe blowes her huſband neuer feeles:
               This Gentle woman, weareth capering heeles.
               There minces Mall, to ſee what youth wil like her,
               Her eyes do beare her witneſſe ſhe's a ſtriker.
               Yonders a wench, new dipt in beauties blaze,
               She, is a Maide as Maides go now adayes.
               And thus Contempt makes choiſeſt recreation,
               In holding euery one in deteſtation:
               His common gate is of the ietting ſize,
               He hath a paire of euer-ſtaring eyes.
               
                  
And lookes a man ſo hungry in the face,
               As he would eate him vp, and neare ſay grace.
               A little low cround Hatte he alwayes weares,
               And Fore-horſe-like therein a Feather beares.
               Goodly curld lockes; but ſurely tis great pitty,
               For want of kembing, they are beaſtly nitty.
               Hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   is a cut caſt Satten one,
               He ſcornes to buy new now, that nere bought none
               Spotted in diuers places with pure fat,
               Knowne for a right tall trencher man by that.
               His Breeches that came to him by befrending,
               Are deſperate like himſelfe, & quite paſt mending
               He takes a common courſe to goe vntruſt,
               Except his Shirt's a waſhing; then he muſt
               Goe woollward for the time: hee ſcornes it hee,
               That worth two Shirts his Laundreſſe ſhould him ſee
               The weapons that his humors do efford,
               Is Bum-dagger, and basket hilted Sword.
               And theſe in euery Bawdie houſe are drawne
               Twice in a day, vnleſſe they be at pawne.
               If any fall together by the eares,
               To field cries he; why? zownes (to field) he ſweares
               Shew your ſelues men: hey, ſlaſh it out with blowes
               
                  
Let won make tothers guts garter his hoſe,
               Make Steele and Iron vmpiers to the Fray,
               You ſhall haue me goe with, to ſee faire play:
               Let mee alone, for I will haue a care
               To ſee that one do kill the tother faire.
               This is Contempt, that's euery ones diſdayner
               The ſtrife purſuer, and the peace refrayner
               
                  Hates thunderbolt, damn'd Murders larum-bell,
               A neare deare Kinſman to the Diuell of hell:
               And he whom Sathan to this humor bringes,
               Istn only man for all deteſted thinges.
               FINIS.
               
            
            
               
               6. SATYRE.
               
                  TOm's no good fellow, nor no honeſt man:
               Hang him, he wold not pledge Ralfe halfe a can
               But if a friend may ſpeake as he doth thinke,
               
                  Will is a right good fellow by this drinke:
               Oh William, William, th'art as kind a youth,
               As euer I was drunke with, thats the trueth.
               
                  Tom is no more like thee, then Chalks like Cheeſe.
               To pledge a health, or to drinke vp-ſe freeſe:
               Fill him his Beaker, he will neuer flinch,
               To giue a full quart pot the emptie pinch.
               Heele looke vnto your water well enough.
               And hath an eye that no man leaues a ſnuffe.
               A pox of peecemeale drinking (William ſayes)
               Play it away, weele haue no ſtoppes and ſtayes,
               Blowne drinke is odious, what man can disieſt it,
               No faythfull drunkard, but he doth deteſt it.
               
                  
I hate halfe this, out with it, and an end,
               He is a buzard will not pledge his friend,
               But ſtandes as though his drinkes maſt-ſacke were cloſed
               with, Heer's t'ye Sir, againſt you are diſpoſed?
               
               How ſay my friend, an may I be ſo bold,
               Blowing on's Beere like broth to make it cold,
               Keeping the full glaſſe till it ſtand and ſower,
               Drinking but after halfe a mile an hower,
               Vnworthy to make one, or gaine a place,
               Where boone companions gage the pots apace.
               A mans a ma
                     •
                  
                  ▪ and therewithall an ende,
               Goodfellowſhip was bred and borne to ſpende,
               No man ere ſaw a pound of ſorrow yet,
               Could be allowd to pay an ounce of debt.
               We may be here to day, and gone to morrow.
               Call mee for ſixe pots more come on, hang ſorrow
               Tut, lacke another day? Why, tis all one,
               When we are dead, then all the world is gone.
               Begin to me good Ned: What? haſt gon right?
               Is it the ſame that tickeld mee laſt night?
               We gaue the Brewers Diet-drinke a wipe:
               Braue Malt-Tabacco in a quart pot-pipe,
               It nettld mee, and did my braines inſpire,
               
                  
I haue forſworne your drinking ſmoake and fier:
               Out vpon Cane and leafe Tabacco ſmell:
               Diuells take home your drinke keepe it in hell.
               Carow
                     •
                  e in Cannons Trinidado ſmoake,
               Drinke healths to one another till you choake,
               And let the Indians pledge you till they ſweate,
               Giue me the element that drowneth heate:
               Strong ſodden Water is a vertuous thing,
               It makes one ſweare, and ſwagger like a King,
               And hath more hidden Uertue then you thinke,
               For Ile maintaine, good liquor's meate and drinke:
               Nay, Ile goe further with you, for in troth,
               It is as good as meate, and drinke, and cloth;
               For he that is in Malt-mans Hall inrolde,
               Cares not a poynt for hunger nor for colde.
               If it be cold, he drinketh till he ſweate,
               If it be hot, he drinkes to lay the heate:
               So that how ere it be cold or hot,
               To pretious vſe he doth apply the pot:
               And will approue it Phiſically ſound,
               If it be drunke vpon the Daniſh round:
               Or taken with a Pickle-herring or two,
               As Flemmings at Saint Katherines vſe to do:
               
                  
Which fiſh hath vertue, eaten ſalt and raw,
               To pull drinke to it, euen as Ieate doth ſtraw.
               Oh tis a very Whetſtone to the braine,
               A march-beere ſhewer that puts downe April raine
               It makes a man actiue to leape and ſpring,
               To daunce and vault, to carrowle and to ſing:
               For all exploytes it doth a man inable,
               T'out leape mens heades, and caper ore the table,
               To burne Sacke with a candle till he reeles,
               And then to trip-vp his companions heeles.
               To ſing like the great Organ pipe in Poules,
               
               And cenſure all men vnder his controules.
               Againſt all commers ready to maintaine,
               That deepeſt wit is in a drunken braine.
               I marry is it; that it is he knowes it,
               And by this drinke, at all times will depoſe it,
               He ſayes, that day is to a minute ſhrunke,
               In which he makes not ſome good fellow drunke:
               As for nine worthies on his Hoſtes wall,
               He knowes three worthy drunkards paſſe them all
               The firſt of them in many a Tauerne tride,
               At laſt ſubdued by Aquauitae, dide.
               His ſecond Worthies date was brought to fine,
               
                  
Feaſting with Oyſters and braue Renniſh wine,
               The third, whom diuers Dutchmen held full deare,
               Was ſtabb'd by pickeld Hearings & ſtrong Beere.
               Well, happy is the man doth rightly know,
               The vertue of three cuppes of Charnico:
               
               Being taken faſting, th'only cure for Flegme,
               It worketh wonders on the braine, extreame.
               A pottle of wine at morning, or at night,
               Drunke with an Apple, is imployed right,
               To rince the Liuet, and to purifie
               A dead ſicke Hart from all infirmitie.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   