
      
         
            
            
            A SACRED MEMORIE OF THE MIRACLES wrought by our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
            Written by Samuel Rowlands.
            
            
               
                  IOHN. 10:
               If you beleeue not Mee, beleeue the works that I doe,
            
            
               depiction of Christ performing miracles
            
            LONDON. Imprinted by Bernard Alſop, and are to be ſold at his houſe by Saint Annes Church neere Alderſgate. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL SORCERERS, ENCHAVNTERS, CHARmers, Nigromancers, Coniurers, Magitians, Southſayers, Witches, Fortunetellers; And all the reſt of the Deuils Iuglers, Whatſoeuer, and Whereſoeuer.
            MOnſters of men, whoſe ſoules damnation claymes,
            Appeare, come forth, and anſwere to your names;
            Like Pharao's blacke Enchaunters all aſſemble,
            And like vnto his drowned hoaſt, all tremble:
            What are the wonders that you vndertake?
            But lying ſignes, amazed fooles to make,
            The meere illuſions, falſe and fained ſhowes,
            Which Sathans power vpon his ſonnes beſtowes;
            A miracle, moſt truely to define,
            Is a rare worke, wrought by ſole power diuine.
            Apparantly againſt th'inſtinct we finde
            Of any courſe in Natures cauſe or kinde:
            And in it ſelfe a true worke it muſt be,
            Moſt ſenſible, and viſible to ſee:
            Not on Illuſion to deceyue the eye;
            
               Such as the Deuill ſtill deludeth by;
            Neither is it celerity of hand,
            No Iuglers trickes with miracle will ſtand,
            Actiuity containing what they doe;
            And meere deceit the onely helpe thereto:
            The miracles of God no ſuch things need;
            But are moſt reall true in power and deed:
            Thoſe wonders which the Lord himſelfe hath done,
            And miracles of Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne,
            All by the Prophets and Apoſtles wrought;
            Doe vtterly confound, and bring to nought
            The counterfeites of Sathan and his route,
            Which they euen like Gods apes doe goe about,
            And therefore when ſtrange things to ſence appeare,
            To know the power, and bee reſolued cleere,
            (Whether it doe proceede from that great might,
            Which onely worketh miracles aright)
            Examine if in actions true eſteeme,
            It be a worke, or onely ſo do ſeeme;
            A worke that rarely is admirde of all,
            Which for diſtinction ſake, I rare doe call,
            Becauſe of Gods great works, ſome vſuall bee,
            Which all of vs, doe ordinary ſee,
            As is the preſeruation of mankind,
            This euery one continually doth finde,
            By Gods eternall counſell and decreeing;
            
               In him we liue, and moue, and haue our being;
            
            But ſince it is effected day and houre,
            By his great prouident protecting power,
            No Miracle this properly is found,
            That with amazement doth mans ſenſe confound;
            
               For miracles haue in them operation,
            To ouercome the mind with admiration;
            As when our Sauiour Chriſt wrought miracle▪
            
            The holy bleſt Euangeliſts doe tell
            Th'effect thereof, thus preſent did befall;
            The people were with feare aſtonied all,
            And ſaid; How can he that a Sinner is,
            
            
               Performe the works of ſuch a power as this?
            
            Thereby inſinuating, there was none
            Could worke true miracles, but God alone:
            Vaniſh therefore like vapours of the night,
            You that would robbe the Lord, of power and might,
            Confounded be all Hell-hounds, howle and barke,
            And fall as Dagon fell before the Arke,
            
            Idolaters, that vnto ſenſeleſſe things,
            Will giue the honour of the King of Kings.
            You Coniurers with circle and triangle,
            That boaſt you can the fiends of hell outwrangle,
            And make them come obedient at your call,
            Herein old Sathan doth deceyue you all:
            For is he ſuch a friend to come at becke,
            Or can you ouer-rule him with a checke?
            No, you are much miſtaken; by this way,
            He doth miſguide, and leade your ſoules aſtray:
            You that depend on miracles and ſignes,
            And will ſee wonders ere you be Diuines:
            Know all the miracles that Ieſus wrought:
            Confirme that doctrine his Apoſtles taught:
            And they which doe relie vpon the ſame,
            Within the Booke of life ſhall find their name,
            
               Sa: Rowlands.
            
         
         
            
            TO ALL TRVE FAITHFVLL CHRISTIANS, Beleeuing and beloued Seruants of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
            DEere Chriſtian ſoule, with humble mind and thought,
            Admire the wonders that thy Sauiour wrought,
            The moſt true miracles that haue beene done,
            By Gods beloued de
                  •
               re and onely Sonne,
            When he for ſinnefull man (without intreat)
            Deſcended from Gods owne right hand and ſeate;
            The manſion of the bleſſed Cherubins:
            To dye on earth for our accurſed ſins,
            When no inducing merite, thine or mine,
            Could thus procure his mercy to incline:
            But when free loue, his lifes free ranſome coſt,
            To ſaue the ſinners that themſelues had loſt:
            Then liuing lowly in contempt and ſcorne,
            Deſpiſed of the world, moſt poorely borne,
            With painefull trauell, preaching vp and downe.
            On ſhore, in ſhip, in mountaine, field and towne;
            Confirming, that he taught to be diuine,
            By many a wonderfull admired ſigne,
            
               Euen ſuch as the beholders did confeſſe,
            The very hand of God, and no power leſſe
            Effected, for ſo wonderfull they were,
            That all ſpectators ſtood amaz'd with feare,
            They ſaw his works to be ſo ſtrangely rare,
            So Admirable, and ſo paſt compare;
            Thoſe (that borne blind) did neuer ſee worlds light,
            To haue perfection giuen them of ſight,
            Dead Lazarus that lay foure dayes in graue,
            Calde forth from thence, his life againe to haue,
            The dumbe to ſpeake, the cripples ſound to goe,
            The figge-tree curſde, to dye and neuer grow,
            The winds and ſeas when they outragious ſwell.
            At his rebuke turne calme as any well:
            The diuels driuen out of men to Swine,
            The water turned into pureſt wine,
            The Souldiers (in the falſe betraying howre)
            All ſtrucken to the ground by Ieſus power;
            The dropſie healed, and the Leapers cured,
            His preſence by the Diuells not endured,
            His walking on vnfirme and liquid water,
            His giuing life vnto the Rulers daughter,
            His healing Malcus eare moſt perfect ſound,
            When Peters ſword had lopt off to the ground:
            And many more (as thoſe fowre holy men,
            Which did the life of our Redeemer pen)
            Haue regiſtred, of wonders Iewes did ſee,
            Which Ieſus onely wrought, that we might bee
            Faithfull, and true beleeuers in his name;
            And in our liues expreſſe and ſhow the ſame.
            Theſe Myracles for Chriſtians may ſuffice,
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            
               Not any thing of truth in actuall deed▪
            
            And therefore as the Scripture warnings giue,
            Thoſe men that will not in obedience liue
            Vnto the truth, but doe the ſame deſpiſe,
            They ſhall by ſtrong deceyuings, follow lyes,
            Falſe Chriſts ſhall come, and ſhall ſuch wonders ſhow,
            That many will beleeue them to be ſo,
            Not hauing knowledge to diſcerne aright
            Gods power, true working from the wicked ſprite.
            But Chriſtian ſoule, moſt conſtantly abide,
            Let not the Deuill draw thy heart aſide,
            For that which Chriſt and his Apoſtles taught,
            And all the miracles which they haue wrought,
            For to confirme what they had preach'd before,
            Is all ſufficient, and we need no more:
            And he thou mindfull what S. Paul doth ſay,
            Within thy ſoules beſt treaſurie it lay,
            If I, ſaith he, ſtrange doctrine ſhould defend,
            Nay ſhould an angell from the heau'n deſcend,
            And preach another Goſpell then the firſt,
            Receyue it not, but hold him for accurſt▪
            
            Remember God of his free loues intent,
            Hath left an euerlaſting teſtament
            Vnto vs all, in Chriſt our Sauiours bloud:
            In this alone conſiſteth all our good;
            All Propheſies had hereunto relation,
            All miracles to this gaue confirmation,
            Therefore if any take in hand to frame
            A miracle in Saint or angels name,
            If any mortall creature vndertake
            His power that makes the earth and heauens quake,
            
               If Sathan and his Miniſters endeauour
            To worke ſtrange wonders, this beleeue, that neuer,
            Can any miracles bee truely done,
            But by the power of God, and Chriſt his Sonne:
            To which eternall maieſty and power,
            Aſcribe we, till the worlds laſt ending howre,
            Till Sunne and Moone decay, paſt date of dayes,
            All honour, glory, Worſhip, endleſſe prayſe.
            
               Sa: Rowlands▪
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            And take of them thoſe gifts himſelfe did giue:
            If all the Monarches that the earth containes,
            All Kings and Princes with their noble traynes,
            Were to a royall feaſt aſſembled all,
            To make ſome wedding moſt maieſticall;
            Yet were that preſence very meane and baſe
            Vnto thoſe gueſts that Gallile did grace;
            As thus with men, the Sonne of God did dine,
            The bloud of grapes, the ſad-heart chearing wine,
            Began to fayle, which bleſſed Mary ſeeing,
            Spake thus to him, in whom all things haue being;
            
               They haue no Wine, knowing his power could graunt
            A ful ſupply, in needes extremeſt want;
            Sixe earthen veſſels there were ſtanding by,
            As the Iewes cuſtome was to purifie,
            Thoſe pots of ſtone, our Sauiour Chriſt did will
            Vp to the brimme with water they ſhould fill,
            And to the Gouernour preſent the ſame;
            Which inſtantly true perfect wine became;
            He ignorant what power the ſame had made,
            Vnto the Bridegroome thus in priuate ſayd;
            At the beginning men preſent the beſt,
            And worſt at laſt, vnto the well-fed gueſt;
            But contrary to vſuall cuſtome, thou
            Set'ſt forth the worſt, and kep'ſt the beſt till now.
            This was the firſt of wonders Ieſus wrought,
            Euen by the power that formed all of nought,
            Which miracle at marriage he began.
            To ſhow himſelfe true God and perfect man;
            As man to eate with men he did encline,
            As God he turned water into wine.
         
         
            
            
               
                  depiction of Christ performing miracles
               
            
            
               A Leaper is clenſed, the Centurions ſeruant healed, Peters wiues mother cured of a Feauer, diuers diſpoſſed of Deuils, the windes calmed with rebuke, two men poſſeſt of Deuils, and beeing caſt foorth, they enter into Swine. Math. 8.
               
            
            DEſcending a moſt hie cloud-checking hill;
            From painefull preaching of his Fathers will:
            To ſaue thoſe ſoules which hell (for ſin) did clayme,
            A Leaper met him, and himſelfe did frame
            In humble manner falling at Chriſts feet,
            With ſuch due worſhip as to God was meet,
            Oh Lord he cryes, of health the onely meane,
            If ſo thou wilt, tis thou canſt make me cleane;
            
               Tis in thy power, and in no power but thine,
            Moſt bleſſed Ieſus, to my helpe incline.
            The Sonne of God no ſooner heard the crie
            Of this poore wretch, plagued with leproſie,
            But in his mercy, of which none doe fayle
            That aſke by faith, (Faith euer doth preuayle)
            Replyed thus, and did his ſute fulfill;
            Becauſe thou ſaiſt I can, I ſay, I will,
            Then toucht him with his holy hand moſt pure,
            And abſolute he wrought a perfect cure:
            So to the Prieſt to offer being ſent,
            As Ieſus into Capernaum went,
            Came a Centurion, and beſought him thus;
            O Lord, my ſeruant lyeth grieuous,
            Pain'd with a palſie: Ieſus did reply,
            When I doe come, ile cure his maladie:
            The Captaine anſweres, Lord, that paines forbeare;
            I am vnworthy that thou ſhouldſt come neere
            The place of my abode, great Heauens King,
            That haſt thy ſeat where Cherubins doe ſing;
            Speake but the word, I know thy onely breath
            Can heale my ſeruant, and giue life in death;
            For I my ſelfe that at thy fauour ſtand,
            By power impoſ'd, haue ſouldiers at commaund,
            I bid one come, he comes, another goe,
            A third doe this, and they performe euen ſo,
            When Ieſus heard his faith, our Sauiour ſayes,
            In peace doe thou depart, and goe thy wayes,
            And as thou haſt firmely beleeu'd on me,
            So Ile extend my grace, and doe for thee.
            
               To Peters houſe then did our Sauiour goe,
            
            
               His god-like power, by myracle to ſhow,
            Whereas the mother of th'apoſtles wife
            (Subiect as others in this mortall life
            To frayle diſeaſes) lay with griefe oppreſt
            Of Feauer fits, moſt painefully poſſeſt
            Her Ieſus, with his healing hand did touch,
            And preſently her healthfull ſtate was ſuch,
            That ſhe aroſe, prayſing the King of Kings;
            And miniſtred vnto them needfull things.
            When glorious Phaebus with his ſhining light,
            Was drawne to Weſt, at the approching night,
            They brought to Ieſus many wofull wights,
            That were poſſeſt with Deuils and foule ſprites,
            Which with his powerfull word he did expell,
            And ſent them to their Habitation, Hell,
            With his Diſciples then forſakes the ſhore,
            Betakes himſelfe where ſtormy tempeſts roare,
            Where ſhip is toſt with hazard vp and downe,
            And raging waues doe ouerwhelming drowne,
            Where great Leuiathan in deepes doe ſayle;
            And all the reſt that ſwimme with finne and tayle,
            Doe keepe their watry common-wealth together,
            There in the great extreames of fouleſt weather,
            The frayle Diſciples all amazedly
            Expected nothing but to drowne and dye:
            Thoſe bleſſed eyes that watch of all things keepe,
            Were then (as God was man) cloſde vp with ſleepe,
            Helpe maſter helpe, the poore Diſciples call,
            Ariſe, and ſaue vs, or we periſh all:
            He that made wind and waue vnto them ſayth,
            Why are yee fearefull, yee of little faith?
            
               And then aroſe their frightfull thoughts aſſwaging,
            And did rebuke his creatures for their raging;
            Which inſtantly were calme and quiet ſound,
            As if the waters were ſecure like ground,
            Cauſing beholders ſtrangely to admire,
            To reaſon with themſelues, and thus enquire;
            Why, who is this that beares ſuch powerfull ſway?
            His very word makes wind and ſea obey.
            Being arriued on the other ſide,
            Two men with Diuels met him, and they cry'd
            
               Ieſus, that ſonne of God art known to be,
            What haue we (helliſh fiends) to doe with thee?
            Before the time doſt thou intend preuent vs?
            Wherefore art thou come hither, to torment vs?
            Thy power doth make vs tremble, dread and doubt,
            From our poſſeſſion thou wilt caſt vs out:
            Which if thou doeſt, thus much to vs encline;
            Graunt we may enter yonder heard of Swine,
            That are a feeding, if we part theſe men,
            Of thoſe ſame hogs giue vs poſſeſſion then;
            
               Suffer vs, as our fellow diuell ſayd;
            When he a ſpoyle of all Iobs ſubſtance made,
            Then ſayd our Sauiour to the Deuils, goe,
            And they into the Swine departed ſo,
            Carrying them in a fury from the ground,
            Into the ſea, and there they all were droun'd:
            The Heardſ-men at this fight with terror runne
            Reporting in the City what was done,
            How from thoſe men (that put them all in feare)
            The fiends (by Ieſus) diſpoſſed were:
            Then getting leaue of that great power diuine,
            
               Into the Sea they carryed all their ſwine,
            Which when they heard, they all came forth to meete him,
            And ſuing for his abſence, thus did greet him;
            
               Ieſus of Nazareth, with one mind and heart,
            We doe entreate, that hence thou wilt depart.
         
         
            
               
                  depiction of Christ performing miracles
               
            
            
               One cured of the Palſie, lying ſicke in his bed, the Rulers Daughter rayſed, a woman healed of a bloudie Iſſue, two blind men receyue ſight, a dumbe man poſſeſſed, healed. Math. 9.
            
            FRom Brutiſh Gergeſenes our Sauiour goes,
            That were ſo farre their owne ſoules mortall foes,
            They from their coaſt did baniſh the moſt high'ſt,
            Eſteeming more their cattell, then their Chriſt,
            Who leauing thoſe ingratefull, wicked men,
            
               By ſhip did paſſe to his owne City then,
            VVhere being come, the people to him brought,
            One ſicke in's bed of palſie, and beſought
            That he would heale him; when he ſaw their faith,
            To the diſtreſſed creature, thus he ſayth,
            
               Sonne, be of comfort, and reioyce herein,
            For I remit and pardon all thy ſinne:
            Whereat the Scribes within their hearts did ſay,
            This man blaſphemeth, and is farre aſtray.
            When Ieſus ſaw, in thought they did him blame,
            (For with hearts hid from him that made the ſame)
            He thus reply'd; Why doth this ill ariſe?
            Which you in cogitation doe deuiſe:
            Tell me, which ſpeech is eaſieſt, for to ſay,
            Ariſe, and walke, or ſinnes are done away?
            But that you all may know the truth of this;
            My power on earth can pardon ſinnes amiſſe,
            Then ſayd he to the ſicke, thy ſelfe prepare,
            Take vp thy bed, and to thy houſe repayre.
            
               Then came a man of woe, with ſorrow pain'd,
            
            A Ruler of the Iewes, and he complain'd,
            
               Ieſus, my daughter euen now is dead:
            But thou that lifes true path doeſt onelie tread,
            Come, and vpon her doe but lay thy hand,
            And ſhe ſhall liue; giue death a countermaund:
            The Lord was moued with his ſad lament,
            And as he ſorth with his Diſciples went,
            A woman with a bloudy iſſue greeued,
            That could not be in twelue yeeres ſpace releeued:
            Behind him came, and toucht his veſtures hem,
            Being aſſured faith could helpe all them,
            
               Which did beleeue; reſoluing thus in thought,
            If I but touch his garment, health is wrought:
            This faith with Ieſus ſuch a comfort found,
            He turn'd and ſayd, Daughter thou art made ſound:
            And as he ſpake, that very inſtant houre,
            She was made perfect by his perfect power.
            Then came he to the Rulers dwelling place,
            And (as the cuſtome was, in mourning caſe)
            He found the Minſtrels, and much people there,
            With noyſe of dolefull muſicke to the eare:
            Thoſe he did will forbeare ſuch quoyle to keepe,
            The mayde (quoth he) is onely but a ſleepe,
            She is not dead, Ile life to her reſtore;
            But ſcornfully they laugh'd at Chriſt therefore,
            Being all thruſt out from thence and put away,
            He came whereas the breathleſſe body lay,
            And tooke her by the hand, wherewith ſhe roſe:
            And this great wonder to the people ſhowes,
            Who to behold her in amazement ſtand,
            And ſpred the fame thereof throwout the land.
            
               As Ieſus paſſed from the wondring crow'd.
            
            Two blind men met him, and they cryde alowde,
            Oh ſonne of Dauid, ſome compaſſion take;
            Haue mercy on vs, for thy mercies ſake.
            To whom he ſayde, doe you belieue aright,
            That I haue power to giue you both your ſight:
            Yea, Lord (they ſayd) beſides thee no man can
            Giue ſauing health, which art true God and man.
            
               Ieſus reply'd, vnto your faithfull mind,
            As you beleeue, ſo ceaſe from being blind.
            
               Then brought they one poſſeſſed that was dumbe,
            
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            
               But when the people vnderſtood the ſame,
            Forth of all Cities vnto him they came;
            Which when the Lord beheld (as he is euer
            A gracious God to all that do endeuour)
            He tooke compaſſion, and did heale their ſicke,
            Their blind, their lame, their deafe, dumbe, lunaticke;
            Vntill dayes glory did begin decline,
            And gaue the world no longer cheerefull ſhine;
            Euening approaching neere with darkſome ſhade,
            Then the Diſciples to their Maſter ſayde.
            This place is ſolitary, vnfrequent;
            We are belated, and the time farre ſpent,
            The multitude of people being great;
            Let them depart, and ſo prouide them meat.
            Then Ieſus ſayd, ther's no ſuch cauſe of need;
            Doe you prouide them whereupon to feed:
            They ſaid, our poore prouiſion is but ſmall,
            Fiue loaues, two fiſhes, onely this is all;
            Bring them to me ſaid Ieſus, then he wil'd
            The people all ſit downe, with eyes vpheld
            To heauen, he did bleſſe, then bread he brake,
            And that to his Diſciples did betake,
            Which did deliuer it the people there,
            Who fed, and all full ſatiſfied were,
            Fiue thouſand ſtomackes had their hungry wiſhes,
            Contented onely with fiue loaues, two fiſhes,
            Beſides the quantity that did remaine
            Of broken meat, twelue baskets to containe:
            Then Ieſus his Diſciples ſent away
            By ſhip, while he went priuately to pray;
            
               Into a mountaine, when at ſea betoſt,
            The poore Apoſtles euen well nie loſt,
            Were all amazed, moſt diſtreſſed ſayling,
            And grieuouſly their maſters want bewailing,
            About the fourth watch (while the winds did roare)
            They ſaw one walke on ſea, as if on ſhore,
            Which put them all in an amazed fright,
            For they ſuppoſed it had been a Sprite;
            Crying with terror fearefully confounded,
            Perplext in thought, and deepely inward wounded.
            Till Ieſus with a word their dread allay'd;
            
               Be of good cheare, feare not, tis I, he ſayd,
            Quoth Peter Lord, if it be thou we ſee,
            Commaund, and giue me power to come to thee.
            
               Ieſus ſaid, come, Into the Sea he goes,
            And as the mighty wind and tempeſt roſe,
            
               Peter began to ſinke; Helpe Lord he cryes;
            Oh ſaue thy ſeruant, or thy ſeruant dyes;
            Then Ieſus ſtretched forth his hand and caught him,
            And with rebuke more conſtancie he taught him:
            
               O thou of little faith, blame thee I muſt,
            
               Why didſt thou doubt? that I would faile thy truſt?
            So when they came into the ſhip together,
            Their ſtorme was chang'd into a fayre calme weather:
            Then thoſe that were aboard came reuerent all
            To worſhip Ieſus, and did on him call,
            Saying with one conſent of ſoule and heart,
            We doe beeleue that Gods true Sonne thou art.
            Paſſing then ouer to the other ſide,
            Which hight Genezaret, being there diſcri'd,
            
               Thoſe that about the Coaſt were reſident;
            Notice of him thorow out the Country ſent,
            How Chriſt was come; when this was once reuealed,
            Sicke people came from all parts to be healed:
            They brought of all diſeaſes various kinds,
            And each ſicke Patient ſpeedy cure there finds:
            And therefore paine they deſired no more,
            But for to touch the garments hem he wore;
            Which all that did, were moſt aſſur'd to gaine
            A true releaſe from euery kind of paine,
         
         
            
            
               
                  depiction of Christ performing miracles
               
            
            
               The woman of Canaans daughter healed, foure thouſand fed with ſeauen loaues and a few fiſhes, the ſicke are healed, two blind men receyue their ſight, the withered Figge-tree. Math. the 15.19.20.21. Chapters.
            
            FRom conference with Phariſies and Scribes,
            
            And others of their wilfull blinded Tribes,
            Which of Gods offre'd grace had no deſire;
            Our Sauiour goes to Sidon coaſt and Tyre,
            
            And as he went a woman Cananite,
            
            That had her daughter vexed with a Sprite;
            Cry'd after him, ſaying, Haue mercy Lord,
            
            
               Thou ſonne of Dauid, doe thy helpe affoord,
            My child is by the Diuels power tormented;
            
               By thy farre greater power be he preuented,
            Heare me and helpe vs, doe not turne thy face:
            Oh take compaſſion on our grieuous caeſ,
            But notwithſtanding all that ſhe could crie,
            Our Sauiour ſilent made her no replie:
            Then the Diſciples did intreat him thus,
            Send her away from crying after vs,
            And rid this noyſe and clamour that ſhe makes,
            Said Ieſus, I am ſent but for theyr ſakes,
            That are the loſt ſheepe of the choſen race,
            To Iſrael I muſt extend my grace.
            But ſhe adoring, downe before him fals,
            And conſtant in her hope, for mercy cals,
            Saying, Lord helpe me, and encline thine ayde.
            Woman, it is not meet, our Sauiour ſaid,
            To take the bread that Childrens food ſhould bee,
            And caſt it vnto dogges, true Lord, quoth ſhe,
            Yet grace and fauour, may the whelpes affoord,
            To eate the crummes fal from their maſters boord.
            Oh woman, Ieſus ſayd, thy faith is great,
            Thou ſhalt obtaine that which thou doſt entreat,
            And in the inſtant that our Sauiour ſpake,
            The curſed fiend her daughter did forſake.
            Then Ieſus paſſed nie vnto the ſea,
            That is denominate of Gallile,
            
            Where he vp to a mountaine did aſcend,
            And there ſate downe his Graces to extend,
            For multitudes of people thither came,
            Of blind and dumbe, of maimed and of lame,
            And many others that in humble wiſe,
            At Ieſus feet preſented mournfull cryes,
            
               Which for his helpe in their extreames did call,
            And he miraculous did heale them all,
            That the great company aſſembled there
            (Being filde with wonder and admiring feare)
            To heare dumbe ſpeake, ſee lame to goe vpright;
            The maymed whole, and blinde receiue their ſight,
            With hearts more ioyfull then their tongus could tell,
            Did glorifie the God of Iſrael.
            
            When Ieſus calling his Diſciples, ſayd,
            My pitty and compaſſion doth perſwade,
            (Becauſe this peoples company hath laſted
            Three dayes with me, and all that time haue faſted,)
            That they haue ſomewhat to ſupply their need,
            Leaſt in returne, ſuch danger it doe breed,
            They faint by hunger on the weary way,
            But his Diſciples vnto him did ſay,
            How ſhall we get in this moſt deſert hill.
            The bread that may ſo many thouſands fill?
            Quoth Ieſus, what prouiſion is your ſtore?
            They ſaid ſeauen loaues, a few ſmall fiſh, no more.
            So cauſing all the people downe to ſit,
            Ieſus tooke bread and fiſh, gaue thanks for it;
            And then he brake it, after hee had bleſt,
            And gaue the twelue, to giue vnto the reſt,
            All being therewith ſo well ſatiſfied,
            That after their neceſſities ſuppli'd,
            There was remaining (which they could not eate)
            To fill ſeuen baskets full of broken meate:
            Yet was the number of the feeders then,
            By computation found foure thouſand men,
            Beſides of others that repaſt did find,
            
               Which were of children, and of women kind.
            Hauing with Soule and bodies food fed them,
            
            
               Our Lord departed towards Ieruſalem,
            
            And as he iournyed from Ierico
            
            (With multitudes that onwards with him goe)
            Two blind-men ſitting by the high-way ſide,
            That heard of Ieſus paſſage, to him cry'd;
            Oh Lord, thou ſonne of Dauid mercy ſhow,
            Mercifull Lord, thy grace on vs beſtow;
            So vehement and earneſt they did call,
            And ſo importunate they were withall;
            Still inuocating on his glorious name,
            That people did rebuke them for the ſame:
            But they the more do eleuate their voyce,
            And make ſuch pittifull complaining noyſe.
            
               Ieſus ſtood ſtill, and calling of them two,
            Did ſay, what is it you would haue me doe?
            Oh Lord (quoth they) let vs behold the light;
            He touching them, gaue preſent perfect ſight;
            Of which deſired ſence, being now poſſeſt,
            They followed Chriſt, moſt ioyfull with the reſt.
            
               Then on a borrowed Aſſe meeke Chriſt did ride,
            
            And all the multitudes about him cri'd,
            
               Hoſanna to the ſonne of Dauids fame;
            Bleſſed is he, comes in the higheſt name.
            And entring the famous City thus,
            The people all admiring wondrous;
            Sayd, this is Ieſus, which is knowne to be
            Of Nazareth a Prophet; this is he:
            Entring the temple then, which did containe
            Buyers and ſellers, w
                  •
               cked and prophane;
            
               He caſt them out, and ſayde, this houſe of prayer,
            Is made by you a den of theeues, a Faire.
            Then came into the Temple for his ayde,
            The blind and lame, and impotent decay'd,
            And whatſoeuer their diſeaſes were,
            He healed all that came vnto him there,
            That children cheerefull did Hoſanna ſing;
            And with ſweet voyces made that temple ring.
            
               From thence he did depart to lodge at night
            
            
               In Bethanie, and with the mornings light,
            As he return'd at dawning backe, next day
            Suſtaining hunger, found vpon the way
            A figge-tree, vnto which for fruit he went,
            But the greene boughes had nothing to preſent,
            Saue onely leaues, no more but goodly ſhow.
            (Like Hypocrites which doe on men beſtow,
            Faire, ſweet enchanting words vnto the eare;
            But neyther heart nor action once comes neere)
            When Ieſus did behold the barrenneſſe,
            Sentence againſt it thus he did expreſſe,
            Neuer may fruit vpon thee more be found,
            And with theſe words it wither'd to the ground:
            When the Diſciples did this wonder ſee,
            The pleaſant greene a preſent dying tree:
            They ſaid with maruell and great admiration,
            How ſtrange and ſodaine is this alteration?
         
         
            
            
               
                  depiction of Christ performing miracles
               
            
            
               A man poſſeſſed with a Deuill healed, diuers healed, and deuils caſt out of many, A blinde man healed, that firſt ſaw men walk like trees, & after ſaw them clearly, The poſſeſſed healed, Blinde Bartimeus healed, The draught of fiſhes, The Widdowes ſon reſtored to life at Naim, Mark. 1.8.9.10. Luk. 5.7. Chap.
               
            
            
               TO Capernaum Ieſus tooke his way,
            
            
               Where being entred on the Sabboth day,
            
            He went into the Synagogue to teach.
            And one amongſt the reſt that heard him preach,
            Vext with a Spirit in moſt fearefull wiſe,
            Deliuered forth outragious helliſh cryes;
            Let vs alone, remaining where we be,
            
               Wilt thou deſtroy vs; we know thou art he,
            
               Of Nazareth, Ieſus Gods holy one;
            
            In our poſſeſſion leaue thou vs alone:
            Be ſilent Sathan, hold thy peace, Chriſt ſayes,
            (Deuils are not ordayn'd to giue God prayſe)
            Come forth, depart, whereat he loude did roare,
            And the poſſeſſed, felly rent and tore;
            So leaues him then, which ſuch amazement wrought,
            That all the people were in terrour brought,
            Saying, with power, is this of matchleſſe wonder?
            That with a word, brings Sathans outrage vnder▪
            
            Come to Bethſaida, there they bring one blind,
            Intreating Ieſus they might mercy finde,
            That he would touch him, ſo his hand he takes,
            And leades him forth (for their beleeuing ſakes)
            From out the towne, where onely he applyes,
            Spittle, as medcine to his cloſed eyes,
            And did demaund what obiect then he ſees;
            Who looking ſaid, men walking like to trees.
            Then Ieſus touch'd his eyes, and made them cleare,
            That euery thing did perfect true appeare.
            
               That Hill deſcending, where thoſe bleſſed three,
            
            
               Iohn, Peter, Iames, did Ieſus glory ſee.
            (When as his rayment, in bright ſhining ſhow,
            Was ſeen in whiteneſſe to exceed the ſnow;
            Where Moſes and Elias did appeare.
            And Peter ſaid, Lord tis good being here)
            One came to Ieſus, and his ſonne did bring;
            Saying, oh Maſter, heare a wofull thing:
            This ſonne of mine, a ſpirit that is dumbe,
            Hath with great torments ſtrangely ouercome,
            
               He teareth him with foming fits moſt fell,
            And gnaſhing teeth as fiends are ſaid in hell,
            To vſe with horrour, this poore man I brought
            To thy Diſciples, and I them beſought,
            That they in thy all powerfull holy name,
            Would caſt him out, who could not doe the ſame;
            Then anſwered he, O faithleſſe generation,
            How long ſhall I endure your Prouocation?
            Bring him to me, which done, outragiouſly
            The Spirit did torment him inſtantly,
            Euen in vnwonted manner, fearefull, ſtrange,
            With cruell fits, and torments interchange,
            For inwardly he did him rent and teare.
            And falling on the ground, lay foming there,
            And wallowing vp and downe, ſaid Ieſus than
            Vnto the father of this wofull man;
            How long hath he bin thus from peace exilde?
            Who anſwer'd, euer ſince he was a child,
            And like as now he caſts him on the ground,
            He throwes him oft in water to be droun'd,
            And otherwhiles into the flaming fire;
            But if thou canſt, O Lord, I thee deſire,
            Helpe, helpe, haue mercy, diſpoſſeſſe this fiend;
            That nothing but deſtruction doth intend:
            Then Ieſus ſaid, if thou haſt faith in this,
            Of my expected helpe thou ſhalt not miſſe.
            Whereat Chriſts poore petitioner did cry,
            With ſorrowes voyce, and teares exceſſiuely;
            O Lord that art the great, the good, the chiefe,
            I doe beleeue, helpe thou mine vnbeleefe.
            Then Ieſus ſayd, thou Deuill deafe and dumbe,
            
               I doe commaund and charge that forth thou come,
            And neuer to reenter any more;
            Who crying low'd, and hauing rent him ſore,
            Departing, left the man as ſeeming dead,
            And all beholders ſayd, his ſoule is fled:
            But Ieſus raiſ'd him by the hand from ground,
            And no infirmity in him was found.
            Then on the way that leades from Ierico,
            
            As he along with multitudes did goe,
            (That admiration to his wonders gaue)
            There ſate a begger that for almes did craue,
            Call'd Bartimeus, who when he did heare
            That all the people followed Ieſus there,
            Making amongſt them an vnwonted noyſe,
            He with a loud and eleuated voyce,
            Cry'd, Ieſus, ſonne of Dauid mercy ſhow;
            
               Ieſu of Nazareth thy grace beſtow:
            His cryes were ſuch ſo vehement and ſhrill,
            The Lord of life was moued to ſtand ſtill:
            And wil'd the people for to call him then,
            Who like moſt kind and charitable men,
            Said, be of comfort man (vnto the blind)
            He calleth thee, and thou ſhalt fauour find:
            Incouraged with that the people ſpoke;
            Haſting to Chriſt, he caſt away his cloake:
            Who ſayd, what wilt thou that I doe for thee;
            Good Maſter (quoth the blind) that I might ſee;
            And Ieſus ſaid, in peace depart away,
            Thy conſtant faith is thy aſſured ſtay.
            So he immediately receyued ſight,
            And followed Ieſus with a ioyfull Sprite.
            
               As he was teaching neere vnto the Lake,
            That from Genezareth its name doth take;
            The multitude of people was ſo great
            Of thoſe that came to Chriſt for heau'nly meate;
            (Which preſſed on him with their throng ſo ſore)
            He entred Simons ſhip and left the ſhore.
            When finiſhing his ſpeech, an end did make,
            To Simon Peter, thus our Sauiour ſpake;
            Launch out into the deepe, and caſt thy net,
            That forth the Sea of fiſhes thou mayſt get:
            Then Peter ſaid, Maſter, laſt night in vaine,
            For nothing we haue ſpent our toyle and paine;
            But yet at thy commaund, obey we will:
            So caſt and drew the net, which fiſh did fill
            Vntill it brake, and they for ayde did call
            Vnto their fellowes, wherewith ioyning all,
            They laded both their ſhips with ſuch a fraight,
            Both ready were to ſinke with fiſhes waight.
            Then Peter fell at Ieſus feet with feare;
            
               Iohn, Iames and all the reſt amazed were:
            But vnto them our bleſſed Sauiour ſayd,
            Let not your hearts with terror be diſmay'd,
            Take conſtant courage, I will make you then,
            From henceforth fiſhers of the ſoules of men.
            
               As Chriſt proceeded to extend his grace,
            
            
               In ſeeking out loſt ſheepe from place to place.
            
            He came to Naim, where euen at the gate,
            He met an obiect of our mortall ſtate;
            A liueleſſe body carried to the graue:
            A ſon, whoſe death ſad teares of ſorrow gaue,
            Vnto a wofull widdow that did beare him:
            
               Who went with weeping, chiefeſt mourner near him:
            Much people followed her deare onely ſonne,
            To ſhow their loue in this laſt office done
            To a dead friend, their lateſt tooken paine,
            In giuing mother earth her owne againe.
            Which when the Lord beheld, the ſight did moue,
            And make him willing to expreſſe his loue.
            Weepe not he ſaid, but ſtint thy vſe of teares,
            Then toucht the Coffin; wherewith thoſe that beares
            The burden of the dead, ſtood ſtill to ſee
            What the euent of this ſtrange ſtay would be.
            Whilſt all on Ieſus fixt their gazing eyes;
            He ſayd, Young man I ſay to thee ariſe.
            
            And preſently the dead-man ſate vpright:
            And ſpake to all that did behold the ſight,
            Then to his mother, Chriſt her ſonne did giue,
            Who ſeeing now her ſorrowes cauſe to liue,
            Had ſuch a fulneſſe of a ioyfull heart,
            That neuer woman ſharde a greater part.
            The wondring multitude of people there,
            Strangely poſſeſt with mixed ioy and feare,
            Gaue all the glory that they could expreſſe
            To Gods dread name, ſaying with thankfulneſſe,
            A Prophet great is riſen vnto vs,
            And God hath viſited his people thus.
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            
               Sayd, is it lawfull on the Sabboth day
            To heale this man, or ſend him ſicke away:
            But they replyed not a word againe:
            Then did he take the man and cur'd his paine,
            A cure that was no longer time in hand,
            Then fingers touch or breath of tongues commaund;
            His body perfect, abſolute was well,
            And he no more of ache or griefe did tell,
            Releaſt of all the miſery he had,
            And made to his great comfort healthfull glad.
            
               As the moſt iuſt, meeke, holy, innocent.
            
            Towards the ſanctified City went,
            Which did containe his Fathers houſe of prayer,
            Vnto a village as he made repayre,
            There met him certaine ſad afflicted men,
            Diſeaſ'd with leproſie, in number ten;
            Who when they ſaw the ſoueraigne cure of griefe,
            They ſtood far off, imploring his reliefe:
            Lifting vp voyces with ſuch wofull cries,
            As from conſtraining ſorrow did ariſe.
            
               Ieſus, they ſayd, maſter, behold and ſee
            The great extreames wherein poore wretches be,
            Of thy accuſtom'd clemency and grace.
            Haue mercy on ten lothſome Leapers caſe.
            
               Ieſus beheld them with compaſſions eye,
            And for their comfort thus he did reply;
            Vnto the Prieſt doe you forthwith repaire,
            (As law appoints for ſuch as Leapers are)
            And ſhew your ſelues to him; ſo as they went,
            The grace of Ieſus did their griefes preuent:
            
               And all were cured, of which number one
            Returned backe (poore wretch) himſelfe alone,
            Falling moſt meekely with his face on ground,
            Deliuering with a thankefull voyces ſound,
            Gods glorious worthy and renowned praiſe,
            To whom our bleſſed Lord and Sauiour ſayes,
            Are there not ten infectious creatures cleane,
            Of whom this poore Samaria ſtranger, meane,
            Onely returnes, and thankfull doth encline:
            What is become of theſe vngratefull nine?
            Is there amongſt ſo many cur'd, no more
            But onely one, that giues God prayſe therefore?
            Ariſe, depart, thy ſelfe in ſoule perſwade,
            By true and liuely faith, thou whole art made.
            A certaine ruler, that of Iewes bare ſway,
            Hauing a ſonne which very grieuous lay,
            In extreame ſickneſſe, and by common fame,
            Hearing that Ieſus out of Iewry came,
            To Cana, where by miracle diuine,
            He made of perfect water pureſt wine;
            Went to the Lord, and earneſt ſute begon,
            That he would pleaſe to come and heale his ſonne,
            At Capernaum, where he then did lye
            In all mens iudgement at the point to dye:
            Ieſus replyed, except that Signes you ſee
            And wonders wrought, you haue not faith in me:
            The Ruler anſwered, ſi
                  •
                affoord thine ayde,
            Ere deathes hard hand vpon my child be layde:
            My deareſt ſonne is breathing out his laſt,
            Oh come and helpe before his life be paſt.
            
               Then Ieſus to his heart did comfort giue:
            Doe thou depart, thy dying ſonne doth liue,
            Becauſe thou haſt a faithfull conſtant mind,
            At thy returne in health thou ſhalt him find,
            As with great ioy he from our Sauiour went,
            Some of his ſeruants came incontinent,
            And met their maſter cheerefull on the way,
            With voyces full of comfort, thus did ſay,
            Thy ſon (whoſe ſickneſſe cauſ'd vs all complaine)
            Is wonderfull reſtor'd to health againe:
            He liues and all his former griefe is paſt,
            Which lay moſt wofull breathing out his laſt,
            Then he demaunded at what time and howre,
            He was deliuer'd from Deaths fatall power,
            And they replyed, yeſterday at ſeuen
            The feauer left him, praiſ'd be God of heau'n.
            Then knew the father t'was the time direct
            That Ieſus of his mercies free reſpect,
            Said vnto him, thy dying ſon doth ſiue,
            That inſtant he reſtoring life did giue,
            And hereupon he and his houſhould all
            Beleeu'd, and faithfull did on Ieſus call.
            
               At Poole Betheſda where attending lay
            
            Of blind and lame, and withr'ed, that each day
            Expected cure, when heau'nly Cherubin,
            
            Did touch the waters, then to get them in,
            And waſh away all griefes they did ſuſtaine:
            A man that eight and thirty yeare in paine,
            Endeuour'd helpe, amongſt the Lazars there;
            Yet wofull wretch, not any whit the neare,
            
               For ſtill when he entended to haue good,
            By entring that ſame ſanctified floud,
            Alwayes by others he was thruſt aſide,
            Where euery man did for himſelfe prouide,
            And got before him, ſo that he put by,
            In moſt perplexed ſtate, diſtreſt did lye.
            Chriſt comming there, and knowing well how long,
            He had ſuſtained this preuenting wrong;
            Sayd to the ſicke, wilt thou haue helpe at all?
            Oh ſir, (quoth he) I know not how I ſhall:
            I haue no friend, that will ſo much befriend me
            As an aſſiſting hand at need to lend me;
            When waters moue by holy Angels touch,
            To get me in, there's none will do ſo much,
            But when I ſeeke with all my beſt endeuour,
            Some one or other doth preuent me euer,
            Stepping before me; thus am I kept backe,
            To doe me good all helpe of friends I lacke.
            Then Chriſt (whoſe word to heale him did ſuffice)
            Said but vnto him, take thy bed, ariſe:
            Depart away, who cheerefully aroſe,
            Tooke vp his burden, and from thence he goes:
            This gracious worke vpon the Sabboth done,
            The Iewes would quarrell for it with Gods ſonne;
            His ſinnefull creatures which he made of clay,
            Would queſtion him, who made both night and day;
            Not thinking how his word fram'd all thats wrought:
            And how that word can bring that all to nought.
            
               A man borne blind vpon the way did lye,
            
            
               Asking for almes as Ieſus paſſed by,
            And the Diſciples to their Maſter ſaid,
            Lord tell vs why this puniſhment is layde,
            On that blind creature, what hath he miſdone,
            Is it for Fathers treſpaſſe, or for ſonne,
            
               Ieſus reply'd, the cauſe he wanteth ſight,
            (Depriued of the day adorning light)
            Is not for any wicked works of ſinne,
            That Parents or himſelfe haue liued in;
            But that the mighty power of God might be
            Made manifeſtly knowne in ſuch as he,
            I am to worke the works of him that ſent me,
            While it is day, before darke night preuent me,
            As long as I within the world abide,
            I am the light that vnto glory guide,
            When thus the Lord had ſpoke, ſpittle and clay
            He mixt together, and the ſame did lay
            Vpon the eyes of him that was borne blind;
            Whoſe hope reſolued, with a faithfull mind,
            That Chriſt had power to giue thoſe eyes true ſight,
            Which neuer yet had ſeene what thing was light.
            Then Ieſus ſayd vnto the blind-man goe,
            And waſh thy ſelfe within the Poole Siloe,
            
            Which by interpretation is call'd ſent:
            He with more ioy, then can be vttered went,
            And did according, hauing ſight as cleare,
            As euer did to glorious light appeare:
            Whereat great wonder preſent was in all;
            Which ſaw what to the begger did befall,
            
               Borne blind they knew (of none to be denide)
            And moſt miraculous, now perfect ey'd
            Yet queſtion'd him, and fell to great debate,
            And wickedly from Chriſt did derogate,
            Denying him his owne eternall might;
            More blind in ſoule, then was the man of ſight.
         
         
            
            
               
                  depiction of Christ performing miracles
               
            
            
               Lazarus rayſed from death: The Souldiers at Chriſtes betraying caſt to the ground. Malcus eare cut off by Peter, healed, The temples veile rent, ſtones diuide, graues open, the dead ariſe. Iohn. 11. Iohn. 18. Luk. 22. Mathew. 27.
               
            
            Two holy ſiſters had theyr brother lying,
            In Bethany, euen at the point of dying;
            One bleſſed Magdalen (that with her teares
            Did waſh Chriſts feet, & dri'd them with her haires)
            The other gratious Martha, theſe ſent thus
            To Ieſus, for their brother Lazarus,
            
            Oh Lord behold he whom thou loueſt deere,
            
               Is grieuous ſicke, affoorde thy preſence here,
            His danger will admit of no delayes,
            Yet Ieſus tarried where he was two dayes;
            Then ſaid to his Diſciples, our kind friend
            
               Lazarus ſleepes; but wake him I entend:
            Lord they reply'd, if he but ſleepe, we know
            He ſhall doe well, there will no danger grow:
            But then he plainely ſpake, his breath is fled,
            And ſoule departed, Lazarus is dead;
            And I am glad for your ſakes in this caſe
            That I was abſent with you from the place,
            Becauſe you may belieue, now you and I,
            Will goe and viſite him at Bethany.
            
            When they came thither, there they notice haue,
            That he had lyen foure dayes within his graue,
            And many of the Iewes (whom loue did lead)
            Were comforting the ſiſters of the dead.
            
               Martha ſaw Ieſus, and alow'd ſhe cride,
            Had'ſt thou been here my brother had not dyed,
            Yet this I know aſſured truth to be,
            What thou doſt aske of God heele giue it thee.
            Then Ieſus ſayd, ariſe againe he ſhall,
            I know it Lord (quoth ſhe) and ſo muſt all
            At that great day of Reſurrection, when
            All ſhall ariſe, both good and wicked men.
            
               I reſurrection am, and Life doe giue,
            
            
               He that beleeues in me, though dead ſhall liue,
            
            
               And he that liueth and belieues in me,
            
            
               Shall neuer dye. Beleeu'ſt thou this (quoth he)
            Yea Lord, ſhe ſaid, thou art Gods ſonne I know,
            Should come into this world, and grace beſtow.
            
               Then Mary came, fell downe and grieuous wept,
            Saying, deare Lord, our brother we had kept,
            Hadſt thou been heere, his life preſeru'd had bin,
            And theſe woe teares we had not bathed in.
            Then Ieſus groned in the Spirit, and ſaid,
            Show me the place, where is the body layd?
            They ſaid, come Lord behold, and therewithall,
            From his moſt holy bleſſed eyes did fall
            The teares of pitty; quoth the Iewes, Oh ſee
            How deere he lou'd; affection this muſt be.
            Being come vnto the deads mans houſe, the graue,
            He bad remoue the ſtone from off the caue:
            Quoth Martha Lord, he loathſome will be found,
            For lying all this time within the ground.
            Did I not ſay (ſayd Chriſt) this inſtant hower,
            If thou haſt faith, thou ſhalt behold Gods power.
            Then they remoue the ſtone which on him lyes.
            While vnto heauen Ieſus lifts his eyes,
            And God the Father thankfull glorified,
            Then with a loud voyce, Lazarus he cri'd,
            Come forth, at which life-giuing breath and ſound,
            The dead aroſe, being in graue clothes bound,
            His hands and feet, a napkin on his face,
            Amazing all with wonder were in place,
            To ſee a man reſtor'd to life againe,
            That did with death foure dayes in graue remayne,
            Committed to corruptions rotten roome,
            There to haue reſted till the day of doome;
            This ſight put all beholders in great feare,
            And many Iewes that came with Mary there.
            Beleeu'd on Ieſus, giuing God the prayſe,
            
               Whoſe onely power, the dead to life did rayſe.
            
               When all thoſe glorious Lampes, adorne the skie,
            
            
               Were hid with ſable cloudes from mortall eye,
            
            And euery creature hauing vitall ſprite,
            Mourn'd at the darkeneſſe of blacke vgly night,
            Perditions child (whom Sathan did inſence,)
            Bribed againſt his Lord with thirty pence.
            The way by night, with armed troupes he tooke,
            To meete his Maſter towards Cedron brooke;
            Where comming to him giues all hayle, and kiſſe.
            To make him knowne vnto the Iewes by this;
            When Peter ſaw the villany intended,
            His Lord moſt traytrous to be apprehended:
            He champion-like did thinke to fight it out,
            And drew his ſword and valiant lay'd about,
            With ſuch a manly reſolution than,
            He made a crop-eare of the High-Prieſts man,
            And wounded Malcus; which when Ieſus ſaw,
            He thus reprou'd raſhneſſe in him to draw.
            Put vp thy ſword into the ſheath againe,
            Who therewith woundeth, ſhall therewith be ſlaine:
            By Prayer, downe from my Father I could call,
            More then twelue Legions, Spirites Angelicall,
            But how ſhall then the Scriptures be fulfilde,
            As God hath in eternall counſell wilde:
            Then Ieſus healed Malcus eare ſo ſound,
            That there appear'd no ſigne of any wound;
            With Miracle with them preuay'ld no more,
            Then ſtriking all vnto the ground before,
            VVhich onely but demaunding whom they ſought,
            All falling backwards, to the earth were brought.
            
               No flames of lightning to amaze withall,
            No bolts of thunder to procure them fall;
            But that moſt powerfull word that ſpake and made,
            Vnto this band of armed ſouldiers ſayde,
            Whom looke you for, at which as men ſtrooke dead,
            They fell at once, yet hardned had no dread.
            
               When the moſt iuſt, vniuſt was doom'd to dye,
            
            Expoſ'd by Pylate, to Iewes cruelty,
            With whips tormented, and by ſinners ſcornes
            Reuiled, ſpit vpon, and crownd with thornes,
            Buffeted, blinded, and compel'd to beare
            The Croſſe, which Chriſtians for their badge do weare
            When all his ſences ſuffre'd for the ſinne
            Which Adams ſences had offended in:
            Whoſe ſight did like the fruit which was forbidden,
            For which Chriſts ſight was blinded and eyes hidden:
            And for his touch that to take hold conſented,
            
               Chriſts feeling was with whips and nayles tormented:
            
               His ſmell, that to the reſt did liking lincke,
            At Golgotha was choak'd with lothſome ſtincke.
            
               His hearing, that did Eues bad counſell chuſe,
            Brought Chriſt to heare the raylings of the Iewes.
            His taſte, which eating he did ſinne withall,
            Made Ieſus taſte of vineger and gall.
            When all theſe great and grieuous paines were ended,
            And Spirit to his Father recommended;
            When that great darkneſſe neuer ſeene before,
            From ſixe to nine, obſcur'd the earth all ore,
            Extinguiſhing the ſunne (dayes golden eye)
            Becauſe that day the ſonne of God did dye.
            Wonders were wrought that did mēs harts confound
            
               The temples vayle from top vnto the ground,
            Was rent quite thorow, to beholders feare,
            Which ſaw that Curtaine admirable teare,
            The ſollid hardeſt flint and marble ſtones,
            Vnder whoſe maſſie burden, ground-worke grones,
            Diuiding, cleaue, and into pieces fall;
            Which were ſupporters to the ſtrongeſt wall.
            And monuments that in them did containe,
            Fleſh made of clay, turning to duſt againe;
            The Sepulchres of Saints (that reſting lay
            From all their labours) on this nere like day,
            Did open, and deliuer liue, with breath
            The bodies were receyued dead from death,
            In ſuch a true perfection found and ſhowne,
            As if mortality they nere had known.
            Within the holy City they appeare,
            To manifeſt Gods mighty power more cleere
            Vnto Beholders eyes, many did ſee
            Their reſurrection from the dead to be,
            Like that which when the Angels trumpe doth call,
            Shall cauſe a riſing vnto life of all,
            That euer in this world (ſince world began)
            Haue been the ofſpring of the firſt made man.
            When the Centurion with his armed guard,
            Which were the men for bloud & death prepar'd,
            Beheld the fearefull wonders that were wrought,
            And how gainſt nature, things to paſſe were brought:
            Day turn'd to 
                  •
               ight, darkned before theyr eyes.
            The graues to open, and the dead ariſe,
            The vayle diuide, the 
                  〈…〉
               mbling earth to quake,
            
               The cleauing ſtones how they in ſunder brake▪
            
            Both Captaine and his curſed crue confeſſe
            VVith inward terror of ſoules guiltineſſe,
            That Ieſus which by Iudas trechery,
            VVas falſe betray'd, vniuſt condemn'd to dye
            By wicked Pylate, and by their miſdeed,
            His precious wounds were opened wide to bleed;
            VVas Gods moſt true, and deere and onely ſon,
            And hell was due for what their ſins had done.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   