
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE
True Chronicle Hiſtorie
of the whole life and death
of Thomas Lord Cromwell.
            
            As it hath beene ſundry times publikely
Acted by the Kings Maieſties
Seruants.
            Written by W. S.
            
            
               LONDON:
Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM.
1613.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The life and death of the Lord
Cromwell.
            Enter three Smiths, Hodge and two other,
old Cromwels men.
            
               Hodge.
               
                  COme Maiſters, I thinke it be paſt fiue a clock,
               Is it not time we were at worke?
               My old Maiſter heele be ſtirring anon.
            
            
               1
               I cannot tell whether my old maſter will be
               ſtirring or no: but I am ſure I can hardly take my
               afternoones nap, for my young maiſter Thomas,
               
               He keepes ſuch a quile in his ſtudie,
               With the Sunne, and the Moone, and the ſeauen ſtarres,
               That I doe verily thinke heele read out his wits.
            
            
               Hod,
               He skill of the ſtarres? theres good-man Car of Fulhum,
               
               He that carried vs to the ſtrong Ale, where goody Trundell
               
               Had her maide got with childe: O he knowes the Starres,
               Heele tickle you Charles Waine in nine degrees,
               That ſame man will tell goody Trundell
               
               When her Ale ſhall miſcary, onely by the ſtarres.
            
            
               2
               I that's a great vertue indeed, I thinke Thomas
               
               Be no body in compariſon to him.
            
            
               1
               Well Maiſters come, ſhall we to our hammers?
            
            
               Hod.
               I content, firſt lets take our mornings draught,
               And then to worke roundly.
            
            
               2
               I agreed, goe in Hodge.
               
            
            Exit omnes.
            Enter young Cromwell.
            
            
               Crom.
               Good morrow morne, I doe ſalute thy brightneſſe,
               The night ſeemes tedious to my troubled ſoule:
               
                  
Whoſe black obſcuritie binds in my minde
               A thouſand ſundry cogitations▪
               
               And now Aurora with a liuely dye,
               Addes comfort to my ſpirit that mounts on high.
               Too high indeede, my ſtate being ſo meane▪
               
               My ſtudy like a minerall of gold,
               Makes my hart proude wherein my hope's inrowld,
               My bookes is all the wealth I doe poſſeſſe,
               Here within they muſt beate with their hammers.
               And vnto them I haue ingaged my hart,
               O learning how deuine thou ſeemes to me:
               Within whoſe armes is all felicity?
               Peace with your hammers, leaue your knocking there,
               You doe diſturbe my ſtudy and my reſt,
               Leaue off I ſay, you madde me with the noyſe.
            
            Enter Hodge and the two Men.
            
               Hod.
               Why how now Maiſter Thomas how now,
               Will you not let vs worke for you?
            
            
               Crom.
               You fret my hart, with making of this noiſe.
            
            
               Hod.
               How fret your hart? I but Thomas, youle
               Fret your fathers purſe if you let vs from working.
            
            
               2
               I this tis for him to make him a gentleman.
               Shall we leaue worke for your muſing, thats well I faith?
               But here comes my old Maiſter now.
            
            Enter old Cromwell.
            
            
               Old Crom.
               You idle knaues, what are you loytring now,
               No hammers walking and my worke to doe?
               What not a heate among your worke to day?
            
            
               Hod.
               Marry ſir your ſonne Thomas will not let vs worke at all,
            
            
               Old Crom.
               Why knaue I ſay, haue I thus carkde and car'd
               And all to keepe thee like a gentleman,
               And doſt thou let my ſeruants at their worke:
               That ſweat for thee knaue? labour thus for thee?
            
            
               Crom.
               Father their hammers doe offend my ſtudie.
            
            
               Old Crom.
               Out of my doores knaue if thou likeſt it not,
               I cry you mercy is your cares ſo fine?
               I tell thee knaue theſe get when I doe ſleepe,
               I will not haue my Anuill ſtand for thee.
            
            
               
               Crom.
               There's mony father, I will pay your men.
            
            He throwes many among
them.
            
               Old Cro.
               Haue I thus brought thee vp vnto my coſt,
               In hope that one day thou wouldſt releeue my age,
               And art thee now ſo lauiſh of thy coine,
               To ſcatter it among theſe idle knaues?
            
            
               Crom.
               Father be patient, and content your ſelfe,
               The time will come I ſhall hold golde as traſh:
               And here I ſpeake with a preſaging ſoule,
               To build a pallace where now this cottage ſtands,
               As fine as is King Henries, houſe at Sheene.
            
            
               Old Crow.
               You build a houſe? you knaue, youle be a begger,
               Now afore God all is but caſt away
               That is beſtowed vpon this thriftleſſe lad;
               Well, had I bound him to ſome honeſt trade:
               This had not beene, but it was his mothers doing,
               To ſend him to the Vniuerſitie:
               How builde a houſe where now this cottage ſtands,
               As faire as that at Sheene? he ſhall not here me,
               A good boy Tom, I con thee thanke Tom,
               
               Well ſaid Tom, gramarcies Tom,
               
               Into your worke knaues hence you ſauſie boy.
            
            Exit all but young Cromwell.
            
            
               Cro.
               Why ſhould my birth keepe downe my mounting ſpirit?
               Are not all creatures ſubiect vnto time?
               To time, who doth abuſe the world,
               And filles it full of hodge-podge baſtardy,
               There's legions now of beggars on the earth,
               That their originall did ſpring from Kings:
               And many Monarkes now whoſe fathers were,
               The riffe-raffe of their age: for time and Fortune
               Weares out a noble traine to beggery,
               And from the dunghill minions doe aduance
               To ſtate: and marke in this admiring world,
               This is but courſe, which in the name of Fate
               Is ſeene as often as it whirles about:
               The Riuer Thames that by our doore doth paſſe,
               His firſt beginning is but ſmall and ſhallow?
               
                  
Yet keeping on his courſe, groues to a ſea.
               And likewiſe W
                        •
                     lſay, the wonder of our age,
               His birth as meane as mine, a Butchers ſonne
               Now who within this land a greaterman?
               Then Cromwell cheere thee vp, and tell thy ſoule,
               That thou maiſt liue to flouriſh and controule.
            
            Enter old Cromwell.
            
            
               Old Crom.
               
                  Tom Cromwell, what Tom I ſay.
            
            
               Crom.
               Doe you call ſir?
            
            
               Old Crom.
               Here is Maiſter Bowſer come to know, if you haue
               diſpatched his petition, for the Lords of the counſell or no.
            
            
               Crom.
               Father I haue, pleaſe you to call him in.
            
            
               Old Crom.
               That's well ſaid Tom, a good lad Tom.
               
            
            Enter Maiſter Bowſer.
            
            
               Bow.
               Now Maiſter Cromwell, haue you diſpatched this petition?
            
            
               Crom.
               I haue ſir, here it is, pleaſe you peruſe it.
            
            
               Bow.
               It ſhall not need, weele read it as we goe by water:
               And Maiſter Cromwell, I haue made a motion
               May doe you good, and of you like of it.
               Our Secretarie at Antwarpe, ſir is dead,
               And the Marchants there hath ſent to me,
               For to prouide a man fit for the place:
               Now I doe know none fitter then your ſelfe,
               If with your liking it ſtand Maiſter Cromwell.
               
            
            
               Crom.
               With all my hart ſir, and I much am bound,
               In loue and duty for your kindneſſe ſhowne.
            
            
               Old Crom.
               Body of me Tom make haſt, leaſt ſome body
               Get betweene thee and home Tom.
               
               I thanke you good Maiſter Bowſer, I thanke you for my boy,
               I thanke you alwayes, I thanke you moſt hartely ſir:
               Hoe a cup of Beere there for Maiſter Bowſer.
               
            
            
               Bow.
               It ſhall not need ſir, Maiſter Cromwell will you goe?
            
            
               Crom.
               I will attend you ſir.
            
            
               Old Crom.
               Farewell Tom, God bleſſe thee Tom,
               
               God ſpeed thee good Tom.
               
            
            Exit omnes.
            Enter Bagot a Broker, 
                  •
               olus.
            
               Bag.
               I hope this day is fatall vnto ſome,
               
                  
And by their loſſe muſt Bagot ſeeke to gaine.
               This is the lodging of Maiſter Friskiball,
               
               a liberall Marchant, and a Florentine,
               
               To whom Baniſter owes a thouſand pound,
               A Marchant Banckrout, whoſe Father was my Maiſter,
               What doe I care, for pitie or regarde?
               He once was wealthy, but he now is falne,
               And this morning haue I got him areſted,
               At the ſute of Maiſter Friskiball,
               
               And by this meanes ſhall I be ſure of coyne,
               For doing this ſame good to him vnknowne:
               And in good time, ſee where the Marchant comes.
            
            Enter Friskiball.
            
            
               Bag.
               Good morrow to kinde Maiſter Friskiball.
               
            
            
               Friſ.
               God morrow to your ſelfe good maiſter Bagot,
               
               And whats the newes you are ſo earely ſtirring?
               It is for gaine, I make no doubt of that.
            
            
               Bag.
               It is for the loue ſir that I beare to you,
               When did you ſee your debter Baniſter?
               
            
            
               Friſ.
               I promiſe you, I haue not ſeene the man
               This two moneths day, his pouertie is ſuch,
               As I doe thinke he ſhames to ſee his friends.
            
            
               Bag.
               Why then aſſure your ſelfe to ſee him ſtraight,
               For at your ſute I haue arreſted him,
               And here they will be with him preſently.
            
            
               Friſ.
               Arreſt him at my ſute? you were to blame,
               I know the mans misfortunes to be ſuch,
               As hee's not able for to pay the debt,
               And were it knowne to ſome he were vndone.
            
            
               Bag.
               This is your pittifull hart to thinke it ſo,
               But you are much deceaued in Baniſter,
               
               Why ſuch as he will breake for faſhion ſake,
               And vnto thoſe they owe a thouſand pound,
               Pay ſcarce a hundred: O ſir beware of him,
               The man is lewdly giuen, to Dyce and Drabs,
               Spends all he hath in harlots companies,
               
               It is no mercy for to pitie him.
               I ſpeake the truth of him, for nothing els,
               But for the kindneſſe that I beare to you,
            
            
               Friſ.
               If it be ſo, he hath deceiued me much,
               And to deale ſtrictly with ſuch a one as he.
               Better ſeuere then too much lenitie,
               But here is Maiſter Baniſter himſelfe,
               And with him as I take the officers.
            
            Enter Baniſter, his wife, and two officers.
            
               Ban.
               O Maiſter Friskiball you haue vndone me,
               My ſtate was well nigh ouerthrowne before,
               Now altogether downe-caſt by your meanes.
            
            
               Miſt. Ba.
               O maſter Friskiball, pity my husbands caſe
               Hee is a man hath liued as well as any,
               Till enuious fortune and the rauenous Sea
               Did rob, diſrobe, and ſpoile vs of our owne.
            
            
               Friſ.
               Miſtris Baniſter, I enuie not your husband,
               Nor willingly would I haue vſed him thus:
               But that I heare hee is ſo lewdely giuen,
               Haunts wicked company, and hath inough
               To pay his debts, yet will not be knowne thereof.
            
            
               Ban.
               This is that damned Broker, that ſame Bagot,
               
               Whom I haue often from my Trencherfed,
               Ingratefull villaine for to vſe me thus.
            
            
               Bag.
               What I haue ſaid to him is naught but truth.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               What thou haſt ſaid ſprings from an enuious hart.
               A Canniball that doth eate men aliue,
               But here vpon my knee beleeue me ſir,
               And what I ſpeake, ſo helpe me God is true▪
               
               We ſcarſe haue meate to feede our little Babes,
               Moſt of our Plate is in that Broken hand.
               Which had we mony to defray our debts
               O thinke wee would not bide that penurie:
               Be mercifull, kinde maiſter Friskiball,
               
               My husband, children, and my ſelfe will eate
               But one meale a day, the other will we keepe and ſell,
               
                  
As part to pay the debt we owe to you:
               If euer teares did pierce a tender minde,
               Be pittifull, let me ſome fauour finde.
            
            
               Bag.
               Be not you ſo mad ſir, to beleeue hir teares.
            
            
               Fri.
               Go to, I ſee thou art an enuious man,
               Good miſtris Baniſter kneele not to me,
               I pray riſe vp, you ſhall haue your deſire.
               Holde officers; be gone, ther's for your paines,
               You know you owe to me a thouſand pound,
               Here take my hand, if eare God make you able;
               And place you in your former ſtate againe,
               Pay me: but if ſtill your fortune frowne,
               Vpon my faith Ile neuer aske you crowne:
               I neuer yet did wrong to men in thrall.
               For God doth know what to my ſelfe may fall.
            
            
               Ban.
               This vnexpected fauour vndeſerued,
               Doth make my hart bleed inwardly with ioy,
               Nere may ought proſper with me is my owne,
               If I forget this kindneſſe you haue ſhowne.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               My children in their prayers both night and day,
               For your good fortune and ſucceſſe ſhall pray.
            
            
               Fri.
               I thanke you both, I pray goe dine with me,
               Within theſe three dayes, if God giue me leaue,
               I will to Florence to my natiue home,
               
                  Bagot holde, theres a Portague to drinke,
               Although you ill deſerued it by your merit,
               Giue not ſuch cruell ſcope vnto your hart,
               Be ſure the ill you doe will be requited,
               Remember what I ſay, Bagot farewell.
               Come Maiſter Baniſter, you ſhall with me,
               My fare's but ſimple, but welcome hartily.
            
            Exit all but Bagot.
            
            
               Bag.
               A plague goe with you, would you had eate your laſt,
               Is this the thankes I haue for all my paines:
               Confuſion light vpon you all for me,
               Where he had wont to giue a ſcore of crown
                     ••
                  
               
               Doth he now foyſt me with a Portague:
               Well, I will be reuenged vpon this Baniſter.
               
               
                  
Ile to his Creditors, buy all the debts he owes,
               As ſeeming that I doe it for good-will,
               I am ſure to haue them at an eaſie rate;
               And when tis done, in Chriſtendome he ſtaies not,
               But ile make his hate t'ake with ſorrow,
               And if that Baniſter become my debter
               By heauen and earth ile make his plague the greater.
            
            Exit Bagot.
            
            Enter Chorus.
            
            
               Cho.
               Now gentlemen imagine, that young Cromwell is
               In Antwarpe, Ledger for the Engliſh Marchants:
               And Baniſter to ſhunne this Bagots hate,
               Hearing that he hath got ſome of his debts,
               Is fled to Antwarpe, with his wife and children,
               Which Bagot hearing is gone after them:
               And thether ſends his billes of debt before,
               To be reuenged on wretched Baniſter,
               
               What doth fall out, with patience ſit and ſee,
               A iuſt requitall of falſe trecherie.
            
            Exit.
            
               Cromwell in his study with bags of money
before him caſting of account.
            
               Crom.
               Thus farre my reckoning doth goe ſtraight and euen:
               But Cromwell this ſame plodding fits not thee:
               Thy minde is altogether ſet on trauell,
               And not to liue thus cloyſtered like a Nunne,
               It is not this ſame traſh that I regard,
               Experience is the iewell of my hart.
            
            Enter a Post.
            
               Poſt.
               I pray ſir, are you ready to diſpatch me?
            
            
               Crom.
               Yes heres thoſe ſummes of mony you muſt cary.
               You goe ſo farre as Frankford, doe you not?
            
            
               Poſt.
               I doe ſir.
            
            
               Crom.
               Well prethee make all the haſt thou canſt,
               For there be certaine Engliſh gentlemen
               Are bound for Venice, and may happily want
               And if that you ſhould linger by the way:
               But in hope that you will make good ſpeed,
               
                  
There's two Angels to buy you ſpurres and wandes.
            
            
               Po.
               I thanke you ſir, this will adde winges indeede.
            
            
               Crom.
               Golde is of power to make an Eagles ſpeed.
               Enter Mistris Baniſter.
               
               What gentlewoman is this that greeues ſo much?
               It ſeemes ſhe doth addreſſe her ſelfe to me.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               God ſaue you ſir, pray is your name Maiſter Cromwell.
               
            
            
               Crom.
               My name is Thomas Cromwell, gentlewoman.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               Know you not one Bagot ſir, that's come to Antwarpe?
               
            
            
               Crom.
               No truſt me, I neuer ſaw the man,
               But here are billes of debt I haue receiued
               Againſt one Baniſter a Marchant fallen into decay.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               Into decay indeede, long of that wretch,
               I am the wife to wofull Baniſter,
               
               And by that bloudy villaine am perſu'de,
               From London here to Antwarpe,
               
               My husband he is in the gouernours hands:
               And God of heauen knowes how he'ill deale with him,
               Now ſir your hart is framed of milder temper,
               Be mercifull to a diſtreſſed ſoule,
               And God no doubt will treble bleſſe your gaine.
            
            
               Crom.
               Good Miſtris Baniſter, what I can, I will,
               In any thing that lies within my power.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               O ſpeake to Bagot, that ſame wicked wretch,
               An Angels voyce may moue a damned diuell.
            
            
               Crom.
               Why is he come to Antwarpe as you here?
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               I hard he landed ſome two houres ſince.
            
            
               Crom.
               Well Miſtris Banister aſſure your ſelfe,
               Ile ſpeake to Bagot in your owne behalfe:
               And winne him t'all the pittie that I can,
               Meane time, to comfort you in your diſtreſſe,
               Receiue theſe Angels to releeue your neede,
               And be aſſured that what I can effect:
               To doe you good, no way I will neglect.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               That mighty God that knowes each mortals hart,
               Keepe you from trouble, ſorrow, griefe and ſmart.
               Exit Mi. Ba.
            
            
               
               Crom.
               Thankes courteous woman,
               For thy hartie prayer:
               It greeues my ſoule to ſee her miſerie,
               But we that liue vnder the worke of fate,
               May hope the beſt, yet knowes not to what ſtate
               Our ſtarres and deſtinies hath vs aſignde,
               Fickle is Fortune, and her face is blinde.
            
            Enter Bagot ſolus.
            
               Ba.
               So all goes well, it is as I would haue it,
               
                  Baniſter he is with the Gouernour:
               And ſhortly ſhall haue guiues vpon his heeles,
               It glads my hart to thinke vpon the ſlaue,
               I hope to haue his body rot in priſon:
               And after here, his wife to hang her ſelfe,
               And all his children die for want of foode,
               The Iewels I haue brought to Antwarpe,
               Are recon'd to be worth fiue thouſand pound,
               Which ſcarcely ſtoode me in three hundreth pound,
               I bought them at an eaſie kinde of rate,
               I care not which way they came by them
               That ſould them me, it comes not neare my hart.
               And leaſt they ſhould be ſtolne as ſure they are,
               I thought it meete to ſell them here in Antwarpe,
               And ſo haue left them in the Gouernours hand,
               Who offers me within two hundreth pound
               Of all my price: but now no more of that,
               I muſt goe ſee and if my billes be ſafe,
               The which I ſent to Maiſter Cromwell,
               
               That if the winde ſhould keepe me on the ſea,
               He might areſt him here before I came:
               And in good time, ſee where he is: God ſaue you ſir.
            
            
               Crom.
               And you, pray pardon me, I know you not.
            
            
               Bag.
               It may be ſo ſir, but my name is Bagot,
               
               The man that ſent to you the billes of debt.
            
            
               Crom.
               O the man that perſues Baniſter,
               
               
                  
Here are the billes of debt you ſent to me:
               As for the man you know beſt where he is,
               It is reported yu'aue a flintie hart,
               A minde that will not ſtoope to any pittie;
               An eye that knowes not how to ſhed a teare,
               A hand thats alwayes open for re
                     ••
                  rd,
               But Maiſter Bagot would you be ruled by me:
               You ſhould turne all theſe to the contrarie,
               Your hart ſhould ſtill haue feeling of remorſe,
               Your minde, according to your ſtate, be liberall
               To thoſe that ſtand in neede and in diſtreſſe;
               Your hand to helpe them that doe ſtand in want,
               Rather then with your poyſe to holde them downe,
               For euery ill turne ſhow your ſelfe more kinde,
               Thus ſhould I doe, pardon, I ſpeake my minde.
            
            
               Bag.
               I ſir, you ſpeake to here what I would ſay,
               But you muſt liue I know, as well as I:
               I know this place to be extortion,
               And tis not for a man to keepe ſafe here,
               But he muſt lye, cog, with his deareſt friend;
               And as for pittie, ſcorne it, hate all conſcience,
               But yet I doe commend your wit in this,
               To make a ſhow, of what I hope you are not,
               But I commend you and tis well done,
               This is the onely way to bring your gaine.
            
            
               Crom.
               My gaine: I had rather chaine me to an ore,
               And like a ſlaue there toile out all my life,
               Before ide liue ſo baſe a ſlaue as thou:
               I like an hipocrite to make a ſhow,
               Of ſeeming vertue and a diuell within?
               No Bagot, if thy conſcience were as cleare,
               Poore Baniſter, nere had beene troubled here.
            
            
               Bag.
               Nay good Maiſter Cromwell be not angry ſir,
               I know full well that you are no ſuch man,
               But if your conſcience were as white as Snow,
               It will be thought that you are otherwiſe,
            
            
               Crom.
               Will it be thought that I am other wiſe?
               
                  
Let them that thinke ſo know they are deceiu'd;
               Shall Cromwell liue to haue his faith miſconſterd,
               Antwarpe for all the wealth within thy Towne
               I will not ſtay here full two houres longer:
               As good lucke ſerues, my accounts are all made euen,
               Therefore ile ſtraight vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                   treaſurer,
               
                  Bagot, I know youle to the gournour,
               Commend me to him, ſay I am bound to trauaile,
               To ſee the fruitefull parts of Italy,
               And as you euer bore a Chriſtian minde,
               Let Baniſter ſome fauour of you finde.
            
            
               Bag.
               For your ſake ſir ile helpe him all I can,
               To ſtarue his hart out eare he gets a groate,
               So Maiſter Cromwell doe I take my leaue,
               For I muſt ſtraight vnto the gouernour.
            
            Exit Bagot.
            
            
               Crom.
               Farewell ſir, pray you remember what I ſaid:
               No Cromwell, no, thy hart was nere ſo baſe
               To liue by falſhoode or by brokery,
               But 't falles out well, I little it repent,
               Hereafter, time in trauell ſhalbe ſpent.
            
            Enter Hodge his fathers man.
            
               Hod.
               Your ſonne Thomas, quoth you, I haue beene Thomaſt,
I had thought it had beene no ſuch matter to a gone by water: for
at Putnay ile goe you to Pariſh-garden for two pence, ſit as ſtill as
may be, without any wagging or ioulting in my guttes, in a little
boate too: here vve were ſcarce foure mile in the great greene
water, but I thinking to goe to my afternoones vnchines, as twas
my manner at home, but I felt a kinde of riſing in my guttes: at
laſt one a the Sailers ſpying of me, be a good cheere ſayes hee, ſet
downe thy victuals, and vp with it, thou haſt nothing but an
Ecle in thy belly▪ Well, too't went I, to my victuals went the
Sailers, & thinking me to be a man of better experience then any
in the ſhippe, asked mee what Woode the ſhippe was made of:
they all ſwore I could them as right as if I had beene acquainted

with the Carpenter that made it, at laſt wee grew neere land,
and I grew villanous hungry, went to my bagge, the diuell a
bit there was, the Sailers had tickled mee▪ yet I cannot blame
them, it was a part of kindneſſe, for I in kindneſſe tould them
what Wood the ſhippe was made of, and they in kindneſſe eate
vp my victuals, as indeede one good turne asketh another: well
would I, could I, finde my Maiſter Thomas in this Dutch Towne,
he might put ſome Engliſh Beare into my belly.
            
            
               Crom.
               What Hodge my fathers man, by my hand welcome,
               How doth my father? whats the newes at home?
            
            
               
                  Hod.-
               Maiſter Thomas, O God Maiſter Thomas, your hand.
gloue and all, this is to giue you to vnderſtanding that your father
is in health, and Alice Downing here hath ſent you a Nutmeg,
and Beſſe Make water a race of Ginger, my fellow Will and
Tom hath betweene them ſent you a dozen of points, and goodman
Tolle, of the Goate, a paire of mittons, my ſelfe came in perſon,
and this is all the newes.
            
            
               Crom.
               Gramarſie good Hodge, and thou art welcome to me,
               But in as ill a time thou commeſt as may be:
               For I am trauelling into Italy,
               What ſaiſt thou Hodge, wilt thou beare me company?
            
            
               Hodge.
               Will I beare thee company Tom, what tell'ſt me of
Italy, were it to the furtheſt part of Flanders, I would goe with
thee Tom, I am thine in all weale and woe, thy owne to commaund.
what Tom, I haue paſſed the rigorous waues of Neptunes
blaſtes, I tell you Thomas I haue beene in the danger of the
flouds, and when I haue ſeene Boreas beginne to play the Ruffin
with vs, then would I downe a my knees and call vpon Vulcan.
               
            
            
               Crom.
               And why vpon him?
            
            
               Hod.
               Becauſe as this ſame fellow Neptune is God of the Seas,
ſo Vulcan is LORD ouer the Smiths, and therefore I being a
Smith, thought his Godhead would haue ſome care yet of me.
            
            
               Crom.
               A good conceit, but tell me haſt thou din'd yet?
            
            
               Hod.
               
                  Thomas to ſpeake the truth, not a bit yet I.
            
            
               Crom.
               Come goe with me, thou ſhalt haue cheere good ſtore.
And farewell Antwarpe if I come no more.
            
            
               Hodg.
               I follow thee ſweet Tom, I follow thee
            
            Exit amb
                  •
               .
            
               
Enter the Gouernour of the Engliſh houſe, Bagot, Baniſter,
his wife, and two officers.
            
               Gouer.
               Is Cromwell gone then, ſay you Maiſter Bagot,
               
               What diſlike, I pray, what was the cauſe?
            
            
               Bag.
               To tell you true, a wilde braine of his owne,
               Such youth as they, cannot ſee when they are well:
               He is all bent to trauaile, thats his reaſon,
               And doth not loue to eate his bread at home.
            
            
               Gou.
               Well, good fortune with him, if the man be gone.
               We hardly ſhall finde ſuch a one as he,
               To fit our turnes, his dealings were ſo honeſt:
               But now ſir, for your Iewels that I haue,
               What doe you ſay? what, will you take my priſe?
            
            
               Bag.
               O ſir, you offer too much vnderfoote.
            
            
               Gou.
               Tis but two hundred pound betweene vs man,
               Whats that in paiment of fiue thouſand pound.
            
            
               Bag.
               Two hundred pound birladie ſir tis great,
               Before I got ſo much, it made me ſweat.
            
            
               Gou.
               Well Maiſter Bagot Ile proffer you fairely,
               You ſee this Marchant Maiſter Baniſter,
               
               Is going now to priſon at your ſute.
               His ſubſtance all is gone, what would you haue?
               Yet in regarde I knew the man of wealth.
               Neuer diſhoneſt dealing, but ſuch miſhaps
               Hath falne on him, may light on me, or you,
               There is two hundred pound betweene vs,
               We will diuide the ſame, Ile giue you one,
               On that condition you will ſet him free:
               His ſtate is nothing, that you ſee your ſelfe,
               And where naught is the King muſt loſe his right.
            
            
               Bag.
               Sir▪ ſir, you ſpeake out of your loue,
               Tis fooliſh loue ſir ſure to pittie him:
               Therefore content your ſelfe, this is my minde,
               To doe him good I will not bate a penie.
            
            
               Ban.
               This is my comfort though thou doſt no good,
               A mighty ebbe followes a mighty floud.
            
            
               
               Mi. Ba.
               O thou baſe wretch, whom we haue foſtered.
               Euen as a Serpent for to poyſon vs,
               If God did euer right a womans wrong:
               To that ſame God I bend and bow my heart,
               To let his heany wrath fall on thy head,
               By whom my hopes and ioyes are butchered.
            
            
               Bag.
               Alas fond woman, I prethee pray thy worſt,
               The Fox fares better ſtill when he is curſt.
            
            Enter Maiſter Bowſer a Marchant.
            
               Gou.
               Maiſter Bowſer! your welcome ſir from England,
               Whats the beſt newes? How doth all our friends?
            
            
               Bow.
               They are all well and doe commend them to you,
               There's letters from your brother and your ſonne:
               So faire you well ſir, I muſt take my leaue.
               My haſt and buſineſſe doth require ſo.
            
            
               Gou.
               Before you dine ſir? what goe you out of towne?
            
            
               Bow.
               I faith vnleſſe I here ſome newes in towne,
               I muſt away, there is no remedy.
            
            
               Gou.
               Maiſter Bowſer what is your buſines, may I know it?
               You may ſir, and ſo ſhall all the Citie.
            
            
               Bow.
               The King of late hath had his treaſury rob'd,
               And of the choyſeſt iewels that he had:
               The value of them was ſeauen thouſand pounds,
               The fellow that did ſteale theſe iewels is hanged,
               And did confeſſe that for three hundred pound,
               He ſould them to one Bagor dwelling in London:
               Now Bagot's fled, and as we here to Antwarpe,
               And hether am I come to ſeeke him out,
               And they that firſt can tell me of his newes,
               Shall haue a hundred pound for their reward.
            
            
               Ban.
               How iuſt is God to right the innocent?
            
            
               Gou.
               Maiſter Bowſer you come in happy time,
               Here is the villaine Bagot that you ſeeke.
               And all thoſe iewels haue I in my hands,
               Officers looke to him, hould him faſt.
            
            
               Bag.
               The diuell ought me a ſhame, and now hath paid it.
            
            
            
               Bow.
               Is this that Bagot? fellowes beare him hence,
               We will not now ſtand for his reply;
               Lade him with Yrons, wee will haue him tride
               In England where his villanies are knowne.
            
            
               Bag.
               Miſchiefe, confuſion, light vpon you all,
               O hang me, drowne me, let me kill my ſelfe,
               Let goe my armes let me run quick to hell.
            
            
               Bow.
               Away, beare him away, ſtop the ſlaues mouth.
            
            They carry him away.
            
               Mi. Ba.
               Thy workes are infinite, great God of heauen.
            
            
               Gou.
               I hard this Bagot was a wealthy fellow.
            
            
               Bow.
               He was indeed, for when his goods were zeaſed,
               Of Iewels, coyne, and Plate within his houſe,
               Was found the value of fiue thouſand pound,
               His furniture fully worth halfe ſo much,
               Which being all ſtrainde for the King,
               He franckly gaue it to the Antwarpe Marchants,
               And they againe, out of their bounteous minde,
               Hath to a brother of their company,
               A man decaid by fortune of the Seas,
               Giuen Bagots wealth, to ſet him vp againe:
               And keepe it for him, his name is Baniſter.
               
            
            
               Gou.
               Maiſter Bowſer, with this happy newes,
               You haue reuiued two from the gates of death,
               This is that Baniſter, and this his wife.
            
            
               Bow.
               Sir I am glad my fortune is ſo good,
               To bring ſuch tidings as may comfort you,
            
            
               Ban.
               You haue giuen life vnto a man deemd dead,
               For by theſe newes, my life is newly bred.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               Thankes to my God, next to my Soueraigne King.
               And laſt to you that theſe good newes doe bring.
            
            
               Gou.
               The hundred pound I muſt receiue as due
               For finding Bagot, I freely giue to you.
            
            
               Bow.
               And Maiſter Banister, if ſo you pleaſe,
               Ile beare you company, when you croſſe the Seas.
            
            
               Ban.
               If it pleaſe you ſir, my company is but meane,
               Stands with your liking, Ile waite on you.
            
            
               
               Gou.
               I am glad that all things doe accorde ſo well:
               Come Maiſter Bowſer, let vs in to dinner:
               And Miſtriſſe Baniſter, be mery woman,
               Come after ſorrow now, lets cheere your ſpirit,
               Knaues haue their due, and you but what you merit.
            
            Exit omnes.
            Enter Cromwell and Hodge in their ſhirtes, and
without Hattes.
            
               Hodg.
               Call yee this ſeeing of faſhions?
               Marry would I had ſtaide at Putney ſtill,
               O Maiſter Thomas, we are ſpoiled, we are gone.
            
            
               Crom.
               Content thee man, this is but fortune.
            
            
               Hodg.
               Fortune, a plague of this Fortune makes me goe wetſhod,
the roagues would not leaue me a ſhooe to my feet, for my
hoaſe they ſcorned them with their heeles, but for my Dublet
and Hatte, O Lord they imbraced mee, and vnlaſed mee, and
tooke away my cloathes, and ſo diſgraced me.
            
            
               Crom.
               Well Hodge, what remedie?
               What ſhift ſhall we make now?
            
            
               Hodg.
               Nay I know not, for begging I am naught, for ſtealing
worſe: by my troth I muſt euen fall to my olde trade, to the
Hammer and the Horſe heeles againe: but now the worſt is, I
am not acquainted with the humor of the horſes in this countrie,
whether they are not coultiſh, giuen much to kicking, or no, for
vvhen I haue one legge in my hand, if he ſhould vp and lay
tother on my chops, I were gone, there lay I, there lay Hodge.
               
            
            
               Crom.
               
                  Hodge I beleeue thou muſt worke for vs both.
            
            
               Hodg.
               O Maiſter Thomas, haue not I tolde you of this, haue
not I many a time and often, ſaid Tom, or Maiſter Thomas, learne
to make a Horſe-ſhooe, it will be your owne another day: this
was not regarded. Harke you Thomas, what doe you call the
fellowes that robd vs?
            
            
               Crom.
               The Bandetto.
            
            
               Hodg.
               The Bandetto doe you call them, I know not what
they are called here, but I am ſure we call them plaine theeues in

England, O Th
                        •
                     mas that we were now at Putney, at the ale there▪
               
            
            
               Crom.
               Content thee man, here ſet vp theſe two billes,
               And let vs keepe our ſtanding on the bridge:
               The faſhion of this country is ſuch,
               If any ſtranger be oppreſſed with want,
               To write the manner of his miſery,
               And ſuch as are diſpoſed to ſuccour him,
               Will doe it, what haſt thou ſet them vp?
            
            
               Hod.
               I they're vp, God ſend ſome to reade them,
               And not onely to reade them, but alſo to looke on vs:
               And not altogether to looke on vs,
               One ſtandes at one end, and one at tother.
               But to releeue vs, O colde, colde, colde.
            
            Enter Friskiball the Marchant, and
reades the billes.
            
               Friſ.
               Whats here? two Engliſhmen rob'd by the Bandetto,
               One of them ſeemes to be a gentleman:
               Tis pittie that his fortune was ſo hard,
               To fall into the deſperate hands of theeues,
               Ile queſtion him of what eſtate he is,
               God ſaue you ſir, are you an Engliſhman?
            
            
               Crom.
               I am ſir a diſtreſſed Engliſhman.
            
            
               Friſ.
               And what are you my friend.
            
            
               Hod.
               Who I ſir, by my troth I doe not know my ſelfe what I
am now, but ſir, I was a Smith ſir, a poore Farrier of Putney,
thats my Maiſter ſir yonder, I was robbed for his ſake ſir.
            
            
               Friſ.
               I ſee you haue beene met by the Bandetto,
               And therefore neede not aske how you came thus:
               But Friskiball, why dooſt thou queſtion them
               Of their eſtate and not releeue their neede?
               Sir, the coyne I haue about me is not much:
               There's ſixteene Duckets for to cloath your ſelues,
               There's ſixteene more to buy your diet with,
               And there's ſixteene to pay for your horſe hier:
               Tis all the wealth you ſee my purſe poſſeſſes,
               But if you pleaſe for to enquire me out,
               You ſhall not want for ought that I can doe,
               My name is Friskiball, a Florence Marchant,
               
                  
A man that alwayes loued your nation.
            
            
               Crom.
               This vnexpected fauour at your hands,
               Which God doth know, if euer I ſhall requi
                     •
                  e it,
               Neceſſitie makes me to take your bountie,
               And for your gold can yeeld you naught but thankes,
               Your charitie hath helpt me from diſpaire.
               Your name ſhall ſtill be in my harty prayer.
            
            
               Friſ.
               It is not worth ſuch thankes come to my houſe,
               Your want ſhall better be releeu'd then thus.
            
            
               Crom.
               I pray excuſe me, this ſhall well ſuffice,
               To beare my charges to Bononia,
               
               Whereas a noble Earle is much diſtreſſed:
               An Engliſhman, Ruſſel
                        •
                     
                   the Earle of Bedford
               
               Is by the French King ſolde vnto his death,
               It may fall out, that I may doe him good:
               To ſaue his life, Ile hazard my hart blood:
               Therefore kinde ſir, thankes for your liberall gift,
               I muſt be gone to aide him there's no ſhift.
            
            
               Friſ.
               Ile be no hinderer to ſo good an act,
               Heauen proſper you, in that you goe about:
               If Fortune bring you this way backe againe,
               Pray let me ſee you: ſo I take my leave▪
               
               All good a man can wiſh, I doe bequeath.
            
            
               Exit Friskiball.
            
               Crom.
               All good that God doth ſend, light on your head,
               There's few ſuch men within our climate bred.
               How ſay you now Hodge, is not this good fortune?
            
            
               Hod.
               How ſay you, Ile tell you what maiſter Thomas▪
                  
               
               If all men be of this Gentlemans minde,
               Lets keepe our ſtandings vpon this Bridge,
               We ſhall get more here with begging in one day,
               Then I ſhall with making Horſhoes in a whole yeere.
            
            
               Crom.
               No Hodge, we muſt begone vnto Bononia,
               
               There to releeue the noble Earle of Bedford:
               
               Where if I faile not in my policie,
               I ſhall deceiue their ſubtile treachery.
            
            
               Hodge.
               Nay Ile follow you, God bleſſe vs from the theeuing
               Bandettoes againe.
            
            Exit omnes
            
               
Enter Bedford and his Hoaſt.
            
               Bed.
               Am I betraide, was Bedforde borne to die,
               By ſuch baſe ſlaues in ſuch a place as this?
               Haue I eſcaped ſo many times in France,
               
               So many battailes haue I ouer paſſed,
               And made the French ſtirre when they hard my name;
               And am I now betraide vnto my death?
               Some of their harts bloud firſt ſhall pay for it.
            
            
               Hoa.
               They doe deſire my Lord to ſpeake with you.
            
            
               Bed.
               The traitors doe deſire to haue my bloud,
               But by my birth, my honour, and my name,
               By all my hopes, my life ſhall coſt them deare.
               Open the dore, ile venter out vpon them,
               And if I muſt die, then ile die with honour.
            
            
               Hoa.
               Alas my Lord that is a deſperate courſe,
               They haue begirt you round about the houſe:
               Their meaning is to take you priſoner,
               And ſo to ſend your body vnto France.
               
            
            
               Bed.
               Firſt ſhall the Ocean beas dry as ſand,
               Before aliue they ſend me vnto France:
               
               Ile haue my body firſt bored like a Siue,
               And die as Hector, gainſt the Mermidons,
               
               Eare France ſhall boaſt Bedfordes their priſoner,
               Trecherous France that gainſt the law of armes:
               Hath here betraide thy enemy to death,
               But be aſſured my bloud ſhall be reuenged,
               Vpon the beſt liues that remaines in France:
               
               Stand backe, or elſe thy run'ſt vpon thy death.
            
            Enter a Seruant.
            
               Meſ.
               Pardon my Lord, I come to tell your honour
               That they haue hired a Neopolitan,
               
               Who by his Oratorie hath promiſed them
               Without the ſhedding of one drop of bloud,
               Into their hands ſafe to deliuer you,
               And therefore craues none but himſelfe may enter,
               And a poore ſwaine that attends on him.
            
            Exit ſeruant.
            
               
               Bed.
               A Neapolitan, bid him come in,
               Were he as cunning in his eloquence
               As Cicero the famous man of Rome,
               His words would be as chaffe againſt the winde,
               Sweet tong'd Vleſſes that made Aiaxe mad;
               Were he and his tongue in this ſpeakers head,
               Aliue he winnes me not, then tis no conqueſt dead.
            
            Enter Cromwell like a Neopolitan, and
Hodge with him.
            
               Crom.
               Sir, are you the maiſter of the houſe?
            
            
               Hoa.
               I am ſir.
            
            
               Crom.
               By this ſame token you muſt leaue this place,
               And leaue none but the Earle and I together,
               And this my Peſſant here to tend on vs.
            
            
               Hoa.
               With all my hart, God grant, you doe ſome good.
            
            Exit. Hoaſt. Cromwell ſhuts the dore.
            
               Bed.
               Now ſir whats your will with me?
            
            
               Crom.
               Intends your honour, not to yeeld your ſelfe:
            
            
               Bed.
               No good-man gooſe, not while my ſword doth laſt,
               Is this your eloquence for to perſwade me.
            
            
               Crom.
               My Lord my eloquence is for to ſaue you,
               I am not as you iudge a Neopolitan:
               
               But Cromwell your ſeruant, and an Engliſhman.
            
            
               Bed.
               How Cromwell, not my Farriers ſonne?
            
            
               Crom.
               The ſame ſir, and am come to ſuccour you.
            
            
               Hod.
               Yes faith ſir, and I am Hodge your poore Smith,
               Many a time and oft haue I ſhooed your Dapper Gray.
            
            
               Bed.
               And what auailes it me that thou art here?
            
            
               Crom.
               It may auaile if youle be rul'd by me,
               My Lord you know the men of Mantua;
               
               And theſe Bononians are at deadly ſtrife,
               And they my Lord, both loue and honour you▪
               
               Could you but get out of the Mantua port,
               Then were you ſafe diſpight of all their force.
            
            
               Bed.
               The man thou talkeſt of things impoſſible,
               Doſt thou not ſee that we are round beſet:
               How then is it poſſible, we ſhould eſcape?
            
            
               
               Crom.
               By force we cannot, but by pollicie,
               Put on the apparell here that Hodge doth weare,
               And giue him yours: the States they know you not,
               For as I thinke they neuer ſaw your face,
               And at a watch-word muſt I call them in,
               And will deſire, that we two ſafe may paſſe
               To Mantua, where Ile ſay my buſineſſe lies,
               How doth your Honour like of this deuiſe?
            
            
               Bed.
               O wondrous good: But wilt thou venter Hodge?
               
            
            
               Hod.
               Will I O noble Lord, I doe accord? in any thing I can,
               And doe agree, to ſet thee free, doe fortune what ſhe can.
            
            
               Bed.
               Come then lets change our apparell ſtraight.
            
            
               Crom.
               God Hodge make haſt leaſt they chance to call.
            
            
               Hod.
               I warrant you ile 
                     〈◊〉
                   with a 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               Exit Earle & Hodge.
            
               Crom.
               Heauens graunt this pollicie doth take ſucceſſe,
               And that the Earle may ſafely ſcape 
                     •
                  eay.
               And yet it greeues me for this ſimple wretch,
               For feare they ſhould offer him violence.
               But of two euils tis beſt to ſhun the greateſt,
               And better is it that he liue in thrall,
               Then ſuch a Noble Earle as he ſhould fall.
               Their ſtubborne harts, it may be will relent:
               Since he is gone, to whom their hate is bent,
               My Lord haue you diſpatched?
            
            Enter Bedford like the Clowne, and Hodge in his
cloake and his Hat.
            
               Bed.
               How dooſt thou like vs Cromwell, is it well?
            
            
               Crom.
               O my Lord excellent: Hodge how dooſt feele thy ſelfe?
            
            
               Hod.
               How do I feele my ſelfe? why as a Noble man ſhould do,
               O how I feele honor come creeping on,
               My Nobilitie is wonderfull melancholy:
               Is it not moſt Gentleman like to be melancholy?
            
            
               Crom.
               Yes Hodge, now goe ſit downe in the ſtudy.
               And take ſtate vpon thee.
            
            
               Hodge.
               I warrant you my Lord, let me alone to take ſtate vpon

me: but harke my Lord, doe you feele nothing bite about you?
            
            
               Bed.
               No truſt me Hodge.
               
            
            
               Hod.
               I, they know they want their old paſture, tis a ſtrange
thing of this vermine, they dare not meddle with Nobilitie.
            
            
               Crom.
               Goe take thy place Hodge, I will call them in,
               All is done, enter
and if you pleaſe.
            
            
               Hodge ſits in the ſtudy, and
Cromwell calles in the States.
            Enter the States and Officers, with Malberts.
            
               Gou.
               What haue you wone him? will he yeelde himſelfe?
            
            
               Crom.
               I haue an't pleaſe you, and the quiet Earle,
               Doth yeeld himſelfe to be diſpoſed by you.
            
            
               Gou.
               Giue him the mony that we promiſed him:
               So let him goe, whether it pleaſe himſelfe.
            
            
               Crom.
               My buſineſſe ſir lies vnto Mantua,
               
               Pleaſe you to giue me ſafe conduct thether.
            
            
               Gou.
               Goe and conduct him to the Mantua port,
               And ſee him ſafe deliuered preſently.
               
                  Exit Cromwell and Bedford.
               Goe draw the curtaines, let vs ſee the Earle.
               O he is writing, ſtand apart a while.
            
            
               Hod.
               Fellow William, I am not as I haue beene, I went from
               you a Smith, I write to you as a Lord: I am at this preſent writing, among
               the Polonyan Caſiges. I do commend my Lordſhip to Raphe
               
               & to Roger, to Bridget & to Doritie, & ſo to al the youth of Putu
                        •
                     y.
               
            
            
               Gou.
               Sure theſe are the names of Engliſh Noblemen.
               Some of his ſpeciall friends, to whom he writes:
               But ſtay he doth adreſſe himſelfe to ſing.
               Here he ſings a ſong.
               My Lord I am glad you are ſo frolick and ſo blithe,
               Beleeue me noble Lord if you knew all,
               Youde change your merry vaine to ſudden ſorrow.
            
            
               Hod.
               I change my merry vaine, no thou Bononian, no,
               I am a Lord and therefore let me goe,
               And doe defie thee and thy Saſigis,
               Therefore ſtand off, and come not neere my honor.
            
            
               Gou.
               My Lord this ieſting cannot ſerue your turne.
            
            
               Hod.
               Dooſt thinke thou blacke Bononian beaſt,
               That I doe floure, doe gibe, or ieſt,
               No, no, thou Beare-pot, know that I, a noble Earle, a Lord pardy.
            
            
               
               Gou.
               What meanes this Trumpets ſound?
            
            A Trumpet ſounds. Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               C
                     ••
                  .
               One come from the States of Mantua.
               
            
            
               Gou.
               What, would you with vs ſpeake, thou man of Mantua?
               
            
            
               Meſ.
               Men of Bononia: this my meſſage is,
               To let you know the Noble Earle of Bedford:
               
               Is ſafe within the towne of Mantua,
               
               And willes you ſend the peſant that you haue,
               Who hath deceiued your expectation,
               Or els the States of Mantua haue vowed:
               They will recall the truce that they haue made,
               And not a man ſhall ſtirre from forth your towne,
               That ſhall returne vnleſſe you ſend him backe.
            
            
               Gou.
               O this miſfortune how it mads my hart?
               The Neopolitan hath beguiled vs all;
               Hence with this foole: what ſhall we doe with him,
               The Earle being gone? a plague vpon it all.
            
            
               Hod.
               No Ile aſſure you I am no Earle, but a ſmith Sir,
               One Hodge, a ſmith at Putney ſir:
               One that hath gulled you, that hath bored you ſir.
            
            
               Gou.
               Away with him, take hence the foole you came for.
            
            
               Hod.
               I ſir: and ile leaue the greater foole with you.
            
            
               Meſ.
               Farewell Bononians, come friend a long with me.
            
            
               Hod.
               My friend afore, my Lordſhip will follow thee.
            
            Exit.
            
               Gou.
               Well Mantua, ſince by thee the Earle is loſt,
               Within few dayes I hope to ſee thee croſt.
            
            Exit omnes.
            Enter Chorus.
            
               Ch
                     •
                  .
               Thus farre you ſee how Cromwells fortune paſſed.
               The Earle of Bedford being ſafe in Mantua:
               
               Deſires Cromwells company into France,
               To make requitall for his courteſie:
               But Cromwell doth denie the Earle his ſute,
               And telles him that thoſe parts he meant to ſee,
               He had not yet ſet footing on the land,
               And ſo directly takes his way to Spaine:
               The Earle to France, and ſo they both doe part,
               Now let your thoughts as ſwift as is the winde,
               
                  
Skip ſome few yeeres, that Cromwell ſpent in trauell,
               And now imagine him to be in England:
               Seruant vnto the Maiſter of the Roules,
               Where in ſhort time he there beganne to floriſh,
               An houre ſhall ſhow you what few yeeres did cheriſh.
               Exit.
            
            The Muſick playes they bring out the banquet, Enter Sir Chriſtopher
Hales, and Cromwell, and two ſeruants.
            
               Hales.
               Come ſirs, be carefull of your Maiſters credit,
               And as our bountie now exceedes the figure
               Of common entertainment: ſo doe you
               With lookes as free as is your Maiſters ſoule,
               Giue formall welcome to the thronged tables,
               That ſhall receiue the Cardinals followers,
               And the attendants of the great Lord Chancellor.
               But all my care Cromwell depends on thee,
               Thou art a man, differing from vulgar forme,
               And by how much thy ſpirit is ranckt boue theſe,
               In rules of Arte, by ſo much it ſhines brighter by trauell,
               Whoſe obſeruance pleades his merit
               In a moſt learned, yet vnaffecting ſpirit,
               Good Cromwell caſt an eye of faire regarde,
               Bout all my houſe, and what this ruder fleſh,
               Through ignorance, or wine, doe miſcreate,
               Salue thou with curteſie: if welcome want,
               Full bowles, and ample banquets will ſeeme ſcant.
            
            
               Crom.
               Sir, whatſoeuer lies in me,
               Aſſure you I will ſhew my vtmoſt duty.
               
                  Exit. Crom.
            
            
               Hales.
               About it then, the Lords will ſtraight be here:
               
                  Cromwell, thou haſt thoſe parts would rather ſute,
               The ſeruice of the ſtate, then of my houſe,
               I looke vpon thee with a louing eye,
               That one day will prefer thy deſtiny.
            
            
               Enter Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ.
               Sir the Lords be at hand,
            
            
               Hales.
               They are welcome, bid Cromwell ſtraight attendys,
               And looke you all things be in perfect readineſſe.
            
            
            The Muſicke playes. Enter Cardinall Wolſay, Sir.
Thomas Moore and Gardiner.
            
               Wol.
               O ſir Chriſtopher you are too liberall, what a banket to?
            
            
               Hal.
               My Lords if words could ſhow the ample welcome,
               That my free hart affords you, I could then become a prater:
               But I now muſt deale like a feaſt Polititian,
               
               With your Lordſhips, deferre your welcome till the banket end,
               That it may then ſalue our defect of faire:
               Yet Welcome now and all that tend on you,
            
            
               Wol.
               Thankes to the kinde Maiſter of the Roules,
               Come and ſit downe, ſit downe ſir Thomas Moore:
               
               Tis ſtrange, how that we and the Spaniard differ,
               Their dinner, is our banquet after dinner,
               And they are men of actiue diſpoſition,
               This I gather, that by their ſparing meate:
               Their body more fitter for the warres,
               And if that famine chance to pinch their mawes,
               Being vſde to faſt it breedes leſſe paine.
            
            
               Hal.
               Fill me ſome Wine: Ile anſwere Cardinall Wolſay:
               
               My Lord we Engliſhmen are of more heer ſoules,
               Then hunger ſtaru'd, and ill complexioned ſpaniards,
               They that are rich in Spaine, ſpare belly foode,
               To decke their backes with an Italian hoode,
               And Silkes of Ciuill: And the pooreſt Snake,
               That feedes on Lemmons, Pilchers, and neare heated
               His pallet with ſweete fleſh, will beare a caſe,
               More fat and gallant then his ſtarued face,
               Pride, the Inquiſition, and this belly-euill,
               Are in my iudgement Spaines three headed diuell.
            
            
               Mo.
               Indeede it is a plague vnto their nation.
               Who ſtager after in blinde imitation.
            
            
               Hal.
               My Lords with welcome, I preſent your Lordſhips
               A ſolemne health.
            
            
               Mo.
               I loue health well, but when as health
                     •
                   doe bring
               Paine to the head, and bodies ſurfetting:
               Then ceaſe I health
                     •
                  : nay ſpill not friend,
               
                  
For though the drops be ſmall,
               Yet haue they force, to force men to the wall.
            
            
               Wel.
               Sir Chriſtopher, is that your man?
            
            
               Hal.
               And like your grace he is a Scholler, and a Li
                        •
                     gueſt,
               
               One that hath trauelled many parts of Chriſtendome my Lord.
            
            
               Wol.
               My friend come nearer, haue you beene a traueller?
            
            
               Cro.
               My Lord I haue added to my knowledge, the low countries,
               
                  France, Spaine, Germanie, and Italie:
               
               And though ſmall gaine of profit I did finde,
               Yet did it pleaſe my eye, content my minde.
            
            
               Wol.
               What doe you thinke of the ſeuerall ſtates.
               And Princes Courts as you haue trauelled?
            
            
               Crom.
               My Lord no Court with England may compare,
               Neither for ſtate nor ciuill gouernment:
               Luſt dwelles in France, in Italie, and Spaine,
               
               From the poore peſant to the Princes traine,
               In Germanie, and Holland riot ſerues,
               And he that moſt can drinke, moſt he deſerues:
               England I praiſe not: for I here was borne,
               But that ſhe laugheth the others vnto ſcorne.
            
            
               Wol.
               My Lord there dwelles within that ſpirit.
               More then can be diſcern'd by outward eye,
               Sir Christopher will you part with your man?
            
            
               Hal.
               I haue ſought to proffer him to your Lordſhip,
               And now I ſee he hath preferred himſelfe.
            
            
               Wol.
               What is thy name?
            
            
               Crom.
               
                  Cromwell my Lord.
            
            
               Wol.
               Then Cromwell here we make thee ſoliciter of our cauſes,
               And neareſt next our ſelfe:
               
                  Gardiner giue you kinde welcome to the man.
            
            
               Gardiner imbraces him.
            
               Mo.
               My Lord you are a royall Winer.
               Hath got a man beſides your bountious dinner,
               Well Knight, pray we come no more:
               If we come often, thou maiſt ſhut thy doore.
            
            
               Wol.
               Sir Chriſtopher hadſt thou giuen me.
               Halfe thy lands, thou couldeſt not haue pleaſed me
               
                  
So much as with this man of thine,
               My infant thoughts doe ſpell:
               Shortly his fortune ſhall be lifted higher,
               True induſtry doth kindle honours fire,
               And ſo kinde Maiſter of the Roules farewell.
            
            
               Hal.
               
                  Cromwell farewell.
            
            
               Crom.
               
                  Cromwell takes his leaue of you
               That neare will leaue to loue and honour you.
            
            Exit Omnes.
            Enter Chorus.
            
               Cho.
               Now Cromwells higheſt fortunes doth begin.
               The Muſicke
playes, as they goe in.
               
                  Wolſay that lou'd him as he did his life:
               Committed all his treaſure to his hands,
               
                  Wolſay is dead, and Gardiner his man,
               Is now created Biſhop of Wincheſter:
               
               Pardon if we omit all Wolſayes life,
               Becauſe our play depends on Cromwells death,
               Now ſit and ſee his higheſt ſtate of all;
               His height of ryſing: and his ſodaine fall,
               Pardon the errors is all ready paſt,
               And liue in hope the beſt doth come at laſt:
               My hope vpon your fauour doth depend▪
               
               And looke to haue your liking ere the end.
               Exit.
            
            Enter Gardiner Biſhop of Wincheſter, the Dukes
of Norfolke, and of Suffolke, Sir Thomas
Moore, Sir Chriſtopher Halles,
and Cromwell.
            
            
               Nor.
               Maiſter Cromwell, ſince Cardinall Wolſayes death,
               His Maieſtie is giuen to vnderſtand,
               There's certaine billes and writings in your hand,
               That much concernes the ſtate of England:
               My Lord of Wincheſter is it not ſo?
            
            
               Gar.
               My Lord of Norfolke, we two were whilome fellowes,
               And Maiſter Cromwell, though our Maiſters loue:
               
                  
Did binde vs, while his loue was to the King,
               It is no boote now to deny thoſe things
               Which may be preiudiciall to the ſtate:
               And though that God hath raiſde my fortune hyer,
               Then any way I lookt for, or deſeru'de.
               Yet my life no longer with me dwell,
               Then I prooue true vnto my Soueraigne:
               What ſay you maiſter Cromwell haue you thoſe writings, I, or no?
            
            
               Crom.
               Here are the writings, and vpon my knees,
               I giue them vp, vnto the worthy Dukes,
               Of Suffolke, and of Norfolke: he was my Maiſter,
               And each vertuous part
               That liued in him, I tendered with my hart,
               But what his head complotted gainſt the ſtate.
               My countries loue commands me that to hate:
               His ſudden death I greeue for, not his fall,
               Becauſe he ſought to worke my countries thrall.
            
            
               Suff.
               
                  Cromwell, the King ſhall here of this thy dutie,
               Whom I aſſure my ſelfe will well reward thee:
               My Lord, lets goe vnto his Maieſtie,
               And ſhow theſe writings which he longs to ſee.
            
            
               Exit Norfolke and Suffolke.
            Enter Bedford hastily.
            
               Bed.
               How now, whoſe this Cromwell?
               
               By my ſoule, welcome to England:
               Thou once didſt ſaue my life, didſt not Cromwell?
               
            
            
               Cro
               If I did ſo, 'tis greater glory for me that you remember it,
               Then for my ſelfe vainely to report it.
            
            
               Bed.
               Well Cromwell, now is the time,
               I ſhall commend thee to my Soueraigne:
               Cheere vp thy ſelfe, for I will raiſe thy ſtate,
               A Ruſſel yet was neuer found ingrate.
               Exit.
            
            
               Hales.
               O how vncertaine is the wheele of ſtate,
               Who lately greater then the Cardinall,
               For feare, and loue: and now who lower lies?
               
                  
Gay honours are but Fortunes flatteries▪
               
               And whom this day, pride and promotion ſwel
                     •
                  ,
               To morrow, enuie and ambition quels.
            
            
               Moore.
               Who ſees the Cob-web intangle the poore Flie,
               May boldly ſay the wretches death is nigh.
            
            
               Gard.
               I know his ſtate and proud ambition,
               Was too too violent to laſt ouer-long.
            
            
               Hales.
               Who ſoares too neare the ſunne with golden winges,
               Mealtes them, to ruine his owne fortune brings.
            
            Enter the Duke of Suffolke.
            
            
               Suf.
               
                  Cromwell kneele downe in king Henries name,
               Ariſe ſir Thomas Cromwell, thus beginnes thy fame.
            
            Enter the Duke of Norfolke.
            
            
               Norf.
               
                  Cromwell the Maieſtie of England,
               For the good liking he conceiues of thee:
               Makes thee Maiſter of the iewell houſe,
               Chiefe Secretary to himſelfe, and with all,
               Creates thee one of his highneſſe priue Counſell.
            
            Enter the Earle of Bedford.
            
            
               Bed.
               Where is ſir Thoma, Cromwell is he knighted,
            
            
               Suf.
               He is my Lord.
            
            
               Bed.
               Then to adde honour to his name,
               The King creates him Lord keeper of his priuie S
                     •
                  ale:
               And Maiſter of the Roules,
               Which you ſir Chriſtopher doe now enioy;
               The King determines higher place for you.
            
            
               Crom.
               My Lords theſe honors are too high for my deſert,
            
            
               Moore.
               O content thee man, who would not chooſe it?
               Yet thou art wiſe in ſeeming to refuſe it.
            
            
               Gard.
               Here's honors, titles and promotions,
               I feare this climing, will haue a ſudden fall.
            
            
               
               Norf.
               Then come my Lords, lets altogether bring,
               This new made Counſeller to Englands King.
            
            Exit all but Gardiner.
            
            
               Gard.
               But Gardiner meanes is glory ſhall be dim'd:
               Shall Cromwell liue a greater men then I?
               My enuie with his honour now is bred,
               I hope to ſhorten Cromwell by the head.
            
            Exit.
            Enter Friskiball very poore.
            
               Fris.
               O Friskiball, what ſhall become ſo thee?
               Where ſhalt thou goe, or which way ſhalt thou turne?
               Fortune that turnes her too vnconſtant wheele,
               Hath turn'd thy wealth and riches in the Sea,
               All parts abroade where euer I haue beene,
               Growes weary of me, and denies me ſuccour,
               My debters they, that ſhould reſerue my want,
               Forſweares my mony, ſaies they owe me none:
               They know my ſtate too meane, to beare out law,
               And here in London where I 
                     〈…〉
                   beene,
               And haue done good to many a w
                     ••
                  ched man,
               Am now moſt wretched here, diſpiſd my ſelfe,
               In vaine it is, more of their hearts to try,
               Be patient therefore, laye thee downe and die.
            
            He lies downe.
            Enter-good man Seely, and his
wife Ioane.
            
            
               Seely.
               Come Ioane, come lets ſee what heele doe for vs now?
I wis wee haue done for him, when many a time and often hee
might haue gone a hungry to bed.
            
            
               Wife.
               Alas man, now he is made a Lord, heele neuer looke vpon
vs, heele fulfill the old Prouerbe: ſet Beggers a horſe-backe, &
theile ride: a wells day for my cow, ſuch as he hath made vs come
behinde hand, we had neuer pawnd our Cowe els to pay our rent.
            
            
               
               Seely.
               Well Ioane, heele come this way: and by Gods dickers
ile tell him roundly of it, and if hee were tenne LORDS: a
ſhall know that I had not my Cheefe and my Bacon for nothing.
            
            
               Wife.
               Doe you remember husband how hee would mouch
vp my Cheeſe cakes, hee hath forgot this now, but now weele
remember him.
            
            
               Seely.
               I we ſhall haue now three flappes with a Foxe taile:
but I faith ile gibber a ioynt, but ile tell him his owne: ſtay
who comes here? O ſtand vp here he comes, ſtand vp.
            
            Enter Hodge very fine with a Tipſtafe, Cromwell,
the Mace caryed before him: Norfolke, and
Suffolke, and attendants.
            
               Hod.
               Come, away with theſe beggars here, riſe vp ſirra,
               Come out good people: runne afore there no.
            
            
               Friskiball riſeth, and ſtands a farre off.
            
               Seely.
               I vvee are kicked away now, vvee come for our
owne, the time hath beene hee vvould a looked more friendly
vpon vs: And you Hodge, we know you well inough though
you are ſo fine.
            
            
               Crom.
               Come hether ſirrah: ſtay, what men are theſe?
               My honeſt Hoſt of Hounſlow, and his wife:
               I owe thee mony father, doe I not?
            
            
               Seely.
               I by the body of mee dooeſt thou, vvould thou
wouldeſt pay mee, good foure pound it is, I haue a the poſte at
home.
            
            
               Crow.
               I know tis true, ſirrah giue him ten Angels,
               And looke your wife, and you doe ſtay to dinner:
               And while you liue I freely giue to you,
               Foure pound a yeere, for the ſoure pound I ought you.
            
            
               Seely.
               Art not changed, art ould Tom ſtill?
               Now God bleſſe the good Lord Tom:
               
               Home Ioane, home, ile dine with my Lord Tom to day,
               
                  
And thou ſhalt come next weeke,
               Fetch my Cow, home Ioane, home.
            
            
               Wife.
               Now God bleſſe thee, my good Lord Tom,
               
               Ile fetch my Cow preſently.
               Exit. Wife.
            
            Enter Cardiner.
            
               Crom.
               Sirra, goe to yon ſtranger, tell him I deſire him
               Stay to dinner: I muſt ſpeake with him;
            
            
               Gard.
               My Lord of Norfolke ſee you this ſame bubble?
               That ſame puffe, but marke the end, my Lord, marke the end.
            
            
               Norf.
               I promiſe you, I like not ſomething he hath done,
               But let that paſſe, the King doth loue him well.
            
            
               Crom.
               Good morrow to my Lord of Wincheſter.
               
               I know you beare me hard, about the Abby lands.
            
            
               Gard.
               Haue I not reaſon, when religion is wronged?
               You had no colour for what you haue done.
            
            
               Crom.
               Yes the aboliſhing of Antichriſt,
               And of his Popiſh order from our Realme:
               I am no enemy to religion,
               But what is done, it is for Englands good,
               What did they ſerue for but to feede a ſort:
               Of lazie Abbots, and of full fed Fryers,
               They neither plow, nor ſowe, and yet they reape
               The fat of all the Land, and ſucke the poore:
               Looke what was theirs, is in King Henries hands,
               His wealth before lay in the Abby lands.
            
            
               Gard.
               Indeede theſe things you haue aledg'd my Lord,
               When God doth know the infant yet vnborne,
               Will curſe the time, the Abbies were puld downe,
               I pray now where is hoſpitality?
               Where now may poore diſtreſſed people goe
               For to releeue their neede, or reſt their bones,
               When weary trauell doth oppreſſe their limmes?
               And where religious men ſhould take them in.
               
                  
Shall now be kept backe with a Maſtiue dogge,
               And thouſand thouſand.
            
            
               Nor,
               O my Lord no more▪ things paſt redreſſe
               Tis booteleſſe to complaine.
            
            
               Crom.
               What ſhall we to the Conuocation houſe.
            
            
               Nor.
               Weele follow you my Lord pray leade the way.
            
            Enter Old Cromwell like a Former.
            
               Old Cro.
               How, one Cromwell made Lord keeper ſince I left Putney
               And dwelt in Yorkeſhire? I neuer hard better newes:
               Ile ſee that Cromwell, or it ſhall goe hard.
            
            
               Crom.
               My aged father: ſtate ſet aſide.
               Father on my knee I craue your bleſſing:
               One of my ſeruants goe and haue him in,
               At better leaſure will we talke with him.
            
            
               Old Crow.
               Now if I die, how happy were the day,
               To ſee this comfort raines forth ſhowers of ioy.
            
            Exit. Old Cromwell.
            
               Nor.
               This dutie in him ſhowes a kinde of grace.
            
            
               Crom.
               Goe on before for time drawes on apace.
            
            Exit all but Friskiball.
            
            
               Friſ.
               I wonder what this Lord would haue with me,
               His man ſo ſtrictly gaue me charge to ſtay:
               I neuer did offend him to my knowledge,
               Well, good or bad, I meane to bide it all,
               Worſe then I am, now neuer can befall.
            
            Enter Baniſter and his wife.
            
               Ba.
               Come wi
                     •
                  e I take it be almoſt dinner time,
               For Maiſter Newton, and Maiſter Croſbie ſent to me:
               Laſt might, they would come dine with me,
               And take their bond in: I pray thee hie thee home,
               And ſee that all things be in readineſſe.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               They ſhalbe welcome, husband Ile goe before,
               But is not that man Maiſter Friskiball?
               
            
            She runnes and imbraces him.
            
               
               Ba.
               O heauens it is kinde Maiſter Friskiball:
               
               Say ſir, what hap hath brought you to this paſſe?
            
            
               Friſ.
               The ſame that brought you to your miſery.
            
            
               Ba.
               Why would you not acquaint me with your ſtate?
               Is Baniſter your poore friend forgot?
               Whoſe goods, whoſe loue, whoſe life and all is yours.
            
            
               Friſ.
               I thought your vſage would be as the reſt,
               That had more kindneſſe at my hands then you,
               Yet looked aſcance, when as they ſaw me poore▪
               
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               If Baniſter ſhould beare ſo baſe a hart,
               I neuer would looke my husband in the face,
               But hath him as I would a Cockatriſe.
            
            
               Ba.
               And well thou mighteſt, ſhould Baniſter deale ſo,
               Since that I ſaw you ſir, my ſtate is mended:
               And for the thouſand pound I owe to you,
               I haue it ready for you ſir at home,
               And though I greeue your fortune is ſo bad:
               Yet that my hap's to help you, makes me glad,
               And now ſir will it pleaſe you walke with me.
            
            
               Friſ.
               Not yet I cannot, for the Lord Chancelour,
               Hath here commaunded me to waight on him,
               For what I know not▪ pray God it be for good.
            
            
               Ba.
               Neuer make doubt of that, ile warrant you,
               He is as kinde a noble gentleman;
               As euer did poſſeſſe the place he hath.
            
            
               Mi. Ba.
               Sir my brother is his ſteward, if you pleaſe,
               Weale goe along and beare you company:
               I know we ſhall not want for welcome there?
            
            
               Friſ.
               Withall my hart: but whats become of Bagot.
               
            
            
               Ba.
               He is hanged, for buying iewels of the Kings.
            
            
               Friſ.
               A iuſt reward for one ſo impious,
               The time drawes on, ſir will you goe along.
            
            
               Ba
               Ile follow you kinde Maiſter Friskiball.
               
            
            Exit Omnes.
            
            Enter two Marchants.
            
               1.
               Now Maiſter Croſbie, I ſee you haue a care
               To keepe your word, in paiment of your mony.
            
            
               2.
               By my faith I haue reaſon vpon a bond,
               Three thouſand pound is too much to forfet,
               Yet I doubt not Maiſter Baniſter.
               
            
            
               1.
               By my faith your ſumme is more then mine,
               And yet I am not much behinde you too,
               Conſidering that to day I paid at Court.
            
            
               2.
               Maſſe and well remembred:
               Whats the reaſon the Lord Cromwels men,
               Weare ſuch long skirts vpon their coates?
               They reach downe to their very ham.
            
            
               1.
               I will reſolue you ſir, and thus it is;
               The Biſhop of Wincheſter, that loues not Cromwell,
               
               As great men are enuied, aſwell as leſſe.
               A while agoe there was a iarre betweene them,
               And it was brought to my Lord Cromwels eare,
               That Biſhop Gardiner would ſit on his skirts,
               Vpon which word, he made his men long Blew coates,
               And in the Court wore one of them himſelfe:
               And meeting with the Biſhop, quoth he, my Lord
               Here's skirt enough now for your Grace to ſit on.
               Which vexed the Biſhop to the very hart,
               This is the reaſon why they weare long coates.
            
            
               2.
               Tis alwaies ſeene, and marke it for a rule,
               That one great man will enuie ſtill another:
               But tis a thing that nothing concernes me:
               What, ſhall we now to Maiſter Baniſters?
               
            
            
               1.
               I come, weele pay him royally for our dinner.
            
            Exit.
            Enter the Vſher and the Shewer, the meate goes
ouer the Stage.
            
               Vſher.
               Vncouer there Gentlemen.
            
            
               
               Enter Cromwell, Bedford, Suffolke, Old Cromwell,
Friskiball, good-man Seely, and
attendants.
            
            
               Crom.
               My noble Lords of Suffolke and of Bedford,
               
               Your honors welcome to poore Cromwels houſe:
               Where is my father? nay be couered Father,
               Although that duty to theſe noble men doth challenge it
               Yet Ile make bolde with them.
               Your head doth beare the calender of care:
               What Cromwell couered, and his Father bare?
               It muſt not be. Now ſit to you,
               Is not your name Friskiball, and a Florentine.
               
            
            
               Fris.
               My name was Friskiball, till cruell fate?
               Did rob me of my name and of ſtate.
            
            
               Crom.
               What fortune brought you to this countrie now?
            
            
               Fris.
               All other parts hath left me ſuccourleſſe,
               Saue onely this, becauſe of debts I haue
               I hope to gaine for to releeue my want.
            
            
               Crom.
               Did you not once vpon your Florence bridge,
               Helpe a diſtreſſed men, robd by the Bandetto,
               His name was Cromwell?
               
            
            
               Fris.
               I neuer made my braine a calender of any good I did,
               I alwaies lou'd this nation with my heart.
            
            
               Crom.
               I am that Cromwell that you there releeu'd,
               Sixteene Duckets you gaue me for to cloath me,
               Sixteene to beare my charges by the way,
               And ſixteene more I had for my horſe hier,
               There be thoſe ſeuerall ſummes iuſtly return'd,
               Yet it iniuſtice were that ſeruing at thy need,
               For to repay them without intereſt,
               Therefore receiue of me theſe foure ſeuerall bag
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               In each of them there is foure hundred marke,
               And bring to me the names of all your debtors,
               And if they will not ſee you paide, I will:
               
                  
O God forbid, that I ſhould ſee him fall,
               That help
                     •
                   me in my greateſt need of all▪
               
               Here ſtands my Father that firſt gaue me life,
               Alas what dutie is too much for him?
               This man in time of need did ſaue my life,
               And therefore cannot doe too much for him.
               By this old man I often times was ſed,
               Els might I haue gone ſupperleſſe to bed.
               Such kindneſſe haue I had of theſe three men,
               That Cromwell no way can repay againe:
               Now in to dinner, for we ſtay too long,
               And to good ſtomackes is no greater wrong
               Exit omnes.
            
            Enter Gardiner in his ſtudy, and his man.
            
               Gard.
               Sirra, where be thoſe men I caus'd to ſtay?
            
            
               Ser.
               They doe attend your pleaſure Sir within,
            
            
               Gar.
               Bid them come hether, and ſtay you without,
               For by thoſe men the Foxe of this ſame land,
               That makes a Gooſe of better then himſelfe,
               Muſt woried be vnto his lateſt home,
               or Gardiner will faile in his intent.
               As for the Dukes of Suffolke and of Norfolke,
               
               Whom I haue ſent for to come ſpeake with me,
               Howſoeuer outwardly they ſhadow it,
               Yet in their harts I know they loue him not;
               As for the Earle of Bedford hee is but one,
               And dares not gaine-
                     •
                  ay what we doe ſet downe.
               Enter the two Witneſſes.
               Now my friends, you know I ſau'd you liues,
               When by the law you had deſerued death,
               And then you promiſed me vpon your othes,
               To venture both your liues to doe me good.
            
            
               Both wit.
               We ſwore no more then that we will performe.
            
            
               Gard.
               I take your words, and that which you muſt doe,
               
                  
Is ſeruice for your God, and for your King,
               To roote a rebell from this flouriſhing land,
               One thats an enemy vnto the Church:
               And therefore muſt you take your ſolemne oathes,
               That you heard Cromwell, the Lord Chauncellor,
               Did wiſh a dagger at King Henries hart:
               Feare not to ſweare it, for I hard him ſpeake it,
               Therefore weele ſhield you from inſuing harmes,
            
            
               2 Wit.
               If you will warrant vs the deed is good,
               Weele vndertake it.
            
            
               Gar.
               Kneele downe, and I will here abſolue you both,
               This Crucifixe I lay vpon you heads,
               And ſprinckle holy-water on your browes,
               The deed is meritorious that you doe,
               And by it ſhall you purchaſe grace from heauen.
            
            
               1
               Now Sir weele vndertake it by our ſoules.
            
            
               2
               For Cromwell neuer loued none of our ſort.
            
            
               Gar.
               I know he doth not, and for both of you,
               I will preferre you to ſome place of worth;
               Now get you in, vntill I call for you,
               For preſently the Dukes meanes to be here.
               Exit wit.
               
                  Cromwell ſit faſt, thy time's not long to raigne,
               The Abbies that were puld downe by thy meanes,
               Is now a meane for me to pull thee downe:
               Thy pride alſo thy owne head lights vpon,
               For thou art he hath chang'd religion:
               But now no more, for here the Dukes are come.
            
            Enter Suffolke, Norfolke, and the Earle of Bedford.
            
            
               Suff.
               Good euen to my Lord Biſhop.
            
            
               Nor.
               How fares my Lord? what are you all alone?
            
            
               Gar.
               No not alone my Lords, my minde is troubled:
               I know your honours muſe wherefore I ſent
               And in ſuch haſt: What came you from the King?
            
            
               Nor.
               We did, and left none but Lord Cromwell with him.
            
            
               
               Gard.
               O what a dangerous time is this we liue in?
               There's Thomas Wolſay, hee's already gone,
               And Thomas Moore, he followed after him:
               Another Thomas yet there doth remaine,
               That is farre worſe then either of thoſe twaine,
               And if with ſpeed my Lords we not purſue it,
               I feare the King and all the land will rue it.
            
            
               Bed.
               Another Thomas? pray God it be not Cromwell.
               
            
            
               Gard.
               My Lord Bedford, it is that traitor Cromwell.
               
            
            
               Bed.
               Is Cromwell falſe? my hart will neuer thinke it.
            
            
               Suff.
               My Lord of Wincheſter, what likelihood,
               Or proofe haue you of this his treachery.
            
            
               Gard.
               My Lord too much, call in the men within,
               Enter witneſſes.
               Theſe men my Lord vpon their othes affirme,
               That they did here Lord Cromwell in his garden,
               Wiſhed a dagger ſticking at the hart,
               Of our King Henrie, what is this but treaſon?
            
            
               Bed.
               If it be ſo, my hart doth bleed with ſorrow.
            
            
               Suff.
               How ſay you friends, what, did you here theſe words?
            
            
               1 Wit.
               
               We did and't like your grace.
            
            
               Norf.
               In what place was Lord Cromwell when he ſpake them?
            
            
               2 Wit.
               
               In his Garden, where we did attend a ſute,
               Which we had waited for two yeere and more.
            
            
               Suff.
               How long iſt ſince you heard him ſpeake theſe words?
            
            
               2 Wit.
               
               Some halfe yeere ſince.
            
            
               Bed.
               How chance that you conceal'd it all this time?
            
            
               1 Wit.
               
               His greatneſſe made vs feare, that was the cauſe,
            
            
               Gard.
               I, I, his greatneſſe thats the cauſe indeed,
               And to make his treaſon here more mainfeſt,
               He calles his ſeruants to him round about,
               Tels them of W
                        •
                     lſayes life, and of his fall,
               Saies that himſelfe hath many enemies,
               And giues to ſome of them a Parke or Manor,
               To others Leaſes, Lands to other ſome:
               What need he doe thus in his prime of life,
               And if he were not fearefull of his death?
            
            
               
               Suff.
               My Lord theſe likelihoods are very great.
            
            
               Bed.
               Pardon me Lords, for I muſt needs depart,
               Their proofes are great, but greater is my heart.
               
                  Exit Bedford.
            
            
               Norf.
               My friends take heed of that which you haue ſaid,
               Your ſoules muſt anſwer what your tongues reports:
               Therefore take heed, be wary what you doe.
            
            
               2 Wit.
               
               My Lord we ſpeake no more but truth.
            
            
               Norf.
               Let them depart my Lord of Wincheſter,
               
               Let theſe men be cloſe kept
               Vntill the day of triall.
            
            
               Gar.
               They ſhall my Lord: hoe take in theſe two men.
               Exit witneſſes.
               My Lords, if Cromwell haue a publike triall,
               That which we doe, is voide, by his deniall:
               You know the King will credit none but him.
            
            
               Nor.
               Tis true, he rules the King euen as he pleaſes.
            
            
               Suff.
               How ſhall we doe for to attache him then?
            
            
               Gar.
               Mary my Lords thus, by an Act he made himſelfe,
               With an intent to intrap ſome of our liues,
               And this it is: If any Councellor
               Be conuicted of high treaſon,
               He ſhall be excecuted without a publike triall.
               This Act my Lords he cauſed the King to make.
            
            
               Suff.
               A did indeed, and I remember it,
               And now it is like to fall vpon himſelfe.
            
            
               Nor.
               Let vs not ſlak it, tis for Englands good,
               We muſt be warry, els heele goe beyond vs.
            
            
               Gar.
               Well hath your Grace ſaid my Lord of Norfolke
               
               Therefore let vs preſently to Lambeth,
               
               Thether comes Cromwell from the Court to night,
               Let vs areſt him, ſend him to the Tower.
               And in the morning, cut off the traitors head.
            
            
               Norf.
               Come then about it, let vs guard the towne,
               This is the day that Cromwell muſt goe downe.
            
            
               Gard.
               Along my Lords, well Cromwell is halfe dead,
               
                  
He ſhak'd my har
                     ••
                   but I will ſhaue his head,
            
            Ethenus
            Enter Bedford 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               Bed.
               My ſoule is like a water troubled,
               And Gardiner is the man that makes it ſo,
               O Cromwell, I doe feare thy end is neare▪
               
               Yet Ile preuent their malice if I can,
               And in good time, ſee where the man doth come,
               Who little knowes how neares his day of dome.
            
            Enter Cromwell with his traine, Bedford makes as though
be would ſpeake to him: he goes on.
            
               Crom.
               Your well encountered my good Lord of Bedford,
               
               I ſee your honour is adreſſed to talke,
               Pray pardon me, I am ſent for to th' King,
               And doe not know the buſineſſe yet me ſelfe,
               So fare you well, for I muſt needes be gone.
            
            Exit all the traine.
            
               Bed.
               You muſt, well, what remedy?
               I feare too ſoone you muſt be gone indeed,
               The King hath buſineſſe, but little doeſt thou know,
               Whoſe buſie for thy life: thou think'ſt not ſo.
            
            Enter Cromwell, and the traine againe.
            
               Crom.
               The ſecond time well met my Lord of Bedford,
               
               I am very ſory that my haſt is ſuch,
               Lord Marques Dorſet being ſicke to death,
               I muſt receaue of him the priuie ſeale
               At Lambeth, ſoone my Lord weele talke our fill,
            
            Exit the traine.
            
               Bed.
               How ſmooth and eaſie is the way to death
            
            Enter
                  •
                ſeruant▪
            
            
               Meſ.
               My Lord, the Dukes of Norfolks and of Suffo
                        •
                     ke,
               
               
                  
Accompani
                     •
                  d Biſhop of Winchest
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Intreates you to come preſently to Lambeth,
               On earneſt matters that concernes the ſtate▪
               
            
            
               Bed.
               To Lambeth, ſo: goe fetch me pen and inke
               I and Lord Cromwell there ſhall talke enough,
               (He writes a letter▪
               
               I and our laſt, I feare, and if he come,
               Here take this letter, and heare it to Lord Cromwell,
               
               Bid him read it, ſay it concernes him nea
                     ••
                  ,
               Away be gone make all the haſt you can,
               To Lambeth doe I goe a woefull man.
            
            Exit.
            Enter Cromwell and his traine.
            
               Crom.
               Is the Barge ready? I will ſtraight to Lambeth,
               And if this one dayes buſineſſe once were paſt,
               I'de take me eaſe to morrow after trouble,
               How now my friend wouldſt thou ſpeake with me?
            
            The Meſſenger brings him the letter, he puts it in his pocket.
            
               Meſ.
               Sir heres a letter from my Lord of Bedford.
               
            
            
               Crom.
               O good my friend commend me to thy Lord,
               Hould take thoſe Angels, drinke them for thy paines.
            
            
               Mſe.
               He doth deſire your grace to reade i
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               Becauſe he ſayes it doth concerne you neare.
            
            
               Crom.
               Bid him aſſure himſelfe of that fare
                     •
                  ell▪
               
               To morrow tell him ſhall he heare from me,
               Set on before there, and away to Lambeth▪
               
            
            Ex
                  ••
               t 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪
            
            Enter Wincheſter, Suffolke, No
                     ••
                  olke, Bedford. Sergiant
at armes, the Her
                  •
               uld, and 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               Gar.
               Halberta ſtand cloſe vnto the waterſide▪
               
               Sergiant at armes be bould in your office,
               Herauld deliuer your proclamation.
            
            
               Ha.
               This is to glue notice to all the Kings ſubiects.
               
                  
The late Lord Cromwell Lord Chancellor of England,
               Vicar generall ouer the realme,
               Him to hould and eſteeme as a traytor,
               Againſt the Crowne and dignitie of England▪
               
               So God ſaue the King.
            
            
               Gar.
               Amen.
            
            
               Bed.
               Amen, and roote thee from the land,
               For whilſt thou liueſt truth cannot ſtand.
            
            
               Nor.
               Make a lane there, the traitor is at hand,
               Keepe backe Cromwells men:
               Drowne them if they come on, Sergiant your office.
            
            Enter Cromwell, they make a lane with their Halberts.
            
               Crom.
               What meanes my Lord of Norfolke by theſe words?
               Sirs come along.
            
            
               Gar.
               Kill them if they come on.
            
            
               Ser.
               Lord Cromwell, in King Henries name,
               I doe arreſt your honour of high treaſon.
            
            
               Crom.
               Sergiant, me of treaſon?
            
            
               Cromwels men offer to draw.
            
               Suf.
               Kill them if they draw a ſword.
            
            
               Crom.
               Hould, I charge you, at you loue me draw not a ſword,
               Who dares accuſe Cromwell of treaſon now?
            
            
               Gar.
               This is no place to reckon vp your crime,
               Your Doue-like lookes were viewed with ſerpents eyes.
            
            
               Crom.
               With ſerpents eyes indeed, by thine they were,
               But Gardiner doe thy woorſt, I feare thee not,
               My faith compared with thine as much ſhall paſſe,
               As doth the Diamond excell the glaſſe:
               Attached of treaſon, no accuſers by,
               Indeede what tongue dares ſpeake ſo foule a lie?
            
            
               Nor.
               My Lord, my Lord, matters are too well knowne,
               And it is time the King had note thereof.
            
            
               Crom.
               The King, let me goe to him face to face,
               No better triall I deſire then that,
               
                  
Let him but ſay that Cromwells faith was 
                     •
                  ained,
               Then let my honour, and my name be ſtained:
               If euer my hart againſt my King was ſet,
               O let my ſoule in Iudgement anſwere it,
               Then if my faith's confirmed with his reaſon,
               Gainſt whom hath Cromwell then committed treaſon?
            
            
               Suf.
               My Lord your matter ſhall be tried,
               Meane time, with patience content your ſelfe.
            
            
               Crom.
               Perforce I muſt with patience be content:
               O deare friend Bedford doeſt thou ſtand ſo neate?
               
                  Cromwell reioyceth one friend ſheds a teare,
               And whether iſt? which way muſt Cromwell now?
            
            
               Gar.
               My Lord you muſt vnto the tower,
               Lieutenant, take him to your charge
            
            
               Crom.
               Well where you pleaſe, yet before I part,
               Let me conferre a little with my men.
            
            
               Gar.
               As you goe by water ſo you ſhall.
            
            
               Crom.
               I haue ſome buſineſſe preſent to impart.
            
            
               Nor.
               You may not ſtay, Lieutenant, take your charge.
            
            
               Crom.
               Well, well my Lord, you ſecond Gardiners text.
               
                  Norfolke farewell, thy turne wil be the next.
            
            Exit Cromwell, and the Lieutenant.
            
               Gar.
               His guiltie conſcience makes him raue my Lord.
            
            
               Nor.
               I let him talke his time is ſhort enough.
            
            
               Gar.
               My Lord of Bedford, come you weepe for him,
               That would not ſhed halfe a teare for you.
            
            
               Bed.
               It grieues me for to ſee his ſudden fall.
            
            
               Gar.
               Such ſucceſſe wiſh I vnto traitours all.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter two Citizens.
            
               1
               Why? can this newes be true? iſt poſſible?
               The great Lord Cromwell arreſted vpon treaſon▪
               
               I hardly will beleeue it can be ſo,
            
            
               2
               It is too true ſir, would it were otherwiſe.
               Condition I ſpent halfe the wealth I haue,
               
                  
I was at Lambeth? ſ
                     •
                  w him there arreſted,
               And afterward committed to the Tower.
            
            
               1
               What waſt for treaſon that he was commit
                     ••
                  d?
            
            
               2
               Kinde noble Gentlem
                     •
                  n 
                     〈…〉
                   time,
               All that I haue, I did in
                     •
                  oy by him,
               And if he 
                     〈◊〉
                  , then all my ſtate is gone.
            
            
               1
               It may be hoped that he ſhall not die,
               Becauſe the King did fauour him ſo much.
            
            
               2
               O ſir, you are deceiued in thinking ſo,
               The grace and fauour he had with the King,
               Hath cauſde him haue ſo many enemies:
               He that in court ſecure ill keepe himſelfe,
               Muſt not be great, for then he is enuied at.
               The Shrub is ſafe, when as the Cedar ſhakes,
               For where the King doth loue aboue compare,
               Of others they as much more entiled are.
            
            
               1
               Tis pittie that this noble man ſhould fall,
               He did ſo many charitable deeds.
            
            
               2
               Tis true, and yet you ſee in each eſtate,
               There
                     ••
                   none ſo good, but ſome one doth him hate,
               And they before would ſmile him in the face,
               will be the formoſt to doe him diſgrace:
               What will you goe along vnto the Court?
            
            
               1
               I care not if I do, and heare the newer,
               How men will iudge what ſhall become of him▪
               
            
            
               2
               Some will ſpeake hardly ſome will ſpeake in pitie▪
               
               Goe you to the Court, Ile goe into the Citie,
               There I am ſure to here more newes then you.
            
            
               1
               Why then ſoone will we meet againe.
               Exit.
            
            Enter Cromwell in the Tower.
            
               Crom.
               Now Cromwell haſt thou time to meditate,
               And thinke vpon thy ſtate, and of the time:
               Thy honours came vnſought, I, and vnlooked for,
               Thy fall as ſudden, and vnlooked for to,
               
                  
What glory was in England that I had not?
               Who in this land commanded more then Cromwell?
               
               Except the King who greater then my ſelfe?
               But now I ſee what after ages ſhall,
               The greater man, more ſudden is their fall.
               And now I doe remember the Earle of Bedford
               
               Was very deſirous for to ſpeake to me:
               And afterward ſent vnto me a letter,
               The which I thinke I haue ſtill in my pocket,
               Now may I read it, for I now haue leaſure,
               And this I take it is.
               He reade
                     •
                   the Letter.
               My Lord come not this night to Lambeth,
               
               For if you doe, your ſtate is ouerthrowne.
               And much I doubt your life, and if you come:
               Then if you loue your ſelfe, ſtay where you are.
               O God had I but read this letter,
               Then had I beene free from the Lions paw,
               Deferring this, to read vntill to morrow,
               I ſpurnd at ioy, and did imbrace my ſorrow,
               Enter the Leiutenant of the Tower and officers.
               Now Maiſter Lieutenant, when's this day of death?
            
            
               Lieu.
               Alas my Lord would I might neuer ſee it,
               Here are the Dukes of Suffolke and of Norfolke,
               
               
                  Wincheſter, Bedford, and ſir Richard Ratcliffe,
               
               With others, but why they come I know not.
            
            
               Crom.
               No matter wherefore, Cromwell is prepard,
               For Gardiner has my ſtate and life inſnard,
               Bid them come in, or you ſhall doe them wrong,
               For here ſtands he, whom ſome thinkes liues too long,
               Learning killes learning, and inſteed of Inck
               To dip his Pen, Cromwels heart blood doth drinke.
            
            
               
Enter all the Nobles.
            
               Norf.
               Good morrow Cromwell, what alone ſo ſad?
            
            
               Crom.
               One good among you, none of you are bad,
               For my part, it beſt fits me be alone,
               Sadneſſe with me, not I with any one.
               What, is the King acquainted with my cauſe?
            
            
               Norf.
               We haue, and he hath anſwered vs my Lord.
            
            
               Crom.
               How, ſhall I come to ſpeake with him my ſelfe?
            
            
               Gard.
               The King is ſo aduertiſed of your guilt,
               He will by no meanes admit you to his preſence.
            
            
               Crom.
               No way admit me, am I ſo ſoone forgot?
               Did he but yeſterday imbrace my neck,
               And ſaid that Cromwell was euen halfe himſelfe,
               And is his Princely eares ſo much bewitched
               With ſcandolous ignomie, and ſlanderous ſpeeches,
               That now he doth deny to looke on me,
               Well, my Lord of Wincheſter, no doubt but you,
               Are much in fauour with his Maieſtie,
               Will you beare a letter from me to his grace?
            
            
               Gard.
               Pardon me, ile beare no traitors letters,
            
            
               Crom.
               Ha, will you doe this kindneſſe then?
               Tell him by word of mouth, what I ſhall ſay to you.
            
            
               Gard.
               That will I.
            
            
               Crom.
               But on your honour will you?
            
            
               Gard.
               I on my honour.
            
            
               Crom.
               Beare witneſſe Lords,
               Tell him when he hath knowne you,
               And tried your faith but halfe ſo much as mine.
               Heele finde you to be the falſeſt harted man
               In England: Pray tell him this.
            
            
               Bed.
               Be patient good my Lord in theſe extreames.
            
            
               Crom.
               My kinde and honorable Lord of Bedford,
               
               I know your honour alwaies loued me well,
               But pardon me, this ſtill shall be my theame,
               
                  
                  Gardiner is the cauſe makes Cromwell ſo extreame,
               Sir Ralph Sadler, pray a word with you,
               You were my man, and all that you poſſeſſe
               Came by my meanes, to requite all this,
               Will you take this letter here of me,
               And giue it with your owne hands to the King.
            
            
               Sad.
               I kiſſe your hand, and neuer will I reſt,
               Eare to the King this be deliuered.
               
                  Exit Sadler.
            
            
               Crom.
               Why yet Cromwell hath one friend in ſtore.
            
            
               Gard.
               But all the 
                     •
                  aſt he makes ſhall be but vaine;
               Heres a diſcharge for your priſoner,
               To ſee him executed preſently:
               My Lord, you here the tenor of your life.
            
            
               Crom.
               I doe imbrace it, welcome my laſt date,
               And of this gliſtering world I take laſt leaue,
               And noble Lords, I take my leaue of you,
               As willingly I goe to meete with death,
               As Gardiner did pronounce in with his breath,
               From treaſon is my hart as white as Snow,
               My death onely procured by my foe:
               I pray commend me to my Soueraigne King,
               And tell him in what ſort his Cromwell died,
               To looſe his head before his cauſe were tride:
               But let his Grace, when he ſhall here my name,
               Say onely this, Gardiner procured the ſame.
            
            Enter young Cromwell.
            
               Lieu.
               Here is your ſonne come to take his leaue.
            
            
               Crom.
               To take his leaue,
               Come hether Harry Cromwell,
               
               Marke boy the laſt words that I ſpeake to thee,
               Flatter not Fortune, neither fawne vpon her,
               Gape not for ſtate, yet looſe no ſparke of honour,
               Ambition, like the plague ſee thou eſchew it,
               I die for treaſon boy, and neuer knew it,
               Yet let thy faith as ſpotleſſe be as mine,
               And Cromwels vertues in thy face ſhall ſhine,
               
                  
Come goe along and ſee me leaue my breath,
               And Ile leaue thee vpon the floure of death.
            
            
               Son.
               O father I ſhall die to ſee this wound,
               Your blood being ſpilt will make my hart to ſound.
            
            
               Crom.
               How boy, not looke vpon the Axe▪
               
               How ſhall I doe then to haue my head ſtroke off▪
               
               Come on my childe and ſee the end of all,
               And after ſay that Gardiner was my fall.
            
            
               Gar.
               My Lord you ſpeake it of an enuious hart,
               I haue done no more then law and equitie.
            
            
               Bed.
               O good my Lord of Wincheſter for beare,
               It would better ſeemed you to beene abſent,
               Then with your words diſturbe a dying man.
            
            
               Crom.
               Who me my Lord? no: he diſturbes not me,
               My mind he ſtirres not, though his mightie ſhocke
               Hath brought mo peeres heads downe to the blocke▪
               
               Farewell my boy, all Cromwell can bequeath,
               My hartie bleſſing, ſo I take my leaue.
            
            
               Hang.
               I am your death
                     •
                   man, pray my Lord forgiue me.
            
            
               Crom.
               Euen with my ſoule, why man thou art my Doctor,
               And brings me Precious phiſicke for my ſoule,
               My Lord of Bedford I deſire of you,
               Before my death a corporall imbrace.
               
                  Bedford comes to him, Cromwell 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   him.
               Farewell great Lord, my loue I doe commend.
               My hart to you, my ſoule to lieauen I ſend,
               This is my ioy that ere my body fleete,
               Your honourd armes is my true winding ſheete,
               Farewell deare Bedford, my p
                     ••
                  ce is made in heauen,
               Thus falles great Cromwell a poore ell in length,
               To riſe to vnmeaſured height 
                     〈◊〉
                   with new ſtrength.
               The land of Wormea, which dying men diſcouer.
               My ſoule is ſhrinde with heauens 
                     〈◊〉
                   couer.
            
            Exit Cromwell and the 
                  〈◊〉
                and others.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  id.
               Well, farewell Cromwe
                        ••
                     
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   friend,
               
                  
That euer Bedford ſhall poſſeſſe againe,
               Well Lords I feare when this man is dead,
               Youle wiſh in vaine that Cromwell had a head.
            
            Enter one with Cromwels head.
            
               Offi.
               Here is the head of the deceaſed Cromwell.
               
            
            
               Bed.
               Pray thee goe hence, and beare his head away,
               Vnto his body, interre them both in clay.
            
            Enter for Raulph Salder.
            
            
               Sad.
               Ho now my Lords, what is Lord Cromwell dead?
            
            
               Bed.
               Lord Cromwels body now doth want a head,
            
            
               Sad.
               O God a little ſpeede had ſaued his life,
               Here is a kinde repriue come from the King,
               To bring him ſtraight vnto his Maieſtie.
            
            
               Suff.
               I, I ſir Raulph, repriues comes now too late.
            
            
               Gar.
               My conſcience now tels me this deede was ill,
               Would Chriſt that Cromwell were aliue againe.
            
            
               Nor.
               Come let vs to the King whom well I know,
               Will grieue for Cromwell, that his death was ſo.
            
            Exeunt 
                  •
               mnes.
            FINIS.
         
      
   