
      
         
            To the moſt irreuerend Pope-holy Fathers of the two Seminaries at Rheimes and Rome.
¶A Confirmation of thexpoſition of the former Emblemes, containing a meſſe of ſpirituall Sonnets, or two paire of paſtorall Eclogues, in rurall meeter:
for the Kings Crowne and Dignitie, againſt the Popes Miter and Rochet.
         
            The firſt paire of Paſtorall Eclogues.
            
               ¶The firſt ſpirituall ſonnet, containing an exhortation to true ſubiects, for due
obedience to their lawfull Magiſtrates, vpon diuers waightie reaſons.
               
                  The Preface.
                  TO euery lawefull Magiſtrate, and Ruler in preheminence,
                  and to their lawefull officers, all people yeeld obedience:
                  Loue, honour, tribute thankefulnes and euery kinde of loyaltie,
                  for conſcience ſake, and not for feare, nor by conſtraint, but willingly.
               
               
                  The Sonnet.
                  
                     1
                     
                        WHo beare Gods Image and his name, and repreſent his Maieſtie,
                     And occupie his roome on earth (though ſubiect to mortalitie.)
                     
                        Like ſunne that shines full bright in skie, and dazells mortall eye,
                     To ſhew blind folkes the Lord of life much more to magnifie.
                  
                  
                     2
                     
                        Who are Gods cunning worke-maiſters, directed by his hand,
                     With power and skill, rude thinges to cauſe in order faire to ſtand:
                     
                        Like ſope and water, ſcowring white, and waſhing very cleane,
                     So as no ſpot in countenance, nor wrincle may be ſeene.
                  
                  
                     3
                     
                        Who weelde Gods Scepter and his Sword to purpoſe, with effect
                     Hard things to ſoften, wrong to right, and hidden to detect:
                     
                        Like fire and flame, with parching heate, which by a ſecret influence,
                     In hardning clay, and ſoftning waxe, declares a wondrous difference.
                  
                  
                     4
                     
                        Who execute Gods holywill, and are a liuing lawe,
                     With paine and price, from ill to good, a number to withdrawe:
                     
                        Like Adamant stone, vplifting yron, or Frankenſence to ſmell,
                     The ſence to pleaſe, the a
                           ••
                        e to purge, ill ſauours to expell.
                  
                  
                     5
                     
                        Who by Gods plentie peace procure, and common-wealth maintaine,
                     With ſtately porte, in carefull ſorte, more then for hope of game:
                     
                        Like fertile ſoile, beſpred with flowers in comfortable ſpring,
                     For mans reliefe, without rewarde, great ſtore of fruite to bring.
                  
                  
                     6
                     
                        Who Nurſes are of Christ his Church, religion to defend,
                     Loſt ſoules to ſaue, and ſafe conduct, and bountie to extend:
                     
                        Like goodly Armies, furniſhed with ſhields of beaten golde,
                     The walles of braſſe, the gates of pearle, in ſure defenced holde.
                  
               
               
                  Concluſion,
                  Beholde the happy progenie of Peeres that neuer die,
                  Each after other miniſtring, by courſe ſucceſsiuely,
                  Who ſway that ciuill gouernment, which God alone doth beare,
                  Prowd ſpirits to daunt in lewd attempts, meeke ſpirits in good to reare.
               
               
                  A ſhort inſtruction or auouchment with ſome notice giuen to the greateſt gainſaiers thereof.
                  
                     THus euery ſeemely propertie imports in full effect,
                     That euery lawfull magiſtrate is one of Gods elect:
                     To rule his ſubiects orderly, in honeſt conuerſation,
                     And ſo to further common wealth with godly reformation.
                  
                  
                     Which pointe, no wiſe man dare denie, nor beaſtes (if they could ſpeake)
                     Who in their kinde are very loth, Gods ordinance to breake:
                     Sith nature teacheth, lawe requireth, the King of kings doth ſay,
                     Superiors ought to rule aright, inferiors muſt obay.
                  
                  
                     Howbeit the romiſh Anabaptiſts, for the popiſh Monarchie,
                     Haue labourd long all gouernements to bring into an anarchie:
                     That they, and theirs, may rule the roaſt, who haue to doe the leaſt,
                     Vnleſſe it be to heale the wounds of that ſeuen headed beaſt.
                  
               
            
            
               The ſecond ſpirituall ſonet containing an encouragement of all lawfull Magiſtrates to
ſuppreſſe the Pope of Rome, and his romish Complices, for ſundry good conſiderations.
               
                  The Preface.
                  All Chriſtian Princes of the earth, pull downe the Popes eſtate,
                  who made you hornes to wrecke his wrath, and furie, (till of late,)
                  And drunken with the poyſny cuppe of ſpirituall fornication,
                  to bring you, and your ſubiects all, to vtter deſolation.
               
               
                  The Sonnet.
                  
                     1
                     
                        WHoſe ordination is but pompe and pride, full of confuſion,
                     
                        Like errand theeues, that breake the fence, and enter by intruſion:
                     Not rightly callde, (as Aron was, annoint with ſacred oyle,)
                     But ſtartvps ſtout, with reuell rout, to liue vpon the ſpoile.
                  
                  
                     2
                     
                        Whoſe inſolent ſupremacie to raigne aboue the reſt,
                     As though he had all holines and wiſdome in his breaſt,
                     No leſſe then Chriſt, the ſonne of God, and th'oly Ghoſt his deputie,
                     
                        Is like Goliahs blaſphemie, againſt the bleſſed Trinitie.
                  
                  
                     3
                     
                        Whoſe Iuriſdiction is too large, for mortall man to teach.
                     
                        Like Babells Tower, which Bablers thought beyond the cloudes to reach:
                     Or Nimrod hunting luſtily for praye in euery ground,
                     Or ſcornefull Iſmaell quarrelling with euery one he found.
                  
                  
                     4
                     
                        Whoſe Canons ſerue to ſtarue the Saintes, and bellie-gods to feed,
                     Pretenſedly to build the Church, and helpe the poore at need:
                     
                        Like Iudas, who to ſpare his purſe, enquir'd, what waſte is this?
                     And did for thirtie pence betraye his Maiſter with a kiſſe.
                  
                  
                     5
                     
                        Whoſe Officialls are hirelings all, which on his ſeige depend,
                     The curſed courts of wrangling wights to bolſter and attend:
                     
                        Like Pilates, Pyrats, Iewes, and Turkes, who naughtie ſhiftes do vſe,
                     Or, bawdes and harlotes impudent, who liue vppon the ſtewes.
                  
                  
                     6
                     
                        Whoſe marchandize is not the marke of any Paſtor pure,
                     
                     But fleſhly, worldly, diueliſh prancks to forge and put in vre,
                     
                        Like hammer, nailes, ſpeare, ſpunge, and whip, of Annas Caiphas brood,
                     
                     Who cried, away with Chriſt to th croſſe, and ſhed his pretious bloud.
                  
               
               
                  Concluſion.
                  BEholde the Chaire of peſtilence, and throne of groſſe iniquitie,
                  Ordaining miſchiefe, for a lawe, and exerciſing crueltie:
                  Heere wiſdome is, and patience, this myſtery to ſpell,
                  How Lucifer climde vp in heauen, and was throwne downe to hell.
               
               
                  A briefe recapitulation, or rehearſall, with a certaine challenge to the gainſaiers thereof.
                  
                     THus euery vitious qualitie, the ſubſtance doth diſgrace,
                     Of popiſh Pſeudo-hierarchie, and put it out of place,
                     And proue it no ſuch Biſhopricke, as ſcripture ſetteth downe.
                     Much leſſe to be ſo catholike, and weare a triple crowne.
                  
                  
                     No Writer euer could declare by any demonſtration,
                     With all his labour and his wit, ſuch Lordly domination,
                     To come from Chriſt by Peters kayes, or other argument,
                     Directly, or, by conſequence, in either teſtament.
                  
                  
                     Howeuer Ecchius, Pigghius, and the reſt of that fraternitie,
                     By hooke or crooke, with bell and booke, ſupport the Popes authoritie:
                     And Verſtegan-Bochi-skenkely, bragge Champions on a rowe,
                     With ſcutchions blaze the Popiſh armes, and caſt the King too lowe.
                  
               
            
         
         
            The ſecond paire of Paſtorall Eclogues.
            
               The third ſpirituall ſonnet, containing an admonition of all ſtates and degrees, in their
ſeuerall places and callings, to prouide for their owne ſafties and welfares, by rooting
out the romish Monster, with his brutish Companions.
               
                  1
                  IN iuſt defence of Magiſtrates, All people hie and lowe,
                  As on your countrie Fathers deare, both limme and life beſtowe,
                  Whom God hath railed vp to rule their ſubiects in his place,
                  All Traitors falſe, eſpecially proude Papiſts to deface.
               
               
                  2
                  Surmounting high, deep ſearching wits, ſound politike, Noble Sates
                  
                  Preſerue your roiall dignities from Antichriſtian mates.
               
               
                  3
                  
                     Braue ancient ſtocks, right famous blouds, whom worth hath ſet aloft
                  Let not Italian Hipocrites your Honours bring to nought.
               
               
                  4
                  
                     Graue Iudges wiſe, and Councel learnde, to tell the truth be bolde,
                  That Soueraintie from ſhauen crownes, al Princes may withholde.
               
               
                  5
                  
                     Good neighbors neere, Confederats kind, and Bordrers round about,
                  Suppreſſe ſedition euery where, caſt Romiſh rebels out.
               
               
                  6
                  
                     True ſubiects all, with loyall mindes, faſt feeding on the hill
                  Of ſafe defence, in fruitfull ground, by watchfull Shepheards skill,
                  Plucke vp your hearts, addreſſe your ſelues, with deadly foes to fight:
                  Namely that monſtrous Babilon, who worketh moſt deſpight.
               
            
            
               ¶The fourth ſpiritual Sonnet, containing an alarme to all the creatures of God, in their
kinde, and eſpecially his faithfull ſeruants, in their vocation, to reſiſt and abandon that
ſauage tyrant of Rome, with his bloudie Colleagures.
               
                  1
                  AGainſt that purpled Whore of Rome, harke all Gods creatures, harke,
                  Who murdereth all his ſeruants deere, that do refuſe her marke,
                  Come, and reuenge their blood on her, and feed vpon the beaſt,
                  Whoſe houre is come, whoſe fall is neere, God bids you to the feaſt.
               
               
                  2
                  Come, all his Saintes, withdraw your ſelues from her abhomination,
                  And double pay her for her hire, and worke her deſolation.
               
               
                  3
                  Come, yee her falſe friends, flattring faire, and take againe the glory,
                  Which ſhe from you tooke, of your lands and liuings tranſitorie.
               
               
                  4
                  Come, yee her wretched wi
                           •
                        es and prancks, forepaſt from age to age,
                  Out of records, and teſtifie againſt her on the ſtage.
               
               
                  5
                  Come, thou Gods word, the breath of life, that trieſt raines and heartes,
                  Set forth and marre her vgly ſhape, and all her filthie partes.
               
               
                  6
                  Come laſt of all, deere Sauiour Chriſt, once more, and quite conſume
                  The remnant of her forgeries, with fire for aye to fume,
                  In furnace of thy Fathers wrath, where breed thoſe monſters fell,
                  Who perſecute thy choſen flocke, and mangle thy Goſpell.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Foure principall properties of a Chriſtian Magiſtrate.
                     1 To know the vertuous,
                     2 to cheriſh them.
                     3 To finde out offenders.
                     4 to puniſh them.
                  
                  Such as honor me, I will honor thē; ſaith the Lord


                  
                     Foure euill fauored qualities of that vſurping Antichriſt.
                     1 To exalt himſelf in the temple of God.
                     2 to diſpiſe gouernment.
                     3 To counterfaite the truth.
                     4 to dene the vertu of it.
                  
                  Such as honor &c
               
            
            
               A fit Praier.
               
                  Lord ſaue thy Church, our Queene, and realme, and graunt they may preuaile,
                  Againſt that hideous Antichriſt, his body, head and taile:
                  And that we ſtil thy bleſſed wil may ſeeke ſincere and pure
                  Till we ſhall be all one with thee, for euer to endure.
               
            
         
         By G. W. P. S. one of the meaneſt Miniſters of the Goſpel in England.
      
   