
      
         
            
            THE
PICTVRE OF
A VVanton: her
leawdneſſe diſcouered.
            LONDON,
Printed by W. White for T. P. and
are to be ſold in Iuie Lane.
            1615.
         
         
            
            
            To the Chriſtian
Reader.
            
               
                  SAlomon in his Prouers,
               Prou. 5. doth in
many Chapters ſo wiſely and pithily
deſcribe the impudencie and leawde
behauiour of an Harlot,
               Prou. 6. that if men
would aduiſedly read them,Prou. 7. and diligently
obey the diuine Counſell in
them contained, they would refraine
comming neere her doores, leaſt they
might be inſnared with her allurements.
But there are ſome that frequent Harlots houſes to
beare their Friend company (as they affirme,) not knowing, or
at leaſt not conſidering the corruption of their Nature, nor their
owne weakeneſſe to reſiſt temptation, nor the danger to walke in
the counſell of the vngodly, and to ſtand in the way of ſinners.
Some beeing ſetled on the Lees of their Sinnes, make it almoſt
their dayly practiſe to conuerſe with them; not regarding how
griuouſly they offende Almightie GOD, tranſgreſſing his
holy Ordinances; nor weighing how they Defile their bodyes,
which are the Temples of the holy Ghoſt: nor conſidering into
what penurie and want they may be brought to: nor fearing the
Iudgements and Puniſhments which God hath threatned to
vnchaſt lyuers:Heb. 13. 4. For, Fornicators and Adulterors, God
will iudge. Almightie GOD, who is holy▪ yea, holineſſe it
ſelfe, rightious in all his wayes, and holy in all his workes, hating
all vncleanneſſe; though he had abundance of Spirit, yet hee
made but one Man for one Woman; and one Woman for one

Man, ioyning them togeather in holy Matrimonie for the procreation
of Children, to gather vnto himſelfe a Church out of
man-kind; as alſo to auoyde Fornication: Therefore GOD
ſayth,Exod. 20. 
               Thou ſhalt not commit Adulterie. Know ye not,
(ſaith S. Paul,) that your Bodies are the members of
Chriſt?
               1. Cor. 16. 15. 
               Shall I then take the members of Chriſt, and
make them the members of an Harlot? God forbidde:
Yea ſaith;19 or, Know ye not that your Body is the Temple
of the holy Ghoſt, which is in you, whom ye haue
of God? and ye are not your owne: ye are bought with
a price. Conſider then how ſuch as couple them-ſelues with
Harlots, defile the members of Chriſt, and pollute the Temple
of the holy Ghoſt, and cut them-ſelues off from the fellowſhip
of Chriſt, and driue away the holy Spirit from them: For
what fellowſhip hath Rightiouſneſſe with Vnrightiouſneſſe?
               1. Cor. 6. 14.
               What communion hath Light with Darkeneſſe?
What concord hath Chriſt with Beliall? Wiſedome
cannot enter into a wicked heart,
               Wiſdom. 1. 4. 
               nor dwell in a
body ſubiect to ſinne. And who doth not know to what
penurie, yea to extreame beggarie many haue been brought by
following of Harlots.
               Pro. 6. 26. 
               For becauſe of the whoriſh Woman,
a man is brought to a morſell of Bread.
               Alea, Vina, Venus, tribus his ſum factus egenus. The example
of the Prodigall Child doth plainely declare it. And laſtly,
God hath, & will iudge Fornicators Corporally Spiritually, and
Eternally: Corporally, in this life with many foule and noyſome
Diſeaſes, as Batches, the French Pox, wherewith many are
conſumed and eate to the bones. Spiritually, in their Ʋnderſtanding;
For,Hoſe. 4. 
               Fornication and Wine, take away a mans
heart.
               Pro. 2. 18. Eternally, both in body and ſoule in Hell fire; For, her
Houſe tendes to death,
               Pro. 7. 27. 
               and her Paths to the Graue.
Therefore,Scortorum pertis ſcribatur Ianua mortis. ſaith S. Paul, Bee not deceiued, neither Fornicators,
nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons,
nor Buggerers, nor Theeues, nor Couetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Raylers,
               2 Cor. 6. 9. 10. 
               nor Extortioners, ſhall inherite the
Kingdome of Heauen. And S. Iohn ſaith, But the fearefull

and vnbeleeuing,
               Reuel. 21. 8. 
               and the abhominable, and Murtherers,
and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters,
and all Lyers, ſhall haue their part in the Lake
which burneth with Fire and Brimſtone: which is the
ſecond death. And let not the ſecret Fornicator and cloſe
Adulterer,
               Iob 24. 15. whoſe Eye waiteth for the twilight, and ſaith,
no eye ſhall ſee mee, and diſguiſeth his Face, thinke that
he ſhall goe vnſeene:Heb. 4. 13. For, all things are naked and bare
to Gods eyes, with whom he hath to doe. Darkeneſſe
and Light are all one to him.
               Pſalm. 139. 
               He knoweth the thoughts
of all men:
               Iob 21. 27. 
               And will ſet in order all that they haue
done;
               Pſalm. 50. 
               for he is the ſearcher of the Heart and Reines.
Therefore ſayth Salomon,Prou. 5. 20. 
               Why ſhouldeſt thou delight,
my Sonne, in a ſtrange Woman, or imbrace the boſome
of a ſtranger?
               21. 
               For the wayes of man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his paths. His
owne iniquities ſhall take the wicked himſelfe,
               22. 
               and hee
ſhall be holden with the cordes of his owne ſinne. He
ſhall die for fault of inſtruction,
               23. 
               and ſhall goe aſtray
through his great folly. Theſe thinges while I conſidered
with my ſelfe, I remembred a Dialogue betweene two, written
in Latine by that reuerend learned man Eraſmus, to diſſwade
young Women from this euill kind of life, by ſhewing the abhominable
filthineſſe thereof. I haue inlarged it both with addition
of more perſons, and larger matter; endeuouring to warne
both young Men, and young Women; yea, and all of what age
or condition ſoeuer, to take heed of this foule vice, and abhominable
ſinne, which will exclude them out of Heauen, if they repent
not. I know that the multitude of Bookes in this age, are
many: but good Bookes, which tende either to the inſtruction
of Vertue, or to the deſtruction of Vice, are to be regarded, and
diligently read: But filthy and vnchaſt Pamphlets, (whereof
the World is too full) are fitter to be burned as corrupters of
Youth: And who ſoeuer doth ſo miſſpende his time, and abuſe
his Witte, and peruert the good guiftes and graces of God, ſhall

receiue condigne puniſhment, and his owne Bookes ſhall be produced
as witneſſes againſt him. I now intreat thee (courtious
Reader) to peruſe this little Treatiſe: and if thou thinke it
needfull for theſe times, fitte to promote Gods glorie, and profitable
to men; as I hope, and am perſwaded it is, giue God the
glorie, and pray for mee his vnworthy ſeruant.
            
               Thine in the Lord,
F. S.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE PICTVRE OF
A LEAWD HVSWIFE.
            The names of
the ſpeakers:
Thais, a Harlot, a Courtizan.
Parmeno, a Pandor.
Sophronius, a young Gallant.
Dorio, a Baud.
            THAIS.
            
               
                  PArmenio,
               I maruaile I haue not
ſeene Dorio this Morning; nor
receaued any Sutors from her.
            
            
               Parmeno.
               If it pleaſe you, I
will goe for her, to know when
ſhe will come: or when you
ſhall expect any Sutor.
            
            
               Thais.
               Nay ſtay a while. But
who comes yonder?
            
            
               Parme.
               I know not yet who it ſhould be: But he is
a proper young man.
            
            
               Thais.
               I like him the better. But if I am not deceiued,
it is Sophronius my old Friend, who hath been at Rome;
for I heard that he is newly returned home.
            
            
               Parme.
               It is hee indeed.
            
            
               Thais.
               My Sophronius, my ſweet heart, my deſired
Friend, welcome: I reioyce that you are returned in
ſafetie; I haue often wiſhed your companie ſince your
departure.
            
            
               Sophro.
               I thanke God, I am returned in ſafetie: But I
thanke God the more, that I am returned a New man.
            
            
               Thais.
               So mee thinkes; for when you departed, you
were beardleſſe, but now you haue got you a handſome

Beard. You ſeeme to mee alſo, to haue changed your
Countenance; for you had a merry & pleaſant Countenance
when you departed; but now you ſeeme very
graue and ſober.
            
            
               Sophro.
               
                  Thais, I deſire to ſpeake with you ſecretly
apart.
            
            
               Thais.
               Are we not alone, ſweet heart? Heere is none
but Parmeno my Pander, who hath been acquainted
with our dealinges.
            
            
               Sophro.
               I know it well: but let vs goe into a more
ſecret place.
            
            
               Thais.
               If it be your minde, wee will goe into an inward
Chamber.
            
            
               Sophro.
               This place is not ſecret enough vnto mee.
            
            
               Thais.
               From whence commeth this new ſhamefaſtneſſe?
I haue a Cloſet, wherein I lay my Head-attire
and my Iewels, which is ſo darke, that I can neither ſee
you, nor you mee.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Looke about all the Creuices.
            
            
               Thais.
               There is not one Creuice, beleeue mee.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Is there no body neere to heare vs?
            
            
               Thais.
               Truly not a Fly, my ſweete heart: Why doe
you linger and ſtay?
            
            
               Sophro.
               I but tell mee Thais, Can wee heere deceiue
the eyes of the Almightie GOD?
            
            
               Thais.
               No, hee ſeeth all things; wee cannot auoyde
his ſight.
            
            
               Sophro.
               How comes it to paſſe (my Thais) that wee
ſhould not be aſhamed to doe that thing in the ſight of
Almighty God, and his holy Angels his witneſſes,
which we durſt not for ſhame doe in the ſight of men?
            
            
               Thais.
               What new matter is this? Come you hither to
preach? I thinke you are turned Puritan.
               
            
            
               Sophro.
               
                  Thais, I would intreat thee, if thou doeſt tender
the ſaluation of thy ſoule, to heare mee a little what

I will ſay vnto thee.
            
            
               Thais.
               Say on.
            
            
               Sophro.
               
                  You confeſſe that we are in the ſight of God:
and we all ſhould know,
                  Pro. 15. 4. 
                  that Gods eyes are in euery place,
beholding both good and euill.
                  Heb. 4. All things are naked and
bare to him, with whom we haue to doe. Wee cannot hide
our ſelues from him,
                  Pſalm. 139. 
                  nor go from him; for If we climbe vp
to Heauen, hee is there: If wee goe downe to the Deepe, hee is
there: If wee take the winges of the Morning, and fly to the
vttermoſt partes of the Earth, yet thither ſhall his hand lead
vs, and his right hand hold vs: If wee ſay the Darkneſſe ſhall
hide vs, euen the Night ſhall be light about vs: Hee is round
about our Bedde, and ſpieth out all our wayes.
            
            
               Thais.
               I pray you my Sophronius, what will you conclude
of this?
            
            
               Sophro.
               My Thais, this is the ſcope of my ſpeach;
that ſeeing our Witneſſe is in Heauen, and our Record
with the Higheſt: ſeeing that God is the beholder of
all our actions, and neither ſecrecie of place, nor darkneſſe
can hide vs from his ſight, wee ſhould take heed
what we doe; for he doth not onely ſee our actions,
but he will alſo iudge them: for he can doe it, becauſe
he is Almightie, and he will doe, for he is iuſt.
            
            
               Thais.
               I but (my Sophronius) God is mercifull, he would
not the death of a Sinner.
            
            
               Sophro.
               God indeed is mercifull;
                  Pſal. 130. but to them that
imbracing his mercie, doe feare him: and not to thoſe
which abuſing his mercie,Rom. 2. 
                  doe offend him.
               
            
            
               Thais.
               You are become very preciſe, and growne
monſtrous holy: You ſhould goe vp into the Pulpit,
and then I would heare thee.
            
            
               Sophro.
               I doe not wonder that you ſcoffe at my good
Counſell, for it is vſuall with the World to deſpiſe holſome
and godly Exhortations: but I would not refuſe
to doe any good Office, that I might recall you from
this ſhamefull and wretched life.
            
            
               
               Thais.
               Wherefore, my ſweete Sophronius? I muſt get
my liuing by ſome meanes: euery Art nouriſheth his
Artificer; this is my Trade, this is my Rent.
            
            
               Soghro.
               I wiſh (my Thais) that thou wouldeſt ſhake
off this madneſſe of minde, and awake out of thy ſecuritie,
and conſider of the matter in good earneſt.
            
            
               Thais.
               I pray thee (Sophronius) keepe thy Sermon till
another time: If I were ſicke, or aged, I would hearken
vnto thee: but let vs now be merry, and enioy our
pleaſure togeather.
            
            
               Sophro.
               O Thais! hearken now vnto my good Counſell:
Delay in all things is dangerous; hee that is not
fitte to day, may be leſſe fitte to morrow: now thou art
in health and thy ſenſes are freſh, and thy vnderſtanding
ſtrong, and thy memorie ripe; if thy body were
ſicke, it may be ſickneſſe would weaken all theſe, and
thy paine would make thee impatient. And whereas
thou ſpeakeſt of old Age; Who hath any charter of
his life? Wee are Tenaunts at will, God may thruſt vs
out of our houſe and giue vs no warning: And this we
haue ſeene often how ſodainely many haue been taken
out of this life; as the Rich man that promiſed vnto
himſelfe many dayes,Luke 12. and gloryed in his abundance,
and this ſentence was giuen againſt him, Thou Foole, this
night they ſhall fetch away thy ſoule. Therefore let vs not
preſume to repent when wee are old, but euen to day
let vs repent, becauſe we know not whether we ſhall
liue till to morrow. Moreouer, thou wouldeſt haue me
merry with thee, and enioy the pleaſures of ſinne: Let
mee tell thee Thais, that I haue learned to be merry in
the Lord; for other mirth is but momentanie and tranſitorie:
and I haue learned to renounce the pleaſures
of my Fleſh, and of the World, becauſe they are but for
a little ſeaſon; but they doe procure eternall torment,
as the example of the Rich Glutton doth teach.
            
            
               Thais.
               My Sophronius, why doe you ſpeake ſo much

Scripture vnto mee, you know that I, and others of my
faſhion, little regard it, and care not how little we heare
it; for it reproueth our life, and doth ouerthrow our
gaine?
            
            
               Sophro.
               Indeed Thais, they which are euill, hate the
Light, and loue Darkneſſe more then the Light, becauſe
the Light diſcouereth their euill deeds. But if you
and others of your faſhion; yea, if al ſinners would harken
vnto the word of God and obey it, it would teach
them to reforme their liues, and to eſcape out of the
ſnares of the Diuell: heare therefore my good Thais, the
word of God diligently, giue obedience vnto it; neither
thinke it will hinder your profit: but aſſure your
ſelfe, that will it procure greater and much better gaine
then you can thinke.
            
            
               Thais.
               If you can ſhew me that, I will hearken vnto
you gladly.
            
            
               Sophro.
               My Thais, the gaine you thinke you reape
by this euill kind of life, doth nouriſh your body; but
the meanes is ſo euill, that it will deſtroy both body
and ſoule, except you repent: But if you hearken to
the Word of God, and reforme your life by it, it will
teach you to ſaue both body and ſoule in the day of
the Lord.
            
            
               Thais.
               My Sophronius, this kind of life which I lead,
is common; yea, many Ladyes, and gallant Women
commit the ſame fault, though not ſo commonly knowen
as our life is.
            
            
               Sophro.
               It may be moſt true, but the more is the pittie;
yet ought not we to follow an e
                     •
                  ill example, no not
in great ones: neither ſhould we follow a multitude to
doe euill.
            
            
               Thais.
               Why then I pray you, Sophronius, doe you ſet
on mee as if I were alone thus ill diſpoſed? Haue you
ſince your returne, inſtructed any other of this life? if
not, you ſeeme to mee, to ſingle out mee from all other,

as if I were the greateſt Sinner?
            
            
               Sophro.
               O Thais, Thais! I haue not talked with many
ſince my arriuall; but I firſt come to thee, becauſe (with
griefe of heart I ſpeake it) I haue liued diſſolutly with
thee: and whereas I doe kindly admoniſh thee, thou
haſt cauſe to take it in good part, and make good vſe
of it. Neither doe I iudge thee to be the greateſt Sinner
this way; but I know that you and I are great ſinners:
therefore let vs both repent, and craue mercie of
God in the mediation of Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               Thais.
               If you wiſh mee well (my Sophronius,) as you
pretend, and tender my ſaluation, as you ſay, ſpeake
on, and I will heare you gladly?
            
            
               Sophro.
               And I will doe it chearefully. But firſt let me
intreat thee to anſwere mee to one or two queſtions.
            
            
               Thais.
               I ſhall moſt willingly (my Sophornius.)
            
            
               Sophro.
               Tell mee, Thais; Haue you not ſome Diuines
that wiſh you euill?
            
            
               Thais.
               Yes, too many.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Would you willingly doe that thing which
is euill, to procure your owne deſtruction; and to miniſter
matter of ioy vnto them?
            
            
               Thais.
               No verily. I would rather giue them Poyſon
to bane them.
            
            
               Sophr.
               You ſpeake indeed like a naturall Woman, for
before we be regenerate,Luke. we all Hate our Enemies; we are
ready to render euill for euill: we are eager to reuenge our
ſelues; but our Lord Ieſus doth teach vs, not to reſiſt
Euill; For Vengeance is mine, ſaith the Lord, I will repay.
But to returne to that which you ſay, you would not
doe, and yet you doe commonly.
            
            
               Thais.
               Not ſo (my Sophronius) I hope.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Yes Thais, it is too euident, as hereafter I will
ſhew you more at large. But tell mee againe (Thais,)
Would you willingly doe that which ſhould offende
your deare Friends?
            
            
               
               Thais.
               No verily.
            
            
               Sophro.
               I, but your euill and vncleane life, doth not
onely greatly grieue, but much offende your Parents,
your Breathren and Siſters, and your Kinsfolke: You
haue renounced all naturall affections vnto them vnto
whom by nature you are moſt neerely ioyned: they
are aſhamed of thee, and thou art aſhamed to come in
their ſight.
            
            
               Thais.
               Though I haue changed ſome few Friendes,
and haue renounced my affections to them; yet I haue
by this kind of life which I liue, gotten me many more
Friendes: whereof you are one, whom I eſteemed all
wayes as my Brother.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Let theſe wordes paſſe, and conſider ſeriouſly
of the matter as it is: You which thinke you
haue ſo many Friendes, haue no Friend, (beleeue mee
my Thais,) for they which come vnto thee, eſteeme thee
not for a Friend, but vſe thee as a Harlot. Conſider
then thou miſerable Woman, into what miſchiefe
thou haſt throwne thy ſelfe. Chriſt Ieſus the Sonne
of GOD, eſteemed thee ſo deare, that hee redeemed
thee not with corruptible thinges, as Siluer and
Gold, but with his precious Blood, that hee might
make thee one of his members the Child of God, and
an inheritour of the kingdome of Heauen; And thou
makeſt thy ſelfe a publike Sinke, in which euey filthy,
vncleane, and ſcabbie perſon, doth diſcharge
their filthineſſe. And if as yet that infectious Leproſie
which ſome call the Spaniſh Pip, ſome the French Pox,
hath not touched thee, yet thou canſt not long eſcape
it: which if it come to paſſe, who can be more miſerable
then thou, though all other things elſe proſper
well with thee. Weigh with thy ſelfe thy ſubſtaunce
and thy report, what elſe ſhalt thou be then a liuing
Carkaſſe. Thou wert grieued to obey thy Mother;
now thou ſerueſt Dorio a ſhameleſſe Baud. It wearied

thee to heare the Admonitions of thy Parents; but now
often times thou art beaten of Whore-maiſters & frantique
Fornicators. It was irkeſome to thee to doe any
worke at home, whereby thou mighteſt get thy liuings
but now, What watchings, what tumults, what intollerable
indignities doſt thou indure of theſe filthy & vnchaſt
perſons, to whom thou doſt proſtitute thy body?
            
            
               Parmenio.
               Ile be ſworne, Sophronius, you ſeeme to be
new changed indeed; for from a gallant youthfull Gentleman,
you are transformed to a Puritane Preacher; but
I thinke if Dorio were here, you would turne your tale,
and change your coppie: ſhee would hold you 
                     •
                  acke,
and make you ſing a new Song; and I purpoſe preſently
to fetch her.
            
            
               Sophro.
               You ſpeake Parmeno, as you are: you are a
goodly Apple-ſquire, a Pander to ſuch Punks as Thais
is: you draw by one line, & are an vpholder of bawdry?
and though you fetch that old Baud, neither ſhe nor
you, ſhall make me goe from that truth which I haue
ſpoken; and if you make haſt, you ſhall finde me here
to auerre that I haue vttered. And now Thais, conſider
with me, that this flower of thy beautie which procureth
thee Louers, it will ſhortly vaniſh away, for either
ſickneſſe, or age, will deface it; what wilt thou then
doe thou wretched woman? No Dung-hill will be abhorred
more then thou. Then of a Harlot, thou muſt
become a Baud, for ſuch are the proceedings of your
wicked trade: which if it happen, what can be more
vile? What can approch nearer vnto the Deuils malice?
            
            
               Thais.
               I confeſſe, (my Sophronius,) that all theſe things
which thou ſayeſt, are true; but tell me I pray you,
from whence you haue learned this holines? You were
wont to be a good fellow, and to delight in me: no man
came more often to me, and more vntimely, then you.
Come you not lately from Rome?
               
            
            
               Sophro.
               Yes, I came from Rome very lately, as before

I tould you.
            
            
               Thais.
               I wonder not a little, that you are ſo transformed,
my Sophronius; for commonly they which goe to
Rome, returne not better, but much worſe▪ how then are
you growne ſo Godly?
            
            
               Sophro.
               I will tell thee, my Thais: Becauſe I went not
with the ſame minde, nor after the ſame faſhion that
many young Gentlemen and others doe; for they goe
to Rome to ſee the Pope that Antichriſt,
                  Papastupor Mundi. the wonder of
the world, to ſee and learne Italian trickes, to learne to
court and ſerue their Miſtris. And I will tell thee
Thais, the occaſions to make a man a Libertine, are
there abundantly offered; for a man may be there, what
he will, ſo hee ſhew not any liking of godlyneſſe and
honeſtie, and therefore no maruaile though they that
haue been at Rome (for the moſt part) returne worſe
then when they went.
            
            
               Thais.
               O my Sophronius, you forget your ſelfe, Rome
is accounted a holy place, the Pope is called Chriſts Ʋicar;
they call others which conſent not vnto them, Heriques,
and profeſſe them ſelues the onely Catholiques
of the world.
            
            
               Sophro.
               I know, Thais, that Rome is accounted a holie
place; but I thinke they that eſteeme it ſo, haue not bin
there: for though it was ſome times an holy Citty where
many of Gods Saintes did liue, yet now it is become an
vnfaythfull Citty, a Cage of vncleane Birdes, a receptacle
for perfidious and fugitiue perſonnes, and a ſinke
of al euill. When I diligently obſerued how licentiouſly,
how viciouſly, how inordinatly men liued there,
committing moſt ſinnes without checke, I did admire
how they could call that place Holy, where men did
lead ſuch vncleane liues. The Pope is called Chriſts
Ʋicar, and is borne vpon mens ſhoulders, and worſhipped
as a God; but he doth not follow the ſteppes
of Chriſt herein, but doth cleane contrary to the preceptes

of Chriſt, and therefore he may rather be called
Antichriſt; And whereas the Romaniſts call others
Heretiques who diſſent from them, I can aſſure thee
Thais, that they hold and maintaine foule and ſhamefull
Hereſies, as I can proue by the holy word of God. And
whereas they call themſelues Catholiques, & appropriat
that name vnto themſelues, they doe but as ſome that
called themſelues Iewes, and were not Iewes, as S. Iohn
doth teach, Reuel. 3. 9. for they hold many things contrary
to the holy Catholique Fayth.
            
            
               Thais.
               If this be true (my Sophronius) which you ſay,
I doe the more admire that you ſhould returne ſo holy
from ſo vnholy a place; We ſee that men generally are
ſo beſotted and inchaunted with the pleaſures of this
life, that they affect thoſe places where they may moſt
inioy them; and deſire rather to abide there where they
may haue libertie to inioy the pleaſures, of the fleſh,
then where men are warned to auoyde theſe Syrenes
and haue the Iudgements of God denounced againſt
them for their ſinnes. I ſpeake this from my owne experience.
Tell me therefore (my Sophronius,) by what
meanes you are ſo transformed?
            
            
               Sophro.
               I will tell thee (my Thais) plainely, wiſhing
that it may be as profitable to thee, as it hath bin gainefull
to mee. I chaunced (by the goodnes and grace of
God) to fall into the companie of a graue Father, who
was a Protiſtant Miniſter, who had bin at Rome to ſeeke
his Sonne, who ſecretly had ſlipt from him to ſee the
Countrie, and to learne faſhions; but hearing that he
was returned to 
                     Ʋenice, he came backe againe, & as we
trauailed togeather, he inquired of me of what Countrie
I was? I told him an Engliſh man: he demaunded of
me the cauſe of my comming into thoſe Countries: I
anſwered him, to ſee Faſhions, and to vnderſtand the
ſtate of the Romiſh religion which I heard commended
in mine owne Countrie; and alſo to obſerue the manners

and faſhions of the Catholiques which I had heard exceedingly
prayſed of our Engliſh Catholiques, in my
owne Countrie. And when he had heard me to the end,
he ſpake on this manner vnto me. My Son, ſaith he (for ſo
he called me, ſpeaking in Latine) Beware and take heed
of thoſe Popiſh Catholiques, which are the Sinagogue of
Sathan, and thanke God that you are come out of Rome,
yea out of Babilon, who exalteth her ſelfe as a Queene, and
yet is that Strumpet ſpoken of in the Reuelation of S. Iohn.
And beleeue mee, Poperie is a bundle of Iniquitie: For,
haue you not ſeene how Curtizans are ſuffered & maintained
vnder the Popes noſe: yea, many of the Popes haue
had their Paramours. The Stewes and Brothell houſes are
euery where alowed. They boaſt of the Scriptures, and
yet they falſifie them, & keepe them from the people, that
they may keepe them in blindneſſe. They iuſtifie themſelus,
and yet are moſt wicked. Their Clergie liue in all
manner of pleaſures of the fleſh. They hold it that a
Prieſt liuing in Adulterie & Fornication, doth not ſinne
ſo much, as when he taketh a Wife. The Ieſuites (which is
the laſt Order amongſt them, and the worſt) doe hold it
meritorious to kill the King of the Countrie, if he be not
of their Religion: And therefore who ſoeuer holdeth the
grounds of Poperie, is in a moſt dangerous eſtate. But my
Sonne, ſearch the Scriptures, as our Sauiour Chriſt exhorteth,
and they ſhall reueale vnto you the miſteries of
our Saluation, and diſcouer all their iuglings & impieties.
I gaue him great thanks, and haue followed his counſell:
Since which time, I haue been ſtudious in the Scriptures,
and euery day I perceiue the groſſe errours of the Papiſtes,
their counterfait Holineſſe, their deepe Hipocriſie,
and their great Iniquitie. Now therefore, my Thais, if you
tender your owne ſaluation, deteſt Poperie, and forſake
this ill kind of life that you haue led: yet there is hope, if
you earneſtly repent, God will receaue you; for hee
would not the death of Sinner, but rather that he ſhould

repent. To day therefore, whiles God doth admoniſh
you, heare his voyce, and harden not your hearts againſt
God; ſo ſhall you eſcape eternall condemnation.
            
            
               Thais.
               If this kind of life (my Sophronius) be ſo euill, if
it be ſo dangerous, and if ſo great a puniſhment doth belong
vnto it, I maruaile that it is ſo common; and I marnaile
why ſome haue affirmed, that Fornication is but a
tricke of Youth: and that it is no fault for a Young man
to commit Fornication?
            
            
               Sophro.
               I told you, that the vniuerſalitie of a ſinne,
doth not make it to be no ſinne, nor excuſe a ſinne; for
we ought not to follow a multitude to doe euill. And
whereas ſome ſay, that it is but a tricke of Youth, to commit
Fornication, & that it is no fault; theſe are the words
of Heathen men, which had not the light of Gods word:
ſuch euill Words corrupt good Manners. But the Word
of God doth tell vs,Heb. 13. 4. 
                        •
                      Cor. 6. that Fornicators and Adulterers God will
iudge, and puniſh. Neither ſhall Fornicators and Adulterers,
enter into the kingdome of Heauen.
               
            
            
               Thais.
               This is a heauie ſentence, if it ſhould be executed;
and indeed my Heart trembleth to heare it. If the
ſtate of this life which I haue ledde, be ſo odious to God,
and lyable to ſo great puniſhment, I will, by Gods grace,
forſake it. But alaſſe (Sophronius) how ſhall I liue? How
ſhall I maintaine my ſelfe?
            
            
               Sophro.
               I am glad to heare that you feare the Iudgements
of God, threatned to ſinners in his Word. No
doubt Gods ſpirit will reſt vpon them that tremble at his
Word; and I hope that God will make me an inſtrument
to conuert you. And whereas you demaund how you
ſhould liue? how you ſhould maintaine your ſelfe? I will
tell you what I would aduiſe you: You ſhall ſecretly
and ſodainly gather vp all your Apparell, & your Stuffe,
and I will helpe you to conuey it to my Houſe: and I
would haue you, to ſerue ſome Lady or Gentlewoman,
and I my ſelfe will helpe to preferre you: yea, and if I

can preferre you to a good Match, I will giue a reaſonable
Portion to further it: and I will labour to reconcile
you to your Parents, and to your Breathren and Kinſfolke.
            
            
               Thais.
               Bleſſed be God (my Sophronius) that brought
you hither this day, to giue mee this good Counſell: and
I thanke God that I haue ſuch a Friend, that is ſo carefull
for my good and ſaluation: And that you may know
how you haue preuayled with mee, I ſubmit my ſelfe
wholy to your diſpoſition, and am content to be ordered
by you in all things. But ſee, Dorio is at hand, and P.
               
            
            
               Dorio.
               I am at hand indeed, and I haue this good
while heard your communication; and your concluſion
I vtterly miſlike, and altogether diſtaſte. Will you Thais,
commit your ſelfe to Sophronius to be ordered? Will you
giue ouer this pleaſant and gainefull kind of life? No, no,
(my Thais) let not him deceiue you, to draw you vnto
Miſerie and Penurie. What can you more deſire, then
you haue? You haue the Pleaſures of this life, you haue
coſtly Garments, daintie Fare, Money at will, and the
companie of luſtie Gallants at commaund; and will you
leaue this kind of life, to waite and attend vpon others,
who are now attended vpon? Will you be at the commaund
of others, who may your ſelfe commaund? To
doe ſo, were extreame follie. And you Sophronius, who
ſeeme to be ſo altred from the man you were, when you
went from vs; I doubt not, but you will be as kind to
Thais: as you haue bin: for if you haue not her to vſe at
your command, you will haue your haunt ſome where
els: therefore play the good fellow, do as you haue done,
and let it not be ſayd, that you are turned Puritane.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Auoyd thou old Baud, I defie thee and thy
counſell: I vtterly deteſt, & I do from my heart hate my
former life, and doe flie vnto the mercie of God, in Ieſus
Chriſt; And I tell thee Dorio, thou art an vncleane woman,
and an Inſtrument of the Deuill to corrupt and deſtroy

young perſons, thy heart is full of Gall and bitterneſſe:
Repent therefore, if ſo be the Lord will haue
mercie vpon thee; Or if thou wilt not, God ſhall puniſh
thee in the end, as he hath done many, for the ſame
fault.
            
            
               Dorio.
               Marie muffe Sophronius▪
                   are you become a Preacher?
In ſooth ſir your yeeres are to young to teach me.
I meane not to forſake this kinde of life yet? I haue vſed
it too long to leaue it, I will endeauour to bring young
Gentlemen to Thais, to enioy their pleaſure: Should not
young men reioyce in their youth, & cheere their hearts
in the dayes of their youth, and walke in the wayes of
their heart and in the ſight of their eyes?
            
            
               Sophro.
               I confeſſe indeed, that I am young, yet my
counſell ought not to be refuſed in reſpect of my youth,
but rather it checketh your old age, continuing ſtill in
vncleanneſſe. And whereas you ſay, you will not leaue
that filthy courſe of life yet, take heed that you harden
not your heart againſt God, and ſo heape vp wrath againſt
the day of wrath. And whereas you ſay, you haue
vſed it too long to leaue it herein, you ſhew how dangerous
a thing it is to accuſtome ones ſelfe to any euill; It
is an eaſie thing to fall into any ſinne, but it is hard to get
out of it. And whereas you ſay, you will be an Inſtrument
to bring others to follie and to impietie, know this,
that thou ſhalt the more ſeueerely be puniſhed, for aſmuch
as thou doeſt not onely euill of thy ſelfe, but art a
Soliciter and abettor of others in ſin. Neither ought yong
men liue laciuiouſly and diſſolutely; for if they doe, God
will call them to iudgement for it.
            
            
               Dorio.
               I tell thee Sophronius, thou art become a preciſe
Foole; or rather I thinke thou doeſt but dally with mee
and Thais, that we may know and vnderſtand thy ſharpe
Witte. But come Sophronius, be vnto vs as thou haſt been:
for thou ſhalt not finde vs changlings.
            
            
               Thais.
               Speake (Dorio) for thy ſelfe; for I tell thee

plainely without any equiuocation, that Sophronius hath
ſo preuayled with me, that I diſclay me thee, and vtterly
deteſt that filthie and vncleane life whereunto thou
haſt brought mee: for had not GOD in mercie made
Sophronius an inſtrument to reclayme mee, I had good
cauſe to curſe thee; for thou dideſt draw mee to this
abhominable life. Thou art ſhee that did procure
mee to forſake my Parents, and their good counſaile,
to practiſe this odious and wicked courſe: therefore I
doe now defie thee, and all ſuch leawde Women as you,
which are the deſtruction of many young Women
about this Cittie, bringing them into euill company, and
giuing them leawd counſell.
            
            
               Dorio.
               Why how now Huſwife, are you become ſo
Holy? It doth not agree with your profeſsion; Haue
not you promiſed to be ordered and ruled by meet
Doe not you call mee Mother, and confeſſe your ſelfe
to bee my Daughter? I thinke you dare not forſake mee
on this faſhion; for if you doe, I will diſplay your life,
and make you to be poynted at in the ſtreetes.
            
            
               Thais.
               You may tearme mee at your pleaſure, but
your mockes and ſcornes ſhall not much offende mee:
and though I promiſed to be ordered by you, I now
ſee my follie therein, and am ſorrie for it; and I know
that euill Promiſes are better broken then kept. And
though I called thee Mother, I ſee now (to my griefe) that
thou wert a wicked Mother to mee. And though you
dare mee, and feare mee with diſcouering my follie; I had
rather be hated of thee & the World, & poynted at, then
haue the diſpleaſure of Almightie God; but if he loue me,
(as I know he will) if I loue him, and hate all iniquitie, I
little care for the hatred of the World: For I now ſee
that they which are Gods friendes, ſhall be hated of the
World. And indeed, if you had your deſert, you deſerue
to be poynted at, and to be ſeueerely puniſhed
for intiſing of young Maydes vnto follie: and I will

make you knowne to others, that they may take heed of
you, and others of your faſhion.
            
            
               Dorio.
               Mary you are a goodly Goſsip indeed, you
will be ſhortly, one of the Holy Siſters; I ſhall haue you
ſhortly, one of the Family of Loue: I will obſerue you, and
marke your faſhions; and I ſweare by my Honeſtie, if
Sophronius were not heere, I would ſo beat thee, that thou
ſhouldeſt not lift thine hands to thy head: But I ſhall
find a time to be reuenged of thee for thy malipartneſſe.
            
            
               Sophre.
               It is the manner of ſuch as you are, to frumpe
and mocke at ſuch as forſake your euill life, and begin
to ſerue God, and to make a conſcience of their wayes:
But you ſhall ſmart for it one day, if you doe not repent.
And whereas you ſay, you will obſerue Thais, and marke
her life; I would wiſh thee to obſerue thy ſelfe, and ſeriouſly
conſider what an abhominable and hatefull life
thou doeſt lead. And whereas thou ſweareſt by thy Honeſtie,
thou ſweareſt by that thou haſt not; for ſuch as
thou art, are at defiance with Honeſtie, and wholly delight
in diſhoneſt and ſhamefull life. And whereas thou
ſayeſt that thou wouldeſt beate her if I were abſent, and
doeſt threaten to be reuenged of her, I tell thee, thou
ſhameleſſe old Baud, that if thou doeſt touch her, or doeſt
any way wrong her, I will cauſe thee and thy companions
to be puniſhed.
            
            
               Dorio.
               Nay then I defie thee, thou proud Puritane,
and if Parmeneo wil helpe me, I will ſcratch out thy eyes,
for abuſing me in this manner, but I hope, I ſhall be reuenged
of thee, ere it be long. But Parmeneo come, let vs
leaue them: let vs be gon, they are no companie for vs;
they are a couple of preciſe Fooles, and ſo they will
proue.
            
            
               Sophro.
               I perceiue, that thou haſt a Harlots face, and
haſt hardned thy heart that thou wilt not repent; but
know thou, thou euill woman, that God ſhall puniſh
thee, and all ſuch perſons: Yee ſhall be excluded out of

heauen, and caſt downe into Hell: this ſhalbe the portion

                     〈◊〉
                   Adulterers, Fornicators, Drunkards, and all vncleane

                     ••
                  rſons, that will not repent. Oh that thou, & ſuch as thou
it, would conſider this, & be wiſe, and lay hold on grace
whiles the day of grace laſteth; for when the day of iudgment
commeth,Pro. 1. 28. it wilbe too late to call for mercie: for as
you ſtop your eares,Zacha. 7. 7. and will not heare God ſpeake vnto
you now, ſo he will not heare you then, but will ſay
depart from me, you workers of iniquitie, I know you
not.
            
            
               Dorio.
               I tell thee, thou young Puritane, that thou prateſt
in vaine to mee, I am no fit hearer for you; I will
when I thinke good, alter my trade of life, and not be at
your diſpoſition, nor be directed by the beſt Preacher
of the Land: Therefore take your Puritane Punke with
you, you haue made her a holy Siſter: I, and Permeneo,
will goe ſeeke ſome other young Miſtris; which I doubt
not, will be more faythfull then your Huſwife hath been,
who hath broken her honeſt word: and ſo a diew.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Farewell thou old Baud, happie are they that
are fartheſt off from ſuch rotten members, and from ſuch
noiſome and infectuous plagues, which are able to deſtroy
many. And now, my Thais, conſider with me how
ſinners hardned in ſin, refuſe to heare good counſell, and
ſtopp their eares like the deafe Adder, refuſing to heare
the voyce of the Charmer, charme he neuer ſo wiſely.
Shee will (ſhee ſayes,) reforme her life at her pleaſure; as
if ſhee could repent when ſhe liſted; whereas it is the
gift of God. Her purpoſe is (as ſhe ſaith) to corrupt ſome
other, as ſhe hath done you: But God (I truſt) will croſſe
her in her euill purpoſe, and confound her wicked enterpriſe.
            
            
               Thais.
               Amen (my Sophronius:) And God Almightie
graunt vs his grace to continue in that good courſe
whereinto wee are entred, and guide vs with his holy

Spirit, that the reſt of our life may be wholly conſecrated
vnto him▪ that wee glorifying him in this life, m
                     ••
                  
be glorified of him in the life to come, through Ieſ
                     ••
                  
Chriſt our Lord.
            
            
               Sophro.
               Amen, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   