
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A View of Valyaunce.
Deſcribing the famous feates, and Martiall exploites of two moſt mightie nations, the Romains and the Carthaginians, for the conqueſt and poſſeſsion of Spayne.
Translated out of an auncient Recorde of Antiquitie, written by Rutilius Rufus, a Romaine Gentleman, and a Capitaine of charge vnder Scipio, in the ſame Warres.
VERY DELIGHTFVLL to reade, and neuer before this time publyſhed.
            ¶Imprinted at London, by Thomas Eaſt. 1580.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Right worſhipfull, Sir Henry Lee, Knight, Maiſter of the Armarie, and Leaſh, vnto hir moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
               SIr, if I were to yeeld a reaſon of my preſent preſumption for thus boldly offering vnto your worſhipful view this little hyſtoricall Abridgemēt of Martiall exploits, by ſundrye moſt famous warriours and renowmed Capitaines long ſince atchieued: I thinke beſides many other allegations, I might aunſwere, & that iuſtly, (wherein alſo I am perſwaded, that the general conſent of your Coū
               trey, wil ioine in opiniō with me) that the title of the book, bearing the name of Valyaunce, & the matter or argument therein compriſed, entreating of warlike affaires, & knightly proweſſe, doth (as it were) by peculiar choice challenge your fauourable patronage. For, omitting the large Seas of your ſundry other deſerued commēdations & praiſes, which I know (ſuch is your Chriſtian

modeſtie) you loue not to heare to your own face emblazed, & which I am far vnmeete & vnable fully to decipher: what inuincible courage in the cauſe and quarrell of your Prince and Country harboureth within your vndaunted breaſt: what dexteritie, with ſhocke and launce followeth your vigorous arme: what prompt readineſſe and alacritie to march againſt the enimie hath appered in you abroad: what courteſie, affabilitie, bountie, & heroicall generoſitie at home: both Courte reſoundeth, & Country plauſibly atteſtifieth. According where-vnto, I know, I need not to dwel vpō any curious, ſute vnto your Worſhip for the cheereful acceptaunce heere-off: but reſt very aſſured of your accuſtomed goodneſſe: wherein I beſeech the Almightie long to continue you, with dayly increaſe of the ſame.
            
               
                  At Butley in Cheſshyre, the.
20. of Iune. 1580.
               
               Your Worſhips humble, Thomas Newton.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            WHat gaine groweth to ſtudious Readers by diligent pervſing of Hyſtories, as there is none (I thinke) ſo inſenſate who féeleth not: ſo, after ſo many worthy clerkes whiche haue from time to time diſplayed the profite, the pleaſure, the vſe, yea the neceſſitie thereof, I déeme labour néedeleſſe, and perſuaſion ſuperfluous. Onely by the way, and euen at a worde, it may ſuffice to ſay, that by the benefite hereof, the practiſes & pollices, the drifts & dealings, ye aduauncements and calamities, the victories & ouerthrowes, the welfare & decay, the alteration and continuance, the good ſtate and the badde, aſwel of great Monarchies, kingdoms, States, & Seignidries, as of the affaires of priuate perſons, and inferiour ſubiects are manifeſtly layd open vnto the perfite view of our eyes, and without the leauell of any daunger plainely diſcouered & preſēted vnto our cōſiderations. For they, without either feare or fauour; affectiō
               
or parcialitie, doe effectuallie deſcribe vnto vs the order and meanes howe Common weales begā, how they grew, how they continued, howe they flouriſhed, and how they fall into decay and finall declination: what wayes aduaunced their honour, what wennes and diſgraces emblemiſhed their eſtimation, and what diſorders eclypſed their maieſties: howe worthy perſons for their worthy ſeruice haue bene worthelye inueſted with titles of honour: and how drouſie drones and carpet capitaines, lulled in the cradle of eaſe, and dandeled in the lappe of ſenſuall ſecuritie, haue in the ende condignely had their memoryes obſcurely raked, and buried with their bodies in the pitte of Obliuion. Finallie, how vertue hath bene notablye rewarded, and vice ſhamefully reproached. All which be good inducements, to trayne our mindes to the due conſideration of their ends: and may ſerue for readie directions (as it were) with the finger to poynt vs to the embracing of honeſtie, and meanes to terrifie vs from

purſuing of looſeneſſe and villanie. To this ende doe all hyſtories generallye tende: and to this effecte affoordeth this little Booke, plentifull ſtoare & varietie of delectable matter: and the ſame ſo compendiouſlye couched together, ye within a ſmall roome it caryeth as great ſubſtance of memorable actes, and venturous exploytes, as many (perhappes) that beare a bigger volume, and bragge it out with a loftier countenāce. Among other praiſes worthily due vnto it, this (ſurely) is none of the leaſt, that it is a Monument of great antiquitie, and nowe of late by a ſtudious Gentleman of this our countrey in his trauaile into Italye there happilye founde, and by him ſenſiblye tranſlated. The copie whereof, being vnto mée (vpon truſt) long agoe committed to peruſe, and my ſymple aduiſe therein required, I coulde doe no leſſe, at the requeſt of my friende, but both peruſe the booke, conferre the matter with other Hyſtroriographers, enlighten it with ſome néedefull marginall Notes, and finally

with the glaunce of my poore pen, commende the ſame, as a new found treaſure vnto thy curteous conſideration. Friendly therfore, and thankefully accept it, that the paines here-in taken and ſuſteyned in thy behalfe, may be thought well beſtowed. Farewell.
            
               Thomas Newton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶THE VIEW OF Valyaunce.
            
               THe auncient name of Spayne, was ſometime called Hiberia: A prouince of ſuch largeneſſe, as hath bene thought incredible. Conteining by the olde accompt .xij.C.L. miles, as wel in length as bredth. It hath the ſame Confines, that it hath euer had, vz. ye 
               Pyrenaei Mountains to the North Occean, and the Tyrrhene Sea, to the Pillours of Hercules.
            
            The firſt inhabitaunce of it is diuers, as of al Countryes: of the which to make much a doe, I doe not intend: ſauing yt I will not omit, how yt the Phoenicians traded Merchandiſe and toke vp place of habitation ther, & that Arganthonius King of Tarteſſo, gaue certeine Grecians that came to viſite him, conuenient grounde to dwell in.
                  After ſome hee lived but▪ 120. and after ſome 300. yeares.
                Which king, as ſtories telleth vs, liued an C.L. yeares. This Region ſo rich & aboundant, the Carthaginians, coueted to poſſeſſe before the Romaines, and

vexed them ſo cōtinually that the Romaines wer called of one part to giue them ayde. Amilcar of Carthage, ſurnamed Barcha, was the firſt yt did any great feat in Spayne, who béeing accuſed at home for his doings abroad, and afrayd to come to aunſwere, immediately after the warre of Africa, which was cauſed of his vntruth, not keping promiſe with ye ſouldiors, yt ſerued him in Sicily, he went with his armie into Spayne, & ſpoyled ye country which had not offended. Wherfore the Lords and princes of Hiberia, cōfedered together, & ſlew him after this ſort. In ye front of their hoaſt, they had placed certeine carres of woode, which went afore, & they followed in order. The Carthaginians not knowing what they ment, made a laughter at ye matter: but whē they began to buckle, ye 
               Hiberians ſet the carres a fire, which made the Oxen ſo in rage, yt they droue vpō ye 
               Africanes, & brake their battaile, by which occaſion, the Spaniards killed many of them,
                  A milcar ſlaine.
                wt their Capitaine Amilcar. But the Carthaginians finding a ſwéetenes

in Spaine, ſent an other armie thether, & made Aſdrubal ſonne in law to Barcha, General of ye ſame,
                  Ther vve ſundry of this name vvhereoft one vvas naturall brother to Annibal.
                & made Annibal, his brother in law, his liuetenant, which afterward atchieued, ſo great a fame of Chiualrye. And theſe two, won all the country vnto ye riuer Iberus, wheroff it had the name, and diuideth it in the midſt. The Saguntines,
               
                  The Zacynthiane builded Sagunt.
                a generation deſcended of the Zacynthians, inhabited in ye midſt of ye mountaines, & the Riuer, with certein other people of Grecia. Theſe being afrayde of ye 
               Carthaginians power, ſent foure Ambaſſadours to Rome to ha
                  •
               e their help. The Senate ſent their Orators to Carthage, wher it was concluded, yt the confine of ye 
               Carthaginians dominion in Spayne, ſhould be the riuer Iberus, & that ye 
               Romains ſhould not paſſe the hether ſide of the ſame, nor ye 
               Carthaginians goe beyond it, & that ye 
               Saguntines & other Greeke people ſhould remaine frée. Shortly after this agréemēt,
                  Aſdrubal ſlaine by a ſlaue. to reuenge the death of his maſter.
                
               Aſdrubal was ſlain of a ſlaue, ye reuēged ye death of his maſter, whom ye ſame Aſdrubal
               
had cruelly murdered. And the armie ther, made yoūg Annibal Barcha their General, of whom they had conceiued great hope. This Annibal had a priuie malyce againſt the Romaines, béeing therto incenſed of his father when he was a childe, and made to ſweare vpon the Altar of the burning Sacrifice, that he ſhould be perpetuall enemie to the Romaines.
               
                  The inward grudge and Old malice of Annibal toward the Romaines.
                Hée thoughte long to picke a quarrell againſt them, & perſwaded the Torboletanes, neighbours to the Saguntines, to come vnto him and complaine of iniuries yt they ſhould doe them.
            They did ſo, and he ſent their Ambaſſadours to Carthage, & with priuie letters procured his friends to fall out with ye 
               Romaines, which thing taking place, he cauſed the Torboletanes, once againe to come vnto him, & complaine of ye 
               Saguntines, in ye which they alſo obeyed him. He, vppon this pretence, ſent to the Saguntines, that they ſhold appoint xv. diſcréete men to treate of this controuerſie: whom being come to his preſence, he commaunded to ſhew

their matter: they aunſwered, they would leaue that, to the iudgement of the Senate of Rome.
            
            
               Annibal made no more words, but the ſame night paſſed the Riuer with all his Campe, and ſpoyled the countrey euen to the walls of Sagunt,
               
                  Sagunt beſieged.
                and after layd ſiege to the cittie. The Saguntines ſent for ayde to the Romains, who after their manner, ſent Ambaſſadors to Annibal, to record vnto him the chapiters of accorde. When they were come into Spayne, he ſent them word, they ſhold come no nigher him, wherfore they wēt to Carthage, wher they had but ſmall enterteinment. And ſo with the debating of the matter, and deferring to ſend help in time, the poore Saguntines were driuen to extreame deſperation. For Annibal helde them ſo ſtreight, that they had oppreſſion of famine, and all kinde of lacke. Wherefore entending to dye valyauntlye, they brought all their corne into the market place, and corrupted it, and then iſſued out in the night and aſſaulted the watche of the

Campe,
                  Valiaunt ſtomacks of the Saguntines.
                and killed many of their enemies, and in the ende they were all ſlaine. Which when ye women in the towne perceiued, ſome lepte from the top of their houſes, ſome choked themſelues, ſome killed firſt their children, and then they followed,
                  Sagunt cō
                     quered.
                and this ende had this noble and rich citie of Sagunt. Annibal entred the citie, & in it planted inhabitaunts of his own country, and named it Carthage Spartagena. The Romaines were much abaſhed at the loſſe of this citie, and ſent Ambaſſadours to Carthage, to haue Annibal delyuered vnto them, as a breaker of league and accord. The Carthaginians, made lyght of them, and dalyed at the matter: Wherefore the Romaine Ambaſſadour, tooke vp a quarter of his gowne, and folded it together, ſaying: In this lappe I haue peace and warre,
                  Open d
                        •
                     fiaunce betvveene Rome and Carthage.
                chuſe which you wil. Nay (quoth they) offer which thou lyſt, I offer warre, (quoth he,) and we take it (quoth they) And vpon the ſame, they wrote to Annibal ye he ſhold range ouer al Spaine, ſparing no countrey, & ſo he did, & either

by faire meanes or foule, brought it to his deuotion.
            Now had Annibal that he would haue, all whoſe deſire was to inuade Italy, & prepared for it accordingly, allying himſelfe with the French-men, and leauing his brother Aſdrubal in Spaine. The Romaines who thought ye warre would be hotteſt in Spayne & Afrike, ſent their power thether, not once thinking, that the Carthaginians would haue come into Italy. Tiberius Sempronius Longus tooke his voyage into Afrike, with C.lxii. ſhips, & two Legions. And Publius Cornelius Scipio came into Spayne, with .lx. ſhips, x M. footemen, and vii.C. horſemen, and his Brother Gneus Cornelius Scipio was his Liuetenaunt. Publius by the waye vnderſtoode of the Merchaunts of Marſilios, that Anniball was paſſed the Alpes: Wherefore hée fearing that the Italians ſhould bee taken napping, left the gouernment of the Armie to his brother, and with one Galley, went into Tuſcaine, to make preparation againſt Annibal.
               
After a while this Publius, retourned into Spayne as Vice-generall, & with his brother kept warre with Aſdrubal.
            
            It chaunced that Siphax Kinge of Numidia,
               
                  Called new Barbarie.
                made ſuch inuaſion vpon the Carthaginians, yt they ſent for Aſdrubal & a part of his armie to come home, in whoſe abſence, ye .ii. Scipioes by their pollycie, got wonderfully in Spayne. Wherefore when the Carthaginians wer accorded wt 
               Siphax, they ſent againe Aſdrubal into Spayne, wt moe men, and two newe Capitaines, Mago & Aſdrubal Giſgo: after whoſe retourne, the Romaines had inough to doe, and yet ſeemed to haue the better hande.
            
               
                  Publius Cornelius Scipio and his brother ſlaine with too much hardineſſe.
               When they wer in Winter campe, newes came to Publius Scipio, ye 
               Aſdrubal was comming toward him: he went with a few men to eſpye his doing, and being ſome-what too hardye, was caught in a trayne, and he and al his men ſlaine.
            His brother vnderſtanding the fray, and not knowing the chaunce, came

foorth with his light horſemen to ayde him, but ye 
               Carthaginians encountred him with ſuch a multitude, yt he was driuen into a Tower, and there, with all his men deſtroyed. Thus periſhed theſe two worthy Capitaines, men of noble courage.
            This was heauy tidings at Rome, and by and by Marcellus and Claudius were ſent into Spayne, with .ii.M. horſe, x.M. men, & a Nauy, & money conuenient. They did no great good there, inſomuch as the Carthaginians encroached ſo farre as the Mountaines.
            The Romains wer in great agony, for if they ſhold haue giuen ouer Spaine, they looked for double warre in Italy, & yet had they ſo much a doe at home, yt they could ſpare no power abroad: Notwithſtanding to auoyd the worſt, they appoynted a daye for the creation of a fit Capitaine into Spayne. There was no man woulde take the matter in hande, till Cornelius Scipio ſonne to Publius that was ſlayne in Spayne,
               
                  A patterue of a moſt valiant tovvardly & victorius Cap
                        ••
                     aine.
                being ſcarcely .xxiiii. yeare of

age ſtoode vp, & lamenting the death of his father & vnckle, whoſe reuēgemēt he ſaid, apperteined to him, ſpake with ſuch vehemencie, as a man rapte of God, inſomuch that the people were wonderfully glad of him, & choſe him Capitaine generall into Spayne. But the auntient fathers ſayd, he was too raſh, & to great an auauntour, & doubted of his procéedings. Wherfore hée came again, & ſpake as he did before, & yet (he ſayd) he wold be loth, his youth ſhould be any let to ye maieſtie of the People of Rome, therfore if any man would take the enterpriſe in hand, he would willingly giue place, but for al their words, ther was no man would take the thing vpon him, but he and ſo there were appointed x.M. men, v.C. horſe, and xxviii, long ſhippes, no more could be ſpared for feare of Annibal. When he was come into Spayne, he moſtrued his men & purged the hoaſt, and ſpake with ſuch vehemencie vnto them, that he was thought to be ſent of god, which opiniō whē he knew, he confirmed it by his polytique deuices,

and pretended to doe all things by diuine inſpiration.
                  For he vſed many times to go into the Tēple alone and to shut the dore after him and therevppon vvas thoght to haue cō
                     ferēce with Iuppiter. Numanda beſieged & vvonne by Scipio.
                When he had learned that the enemies were encamped in diuers places▪ and that Mago was at Sagunt, now called new Carthage, with x.M. men, he determined to giue the firſt onſet there, as well for ye ſmal number, as for ye cōmoditie of ye place, without the which, ye 
               Romaines ſhold haue but hard landing in Spayne. He toke his iourney before night, & in the morning was at Carthage, & immediately layd his ſiege and entrenched it, whereat the Carthaginians were aſtoniſhed. The next day he entended to aſſault it, and appointed ſcaling ladders and engines for euery part, except one, where the wall was low and not warded, being defenſed with a ſtanding water and the Sea.
            When all things were furniſhed, and the ſhips at the mouth of the port, before day he commaunded his ſouldiours in part, to giue the aſſault from the engines to annoy them aboue, and in part with other engines for ye purpoſe to batter the wall beneath.
            
               
               Mago had appointed his men likewiſe, partly to break out at the gates & to fight beneath with their ſwords, bicauſe it was too narrowe for the pikes, and partlye with ſtones, & fire, and other deuiſes to defende from the wall. Ther was an hote aſſault, ther was no courage vnſhewed, there was no deuice to ſeeke. The Romaines that ſtoode at the batterie beneath, wer ſore handeled of them that iſſued out with ſhort weapons: but they whoſe harts euen encreaſeth in daunger, ſo manfully behaued themſelues, yt they droue the enemie in. They that defended the Battlements, began alſo to ſhrincke, ſo that the Romaines began to take holde with their ſcaling ladders: But they that had fought without, mounted the wals, & repulſed the Romaines very valyauntly. Scipio did the office of a good Capitaine, incouraging his Souldiours, and continuing the fight, till ye time came yt he had appoynted, & made no man priuie.
                  Secrecie & vviſe dealing in a polytique
                At middaye the water that was on one ſide of ye wal, was ſo low, that a man might wade

ouer by the mid-legge.
                  General of great force
                Wherefore he tooke the occaſion, and cryed vnto thē: Now is the time (valyaunt ſouldiors) now is ye time, wherin God hath appointed you to winne this cittie. The Sea and the freſh water maketh you way, bring your ladders, follow me, and all is yours. He tooke a ladder, & entred the water, and his band of men followed, he was the firſt that ſet the ſcale to the wall to haue gone vp, but certeine of his Gard and other ſtayed him, whiles the Souldiours brought their ladders and ſcaled. Reliefe came vnto this ſide, with great tumulte on euery parte, and the fight continued long and ſharpe, till at length the victory was the Romaines, who firſt got certeine lyttle Touers, vpon ye which Scipio made the Flutes & the Drums to goe, to encourage the reſt of the Romaines: at the which ſight, ſome of the Citie fledde, as all had bene takē, and ſome abode by it manfully, til certeine of the Romaines lept downe and opened ye gates to Scipio, who entred with all his armie: & then euery man

fledde, ſome this way, ſome that way. Mago with a good band a while kept the Market place, & after his men wer ſlaine, & he could not holde out, he fled with a few into the Caſtle, where, for lacke of all things, he yéelded ſhortlye after. When Scipio had taken this, ſo rich & mightie a cittie in one day, & the iiij. after his cōming into Spayne, euery man thought him to do all things rather by diuine inſpiratiō, thā by mās policie, which opinion, he all his life maintained, by ſuch means as he vſed, which was many times, to enter alone into ye high Tēple of Rome in ye 
               Capitol, & to ſhut ye dores to him, as though God had ther taught him his leſſon. Wherfore in Triumphes al other Images are takē out of ye Cōmon place, but ye Image of Scipio is takē out of ye 
               Capitol. Whē he had got this citie, which ſhold be as a receipt & munitiō as wel in peace as in warre, he ſacrificed to god, praiſed his hoſt, & recōforted ye inhabitants, recording to thē the memorie of his aunceſtors. The riches of ye Citie was infinit, for ther was

aboundaunce, & great ſtore of armure, artillerie both for ye land & ſea, vittaile & corne, Iuory, golde, & ſiluer, coined & vncoyned, the pledges & priſoners of Spayne, & all other things afore taken frō ye 
               Romaines. The priſoners he ſet free, to win friēdſhip of their coūtries. He moſt bountifully rewarded him,
                  A vvorthy vvarrior to encourage his ſouldiors revvardeth ech according to their valyant ſeruice.
                ye firſt boldly ſcaled the wall, & halfe ſo much to ye ſecond, & ratably to ye reſt. Al yt precious things he ſent to Rome, wher ſacrifice was made iij. dayes together. Now began ye 
               Carthaginiās & al Spayne to trēble at ye feate of this Scipio, as a thing paſſing man his reaſō. Immediately vpon ye fame of this victory, a coūtrey in Spayne called Betica toke ye 
               Romains part,
                  Vvhich is novv the countrey of Granada.
                & Mago one of the contrary Capitaines inuaded that Region. Scipio hearing thereoff, made ſpéede thether-wards, and with little labour, enforced him to forſake the ground.
            
               Aſdrubal, Mago & Maſsimiſſa, vnited their forces together, & Scipio tooke his place a mile off, or little more. They had in their campe aboue .lxx.M. mē, &

v.M. horſmen, with .xxxvi. Elephants. Scipio had not the thirde part, & therfore durſt not come to fight, but ſpent the time in ſkirmiſhing. And when he ſaw his vittailes fayled him, and thought it reproch to depart, he made ſacrifice, and aſſembled the ſouldiors in conuenient place to be heard, and with countenaunce chaunged, lyke a man inſpired of God, he told them that his accuſtomed Angell had appeared vnto him, and giuen him courage to fight, foraſmuch, as victory did rather conſiſt in the ayde of God, then in the number of men. And that they might beléeue him the better, he cauſed the Maiſters of the Ceremonies and ſacrifices, to report what they ſaw in the ſame. And whiles he was about this matter, behold a number of birds, came flying ouer him, which béeing wont to be taken for a luckie token, he did not let it paſſe, but tourned his body and ſight toward their flight, and as a man in furie, cryed to the armie to behold this token of victory. At the ſight whereoff, euerye man tourned

himſelfe as he did, and required that they might go fight:
                  A wiſe capitaine letteth no occaſion ſlip, that may anie reayes further his affaires.
                When he perceiued his deuiſe to take place, he ſaid he would follow the ſignes of heauen, and ordered his men for the battaile. And when the ſouldiours had taken repaſt, he committed the horſemen to Sillanus, and the footemen to Laelius, and Martius.
            
            When the Capitaines of the enimies ſawe this ſodaine aſſault, they armed themſelues with great confuſion, hauing yet taken no repaſt. The onſet was giuen on both partes at once, as well by the horſemē as footemen. The Numidians that were there with Maſsimſſa vſed to come fearſely vpon their enimies, & ſpende their Darts, and then retyre, & when they had a while fled, they would returne as fearſly againe. Scipio had deuiſed that the Romaines ſhould follow thē ſo neare with ſpeare in reſt, that their launching tooles ſhold ſtand them in little ſtéede. And ſo they had ye worſt in that fight, but the footemē of the Romaines were ſo ouerlayd with

the multitude of the others, that all the day they had the worſt, although Scipio neuer ceaſed to encourage & refreſh them, til at the laſt he left his horſe & taking a tergate from a ſouldiour, ſtept into ye middeſt of them & cryed, now Romaines helpe your capitaine, help your Scipio in this daū
               ger, at the which, partly for ſhame, & partly for feare of their capitain they thruſt vpon the enimies wc ſuch vyolence, yt they coulde not endure their force for yt they were with long fighting & lack of ſuſtenance very faint, being now neigh night, & hauing catē nothing all ye day. This was ye battayl at Cerbona.
               
                  Battaile of Cerbona.
                Wher ye victory was a great while doubtful, of ye 
               Romanes viii.C. and of the Carthaginians x.M. fiue C. were ſlaine. After this loſſe, the Carthaginians retyred more & more, til Scipio droue thē to a place, wher they were conueniently ſtrong, & had reliefe of all things: Wherefore Scipio left Sillanus to beſeage them, & he himſelf went further into Spaine. Sillanus did ſo wel wt his enimies, that they recoiled ſtil, till they came to the

ſtreict, & paſſed ouer to Gades. Annibal had ſēt for his brother Aſdrubal, yt was prouiding mē at North Spaine, to come to him into Italy: And bicauſe he would deceiue Scipio, he tooke his way Northerly by ye moūtaines Hyrenaei. In this meane time Liuius was come frō 
               Rome, to ſuccéed Scipio & told him yt the Senate minded to ſēd him into Affrica againſt Carthage, which enterprice he had long deſired, & was glad of it. He ſent Laelio into Barbaria to Siphax wt many giftes, requeſting him of aliance, if hée came into Affrick, for ye former loue yt had bene wt him & his aunceſters, Siphax promiſed ſo to be, receiuing ye gifts, & ſent likwiſe to Scipio. When the Carthaginians vnderſtoode this, they alſo made out Aſdrubal to Siphax to require him of confederacie:
                  The vēturous enterpriſe of Scipio.
                whiche whē 
               Scipio heard, he thought to preuent him, & wc two Gallies, ſailed to Barbary: whē he was cōming ye galies of Carthage, yt were before him lay in wait for him, but by yt benifite of the wynd he eſcaped, & got ye port. Siphax gaue gētle entertainmēt to thē both,

and priuely cōcluded leage with Scipio, and ſent him away: The Carthaginians had laide for him againe, but yet by good fortune he againe eſcaped. A number of the inhabitants beyond the ryuer,
                  Novv called Biſkay.
                called Celtiberians, were in Campe with Hanno, whom Martius droue to ſuch a ſtrait, that they were forced to ſend him meſſēgers to treat of accord: he bad them firſt deliuer their Captaine, and the fugitiues & then expounde their meſſage: they tooke their captaine & the fugitiues, & brought thē to Martius: he required alſo the priſoners, & they brought thē: then he commaunded them to delyuer him their mony, and come downe to the plaine, for it was not méete that they whiche ſewed for pardon, ſhoulde kéepe a place of ſtrength.
            When they were come downe, hée ſaide vnto them, Although yee haue deſerued to die, hauing forſaken your countrey that obeyeth vs, and ſerued our enimies, yet I am content to let you all goe ſafe, if you wil leaue your armour. At the whiche

word, they were ſo agreeued, that they cryed out and ſaid, they would rather die then ſo to doe, wherevpon began a cruell fight, in the which the halfe of the Celtiberians were manfullye ſlaine. Sillanus went to receiue a citie called Caſtace, but whē he came there he was repulſed, wherof he ſent word to Scipio, who made readie to come vnto it, and by the way aſſaulted the Citie of Illiturgo: This citie when the Scipiones were aliue, was friend to the Romaines, but after their death plaied a traiterous part, and delyuered the Romaines, to the Carthaginians. Scipio remembred this iniurie,
                  Illiturgo vtterly razed, and all the inhabytauntes ſlaine.
                & in foure houres deſtroyed it, and although he were wounded in the neck, yet he gaue not ouer til he had ye victory: wherfore the ſouldiers without any cōmandement, deſpiſing al ſpoile, killed men, women, & childrē, & laid ye city to the ground. Being come to Caſtace he Marſhalled his camp in iii. ſeueral places, & refrained from fight, to ſée what they would do. The citizēs renouncing ye gariſō of the Carthaginians
               
deliuered the citie to the Romaines, where Scipio left a man of their owne, to gouerne it. Ther was a citie called Aſtapa, which had continued in faith with ye 
               Carthaginians, & was beſeiged of Martius. They of the citie conſidering, that if they were taken▪ they ſhoulde be ſold as ſlaues, cauſed al their ritches & ſubſtance, to be brought into the market place, & layde a ſtacke of woode about it, & ſet their wiues & children vpon it.
                  Deſperate & inuincible courage of the Aſtapians.
                Then did they chooſe fifty of their beſt men, and bound them by othe, that if their citie were taken, they ſhould firſt kill their wiues & children, & than themſelues, hauing firſt ſet al on fire: when they had called ye Gods into witneſſe of their purpoſe, they came out & aſſalted Martius yt looked for nothing leſſe, & at the firſt brunt put ye light horſemen to flight: the battaile of footemē made reſiſtance & fought it out. The Aſtapians ſhewed great proweſſe, & though they were inferiour in nūber, yet were they nothing inferiour in valour: And being deuoide of hope,

fought without ſtop, till they were al killed. Whē ye fiftie of the towne perceiued yt, they diſpatched the women & the children, & ſet the woode a fire, and killed themſelues. Martius, had their noble hearts in admiration, and refrained from ruine of their houſes.
            It chaunced that Scipio fell ſicke,
                  Mutinie of Souldiours againſt their capitaine.
                and left the charge of all the campe to Martius, wherefore ſuch ſoldiours as had ſpent their gaines vpon pleaſure, and thought they were not ſufficiently rewarded, and that Scipio did attribute their trauailes to his glory, were not content but rebelled againſt Martius. They cāped by thē
               ſelues, they made their own captains and gouernours, they prouided all things, & ſware to hold together. Many of ye coūtry tooke their part, & Mago ſent money to them, to allure thē to their ſids. They alwayes tooke the mony, abode ſtil together.
                  Diſcipline and pollicy of a noble capitaine.
                
               Scipio wrot his letters to them that were occaſiō of this mutinie, excuſing the matter & ſaying, yt his ſicknes had béen cauſe, why he had not condignly rewarded

them according to their deſerts, and yt he would do it immediatly vpon his recouerye. Some of them with faire words he cauſed to be entreated, and generally wrote to them all, to leaue their opinion, and come to him to receiue their reliefe: ſome had ye letters in ſuſpect, and ſome thought good to giue credite, and ſo by accorde they went toward Carthage. When Scipio vnderſtoode their comming, he commaunded the chiefe Gentlemen to accompany them, that were the Capitaines of the ryot, and vnder pretence of entertainment, to haue them into their tentes, and make them ſure. He alſo gaue order to the Liefetenants and Marſhals of the army, that the next morning they ſhould be redie with their truſtie men, and if any made any buſineſſe while hée ſpake, forthwith to diſpatch them. He betimes in the morning, called them to ye aſſembly, & had al things accordingly. The ſoldiers wer ſcarſly vp, & made them ready with haſt, being aſhamed, that their ſicke Capitaine

ſhould be vp before them, and came vnarmed and vnready. He lamented at their fact, and ſaide: I will with your helpe, chaſtiſe the cauſers of your offence. Then he cauſed way to be made, that the gentlemen might bring in the Capitains, who cryed to the Souldiours for helpe, and by and by ye Marſhals diſpatched thē. When the multitude ſaw this, and how they wer naked and encloſed with harneſſed men, they were heauy & ſad. He cauſed all the remnaunt of the chief & heades, to be beaten at the pale,
                  Rebellious ſouldiers executed.
                and after beheadded, and to the reſidue hée proclaimed a frée & generall pardon. And thus he redreſſed his Armie.
            There was a Prince of Spayne, that had to name Indibilis, & was in league with the Romaines.
               
                  King Indibilis rebelled and being ouerthrovvn in battaile entred into new league and vvas pardoned.
                
               Scipio went againſt him, and he refuſed not to fight, but hauing loſt twentie thouſand of his men, he was compelled to aſke peace, which was graunted him, vpon paiment of certeine ſummes of money. Maſsimiſſa came to Scipio to confeder with him, moued by a diſpleaſure

wrought againſt him at Carthage.
               
                  Maſsiniſſa becōmeth a moſt faithfull confederate with Scipio and the Romaines.
                He was brought vp in the Citie, and eſpouſed to Sophonisba, daughter vnto Aſdrubal, yt was Generall of the Armie. King Siphax alſo was in loue with the ſame Gentlewoman, whoſe beautie was renoumed ouer all Africa, & bicauſe he ſaw an other man preferred, he tooke diſdain, & allied himſelfe wt yt 
               Romains. The Carthaginians cōſidering what a loſſe they ſhold haue of ſuch a prince, ſent him word, yt if he would returne againe to them, they would giue him Sophonisba to his wife. He tooke ye cō
               dition,
                  Siphax maryed to Sophonisba.
                & forſooke ye 
               Romains, they maried hir to him, in ye abſence of hir father & hir former huſband, not making thē priuy to it. When Aſdrubal heard of it, he thought to beare wt it, bicauſe it ſtoode with ye benefit of his coūtry▪ & wold not tell Maſsiniſſa of it, who was wt him in campe, but yet he had priuie intellygence of it, & ſecretly went to ye 
               Romaines, wt whom euer after moſt faithfully he continued. Then Mago that was Admirall,

perceiuing that Fortune beganne to lowre & frown vppon them, left the ſtreightes of Gades, and went into Fraunce and Liguria, and ſo the Romaines tooke it, and after that time ſent yearely Officers to gouerne the coūtry. Scipio reduced the Zanthianes into the forme of a Citie, & of yt name of Italy, called it Italica,
               
                  The country of Traiane and Adriane Emperours.
                which was the countrey of Traiane and Adriane that after wer Emperours of Rome. He retourned to Rome, with a great Nauy & a rich pray, & ther triumphed to yt admiration of all men. Whē 
               Scipio was departed to Rome, Indibilis rebelled again, & the preſidents of the countrey to withſtand him, made an armie of ſuch gariſōs as wer ther left, & of ſuch other help as tooke part with thē, & had ye day againſt him, where he was ſlaine, ye reſt of the countrey was puniſhed according to their deſerts.
                  Indibilis ſlaine.
                This was ye end of ye firſt expeditiō ye 
               Romaines made into Spaine. After a ſeſon, whē they had to do wt 
               Philip of Macedon, more trouble begā in Spain, & Sēpronius Tuditanus, M. Claudius,
               
and Minutius, were ſucceſſiuely ſent thether,
                  Cato a moſt ſtout Capitaine & vehement Orator vvan more cities in Spaine than hee abode daies
                and did no great good. Wherefore at length Cato went in perſon, a young man in déed, but a ſeuere and painefull Capitaine, and an eloquent Oratour, inſomuch that he was worthely compared to Demoſthenes. When he was come into Spaine, hée had an armie of xl.M. men, whom he cōtinually trained in feats of armes, and when he was appointed to fight, he ſent away his Nauie to Marſyles, declaring to his ſouldiours that only victorye muſt be their refuge, which ſtandeth not in huige multitudes, but in valyaunt courages. And ſo when he had vſed ſuch wordes vnto them, as men vſe rather in reproofes, than in exhortations, he began the fight, & in euery place encouraged his men valyantly. The field continued equal, till the euening: he with thrée bands of men went vp to an hill, to beholde in euery place how the battaile went, and ſaw that in the midde battaile his men had the worſt: wherefore hée ranne thether with ſuch a fury with

his freſh men, that he himſelfe was the forwardeſt in the conflict, crying & fighting ſo fiercely, that the enimies were put to flight, whom he chaſed al the night, and tooke their Campe: and all the whole armie attributed ye enterpriſe and thankes onely to him as the chiefe and firſt author of the victory: he deuided the ſpoyle among his men, and required pledges of the citties. He ſent his letters to euery cittie, commaunding the meſſengers ſo to appoynt their iourneyes, that although they wer ſent ſeueral wayes, ſome to one cittie & ſome to an other, yet they might arriue, & debate their letters all in one daye.
            The letters commaunded euerye Magiſtrate of the ſayd Citties,
                  A notable pollycie of Cato.
                that immediately vppon the ſight thereoff they ſhould beat downe the walls of their Cities, and they yt did not obey, ſhould looke for all extremitie. They hauing no time to conſult with their neighbours, and ſuppoſing it had ben but a ſeuerall cōmaundement, afraid of a further inconuenience, wer compelled

to obey, and ſo in one day, al the cities about the riuer Iberus, wer defaced by the policie of the Capitaine, & continued quiet a long time after.
            In proceſſe of time, for lack of competent ground to occupy, there was a new tumult among the people, for the appeaſment whereoff, Fuluius Flaccus was ſent, who droue ye people to their holdes: but one great rout kept to-gether at Complega, which was wel fortified & newly buylded:
                  Flouting & mockerie requited.
                They greatly moleſted the Romains, & ſent a meſſage in mockerie to Flaccus, that he ſhould leaue a Iacke, an Horſe, and a Sword, for ſo many as he had killed, and flye out of Spayne, before he had any more hurt: he ſent them worde, he would ſhortly bring amongs them, many moe Iackes than they ſhoulde vouchſafe well to thinke well off, and incontinent layd ſiege to their Citie. They nothing aunſwerable to their late brauerie, and luſtineſſe, ran their way, & he ſpoyled all the country. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus ſuccéeded Flaccus,
               
                  Biskay.
                when the Celtiberians had beſieged

the Citie of Carabia, friend to the Romaines, ye citie was at poynt to be rendred, & bicauſe the ſiege was ſo ſtreight, Gracchus could not ſend them word of his comming, wherfore he deuiſed with a Capitaine of his called Cominius, which could ſpeake yt countrey language very well,
                  Great care and pollicy vſed by Gracchus for the ſuccouring of his beſieged friends.
                & clad him with a Spaniſh Iack, who got among them that went a forraging & ſo from the Campe fled into the Citie, & told the ſelye beſieged, that the Romaines were at-hande: wherefore they endured the ſiege, and in thrée daies by the comming of Gracchus were delyuered of the ſame. Out of the Citie of Complega, ther iſſued xx.M. with branches of Olyue in their handes, in token of ſupplycation, and being come nigh the Romaines, they ſet fiercely vpon thē,
                  They that meane miſchiefe many times fall into miſchiefes themſelues.
                & put them to great trouble. Gracchus of purpoſe forſooke his campe, & fayned to fly away, & whiles they wer about the ſpoyle, he returned vpon thē, & ſlew ſo many of them, yt he got ye town, wherin after he had ſtaid a certein while, he gaue the lands of the country to ſuch

as had néede of ground: whō vpō certeine conditions and bondes, he confedered with the people of Rome, which capitulatiō did good ſeruice, in all the warres that followed, and by this meane, the name of Gracchus was notable in Spayne, and alſo in Rome, where he had Tryumph.
            Certeine yeares after, there aroſe a cruell warre in Spayne by this occaſion.
            A Cittie of Celtiberia, called Segeda,
               
                  Sharp vvar renued.
                being compriſed in the articles of Gracchus, allured certeine towns to them, and reedified their wals, whoſe example induced the Tithians another nation of Celtiberia, to doe the lyke. The Senate forbad them the buylding of the Walls, and required the tribute, and their ſeruice, according to the compoſition of Gracchus, They aunſwered that they were forbidden ye building of any new cities, but not the repairing of their olde, and that the tribute which they wer bound to paye, was after forgiuen of the Senate, and ſo it was in deede:

but all ſuch priuiledges, were vnderſtand for ye time, that they continued faithful to the people of Rome: wherfore Quintius Fuluius Nobilior, was choſen capitaine againſt them, with an armie of xxx.M.
            Whan the Segedanes had knowledge of his comming, bicauſe their wals were not finiſhed, they fled to ye 
               Araſthianes deſiring them to be receiued with their wiues and children, and they were content: And choſe one Carus a Segedane, their generall capitaine, a man expert in feats of war. He iii. dayes after he was capitaine, laid an ambuſhment of xx.M. in a place for the purpoſe, and aſſalted the Romaines as they paſſed: The fight continued doubtfull, but at length Carus had the victory,
                  Great ſlaughter of the Romaines.
                and killed vi. thouſande of the verye Romaines borne, which was a great loſſe: but in following the chaſe raſhly, the horſemen of the Romaines, that warded the cariage, ſet vpon him, and ſlew him, fighting moſt valyauntly, the murther there was great, and greater

had bene, if the darkeneſſe of the night had not ſtayed the ſame. This was done the next day after the feaſt of Vulcan in Rome, at which time the Romaines would neuer after take any battaile in hand.
            The Araſtianes aſſembled in Numantia, a ſtrong citie, and choſe Arathane, & Lencone, for their capitaines. Nobilior went thither with-in thrée dayes, and camped thrée myle off. Maſsiniſſa ſent him iii.C. horſes of Numidia, and x. Elephants, with the which he made order for to fight, and placed the Elephants behinde, with a deuiſe, that way ſhoulde bée made for them: And when the onſet was giuen, away was opened for the Elephants, which ſo affraid the enimies and their horſe, that they fledd. The Romaine capitaine followed to the harde walles,
                  Diſcommodity of Elephants in vvarres.
                and did verye well, till one of the Elephants had a blow on the heade, with a ſtone, that was caſt from the wall, with the which he became ſo frowarde and ſo raging, that he turned vpon his frindes

and beate downe all that was in his way, and the other affraide with his roaring, did the like, thruſting▪ & throwing the Romaines to ye grounde. And this is the diſcommoditie of Elephantes, which when they beginne to rage, there is no rule with them, and therefore be they called common enimies. The Romaines by this occaſion fledde with ſuch diſorder, that the Numantines iſſued out and ſlewe iiii.M. of them, and tooke thrée Elephants, and many enſinges, when Nobilior had recouered himſelfe, hée went to beate the Citie of Apenio, which was a great reliefe to the enimies, but he did nothing there, but retourned by night with loſſe to his campe.
                  Lovvring lucke of Nobilior & his companie.
                He ſent Bleſius capitaine of the horſemen, ſo confeder with a coū
               trie for ſuccour of horſe-men: who in his returne fell in an Ambuſhment, where his friendes forſooke him, and he very manfully fighting was ſlaine, and all moſt all the Romaines. And vppon theſe daylye loſſes, the Citie of Ocile, where the

               Romaine munition & treaſure, was rendered to the Celtiberians, wherefore Nobiliar was driuē to ſuch ſhift, as he lay all that winter in the fielde, and ſuſtained ſuch diſeaſe with hunger and colde, that many periſhed pitifully.
            The yeare following Claudius Marcellus came in his place, bringing with him viii.M. men, & v.C. horſe, & where his enimies had layd ambuſhment for him, he auoyded it, & with all his hoaſt, layd ſeage to Ocile, and at the firſt aſſalt tooke it. And vppon the receipt of certaine pledges & xxx. Talentes of golde, he pardoned the Citie.
            The Nertobriganes ſent vnto Marcellus to knowe his pleaſure what they might doe to obtaine peace, hée bad them ſend him an hundred horſe and they ſhould haue it: they were content, & appointed ye number which followed the taile of the armie, & did euermore ſome hurt to the caryage, & when they were come in Marcellus ſight, they offred their ſeruice, and excuſed

ye offence to be done by thē that knewe not the accorde, but Marcellus deteined ſtil with him the men as priſoners, and ſolde their horſes, and made a rode into their country, & laid ſeage to ye citie, which whē they ſaw, they ſent an haralde with a Wolfes ſkinne in ſtéede of a rod, to demaund pardon. Marcellus ſaid,
                  Double deling of Marcellus.
                if the Arbaceanes, Bellanes, & Tithianes woulde in treate for them, they ſhold haue their requeſt. They were content ſo to do, & deſired Marcellus that they might haue a moderate puniſhment, and be conteined in the conditions of Gracchus: But ſome there were, ye would not agrée to it, bicauſe ther had bene variunce betweene them, wherefore Marcellus ſent them Ambaſſadours of both parties to Rome, to diſpute their cauſe before the Senate. Hée wrot priuate letters, exhorting to accord. Whē they were come to Rome, ye Ambaſſadors of their friends were lodged within the citie, & they which were of their enimies, without. The Senate was not diſpoſed to peace, &

gaue them none other aunſwere, but that Marcellus ſhoulde declare vnto them the will of the Senate, & apointed a new army, of the which Lucius Lucullus was capitaine. And thē was the firſt time that the ſouldiours wer taken vp by hap, and not by election, as was wont to be, wherefore many citizens were offended. The Leifetenant of the armie was Lucius Cornelius Scipio, whiche afterwarde tooke Carthage, and Numantia. Marcellus proteſted war againſt the Celtiberians, and yet kept ſtill with him the Ambaſſadour that had ben at Rome, and all was to make an ende of the warre before the comming of Lucullus. Certeine people of the Arbaceanes tooke Nertobridge, & made their chiefe reſort to Numantia, whither he marched, & camped within v. mile of the citie.
                  VVilfulnes & couetouſnes of Lucullus.
                The capitain of the Numā
                  tines called Lintenone, deſired to ſpeake with Marcellus, which being to him graunted, they cōcluded that ye 
               Bellanes, Titthianes, and Arbaceanes ſhould remaine & be leſt frée, wherevpon

mony & pledges were receiued, & ſo the war of this people, was ended, before the comming of Lucullus.
            
            Now began ye time of ye 
               Romaines declination from their auncient puritie and ſtate: for notwithſtanding ye peace was made by the Romaine cō
               ſull, yet Lucullus for deſire of glorye, & couetous of mony, inuaded the Vacceanes, who had neuer offended the Romaines. He paſſed the ryuer Tagus,
               
                  Novv called Taio.
                without any commiſſon from the Senate, and camped at Cancea: they of the towne came forth to know the cauſe why he lay there, he aunſwered to reueng the Carpentanes, whō they had iniuried, & with this aunſwere they retourned. And when the Romaines went a foraging, they lay in a waite, & ſet vpon them, & ſlew many of them, & droue ye reſt to their camp, wherefore he came out againſt them in order,
                  Stout courages with out skill & order, ſoon ouerthro
                        •…
                     
                     en.
                and they a long time had the better hande, but when they had waſted their ſhotte, and not experte in firme battaile, they tourned their backs, & at the ſtreightneſſe

of the gate, thruſting one another, very many were ſlaine.
            The next day the olde men of the towne came out to know what they might doe to bée friendes with the Romaines: Lucullus bad them to bring vnto him pledges, and an C. talents of gold, and to ſerue him in the warres. They graunted all: than he required his garriſon to be receiued, & they were likewiſe content: Then put he in two M. picked men,
                  VVicked & shameful dealing of Lucillus.
                & commaunded them to be ſure of the gats, & the wals: which being done▪ he entred with all his hoaſt, & gaue commaundement to kill man and childe, without reſpect: ſo were they cruelly murdered & ſlaine, calling the Godds to witnes of their iniurie receiued at the Romaines hands: Lucullus ſacked the Citie, and for reward wan to the Romaines a perpetuall ſlaunder.
            The other people drewe together into ſtrong places, & burned all ſuch things as they could not carrie, bicauſe they woulde leaue nothing for Lucullus: he made a long voyage in

deſert places, and at length came to a Citie called Endecacia, wher xx.M. were aſſembled. Than he like a fond man moued them to accord:
                  Crueltie getteth hatred at all hands.
                they obiected vnto him the calamitie of the Cauſeanes, demaunding if he woulde bring them to lyke amitie. Wherfore he being in a rage, (as al men be, that haue done euill, who rather ought to repent) ſpoyled all the countrey, & then layde ſiege to the Citie: They of the towne came out, and ſkirmiſhed, and ſo kept him occupyed. There was one among them of a goodly ſtature, and faire in armes, that came many times forth, and challenged any Romaine to fight hand to hande, and bicauſe none tooke the defence, he flouted and ſcorued the Romaines and went his way.
                  Combat betvveene Scipio and an other big chalenger of huge ſtature.
                Thus he vſed long time, till Scipio, a man of ſmal ſtature, could no longer ſtay himſelfe, but would néedes fight with him, and by good fortune killed him, as great as he was.
            There was a company of the Citie that wer gone for a conuay of vittayle, before Lucullus came, & bicauſe

they could not enter the Citie, they came by night, & gaue alarme to the Campe, and they of the Citie did the lyke, ſo ye they wer ſore troubled in the hoſt, and beſides this, they wer not accuſtomed with the meates of ye countrey, hauing neither ſalt, oyle, nor vineger, they eate all things freſh, wherby they were ſicke of the fluxe, & many of them died. When the ramperes were finiſhed,
                  Lucullus vntruth & breache of promiſe made him and all his to fare the vvorſe.
                they battered the wall, and entered the citie, but by very fine force, they wer repelled, and in the retire, fell into a fenne, and the more part periſhed. They of the Citie repayred the wall by night. In continuaunce of time, their want wared ſo great, that they were not able to hold out, and yet would not yéelde for the vntruth of Lucullus. Wherefore Scipio tooke the matter in hand, and promiſed, that in the accorde, no fraude ſhould be vſed:
                  Iuſt deling & vertue is beloued euen of the enimies.
                They were content to truſt him, bicauſe of ye great fame and renowme that was generallye reported of him. They were content to giue to the Romaines x.M. Iackes,

fiftie pledges, and a number of Cattaile. Lucullus that ſought for nothing but mony, required golde and ſiluer, thinking to finde plentie there, but he was deceiued, for thoſe people did not care ſo greatly for it, and had none to giue him.
            After this league, he went to the citie of Pallantia, which was of more ſtrength, & better defenced with men, and all other things neceſſary, he had counſaile not to meddle with it, but yet he had hope to be enriched by it, his expectation fayled, for the Horſemen of the Pallantines kept him alwayes ſo from vitaile, that he fell in lacke, and was forced to depart, and they followed him to the riuer Orio, which he paſſed, and tooke places, for his Winter herborow
            There was an other Countrey of Spayne, called Luſitania,
               
                  Portugall.
                which liued after their owne lawes, and vnder a Capitaine of Africa, they did much hurte to the Romaines, they ouerthrewe Caliphurnius 
               
                  •…
               iſo, and

               Manlius, and killed vi.M. Romaines, and beſieged a nation that obeyed the ſame, called Blaſtophenitianes, which had that name, bicauſe Hannibal had mingled certeine Africans with them. Their Capitaine had a blowe on the head with a ſtone, of the which he dyed, and in his place they made one Ceſſacrone. He encoūtred with Mummius that was come from Rome with a new armie, and was put to flight. Mummius chaſed him without order, which he perceiuing ſtayd his men,
                  Romaines through their ovvn folly ouerthrovvne.
                & retourned vpon the Romaines diſparſed, and killed x.M. of them, recouering his owne Campe that was loſt, and gayning the Romaines, with all their armes and enſignes, which hée ſhewed abroad in Spayne, for a brag and glory of his victorye. Mummius with fiue. M. that were left, kept himſelfe in a ſure place, being afrayde to come out into the playne, and watching the time, when the enimie ſent away their ſpoyle, he ſodainly ſet vpon them, and flew many of them, recouering againe all his loſſe.
            
               An other ſort of the Luſitanes beyond the Riuer Tagus, moleſted the Romaines, and beſieged the Citie of Ocile. Mummius followed them, & at diuers times killed xv.M. of them, and tooke their pray from them, and deuided it to the Romaines, and that which could not be caried, he ſacrificed to the Gods after the faſhion of war. And for theſe feates, Mummius had Tryumph when he came to Rome.
            
            After him ſuccéeded Marcus Attilius, which deſtroyed a great Citie called Oſtrace, and brought all the countrey to accorde, but he was no ſooner gone to winter campe, but they rebelled againe, and anoyed the Romaines.
            
            
               Seruius Galba that ſuccéeded Attilius, intending ſodeinly to ſurprey and take them vnawares, marched in a night and a day, about l. mile,
                  The chāce of vvarre diuers.
                and immediately vpon his comming embattayled his wearie Souldiours, & with the ſodeine aſſault, put the enimies to flight, but in the chaſe vſing little diſcretion, and not conſidering the wearineſſe and faintnes of his ſouldiors,

which were compelled to reſt them many times by the way, the other gathered together, and ſet vppon them being ſcattered and weake, and ſlew vij.M. Galba with the remnaunt of the horſe-men fled to Carmena, where he aſſembled all them that were fled, and when he had renued his armie to the number of xx.M. hee went to Winter in Cuueſtagi.
            
            
               Lucullus who hadde made warre vpon the Vacceanes, without commiſſion, would not goe home for feare of iudgement, but remayned with the Capitaines of the armie, & comming with his men into Luſitania, did much hurt in one part of the countre, & Galba ſacked the other. Many of the people ſent vnto him to renew the accord made with Attilius & he fained to bée content ſaying: that he knewe well, pouertie & lacke of liuing made them to offend, & therfore he would giue thē a plentiful ground to inhabile, & they being glad of his promiſe, came to him with al their goods, whom he deuided into thrée parts, & appointed a Plaine

for them to ſtaye, till he had aſſigned their place, wher they ſhoulde buylde their citie. Then he came to ye former, willing them to leaue their harneſſe, bicauſe they wer friends, & cauſed thē to be entrenched, & they wer content: which wen he hadde brought to paſſe through-out, he ſent his ſouldiours among them, & killed them euery one, they calling & crying vpon ye Gods, as witneſſes of periurie & crueltie. So he puniſhed falſhood with falſhood, as a Barbarian, & not as a man worthy the name of Rome. Uery few eſcaped from this murder, of ye which Viriatus was one, which after was a Capitain, & did many notable feats, as ſhall be ſhewed. Galba gaue a fewe trifling things to the Romaines, and kept the reſt to himſelf, for he was more couetous than Lucullus,
               
                  Neither barrel better Hering.
                & more rich thā any Romain, but of ſuch nature as wel in peace as warre, yt for his profit, he paſſed neither for periury nor lyes, & although euery man hated him, and though he was many times accuſed, yet for his riches he alwaies eſcaped.

For in his dayes, the Romaines began to ſette more by money than by truth.
            An other company of the Luſitans, made an head, and ranged the countreyes of the Romaines. M. Ventidius, was ſent from Rome with an armie, who droue them from the field, and made them take a Caſtle: where being in deſperation of al things, they were forced to ſend to Ventidius, to haue peace and grounde to inhabite, which he promiſed them. But one Viriatus who (as before is ſayde, had eſcaped the crueltie of Galba, recorded vnto them, the vnfaithfulneſſe of the Romaines, and howe ofte they hadde bene oppreſſed, vnder pretence of an oth and attonement, which the Romaines no longer regarded than they luſted,
                  Viriatus a ſtout vvarriour and vvorthy Capitaine
                and repeated to them the example of Galba and Lucullus, and promiſed them to conuey them ſafe, if they would be ruled by him. They were mooued with his wordes, and made him their Capitaine.
            He placed in the front of the armie

his Horſe-men, as though hée would fight, and gaue warning, that as ſoone, as he tooke his Horſe, they that were a foote, ſhoulde flye by diuers wayes, as well as they coulde, to the citie of Tribola, and ther abide him. He kept with him, them that were moſt méete for Horſemen, and when he mounted on horſeback, they fledde their way with all haſt. Ventidius doubted to followe them in ſo many parts, and abode to ſée, what Viriatus would do that ſtoode ſtill. He ſkirmiſhed with the Romaines all the daye, and the next, too and fro, and when he thought the foote-men to be paſt daunger, he went his waye by night, with ſuch ſpéede, and by ſuch wayes, as the Romaines could not tel how to followe. This feate got him great fame in all the country, & euery man ranne to him, wher-by he kept warre a great while with ye 
               Romains, and did them much hurt. Ventidius followed til he came to Tribola, Viriatus layd an ambuſhment for him in a place ful of woode, & when he eſpied

his aduauntage, he with the company that he had, fayned to flye, till Ventidius was paſt the trayne, than returned hée, and the buſhment diſcouered, and ſo beſet the Romaines, that they were either ſlaine or taken priſoners, and Ventidius himſelfe was one,
                  Ventidius ſlaine, and his army diſcomfited
                but bicauſe he was not knowen, being an olde fat man, he was cut in péeces, & of xx.M. Romaines, ſcarcely x.M. eſcaped to a Citie of the Coaſt, called Carpteſſo, which (I thinke) was ſomtime called Tarteſſo, where the olde King Arganthonius lyued. The Treſurer of the Campe, tooke the charge vpon him a freſh, and gathered v.M. of of the countrey about, which he ſent to kéepe Viriatus backe, and he ſo laid for them, that one eſcaped not to bring newes. The Treaſurer ſtood cloſe in the towne and durſt do nothing til he heard from Rome,
               
                  Profperous ſucceſſe of Viriatus.
                
               Viriatus inuaded the rich countrey of Carpentania, and without all feare, ſpoyled at his pleaſure.
            
               Caius Plantius came from Rome, with x.M. mē, & a M.iii.C. horſe. Thā
               
               Viriatus pretended to fly, after whom he ſent iiii.M. men, which were almoſt all deſtroyed and ſlaine. He paſſed the riuer Tagus, and camped in an hill ful of Oliues, although it wer called Venus Mount. There Plantius came vpon him, and made haſt to recouer his diſhonour, and after a ſore fight he was diſcomfited, and compelled ſhamefully to flye, with great loſſe of his men: & the reſt of the Sommer he kept within townes, and durſt not come foorth. Viriatus went abroade the countryes, requiring paiment for the ſauing of their Corne.
            When theſe newes were known at Rome, they ſent Q. Fabius Maximus Emilianus, ſonne of that Emilius, that ouercame Perſeus king of Macedonie. They gaue him authoritie to take what men he would, he to giue reſpite to the olde ſouldiours, tooke vp young men of the firſt beard, hauing no practiſe in warre, and came to Orſone a Citie of Spain, wt xv.M. men, & ii..M. horſe, but he durſt not enterpriſe to take any battaile in hand, till

he had trayned his men in feates of armes, and bene at Gades to Sacrifice to Hercules. Viriatus met with a company of his men that went a forraging, & killed the moſt part, whom being againe ſet in arraye and order by their Leader, the ſame Viriatus diſcomfited the ſecond time, and tooke a great praye from them. When Maximus was come, he durſte not fight in open field, but kept his men in exerciſes, and gaue them leaue to ſkirmiſh, to proue their hearts, and to eſpie the aduauntage of his enimies doings. When he went for vittayle, he warded the Dimilances with men of armes, that ſcoured the countrey, as he had ſéene his father Paulus doe in Macedonia. After the Winter hée came forth to battaile, and ouercame Viriatus, and put him to flight, and of two Cities that he kept, he tooke the one, & burned the other, & droue him to an holde called Vecor, & then went to herborow at Corduba.
            
            Now was Viriatus nothing ſo brag as he was wont to be, but ſought

helpe, & induced the Arbaceanes, Titthianes, and Bellanes, al warlyke people, that had kept warre of themſelues, to take his part, which was an occaſion of great a doe. Viriatus was in an other part of Spaine, and fought with Quintus Pompeius, that was an other Capitaine of the Romaines, and had the loſſe, and from thence fled to Aphrodiſio, Venus Hill, and from thence came ſodeinly vppon the Romaines, and put them to flight, and tooke ſome of their Standards, and chaſed them into their Campe, and then droue awaye the garriſon and Warde from Vtica, and ſacked the countrey of the Baſetanes, Quintus ſending vnto them no ayde, for lacke of knowledge and courage: but remayned in houſe, till Sommer was ended.
            The yeare after, Fabius Maximus brother to Emilianus ſuccéeded Quintus, and had two Legions of the Romaines, & other of their friendes, that ther was xviii.M. men, & a.M.vi.C. horſe. He wrote to Micypſa king of

               Numidia, that in haſt, he ſhould ſende him ſuccour of Elephants, and with a part of his armie went toward Vtica, and by the way, Viriatus gaue him alarme, with great ſhoutes, and terrible behauiour, but he repulſed him without loſſe. When x.Elephants were come from Africa, he camped in a large field, and fought with Viriatus, and put him backe, but at one time, when the Romaines chaſed with out order, he tourned vpon them, and killed thrée. M. & droue the reſt within, and followed ſo hard that he found few or none in the way towarde the Campe, but they were fled into their Cabbins, out of the which, the Capitaines had much a doe to draw them, and had it not bene for Fannius,
               Fannius prayſed. ſonne in law to Laelius, who ſhewed yt night great wiſedome and manhoode, the Romaines had bene vtterlye deſtroyed.
            
               Viriatus ceaſed not, neither by the darke of night, nor by the heate of day, to moleſt them with all deuice, till Emilianus had mooued his campe

to Vtica. Viriatus being diſtreſſed for lacke of vittayle, and hauing a ſmall armie, burned his Campe by night, and went into Luſitania. After whoſe departure, Emilianus ſpoyled the countrey, and fiue Cities that had ſuccoured him, and from thence hée went by Cunea, and ſo into Luſitania againſt Viriatus.
            
            By the way, two Kingleaders of Romaine théeues, did him much diſpleaſure, which were called Curius, and Apuleius, Curius was afterward ſlayne, and Emilianus recouered his loſſe, and tooke diuers Cities, of the which ſome he ſpoyled, and ſome hee pardoned, and of x.M. priſoners, he beheaded fiue hundred, and killed the reſt.
            This done, he paſſed ouer the Wynter and went to Rome, hauing bene two yeare in Office.
            His brother Maximus Emilianus, tooke a Capitaine of théeues by yéelding, and pardoned him, and cut off the handes of the other.

He followed Viriatus, and layd ſiege to Friſana, into the which, Viriatus got in by night, and the next daye came ſo ſodeinlye and fiercely out, that firſt the Pieners and then the Souldiours fledde: whome he droue to ſuch barrein and wylde Mountaynes, that they had no hope of eſcape.
            
               Viriatus was not too proud of this victory, but thought that now hée had a good occaſion,The Romaines and Viriatus friendes & louers. to make an honourable peace with the Romaines: And ſo vpon treatie it was concluded, that he ſhoulde bée taken, as the Romaines friend, & al they that wer vnder him, ſhould remain Lords of ſuch poſſeſſions as they had. Thus had this war an ende by ye benefit of a Romain enimie. But it did not long continue: For Cepio, Brother to Emiliane, thought it diſhonourable to the name of Rome, and not to be ratified. The Senate was content, that hée ſhould ſéeke new matter to fal out with him: But he ceaſed not writing, till the league was openly reiected.

Wherefore by this authouritie Cepio went againſt Viriatus, and tooke the citie of Arſa, whiche Viriatus had forſaken, and was retired bicauſe he had no conuenient power. He ouer tooke him at Carpentania, and hadde farre greater power than Viriatus had, wherefore Viriatus woulde not fight with him,Viriatus his policie but ſent away ye moſt part of his men by a priuie path, and placed the reſt vppon an hill, in order of battaile: and when he knew them to be come to the place which he appointed, he ſet ſpurres to the horſe with ſuch ſpéede, and celeritie, that ye 
               Romaines might caſt their cappes at him, & ſo with ye ſcorne of his enimie, he ſaued himſelfe.
            
               Cepio ſacked the Vettones and ye 
               Callecianes, in Portugal, many followed ye example of Viriatus, & liued of Robbing▪ Sextus Iulius was ſent againſt them, who founde more a do than at the firſt he ſuppoſed, the countrey was ſo great and the riuers ſo many, as Taio, Linia, Leca, or rather Lima, Duero, & Gauda Loquitur, Betis,
               
all Nauigable, that they might eſcape at their pleaſure. Wherefore Brutus conſidered that it was impoſſible to ioyne with them all, and a rebuke to let them continue, and ſmall glorie to ouercome them, wherefore he thought beſt to aſſaulte their holdes, thinking when euerye man was driuen to defende his owne, their broode ſhoulde bée the ſooner broken. So following this deuiſe, hée beate downe all he could meete. The woemen were in the warre with their huſbandes, and ſhewed ſuch manlye heartes,
                  Manlye heartes in vvomen.
                that when they were killed, they did not caſt forth one worde. Manye fledde into the mountaines, and for lacke of foode, required pardon, whiche he fréely gaue them, and tooke their pray.
            When hée hadde thus done, hée paſſed the Ryuer Orio, and raunged ouer the countrie, taking pledges of them that accorded with him. And he went ouer the flodde Lima, where no Romaine had done ſo much, and from

thence to the Ryuer Niben,
               Novv Rio Cauado, Braga in Portingale. and ledde his armie againſt the Braccarianes, bicauſe they had ſtopped vitaile that came vnto him.
            Theſe be people, with whome their wiues goeth to warre, and dye valiauntly without any ſhrinking, or ſcryking, and whē they fight they neuer flée, nor any whit lament when they die: Many of theſe being taken, the women to auoyde captiuitie, killed their children, and afterwardes themſelues, chooſing rather to dye worthily, than to liue wretchedly. Thus, Brutus wan much, and came to a citie called Labrica, whiche had many times broken promiſe with him, and once againe they deſired pardon, and rendred themſelues, he required all the fugitiues of the Romaines, all their armour and certeine pledges, and laſt of all, that they ſhould forſake their city, which when it was done, hée called them to a Parlaiment, in the whiche hee reproued them of their ofte rebellion, and breaking of their promiſe,

with ſo ſharpe words, that they feared ſome grieuous puniſhment, being on ech ſide encloſed with al the army, but he reſted ſatiſfied with repeting them with this reproch, and refrained from further vengance, And when he had taken their corne, and their common treaſure from them, contrarie to all mens opinion, he let thē dwell in their owne citie.
            Thinges being thus ended it fell out that he muſt returne to Rome. And before he went, it chaunced that Viriatus ſent to him iii. Ambaſſadors Aulace, Ditalcone, and Minuro, to treat of accorde, which Ambaſſadors by faire promiſes were corrupted, & did agrée for a ſome of mony, and other thinges, to kill their tapitaine the valiant Viriatus.
               Deſcriptiō of Viriatus & hovv he vvas traiterouſlye murdered. This Viriatus was a man of verye ſmall ſléepe, though his trauaile were neuer ſo great. And for the moſt part, ſlept in in his harnes, bicauſe he might bée readie at all aſſayes. And it was lawfull for any ſouldiour to come and ſpeake with him by night, whiche

vſe the traytours knewe, and at the firſt ſléepe entering into his tent as though they had had ſome matters of weightie importance, they cut his throate, for otherwiſe they could not hurt him, being ſo well armed, after whiche villanous déede, they went their way ſafe, no man ſuſpecting thē or hearing any noyſe: When they were come to Cepio, they demaunded their rewarde for their fact. He grā
               ted them all their poſſeſſions, and for the reſt ſent thē to Rome, in ye morning they of the campe marueiled ye 
               Viriatus came not forth, & thought he had repoſed himſelfe to ſome eaſe. But in the end when they heard nothing of him, certeine of them went in, and founde him deade. Wherevpon throughout the whole armie, there was great dolour as might wel bee, & no meruaile, conſidering the loſſe of ſo good & valiant a capitaine, and the caſe that they preſētly ſtoode in: & one thing greatly grieued them, that they could not finde the murtherers.
            They burned his bodie after the

manner, vppon a great ſtack of wood with many ornaments, and great ſacrifices, and with their bandes of horſemen, rode about it, magnifying and prayſing him. Whan the fire was quenched, and the exequies done, they made a goodly ſepulchre in his honour, & ſet forth Iuſts, & attorniaments with moſt ſolemne pompe, and chalengies, man to man, ſo great was the loue and deſire that euerye man had of him.
                  Praiſe of Viriatus.
                And ſurely he was a man moſt expert in gouerment, moſt circumſpect and warie in perill, and moſt bolde and hardie, in diſpiſing the ſame, in deuiſion of any pray or bootie, he obſerued ſuch iuſtice, as hath not ben heard: he wold haue no more for his part thē any other cōmō perſon had. And though they deſired him to take prefermēt he would not, and that alſo which fell to his ſhare, and portion, he gaue away alwayes to them that were forwarde men, and valiaunt, wherefore he might ſay yt which none other capitaine coulde, for his armie being gathered of a

mixture and rifraff of all ſorts, continued in obedience vnder him viii. years wt out any mutinie in yt world, and at all daungers were moſt readie to ſerue him.
            After him they choſe Tantalus to their capitaine, who tooke vpon him to aſſalt Sagunt, whiche was nowe Carthage,
               Cartagena. but being repelled from thence, and wery of his wandring, hée was content to yealde vnto Cepio: he tooke their armour from them and gaue thē ground to inhabite, bicauſe they ſhould refraine from robbery & pillage. After Cepio came Cecilius, Metellus, & ſubdued the Vacceanes.
            
            Ther were two ſtrong cities that would not giue ouer, Termantia, and Numantia, of the whiche Numantia was ſituate in a rocky place, deuided with two ryuers, fenſed with mountaines, & cōpaſſed with thicke woods,Numantia now called Soria. and onely on one ſide had way to the plaine which was fortified with many ditches, and pillaires ouerthwart. They were good men on horſebacke and a foote, and might make viii.M.

fighting men, the which ſmall number, for their worthy valour wrought the Romaines much a do. There was of the Romaines xxx. thouſande men, and two thouſand horſe, well trained and practiſed in war. Pompeius lay at the ſeage at Numantia, & went forth on a time to viewe a certeyne ground: the Numantines came from the hill, & killed his horſemen, wherevpon he with ſuch mē as he had marſhalled his hoaſt, and came into the plain to fight. The enimies deſcended downe, and affronted them, and after as they had bene afraide fledde vp to the hill, whither if the Romaines followed, they were ſure to be loſt. And ſo Pompeius euery day had the worſt in theſe ſkirmiſhes, although his nū
               ber were a great deale more, wherefore he brak vp ſeage, & went to Termantia,
               Pompeius & his men for laide vnto by the Numātines & Termā
                  tines, as to a more eaſie enterprice, but he founde it of the ſame nature: For at ye firſt onſet, he loſt 7.C men, and a capitaine of x. thouſande that brought a conuaye of vittaile, was put to flight, and thrée times encountred

in one day, and at length driuen to the Hils and Rockes, where many miſerably periſhed, both Horſe and man, and all that night tooke no reſt, and in the morning, were aſſailed againe, and fought all day till night deuided the fight, where-fore Pompeius forſooke the fielde by night and went to the citie of Malia, in the which was a garriſon of the Numantines. They of the towne at the comming of Pompei ſecreatly killed the garriſon by crafte, and receiued him.
            From thence he went to Sweditania, which place a capitaine called Tangino, haried and oueranne with ſpoyle, with whom Pompeius fought, and him diſcomfited, taking manye of his men priſoners.Deſperate dealinges. And ſuch generoſitie was in the heartes of thoſe théeues, that they rather choſe to dye then to liue ſlaues, ſome killed their Lordes, and then their ſelues: ſome killed themſelues onely, and being put in ſhippes to be conueyed awaye, they made ſuch ports and holes, that they ſunke their ſhippes, and drowned

themſelues, and all the reſidue of the company.
            Now Pompei returned againe to Numantia, with an intent to turne the courſe of the ryuer another way, and ſo to famiſh the city. They of the towne came fearcelye out in a brunt without any noyſe of trumpet, and beate away the labourers: and laide a waite for a capitaine that guided vittaile, and ſlewe him and moſt parte of his men. And an other time iſſued out vppon the Romaines that made a trench, and ſlew about a M.iiii.C. with the capitaine.
            Bicauſe of theſe loſſes, diuerſe Senatours with more helpe was ſent to Pompei. And he was driuen to lye the Winter in the fielde, where his ſouldiours for the colde and watch, were much troubled, the ayre alſo vexed them, and the water, and engēdred the flixe among them, of the which many dyed.
            A number appointed went on a time for vittaile, for whome the Numantines had laide a ſtacke, and other

with their weapons of ſhotte, moleſted the Romaines, and reproched them, with villanouſe wordes, whiche they coulde not abide, but marched to fight with them, when ſodainely they of the Ambuſhment diſcouered and killed many of them, as well Gentlemen as other.
                  Pompei greatly troubled in minde for his loſſes, & mishap at the ſiege of Numantia.
                
               Pompeius was much troubled and greatly netled with theſe loſſes, and by the counſaile of the Senatours went to lye with his campe the reſt of winter in cities. And bicauſe he looked for a ſucceſſor, & feared to be accuſed, he began to practiſe a priuy peace with the Numantines. They of the towne alſo hauing loſt manye of their beſt capitaines, & thereby brought to extreme want, ſent Ambaſſadours likewiſe to treat of peace. Pompei in opē audiēce ſaid, yt they muſt commit thēſelues to ye 
               Romaines diſcretion, for otherwiſe he knew no way of accord, but priuily he cōcluded wt them to haue again the fugitiues to receiue pledges, & 30. talēts of ſiluer, al ye which was fulfilled, and halfe the mony paide downe.
            
               When time came, Marcus Popilius arriued in Spaine to be ſucceſſour vnto Pompeius, by whoſe comming Pompeius was now delyuered from feare,
                  Double dealing of Pompei vvith the Numātines
                and ſo when the Numantines brought ye reſt of ye mony, he denyed the accorde, and ſaid he ne
                  •…
                conſented to ſuch diſhonourable league, the Numantines affirmed it, and tooke witneſſe of the beſt men in his campe. Where-fore Popilius ſent them both to Rome, to pleade their matter before the Senate. They wer both hard, and yet the Senate was diſpoſed to continue the war againſt the Numantines. Popilius tarried out his yeare in Spaine, & went his way without any great honour. In his place came C. Oſtilius Mācinus, who was diuerſe times ouercome and driuen to his lodging. And bicauſe their was a voyce that the Cantabranes, and the Vacceanes came to ayde the enimies, he fledde by night in the darke, with-out making any fyres, and gotte to an olde forſaken campe which Fuluius Nobilior hadde made,

and ſtayed there without any fortification in the worlde, being beſeaged of the Numantines, that manaſed vtter decaye to him and all his. Wherefore to a voyde further inconuenience, he made ſuch reaſonable leage with them as he could? Which thing when it was heard at Rome, it was not lyked, and Emilius Lepidus was ſent capitaine thither, and Mancinus called home to iudgemēt. And after him went the Ambaſſadours of Numantia.
            
            While the matter was debated at Rome, Emilius was wearye to ſtande ſtill idle in Spaine, and therefore picking a quarrell againſt the Vacceanes, inuaded their countrey, he layde ſeage to Pallantia that had committed no faulte. And ſent his ſonne in Lawe Brutus into other partes of Spaine. Wherefore the Senate ſent two Ambaſſadours vnto him, meruailing that hée woulde ſéeke newe occaſion of war, ſéeing the loſſe had bene ſo great of late. He ſhewed reaſons ye all Spaine
               
woulde haue the Romaines in contempt, if the war ſhould be left now, and that the Numantines woulde thereby wax ſo ſtrong, that it would be hard hereafter for the Romaines to bridle or annoy them, and ſo ſent away the Ambaſſadours without concluſion.
                  Deuiſe of Flaccus to ſaue himſelf and his men
                
               Flaccus one of his capitaines was gone for vittaile, and by the way was caught in a traine, who ſéeing himſelfe in ſuch extremitie and daunger, ſodeinly eryed out, Pallantia is taken: at which words his ſouldiours made ſuch ſhoutes, as men bée wont in victory, inſomuch that the enimie afraid of themſelues, retyred, and ſo he ſaued himſelfe and the vittaile, onely by ye deuiſe of one word.
            The ſeage continued long at Pallantia, and the Romaines lacked vitaile, they had eaten alreadie their and beaſts,
                  Famine and mortalitie, able to dant euen the ſtouteſt.
                & begā to die of hūger. Emilius and Brutus ſuſtained famine & diſeaſe long, but at length they were forced to giue ouer, wherevpon the capitaines went about the campe, commaunding to depart before day, leauing

behinde them all things, euen their wounded fellowes, and ſick ſoldiours, which pitifully embraſed thē,
                  Vnnaturale & more thē brutish vnkindneſſe, to leaue our friends and companions in extremitie.
                and deſired their helpe, but for all that they departed like men conquered, with tumult and diſorder. The Pallantines iſſued out vpon them and did them much hurt, following the chaſe from morning till night: The Romaines being thus ſcattered, hither and thither, ſhifted away, and ranne ſome hither, ſome thither, as hap lead them: So, that if by the purueyance of God, the Pallantines had not retyred, they had bene vtterly confoūded. When this was hearde at Rome, they depriued Emilius of his office, & condempned him in a ſume of mony. Audience was giuen in the Senate houſe, to Mancinus, and the Ambaſſadours of the Numantines. They alleadged the Chapiters of accorde, and he layde all the blame in Pompei that was capitaine a-fore him: but hée was pardoned before, and therefore this blame depended vppon him. And ſo the Romaynes,
               
by decrée gaue Mācinus into ye hands of ye 
               Numantines,
               
                  Mancinus 
                        •
                     eprochfully vſed.
                bicauſe wt out their conſent, he had diſhonourably concluded with them, folowing the example of their aunceſtours, that gaue their Conſul into ye power of the Sanuites, bicauſe he hadde made a ſhamefull peace.
            The Numantines would not take him, wherefore Furius ledde him into Spaine, naked, and ſpoyled of all thinges. The charge of the armie was cōmitted to Calphurinus Piſo, who entred the dominion of the Numantines, and after that he had a little ranged, and trauerſed the ground of the Pallantines without doing any harme, but ſpent the reſt of his time in harborough at Carpetane. The people of Rome were weary of this tedious warre,
                  The noble & victorious Scipio.
                and determined to create Cornelius Scipio, Conſull, as he who onely (as their hope was) coulde diſpatch this enterpriſe, but bicauſe hee coulde not be conſull by reaſon of his young years, ye ſenate was content ye peple ſhold repeal ye law for one yere.

And ſo he was made Conſull, and came into Spaine. He tooke vp no ſouldiours by order, but ſuch as would go with him of good will, and ſuch as came to him from Cities and Kings confederated, he tooke to ſupplye the number, many ſlaues, and made one band of ſuch as wer his aſſured friēds and companions, which bande he called Philonide.
            
            Theſe ſouldiours to the number of foure M. he tooke to his couſin Buteo to leade, and he went afore in haſte to Spayne, where he found the army loſt and effeminated with ryot and ſeditition: he conſidered wel, that he ſhold neuer do no feat with his men, except he had them in awe and order, and therefore he was no ſooner come, but he baniſhed al Merchants, Whores,
                  The vvarlyke diſcipline of Scipio.
                & Southſayers: For now the Souldiours were ſo frayed with the former loſſes, that they would do nothing but with Prophecies, he aſſigned few ſeruaunts and Pieners, he ſold al beaſts of Cariage, except ſuch as were néedfull, he woulde haue no Cookes in

the army, nor inſtruments of the kitchin, but a ſpit and a pot, & tooke an order for their dyet, which was no more than ſufficient.
            He would not ſuffer them to haue any beddes, and he him ſelfe was the firſt that ſlept vpon a couch of ſtraw. He forbad the ſouldiours in the waye to ryde vppon the beaſtes of cariage, ſaying, there was no great hope of his trauaile, who could not walke a foote. He reproued them that had ſeruants to rubbe them in the bathe, ſaying: that Mules without hands, had néede of ſome to clawe them.
            He by this meanes, brought the armie, againe to temperaunce, and obedience, and accuſtomed them to reuerence and feare, and was harde to entreat, except it were in matters iuſt and honeſt. He vſed to ſaye, that gentle Capitaines were profitable to their enimyes, and harde Capitaines were profitable to themſelues.
            When he hadde brought them to good order, yet durſte he not venter in anye aſſaye, till he had trayned

them furder. Wherefore he made euerye daye newe Campes, one after an other, to kéepe them occupied, and caſt great Ditches, and fill them agayne, buylded high walles, and pulled them downe agayne. And he in perſon was there from morning till nyght, to encourage the Labourers.
            In his waye, hée marched euermore in a ſquare Battayle, and would ſuffer none to goe out of their place: Hee rode about the armye, ſome time before, ſome time behinde, and made the ſicke Souldiours to ryde in ſtéede of the Horſemen. The Mules that were ouerladen, he cauſed to be lyghted, and deuided the burden among the footemen.
            When hée camped in Sommer, hée woulde haue the Horſes that hadde bene abroade by daye, to reſt at night, and haue other goe in theyr place. Euerye thing was appoynted to euerye manne, who to appoynt the place, who to digge the Trenche, who to buylde

the wall, and who to ſet the tents, to all the which was a time and meaſure aſſigned.
            When he perceiued the armie to be in good diſcipline, and of luſtie courage, he remooued toward Numantia, and by the way made no great buſineſſe, but kept himſelfe cloſe, leaſt otherwiſe he ſhoulde growe into contempt among his enimies, if at the beginning, he ſhould receiue any loſſe: therefore conſidering well the ſtate of the thing, and the importaunce of the Empire, he thought he wold come with all force at once, vppon the Numantines, he waſted euery thing, and cut downe the Corne, before it was ripe.
            Ther was two wayes to Numantia, one ſhort and plaine, which they perſwaded him to take: he aunſwered that he muſt thinke as wel of his Retyre, as of his March, and conſidering the enimies were armed lyght, and hadde the Citie on their backes, they might ſo trouble him with his heauye carriage, that all his labour

ſhould be in vaine: for if he did ouercome, he ſhould get no profit, and if he were ouercome, he ſhould haue great loſſe. He ſayd further that he was an euill Capitaine, which would aduenture to fight with-out great aduauntage, and he was a ſage Capitaine, that would not fight, but when mere neceſſitie compelled him: euen as wiſe Phiſitions, refraine from cutting and ſearing, till they haue proued al other medicines and ſalues. Wherefore he gaue order to goe the longer way about, and to waſt the lande of ye 
               Vacceanes, from whence the Numantines had reliefe.
            The Pallantines had layed an ambuſhment in certeine hills, and with an other company moleſted them that cut downe the Corne.
                  The Authour of this hiſtory
                
               Scipio ſent a Capitaine of his, named Rutilius Rufus, (who wrote this Pamphlet) with foure Troupes of Horſe-men, to refraine their incurſions, Rufus did his Office, and encountred with them, who of purpoſe fledde to the Mountaynes, and he followed them too boldlye,

but when he ſuſpected fraude, hée made his men leaue the chaſe, & onely with their ſtaues kéepe them off. When Scipio ſawe him approach too nigh the Hils, doubting of the traine, he came forward to helpe him, and diuided his men into two partes, to aſſaile the enimies, and by encountring and retiring not haſtelye, but with the vſe of their ſhot, he ſaued all the other. After this he leuied his campe, and went forward.
            There was a déepe riuer, daungerous to wade, and full of myre, about the which, the enimies were ambuſhed, which when he perceiued, he tooke an other way about, going night and day, and for lack of water made wels, in many of the which was found bitter water. And in the ende, the men paſſed ſafe, although with paine, but of his Horſes and Moyles, there dyed a great number.
            Marching thorow the country of the Cauceanes, vppon whom Lucullus had made iniuſt warre, he proclaymed by his Herauld, that they ſhould

not doubt, but retourne euerye man home to his countrey to doe his buſineſſe. Than went he forward into the countrey of Numantia to lye ther the Winter, till he had .xii. Elephants, & a band of Archers and ſlingers ſent him frō 
               lugurth, Nephew to Maſsiniſſa, & as he was about a ſpoyle, he fell on a time in an ambuſhmēt nigh a towne, the greater parte where-off, was enuironed with a fenne & marſh, and the other with a ſharpe Hill and a thicke Wood, in the which the buſhment laye. The hoaſt of Scipio was deuided, and one part was gone into the Wood, to ſéeke their pray, and had left their enſignes without, an other company of Horſemen not verye many, were gone on for raging and ranging about, and were affronted of the buſhment. Scipio himſelfe remayned with the enſigns, and called forth the ſouldiors with a Trompe, and before they were retourned, a companye of a thouſand in an heape, went to ſuccour the Horſe-men, which began to ſhrinke.

And with the other, whom he had ſet in martiall arraye, he himſelfe went forth and made his enimyes to flye, yet would hée not purſue them.
            After this, hauing planted two Camps before Numantia, the gouernment of the one he gaue to his Brother Maximus, and the other gouerned himſelfe.
            
               
                  Polllcie of Scipio to vvinne the citie by famine.
               The Numantines came manye times out, and prouoked the Romaines to fight, but Scipio made lyght of it, not intending to trye the matter, with ſuch deſperate people, but rather to conquer them by famine. Wherefore he buylded ſeuen Baſtiones, and ſent to the Nations his confederates there-abouts, appoynting what men they ſhould ſend him, ouer whom he appoynted ſeuerall Capitaines, and them he commaunded to entrench the towne.
            
               Numantia was thrée mile about, and the trench was as much againe, and euery part had his Gouernour, with order that when they were moleſted of the enimie, they ſhould make

a token with a red cloth vppon a long ſpeare, and if it were by night, they ſhould make a fire.
            After the firſt trench was made, hée cauſed an other to be begon, & to laye a foundation for a wal, ye bredth whereoff was viii.foote, and the height x. beſide the battlements: and at euery Arches bredth, was a tower, and bicauſe he could not kéepe the proportion of the wall for a ſtanding water that was there, he made a thick rampier to ſerue in place of ye wall. This Scipio was the firſt (as I thinke) that entrenched a Campe, before that Citie which refuſed not to fight.
            There was a Riuer called Duero, which did the Numantines much eaſe, as wel for the conueyance of vittaile, as for the priuie paſſage of men, wher off ſome diued vnder the water, and ſome with ſmall Ueſſells, when the winde was great,
                  The riuer Duero cha
                        •
                     
                     ned ouer.
                paſſed thorowe at their pleaſure. And bicauſe he could make no bridge ouer it, for the ſwiftneſſe and Carriages of the water, he made two Fortes at either ſide, and

from the one Fort to the other, he tyed long Beames with Ropes, ouerthwart the Ryuer, to the bottome of the water, and in the Beames were pricked ſwerd blades, and all kinde of ſharpe poynted fooles, the which tourning vp and downe with the ſtreame of the water, kept the enimyes from paſſage, as well by ſhip as by ſwimming. This was the thing that Scipio moſt deſired, to kéepe them from all out-going, and receiuing of anye thing in. Upon the towres of the wal, he placed engines to ſhoote dartes & ſtones, and the walles were fully furniſhed with caſt and ſhotte, and the Forts ſtoutly warded with Archers, and ſlingers. And beſide this, he gaue order, yt a number of men ſhold be alwaies redy to ſignifie from one to another, what chanced, & that they of the Towers ſhould, in any lacke ſet vp a banner, where the thing was, and that the other ſhoulde followe the ſame.
            And this was to know euery ſodeine accident, but in ſuch caſes, as

were to be preciſely and ſecretly declared, other wiſe he ordeined, that the meſſage ſhoulde bée brought by mouth.
            He deuided his armye into two partes, which was of the number of fortie thouſande perſons, one part kept the Walles, and the other ſerued to fight abroade, of the which, twentie thouſande were ordinarye, and twentie thouſande in relyefe. All theſe hadde their place appoynted, from the which they might not paſſe, but with lycence, and repayred to the ſame, at the ſight of a token.
            Of the other ſide the Numantines ceaſed not to aſſaulte the Warde, ſome-time on one ſide, and ſometime on an other, but the defence was ſo meruaylous and ſo ſodeyne, and the multitude of Standerdes ſo great, and the number of menne ſo manye, which at the ſounde of a Trompe, euen as it were in a moment, came to the wall & the noyſe

of the drommes ſo terrible, that many times the Numantines remayned amazed. This encloſure, that compaſſed ſixe mile and more, Scipio euery day and euery night, paced & went ouer in his owne perſon, to ſée what was done. The enimies being thus ſhut from al hope of reliefe, could not long continue.
            There was one Ritogenes, one of the chiefe of the Citie,Valiant enterpriſe of Ritogenes. who with fiue companions and as many ſeruaunts and horſes, in a darke night, paſſed from the Towne to the Trench, and with Ladders for the purpoſe ſkaled the ſame, taking the watch a ſleepe, & with their deuices cōueyed ouer their horſes, & went to the Citie of the Aruaceanes, and as humble ſuiters beſought them to help the poore Numantines their kinſmen and neighbours. The Aruaceanes did them no hurte, but for feare, charged them to depart.
            From thence they went to Lucia, a ſtrong Citie, where the youth was enclyned to fauour them: But the

auncients ſent word of it to Scipio, & he in the night went foorth, and by breake of day, had compaſſed the Citie, and required the heades of the young men to be giuen him: they aunſwered, that they were fledde and gone. He menaced to ſacke their Towne, except they were delyuered.Punishment of vvilful & vvilde yong heads. Wherfore for feare they brought them foorth, to the number of foure hundred, whoſe handes Scipio cutte off, and went his way.
            The Numantines oppreſſed with the miſerie of famine and penurie,Hunger maketh the ſtouteſt to ſtoupe. ſent fiue men to Scipio, to know what clemencie he would vſe with them if they did render. The chiefe of the fiue ſtoode greatly vpon his honour, and magnified the purpoſe of the Numantines, who ſo valyauntly had ſtood to ye defence of their lybertie, wyues, and children, and affirmed that it ſhould be a thing cōuenient to the noble nature of Scipio, to take pittie of ſo noble a people. Wherefore (quoth hée) receyue vs to thy mercye, with conuenient puniſhment, or come and

fight with vs, that we may dye like men.
            
               Scipio, who knewe well ynough how it was with them, required that they ſhould ſimply render themſelues to his diſcretion, which aunſwere when it was reported to the Numā
                  tines, like men madde and furious, they killed the v.meſſengers, as bringers of euil news: ſo fierce was their nature by continuall calamitie, not accuſtomed to obey.
            And after they had ſpent all their beaſtes,
                  The miſerarable & lamentable ſtate of the Numantins.
                and fedde vpon Lether ſuppled in water, laſt of all they fell to eating of deade mens fleſh, whiche they either founde decayed or killed them ſelues, where vppon their nature was become like the noriture that they tooke, and at length conquered with famine, and peſtilence, they yealded to Scipio.
            
            Hée commaunded them to bring foorth all their armour, and come them-ſelues, into a place appoynted.
            But they deferred the day, bicauſe

ſome deſired to ende their lyues by famine, in the lybertie of their countrey.
            Such hyghe courage was in this lyttle Citie, that ſo many tymes had driuen the Romaynes to make ſuch accorde with them, as they neuer dydde, wyth anye other Natyons.
            Euerye man knoweth what a Capitaine this Scipio was, that laye at the ſiege, with thréeſcore thouſand men, & yet they with their eight thouſand, prouoked him many times to fight.
            But ſurelye hée was more experte than anye other Capitaine, and by his long experience in warres, knewe that it was a thing booteleſſe, and woulde not auayle, to fight and deale with ſuch ſauage people anye other waye, than to ſubdue them by hunger, which is remedileſſe, and the onelye thing, that coulde ouer-throwe the Numantines, as it didde in déede. They

that determined to dye in the ſpace of thrée dayes diſpatched them-ſelues, ſome one way, and ſome an other. The other came forth at the place appoynted,
                  Numantia conquered by Scipio.
                all deformed and horrible to ſée, their bodyes wer foule, and their hayre long, their nayles ouergrowen, and ful of filth, their garments ill fauoured and worſe ſauoured, and the whole feature of their body vgly and terrible, their countenaunce ſtrange & fierce, their affections cruel & beaſtly, being by their dyet tourned from the nature of men.
            The Romaines were aſroniſhed at the ſight, with meruaile at their diſpoſition of bodye and minde, they conſidered the penury, the dolour, and the paine that they had takē, they abhorretd he remembrance of their feeding, being driuen one to gnawe anothers fleſh: their infected ayre, their periſhing by hunger, their decay by ſword, made the Romaines heauie in that their time of ioy. Scipio reſerued ſome of them for the triumph, and ſolde the others.
            
               This capitaine that had ouerthrowne two mighty cities, and hard to be taken, reſerued Carthage, that was ſo great, and had Empire both by ſea and lande, and deſtroyed Numantia from the foundatiō, that was but little, and of ſmal receipte, which he did either bicauſe it was ſo expedient for the Romaines, or bicauſe hee was a man of cruell nature to them whom he tooke by force, or (as ſome men thinke) bicauſe he thought his glorie ſhould growe by the quantitie of their affliction, and therefore he is called Africanus, and Numantinus of the calamities that he wrought theſe two cities. Whan he had diuided the countrey of Numantia to the next cities, and quieted the ſuſpected places, with payment of money, he went home by ſhippe.
            After him came other capitaines and did no great feates, ſauing onely Didius, ſlew a xx.M. Aruaceanes, and made ye Citizens of Termeto to leaue their ſtrong ſituation, and dwell in the plaine. He alſo tooke Colenda, ix.

moneths after he had beſeaged it. And in one thing followed the cruel
               
                  •
               te of Lucullus, for he made a number of Celtiberians beléeue, that he would giue them lande to inhabite, and apponted them to come to a place aſſigned with their wiues and children. And when they were come in deede,
                  Crueltie & falſhod of Lidius.
                he made his armie to kill them euery mothers ſonne. After him came Flaccus, and killed xx.M. of them, and at the citie of Belgida the people was diſpoſed to rebell, and cauſed the Senatours to conſult what was beſt to be done, and bicauſe they were long or the could conclude, they ſet fire on the place and burned them all. After the which time there was no great a doe, till Q. Sertorius, a noble man of Rome, and of the faction of Cinnia, made much a doe in Spaine againſt the Romaines, againſt whom Cecelius Metellus, and Gneus Pompeius were ſent, and after that Certorius was traiterouſly ſlayn by Perpenna, one of his owne ſort: Pompey made an end of the warre, and ſlewe Perpenna.
               
After him Caius Caeſar had ſomewhat adde with Pompeies childrē, who wer fauoured in ye country, and laſt of al Octauius Ceſar ſubdued them that diſobeyed, and made an end of them. All the which things bicauſe they were done of the Romaines againſt Romaines, in the time of ciuil warre, they be declared in the bookes appropriate to the ſame. And whē the Emperour of Rome had the Lordſhip of all the world, and euery land was at his commaundement, than Spaine was cōpelled to receiue ſuch gouernment as he did appoint, which 
                  〈…〉
                preſident of iuſtice, and a 
                  〈…〉
                warre. And after the decli
                  ••…
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                of the Romaine Empire, they r
                  •••
               uered libertie, and grewe into kingdomes, as other countries did.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London, by Thomas Eaſt. 1580.
         
      
   