
      
         
            
            
            
               QVEENE EL'ZABETHS LOSSE, AND King Iames his vvelcome.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
               VERITAS VIRESSIT VVLNERE
               TC
            
            LONDON Printed by T. C. for Iohn Smythicke, and are to be ſold at his ſhoppe in Saint Dunſtons Church. yard in Fleetſtreete. 1603.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Queene El'zabeths loſſe, and King Iames his welcome.
            
            
               YOu ſacred ſp'rits that haunt Pernaſſus ſpring,
               Whoſe ſoaring thoughts mounted on Pegas' wing
               Do pierce the 
                     ••
                  ies 
                     〈…〉
                  iſing from lowly duſt
               Euen whom you l
                     •
                  t, & whom you liſt downe thruſt.
               You whom the Muſes all do ioyntly greete,
               Eate, and drinke Nectar, and Ambroſta ſweete.
               My weakeling Muſe did many wiſhes make,
               That ſome of you her taske would vndertake;
               I thought in ſilence ſtill my cares to keepe,
               Theſe are true teares, which we vnwitneſt weepe.
               But ſince my plaints I do ſo publicque make,
               Seemeth I put on blacke for faſhions ſake.
               This cauſ'd my Muſe her wiſhes to powre forth,
               Some abler wit would ſhewe his Muſes worth.
               But ſince in vaine: ſhe takes in hand the ſame,
               And ſings ſad Anthems to Elizaes name.
               What, is Elizaes name ſo ſoone forgot?
               It cannot be: how then? she heares them not.
               
                  Scarce one is found to ſing her dying praiſe,
               Whom all admir'd and honor'd in her daies.
               But whileſt ſhe liu'd: O God! yet ſtill ſhe liues
               In heauen! I, and on earth. Her vertue giues
               Her this: ſhe liues in her late ſubiects hearts,
               Shee liues in her ſucceſſors vertuous parts,
               Shee liues in him (euen in deſpight of Fate)
               To whom ſhe left her vertues, crowne, & ſtate.
               Her vertues fame haue built her ſuch a tombe,
               As ſhee ſhall liue euen till the day of doome:
               And then enioy the happie company
               Of all the bleſſed, euerlaſtingly.
               Her ſoule (no doubt) can now alreadie tell
               What guerdon Princes haue that gouerne well.
               My Muſe dares vndertake for to diſcloſe
               Nothing, but what the meaneſt reader knowes.
               What ſubiect liued in her happie daies
               That felt no warmth from her reſplendant raies?
               And feeling them, who would not ſeeke to know
               The ſpring from whence theſe happie bleſſings flow?
               Her birth and vertuous life are ſo well knowne,
               Each one can tell as much as may be showne,
               
                  Yet cannot this my zealous dutie ſtay,
               Though I shew nothing but what each can ſay.
               
                  Greenwich, VVeſtminſter, Richmond, famous bee,
               For shee was borne, crown'd, died in theſe three.
               
                  Henry the eigth (ſprung from th'vnited Roſe,
               VVhich match for Englands good God did compoſe)
               Had by his ſecond choiſe this budde diuine,
               VVhoſe luſtre through the world ſo cleare did shine;
               
                  Elizabeth whom God Almightie gaue
               Fulneſſe of peace, and honor to the graue.
               
                  Fulneſſe of God, ſo doth her name import:
               How well th'euent and name together ſort?
               Sure theres a myſterie in Princes names,
               For we do hope our royall L. King Iames
               
               VVill proue a true Maintainer of the faith,
               (As both his name and his iuſt title ſaith)Fidei defenſor.
               
               The Pope he wll ſupplant, Chriſts Church maintaine.
               
               Kings haue their names ſeldome impoſde in vaine.
               But we put on too faſt, let's backe returne,
               And thinking on our loſſe againe let's mourne.
               
                  I will not ſpeake of her exterior parts,
               But of of her minde, adorn'd with liberall Arts:
               
                  Yet he that would deſcribe them with his quill,
               Had need of Homer's or a greater skill.
               Not England only, but the world doth know
               Her learned wiſedome: then what need I show
               What's ſo well knowne? how each Embaſſador
               Shee anſwere could without Interpretor?
               Greeke, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian,
               Shee vnderſtood: and ſpake them euery one,
               Or of her knowledge in diuinitie?
               Her practiſe show'd it moſt apparantly.
               VVhy tell I this? but to lament her death,
               Vnder whoſe happie raigne I firſt drew breath.
               This roſe is cropt, alaſſe, a heauie caſe:
               But that t'is planted in a better place.
               But of her life ſince that she liu'd ſo well,
               Be bolde my Muſe a litle for to tell:
               So well ſhe liu'd, the learnedſt man of all
               It to deſcribe would finde his wit too ſmall,
               My ſimpler wit, doing the beſt it can,
               Scarce ſhewes a droppe of that huge Ocean
               Of her praiſe-worthy vertues, my good will
               May (as I hope) excuſe my ſlender skill.
               
                  Firſt, for her infancie and childiſh yeares
               I ouerſlip; though euen in them appeares
               Matter well worthy of a brazen pen,
               And leaues of hardeſt Marble: but yet when
               Her riper yeares with iudgement we do deeme,
               The former then we not ſo much eſteeme.
               Theſe vertues then come to perfection,
               The which before ſeem'd in election.
               My ſlender reede doth purpoſe to ſet downe
               Only ſuch vertues as adorn'd her crowne.
               And firſt as chiefe of all ſhall be expreſt,
               How Gods religion which her ſelfe profeſt
               Shee did eſtabliſh: baniſht Poperie,
               With ſuperſtition and Idolatrie.
               Her heartie zeale ſought both by deed & word,
               To build the ruind Temple of the Lord:
               Proud Antichriſt, and hautie Spaine did ſtriue
               To cut her off, whom God preſeru'd aliue,
               Safely preſeru'd with his outſtretched arme
               From murder, poyſon, and all other harme
               Which Popiſh bulles, or Spaniſh gold procur'd,
               Blinde zeale prouok'd, or wicked Mammōlur'd.
               
                  Nay that indeed at which Spaine moſt repines,
               She ſtor'd her treaſury with Indian Mines:
               The which her bounty mōgſt her ſubiects parts,
               And laid vp ſurer treaſure in their harts.
               Neuer was Prince of ſubiects better loued,
               Neuer in Prince like care for ſubiects proued.
               From poore mans ſute ſhe neuer turn'd her face,
               Her meaneſt ſubiects right ſhe ſtill would grace.
               Bleſt be that God who lent vs ſuch a Queene,
               Whoſe like before no mortall eye had ſeene.
               The fiue and fortith yeare of her bleſt raigne,
               Whē ſhe had liu'd neare three ſcore yeares & ten,
               She paide the God of nature her laſt debt,
               And di'de in peace, without impeach or let
               Of home-bred traitors, or elſe forraigne foes,
               God gaue this comfort to appeaſe our woes.
               Who though she liu'd and di'de a perfect maide,
               Left ſuch an Heire of whom it may be ſaide,
               We loſt the Iewell which we loued beſt,
               Had it reſtor'd againe with intereſt.
               We may well ſay; Had not our loſſe bene ſuch,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     jſſemus perijſſ
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
               
               (T'is well we may ſo ſay) we had loſt much.
               
                  
                  Richmond it was firſt brought in Tudors name,
               
                  Richmond it was abolished the ſame.
               
                  Henry of Richmond brought to vs that peace
               Which al true English harts pray ne'er may ceaſe.
               Now pray with me al that loue Englands good,
               God would for euer ſtablish in his blood
               This kingdomes rule, and theſe to it belong,
               God ſtill defend them from all manner wrong.
               My hopefull ſpirit ſaies it ſo shall bee,
               Since Peeres and people do ſo well agree.
               For now the Councell and the Peeres are bent,
               A new King to proclaime with full conſent:
               Both Peeres and people make the ſtreets to ring,
               God ſaue King Iames the firſt, our royall King.
               Each faithful ſubiect now himſelfe doth ſtraine
               The beſt he may, his King to entertaine.
               How many a ioyfull Aue's ſent before:
               My (Hayle) comes limping lateſt of a ſcore.
               My teares (alas) do ſo be-blind my ſight,
               I wipe mine eyes whileſt they outstrip me quite;
               Yet doubt I not but that his royall minde
               Holdes me excus'd, although I come behinde.
               
                  How can that heart loyall to him appeare,
               That for Eliza cannot ſhed a teare?
               He knowes her loſſe what ſubiect doth not mone,
               Would do the like by him, if he were gone.
               And thoſe that waſh her tombe with their ſalt teares,
               Do wiſh him many, many happie yeares.
               Now my blacke plume's to red and yealow turnd,
               And now I ioy as faſt as erſt I mournd.
               My ſorrowes all lye buried in her tombe,
               Heart leape for ioy, for now King Iames doth come.
               Come Englands hope, come hither merrily,
               Bring with thee many yeares of Iubily.
               The Locuſts that did wiſh Eliza dead,
               At thy names ſound ſuddenly vaniſhed.
               O if thy name had power to daunt them ſo,
               (Moſt royal King) what would thy preſence do?
               Thy lineall right baniſht diſſention,
               Thy princely vertues wrought this vnion.
               Our heartie praiers ſent before to meete thee,
               Wiſh thy good ſpeed: our eies do long to greete thee.
               Thoſe whom Elizaes loſſe wounded to death,
               Thy glorious name hath giuen a ſecond breath.
               
                  The Merchant traffiques ſtill without diſturbe,
               Th'artificers or trades-men, feare no curbe
               Of malecontent, Papiſt, or Libertine,
               Next vnto God (great King) the praiſe be thine.
               The earth is till'd in peace, the ground is dreſt,
               Each vnder his owne vine in peace may reſt.
               Thy princely wiſedome, or thy rightful claime,
               My infant Muſe dares ſcarce preſume to name:
               This, hath a riper penne alreadie donne,
               And made apparant as the midday Sunne:
               For that, the ſpacious world full wel doth know
               Thy ſelfe (heroick Monarch) beſt can ſhow.
               The Princely Poet, and the Poets Prince,
               That name thou art acquainted with long ſince.
               Thy many vertues alſo are proclaimed,
               
               Thy iuſtice and thy fortitude are named,
               As peereleſſe mongſt the reſt, happie our land
               When fortitude and iuſtice take in hand
               To guide the helme, nay thou maiſt challenge all:
               Foure kingdomes, and foure vertues cardinall.
               Thy kingly vertues, thou a King canſt tell,
               No other can declare them halfe ſo well.
               
                  When Dauid teacheth Salomon his ſonne,
               Feare God (my childe) and liue as I haue donne.
               O happie is that land when Kings ſo teach,
               Where vertue by example they do preach.
               My Muſe weepes teares of ioy, in hope to proue
               
                  Dauid doth raigne the man whō God doth loue.
               King Iames doth raigne whom God doth loue ſo much,
               God loues them ſtill whoſe loue to him is ſuch.
               Now Saturnes golden times wil come againe,
               And now no vice our cōmon-weale ſhall ſtaine.
               For as the King to good or bad doth frame
               His life, the people imitate the ſame.
               Thy England now doth like a longing wife
               Expect thy comming; then ſhe hopes no ſtrife
               Should dare diſturbe her quiet: all with one accord
               Wiſh to behold their King, their dread liege lord.
               And I amongſt the reſt of meaneſt place,
               Throw vp my hat, and ſay God ſaue your Grace.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Ad Detractores Inuidus alterius rebus macreſcit opimis.
               SNarle on and ſpare not, Curres will ſnarle by kinde,
               
                  Momus to carpe at, needs muſt ſomething finde.
               To ſtriue with ſuch, is labour ſpent in vaine:
               Though an Aſſe kicke, I will not kicke againe.
               VVould any know who t'was did write this booke?
               He that ne're thought ſo many ſhould ore-looke
               His eight houres follie: yet now, hopes to finde
               Kinde cenſure of each well-deſeruing minde.
               Truſting his Maieſtie will pardon grant;
               Accept good will, beare with his Muſes want.
            
            
               H. S.
            
         
      
   