
      
         
            
            
            THE Lamentable Tragedie of Locrine, the eldest sonne of King Brutus, discoursing the warres of the Britaines, and Hunnes, with their discomfiture: The Britaines victorie with their Accidents, and the death of Albanact. No lesse pleasant then profitable.
            Newly set foorth, ouerseene and corrected, By VV. S.
            
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1595.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The lamentable Tragedie of Locrine, the eldest sonne of King Brutus, discoursing the warres of the Britaines and Hunnes, with their discomfiture, the Britaines victory with their accidents, and the death of Albanact.
            
            The first Act.
            
               Scene 1.
               
               Enter Atey with thunder and lightning all in black, with a burning torch in one hand, and a bloodie swoord in the other hand, and presently let there come foorth a Lion running after a Beare or any other beast, then come foorth an Archer who must kill the Lion in a dumbe show, and then depart. Remaine Atey.
               
               
                  Atey.
                  In paenam sectatur & Vmbra.
                  A Mightie Lion ruler of the woods,
                  Of wondrous strength and great proportion,
                  With hideous noyse scarring the trembling trees,
                  With yelling clamors shaking all the earth,
                  
                     Trauerst the groues, and chast the wandring beasts.
                  Long did he raunge amid the shadie trees,
                  And draue the silly beasts before his face,
                  When suddeinly from out a thornie bush,
                  A dreadfull Archer with his bow ybent,
                  Wounded the Lion with a dismall shaft,
                  So he him stroke that it drew forth the blood,
                  And fild his furious heart with fretting yre,
                  But all in vaine he threatneth teeth and pawes,
                  And sparkleth fire from forth his flaming eies,
                  For the sharpe shaft gaue him a mortall wound,
                  So valiant Brute the terror of the world,
                  Whose only lookes did scarre his enemies,
                  The Archer death brought to his latest end.
                  Oh what may long abide aboue this ground,
                  In state of blisse and healthfull happinesse.
               
               Exit.
            
            
               The first Act. Scene. 2.
               
               Enter Brutus carried in a chaire, Locrine, Camber, Albanact, Corineius, Guendelin, Assaracus, Debon, Thrasimachus.
               
               
                  Brutus.
                  Most loyall Lords and faithful followers
                  That haue with me vnworthie Generall,
                  Passed the greedie gulfe of Ocean,
                  
                  Leauing the confines of faire Italie,
                  
                  Behold 
                        •
                     our Brutus draweth nigh his end,
                  And I must leaue you though against my will,
                  My sinewes shrunke, my numbed sences faile,
                  A chilling cold possesseth all my bones,
                  
                     Blacke vgly death with visage pale and wanne,
                  Presents himselfe before my dazeled eies,
                  And with his dart prepared is to strike,
                  These armes my Lords, these neuer daunted armes,
                  That oft haue queld the courage of my foes,
                  And eke dismayd my neighbours arrogancie,
                  Now yeeld to death, orelaid with crooked age,
                  Deuoyd of strength and of their proper force,
                  Euen as the lustie cedar worne with yeares,
                  That farre abroad her daintie odore throwes,
                  Mongst all the daughters of proud Lebanon,
                  This heart my Lords, this neare appalled heart,
                  That was a terror to the bordring lands,
                  A dolefull scourge vnto my neighbor Kings,
                  Now by the weapons of vnpartiall death,
                  Is cloue asunder and bereft of life,
                  As when the sacred oake with thunderbolts,
                  Sent from the fiery circuit of the heauens,
                  Sliding along the aires celestiall valts,
                  Is rent and clouen to the verie rootes.
                  In vaine therefore I strangle with this foe,
                  Then welcome death, since God will haue it so.
               
               
                  Assar.
                  Alasse my Lord, we sorrow at your case,
                  And greeue to see your person vexed thus,
                  But what so ere the fates determind haue,
                  It lieth not in vs to disanull,
                  And he that would annihillate his minde,
                  Soaring with Icarus too neare the Sunne,
                  May catch a fall with yoong Bellerophon,
                  
                  For when the fatall sisters haue decreed
                  To seperate vs from this earthly mould,
                  
                     No mortalll force can countermaund their minds:
                  Then worthie Lord since ther's no way but one,
                  Cease your laments, and leaue your grieuous mone.
               
               
                  Corin.
                  Your highnesse knows how many victories
                  How many trophees I erected haue,
                  Tryumphantly in euery place we came
                  The Grecian Monarke warlike Pandrassus,
                  
                  And all the crew of the Molossians,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        offarius the arme strong King of Gaules,
                  
                  And all the borders of great Aquitane,
                  
                  Haue felt the force of our victorious armes,
                  And to their cost beheld our chiualrie,
                  Where ere Ancora handmayd of the Sunne,
                  Where ere the Sun-bright gardiant of the day,
                  Where ere the ioyfull day with chearfull light,
                  Where ere the light illuminates the word,
                  The Troyans glorie flies with golden wings,
                  Wings that do soare beyond fell enuious flight,
                  The fame of Brutus and his followers
                  Pearceth the skies, and with the skies the throne
                  Of mightie Ioue Commaunder of the world,
                  Then worthie Brutus, leaue these sad laments,
                  Comfort your selfe with this your great renowne,
                  And feare not death though he seeme terrible.
               
               
                  Brutus.
                  Nay Corinus you mistake my mynd
                  In construing wrong the cause of my complaints,
                  I feard to yeeld my selfe to fatall death,
                  Cod knowes it was the least of all my thought,
                  A greater care torments my verie bones,
                  And makes me tremble at the thought of it,
                  And in you Lordings doth the substance lie.
               
               
                  
                  Thrasi.
                  Most noble Lord, if ought your loyall peers
                  Accomplish m
                        •
                     y, to 
                        •
                     ase your lingring grief,
                  I in the name of all protest to you,
                  That we will boldly enterprise the same,
                  Were it to enter to black Tartarus,
                  
                  Where triple Cerberus with his venomous throte,
                  Scarreth the ghoasts with high resounding noyse,
                  Wele either rent the bowels of the earth,
                  Searching the entrailes of the brutish earth,
                  Or with his Ixions ouerdaring soone,
                  Be bound in chaines of euer during steele.
               
               
                  Bru.
                  Thē harken to your soueraigns latest words,
                  In which I will vnto you all vnfold,
                  Our royall mind and resolute intent,
                  When golden Hebe daughter to great Ioue,
                  
                  Couered my manly cheeks with youthful downe,
                  Th'vnhappie slaughter of my lucklesse sire,
                  Droue me and old Assarachus mine 
                        •
                     ame,
                  As exiles from the bounds of Italy,
                  
                  So that perforce we were constraind to flie
                  To Graecians Monarke noble Pandrassus,
                  
                  There I alone did vndertake your cause,
                  There I restord your antique libertie,
                  Though Grecia fround, and all Mollossia stormd,
                  Though braue Antigonus with martiall band,
                  In pitched field encountred me and mine,
                  Though Pandrassus and his contributories,
                  With all the 
                        •
                     out of their confederates,
                  Sought to deface our glorious memorie,
                  And wipe the name of Troians from the earth,
                  Him did I captiuate with this mine arme,
                  
                     And by compulsion for
                        •
                     st him to agree
                  To certain artickles which there we did propound,
                  From Graecia through the boisterous Hellespont,
                  
                  We came vnto the fields of Lestrigon,
                  
                  Whereas our brother Corineius was,
                  Which when we passed the Cicillian gulfe,
                  And so transfretting the Illician sea,
                  Arriued on the coasts of Aquitane,
                  
                  Where with an armie of his barbarous Gaules
                  
                  
                     Goffarius and his brother Gathelus
                  
                  Encountring with our hoast, sustaind the foile,
                  And for your sakes my Turnus there I lost,
                  
                     Turnus that slew six hundreth men at armes
                  All in an houre, with his sharpe battle-axe,
                  From thence vpon the strons of Albion
                  
                  To Corus hauen happily we came,
                  And queld the giants, comne of Albions race,
                  With Gogmagog sonne to Samotheus,
                  
                  The cursed Captaine of that damned crew,
                  And in that Ile at length I placed you.
                  Now let me see if my laborious toiles,
                  If all my care, if all my greeuous wounds,
                  If all my diligence were well imploid.
               
               
                  Corin.
                  When first I followed thee & thine (braue king)
                  I hazarded my life and dearest blood,
                  To purchace fauour at your princely hands,
                  And for the same in daungerous attempts
                  In sundry conflicts and in diuers broiles,
                  I shewd the courage of my manly mind,
                  For this I combated with Gathelus,
                  
                  The brother to Goffarius of Gaule,
                  
                  
                     For this I fought with furious Gogmagog,
                  
                  A sauage captaine of a sauage crew,
                  And for these deeds braue Cornwale I receiu'd,
                  A gratefull gift giuen by a gratious King,
                  And for this gift, this life and dearest blood,
                  Will Corineus spend for Brutus good.
               
               
                  Deb.
                  And what my frend braue prince hath voud to you,
                  The same wil Debon do vnto his end.
               
               
                  Bru.
                  Then loyall peeres 
                        •
                     ince you are all agreed,
                  And resolute to follow Brutus hoasts,
                  Fauour my sonnes, fauour these Orphans Lords,
                  And shield them from the daungers of their foes,
                  
                     Locrine the columne of my familie,
                  And onely piller of my weakned age.
                  
                     Locrine draw neare, d
                        •
                     aw neare vnto thy sire,
                  And take thy latest blessings at his hands,
                  And 
                        •
                     or thou art the eldest of my sonnes,
                  Be thou a captaine to thy bretheren,
                  And imitate thy aged fathers steps,
                  Which will conduct thee to true honors gate,
                  For if thou follow sacred ve
                        •
                     tues lore,
                  Thou shalt be crowned with a lawrell braunch,
                  And weare a wreath of sempiternall fame,
                  Sorted amongst the glorious happie ones.
               
               
                  Locrin.
                  If Locrine do not follow your aduise,
                  And beare himselfe in all things like a prince
                  That seekes to amplifie the great renowne
                  Left vnto him for an inheritage
                  By those that were his ancestors,
                  Let me be flung into the Ocean,
                  And swallowed in the bowels of the earth.
                  
                     Or let the ruddie lightning of great Ioue,
                  
                  Descend vpon this my deuolted head.
                  
                     Brutus taking Guendoline by the hand.
                  But for I see you all to be in doubt,
                  who shall be matched with our royall sonne,
                  
                     Locrine receiue this present at my hand,
                  A gift more rich then are the wealthie mines
                  Found in the bowels of America,
                  
                  Thou shalt be spoused to faire Guendoline,
                  
                  Loue her, and take her, for she is thine owne,
                  If so thy vnckle and herselfe do please.
               
               
                  Corin.
                  And herein how your highnes honors me
                  It cannot be in my speech exprest,
                  For carefull parents glorie not so much
                  At their honour and promotion,
                  As for to see the issue of their blood
                  Seated in honor and prosperitie.
               
               
                  Guend.
                  And far be it from my maydens thoughts
                  To contradict her aged fathers will,
                  Therefore since he to whom I must obey
                  Hath giuen me now vnto your royall selfe,
                  I will not stand aloofe from off the lure,
                  Like craftie dames that most of all deny
                  That, which they most desire to possesse.
                  
                     Brutus turning to Locrine.
                  
                  
                     Locrine kneeling.
                  Then now my soone thy part is on the stage,
                  For thou must beare the person of a King.
                  Puts the Crowne on his head.
                  
                     Locrine stand vp, and weare the regall Crowne,
                  And thinke vpon the state of Maiestie,
                  
                     That thou with honor well maist weare the crown,
                  And if thou tendrest these my latest words,
                  As thou requirst my soule to be at rest,
                  As thou desirest thine owne securitie,
                  Cherish and loue thy new betrothed wife.
               
               
                  Locrin.
                  No longer let me wel enioy the crowne,
                  Then I do peerlesse Guendoline.
                  
               
               
                  Brut.
                  C
                        •
                     m
                        •
                     er.
               
               
                  Cam.
                  My Lord.
               
               
                  Brut.
                  The glorie of mine age.
                  And darling of thy mother Iu
                           •
                        oger,
                  
                  Take thou the South for thy dominion,
                  From thee there shall proseed a royall race,
                  That shall maintaine 
                        •
                     he honor of this land,
                  That sway the regall scepter with their hands.
                  Turning to Albanact.
                  
                  And Albanact thy fathers onely ioy,
                  Yoongst in yeares, but not the yoongst in mind,
                  A perfect patterne of all chiualrie,
                  Take thou the North for thy dominion,
                  A country full of hills and ragged rockes,
                  Replenished with fearce vntamed beasts,
                  As correspondent to thy martiall thoughts,
                  Liue long my sonnes with endlesse happinesse,
                  And beare firme concordance amongst your selues,
                  Obey the counsels of these fathers graue,
                  That you may better beare out violence,
                  But suddeinly through weaknesse of my age,
                  And the defect of youthfull puissance,
                  My maladie increaseth more and more,
                  And cruell death hastneth his quickned pace,
                  
                     To dispossesse me of my earthly shape,
                  Mine eies wax dimme, ouercast with clouds of age,
                  The pangs of death compasse my crazed bones,
                  Thus to you all my blessings I bequeath,
                  And with my blessings, this my fleeting soule.
                  My glasse is runne, and all my miseries
                  Do end with life: death closeth vp mine eies,
                  My soule is haste flies to the Elisian fields.
               
               He dieth.
               
                  Loc.
                  Accursed starres, damd and accursed starres,
                  To abreuiate my noble fathers life,
                  Hard-harted gods, and too enuious fates,
                  Thus to cut off my fathers fatall thred,
                  
                     Brutus that was a glorie to vs all,
                  
                     Brutus that was a terror to his foes,
                  Alasse too soone by Demago
                           •
                        gons knife,
                  The martiall Brutus is bere
                        •
                     t of life.
                  No sad complaints may moue iust Lacus.
                  
               
               
                  Corin.
                  No dreadfull threats can feare iudge Rhodomanth,
                  
                  Wert thou as strong as mightie Hercules,
                  
                  That tamde the hugie monsters of the world,
                  Plaidst thou as sweet, on the sweet sounding lute,
                  As did the spouse of faire Euridies,
                  
                  That did enchant the waters with his noise,
                  And made stones, birds, and beasts, to lead a dance,
                  Constraind the hillie trees to follow him,
                  Thou couldst not moue the iudge of Crebus,
                  
                  Nor moue compassion in grimme Plutos heart,
                  For fatall Mors expecteth all the world,
                  And euerie man must tread the way of death,
                  Braue Tantalus the valiant Pelops sire,
                  
                     Guest to the gods, suffred vntimely death,
                  And old Fleithonus husband to the morne,
                  And eke grim Minos whom iust Iupiter
                  
                  Deignd to admit
                        •
                      vnto his sacrifice,
                  The thundring trumpets of blood-thirstie Mars.
                  
                  The fearfull rage of fell Tisiphone.
                  
                  The boistrous waues of humid Ocean,
                  Are instruments and tooles of dismall death.
                  Then noble cousin cease to mourne his chaunce,
                  Whose age & yeares were signes that he shuld die.
                  It resteth now that we interre his bones,
                  That was a terror to his enemies.
                  Take vp the coarse, and princes hold him dead,
                  Who while he liu'd, vpheld the Troyan state.
                  Sound drums and trumpets, march to Troinouant,
                  
                  There to prouide our chieftaines funerall.
               
            
            
               The first Act. Scene 3.
               
               Enter Strumbo aboue in a gowne, with inke and paper in his hand, saying;
               
                  Strum.
                  Either the foure elements, the seuen planets and all the particuler starres of the pole Antastick, are aduersatiue against me, or else I was begotten and borne in the wane of the Moone, when euerie thing is saith Lactantius in his fourth booke of Constultations dooth say, goeth a
                        •
                     ward. I maisters I, you may laugh, but I must weepe; you may ioy, but I must sorrow; sheading salt teares from the watrie fountaines of my moste daintie faire eies, along my comely and smooth cheeks, in as

great plentie as the water runneth from the buckingtubbes, or red wine out of the hogs heads: for trust me gentlemen and my verie good friends, and so foorth: the little god, nay the desperate god Cuprit, with one of his vengible birdbolts, hath shot me vnto the heele: so not onlie, but also, oh fine phrase, I burne, I burne, and I burne a, in loue, in loue, and in loue a, ah Strumbo what has thou seen, not Dina with the Asse Tom? Yea with these eies thou hast seene her, and therefore pull 
                        •
                     hem out: for they will worke thy bale. Ah Strumbo hast thou heard, not the voice of the Nightingale, but a voice sweeter then hers, yea with these eares hast thou heard them, and therefore cut them off, for they haue causde they sorrow. Nay Strumbo kill thy selfe, drowne thy selfe, hang thy selfe, sterue thy selfe. Oh but then I shall leaue my sweet heart. Oh my heart, Now pate for thy maister, I will dite an aliquant loue-pistle to her, and then she hearing the grand verbositie of my scripture, will loue me presently.
Let him write a litle and then read.
My penne is naught, gentlemen lend me a knife, I thinke the more haste the worst speed.
                  Then write againe, and after read.
                  So it is mistresse Dorothie, and the sole essence of my soule, that the little sparkles of affection kindled in me towards your sweet selfe, hath now increased to a great flame, and will ere it be long consume my poore heart, except you with the pleasant water of your secret fountaine, quench the furious heate of the same. Alasse I am a gentleman of good fame, and

name, maiesticall, in parrell comely, in gate portlie. Let not therefore your gentle heart be so hard as to despise a proper tall yoong man of a handsome life, and by despising him, not onlie, but also to kill him. Thus expecting time and tide, I bid you farewell Your seruant, Signior Strumbo.
                  
                  Oh wit, Oh pate, O memorie, O hand, O incke, O paper. Well now I will send it away. Trompart, Trompart, what a villaine is this? Why sirra, come when your maister calls you
                        •
                      
                     Trompart.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Trompart entring saith;
                  
Anon sir.
               
               
                  Strumbo.
                  Thou knowest my prettie boy what a good maister
                        •
                      I haue bene to thee euer since I tooke thee into my seruice.
               
               
                  Trom.
                  I sir.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  And how I haue cherished thee alwaies, as if you had bene the fruit of my loines, flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone?
               
               
                  Trom.
                  I sir.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Then shew thy selfe herein a trustie seruant, and carrie this letter to mistresse Dorothie, and tell her.
Speaking in his eare.
                  
               
               Exit Trompart.
               
                  Strum.
                  Nay maisters you shall see a marriage by and by. But here she comes. Now must I frame my amorous passions.
               
               Enter Dorothie and Trompart.
               
               
                  Doro.
                  
                     Signior Strumbo, well met, I receiued your letters by your man here, who told mee a pittifull storie of your anguish, and so vnderstanding your

passions were so great, I came hither speedily.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Oh my sweet and pigsney, the fecunditie of my ingenie is not so great, that may declare vnto you the sorrowful sobs and broken sleeps, that I suffred for your sake; and therefore I desire you to receiue me into your familiaritie.
                  
                     For your loue doth lie,
                     As neare and as nigh:
                     Vnto my heart within,
                     As mine eye to my nose,
                     My legge vnto my hose,
                     And my flesh vnto my skin.
                  
               
               
                  Dor.
                  Truly M. Strumbo, you speake too learnedly for mee to vnderstand the drift of your mind, and therfore tell your tale in plaine termes, and leaue off your darke ridles.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Alasse mistresse Dorothie this is my lucke, that when I most would, I cannot be vnderstood: so that my great learning is an inconuenience vnto me. But to speake in plaine termes, I loue you mistresse Dorothie, if you like to accept me into your familiaritie.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  If this be all I am content.
               
               Turning to the people.
               
                  Strum.
                  Saist thou so sweet wench, let me lick thy toes. Farwell mistresse. If any of you be in loue, prouide ye a cap
                        •
                     ase full of new coined wordes, and then shall you soone haue the succado de labres, and something else.
Exeunt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The first Act. Scene 4.
               
               Enter Locrine, Guendoline, Camber, Albanact, Corineus, Assaracus, Debon, Thrasimachus.
               
               
                  Locrine.
                  Vncle and princes of braue Britany,
                  
                  Since that our noble father is intombd,
                  As best beseemd so braue a prince as he,
                  If so you please, this day my loue and I,
                  Within the temple of Concordia,
                  
                  Will solemnize our roiall marriage.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Right noble Lord, your subiects euery one,
                  Must needs obey your highnesse at commaund,
                  Especially in such a cause as this,
                  That much concerns your highnesse great content.
               
               
                  Locr.
                  Then frolick lordings to fair Concords wals,
                  Where we will passe the day in knightly sports,
                  The night in dauncing and in figured maskes,
                  And offer to God Risus all our sports.
               
               Exeunt.
            
         
         
            The 2. Act.
            
               Scene 1.
               
               Enter Atey as before, after a litle lightning and thundring, let there come forth this show. Perseus and Andromeda, hand in hand, and Cepheus also with swords and targets. Then let there come out of an other doore, Phineus, all blacke in armour, with Aethiopians after him, driuing in Per
                        •
                     eus, and hauing taken away Andromeda, let them depart. Ate remaining, saying;
               
                  Ate.
                  Regit omnia numen.
                  
                     When Perseus married faire Andromeda,
                  
                  The onlie daughter of king Cepheus,
                  
                  He thought he had establisht well his Crowne,
                  And that his kingdome should for aie endure.
                  But loe proud Phineus with a band of men,
                  Contriu'd of sun-burnt Aethiopians:
                  
                  By force of armes the bride he tooke from him,
                  And turnd their ioy into a floud of teares.
                  So fares it with yoong Locrine and his loue,
                  He thinkes this marriage tendeth to his weale,
                  But this foule day, this foule accursed day,
                  Is the beginning of his miseries.
                  Behold where Humber and his Scithians
                  
                  Approcheth nigh with all his warlike traine,
                  I need not I, the sequel shall declare,
                  What tragicke chances fall out in this warre.
               
            
            
               The 2. Scene.
               Enter Humber, Hubba, Estrilo, Segar, and their souldiers.
               
                  Hum.
                  At length the sna
                        •
                     le doth clime the highest tops,
                  Asce
                        •
                     ding vp the stately castle walls,
                  At length the water with continuall drops,
                  Doth penetrate the hardest marble stone,
                  At length we are arriued in Albion,
                  
                  Nor could the barbarous Dacian soueraigne,
                  Nor yet the ruler of braue Belgia
                  
                  Staie vs from cutting ouer to this Ile,
                  Whereas I heare a troope of Phrigians
                  
                  Vnder the conduct of Postumi
                           •
                        s sonne,
                  Haue pitched vp lordly pauillions,
                  
                     And hope to prosper in this louely Ile:
                  But I will frustrate all their foolish hope,
                  And teach them that the Scithian Emperour
                  Leades fortune tied in a chaine of gold,
                  Constraining her to yeeld vnto his will,
                  And grace him with their regall diademe:
                  Which I will haue maugre their treble hoasts,
                  And all the power their pettie kings can make.
               
               
                  Hubba.
                  If she that rules faire Rha
                           •
                        nis golden gate
                  Graunt vs the honour of the victorie,
                  As hitherto she alwaies fauourd vs,
                  Right noble father, we will rule the land,
                  Enthronized in seates of Topace stones,
                  That Locrine and his brethren all may know,
                  None must be king but Humber and his sonne.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Courage my sonne, fortune shall fauour vs,
                  And yeeld to vs the coronet of bay,
                  That decketh none but noble conquerours:
                  But what saith Estrild to these regions?
                  How liketh she the temperature thereof,
                  Are they not pleasant in her gratious eies?
               
               
                  Astr.
                  The plaines my Lord garnisht with Floras welth
                  And ouerspred with party colored flowers,
                  Do yeeld sweet contentation to my mind,
                  The aierie hills enclosd with shadie groues,
                  The groues replenisht with sweet chirping birds,
                  The birds resounding heauenly melodie,
                  Are equall to the groues of Thessaly,
                  
                  Where Phaebus with the learned Ladies nine,
                  Delight themselues with musicke harmonie,
                  And from the moisture of the mountaine tops,
                  
                     The silent springs daunce downe with murmuring streams,
                  And water al y• ground with cristal waues,
                  The gentle blasts of Eurus modest winde,
                  Mouing the pittering leaues of Siluanes woods,
                  Do equall it with Tempes paradice,
                  And thus comforted all to one effect,
                  Do make me thinke these are the happie Iles,
                  Most fortunate, if Humber may them winne.
               
               
                  Hubba.
                  Madam, where resolution leads the way,
                  And courage followes with imboldened pace,
                  Fortune can neuer vse her tyrannie,
                  For valiantnesse is like vnto a rocke
                  That standeth in the waues of Ocean,
                  Which though the billowes beat on euery side,
                  And Borras fell with his tempestuous stormes,
                  Bloweth vpon it with a hideous clamour,
                  Yet it remaineth still vnmooueable.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Kingly resolu'd thou glorie of thy sire,
                  But worthie Segar what vncoth nouelties
                  Bringst thou vnto our royall maiestie?
               
               
                  Seg.
                  My Lord, the yoongest of all Brutus sonnes,
                  Stout Alban
                           •
                        ct, with millions of men,
                  Approcheth nigh, and meaneth ere the morne,
                  To trie your force by dint of 
                        •
                     atall sword.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Tut let him come with millions of hostes,
                  He shall find entertainment good inough,
                  Yea fit for those that are our enemies:
                  For weell receiue them at the launces points,
                  And massaker their bodies with our blades:
                  Yea though they were in number infinit,
                  More then the mightie Babilonian queene,
                  
                     
                     Semiramis the ruler of the West,
                  Brought gainst the Emperour of the Scithians,
                  Yet would we not start back one foote from them:
                  That they might know we are inuincible.
               
               
                  Hub.
                  Now by great Ioue the supreme king of heauen,
                  And the immortall gods that liue therein,
                  When as the morning shewes his chearfull face,
                  And Lucifer mounted vpon his steed,
                  Brings in the chariot of the golden sunne,
                  Ile meet yoong Albanact in the open field,
                  And crack my launce vpon his burgane
                        •
                     ,
                  To trie the valour of his boyish strength:
                  There will I shew such ruthfull spectacles
                  And cause so great effusion of blood,
                  That all his boyes shall wonder at my strength:
                  As when the warlike queene of Amazon,
                  
                  
                     Penthisilea armed with her launce,
                  Girt with a corslet of bright shining steele,
                  Coupt vp the fainthart Graecians in the campe.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Spoke like a warlike knight my noble son,
                  Nay like a prince that seekes his fathers ioy,
                  Therefore to morrow ere faire Titan shine,
                  And bashfull Eos messenger of light:
                  Expells the liquid sleep from out mens eyes,
                  Thou shalt conduct the right wing of the hoste,
                  The left wing shall be vnder Segars charge,
                  The reareward shall be vnder me my selfe,
                  And louely Estrild faire and gratious,
                  If fortune fauour me in mine attempts,
                  Thou shalt be queene of louely Albion,
                  
                  Fortune shall fauour me in mine attempts,
                  
                     And make the Queene of louely Albion.
                  
                  Come let vs in and muster vp our traine,
                  And furnish vp our lustie souldiers,
                  That they may be a bullwarke to our state,
                  And bring our wished ioyes to perfect end.
               
            
            
               The 2. Scene.
               Enter Strumbo, Dorothie, Tr
                        •
                     mpart cobling shooes and singing.
               
                  Trum.
                  We Coblers lead a merie life,
               
               
                  All.
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan:
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Void of all ennie and of strife:
               
               
                  All.
                  Dan diddle dan.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  Our ease is great, our labour small:
               
               
                  All.
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  And yet our gaines be much withall:
               
               
                  All.
                  Dan diddle dan.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  With this art so fine and faire:
               
               
                  All.
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan.
               
               
                  Trum.
                  No occupation may compare
               
               
                  All.
                  Dan diddle dan:
               
               
                  Strum.
                  For merie pastime and ioyfull glee:
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  Most happie men we Coblers bee:
                  Dan diddle dan.
               
               
                  
                     Tr
                           •
                        m.
                  
                  The can stands full of nappie ale,
                  Dan: dan: dan: dan:
               
               
                  Strum.
                  In our shop still withouten faile:
                  Dan diddle dan.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  This is our meate, this is our foode:
                  Dan: dan: dan: dan:
               
               
                  
                  Trum.
                  This brings vs to a mery mood:
                  Dan didle dan.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  This makes vs worke for companie:
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan:
               
               
                  Dor.
                  To pull the tankards cheerfully:
                  Dan didle dan.
               
               
                  Trum.
                  Drinke to thy husband Dorothie,
                  
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan:
               
               
                  Dor.
                  Why then my Strumbo ther's to thee:
                  Dan didle dan:
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Drinke thou the rest Trumpart amaine:
                  Dan, dan, dan, dan.
               
               
                  Dor.
                  When that is gone weell filt againe,
                  Dan didle dan.
               
               
                  Cap.
                  The poorest state is farthest from annoy,
                  How merily he sitteth on his stoole:
                  But when he sees that needs he must be prest,
                  Heele turne his note and sing another tune,
                  Ho, by your leaue maister Cobler:
               
               
                  Stru.
                  You are welcom gentleman, what wil you any olde shooes or buskins, or will you haue your shooes clouted, I will do them as well as any Cobler in Cathues whatsoeuer?
                  Captaine shewing him presse mony.
                  O maister Cobler you are farre deceiued in mee, for don you see this? I come not to buy any shooes, but to buy your selfe; come sir you must be a souldier in the kings cause.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Why but heare you sir, has your king any commission to take any man against his will. I promise you I can scant beleeue it, or did hee giue

you commission?
               
               
                  Cap.
                  O sir, ye neede not care for that, I neede no commission: hold here, I command you in the name of our king Albanact, to appeare to morrow in the towne-house of Gathnes.
                  
               
               
                  Strum.
                  King Nactabell, I crie God mercy, what haue we to doo with him, or he with vs? but you sir master capo
                        •
                     taile, draw your pastebourd, or else I promise you, Ile giue you a canuasado with a bastinano ouer your shoulders, and teach you to come hither with your implements.
               
               
                  Cap.
                  I pray thee good fellow be content, I do the kings commaund.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Put me out of your booke then.
               
               
                  Cap.
                  I may not.
                  
                     Strumbo snatching vp a staffe.
                  No will, come sir will your stomacke serue you, by gogs blew hood and halidom, I will haue about with you.
                  Fight both.
                  Enter Thrasimachus.
                  
                  How now, what noyse, what sodain clamors this?
                  How now, my captain and the cobler so hard at it?
                  Sirs what is your quarrell?
               
               
                  Cap.
                  Nothing sir, but that he will not take presse mony.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Here good fellow take it at my command,
                  Vnlesse you meane to be stretcht.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Truly master gentleman, I lacke no mony, if you please I will resigne it to one of these poore

fellowes.
               
               
                  Thrasi.
                  No such matter,
                  Looke you be at the common house to morrow.
               
               Exit Thras
                        •
                     machus and the captaine.
               
                  Strum.
                  O wife I haue spunne a faire thredde, if I had bene quiet, I had not bene prest, and therefore well may I wayment; But come sirrha shut vp, for we must to the warres.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               The 4. Scene.
               Enter Albanact, Debon, Thrasimachus, and the Lords.
               
                  Alba.
                  Braue cauileres, princes of Albany,
                  
                  Whose trenchant blades with our deceased sire,
                  Passing the frontiers of braue Graecia,
                  
                  Were bathed in our enemies lukewarme blood,
                  Now is the time to manifest your wills,
                  Your hautie mindes and resolutions,
                  Now opportunitie is offred
                  To trie your courage and your earnest zeale,
                  Which you alwaies protest to Albanact,
                  
                  For at this time, yea at this present time,
                  Stout fugitiues come from the Scithians bounds
                  Haue pestr
                        •
                     d euerie place with mutinies:
                  But trust me Lordings I will neuer cease
                  To persecute the rascall runnagates,
                  Till all the riuers stained with their blood,
                  Shall fully shew their fatall ouerthrow.
               
               
                  
                  Deb.
                  So shal your highnes merit great renowne,
                  And imitate your aged fathers steppes.
               
               
                  Alba.
                  But tell me cousin, camst thou through the plaines?
                  And sawst thou there the faint heart fugitiues
                  Mustring their weather-beaten souldiers,
                  What order keep they in their marshalling?
               
               
                  Thra.
                  After we past the groues of Caledone,
                  
                  Where murmuring riuers slide with silent streames
                  We did behold the stragling Scithians campe,
                  Repleat with men, storde with munition;
                  There might we see the valiant minded knights
                  Fetching carriers along the spatious plaines,
                  
                     Humber and Hubba arm'd in azure blew,
                  Mounted vpon their coursers white as snow,
                  Went to behold the pleasant flowring fields;
                  
                     Hector and Troialus, Priamus louely sonnes,
                  Chasing the Graecians ouer Simoeis,
                  
                  Were not to be compared to these two knights.
               
               
                  Alba.
                  Well hast thou painted out in eloquence
                  The portraiture of Humber and his sonne;
                  As fortunate as was Policrates,
                  
                  Yet should they not escape our conquering swords,
                  Or boast of ought but of our clemencie.
                  Enter Strumbo and Trompart, crying often;
                  Wilde fire and pitch, wilde fire and pitch, &c.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  What sirs what mean you by these clamors made,
                  Those outcries raised in our stately court?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Wilde fire and pitch, wilde fire and pitch.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Villaines I say, tell vs the cause hereof?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Wilde fire and pitch, &c.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Tell me you villaines, why you make this noise,
                  
                     Or with my launce I will prick your bowels out.
               
               
                  Al.
                  Where are your houses, wher's your dwelling place?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Place, Ha, ha, ha, laugh, a moneth and a day at him; place, I cry God mercy, why doo you think that such poore honest mē as we be, hold our habitacles in kings pallaces: Ha? ha, ha. But because you seeme to be an abhominable chieftaine, I wil tel you our state.
                  
                     From the top to the toe,
                     From the head to the shoe;
                     From the beginning to the ending,
                     From the building to the burning.
                  
                  This honest fellow and I had our mansion cottage in the suburbes of this citie, hard by the temple of Mercury. And by the common souldiers of the Shitens, the Scithians; what do you call them? with all the suburbes were burnt to the ground, and the ashes are left there, for the countrie wiues to wash buckes withall. And that which greeues me most, my louing wife, O cruell strife; the wicked flames did roast.
                  
                     And therefore captaine crust,
                     We will continuallie crie,
                     Except you seeke a remedie
                     Our houses to redifie
                     Which now are burnt to dust.
                  
               
               
                  Both cry; Wild fire and pitch, wild fire and pitch.
               
                  
                  Alba.
                  Well we must remedie these outrages,
                  And throw reuenge vpon their hatefull heads,
                  And you good fellowes for your houses burnt,
                  We will remunerate you store of gold,
                  And build your houses by our pallace gate.
               
               
                  Strumbo.
                  Gate, O pettie treason to my person, no where else but by your backside; gate, oh how I am vexed in my coller; gate, I crie God mercie, doo you hear master king? If you mean to gratifie such poore men as we bee, you must build our houses by the Tauerne.
               
               
                  Alba.
                  It shall be done sir.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Neare the Tauerne, I by ladie sir it was spoken like a good fellow. Do you heare sir, when our house is builded, if you do chance to passe or repasse that way, we will bestowe a quart of the best wine vpon you?
               
               Exit.
               
                  Alb.
                  It greeues me lordings that my subiects goods
                  Should thus be spoiled by the Scithians,
                  Who as you see with lightfoote forragers
                  Depopulate the places where they come,
                  But cursed Humber thou shalt rue the day
                  That ere thou camst vnto Cathuesia.
                  
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               The 2. Act. Scene 5.
               
               Enter Humber, Hubba, Segar, Trussier, and their souldiers.
               
                  Hum.
                  
                     Hubba, go take a coronet of our horse
                  As many launciers, and light armed knights
                  As may suffice for such an enterprise,
                  
                     And place them in the groue of Caledon,
                  
                  VVith these, when as the skirmish doth encrease
                  Retire thou from the sheltiers of the wood,
                  And set vpon the weakened Troians backs,
                  For pollicie ioyned with chiualrie
                  Can neuer be put back from victorie.
                  Exit.
                  
                     Albanact enter and say, clownes with him.
                  Thou base borne Hunne, how durst thou be so bold
                  As once to menace warlike Albanact?
                  The great commander of these regions,
                  But thou shalt buy thy rashnesse with thy death,
                  And rue too late thy ouer bold attempts,
                  For with this sword this instrument of death,
                  That hath bene drenched in my foe-mens blood,
                  Ile separate thy bodie from thy head,
                  And set that coward blood of thine abroach.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Nay with this staffe great Strumbos instrument,
                  Ile crack thy cocks come paltry Scithian.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Nor wreake I of thy threats thou princox boy,
                  Nor do I feare thy foolish insolencie,
                  And but thou better vse thy bragging blade,
                  Then thou doest rule thy ouerflowing toong,
                  Superbious Brittaine, thou shalt know too soone
                  The force of Humber and his Scithians.
               
               Let them fight.
               
                  Humber and his souldiers runne in.
               
                  Strum.
                  O horrible, terrible.
               
            
            
               
               The sixt Act.
               Sound the alarme.
               Enter Humber and his souldiers.
               
                  Hum.
                  How brauely this yoong Brittain Albanact
                  
                  Darteth abroad the thunderbolts of warre,
                  Beating downe millions with his furious moode;
                  And in his glorie triumphs ouer all,
                  Mouing the massie squadrants of the ground;
                  Heape hills on hills, to scale the starrie skie,
                  When Briareus armed with an hundreth hands
                  Floong forth an hundreth mountains at great Ioue,
                  
                  And when the monstrous giant Monichus
                  
                  Hurld mount Olimpus at great Mars his targe,
                  And shot huge caedars at Mineruas shield;
                  How doth he ouerlooke with hautie front
                  My fleeting hostes, and lifts his loftie face
                  Against vs all that now do feare his force,
                  Like as we see the wrathfull sea from farre
                  In a great mountaine heapt with hideous noise
                  VVith thousand billowes beat against the ships
                        •
                     
                  
                  And tosse them in the waues like tennis balls.
               
               Sound the alarme.
               
                  Humb.
                  Ay me, I feare my Hubba is surprisde.
               
               Sound againe; Enter Albanact.
               
               
                  Alba.
                  Follow me souldiers, follow Albanact;
                  Pursue the Scithians flying through the field:
                  Let none of them escape with victorie:
                  That they may know the Brittains force is more
                  Then al the power of the trembling Hunnes.
                  
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Forward braue souldiers, forward keep the chase,
                  
                     He that takes captiue Humber or his sonne,
                  Shall be rewarded with a crowne of gold.
               
               Sound alarme, then let them fight, Humber giue backe, Hubba enter at their backs, and kill Debon, let Strumbo fall downe, Albanact run in, and afterwards enter wounded.
               
                  Alba.
                  Iniurious fortune hast thou crost me thus?
                  Thus in the morning of my victories,
                  Thus in the prime of my felicitie
                  To cut me off by such hard ouerthrow;
                  Had
                        •
                     t thou no time thy rancor to declare,
                  But in the spring of all my dignities?
                  Hadst thou no place to spit thy venome out
                  But on the person of yoong Albanact?
                  
                  I that ere while did scare mine enemies,
                  And droue them almost to a shamefull flight,
                  I that ere while full lion-like did fare
                  Amongst the dangers of the thick throngd pikes,
                  Must now depart most lamentably slaine
                  By Humbers trecheries and fortunes spights:
                  Curst be their charms, damned be her cursed charms
                  That doth delude the waiward harts of men,
                  Of men that trust vnto her fickle wheele,
                  Which neuer leaueth turning vpside downe.
                  O gods, O heauens, allot me but the place
                  Where I may finde her hatefull mansion,
                  Ile passe the Alpes to watry Mer
                           •
                        e,
                  
                  Where fierie 
                        
                           •
                        hoebus in his charriot
                  The wheels wherof are dect with Emeraldes,
                  Ca
                        •
                     t such a heate, yea such a scorching heate,
                  And spoileth Flora of her checquered grasse,
                  
                     Ile ouerrun the mountaine Cancusus,
                  
                  Where fell Chimaera in her triple shape
                  Rolleth hot flames from out her monstrous panch,
                  Scaring the beasts with issue of her gorge,
                  Ile passe the frozen Zone where ysie flakes
                  Stopping the passage of the fleeting shippes
                  Do 
                        •
                     ie, like mountaines in the congeald sea,
                  Where if I finde that hatefull house of hers,
                  Ile pull the fickle wheele from out her h
                        •
                     nds,
                  And tie her selfe in euerlasting bands:
                  But all in vaine I breath these threatnings,
                  The day is lost, the Hunnes are conquerors,
                  
                     D
                           •
                        oon is slaine, my men are done to death,
                  The currents swift, swimme violently with blood
                        •
                     
                  
                  And last, O that this last night so long last,
                  My selfe with woundes past all recouery,
                  Must leaue my crowne for Humber to possesse.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Lord haue mercy vpon vs; masters I think this is a holie day, euerie man lies sleeping in the fields, but God knowes full sore against their wills.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Flie noble Albanact and saue thy selfe,
                  The Scithians follow with great celeritie,
                  And ther's no way but fight, or speedie death,
                  Flie noble Albanact and saue thy selfe.
               
               Sound the alarme.
               
                  Alba.
                  Nay let them flie that feare to die the death
                  That tremble at the name of fatall mors,
                  Neu
                        •
                     r shall proud Humber boast or brag himselfe
                  That he hath put yoong Albanact to flight,
                  And least he should triumph at my decay,
                  This sword shall reaue his maister of his life,
                  
                     That oft hath sau'd his maisters doubtfull life:
                  But oh my brethren if you care for me,
                  Reuenge my d
                        •
                     ath vpon his traiterous head.
                  
                     Et vos queis domus ect nigrantis regia ditis,
                     Qui regitis rigido stigios moder amine lucos:
                     Nox caeci r
                           •
                        gina poli furialis Erinnis
                     D
                           •
                        ique de aeque omnes Albanum 
                           •
                        olliteregem
                     Tollit
                           •
                         flumi
                           •••
                         v
                           •
                        dis rigidaque palude
                     Nunc me fata voca
                           •
                        t, hoc condam pectore ferrum.
                  
                  Thrust himselfe through.
                  Enter Tr
                           •
                        mpart.
                  
                  O what hath he don, his nose bleeds? but oh I smel a foxe,
                  Looke where my maister lies, master, master.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Let me alone I tell thee, for I am dead.
               
               
                  Trum.
                  Yet one, good, good, master.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  I will not speake, for I am dead I tel thee.
               
               
                  Trum.
                  And is my master dead?
                  O sticks and stones, brickbats and bones,
                  and is my master dead?
                  O you cock
                        •
                     tri
                        •
                     es and you bablatrices,
                  that in the woods dwell:
                  You briers and brambles, you cookes shoppes and shambles,
                  come howle and yell.
                  With howling & screeking, with wailing and weeping.
                  come you to lament.
                  O Colliers of Croyden, and ru
                        •
                     ticks of Royden,
                  
                  and fishers of Ke
                           •
                        t.
                  
                  For Stru
                           •
                        bo the cobler, the fine mery cobler
                  of Cathnes towne
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     At this same stoure, at this very houre
                  lies dead on the ground.
                  O maister, theeues, theeu
                        •
                     s, theeues.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Where be they? cox me 
                        •
                     unny, bobekin let me be rising, be gone, we shall be robde by and by.
Exeunt.
                  
               
            
            
               The 8. Act.
               Enter Humber, Hubba, Segar, Thrassier, Estrild, and the souldiers.
               
                  Hum.
                  Thus from the dreadful shocks of furious Mars
                  
                  Thundring alarmes, and Rhamnusias drum
                  We are retyred with ioyfull victorie,
                  The slaughtered Troians squeltring in 
                        •
                     heir blood,
                  Infect the aire with their carcasses,
                  And are a praie for euerie rauenous bird.
               
               
                  Estrild.
                  So perish they that are our enemies.
                  So perish they that loue not Humbers weale.
                  And mightie Ioue commander of th
                        •
                      world,
                  Protect my loue from all false trecheries.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Thanks louely Estrild, solace to my soule.
                  But valiant Hubba for thy chiualrie
                  Declarde against the men of Albany,
                  
                  Loe here a flowring garland wreath'd of bay,
                  As a reward for thy forward mi
                        •
                     de.
               
               Set it on his he
                     •
                  d.
               
                  Hub.
                  This vnexpected honor noble sir
                        •
                     ,
                  VVill p
                        •
                     ick my courage vnto brauer deeds,
                  And cause me to attempt such hard exploits,
                  That all the world shall sound of Hubbaes name.
               
               
                  
                  Hum.
                  And now braue souldiers for this good successe,
                  Carouse whole cups of Amazonian wine,
                  Sweeter then Nectar or Ambrosia,
                  And cast away the clods of cursed care,
                  VVith goblets crownd with Semeleius gifts,
                  Now let vs martch to Abis siluer streames
                  That clearly glide along the Champane fields,
                  And moist the gra
                        ••
                     ie meades with humid drops.
                  Sound drummes & trumpets, sound vp cheerfully,
                  Sith we returne with ioy and victorie.
               
            
         
         
            The 3. Act.
            
               Scene 1.
               
               Enter Ate as before. The dumb show. A Crocadile sitting on a riuers banke, and a little Snake stinging it. Then let both of them fall into the water.
               
                  Ate.
                  Scelera i
                        •
                      auth
                        •
                     rem cadunt.
                  High on a banke by Nilus boystrous streames,
                  Fearfully sat the Aegiptian Crocodile,
                  Dreadfully grinding in her sharpe long teethe,
                  The broken bowels of a silly fish,
                  His back was armde against the din
                        •
                      of speare,
                  VVith shields of brasse that shind like burnisht gold
                  And as he stretched forth his cruell pawes,
                  A subtill Adder creeping closely neare
                  Thrusting his forked sting into his clawes,
                  Priuily shead his poison through his bones
                  VVhich made him swel that there his bowels burst,
                  That did so much in his owne greatnesse trust.
                  So Humber hauing conquered Alba
                           •
                        act,
                  
                  Doth yeeld his glorie vnto L
                           •
                        crines sword.
                  
                     Marke what ensues and you may easily see,
                  That all our life is but a Tragedie.
               
            
            
               The 2. Scene.
               Enter Locrine, Guendoline, Corineus, A
                        •
                     saracus, Thrasimachus, Camber.
               
               
                  Locrine.
                  And is this true, is Albanactus slaine?
                  Hath cursed Humber with his stragling hoste
                  With that his armie made of mungrell curres,
                  Brought our redoubted brother to his end.
                  O that I had the Thracian Orpheus harpe
                  For to awake out of the infernall shade
                  Those ougly diuels of black Ereb
                           •
                        s,
                  
                  That might torment the damned traitors soule:
                  O that I had Amphions instrument
                  To quicken with his vitall notes and tunes
                  The flintie ioynts of euerie stonie rocke,
                  By which the Scithians might be punished,
                  For by the lightening of almightie Ioue
                  
                  The Hunne shall die, had he ten thousand liues:
                  And would to God he had ten thousand liues,
                  That I might with the arme-strong Hercules
                  
                  Crop off so vile an Hidras hissing heads,
                  But say me cousen, for I long to heare
                  How Albanact came by vntimely death?
               
               
                  Thrasi.
                  After the traitrous hoast of Scithians,
                  Entred the field with martiall equipage
                  Yoong Albanact impatient of delaie
                  Ledde forth his armie gainst the stragling mates,
                  Whose multitude did daunt our souldiers mindes,
                  
                     Yet nothing could dismay the forward prince,
                  But with a courage most heroicall
                  Like to a lion mongst a flock of lambes
                  Made hauocke of the faint heart fugitiues,
                  Hewing a passage through them with his sword,
                  Yea we had almost giuen them the repulse
                  When suddeinly from out the silent wood
                  
                     Hubba with twentie thousand souldiers
                  Cowardly came vpon our weakened backes,
                  And murthered all with fatall massacre,
                  Amongst the which old Deb
                           •
                        n martiall knight,
                  With many wounds was brought vnto the death.
                  And Alban
                           •
                        ct opprest with multitude
                  Whilst valiantly he feld his enemies
                  Yeelded his life and honour to the dust,
                  He being dead, the souldiers fled amaine,
                  And I alone escaped them by flight,
                  To bring you tidings o
                        •
                      these accidents.
               
               
                  Locr.
                  Not aged Priam King of stately Troy,
                  
                  Graund Emperour of barbarous Asia,
                  
                  When he beheld his noble minded sonnes
                  Slaine traiterously by all the Mermidons,
                  
                  Lamented more then I for Albanact.
                  
               
               
                  Guen.
                  Not Hec
                           •
                        ba the queene of Ilium
                  
                  When she beheld the towne of Pergamus,
                  
                  Her pallace burnt, with all deuouring flames,
                  Her fiftie sonnes and daughters fresh of hue,
                  Murthred by wicked Pirrhus bloodie sword,
                  Shed such sad teares as I for Albanact.
                  
               
               
                  Cam.
                  The griefe of Niobe faire Athens queene,
                  For her seuen sonnes magnanimious in fi
                        •
                     ld,
                  
                     For her seuen daughters fairer then the fairest,
                  Is not to be comparde with my laments.
               
               
                  Cor.
                  In vain you sorow for the slaughtred prince,
                  In vain you sorrow for his ouerthrow,
                  He loues not most 
                        •
                     hat doth lament the most,
                  But he that seekes to venge the iniurie.
                  Thinke you to quell the enemies warlike traine,
                  VVith childish sobs and womannish laments?
                  Vnsheath your swords, vnsheath your conquering sword,
                  And seek reuenge, the comfort for this sore,
                  In Cornwall where I hold my regiment
                  Euen iust tenne thousand valiant men at armes
                  Hath Corineus readie at commaund:
                  All these and more, if need shall more require,
                  Hath Corrineus readie at commaund.
               
               
                  Cam.
                  And in the fields of martiall Cambria,
                  
                  Close by the boystrous Iscans siluer streames,
                  VVhere lightfoote faires skip from banke to banke,
                  Full twentie thousand braue couragious knights
                  VVell exercisde in feates of chiualrie,
                  In manly maner most inuincible,
                  Yoong Camber hath with gold and victuall,
                  All these and more, if need shall more require,
                  I offer vp to venge my brothers death.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Thanks louing vncle and good brother too,
                  For this reuenge, 
                        •
                     or this sweete word reuenge
                  Must ease and cease thy wrongfull iniuries,
                  And by the sword of bloodie Mars I sweare,
                  Nere shall sweete quiet enter this my front,
                  Till I be venged on his traiterous head
                  That slew my noble brother Albanact.
                  
                  
                     Sound drummes and trumpets, muster vp the camp,
                  For we will straight march to Albania.
                  
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               The 3. Scene.
               Enter Humber, Estrild, Hubba, Trussier, and the souldiers.
               
                  Hum.
                  Thus are we come victorious conquerors
                  Vnto the flowing currents siluer streames
                  Which in memoriall of our victorie,
                  Shall be agnominated by our name,
                  And talked of by our posteritie:
                  For sure I hope before the golden sunne
                  Posteth his horses to faire Thetis plaines,
                  To see the waters turned into blood,
                  And chaunge his blewish hue to rufull red,
                  By reason of the fatall massacre
                  Which shall be made vpon the virent plaines.
                  Enter the ghoast of Almanact.
                  
                  See how the traitor doth presage his harme,
                  See how he glories at his owne decay,
                  See how he triumphs at his proper losse,
                  O fortune vilde, vnstable, fickle, fraile.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Me thinkes I see both armies in the field,
                  The broken launces clime the cristall skies,
                  Some headlesse lie, some breathlesse on the ground,
                  Anb euery place is straw'd with carcasses,
                  Behold the grasse hath lost his pleasant greene,
                  The sweetest sight that euer might be seene.
               
               
                  Ghost.
                  I traiterous Humber, thou shalt find it so,
                  
                     Yea to thy cost thou shalt the same behold,
                  With anguish, sorrow, and with sad laments,
                  The grassie plaines that now do please thine eies,
                  Shall ere the night be coloured all with blood,
                  The shadie groues which now inclose thy campe
                  And yeeld sweet sauours to thy damned corps,
                  Shall ere the night figured all with blood,
                  The profound streame that passeth by thy tents,
                  And with his moisture serueth all thy campe,
                  Shall ere the night conuerted be to blood,
                  Yea with the blood of those thy stragling boyes,
                  For now reuenge shall ease my lingring griefe,
                  And now reuenge shall glut my longing soule.
               
               
                  Hub.
                  Let come what wil, I meane to beare it ou
                        •
                     ,
                  And either liue with glorious victorie,
                  Or die with 
                        •
                     ame renowmed for chiualrie,
                  He is not worthie of the honie combe
                  That shuns the hiues because the bees haue stings,
                  That likes me best that is not got with ease,
                  Which thousand daungers do accompany,
                  For nothing can dismayour regall minde,
                  Which aimes at nothing but a golden crowne,
                  The only vpshot of mine enterprises,
                  Were they inchanted in grimme Plutos court,
                  And kept for treasure mongst his hellish crue,
                  I would either quell the triple Cerberus
                  
                  And all the armie of his ha
                        •
                     efull hags,
                  Or roll the stone with wretched Sisiphon.
                  
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Right martiall be 
                        •
                     hy thoughts my noble sonne,
                  And all thy words sauour of chiualrie,
                  But warlike Segar what strange accidents
                  
                     Makes you to leaue the warding of the campe.
               
               
                  Segar.
                  To armes my Lord, to honourable armes,
                  Take helme and targe in hand the Brittaines come,
                  With greater multit
                        •
                     de then erst the Greekes
                  Brought to the ports of Phrigian Tenidos.
                  
               
               
                  Hum.
                  But what saith Segar to these accidents?
                  What counsell giues he in extremities?
               
               
                  Seg.
                  Why this my Lord experience teacheth vs,
                  That resolution is a sole helpe at need.
                  And this my Lord our honour teacheth vs,
                  That we be bold in euerie enterprise,
                  Then since there is no way but fight or die,
                  Be resolute my Lord for victorie.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  And resolute Segar I meane to be,
                  Perhaps some bli
                        •
                     full starre will fauour vs,
                  And com
                        •
                     ort bring to our perplexed state:
                  Come let vs in and fortifie our campe,
                  So to withstand their strong inuasion.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               The 4. Scene.
               Enter Strumb
                        •
                     , Trumpart, Oliuer, and his sonne VVilliam following them.
               
                  Strum.
                  Nay neighbour Oliuer, if you be so whot, come prepare your selfe, you shall finde two as stout fellowes of vs, as any in all the North.
               
               
                  Oliu.
                  No by my dorth neighbor Strumbo, Ich zee dat you are a man of small zideration, dat wil zeek to iniure your olde vreendes, one of your vamiliar guests, and derefore zeeing your pinion is to deale

withouten reazon, iche and my zonne VVilliam will take dat course, dat shall be fardest vrom reason, how zay you, will you haue my daughter or no?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  A verie hard question neighbour, but I will solue it as I may; what reason haue you to demaund it of me?
               
               
                  VVil.
                  Marry sir, what reason had you when my sister was in the barne to rumble her vpon the haie, and to fish her belly.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Mas thou saist true, well, but would you haue me marry her therefore? No I scorne her, and you, and you. I, I scorne you all.
               
               
                  Oliu.
                  You will not haue her then?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  No as I am a true gentleman.
               
               
                  VVil.
                  Then wil we schoole you, ere you and we part hence.
               
               Enter Margerie and snatch the staffe out of her brothers hand, as he is fighting.
               
                  Strum.
                  I you come in pudding time, or else I had drest them.
               
               
                  Mar.
                  You master sausebox, lobcock, cockscomb, you slopsauce, lickfingers, will you not heare?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  Who speake you too, me?
               
               
                  Mar.
                  I sir to you, Iohn lackhonestie, little wit, is it you that will haue none of me?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  No by my troth, mistressenicebice, how fine you cā nickname me, I think you were broght vp in the vniuersitie of bridewell, you haue your rhetorick so ready at your toongs end, as if you were

neuer well warned when your were yoong.
               
               
                  Mar.
                  Why then goodman cods-head, if you wil haue none of me, farewell.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  If you be so plaine mistresse drigle dragle, fare you well.
               
               
                  Mar.
                  Nay master Strumbo, ere you go from hence we must haue more words, you will haue none of me?
               
               They both fight.
               
                  Strum.
                  Oh my head, my head, leaue, leaue, leaue, I will, I will, I will.
               
               
                  Mar.
                  Vpon that condition I let thee alone.
               
               
                  Oliu.
                  How now master Strumbo, hath my daughter taught you a new lesson?
               
               
                  Strum.
                  I but heare you goodman Oliuer? it will not bee for my ease to haue my head broken euerie day, therefore remedie this and we shall agree.
               
               
                  Oli.
                  Well zonne well, for you are my zonne now, all shall be remedied, daughter be friends with him.
               
               Shake hands.
               
                  Strum.
                  You are a sweet nut; the diuel crack you. Maisters I thinke it be my lucke, my first wife was a louing quiet wench, but this I thinke would weary the diuell. I would she might be burnt as my other wife was. If not, I must runne to the halter for help. O codpeece thou hast done thy maister, this it is to be medling with warme plackets.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               
               The 5. Scene.
               Enter Locrine, Camber, Corineus, Thrasimachus, Assarachus.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Now am I garded with an hoste of men,
                  VVhose hautie courage is inuincible,
                  Now am I hembde with troupes of souldiers,
                  Such as might force Bellona to retire,
                  And make her tremble at their puissance,
                  Now sit I like the mightie god of warre,
                  VVhen armed with his coat of Adament,
                  Mounted his charriot drawne with mighty bulls,
                  He droue the Argiues ouer Xanthus streames.
                  Now cursed Humber doth thy end draw nie,
                  Downe goes the glorie of his victories,
                  And all his fame, and all his high renowne
                  Shall in a moment yeeld to Locrines sword,
                  Thy bragging banners crost with argent streames,
                  The ornaments of thy pauillions
                  Shall all be captiuated with this hand,
                  And thou thy selfe at Albanactus tombe
                  Shalt offred be in satisfaction
                  Of all the wrongs thou didst him when he liu'd.
                  But canst thou tell me braue Thrasimachus,
                  
                  How farre we are distant from Humbers campe?
               
               
                  Thra.
                  My Lord, within your foule accursed groue
                  That beares the tokens of our ouerthrow,
                  This Humber hath intrencht his damned campe.
                  March on my Lord, because I long to see
                  The trecherous Seithians squeltring in their gore.
               
               
                  
                  Locri.
                  Sweet fortune fauour Locrine with a smile,
                  That I may venge my noble brothers death,
                  And in the midst of stately Troinonant,
                  
                  Ile build a temple to thy deitie
                  Of perfect marble and of Iacinthe stones,
                  That it shall passe the high Pyramides
                  
                  VVhich with their top surmount the firmament.
               
               
                  Cam.
                  The armestrong ofspring of the doubted knight,
                  Stout Hercules Alcmenas mightie sonne,
                  That tamde the monsters of the threefold world,
                  And rid the oppressed from the tyrants yokes,
                  Did neuer shew such valiantnesse in fight,
                  As I will now for noble Albanact.
                  
               
               
                  Cori.
                  Full foure score yeares hath Corineus liu'd,
                  Sometime in warre, sometime in quiet peace,
                  And yet I feele my selfe to be as strong
                  As erst I was in sommer of mine age,
                  Able to tosse this great vnwildie club
                  VVhich hath bin painted with my foemens brains,
                  And with this club ile breake the strong arraie
                  Of Humber and his stragling souldiers,
                  Or loose my life amongst the thickest prease,
                  And die with honour in my latest daies,
                  Yet ere I die they all shall vnderstand
                  VVhat force lies in stout Corineus hand.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  And if Thrasimachus detract the fight,
                  Either for weaknesse or for cowardise,
                  Let him not boast that Brutus was his 
                        •
                     ame,
                  Or that braue Corineus was his sire.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Then courage souldiers, first for your safetie,
                  Next for your peace, last for your victory.
Exeunt.
                  
               
               
                  Sound the alarme.
               Enter Hubba and Segar at one doore, and Corineus at the other.
               
                  Cori.
                  Art thou that Humber prince of fugitiues,
                  That by thy treason slewst yoong Albanact?
               
               
                  Hub.
                  I am his sonne that slew yoong Albanact,
                  
                  And if thou take not heed proud Phrigian,
                  
                  Ile send thy soule vnto the Stigian lake,
                  There to complaine of Humbers iniuries.
               
               
                  Cori.
                  You triumph sir before the victorie,
                  For Corineus is not so soone slaine.
                  But cursed Scithians you shall rue the day
                  That ere you came into Albania.
                  
                  So perish that they enuie Brittaines wealth,
                  So let them die with endlesse infamie,
                  And he that seekes his soueraignes ouerthrow,
                  Would this my club might aggrau
                        •
                     te his woe.
                  Strikes them both downe with his club.
                  Enter Humber.
                  
                  Where may I finde some desart wildernesse,
                  Where I may breath out curses as I would,
                  And scare the earth with my condemning voice,
                  Where euerie ecchoes repercussion
                  May helpe me to bewaile mine ouerthrow,
                  And aide me in my sorrowfull laments?
                  Where may I finde some hollow vncoth rocke,
                  Where I may damne, condemne and ban my fill,
                  The heauens, the hell, the earth, the aire, the fire,
                  And vtter curses to the concaue skie,
                  Which may infect the aiery regions,
                  And light vpon the Brittain Locrines head?
                  
                     You vgly sprites that in Cocitus mourne,
                  And gnash your teeth with dolorous laments,
                  Yea fearfull dogs that in black Lathe howle,
                  And scare the ghoasts with your wide open throats,
                  You vgly ghoasts that flying from these dogs,
                  Do plunge your selues in Puryflegiton,
                  
                  Come all of you, and with your shriking notes
                  Accompaie the Brittaines conquering hoast.
                  Come fierce Erinnis horrible with snakes,
                  Come vgly Furies, armed with your whippes,
                  You threefold iudges of black Tartarus,
                  
                  And all the armie of you hellish fiends,
                  With new found tormēts rack proud Locrins bones
                  O gods, and starres, damned be the gods & starres
                  That did not drowne me in faire Thetis plaines.
                  Curst be the sea that with outragious waues
                  With surging billowes did not riue my shippes
                  Against the rocks of high Cerannia,
                  
                  Or swallowed me into her watrie gulfe,
                  Would God we had arriu'd vpon the shore
                  Where Poliphlemus and the Cyclops dwell,
                  Or where the bloodie Anthropomphagie
                  
                  With greedie iawes deuours the wandring wights,
                  Enter the ghoast of Albanact.
                  
                  But why comes Albanacts bloodie ghoast,
                  To bring a corsiue to our miseries?
                  Ist not inough to suffer shamefull flight,
                  But we must be tormented now with ghoasts,
                  With apparitions fearfull to behold.
               
               
                  Ghoast.
                  Reuenge, reuenge for blood.
               
               
                  Hum.
                  So nought wil satisfie your wandring ghost
                  
                     But dire reuenge, nothing but Humbers fall,
                  Because he conquerd you in Vlbany.
                  
                  Now by my soule Humber would be condemn'd
                  To Tan
                           •
                        als hunger or Ixions wheele,
                  Or to the vultur of Prometheus,
                  
                  Rather then that this murther were vndone.
                  When as I die ile dragge thy cursed ghoast
                  Through all the riuers of foule Erebus,
                  
                  Through burning sulphur of the Limbo-lake
                        •
                     
                  
                  To allaie the burning furie of that heate
                  That rageth in mine euerlasting soule.
               
               Exeunt.
               Alba. ghost. Vindicta, vindicta.
            
         
         
            The 4. Act.
            
               Scene 1.
               
               Enter Ate as before. Then let their follow Omphale daughter to the king of Lydia, hauing a club in her hand, and a lions skinne on her back, Hercules following with a distaffe. Then let Omphale turn about, and taking off her pantofle, strike Hercules on the head, then let them depart. Ate remaining, saying;

                     Quem non Argolici mandata seuera Tyranni,
                     Non potuit Iuno vincere, vicit amor.
                  
               
               Stout Hercules the mirrour of the world,
               Sonne to Al
                        •
                     mena and great Iupiter,
               
               After so many conquests wonne in field,
               
                  After so many monsters queld by force,
               Yeelded his valiant heart to Omphale,
               
               A fearfull woman voyd of manly strength,
               She tooke the club, and ware the lions skinne,
               He tooke the wheele, and maidenly gan spinne.
               So martiall Locrine cheerd with victorie,
               Falleth in loue with Humbers concubine,
               And so forgetteth peerlesse Guendoline.
               
               His vncle Corin
                        •
                     us stormes at this,
               And forceth Locrine for his grace to sue,
               Loe here the summe, the processe doth ensue.
               Exit.
            
            
               The 2. Scene.
               Enter Locrine, Camber, Corineus, Assaracus, Thrasimachus, and the souldiers.
               
                  Loc.
                  Thus from the fury of Bellonas broiles,
                  With sound of drumme and trumpets melodie,
                  The Brittaine king returnes triumphanly,
                  The Scithians slaine with great occision,
                  Do aequalize the grasse in multitude,
                  And with their b
                        •
                     ood haue staind the streaming brookes,
                  Offering their bodies and their dearest blood
                  As sacrifice to Albanactus ghoast,
                  Now cursed Humber hast thou payd thy due,
                  For thy deceits and craftie trecheries,
                  For all thy guises, and damned stratagems,
                  With losse of life, and euer during shame.
                  Where are thy horses trapt with burnisht gold,
                  
                     Thy trampling coursers rulde with foming bits?
                  Where are thy souldiers strong and numberlesse,
                  Thy valiant captains and thy noble peeres?
                  Euen as the countrie clownes with sharpest sithes
                  Do mowe the withered grasse from off the earth,
                  Or as the ploughman with his piercing share
                  Renteth the bowels of the fertile fields,
                  And rippeth vp the rootes with razours keene.
                  So Locrine with his mightie curtleaxe,
                  Hath cropped off the heads of all thy Hunnes,
                  
                  So Locrines peeres haue daunted all thy peeres,
                  And droue thine hoast vnto confusion,
                  That thou maist suffer penance for thy fault,
                  And die for murdring valiant Albanact.
                  
               
               
                  Cori.
                  And thus, yea thus shall all the rest be seru'd
                  That seeke to enter Albion gainst our willes.
                  If the braue nation of the Troglodites,
                  
                  If all the coleblacke Aethiopians,
                  
                  If all the forces of the Amazons,
                  
                  If all the hostes of the Barbarian lands,
                  Should dare to enter this our little world,
                  Soone should they rue their ouerbold attempts,
                  That after vs our progenie may say,
                  There lie the beasts that sought to vsurp our land.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  I they are beasts that seeke to vsurp our land,
                  And like to brutish beasts they shall be seru'd.
                  For mightie loue the supreame king of heauen,
                  That guides the concourse of the Metiors,
                  
                  And rules the motion of the azure skie,
                  Fights alwaies for the Brittaines safetie.
                  But staie, mee thinkes I heare some shriking noise,
                  
                     That draweth neare to our pauillion.
               
               Enter the souldiers leading in Estrild.
               
               
                  Estrild.
                  What prince so ere adornd with golden
                  Doth sway the regall sceptler in his hand:
                  And thinks no chance can euer throw him downe,
                  Or that his state shall euerlasting stand,
                  Let him behold poore Estrild in this plight,
                  The perfect platforme of a troubled wight.
                  Once was I guarded with manortiall bands,
                  Compast with princes of the noble blood,
                  Now am I fallen into my foemens hands,
                  And with my death must pacifie their mood.
                  O life the harbour of calamities,
                  O death the hauen of all miseries,
                  I could compare my sorrowes to thy woe,
                  Thou wretched queen of wretched Pergamus,
                  
                  But that thou viewdst thy enemies ouerthrow.
                  Nigh to the rocke of high Caphareus,
                  
                  Thou sawst their death, and then departedst thence,
                  I must abide the victors insolence.
                  The gods that pittied thy continuall griefe,
                  Transformd thy corps, and with thy corps thy care,
                  Poore Estrild liues dispairing of reliefe,
                  For friends in trouble are but fewe and rare.
                  What said I fewe? I fewe or none at all,
                  For cruell death made hauock of them all.
                  Thrice happie they whose fortune was so good,
                  To end their liues, and with their liues their woes,
                  Thrice haplesse I, whome fortune so withstood,
                  That cruelly she gaue me to my foes.
                  Oh souldiers is there any miserie,
                  
                     To be comparde to fortunes trecherie.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  
                     Cam
                           •
                        er, this 
                        •
                     ame shuld be the Scithiā queen.
               
               
                  Cam.
                  So may we iudge by her lamenting words.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  So faire a dame mine eies did neuer see,
                  With floods of woes she seems orewhelmed to bee
               
               
                  Cam.
                  O Locrine hath she not a cause for to be sad?
                  
                     Locrine at one side of the stage.
                  If she haue cause to weepe for Humbers death,
                  And shead sault teares for her ouerthrow,
                  
                     Locrine may well bewaile his proper griefe,
                  
                     Locrine may moue his owne peculiar woe,
                  He being conquerd died a speedie death,
                  And felt not long his lamentable smart,
                  I being conqueror, liue a lingring life,
                  And feele the force of Cupids suddaine stroke.
                  I gaue him cause to die a speedie death,
                  He left me cause to wish a speedie death.
                  Oh that sweete face painted with natures dye,
                  Those ros
                        •
                     all checks mizt with a snowy white,
                  That decent necke surpassing yuorie,
                  Those comely brests which Venus well might spite,
                  Are like to snares which wylie fowlers wrought
                        •
                     
                  
                  Wherein my yeelding heart is prisoner cought.
                  The golden tresses of her daintie haire
                  Which shine like rubies glittering with the sunne,
                  Haue so entrapt poore Locrines louesick heart,
                  That from the same no way it can be wonne.
                  How true is that which oft I heard declard,
                  One dramme of ioy, must haue a pound of care.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  Hard is their fall who from a golden crown
                  Are cast into a sea of wretchednesse.
               
               
                  
                  Loc.
                  Hard is their thrall who by Cupids frowne
                  Are wrapt in waues of endlesse carefulnesse.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  Oh kingdome obiect to all miseries.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Oh loue, the extreemst of all extremities.
                  Let him go into his chaire.
               
               
                  A sold.
                  My Lord, in ransacking the Scithian tents
                  I found this Ladie, and to manifest
                  That earnest zeale I beare vnto your grace,
                  I here present her to your maiestie.
               
               
                  Another sold.
                  He lies my Lord, I found the Ladie first,
                  And here present her to your maiestie.
               
               
                  1. Sold.
                  
                  Presumptuous villaine wilt thou take my prize?
               
               
                  2. Sol.
                  
                  Nay rather thou depriuest me of my right.
               
               
                  1. Sol.
                  
                  Resigne thy title (catiue) vnto me,
                  Or with my sword ile pearce thy cowards loines.
               
               
                  2. Sol.
                  
                  Soft words good sir, tis not inogh to speak
                  A barking dog doth sildome strangers bite.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Vnreuerent villains, striue you in our sight?
                  Take them hence Iaylor to the dungeon,
                  There let them lie and trie their quarrell out.
                  But thou faire princesse be no whit dismayd,
                  But rather ioy that Locrine fauours thee.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  How can he fauor me that slew my spouse?
               
               
                  Loc.
                  The chance of war (my loue) tooke him frō thee
               
               
                  Est.
                  But Locrine was the causer of his death.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  He was an enemy to Locrines state,
                  And slue my noble brother Albanact.
                  
               
               
                  Estr.
                  But he was linckt to me in marriage bond,
                  And would you haue me loue his slaughterer?
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Better to liue, then not to liue at all.
               
               
                  
                  Estrild.
                  Better to die renownd for chastitie,
                  Then liue with shame and endlesse infamie.
                  What would the common sort report of me,
                  If I forget my loue, and cleaue to thee?
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Kings need not feare the vulgar sentences.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  But Ladies must regard their honest name.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Is it a shame to liue in marriage bonds?
               
               
                  Estr.
                  No, but to be a strumpet to a king.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  If thou wilt yeeld to Locrines burning loue,
                  Thou shalt be queene of faire Albania.
                  
               
               
                  Estr.
                  But G
                           •
                        endoline will vndermine my state.
               
               
                  Lo.
                  Vpon mine honor thou shalt haue no harme.
               
               
                  Est.
                  Then lo br
                        ••
                     e Locrine, Estrild yeelds to thee,
                  And by the gods whom thou doest inuocate,
                  By the dead ghoast of thy deceased sire,
                  By thy right hand and by thy burning loue,
                  Take pitie on poore Estrilds wretched thrall.
               
               
                  Cori.
                  Hath Locrine then forgot his Guendoline,
                  
                  That thus he courts the Scithians paramore?
                  VVhat are the words of Brute so soone forgot?
                  Are my deserts so quickly out of minde?
                  Haue I bene faithfull to thy 
                        •
                     ire now dead,
                  Haue I protected thee from Humbers hands,
                  And doest thou quite me with vngratitude?
                  Is this the guerdon for my greeuous wounds,
                  Is this the honour for my labors past?
                  Now by my sword, Locrine I sweare to thee,
                  This iniury of thine shall be repaide.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Vncle, scorne you your royall soueraigne,
                  As if we stood for cyphers in the court?
                  Vpbraid you me with those your benefits?
                  
                     Why it was a subiects dutie so to do.
                  What you haue done for our deceased sire,
                  We know, and all know you haue your reward.
               
               
                  Cori.
                  Auaunt proud princoxe, brau'st thou me withall,
                  Assure thy self though thou be Emperor
                  Thou nere shalt carry this vnpunished.
               
               
                  
                     C
                           •
                        m.
                  
                  Pardon my brother noble Corineus,
                  
                  Pardon this once and it shall be amended.
               
               
                  Assar.
                  Cousin remember Brutus latest words,
                  How he desired you to cherish them,
                  Let not this fault so much incense your minde.
                  Which is not yet passed all remedie.
               
               
                  Cori.
                  Then Locrine, loe I reconcile my selfe,
                  But as thou lou'st thy life, so loue thy wife:
                  But if thou violate those promises,
                  Blood and reuenge shall light vpon thy head.
                  Come let vs backe to stately Troinouant,
                  
                  Where all these matters shall be setteled.
                  
                     Locrine to himselfe.
                  Millions of diuels wayt vpon thy soule.
                  Legion of spirits vexe thy impious ghoast.
                  Ten thousand torments rack thy cursed bones.
                  Let euerie thing that hath the vse of breath,
                  Be instruments and workers of thy death.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               The 3. Scene.
               Enter Humber alone, his haire hanging ouer his shoulders, his armes all bloodie, and a dart in one hand.
               
                  Hum.
                  What basiliskt was hatched in this place,
                  
                     Where euerie thing consumed is to nought?
                  What fearefull Furie haunts these cursed groues
                        •
                     
                  
                  Where not a roote is le
                        •
                     t for Humbers meate?
                  Hath fell Alecto with inuenomed blasts,
                  Breathed forth poyson in these tender plaines?
                  Hath triple Cerberus with contagious fome,
                  Sowde Aconitum mongst these withered hearbes?
                  Hath dreadfull F
                           •
                        mes with her charming rods
                  Brought barreinnesse on euery fruitfull tree?
                  What not a roote, no frute, no beast, no bird,
                  To nourish Humber in this wildernesse?
                  What would you more you fiends of Erebus,
                  
                  My verie intralls burne for want of drinke,
                  My bowels crie, Humber giue vs some meate,
                  But wretched Humber can giue you no meate,
                  These foule accursed groues affoord no meat.
                  This fruitles soyle, this groūd brings forth no mea
                        ••
                     
                  
                  The gods, hard harted gods, yeeld me no meat.
                  Then how can Humber giue you any meat?
                  Enter Strumbo with a pitchforke, and a scotch-cap, saying:
                  How do you maisters, how do you? how haue you scaped hanging this long time? yfaith I haue scapt many a scouring this yeare, but I thanke God I haue past them all with a good couragio, couragio, & my wife & I are in great loue and charitie now, I thank my manhood & my strength, for I wil tell you maisters, vpon a certain day at night I came home, to say the verie truth, with my stomacke full of wine, and ran vp into the chamber where my wife soberl
                        •
                      sate

rocking my little babie, leaning her back against the bed, singing lullabie. Now when she saw me come with my nose formost, thinking that I bin drunk, as I was indeed, snatcht vp a fagot stick in her hand, and came furiously marching towards me with a bigge face, 
                        •
                     s though shee would haue eaten mee at a bit; thundering out these words vnto me. Thou drunken knaue where hast thou bin so long? I shall teach thee how to benight mee an other time; and so shee began to play knaues trumps. Now althogh I trembled fearing she would set her ten commandements in my face, ran within her, and taking her lustily by the midle, I carried her valiantly to the bed, and flinging her vpon it, flung my selfe vpon her, and there I delighted her so with the sport I made, that euer after she wold call me sweet husband, and so banisht brawling for euer: and to see the good will of the wench, she bought with her portion a yard of land, and by that I am now become one of the richest mē in our parish. Well masters whats a clocke, it is now breakfast time, you shall see what meat I haue here for my breakfast.
               
               Let him sit downe and pull out his vittailes.
               
                  Hum.
                  Was euer land so fruitlesse as this land?
                  Was euer groue so gracelesse as this groue?
                  Was euer soyle so barrein as this soyle?
                  Oh no: the land where hungry Fames dwelt,
                  May no wise aequalize this cursed land,
                  No euen the climat of the torrid zone
                  Brings forth more fruit then this accursed groue.
                  
                     Nere came sweet Ceres, nere came Venus here,
                  
                     Triptolemus the god of husbandmen,
                  Nere sowd his seed in this foule wildernesse.
                  The hunger-bitten dogs of Acheron,
                  
                  Chast from the ninefold Puriflegiton,
                  
                  Haue set their footesteps in this damned ground.
                  The yron harted Furies arm'd with snakes,
                  Scattered huge Hidras ouer all the plaines,
                  which haue cōsum'd the grasse, the herbes, the trees
                  which haue drunke vp the flowing water springs.
               
               
                  Strumbo hearing his voice shall start vp and put meat in his pocket, seeking to hide himselfe.
               
                  Hum.
                  Thou great commander of the starry skie,
                  That guid
                        •
                     st the life of euerie mortall wight
                  From the inclosures of the fleeting clouds,
                  Raine downe some foode, or else I faint and die.
                  Powre downe some drinke, or else I faint and die.
                  O Iupiter hast thou sent Mercury
                  
                  In clownish shape to minister some foode?
                  Some meate, some meate, some meate.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  O alasse sir, ye are deceiued, I am not Mercury, I am Strumbo.
                  
               
               
                  Hum.
                  Giue me som meat vilain, giu
                        •
                      me some meat,
                  Or gainst this rock, Ile dash thy cursed braines,
                  And rent thy bowels with my bloodie hands.
                  Giue me some meat villaine, giue me some meat.
               
               
                  Strum.
                  By the faith of my bodie good fellow, I had rather giue an whole oxe then that thou shuldst serue me in that sort. Dash out my braines? O horrible,

terrible. I thinke I haue a quarry of stones in my pocket.
               
               Let him make as though hee would giue him some, and as he putteth out his hand, enter the ghoast of Albanact, and strike him on the hand, and so Strumbo runnes out, Humber following him.
               Exit.
               
                  Alba. ghost.
                  Loe here the gift of fell ambition,
                  Of vsurpation and of trecherie.
                  Loe here the harmes that wait vpon all those
                  That do intrude themselues in others lands,
                  Which are not vnder their dominion.
               
               Exit.
            
            
               The 4. Scene.
               Enter Locrine alone.
               
                  Loc.
                  Seuen yeares hath aged Corineus liu'd
                  To Locrines griefe, and faire Estrild
                           •
                        s woe,
                  And seuen yeares more he hopeth yet to liue,
                  Oh supreme Ioue, annihilate this thought.
                  Should he enioy the aires fruition?
                  Should he enioy the benefit of life?
                  Should he contemplate the radiant sonne,
                  That makes my life equall to dreadfull death?
                  
                     Venus conuay this monster fro the earth,
                  That disobeieth thus thy sacred hests.
                  
                     Cupid conu
                        •
                     y this monster to darke hell,
                  That disanulls thy mothers fugred lawes.
                  
                     Mars with thy target all beset wiih flames,
                  
                     With murthering blade bereaue him of his life,
                  That hindreth Locrine in his sweetest ioyes.
                  And yet for all his diligent aspect,
                  His wrathfull eies piercing like Linces eies,
                  VVell haue I ouermatcht his subtiltie.
                  Nigh Deucolitum by the pleasant Lee,
                  where brackish Thamis slides with siluer streames,
                  Making a breach into the grassie downes,
                  A curious arch of costly marble fraught,
                  Hath Locrine framed vnderneath the ground,
                  The walls whereof, garnish with diamonds,
                  VVith ophirs, rubies, glistering emeralds,
                  And interlast with sun-bright carbuncles,
                  Lighten the roome with artificiall day,
                  And from the Lee with water-flowing pipes
                  The moisture is deriu'd into this arch
                  VVhere I haue placed faire Estrild secretly,
                  Thither eftsoones accompanied with my page,
                  I couertly visit my harts desire,
                  VVithout suspition of the meanest eie,
                  For loue aboundeth still with pollicie:
                  And thither still meanes Locrine to repaire,
                  Till Atropos cut off mine vncles life.
               
               Exit.
            
            
               The 5. Scene.
               Enter Humber alone, saying;
               
                  Hum.
                  
                     O vita miserolonga, faelici breuis,
                  
                  
                     Ehen malorem fames extremum malum.
                  
                  Long haue I liued in this desart caue,
                  VVith eating hawes and miserable rootes,
                  
                     Deuouring leaues and beastly excrements.
                  Caues were my beds, and stones my pillow bea
                        •
                     es,
                  Feare was my sleep, and horror was my dreame,
                  For still me thought at euery boisterous blast
                  Now Locrine comes, now Humber thou must die:
                  So that for feare and hunger, Humbers minde
                  Can neuer rest, but alwaies trembling stands.
                  O what Danubius now may quench my thirst?
                  VVhat Euphrates, what lightfoot Euripus,
                  
                  May now allaie the furie of that heat,
                  VVhich raging in my entralls eates me vp?
                  You gastly diuels of the ninefold Stickes,
                  
                  You damned ghoasts of ioylesse Acheron,
                  
                  You mournfull soules, vext in Abissus vaults,
                  You coleblack diuels of Auern
                           •
                        s pond,
                  Come with your fleshhooks, rent my famisht arms,
                  These armes that haue sustaind their maisters life,
                  Come with your raisours, 
                        •
                     ippe my bowels vp,
                  VVith your sharp fireforks crack my sterued bones,
                  Vse me as you will, so Humber may not liue.
                  Accur
                        •
                     ed gods that rule the starry poles,
                  Accursed Ioue king of the cursed gods,
                  Cast downe your lightning on poore Humbers head,
                  That I may leaue this deathlike life of mine,
                  VVhat heare you not, and shall not Humber die?
                  Nay I will die though all the gods say nay.
                  And gentle Aby take my troubled corps,
                  Take it and keep it from all mor
                        •
                     all eies,
                  That none may say when I haue lost my breath,
                  The very flouds conspirde gainst Humbers death.
                  Fling himselfe into the riuer
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Enter the ghoast of Albanact
                     
                        •
                     
                  
                  Encaedem sequitur, caedes in caede quieso
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Humber is dead, ioy heauens, leap earth, dance trees
                        •
                     
                  
                  Now maist thou reach thy apples Tantalus,
                  
                  And with them feed thy hunger-bitten limmes.
                  Now Sisiphus leaue 
                        •
                     umbling of thy rock,
                  And rest thy restlesse bones vpon the same.
                  Vnbind Ixion cruell Rhadamanth,
                  
                  And laie proud Humber on the whirling wheele.
                  Backe will I post to hell mouth Taenarus
                     
                        •
                     
                  
                  And passe Cocitu
                           •
                        , to the Elysian fields,
                  And tell my father Brutus of these newes.
               
               Exit.
            
         
         
            The 5. Act.
            
               Scene 1.
               
               Enter A
                        •
                     e as before. 
                     
                        •
                     ason leading Creons daughter. Medea following, hath a garland in her hand, and putting it on Creons daughters head, setteth it on fire, and then killing Iason and her, departeth.
               
                  Ate.
                  Nont
                        •
                     m Tincriis excestnat A
                        •
                     tna cauer
                        •
                     is
                        •
                     
                  
                  Laesae furtino quam cor m
                        •
                     lieris amore.
                  
                     Medea seeing Iason leaue her loue,
                  And choose the daughter of the Thebane king,
                  Went to her diuellish charmes to worke reuenge,
                  And raising vp the triple Hecate,
                  
                  With all the rout of the condemned fiends,
                  Framed a garland by her magick skill,
                  With which she wrought Iason and Creons ill.
                  So Guendoline seeing her selfe misvs'd,
                  And H
                           •
                        mbers paramour possesse her place,
                  
                     Flies to the dukedome of Cornubia,
                  
                  And with her brother stout Thrasimachus,
                  
                  Gathering a power of Cornish souldiers,
                  Giues battaile to her husband and his hoste,
                  Nigh to the riuer of great Mertia,
                  
                  The chances of this dismall massacre,
                  That which insueth shortly will vnfold.
Exit.
                  
               
            
            
               The 2. Scene.
               Enter Locrine, Camber, Assarachus, Thrasimachus.
               
               
                  Assa.
                  But tell me cousin, died by brother so?
                  Now who is left to helplesse Albion,
                  
                  That as a piller might vphold our state,
                  That might strike terror to our daring foes?
                  Now who is le
                        •
                     t to haplesse Brittanie,
                  
                  That might defend her from the barbarous hands
                  Of those that still desire her ruinous fall,
                  And seeke to worke her downfall and decaie?
               
               
                  Cam.
                  I vncle death is our common enemie,
                  And none but death can match our matchles power
                  Witnesse the fall of Albioneus crewe,
                  Witnesse the fall of Humber and his Hunnes,
                  
                  And this foule death hath now increast our woe,
                  By taking Corineus from this life,
                  And in his roome leauing vs worlds of care.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  But none may more bewaile his mournful hearse,
                  Then I that am the issue of his loines,
                  Now foule befall that cursed Humbers throat,
                  That was the causer of his lingring wound.
               
               
                  
                  Lo.
                  Teares cannot raise him from the dead again,
                  But wher's my Ladie mistresse Guendoline?
                  
               
               
                  Thra.
                  In Cornwall Locrine is my sister now,
                  Prouiding for my fathers 
                        •
                     unerall.
               
               
                  Lo.
                  And let her ther prouide her mourning weeds
                  And mourne for euer her owne widdow-hood.
                  Ner shall she come within our pallace gate,
                  To countercheck braue Locrine in his loue.
                  Go boy to Deucolitum, downe the Lee,
                  Vnto the arch where louely Estrild lies,
                  Bring her and Sabren strait vnto the court,
                  She shall be queene in G
                           •
                        endolinas roome.
                  Let others waile for Corineus death,
                  I meane not so to macerate my minde,
                  For him that bard me from my hearts desire.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Hath Locrine then forsooke his Guendoline?
                  
                  Is Corineus death so soone 
                        •
                     orgot?
                  If there be gods in heauen, as sure there be,
                  If there be fiends in hell, as needs there must,
                  They will reuenge this thy notorious wrong,
                  And powre their plagues vpon thy cursed head.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  What prat'st thou pesant to thy soueraigne
                        •
                     
                  
                  Or art thou strooken in some extasie?
                  Doest thou not tremble at our royall lookes?
                  Dost thou not quake when mighty Locrine frowns?
                  Thou beardlesse boy, wert not that Locrine scornes
                  To vexe his mind with such a hartlesse childe,
                  With the sharpe point of this my battale-axe,
                  I would send thy soule to Puri
                           •
                        legiton.
                  
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Though I be yoong and of a tender age,
                  Yet will I cope with Locrine when he dares.
                  
                     My noble father with his conquering sword,
                  Slew the two giants kings of Aquitaine.
                  
                  
                     Thrasimachus is not so degenerate
                  That he should feare and tremble at the lookes
                  Or taunting words of a venerian squire.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Menacest thou thy roiall soueraigne,
                  Vnciuill, not beseeming such as you.
                  Iniurious traitor (for he is no lesse
                  That at defiance standeth with his king)
                  Leaue these thy tauntes, leaue these thy bragging words,
                  Vnlesse thou meane to leaue thy wretched life.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  If princes staine their glorious dignitie
                  With ougly spots of monstrous infamie,
                  They leese their former estimation,
                  And throw themselues into a hell of hate.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Wilt thou abuse my gentle patience,
                  As though thou didst our high displeasure scorne?
                  Proud boy, y• thou maist know thy prince is mou'd,
                  Yea greatly mou'd at this thy swelling pride,
                  We banish thee for euer from our court.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Then 
                        •
                     osell Locrine, looke vnto thy selfe,
                  
                     Thrasimachus will venge this iniurie.
Exit.
                  
               
               
                  Lo.
                  Farwel proud boy, and learn to vse thy toong.
               
               
                  Assa.
                  Alas my Lord, you shuld haue cald to mind
                  The latest words that Brutus spake to you,
                  How he desirde you by the obedience
                  That children ought to beare vnto their sire
                        •
                     
                  
                  To loue and fauour Ladie Guendoline,
                  
                  Consider this, that if the iniurie
                  Do mooue her mind, as certainly it will,
                  Warre and dissention followes speedely.
                  
                     What though her power be not so great as yours,
                  Haue you not seene a mightie elephant
                  Slaine by the biting of a 
                        •
                     illy mouse?
                  Euen so the chance of warre inconstant is.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Peace vncle peace, and cease to talke hereof,
                  For he that seekes by whispering this or that,
                  To trouble Locrine in his sweetest life,
                  Let him perswade himselfe to die the death.
               
               Enter the Page, with Estrild and Sabren.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  O say me Page, tell me where is the king,
                  Wherefore doth he send for me to the court,
                  Is it to die, is it to end my life,
                  Say me sweete boy, tell me and do not faine?
               
               
                  Page.
                  No trust me madame, if you will credit the litle honestie that is yet le
                        •
                     t me, there is no such danger as you feare, but prepare your selfe, yonders the king.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  Then Estrild lift thy dazled spirits vp,
                  And blesse that blessed time, that day, that houre,
                  That warlike Locrine first did fauour thee.
                  Peace to the king of Brittany my loue,
                  Peace to all those that loue and fauour him.
                  
                     Locrine taking her vp.
                  Doth Estrild fall with such submission
                  Before her seruant king of Albion?
                  
                  Arise faire Ladie, leaue this lowly cheare,
                  Lift vp those lookes that cherish L
                           •
                        crines heart,
                  That I may freely view that ros
                        •
                     all face,
                  Which so intangled hath my louesick brest,
                  Now to the court where we will court it out,
                  And passe the night and day in Venus sports.
                  
                     Frollick braue peeres, be ioyfull with your king.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               The 3. Scene.
               Enter Guendoline, Thrasimachus, Madan, and the souldiers.
               
                  Guen.
                  You gentle winds that with your modest blasts,
                  Passe through the circuit of the heauenly vault,
                  Enter the clouds vnto the throne of Ioue,
                  
                  And beare my praiers to his all hearing eares,
                  For Locrine hath forsaken Guendoline,
                  
                  And learne to loue proud Humbers concubine.
                  You happie sprites that in the concaue skie
                  With pleasant ioy, enioy your sweetest loue,
                  Shead foorth those teares with me, which then you shed
                  Whē first you wood your ladies to your wils,
                  Those teares are fittest for my wofull case,
                  Since Locrine shunnes my nothing pleasant face.
                  Blush heauens, blush sunne, and hide thy shining beams,
                  Shadow thy radiāt locks in gloomy clouds,
                  Denie thy cheerfull light vnto the world,
                  VVhere nothing raigns but falshood and deceit.
                  VVhat said I, falshood? I that filthie crime,
                  For Locrine hath forsaken Guendoline.
                  
                  Behold the heauens do waile for Guendoline.
                  
                  The shining sunne doth blush for Guendoline.
                  
                  The liquid aire doth weep for Guendoline.
                  
                  The verie ground doth grone for Guendoline.
                  
                  I they are milder then the Brittaine king,
                  For he reiecteth lucklesse Guendoline.
                  
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Sister, complaints are b
                        •
                     otlesse in this cause,
                  This open wrong must haue an open plague:
                  This plague must be repaid with grieuous warre,
                  
                     This warre must finish with Locrinus death,
                  His death will soone extinguish our complaints.
               
               
                  Guen.
                  O no, his death wil more augment my woes,
                  He was my husband braue Thrasimachus,
                  
                  More deare to me then the apple of mine eie,
                  Nor can I finde in heart to worke his scathe.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Madame if not your proper iniuries,
                  Nor my exile, can moue you to reuenge,
                  Thinke on our father Corineus words,
                  His words to vs stands alwaies for a lawe,
                  Should Locrine liue that caus'd my fathers death?
                  Should Locrine liue that now diuorceth you?
                  The heauens, the earth, the aire, the fire reclaimes,
                  And then why should all we denie the same?
               
               
                  Guen.
                  Then henceforth farwel womanish complaints,
                  All childish pitie henceforth then farwel:
                  But cursed Locrine looke vnto thy selfe,
                  For Nemesis the mistresse of reuenge,
                  Sits arm'd at all points on our dismall blades,
                  And cursed Estrild that inflamed his heart,
                  Shall if I liue, die a reproachfull death.
               
               
                  Madan.
                  Mother, though nature makes me to lament,
                  My lucklesse fathers froward lecherie,
                  Yet for he wrongs my Ladie mother thus,
                  I if I could, my selfe would worke his death.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  See madame see, the desire of reuenge
                  Is in the children of a tender age.
                  Forward braue souldiers into Mertia,
                  
                  Where we shall braue the coward to his face.
               
               Exeunt.
            
            
               
               The 4. Scene.
               Enter Locrine, Estrild, Habren, Assarachus, and the souldiers.
               
                  Loc.
                  Tell me Assarachus, are the Cornish chuffes
                  In such great number come to Mertia,
                  
                  And haue they pitched there their pettie hoste,
                  So close vnto our royall mansion.
               
               
                  Assa.
                  They are my Lord, and meane incontinent
                  To bid defiance to your maiestie.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  It makes me laugh, to thinke that Guendoline
                  
                  Should haue the hart to come in armes gainst me.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  Alas my Lord, the horse wil runne amaine
                  When as the spurre doth gall him to the bone,
                  Iealousie Locrine hath a wicked sting.
               
               
                  
                     L
                           •
                        c.
                  
                  Saist thou so Estrild, beauties paragon?
                  Well we will trie her chollor to the proofe,
                  And make her know Locrine can brooke no braues.
                  March on Assarachus, thou must lead the way,
                  And bring vs to their proud pauillion.
Exeunt.
                  
               
            
            
               The 5. Scene.
               Enter the ghost of Corineus, with thunder & lightening.
               
                  Ghost.
                  Behold the circuit of the azure sky,
                  Throwes forth sad throbs, and grieuous suspirs,
                  Preiudicating Locrines ouerthrow,
                  The fire casteth forth sharpe dartes of flames,
                  The great foundation of the triple world,
                  Trembleth and quaketh with a mightie noise,
                  Presaging bloodie massacres at hand.
                  The wandring birds that flutter in the darke,
                  When hellish night in cloudie charriot sea
                        •
                     ed,
                  
                     Casteth her mists on shadie Tellus face,
                  VVith sable mantels couering all the earth,
                  Now flies abroad amid the cheerfull day,
                  Foretelling some vnwonted miserie.
                  The snarling curres of darkened Tartarus,
                  
                  Sent from Auernus ponds by Radamanth,
                  
                  VVith howling ditties pester euerie wood,
                  The watrie ladies and the light foote fawnes,
                  And all the rabble of the wooddie Nymphs,
                  All trembling hide themselues in shadie groues,
                  And shrowd themselues in hideous hollow pitts.
                  The boysterous Boreas thundreth forth reuenge.
                  The stonie rocks crie out on sharpe reuenge.
                  The thornie bush pronounceth dire reuenge.
                  Sound the alarme.
                  Now Corineus staie and see reuenge,
                  And feede thy soule with Locrines ouerthrow.
                  Behold they come, the trumpets call them foorth.
                  The roaring drummes summon the souldiers.
                  Loe where their army glistere
                        •
                     h on the plaines,
                  Throw forth thy lightning mightie Iupiter,
                  
                  And powre thy plagues on cursed Locrines head.
               
               Stand a side.
               Enter Locrine, Estrild, Assaracus, Habren and their soldiers at one doore, Thrasimachus, Guendolin, Madan and their followers at an other.
               
                  Loc.
                  VVhat is the tigre started from his caue?
                  Is Guendoline come from Cornubia,
                  
                  That thus she braueth Locrine to the teeth?
                  And hast thou found thine armour prettie boy,
                  Accompanied with these thy stragling mates?
                  
                     Beleeue me but this enterprise was bold,
                  And well deserueth commendation.
               
               
                  Guen.
                  I Locrine, traiterous Locrine we are come,
                  With full pretence to seeke thine ouerthrow,
                  What haue I don that thou shouldst scorn me thus?
                  What haue I said that thou shouldst me reiect?
                  Haue I bene disobedient to thy words?
                  Haue I bewrayd thy Arcane secrecie?
                  Haue I dishonoured thy marriage bed
                  With filthie crimes, or with lasciuious lusts?
                  Nay it is thou that hast dishonoured it,
                  Thy filthie minde orecome with filthie lusts,
                  Yeeldeth vnto affections filthie darts.
                  Vnkind, thou wrongst thy first and truest feer,
                  Vnkind, thou wrongst thy best and dearest friend
                        •
                     
                  
                  Vnkind, thou scornst all skilfull Brutus lawes,
                  Forgetting father, vncle, and thy selfe.
               
               
                  Estr.
                  Beleeue me Locrine but the girle is wise,
                  And well would seeme to make a vastall Nunne,
                  How finely frames she her oration.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  
                     Locrin we came not here to fight with words
                  Words that can neuer winne the victorie,
                  But for you are so merie in your 
                        •
                     rumpes,
                  Vnsheath your swords, and trie it out by force,
                  That we may see who hath the better hand.
               
               
                  Loc.
                  Thinkst thou to dare me bold Thrasimachus?
                  Thinkst thou to feare me with thy taunting braues,
                  Or do we seeme too weake to cope with thee?
                  Soone shall I shew thee my fine cutting blade,
                  And with my sword the messenger of death,
                  Seal thee an acquitāce for thy bold attempts.
Exeūt.
                  
               
               
                  Sound the alarme. Ente
                     •
                   
                  Locrine, Assaracus, and 
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ouldier at one doore, Guendoline, Thrsimachus, at an other, Locrine and his followers driuen back. Then let Locrine & Estrild enter again in a maze.
               
                  Loc.
                  O faire Estrilda, we haue lost the field,
                  
                     Thrasimachus hath wonne the vic
                        •
                     orie,
                  And we are lest to be a laughing s
                        •
                     ocke,
                  Scoft at by those that are ou
                        •
                      enemies,
                  Ten thousand souldiers armd with sword & shield,
                  Preuaile against an hundreth thousand men,
                  
                     Thrasimachus incenst with 
                        •
                     uming ire,
                  Rageth amongst the faint heart souldiers
                  Like to grim Mars, when couered wi
                        •
                     h his 
                        •
                     arge
                  He fought with Diomedes in the field,
                  Close by the bankes of siluer Simois,
                  
                  Sound the alarme.
                  O louely Estrild now the chase begins,
                  Ner shall we see the stately Traynouant
                  
                  Mounted on the coursers garnisht all with pearl
                        •••
                     
                  
                  Ner shall we view the faire Concordia,
                  
                  Vnlesse as captiues we be thither brought.
                  Shall Locrine then be taken prisoner,
                  By such a yoongling as Thrasimachus?
                  Shall Guendolina captiuate my loue?
                  Ner shall mine eies behold that dismall houre,
                  Ner will I view that ruthfull spectacle,
                  For with my sword this sharpe curtl
                        •
                     axe,
                  Ile cut in sunder my accursed heart.
                  But O you iudges of the nine
                        •
                     old Stix,
                  
                  Which with incessant torments racke the ghoa
                        ••
                     s
                  Within the bottomlesse Abissus pits,
                  
                     You gods commanders of the heauenly spheres,
                  Who
                        •
                     e will and lawes irreuocable stands,
                  Forgiue, forgiue, this soule accursed sinne,
                  Forget O gods this foule condemned fault:
                  And now my sword that in so many fights kisse his sword.
                  Hast sau'd the life o
                        •
                      
                     Brutus and his sonne,
                  End now his life that wisheth still for death,
                  Worke now his death that wisheth still for death,
                  Worke now his death that hateth still his life.
                  Farwell faire Estrild, beauties paragon,
                  Fram'd in the front of forlorne miseries,
                  Ner shall mine eies behold thy sunshine eies,
                  But when we meet in the Elysian fields,
                  Thither I go before with hastenened pace.
                  Farwell vaine world, and thy inticing snares.
                  Forwell 
                        •
                     oule sinne, and thy inticing pleasures.
                  And welcome death the end of mortall smart,
                  Welcome to Locri
                           •
                        es ouerburthened hart.
               
               Thrust himselfe through with his sword.
               
                  Estr.
                  Break hart with sobs and greeuous suspirs,
                  Streame forth you teares from forth my watry eies,
                  Helpe me to mourne for warlike Locrines death,
                  Powre downe your teares you watry regions,
                  For mightie Locrine is bereft of life.
                  O 
                        •
                     ickle fortnne, O vnstable world,
                  What else are all things that this globe containes,
                  But a confused chaos of mishaps?
                  VVherein as in a glasse we plainly see,
                  That all our life is but as a Tragedie.
                  Since mightie kings are subiect to mishap
                        •
                     
                  
                  I mightie kings are subiect to mishap,
                  Since martiall Locrine is bereft of life,
                  
                     Shall Estrild liue then after Locrines death?
                  Shall loue of life barre her from Locrines sword?
                  O no, this sword that hath bereft his life,
                  Shall now dep
                        •
                     iue me of my fleeting soule:
                  Strengthen these hands O mightie Iupiter,
                  
                  That I may end my wofull miserie.
                  
                     Locrine I come, Locrine I follow thee.
               
               Kill her selfe.
               Sound the alarme. Enter Sabren.
               
               
                  Sab.
                  What dolefull sight, what ruthful
                        •
                      spectacle
                  Hath fortune offred to my haplesse hart?
                  My father slaine with such a fatall sword,
                  My mother murthred by a mortall wound?
                  What Thracian dog, what barbarous Mirmidon,
                  
                  Would not relent at such a ruthfull case?
                  What fierce Achilles, what hard stonie flint,
                  Would not bemone this mournfull Tragedie?
                  
                     Locrine the map of magnanimiti
                        •
                     ,
                  Lies slaughtered in this foule accursed caue,
                  
                     Estrild the perfect patterne of renowne,
                  Natures sole wonder, in whose bewteous brests
                  All heauenly grace and vertue was inshrinde,
                  Both massacred are dead within this caue,
                  And with them dies faire Pallas and sweet loue.
                  Here lies a sword, and Sabren hath a heart,
                  This blessed sword shall cut my cursed heart,
                  And bring my soule vnto my parents ghoasts,
                  That they that liue and view our Tragedie,
                  May mourne our case with mournfull plaudities.
                  Let her offer to kill her selfe.
                  Ay me, my virgins hands are too too weake,
                  
                     To penetrate the bullwarke of my brest,
                  My fingers vsde to tune the amorous lute,
                  Are not of force to hold this steely glaine,
                  So I am lie
                        •
                     t to waile my parents death,
                  Not able for to worke my proper death.
                  Ah Locrine honord for thy noblenesse.
                  Ah Estrild, famous for thy constancie.
                  Il may they fare that wrought your mortall ends.
               
               Enter Guendoline, Thrasimachus, Madan, and the souldiers.
               
                  Guen.
                  Search souldiers search, find Locrin and his loue,
                  Find the proud strumpet Humbers concubine,
                  That I may change those her so pleasing lookes,
                  To pale and ignominious aspect.
                  Find me the issue of their cursed loue,
                  Find me yoong Sabren, Locrines only ioy,
                  That I may glut my mind with lukewarme blood,
                  Swiftly distilling from the bastards brest,
                  My fathers ghoast stil haunts me for reuenge,
                  Crying, reuenge my ouerhastened death,
                  My brothers exile, and mine owne diuorce,
                  Banish remorse cleane from my brazen heart,
                  All mercie from mine adamin
                        •
                     iue brests.
               
               
                  Thra.
                  Nor doth thy husband louely Guendoline,
                  
                  That wonted was to guide our staile
                        •
                     se steps,
                  Enioy this light; see where he murdred lies:
                  By lucklesse lot and froward frowning fate,
                  And by him lies his louely paramour
                  Faire Estrild goared with a dismall sword,
                  And as it seemes, both murdred by themselues,
                  Clasping each other in their feebled armes,
                  
                     VVith louing zeale, as if for companie
                  Their vncontented corpes were yet content
                  To passe soule Stix in Ch
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        ns ferry-boat.
               
               
                  Guen.
                  And hath proud Estrild then preuented me
                        •
                     
                  
                  Hath she escaped Guend
                           •
                        lin
                           •
                        s wrath,
                  Violently by cutting off her life?
                  VVould God she had the monstrous Hidr
                           •
                        s liues,
                  That euery houre she might haue died a death
                  VVorse then the swing of old Ixions wheele,
                  And euery houre reuiue to die againe,
                  As Titius bound to hous
                        •
                     es Caucas
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  Doth feed the substance of his owne mishap,
                  And euery day for want of foode doth die,
                  And euery night doth liue againe to die.
                  But staie, mee thinks I heare some fainting voice,
                  Mournfully weeping for their lucklesse death.
               
               
                  Sa.
                  You mountain nimphs which in these desarts raign,
                  Cease off your ha
                        •
                     tie chase of sauadge beasts,
                  Prepare to see a heart opprest with care,
                  Addresse your eares to heare a mournfull stile,
                  No humane 
                        •
                     trength, no work can work my weale,
                  Care in my hart so tyrant like doth deale.
                  You Driades and lightfoo
                        •
                     e Satiri,
                  
                  You gracious Faries which at euening tide,
                  Your closets leaue with heauenly beautie storde,
                  And on your shoulders spread your golden locks,
                  You sauadge beares in caues and darkened dennes,
                  Come waile with me, the martiall Locrines death.
                  Come mourn with me, for bea
                        •
                     teous Estrilds det
                        •
                     .
                  Ah lo
                        •
                     ing parents little do you know,
                  what sorrow Sabren suffers for your thrall.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uen.
                  
                  But may this be, and is it possible,
                  Liues Sabren yet to expiat my wrath?
                  Fortune I t
                        •
                     anke thee for this curtesie,
                  And let me neuer see one prosperous houre,
                  If Sabren die not a reproachfull death.
               
               
                  Sab.
                  Hard harted death, that when the wretched call,
                  Art furthest off, and sildom heer
                        •
                     t at all.
                  But in the midst of fortunes good successe,
                  Vncalled comes, and sheeres our life in twaine:
                  VVhen wil that houre, that blessed houre draw nie,
                  VVhen poore distressed Sabren may be gone.
                  Sweet Atropos cut off my fatall thred,
                  VVhat art thou death, shall not poore Sabren die?
               
               
                  Guendoline taking her by the chin shall say thus.
               
                  Guen.
                  Yes damsell yes, Sabren shall surely die,
                  Though all the world should seeke to saue her life,
                  And not a common death shall Sabren die,
                  But after strange and greeuous punishments
                  Shortly inflicted vpo
                        •
                      thy bastards head,
                  Thou shalt be cast into the cursed streames,
                  And feede the fishes with thy tender flesh.
               
               
                  Sab.
                  And thin
                        ••
                      thou then thou cruell homicid,
                  That these thy deeds shall be vnpunished?
                  No traitor no, the gods will venge these wrongs,
                  The fiends of hell will marke these iniuries.
                  Neuer shall these blood-sucking mastie curres,
                  Bring wretched Sabren to her latest home.
                  For I my selfe inspire of thee and thine,
                  Meane to abridge my former destenies,
                  And that which Locrines sword could not perform,
                  This pleasant streame shall present bring to passe.
               
               She drowneth her self
                     •
                  .
               
                  
                  Guen.
                  One mischiefe followes anothers ne
                        •
                     ke,
                  VVho would haue thought so yoong a mayd as she
                  VVith such a courage wold haue soug
                        •
                     t her death.
                  And for because 
                        •
                     his Riuer was the plac
                        •
                     
                  
                  VVhere little S
                           •
                        bre
                           •
                        
                      resolutely died,
                  
                     Sabren for euer shall this same be call'd.
                  And as for Locrine our deceased spouse,
                  Because he was th
                        •
                      sonn
                        •
                      of mightie Brute
                     
                        •
                     
                  
                  To whom we owe our country, liu
                        •
                     s and goods,
                  He shall be buried in a stately 
                        •
                     ombe,
                  Close by his aged father Br
                           •
                        tus bones,
                  VVith such great pomp and great solemnitie
                        •
                     
                  
                  As well beseemes so braue a prince as 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     
                  
                  Let Estrild lie without the sh
                        •
                     llow 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  VVithout the honour due vnto the dead
                        •
                     
                  
                  Because she was the author of this warre.
                  Retire braue followers vnto Troyno
                           ••••
                        
                     
                     
                        •
                     
                  
                  VVhere we will celebrate thes
                        •
                      exequies
                        •
                     
                  
                  And place yoong Locri
                           ••
                        
                      in his fathers tombe.
               
               
                  Exe
                        •
                     nt omne
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Ate.
                  Lo here the end of lawlesse trecherie,
                  Of vsurpation and ambitious pride,
                  And they that for their priuate amours dare
                  Turmoil
                        •
                      ou
                        •
                      land, and s
                        •••
                     heir brolles abroach,
                  Let them be warned by these premisses,
                  And as a wom
                        •
                     n was the onely cause
                  That ciuill discord was then stirred vp,
                  So let vs pray for that renowned 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  That eight and thirtie yeares 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     w
                        •
                     yd,
                  In quiet peace and sweet 
                        •
                     elicitie,
                  And euery wight that seekes her g
                        •••
                     es smart,
                  wold that this sword wer pi
                        ••
                     ee
                        ••
                      in his hart.
Exit.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   