
      
         
            
            A FVNERALL Elegye Jn memory of the late Ʋertuous Maiſter William Peter of Whipton neere Exceſter.
            By W.S.
            Imprinted at London by G. Eld. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO MAISTER Iohn Peter of Boohaye in Deuon. Eſq.
            
            
               THe loue I bore to your brother, and will doe to his memory, hath crau'd from me this laſt duty of a friend; I am heerein but a ſecond to the priuiledge of Truth who can warrant more in his behalfe, then I vndertooke to deliuer. Exerciſe in this kind I will little affect, and am leſſe adicted to, but there muſt be miracle in that labour, which to witneſſe my remembrance

to this departed Gentleman, I would not willingly vndergoe: yet what-ſoeuer is heere done, is done to him, and to him onely. For whom, and whoſe ſake, I will not forget to remember any friendly reſpects to you, or to any of thoſe that haue lou'd him for himſelfe; and himſelfe for his deſerts.
            
               W.S.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Funerall Elegie.
            SInce Time, and his predeſtinated end,
            Abridg'd the circuit of his hope-full dayes;
            Whiles both his Youth and Vertue did intend,
            The good indeuor's, of deſeruing praiſe:
            What memorable monument can laſt,
            Whereon to build his neuer blemiſht name?
            But his owne worth, wherein his life was grac't?
            Sith as it euer hee maintain'd the ſame.
            Obliuion in the darkeſt day to come,
            When ſinne ſhall tread on merit in the duſt;
            Cannot raſe out the lamentable tombe
            Of his Short-liu'd deſert's: but ſtill they muſt
            Euen in the hearts and memories of men,
            Claime fit Reſpect; that they, in euery lim,
            Remembring what he was, with comfort then
            May patterne out, One truly good by him.
            For hee was truly good; if honeſt care,
            Of harmleſſe conuerſation, may commend
            A life free from ſuch ſtaines, as follyes are;
            Ill recompenced onely in his end.
            Nor can the toung of him who lou'd him leaſt,
            (If there can bee minority of loue,
            To one ſuperlatiue aboue the reſt,
            Of many men in ſteddy faith) reproue
            His conſtant temper, in the equall weight
            Of thankfulneſſe, and kindneſſe: Truth doth leaue
            Sufficient proofe, he was in euery right,
            As kinde to giue, as thankfull to receaue.
            
            The curious eye, of a quick brain'd ſuruey,
            Could ſcantly find a mote amidſt the fun,
            
               Of his too-ſhortned dayes: or make a prey
            Of any faulty error he had done.
            Not that he was aboue the ſpleenfull ſence
            And ſpight of mallice; but for that he had
            Warrant enough in his owne innocence,
            Againſt the ſting of ſome in nature bad.
            Yet who is hee ſo abſolutely bleſt,
            That liues incompaſt in a mortall frame?
            Some-time in reputation not oppreſt?
            By ſome in nothing famous but defame?
            Such in the By-path and the Ridg-way lurke
            That leades to ruine; in a ſmooth pretence
            Of what they doe, to be a ſpeciall worke,
            Of ſingleneſſe, not tending to offence.
            Whoſe very vertues are not to detract,
            Whiles hope remaines of gaine (baſe fee of ſlaues)
            Deſpiſing chiefly, men in fortunes wrackt,
            But death to ſuch giues vnremembred graues.
            Now therein liu'd he happy, if to bee
            Free from detraction, happineſſe it bee,
            His yonger yeares, gaue comfortable hope
            To hope for comfort, in his riper youth;
            Which (harueſt-like) did yeeld againe the crop
            Of Education; betterd, in his truth:
            Thoſe noble twins of heauen infuſed races,
            
               Learning and Wit, refined in their kind:
            Did ioyntly both, in their peculiar graces,
            Enrich the curious temple of his mind.
            Indeed a temple, in whoſe precious white,
            Sot Reason by Religion ouer ſwayd:
            Teaching his other ſenſes, with delight,
            How Piety and Zeale ſhould bee obey'd.
            
               Not fruitleſly in prodigall expence,
            Waſting his beſt of time: but ſo content
            With Reaſons golden Meane to make defence,
            Againſt the aſſault of youth's incouragement:
            As not the tide of this ſurrounding age,
            (When now his Fathers death had freed his will)
            Could make him ſubiect to the drunken rage,
            Of ſuch whoſe onely glory is their ill.
            Hee from the happy knowledge of the wiſe,
            Drawes vertue to reprooue ſecured fooles;
            And ſhuns the glad ſleights of inſnaring vice,
            To ſpend his ſpring of dayes in ſacred ſchooles.
            Heere gaue hee dyet to the ſick deſires,
            That day by day, aſſault the weaker man;
            And with fit moderation ſtill retires,
            From what doth batter Vertue now and than.
            But that I not intend in full diſcourſe,
            To progreſſe out his life; I could diſplay,
            A Good man in each part exact; and force
            The common voyce to warrant what I ſay.
            For it his fate and heauen had decreed,
            That full of dayes hee might haue liu'd to ſee
            The graue in peace; the times that ſhould ſucceed
            Had been beſt-ſpeaking witneſſes with mee.
            Whoſe conuerſation ſo vntoucht, did moue
            Reſpect moſt in it ſelfe, as who would ſcan
            His Honeſty and Worth, by them might prooue,
            Hee was a kind, true, perfect, gentleman.
            Not in the out-ſide of diſgracefull folly
            Courting Opinion, with vnfit diſguiſe;
            Affecting faſhions; nor addicted wholy
            To vnbeſeeming bluſhleſſe vanities:
            
               "But ſuting ſo his habit and deſire,
            "As that his Vertue was his beſt Attire.
            
            Not in the waſt of many idle words
            Car'd hee to be heard talke; nor in the flote
            Of fond conceit (ſuch as this age affordes)
            By vaine diſcourſe vpon himſelfe to dote.
            For his becomming ſilence, gaue ſuch grace
            To his iudicious parts; as what hee ſpake
            Seem'd rather anſwers (which the wiſe imbrace)
            Then buſie queſtions, ſuch as talkers make.
            And though his qualities might well deſerue
            Iuſt commendation, yet his furniſht mind
            Such harmony of goodneſſe did preſerue,
            As Nature neuer built in better kind.
            Knowing the beſt, and therefore not preſuming
            In knowing, but for that it was the beſt:
            Euer within himſelfe free choyce reſuming
            Of true perfection, in a perfect breſt.
            So that his Minde and Body made an In,
            The one to lodge the other, both like fram'd
            For faire conditions; gueſts that ſooneſt win
            Applauſe, in generality well-fam'd,
            If trim behauiour, geſtures mild, diſcreet
            Endeuors; modeſt ſpeech; beſeeming mirth;
            True friendſhip; actiue grace; perſwaſion ſweete;
            Delightfull loue, innated from his birth;
            Acquaintance vnfamiliar; carriage iuſt;
            Offenceleſſe reſolution; wiſht ſobriety;
            Cleane-temper'd Moderation; ſteddy Truſt;
            Vnburthen'd conſcience; vnfain'd Piety;
            If theſe, or all of theſe, knit faſt in one
            Can merit praiſe: then iuſtly may wee ſay,
            
               Not any from this frailer ſtage is gon,
            Whoſe name is like to liue a longer day.
            Though not in eminent courts, or places great,
            For popular concourſe; yet in that ſoile
            Where hee inioy'd his birth, life, death, and ſeat,
            Which now ſits mourning his vntimely ſpoile.
            And as much glory is it to be good;
            For priuate perſons, in their priuate home;
            As thoſe deſcended from illuſtrious bloud,
            In publick view of greatneſſe: whence they come.
            Though I rewarded with ſome ſadder taſte,
            Of knowing ſhame; by feeling it haue prou'd
            My countries thankleſſse miſconſtruction; caſt
            Vpon my name and credit, both vnlou'd
            By ſome, whoſe fortunes ſunck into the wane
            Of Plenty and Deſert, haue ſtroue to win
            Iuſtice by wrong; and ſifted to imbane
            My reputation, with a witleſſe ſinne,
            Yet Time, the Father of vnbluſhing Truth,
            May one day lay ope malice which hath croſt it:
            And right the hopes of my indangered youth,
            Purchaſing credit in the place I loſt it.
            Euen in which place, the ſubject of the verſe
            (Vnhappy matter of a mourning ſtile)
            Which now that ſubjects merits doth rehearſe,
            Had education, and new beeing: while
            By faire demeanor, he had wonne repute
            Amongſt the All of all that liued there:
            For that his actions did ſo wholy ſute
            With worthyneſſe, ſtill memorable here.
            The many houres till the day of doome,
            Will not conſume his life and hapleſſe end:
            
               For ſhould he lye obſcur'd without a toombe,
            Time would to time his honeſty commend.
            Whiles Parents to their children will make known,
            And they to their poſterity impart,
            How ſuch a man was ſadly ouerthrowne,
            By a hand guided by a cruell heart.
            "Whereof as many as ſhall heare that ſadneſſe,
            "Wil blame ye or es hard fate, the others madneſſe.
            Whiles ſuch as doe recount that tale of woe,
            Told by remembrance of the wiſeſt heades,
            Will in the end conclude the matter ſo,
            As they will all goe weeping to their bedds.
            For when the world lies winterd in the ſtormes
            Of fearefull conſummation; and layes downe,
            Th' vnſteddie change of his fantaſtick formes,
            Expecting euer to be ouer-throwne:
            When the proud height of much affected ſinne
            Shall ripen to a head, and in that pride,
            End in the miſeries it did begin,
            And fall amidſt the glory of his tide:
            Then in a booke where euery worke is writ,
            Shall this man's actions bee reueal'd; to ſhew
            The gainfull fruit of well-imployed wit,
            Which payed to heauen the debt that it did owe:
            Heere ſhall be reckoned vp the conſtant faith,
            Neuer vntrue, where once he loue profeſt;
            Which is a miracle in men (one faith)
            Long ſought, though rarely found: and he is beſt
            "who cā mak freindſhip, in thoſe times of change,
            "Admired more, for being firme then ſtrange.
            When thoſe weake houſes of our brittle fleſh,
            Shall ruin'd bee by death; our grace, and ſtrength,
            
               Youth, memory and ſhape, that made vs freſh,
            Caſt downe, and vtterly decay'd at length:
            Whē all ſhall turne to duſt from whence we came,
            And we low leueld in a narrow graue,
            What can we leaue behind vs but a name?
            Which by a life well led may honour haue?
            Such honor, ô thou youth vntimely loſt,
            Thou didſt deſerue and haſt; for though thy ſoule
            Hath tooke her flight to a diuiner coaſt,
            Yet here on earth thy fame liues euer whole.
            In euery heart ſeald vp, in euery toung
            Fit matter to diſcourſe; no day preuented,
            That pitties not thy ſad and ſuddaine wrong,
            Of all alike beloued and lamented.
            And I here to thy memorable worth,
            In this laſt act of friendſhip, ſacrifice
            My loue to Thee; which I could not ſet forth
            In any other habit of diſguiſe.
            Although I could not learne (whiles yet thou wert)
            To ſpeake the language of a ſeruile breath:
            My truth ſtole from my toung into my hart,
            Which ſhall not thence be ſundred, but in death.
            And I confeſſe my loue was too remiſle,
            That had not made thee know, how much I priſ'd thee:
            But that mine error was, as yet it is,
            To thinke loue beſt in ſilence: for I ſiz'd thee
            By what I would haue been; not onely ready
            In telling I was thine; but beeing ſo,
            By ſome effect to ſhew it: Hee is ſteddy
            Who ſeems leſſe then hee is, in open ſhew.
            Since then I ſtil reſeru'd to trye the worſt,
            Which hardeſt ſate and time thus can lay on mee.
            
               Tinlarge my thoughts, was hindered at firſt,
            While thou hadſt life: I tooke this taske vpon me,
            To regiſter with mine vnhappy Pen,
            Such duties as it owes to thy deſert;
            And ſet thee as a Preſident to Men,
            And Limne thee to the world but as thou wert.
            Not hir'd, as heauen can witneſſe in my ſoule,
            By vaine conceit, to pleaſe ſuch ones as know it;
            Nor ſeruile to be lik't; free from controule;
            Which paine to many men I doe not owe it.
            But here I truſt, I haue diſcharged now
            (Faire louely branch too ſoone cut off) to Thee,
            My conſtant and irrefragable vow,
            As had it chanc't thou might'ſt haue done to mee.
            But that no merit ſtrong enough of mine,
            Had yeelded ſtore to thy well-abled quill:
            Whereby t'enrole my name, as this of thine,
            How ſ'ere inritched by thy plenteous skil.
            Heere then I offer vp to Memory,
            The value of my tallent (precious man)
            Whereby if thou liue to Poſterity,
            Though't be not as I would, tis as I can:
            "In minds from whence endeauor doth proceed,
            "A ready will is taken for the deed.
            Yet ere I take my longeſt laſt farewell,
            From thee, faire marke of ſorrow; let me frame
            Some ampler work of thanke, wherein to tel
            What more thou didſt deſerue, then in thy name,
            And free thee from the ſcandall of ſuch ſenſes,
            As in the rancour of vnhappy ſpleene,
            Meaſure thy courſe of life (with falſe pretences)
            Comparing by thy death, what thou haſt beene.
            
               "So in his miſchiefes is the world accurſt,
            "It picks out matter to informe the worſt.
            The wilfull blindneſſe that hood-winkes the eyes
            Of men in-wrapped in an earthy vayle,
            Makes them moſt ignorantly exerciſe,
            And yeeld to humor, when it doth aſſaile;
            Whereby the candle, and the bodies light
            Darken's the inward eye-ſight of the mind:
            Preſuming ſtill it ſees, euen in the night
            Of that ſame ignorance which makes them blind.
            Hence conſter they with corrupt Commentaries,
            Proceeding from a nature as corrupt,
            The text of malice; which ſo often varies,
            As 'tis by ſeeming reaſon vnder-propt.
            O! whether tends the lamentable ſpight
            Of this worlds teen-full apprehenſion?
            Which vnderſtands all things amiſſe; whoſe light
            Shines not amidſt the darke of their diſſention?
            True 'tis, this man (whiles yet he was a man)
            Sooth'd not the current of beſotted faſhion:
            Nor could diſgeſt as ſome looſe Mimicks can,
            An empty ſound of ouer-weening paſſion:
            So much to bee made ſeruant to the baſe,
            And ſenſuall aptneſſe of diſ-vnion'd vices:
            To purchaſe commendation by diſgrace,
            Whereto the world and heate of ſinne intices.
            But in a ſafer contemplation,
            Secure in what he knew, he euer choſe
            The ready way to commendation,
            By ſhunning all inuitemens ſtrang, of thoſe
            Whoſe illneſſe is the neceſſary praiſe,
            Muſt waite vpon their actions: onely rare
            
               In beeing rare in ſhame, which ſtriues to raiſe
            Their name by dooing what they do not care.
            As if the free commiſſion of their ill,
            Were euen as boundleſſe as their prompt deſires:
            Only like Lords, like ſubiects to their will,
            Which their fond dotage euer-more admires.
            Hee was not ſo; but in a ſerious awe,
            Ruling the little ordered common-wealth,
            Of his owne ſelfe with honour to the law,
            That gaue peace to his bread, bread to his health.
            Which euer hee maintaind in ſweet content,
            And pleaſurable reſt; wherein he ioyd
            A Monarchy of comforts gouernment,
            Neuer vntill his laſt to bee deſtroyd.
            For in the Vineyard of heauen-fauoured learning,
            (Where hee was double honor'd in degree)
            His obſeruation and diſcreet diſcerning,
            Had taught him in both fortunes to bee free.
            Whence now retir'd home; to a home indeed;
            The home of his condition and eſtate;
            
               Hee well prouided gainſt the hand of need,
            Whence yong-men ſome time grow vnfortunate.
            His diſpoſition, by the bonds of vnity,
            So faſtned to his reaſon; that it ſtroue,
            With vnderſtandings graue immunity,
            To purchaſe from all hearts a ſteddy loue.
            Wherein not any one thing comprehends,
            Proportionable note of what hee was,
            Then that hee was ſo conſtant to his friends,
            As hee would no occaſion ouer-paſſe,
            Which might make knowne his vnaffected care,
            In all reſpects of triall, to vnlock
            
               His boſome and his ſtore which did declare,
            That Chriſt was his, and he was Frendſhips Rock:
            A Rock of Frendſhip figured in his name,
            Fore-ſhewing what he was, and what ſhould be,
            Moſt true preſage, and he diſchargd the ſame,
            In euery act of perfect amitye:
            Though in the complementall phraſe of words,
            He neuer was addicted to the vaine
            Of boaſt, ſuch as the common breath affoords,
            He was in vſe moſt faſt in tongue moſt plaine,
            Nor amongſt all thoſe virtues, that for euer,
            Adorn'd his reputation, will be found
            One greater then his Faith: which did perſeuer,
            Where once it was proteſted alway ſound.
            Hence ſprung the deadly fuell that reuiu'd
            The rage which wrought his end; for had he been
            Slacker in loue, he had beene longer liu'd,
            And not oppreſt by wraths vnhappy ſinne.
            By wrathes vnhappy ſinne, which vnaduiſ'd
            Gaue death for free good wil and wounds for loue
            Pitty it was that blood had not beene priſ'd
            At higher rate, and reaſon ſet aboue
            Moſt vniuſt choller, which vntimely Drew
            
            Deſtruction on it ſelfe: and moſt vniunſt,
            Robd virtue of a follower ſo trew,
            As time can boaſt of both for loue and truſt,
            
            "So henceforth all (great glory to his blood)
            "Shall be but Seconds to him being good.
            "The wicked end their honor with their ſinne,
            "In death, which only then the good begin.
            Loe heere a leſſon by experience taught,
            For men whoſe pure ſimplicity hath drawne,
            
               Their truſt to bee betrayd by beeing caught
            Within the ſnares of making truth a pawne.
            Whiles it not doubting whereinto it enters,
            Without true proofe and knowledge of a friend,
            Sincere in ſingleneſſe of heart, aduenters
            To giue fit cauſe, ere loue begin, to end.
            "His vnfain'd frienſhip where it leaſt was ſought,
            "Him to a fatall time-leſſe ruine brought.
            Whereby the life that purity adorn'd
            With reall merit, by this ſudaine end,
            Is in the mouth of ſome in manners ſcorn'd,
            Made queſtionable, for they doe intend,
            (According to the tenour of the Saw
            Miſtooke, if not obſeru'd, writ long agoe)
            When men were onely led by Reaſons law,
            
               That ſuch as is the end, the life prooues ſo.
            
            Thus Hee, who to the vniuerſall lapſe
            Gaue ſweete redemption, offring vp his bloud,
            To conquer death by death; and looſe the traps
            Of Hell, euen in the triumph that it ſtood:
            Hee thus, for that his guiltleſſe life was ſpilt
            By death, which was made ſubiect to the curſe;
            Might in like manner bee reprou'd of guilt,
            In his pure life, for that his end was worſe.
            But ô farre bee it, our vnholy lips
            Should ſo prophane the Deity aboue:
            As theerby to ordaine reuenging whips,
            Againſt the day of Iudgment and of Loue:
            The hand that lends vs honour in our dayes,
            May ſhorten when it pleaſe; and iuſtly take
            Our honour from vs, many ſundry wayes,
            As beſt becomes that wiſedome did vs make.
            
               The ſecond brother who was next begot,
            Of all that euer were begotten yet;
            Was by a hand in vengeance rude and hot,
            Sent innocent to be in heauen ſet.
            Whoſe fame the Angels in melodious quiers,
            Still witneſſe to the world; then why ſhould hee,
            Well-profited in excellent deſires,
            Bee more rebuk'd, who had like deſtiny?
            Thoſe Saints before the euer-laſting throne,
            Who ſit with crownes of glory on their heads,
            Waſht white in bloud, from earth hence haue not gone,
            All to their ioyes, in quiet on their beds;
            But taſted of the ſower-bitter ſcourge,
            Of torture and affliction, ere they gained,
            Thoſe bleſſings which their ſufferance did vrge.
            Whereby the grace fore-promiſ'd they attained.
            Let then the falſe ſuggeſtions of the froward
            Building large Caſtles in the empty ayre,
            By ſuppoſitions fond and thoughts vntoward,
            (Iſſues of diſcontent and ſick deſpaire)
            Rebound groſſe arguments, vpon their heart;
            That may diſproue their malice: and confound
            Vnciuill looſe opinions, which inſert
            Their ſoules into the roule, that doth vnſound
            Betraying pollicies: and ſhew their braines
            Vnto their ſhame ridiculous: whoſe ſcope
            Is enuie, whoſe indeuors fruitleſſe paines,
            In nothing ſurely proſperous, but hope.
            And that ſame hope, ſo lame, ſo vnpreuailing,
            It buries ſelfe conceit in weake opinion;
            Which beeing croſt, giues matter of bewayling
            Their vain deſignes, on whom want hath dominiō.
            
               Such, and of ſuch condition may deuiſe,
            Which way to wound with defamations ſpirit,
            (Cloſe lurking whiſpers hidden forgeries)
            His taintleſſe goodneſſe, his deſertfull merit.
            But whiles the minds of men can iudge ſincerely,
            Vpon aſſured knowledge: his repute
            And eſtimation, ſhall be rumor cleerly,
            In equall worth, Time ſhall to time renew't.
            The Graue, that in his euer empty wombe,
            For euer cloſes vp the vnreſpected,
            Who when they dye, dye all; ſhall not intombe
            His pleading beſt perfections as neglected.
            They to his notice in ſucceeding yeeres▪
            
            Shall ſpeake for him, when Hee ſhall lye below;
            When nothing but his memory appeares,
            Of what hee was; then ſhall his vertues grow.
            His beeing but a priuate man in ranke,
            (And yet not rank't beneath a Gentleman)
            Shall not abridge the commendable thanke,
            Which wiſe poſteritie ſhall giue him than:
            For Nature, and his therein happy Fate,
            
            Ordain'd that by his quality of minde,
            Tennoble that beſt part, although his ſtate
            Were to a lower bleſſedneſſe confin'd,
            Blood, pompe, ſtate, honour, glory and command,
            Without fit ornaments of diſpoſition,
            Are in themſelues but heathniſh and prophane,
            And much more peacefull is a meane condition,
            Which vnderneath the roofe of ſa
                  •
               e content,
            Feeds on the bread of reſt: and takes delight,
            To looke vpon the labours it hath ſpent,
            For it's owne ſuſtenance, both day and night.
            
               Whiles others plotting which way to bee great,
            How to augment their portion and ambition,
            Doe toile their giddie braines, and euer ſweat,
            For popular applauſe, and power's commiſſion.
            But one in honour's like a ſeeled Doue,
            Whoſe inward eyes are dim'd with dignity;
            Do's thinke moſt ſafety doth remaine aboue.
            And ſeekes to be ſecure, by mounting high:
            "Whence when he falz, who did ere while aſpire,
            "Fal's deeper downe, for that he climed higher.
            Now men who in a lower region liue,
            Exempt from danger of authority,
            Haue fitteſt times in Reaſons rules to thriue,
            Not vext with enuy of prioritie.
            "And thoſe are much more noble in the mind,
            "Then many that haue nobleneſſe by kind.
            Birth, blood, and anceſters, are none of ours,
            Nor can we make a proper challenge to them:
            But vertues and perfections in our powers,
            Proceed moſt truly from vs, if we doe them.
            Reſpectiue titles or a gracious ſtile,
            With all what men in eminence poſſeſſe,
            Are, without ornaments to praiſe them, vile:
            The beauty of the mind, is nobleneſſe.
            And ſuch as haue that beauty, well deſerue
            Eternall characters, that after death
            Remembrance of their worth, we may preſerue,
            So that their glory die not with their breath.
            Elſe what availes it in a goodly ſtrife,
            Vpon this face of earth heere to contend,
            The goood t'exceed the wicked in their life,
            Should both be like obſcured in their end?
            
               Vntill which end, there is none rightly can
            Bee termed happy, ſince the happineſſe
            Depends vpon the goodneſſe of the man,
            Which afterwards his praiſes will expreſſe.
            Looke hither then, you that inioy the youth
            Of your beſt dayes; and ſee how vnexpected
            Death can betray your iollity to ruth?
            When death you thinke is leaſt to be reſpected?
            The perſon of this modell here ſet out,
            Had all that youth & happy dayes could giue him:
            Yet could not all encompaſſe him about,
            Againſt th' aſſault of death, who to relieue him
            Strooke home but to the fraile and mortall parts,
            Of his humanity: but could not touch
            His flouriſhing and faire long-liu'd deſerts,
            Aboue fates reach, his ſingleneſſe was ſuch.
            So that he dyes but once, but doubly liues,
            Once in his proper ſelfe, then in his name:
            Predeſtinated Time, who all depriues,
            Could neuer yet depriue him of the ſame.
            And had the Genius which attended on him,
            Beene poſſibilited to keepe him ſafe,
            Againſt the rigour that hath ouer-gone him,
            He had beene to the publick vſe a ſtaffe:
            Leading by his example in the path,
            Which guides to doing well, wherein ſo few
            The proneſſe of this age, to error hath
            Informed rightly in the courſes trew.
            As then the loſſe of one, whoſe inclination
            Stroue to win loue in generall, is ſad,
            So ſpecially his friends, in ſoft compaſſion
            Do feele the greateſt loſſe they could haue had.
            
               Amongſt them all ſhe who thoſe nine of yeares
            Liu'd fellow to his counſailes, and his bed;
            Hath the moſt ſhare in loſſe: for I in hers,
            Feele what diſtemperature this chance hath bred.
            The chaſt imbracements of coniugall loue,
            Who in a mutuall harmony conſent;
            Are ſo impatient of a ſtrange remoue,
            As meager Death it ſelfe ſeemes to lament.
            And weep vpon thoſe cheeks, which nature fram'd
            To be delightfull orbes, in whom the force
            Of liuely ſweetneſſe playes, ſo that aſham'd
            
               Death often pitties his vnkind diuorce.
            Such was the ſeparation here conſtraind,
            (Well-worthy to be termed a rudeneſſe rather)
            For in his life his loue was ſo vnfain'd,
            As hee was both an husband and a father.
            The one in firme affection, and the other
            In carefull prouidence, which euer ſtroue
            With ioynt aſſiſtance to grace one another,
            With euery helpfull furtherance of loue.
            But ſince the ſumme of all that can be ſaid
            Can bee but ſaid that Hee was good: which wholy
            Includes all excellence can be diſplaide,
            In praiſe of Vertue and reproach of Folly:
            His due deſerts, this ſentence on him giues,
            
               Hee dy'de in life, yet in his death hee liues:
            Now run's the method of this dolefull ſong,
            In accents breefe to thee, O thou deceaſt!
            To whom thoſe paines do onely all belong,
            As witneſles I did not loue thee leaſt.
            For could my worthleſſe braine find out but how,
            To raiſe thee from the Sepulcher of duſt;
            
               Vndoubtedly thou ſhouldſt haue partage now,
            Of life with mee; and heauen bee counted iuſt:
            If to a ſupplicating ſoule, it would
            Giue life a new, by giuing life againe
            Where life is miſt: whereby diſcomfort ſhould
            Right his old griefes, and former ioyes retaine.
            Which now with thee are leapt into thy toombe,
            And buried in that hollow vault of woe:
            Expecting yet a more ſeuerer doome,
            Then times ſtrickt ſlinty hand will let 'm know.
            And now if I leuel'd mine account,
            And reckon'd vp in a true meaſured ſcore,
            Thoſe perfect graces which were euer wont
            To wait on thee aliue, I aske no more.
            But ſhall heereafter in a poore content,
            Immure thoſe imputations I ſuſtaine,
            Learning my dayes of youth ſo to preuent,
            As not to be caſt downe by them againe:
            Only thoſe hopes, which fate denies to grant,
            In full poſſeſſion to a captiue hart:
            Who if it were in plenty, ſtill would want,
            Before it may inioy his better part:
            From which detain'd, and baniſht in th' exile
            Of dimme misfortune, ha's none other prop,
            Whereon to leane and reſt it ſelfe the while,
            But the weake comfort of the hapleſſe Hope.
            
            And Hope muſt in deſpight of fearfull change,
            Play in the ſtrongeſt cloſet of my breſt:
            Although perhaps I ignorantly range,
            And court opinion in my deep'ſt vnreſt.
            But whether doth the ſtreame of my miſchance
            Driue me beyond my ſelfe: faſt friend, ſoone loſt,
            
               Long may thy worthineſſe thy name aduance,
            Amongſt the vertuous, and deſeruing moſt.
            Who herein haſt for euer happy prou'd,
            In life thou liu'dſt, in death thou dyed'ſt belou'd.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   