
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  CERTAINE WORTHYE MANVſcript Poems of great Antiquitie Reſerued long in the Studie of a Northfolke Gentleman.
And now firſt publiſhed By J. S.
                  
                  1 The ſtatly tragedy of Guiſtard and Siſmond.
                  
                  2 The Northren Mothers Bleſſing.
                  
                  3 The way to Thrifte.
                  
                  
                     DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS.
                  
                  
                     Imprinted at London for R. D.
1597.
               
               
                  
                  To the worthiest Poet
Maister Ed. Spenſer.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE STATELIE Tragedie of Guiſtard and Siſmond in two Bookes.
                  
                     The firſt Booke.
                     
                        TANCREDE the noble Prince of Salurne▪
                        
                        Flowre of Knighthood, and myrrour of proweſſe,
                        The which long time his people did gouerne
                        Wittilie by benignitie and gentleneſſe,
                        Iche man reioyced of his great nobleſſe:
                        Diſcreete in all thing that was iudiciall,
                        And euermore Prince-like in things imperiall.
                     
                     
                        His law he kept iuſtly through his Prouince,
                        Rigorous to vice, yet bounteous to all,
                        And mercifull als as euer was any Prince,
                        And ſhortly as my Doctor makis rehearſall,
                        His fame had neuer ſpot in all his gouernall,
                        Til haſty cruelneſſe procured in greate yre
                        The fatall death of tweyne that loue had ſet on fyre.
                     
                     
                        
                        A wife he toke, which come of blood Royall,
                        But of what prince or yet of what linage,
                        What was her name, or what men did her call,
                        Nought ſayes mine Author▪ But of high parage
                        Men may well know, that thus in marryage
                        Was ioyned with ſo high a Prince as was Tancrede:
                        Therefore I paſſe ouer & take there of none heed.
                     
                     
                        This noble Prince Tancrede had neuer iſſue
                        In time of all his life to be his heire
                        Saue only a doughter whome Nature & vertue
                        Excellently indued, ſo was ſhee good and fayre.
                        But ôcruel deſtiny that mirth does oft appeyre,
                        And after great gladnes maketh men to morne!
                        Better had Tancrede bene that childe had neuer be borne.
                     
                     
                        But all that was full ferre fro his minde,
                        He red not in the booke of her Deſtinye,
                        Her fatall chaunce was to him derke and blinde;
                        Let all this paſſe: This childe was put to noiye,
                        Daily ſhe increaſed in fauour and beauté
                        So that when her nonage paſſed and her youth
                        Her noble fame & beautè was in ich mans mouth.
                     
                     
                        
                        If I ſhould diſcriue this beauteous creature▪
                        
                        Nature had her ſpecially in remembrance▪
                        
                        For ſhe was wel fetured & ſeemly of ſtature,
                        Her chere was ruddy according to pleaſaunce,
                        Aſpere it was to louers her goodly countenance,
                        Her beautie not made be ſignement ne other gere
                        But of her kinde as Nature gaue to her.
                     
                     
                        She excellid in beauté Vlixes Ladie fayre
                        Penelope of Greece, and eke fayre Helene:
                        Hypolita alſo, and Emely her ſiſter
                        Might not compare with her, nor Polixyne:
                        Inſtedfaſt loue ſhe paſſed Dido the Queene;
                        Faithfull and true without daungerous diſdaine,
                        Curteys and deboneyre, ſhe was not ſullein.
                     
                     
                        As for to ſpeake of her pregnant wit,
                        Her perfite minde, and her intelligence,
                        No thing was ſo heard, but ſhe conceiued it;
                        In ferre ſottell caſting ſhe had experience:
                        What ſhould I ſay more but ſhortly in ſentence,
                        She knew more happily than was expedient
                        Vnto any woman, or ellis conuenient.
                     
                     
                        
                        Like as the vnhappie fader ofyſſue had no more,
                        But this child onely, ſo loued he her truely:
                        His heart, his mind, his loue was ſet on her ſo ſore,
                        That if ſhe were abſēt him thought he ſhuld die;
                        So that in his minde he is determind vtterly
                        Euer to keepe his daughter with him in his ſight,
                        And neuer to graunt her in marriage to no wight:
                     
                     
                        Tho Princys royall, to whome of high fauour
                        Fortune had grauntit great inheritance,
                        Deſyren this feyre Lady to their Paramour
                        Euer to be true withouten variance
                        And ſo by matrimony to make Aliance.
                        But tho Cupid hit them with his firie dart
                        Yet nolde her fader ſuffer her to depart.
                     
                     
                        So ſhortly for to tell, this maide fro her deſire
                        Was alſo needly compellit to abſtaine:
                        Tho luſtie youth and corage brent her as fyre,
                        Yet mought ſhe neuer pleaſure of her loue attaine,
                        But euer contemned, ſtill liuing in paine
                        Till many of her luſtie yeris were agoo,
                        Her owne cruell fader did her all this woo▪
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        It fortund in a time I wot not in what wiſe
                        Wheder that her fader had compaſſion
                        Vpon her great woe, or ellis for ſom promiſe
                        Of good riches, or of poſſeſſion,
                        But ſhortly to Champayn the Dukes ſonne
                        He graunted his doughter to haue in marriage;
                        A man of blood royall and of high parage.
                     
                     
                        It needith not rehers the rich Apparell
                        Of thoſe two louers the day of their wedding:
                        Or to my purpoſe what may hit auaile
                        To tell of the curious feeſt, and the guyding?
                        All this I paſſe ouer, and make notarying:
                        I ſpeke not of the myrth & melody that was there,
                        But for a concluſion, thus wedded they were.
                     
                     
                        Of ſorrowfull morning now is the clowdie night
                        By the fyre of loue driuen farre away,
                        The feruēt ſun of pleſance ſhineth now fulbright,
                        His freſh luſtie beames hath turned night to day,
                        Now may ſhe dāce & ſing now hath ſhe luſt to play▪
                        
                        For euer after mourning the mirth is the ſweter,
                        And after great ſorrow the ioy ſhalbe the greater.
                     
                     
                        
                        But as luſtie Phoebus with his fierie beames
                        When his golden Carrehath raught into the weſt,
                        Anon he withdrawes his hote brenning ſtreames
                        And then aperith Phoebe out of her cloudyneſt,
                        Then comes the night when al men drawn to reſt,
                        Vntill on the morrow that Lucifer appeare
                        Called the Day-ſtarre, the daies meſſengere.
                     
                     
                        Right ſo the feruent Sun of her luſty pleaſance.
                        Was wrapped with weeping of the cloudy raine:
                        For within little ſpace of continuance
                        After their wedding, Death parted hem tweyne,
                        I wot not by what meane: her Lord her ſoueraine
                        By ſickneſſe or by battell I can no knowlech haue,
                        But ſhortly this Duke-is ſon is dede in his graue.
                     
                     
                        Alas departure ground of all heauineſſe,
                        Cauſing the darke night of cloudie diuorſe!
                        O cruell Death, I meane deſtruction of gladneſſe
                        Diſdaining the pleaſure of this wofull corſe!
                        Why would thou thus with thy malicious force
                        Eclipſe the cleereneſſe of this her ioyfull day
                        Bringing forth the night, and care, and wele-away?
                     
                     
                        
                        Falſly thou robbeſt her of her harts pleaſure
                        Taking from her him that ſhe loued beſt.
                        Alas thou art the common theefe of Nature
                        That haſt take from her all eaſe and herts reſt.
                        Wold God on thee ſhe mought call a Queſt
                        Of Louers▪ and then for all thine art
                        Thou ſhouldyſt be do to death with thin owne dart.
                     
                     
                        What needith it to ſpeake of thine Enuy?
                        When this woful woman ſhal neuer be the better
                        For that hath be the cauſe of all her Malady
                        If it be reherſed, it makys her wo the greater,
                        Wherefore my pen ſhall write therof no letter▪
                        
                        But thus this woman wepith, & can none otherrede,
                        It helpeth her nothing, for her make is dede.
                     
                     
                        How ſhall ſhe now be ruled, ſhee takis her councell
                        Deuoide of comfort, for her lacks her guide:
                        Anon ſhe hath cōclud within her mind right well
                        At home with her fader ſhe thinkith to abide,
                        And there to leaue her ſorrow if it would betide
                        Whereas all her penance firſt of all was take;
                        So wedow to her fader ſhe comith in clothis blake.
                     
                     
                        
                        Things artificiall that be violent
                        Wrought or ellis made by cauſe accidental
                        May not euer indure▪ for when the cauſe is ſhent
                        The effect thereof ſhall ſone faide and fall.
                        Why ſhould this woman then lenger, feynt, or pall,
                        Syth the cauſe of her mourning is fro her mind ycaſt
                        The death of her Huſband is ſo fer-ſince paſt?
                     
                     
                        If ſtill ſhe bide, and dwell euer ſtill
                        In wofull care to continue and indure,
                        Within ſhort time ſhe ſhould her ſelfe ſpill:
                        For ſorrow is a poyſon which no man may cure,
                        It bringeth hearts proude full low vnto the lure,
                        It maketh ſtrength to faide and alſo Beautè,
                        It is the greateſt malady that to man may be.
                     
                     
                        So ſhe ſtill bided in hir faders houſe,
                        Young and coragious alſo in high degree,
                        With affluence of all thing that was delicious▪
                        
                        But when at laſt ſhe gan perceiue and ſee
                        That for loue, hir Fader intendeth not that ſhe
                        Should neuer more none other husband haue,
                        But ſtill to dwell with him to he be dead in graue:
                     
                     
                        
                        Thus then hath her Fader determind vtterly
                        Neuer to procure for her no marriage,
                        And her ſelfe to axe it her ſeemed velonye,
                        She thought therfore to take her beſt aduantage,
                        Gife ſhe mought eſpy a man of good linage,
                        So that he gentil were, to take her owne choyce,
                        And in the electiō her Fader ſhould haue novoice.
                     
                     
                        Now this noble Tancrede had in his houſhold,
                        As in a Princes Court is wont for to be,
                        Both Lords and Knights couragious to behold,
                        Som gentlemen, ſom yemen, ſome of low degre,
                        Among theſe ſhe began to looke and ſee
                        If ſhe can any finde that were to her pleaſure,
                        Whome ſhe would euermore loue while ſhe might endure.
                     
                     
                        So dayly in her minde ſhe was full diligent,
                        For to note ech man in his demeanance:
                        But Guiſtard to loue is only her intent,
                        And he right well knew by the apearance
                        Of her chere and her chaunged countenance
                        That of brennyng loue ſhe daunced in the trace,
                        Which hath bound her heart with his goldin lace.
                     
                     
                        
                        But where ſhe ſet her loue he wiſt in no caſe,
                        Till ones he fortuned to ſtond before this Lady,
                        And ſhe beholding him with deadly pale face
                        Not ſpeaking o word, ſhe ſighed greatly
                        And anon with that ſhe can withdraw her eye
                        Caſting downe her looke farre vnto the ground,
                        So womanly ſhamfaſt ſhe ſat a greate ſtound.
                     
                     
                        And when this young louer now brought in loues daunce
                        Of her entent had ſuch experience
                        He was not dull of wit, but gaue attendance,
                        Her to ſerue and pleaſe he did his diligence,
                        Cupid hath ſmitten him with ſo great feruence
                        Of loue, that their hearts be together bound,
                        Both periſhed with one dart, two louers with one wound▪
                        
                     
                     
                        Right ioyfull he was that he ſtode in ſuch grace
                        Of this faire Lady But euer he drad fortune:
                        Alas he ſeyth thy where turneth in litle ſpace
                        Thy double chere vnſtable neuer will continue,
                        More variant then is the flitting Lune:
                        I feare that thou will cauſe my Lady ſoueraigne
                        Vpon my ſimple birth of daunger to diſdaine.
                     
                     
                        
                        Yet know I her heart ſo true and ſo ſtedfaſt
                        And ſhee began alſo to proffer loue,
                        Why ſhould I then feare or ellis be agaſt
                        Or put default in her? O mercie god aboue!
                        For all treaſure in earth it would not me behoue
                        That my hearts ioy, my ladie hereof wiſt
                        That I ſhuld put in her any ſuch miſtriſt.
                     
                     
                        And percaſe that if ſhee loued mee not,
                        Yet would I in her ſeruice ſtill perſeuer:
                        Mee nead not by reaſon argue, for I wot
                        Loue hath her heart imbraſt me to loue euer,
                        What ſhould I ſhortly ſay? for they had leuer
                        Ych of hem die than to part fro other,
                        More feruently they loued than ſiſter or broder.
                     
                     
                        So betweene hem both that loued on this wiſe
                        They deſired only for their great pleaſaunce
                        By ſome ſottle meane how they mought deuiſe
                        For to ſpeake togeder and haue their dalliaunce,
                        They will not put noe triſt ne noe affiaunce
                        To any on liue their matter for to tell,
                        But euer to hemſelues they kept it counſell:
                     
                     
                        
                        Till it fell on a time of a ſudden aduiſe
                        The Lady found a mean that was a great cautell,
                        As oft it faris that women bin ſone wiſe
                        And in a ſudden caſe they bee right ſuttell:
                        Shee tels him her intent by wrighting euerie deale
                        And the letter cloſed in a reed-ſpyre
                        Shee tooke it to Guiſtard for to ſtur the fire.
                     
                     
                        Guiſtard remembred well that for ſom priuie cauſe
                        The reed was take to him, he did it ſone on cloſe,
                        And when he ſaw the letter, made a little pauſe
                        Sitting in a ſtudie and anon he roſe
                        And to reade this letter can himſelfe diſpoſe,
                        The which the Ladie made of her owne inditing
                        She was her own ſecretarie, it was her owne writing.
                     
                     
                        The tenor of this letter was this and all the effect:
                        I ſend you greting with hart & loue entere
                        Not bold by reherſall my counſell to detect
                        For dredful ſhamfaſtnes. Wherfore this meſſēgere
                        Shal do this enterpriſe whoſe coūtenance & chere
                        Changeth for no ſham; therfore theſe letters blake
                        I pray you diſdaine not to read them for my ſake.
                     
                     
                        
                        Certefying you all my herts pleaſaunce
                        All my worlds reſt, my ioy and comforture,
                        That my life, my deth, as in a balance
                        Dependith and hangith only in your cure,
                        In you alone is put mine Auenture:
                        Wherefore I require you that you be not ſtrange,
                        For I enſure you verily my hert ſhall neuer change.
                     
                     
                        And I trow certaine that your gentill hert
                        Diſdeineth not my loue, nor is not dangerous
                        Conſidering your birth, and your great pouerty,
                        And I a Ladie both young and beauteous:
                        For Cupid knoweth right well & his moder Venus
                        That only for your vertue and your gentilnes
                        I ſet my loue on you and for no great riches.
                     
                     
                        But becauſe alſo my Fader hath made an othe
                        That I ſhall neuer wed while he is liuing,
                        To ſuffer me depart from him he is loth:
                        Yet luſtie youth like as the fire brenning
                        Hath choſe you for my ſouereyn all my life enduring,
                        And alſo fortune of her high fauour
                        Hath ſhewed me the meane to ſaue all our honour.
                     
                     
                        
                        Remember there is faſt by my faders place
                        A dungeon deepe & ſtrong farre vnder ground
                        The which at his entry has no more ſpace
                        But an hole aboue that litle is and round,
                        And becauſe it is not vſed ne is found,
                        With buſhes and briers it is ouergrow
                        So that the dungeon deep ther may no man know.
                     
                     
                        Out from thilke pit is there a ſecret way
                        By a poſterne dore that ſtands full preuely
                        Strong bars, and poſts, both with locke and key
                        That leadith to the Chamber where as I
                        Am wont of cuſtom in ſleping for to lye,
                        And by great diſ-uſe this way is out of minde,
                        This little dore this poſterne can no man finde.
                     
                     
                        Till at the laſt loue to whome nought is hid,
                        The which for euery ſore can finde a remedye,
                        This way into my minde ſone hath reducid:
                        But ſhortly I taried not but haſtly did me hie
                        To vnbarre and vnlock I can looke and ſpy,
                        And at the laſt with great paine and beeſy labore
                        I haue found all the craft for to vndoe this doore.
                     
                     
                        
                        Be my ſelfe alone I went into the caue,
                        I ſaw the little hole where is the entering
                        How and in what wiſe ye may your ſelfe ſaue
                        Agein all manner perils in theder comming,
                        The hight and the depenes I ſend you be writing
                        So that you need not dread for no miſauenture,
                        Ye know where & whan you may haue your pleſure.
                     
                     
                        And after this in her inditing
                        There was a little clauſe for a concluſion
                        As is the common vſage in each writing
                        Whoſe name ſhould be callid Subſcription;
                        She wrot ther By your owne, and made no mentiō
                        
                        Of her name: till after a great ſtound
                        With ſighing ſore ſhe added to, Siſmond.
                     
                     
                        What maruaile now if he be not penſiue?
                        Now he hath rad this letter of comfort
                        And from his deedly ſorrow turns againe to liue,
                        Sith he has almoſt raught the luſtie port
                        Of pleaſance, luſt▪ ſolace and of all diſport:
                        Wherefore he haſteth full beſely and hieth
                        To meet his Ladie as the letter ſpecifieth.
                     
                     
                        
                        Who now but this Guiſtard with his diligence
                        To this pleaſant Iourney ſpedith him apace:
                        Euery houre that he is out of her preſence,
                        Him ſeemeth for to be a thouſand yere of ſpace:
                        But tho the ſluggiſh carkaſſe be far fro her face
                        Yet with the flighty wings of amorous deſire
                        He is euer in her ſeruice brenning as the fire.
                     
                     
                        A cord he let adoun anon of great length,
                        And faſt vnto a Bough aboue he did it tye
                        Fret all full of knots ſufficient of ſtrength
                        By which into the pit he mought himſelf cōuey,
                        To cloſe himſelfe in ledder alſo he did puruey
                        Fro buſhes and fro briers to kepe him ſewre:
                        And thus towards the pit he went in this armour.
                     
                     
                        The bright eye of the world when that the ſhining day
                        Withdrawith, and alſo Titan with his ſparkling light,
                        Then this young louer takith his iourney
                        Towards the foreſaid pit: abiding there al night
                        Till on the morrow Aurora ſhone full bright;
                        Whē ſom haukith, ſom huntith, ſom to their labour,
                        Then gins this Ladie to com out from her towre.
                     
                     
                        
                        Remembring her well, when the night was gone,
                        Of their couenants made by iuſt appointment,
                        All her gentyl-men and maydens euerychone
                        To her gardent to ſport and play ſhe ſent
                        Feyning her to be ſick, and for that intent
                        She ſaid to her chamber ageyn ſhe would forth right
                        To taken reſt and ſlepe if ſhe might.
                     
                     
                        The dores & the windowes ſhe cloſed anon ful ſure,
                        Then towards the dungeon took ſhe the right way
                        Where ſhe found Guiſtard her herts pleaſure:
                        Ioyfully they kiſſed, Then ſhe gan to ſay,
                        Gramercy fortune that I may ſee this day
                        To ſpeake with him that is my worldly pleaſaunce,
                        In whome is all my truſt and affiaunce.
                     
                     
                        She brought him to her chāber this Lady beauteous,
                        Her freſh apparrell full Luſty was and gay,
                        Her ſurcote of gold furryd with Ermin precious,
                        A fayre mirror of Loue her beautie and ary:
                        So ſhortly▪ for to tell, I can no more ſay;
                        But conſtrue if ye can, louers, what they did,
                        For I can no more, but long they there abid.
                     
                     
                        
                        And when them ſeemed beſt they parted in ſondre,
                        Not long they tary, ne dayly their ſports vſe,
                        For dayly comming maketh men to wonder,
                        And eke long taryaunce makith men to muze,
                        But cheifely womens ſhrewd tongues will accuſe
                        Your noble fame, and ſey your life is nought,
                        Tho neuer ye do offend in word ne thought.
                     
                     
                        Wiſely they prouided to eſchew infamy,
                        And for all thing ſecret mought be kept
                        Into the garden went ſhe full haſtely,
                        Where that her maydens pleyd thinking ſhe ſlept,
                        And at night Guiſtard out of the pit crept:
                        So comming thus, and by night parting away,
                        Continued they their pleaſure till after many a day,
                     
                     
                        That fortune alas by treaſon falſly compaſt,
                        Bewrayed all their counſell of miſauenture,
                        All their luſty pleaſance turned at the laſt
                        Into cruell deth at their departing:
                        O thou falſe fortune that euer is on sure,
                        Bringing herts light to wo when they be well,
                        It ſeem is thou art not able for to rule thy whele!
                     
                     
                        
                        It is next in our proceſſe to ſpeake of Tancrede
                        The noble Prince her fader, which of great frequēce
                        Of tender loue & Ielouſy more then need,
                        So he delyted in her ſpeche and eloquence,
                        That he vſ'd of cuſtome vnder cares pretence
                        To come vnto the Chamber of his doughter feyre,
                        And after they had talkyd, agayne home to repeyre.
                     
                     Explicit Liber primus.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE SECOND booke of Guiſtard and Siſmond.
                     
                     
                        IN the mery ſeaſon of Summer feyre and hot,
                        When euery thing renewith by courſe of nature,
                        And winter with his froſty beard and f
                              •
                           ieſed cote
                        Is put into exile and may no lenger dure,
                        Then Summer geuith his liuery with beſy cure,
                        New clothing all the Earth in a luſty greene
                        All browderid full of flouers right freſhly to ſeene.
                     
                     
                        Sterring harts light in gardens to walke,
                        So did this Lady Siſmond for her pleaſaunce
                        In this freſh ſeaſon, plucking flowres fro their ſtall▪
                        
                        She made her garlōd wherwith ſhe thought to daūce:
                        But in the meane while, alas the vnhappy chaunce,
                        Her Fader, of a Cuſtom as he was wont to do,
                        Only to talk with her is to her garden go.
                     
                     
                        
                        But when he perceiuit ſhe was in her diſport,
                        Right loath he was to let her recreation,
                        He would for nothing his doughter diſcomfort,
                        Neither diſquiet her till ſhe had all done,
                        Forth into the chamber entred he full ſone
                        The curteyns were draw by the bed ſide,
                        He ſat behind the curtein his doughter to abide.
                     
                     
                        And as he ſat ſtill, ſleep did him encumbre,
                        He waxed all vnliſty and alſo ſomnolent,
                        Then to the bed lened he began to ſlumbre.
                        O thou vntriſtie fortune what is thine entent?
                        To diſtroy this Lady it ſeemith thou haſt ment.
                        Where thou may bewray, it is not kept counſell;
                        That ſhould be counſel kept, thou telliſt euery deal.
                     
                     
                        O princis doughter Siſmond infortunate by birth,
                        O houre vnhappy when thou began to ſo iourne
                        With Loue in his Palace: The pleaſant Sun of mirth
                        Ys comin to his hieſt, & beginnith to turne.
                        O ſlow malicious meeuer, thou curſed Saturne,
                        I trow by ſome enuy or malicious aſpect
                        Of all this feruent loue thou haſt broken the affect.
                     
                     
                        
                        Poore Siſmond thinking no deceyt ne guile
                        Partid fro her maydens & to her chamber went,
                        And ſo forth to the pit: wher in a little while
                        She found her Guiſtard all readye preſent,
                        For a little before (alas) for him ſhe ſent:
                        And when they wer in comin, they put no miſtriſt,
                        They know no body there, they did what they liſt.
                     
                     
                        Now when her fader ſee the abhominable Crime
                        After he was out of his ſleepe awake
                        He thought haue cryed: but for a litle tyme
                        It ſeemed him beſt to let his anger ſlake
                        And eaſily within himſelfe this payne to take:
                        He made no ſtirring, but ſat euer ſtill
                        Till they had done their pleaſure at their owne will.
                     
                     
                        And after that departed as before,
                        Guiſtard to the pit, and ſhe to her women▪
                        
                        Her wofull fader would tarry there no more,
                        But home he went in haſt, and callyd for his men,
                        Of which he ſent a certain to the den
                        For to take Guiſtard when he ſhould goe hence,
                        And ſo to preſent him to the Kings preſence.
                     
                     
                        
                        When this man come vp, anon they him arreſt,
                        With dread and pale viſage for dread he ſhooke,
                        All they had ruth on him both moſt and leaſt,
                        But forth in that Aray they there him tooke,
                        They brought him to the Prince, & he did on him loke,
                        For great wrath and anger very pale of chere,
                        Seying vnto Guiſtard as ye ſhullen after heare:
                     
                     
                        Guiſtard, he ſeyd, my loue and tender fauor,
                        The mekenes & gentyll hert that I haue ſhewd to you
                        Hath nothing deſerued ſo great a diſhonor
                        To mee and mine as ye haue doe right now,
                        Seing my ſelfe all thing, what ye did and how:
                        That truly ſo I mought my worſhip keepe and ſaue,
                        I would I were dede and beryed in my graue.
                     
                     
                        This great rebuke and contum ele went euen to the hert
                        Of Guiſtard that for ſhame cannot ſpeake o word,
                        Till at the laſt with corage forth he ſtert,
                        Saying no more but this▪ Remēbreth wel my Lord,
                        Experience I trow will to my ſentence accord:
                        The mightie power of Loue is a ſtronger bond
                        Then other ye or I am able to withſtond.
                     
                     
                        
                        But all his excuſe was euin ſamfayll,
                        So was his mind with malice and Ire obumbrate.
                        Alas where malice reigneth may non excuſe auail,
                        A great abuſion is a ruler to be paſſionate.
                        O ye princis therefore to whom of high eſtate,
                        The guiding is committed of noble nations,
                        Well ought ye take heed to rule your paſſions.
                     
                     
                        Permit not your willfull Senſualitè,
                        Geinſt wiſdoms councell for to put reſtreant:
                        Be not ruld only by your voluntè,
                        Oppreſſing by power him that is weak and feynt,
                        Whereby your noble fame is hurt and attaynt:
                        It cauſeth your people alſo in tyme of your diſtreſſe
                        To withdraw their fauour and herty faithfullnes.
                     
                     
                        To euery gloſing tale giue no credence,
                        Let not haſty cruelnes guide your iudgment:
                        Remember well or ye define your ſentence,
                        What ſhalbe the end and what the hole intent:
                        Rule your ſelfe diſcretly by good auiſement:
                        Remember the prouerbiall ſeying long agoo,
                        A cruell haſty man ſhall neuer lack of woo:
                     
                     
                        
                        Preeued wellby Tancredes cruell haſtineſſe,
                        Committing Guiſtard anon to cloſe preſon,
                        Putting him in Irons and in great diſtreſſe,
                        As a traytor guiltie of falſe prodicion,
                        And afterwards alas agein all reaſon
                        This innocent was do to deth ſo cruelly,
                        That ech man abhorrith to here that tyranny.
                     
                     
                        What man of his wit is ſo dull and herd,
                        That cannot think herby of ſorrow augmentatiō?
                        The gret thought this Lady had for her Guiſtard
                        Sore trobled in her ſleep by fearefull viſion,
                        Her mind was ſet on him with ſuch oppreſſion,
                        That both of wele and wo all his auenture
                        Was ſhewed her in ſleep by a feyned figure.
                     
                     
                        I trow ſhe ſee full dreadfull viſions and dreamis
                        When her loue was preſoned in that wofull night,
                        In weeping her eyne waterid like two ſtreemis,
                        And euer ſhe thought Guiſtard ſtood in her ſight
                        Holding a cup of gold, with an hert al blody dight,
                        Himſelfe eke ſprent with blood did her ſalue,
                        Seying: Farewell Siſmond, thys is my laſt adieu.
                     
                     
                        
                        She thought her anſwere was to him anone,
                        Alas will ye ſo ſone make a departure,
                        And voyd of comfort leue me thus alone?
                        Ye ſhall not ſo dere hert: For certain I enſure,
                        I ſhall but once drinke and do my beſy cure
                        To go with you euer: how ſo your Iourney turne
                        Mine hert and yours ſhall ay togeder ſoiourne.
                     
                     
                        And ſodenly with that out of her ſlepe ſhe ſtert
                        As a woman from her ſelf, ſhe was ſo ſore diſmaid,
                        She thought of very deth the ſword went to her hert,
                        And thus weeping by her ſelfe ſhe prayed:
                        O myrror of all women Mary ſhe ſeyd,
                        From all ſhame and velony my loue & me defend,
                        And helpe that my dreme to me none pretend.
                     
                     
                        All theſe and many mo thing is conuenturall
                        May well be ymagined by perſuation▪
                        
                        But all this is feyning as dreme fantaſticall,
                        And therof mine Author makith no mencion,
                        So that I think to make no manner digreſſion,
                        Encreaſing any thing that is not pertinent
                        To my firſt purpoſe or to mine entent.
                     
                     
                        
                        Wherefore I will proceede to ſpeake of Siſmond,
                        Which of Guiſtards dureſſe had no notice
                        Saue only by her dreams, till after a great ſtound
                        Tancrede to her chāber com as was his old guiſe,
                        And ſhe anon with reuerence did again him riſe
                        Welcoming her fader with obeyſant lowlines,
                        The which ſeyd vnto her as I ſhall expreſſe:
                     
                     
                        Doughter Syſmond, he ſeys, your womanly Ap port,
                        Your vertuous talke and carefull demenaunce,
                        Your ſtedfaſt hert and guidance gaue me ſuch cōfort
                        Truſting in your hert with hole affiaunce,
                        That ye of voluptuous Venus the luſty pleaſance
                        Without aſſent giuen, I meane of mariage,
                        Would not haue take your ſelfe leaue for all your corage.
                     
                     
                        But well I ſee my wit was dull and blynd,
                        For ſure I would haue demid the great occaſion
                        Shuld ſooner haue dryed flaming agein kinde,
                        Thē ye wold euer haue thought to be a miſ-womā
                           ▪
                        
                        For had I not ſeen the deed in what place & whā,
                        Shuld neuer man haue cauſit me haue ſuppoſaill
                        E re that you would ſo done but in your ſpouſaill.
                     
                     
                        
                        Remember well what hurt therefore and damage
                        Ye did vnto your birth and blood royall,
                        When ye like women of brothel and proſtrage
                        Toke what com to hond as the chaūce would fall:
                        It ſeem is ye put no difference twixt Get & Chriſtall:
                        All one to you a flint and a Diamond,
                        Peaſin as good as Perles orient and round.
                     
                     
                        From all womanhode you be degeneraunt,
                        Which of worſhipps ſouerance is euer deſperous;
                        But ye peruert all this, ye be ſo variaunt,
                        Taking in ſteed of worſhip, luſt voluptuous,
                        And ſike
                              •
                           ly the offence were not ſo grieuous
                        Hadye taken ſuch as had be commendable,
                        To your noble birth or elis conuenable.
                     
                     
                        But in all this region yt ſeemith by your choyce,
                        Lord, knight, ne ſquire was none to your pleaſure
                        Of royall blood, in whome ye couth reioyce,
                        Saue only poore Guiſtard, whoſe birth & auēture
                        Fortune of diſdain hath take no thing in cure:
                        Which for great pouert in time of miſery,
                        Without my releife had dyed for penury.
                     
                     
                        
                        So that my creuell deth dayly doth renew,
                        Death? nay more then deth I may call it truly
                        Percing my breſt ay freſh, new and new,
                        By the ſhamefaſt ſword rebuke and velony,
                        Which you haue do Siſmond to all our Ancetry,
                        Chuſing ſuch one to be my Londs inheritaunt
                        As is by birth ignoble and poore mendicant.
                     
                     
                        Wherefore I verely purpoſe to repreſſe
                        His great inhaunced pride and great preſumtion
                        Condemning for his 
                              •
                           yot in payne and dureſſe,
                        Intending the law ſhall haue due execution,
                        Shortly ſhall he die, this is the concluſion
                        Vtterly I am determined for his great offence:
                        But of you Siſmond I giue yet no ſentence.
                     
                     
                        For I may reſemble as in my ragious minde,
                        A ſhip without anckre, lacking ſterne alſo
                        In ſtormy rage of euery furious winde,
                        It is a thing vnſtable waning to and fro,
                        Semblable now am I one of thoo▪
                        
                        My doubtfull minde is brought in perplexité,
                        And caſt fro ſide to ſide twixt iuſtice and pité
                     
                     
                        
                        Furſt iuſtice meueth me to do correction,
                        Rewarding euery wight to their deſert,
                        Some loue, ſome payne with great affliction,
                        But faderly pity ſo ſtirrith my tender hert
                        That it ſufferith mee not ſee nor aduert
                        Your criminall offence, but rather doth it excuſe;
                        So that twixt both I ſtand a man confuſe.
                     
                     
                        And forth with anone he fell to weping,
                        As a young infant ſore ſcourged and bett,
                        In all worldly pleaſaunce reioyced he nothing
                        Sorrow and ſhame ſo by the hert him fret,
                        Seying nothing thus ſat he ſtill and muet:
                        Doughter he ſeyd gif ye will axe mercy,
                        To pardon your offence forſooth I am redy.
                     
                     
                        But when Siſmond ſaw how her loue Guiſtard
                        In preſon was intreted kept in yron ſtrong,
                        That fortune to her alſo was ſo cruell and hard
                        To publiſh her councell that ſecret was ſo long,
                        With gentilles and rurals it was a commen ſong,
                        That euery man within the country round
                        Spake of the vnhappy Guiſtard and Siſmond.
                     
                     
                        
                        Wherefore ſhe plunged ſo far in pit of ſorrow deep,
                        That I trow ech hart that gentill is & tender
                        If I ſhuld tel her payne wuld alſo mone & wepe:
                        Full oft ſhe wrung her fingers long and ſlender,
                        Seying; all wordly pleaſaunce here I ſurrendre:
                        For ſithence my loue Guiſtard is iudgid for to dy,
                        I will doe the ſame, I thinke not to abye.
                     
                     
                        Wherefore ô curſed Fortune with thy double chere
                        All thy great malice wholly I defy,
                        Setting no thing by thy deynous daungere,
                        Thou ſhall vs not depart for all thine enuy,
                        For our loue togeder ſhall dwell perſeuerantly▪
                        
                        And turnid to her fader with corage and boldnes,
                        Seying as in this booke myne Author doth witnes:
                     
                     
                        Tancrede, ſhe ſeyd, Fader if I ſhuld ye call,
                        Nother will I denie it, nor prey you of fauour▪
                        
                        The furſt it will helpe me nothing at all,
                        Sith ye haue full knowledge of my Paramour▪
                        
                        But for the ſecond, to axe grace or ſuccour,
                        I will not axe no grace for that in no wiſe,
                        Nor of your grace and fauour aſke no benefice.
                     
                     
                        
                        So that I knowlich plainly all mine entent,
                        My loue is ſet on Guiſtard, & hath be many a day▪
                        
                        And ſhalbe when my ſpirit and ſoule is went
                        From the brotle manſion of this bodies clay:
                        If nature would me helpe meane to puruey
                        That I mought execute mine affection and will,
                        Yet would I after my deth euer loue him ſtill.
                     
                     
                        And if ye thinke this Loue ſo great a cryme,
                        Forſooth the cauſe thereof was your negligence
                        When in youth and corage my luſty prime
                        The brenning fire of loue with ſo great feruence,
                        Perſid myne hert: And yet your cruell inſolence
                        Would not me ſuffer for all my great payne
                        After myne husbands deth be marryed againe.
                     
                     
                        Hadye well learned the doctrine of prudence,
                        Ye wold remember your ſubſtance materiall,
                        I trow it ſhould be imprinted in your aduertence,
                        That you bene made of matter freale and carnall,
                        Right ſo am I your doughter by vertue ſeminall;
                        I am nother of ſtone yron ne braſſe,
                        But of fleſh and blood more brekill than the glaſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                        Altho your head be white ſnowid for age,
                        Your froſty lims eke be vnweldy and cold,
                        The hete ny extinct of your luſty corage,
                        Right well ought ye forſooth conſider & behold
                        How hote is youth with brenning pricking manifold
                        Aſſayling ech man be he neuer ſo haute
                        With many a fyry dart and hote brenning aſſaut.
                     
                     
                        Aboue all thing ye ſhuld haue memory,
                        Tho ye haue ſpent moſt of your luſty ſeaſon
                        In arms of knighthoode and of cheualrye,
                        Yet ſhuld ye not foryet, as ſeemis by reaſon,
                        Eaſe, reſt, and dilicates what great incheaſon
                        They giue to ſterre a man to corage hote feruent,
                        As well in crooked age as luſty Iuuent.
                     
                     
                        All theſe occaſions I had and many moo
                        By which I meuid was ſo gretly deſirous,
                        Borne by Natures courſe of fleſh and blood alſo,
                        Of corage luſty young and amorous,
                        Foſterid alſo in pleaſaunce and metes delicious:
                        And that that ſtirred moſt, & was my cheife motife,
                        The experience therof ſith I was a wife.
                     
                     
                        
                        But all this is ferre fro your remembrance,
                        Ye think not your youth which is paſt & goo,
                        Ye may well reſemble him in your demeanaunce
                        Which fell into the water with others one or two,
                        But after he was deliuerid of his care and wo
                        Thought nothing at all where he had bin beforne,
                        His fellows he rebukith, laughing them to ſcorne.
                     
                     
                        And if ye haply couth rule your paſſions
                        Nor ſet nought by their force and violence,
                        Yet mought not my frailté geinſt ſuch occaſions
                        Make no champarty nor no great defence,
                        My hert was not ſo big to make reſiſtence:
                        So at laſt woundid, at laſt with loues firie launce
                        I was ſubdued as priſoner to Caſtle of Pleaſaunce.
                     
                     
                        Natheleſſe with deuour I put my diligence
                        All ſklaunders and infamie to auoid and eſchew,
                        And fortune of her fauour gaue vs aſſiſtence
                        Our luſty ſport oft tymes for to renew▪
                        
                        We thought her promiſe had be ſtedfaſt & true,
                        Blandeſhing vs euer with countnaunce and chere
                        As tho the ſun of pleaſaunce ſhuld ſhine euer clere.
                     
                     
                        
                        But now I ſee right wel ſhee ginneth for to change,
                        Sith ye of all our counſell haue plainly notice,
                        Such is falſe fortune, ay variant and ſtrange:
                        But how ye come to knowledge or in what wiſe
                        My wit is rude and dull, I can it not deuiſe;
                        Whether by experience or by information,
                        By force preſtigious, or ſome ſuperſtition.
                     
                     
                        And wold God your knowlech were certain & true
                        Not meued ne made by falſe ſuggeſtion,
                        Ye wold not then your doughter thus purſue
                        Seing that I erre in mine election
                        Taking no ſad guiding or direction▪
                        
                        But let my reuell ren at the hole chaunce,
                        I nas not ſo fool-hardy without deliberance.
                     
                     
                        For I ſet not my loue ne my fatall intent
                        Of ſudden hap as a comen velayne,
                        But with deliberation and auiſement
                        I gaue my loue to Guiſtard as my Souerayn,
                        And truly to no mo, this is, certayne:
                        Wherefore ye be to blame fader, yt ſemith mee,
                        To ſey my loue was to ych in like free.
                     
                     
                        
                        As to the great repreeue alſo contriued,
                        Which alder firſt ayen me ye obiect▪
                        
                        Seing of pleaſaunce my ſhip was ariued
                        In a port that was ignoble and deſpect,
                        I mean that Guiſtard was pore and deiect
                        Hauing no part of nobleſſe by diſcent,
                        Which maketh my fault greater after iudgment:
                     
                     
                        But as in this ye follow the vnſtable vulge
                        Clacking and blaſting, variant as the winde
                        As fame the flying meſſenger can diuulge
                        Their rude opinions ignorant and blinde,
                        Seing it is a prouerbe ſufficient and kinde
                        Hee that is not borne to habundance of good
                        But needy for pouert, is not of gentle blood.
                     
                     
                        Thus by fond reaſons daylie talking they erre
                        Not thinking how fortune fro her vnſtable center
                        Plongeth downe Eſtats fro her wheele aferre
                        When ſhe liſt of daunger to frowne & repent her▪
                        
                        But would they firſt weigh the originall enter
                        Of our common birth in all our firſt beginning
                        Brought forth into this world poor naked & weping,
                     
                     
                        
                        Then ſhould they remember who were of nobleſſe,
                        Who might intitle him to the blood royall▪
                        
                        They ſhould ſee how Nature whith her beſineſſe,
                        Brings forth her effect & wondrous gifts all,
                        Being as in her birth to euery man egall:
                        For as naked is a King borne as I vnderſtond
                        As is the lowiſt borne that neuer had houſe ne lond.
                     
                     
                        For when our moder Eue brought forth A bell and Caine,
                        Who couth prefer himſelfe for birth or linage,
                        Or of theſe two infants who couth the title clame
                        Of gentle blood of nobleſſe or parage?
                        That time no difference was twixt gentle & page,
                        But euery one was fayn to endeuour
                        His liuing to get with ſweat and with labour.
                     
                     
                        Of all this time was none bond in ſeruage,
                        Was none by ſeruice vnder ſubiection,
                        Till that the people gan to rule and rage
                        Guiding hemſelfe by will and not by reaſon
                        Offending their lawes by their tranſgreſſion▪
                        
                        Then of right and Iuſtice they muſt bee correct
                        Of one their ſoueraigne, and they to him ſubiect.
                     
                     
                        
                        But he that ſhould bee ruler and haue regency
                        May not of right bee ſuch as a tranſgreſſour:
                        Agen all due order of nature is it trewly
                        That vice ſhold ſit aboue as gouernour:
                        But when that vertue gentleneſſe doth honour
                        He is of right prouided ſoueraigne,
                        Although his birth is poore, this is certaine.
                     
                     
                        Of this wife was Moſes and Gedeon alſo,
                        The noble duke Ioſuah of God himſelfe elect,
                        And ſcripture reherſeth eke of many moe,
                        Which though for their birth were poore & deiect,
                        Yet were they for their vertue choſed to direct
                        And guide the people. So ſhortly it is true,
                        There is no gentleman ſaue only by vertue.
                     
                     
                        Then fader Tancrede in all your great houſhold
                        Remember well your gentles in their geſture,
                        The guidance eke of Guiſtard if you liſt behold,
                        His lowly demeanance with all his hauiour,
                        I trow yee affirme that madam nature
                        Hath graunted more to him than many of tho
                        Which yee call gentlemen, tho all they bee not ſo.
                     
                     
                        
                        And truly I heard neuer ſuch relation
                        In praiſe and laud of Guiſtards nobleſſe,
                        As I haue often heard by your aſſertion
                        Commending his Vertues and his gentleneſſe,
                        Yet was his vertue more than the name doubtles:
                        Hee that ſaith Guiſtard is no gentleman,
                        Forſooth he ſaith vntrue and little good can.
                     
                     
                        Had yee him called poore yee had not greatly erred;
                        And yet forſooth it is great velony
                        To bee with you a gentleman vnpreferred,
                        Such one as tends on your ſeruice daly,
                        A gentle maiſter bids not his man needy,
                        And though needie pouert take fro a man riches
                        Yet reues it not nurture nor gentleneſſe.
                     
                     
                        As for your doubtfull ambiguity
                        What doome to giue of mee, or what ſentence,
                        Bee not in doubt thus nor perplexity,
                        Dye he, I dye with cruell violence:
                        For I was roote and cauſe of this offence.
                        For thy, if you will not my death compliſh,
                        Theſe cruell honds my life ſhall ſoon finiſh.
                     
                     
                        
                        For iuſtice knoweth with her egall ballaunce,
                        Which rightwiſe iudge is vnto euery wight,
                        My fault is more than his in ponderaunce:
                        Why then ſhold not her ſword mee ſharply ſmite
                        Sith that in my perſon is all the wite?
                        Reaſon wold that I ſhold haue correction,
                        Which was the very cauſe & the occaſion.
                     
                     
                        And if your pleaſure be at my requeſt
                        To chaunge his mortal fait with merciful pardon,
                        I for your finaunce giue that ye loue beſt,
                        Mine owne life I meane I giue you to guerdon:
                        For ſley yee Guiſtard, this is the concluſion,
                        Let your fooliſh haſtines your doughter ſley alſo:
                        For if ye do it not, my ſelfe ſone ſhall it doe.
                     
                     
                        The prince her fader anone perceiued well
                        Her chear nought abaſhed, her hert not feminine:
                        Yet thought her not ſoe tigrous and cruell
                        To procure her owne deth, and her mortall fine:
                        Hee thought her loues feruence world decline,
                        If the fire were not kindled ay new and new
                        By the ſight of Guiſtard comfort of her hew.
                     
                     
                        
                        Wherefore Tancrede meaning his ire to compliſh,
                        Sent forth his men by night ſo priuily
                        To ſley Guiſtard. Oh Tancrede thou might wiſh
                        Siſmond had not be borne: for her noble glory
                        Is macculate by this thy tirrany,
                        Commaunding the bloodie hart with violent force
                        Furiouſly be rent from his dead murdered corſe.
                     
                     
                        Tancred hath cloſd this hart ſprēt with blood round
                        In a cupe of gold in ſtead of ſepulture,
                        And by a meſſenger ſent it to Siſmond,
                        Which doth her diligence with buſie cure
                        Intending her owne death for to procure,
                        Of herbes and roots to make a potion
                        Mixt in a viole with venemous poyſon.
                     
                     
                        And what the bearer ſaid ſhortly to expreſſe,
                        Madam, he ſaide, your father hath you ſent
                        This woefull donatiue to your nobleneſſe,
                        The thing you loued beſt he ſends you to preſent,
                        Telling you that it is his whole intent
                        To giue you of Guiſtard ſuch ioy and comforture,
                        As ye gaue him of Syſmond. This was his pleaſure.
                     
                     
                        
                        When Siſmond ſaw the hart cloſed in gold,
                        Shee vnderſtoode her ſoueraigne was deed:
                        Alas now been deathes Kalenders ſo cold
                        Entred this Lady, now can ſhee no rede,
                        Now is ſhe wan the flower of woman head
                        That ſometime was the mirrour of fayrenes,
                        The orient margarite of all gentleneſſe.
                     
                     
                        Voyde of all comfort ſat ſhe ſtill diſmaid,
                        Till at the laſt with bold hardy courage
                        Beholding the meſſenger, thus to him ſhee ſaid,
                        It were ayen reaſon to put you in dammage
                        Onely for the doing of your meſſage:
                        But for my fader I giue you in witting,
                        Ye ſhall on my behalfe be are him no greeting.
                     
                     
                        For he reſembleth more in his wood rage
                        A tyraunt than a prince ay thirſting for vengaūce,
                        Which no whit couth his paſſion aſſuage,
                        Nor all his life himſelfe culd auaunce
                        To ſuch worſhip, as when his violence
                        Let this heart be ſhrined in a tombe of gold,
                        And in this only his goodnes may be told.
                     
                     
                        
                        And when ſhe liſt no lenger talke continue,
                        Viewing the bloody hart in wofull ſepulture,
                        She gan his Exequy with pitious intune,
                        Saying with faynt Spright; o peece ſo pure,
                        Hoſtage of lowly luſt, very port of pleaſure,
                        Curſed might he be and waried eternally
                        Which cauſeth the be ſeene with mortalleye.
                     
                     
                        Sufficient was to me and eke more pleaſaunt.
                        To view the with my minde with thy luſty ſight,
                        Of true loue ay ſtedfaſt and not variant,
                        It is too much to ſee thee thus in light:
                        But now thy courſe is done, thy counts are quite,
                        Thus Fortune hath compliſhed thy fatall fyne
                        Buried in gold in ſtede of Lybitine.
                     
                     
                        I trow no lack was of what ſhould behoue
                        To deadly faite and ſeruice funerall,
                        Saue teerling teares of her that was thy loue,
                        For weeping ſhold be at departing mortall:
                        Wherefore I trow my fader at thy bane fatall
                        Hath ſent thee to my chamber of full remembrance
                        That I ſhuld bewail thy dethper ſoluing al obſeruāc.
                     
                     
                        
                        And I ſhall fulfill with my power and might
                        All thing requiſite to thy mortuarye:
                        And after all is done by cuſtom and right
                        I ſhall yeild my ſelfe to death tributarie,
                        Suing thy fearefull trace: for ſooth I ſhal not tary,
                        But among other in deathes wofull daunce,
                        Following next thy hond as is my fatall chaunce.
                     
                     
                        In whoſe felowſhip, or whoſe comitiue,
                        Might I better paſſe that painefull iourney,
                        Than in his whom I loued moſt on liue?
                        And alſo he tarryeth for me I dare well ſay:
                        Wherefore ſith his partner was alway
                        Of pleaſure; I ſhall take part of his payne,
                        Death ſhall not vs diſſeuer thus in twayne.
                     
                     
                        And anon with that her chere ſhe gan to turne,
                        Her eyne in weping ran like ſhowrs ofrayne,
                        Till ſhe had waſh'd the hart filling the vrne
                        By the ſtilling water of her eyne twaine:
                        And after ſhe had ceaſ'd weeping againe
                        Beholding the hart againe with deadly chere,
                        With ſobbing voice ſhe ſaide as ye ſhall here.
                     
                     
                        
                        O ioyfull hart, ô amiable mirrour!
                        Now lacks there nought required of duty
                        Vnto deadly fine and funerall honour
                        Saue only this that I might follow thee.
                        But for it ſeemith that death diſdaineth mee,
                        I ſhall therefore my ſelfe with violent force
                        Diſſeuer my ſpirit fro his wofull corſe.
                     
                     
                        Alas my wofull penne ſorroweth to write,
                        That lamentable end of this Tragedy,
                        Who couth without weeping this matter indite,
                        To ſe ſo faire a creature dy ſo wretchedly,
                        Of beauty ſurmounting and well of curteſy?
                        Shee tooke alas the viole with the potion,
                        That ſhe had made afore, & dranke vp the poyſon.
                     
                     After ſhe had dronke that peſtiferous drought.
                     Deſunt nonnulla.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        So came he in with pale affrighted chere,
                        Saying ſweete Siſmond be of good ſembland,
                        If ye thus mourne it will bring mee to diſpaire:
                        Thus he ſuppoſed to looſe her of her band
                        With his wordes of cōfort, but death was at hand
                        Crampeſing her limes, and gone was her ſight,
                        Yet ſhe anſwered againe her fader as ſhe might,
                     
                     
                        And ſaide, Tancrede beſtow better, if thou can,
                        Thy tears, for they ſtand mee in no effect:
                        Thou reſembleſt him that firſt ſlew the man,
                        And after him repenting ſore bewept:
                        Had it not be better him to haue kept
                        Thy ſorrowfull doughter with ioy then liuing
                        At hir owne pleaſure ſecretly a man louing,
                     
                     
                        Than to ſee by thy cruell execution
                        Her hard death to thine endles languor?
                        The which death ſhall bee a direction,
                        Giuing open knowledge of this error
                        The which was ſecret, but now the rumor
                        Shall make the thing which was not fully knowen
                        Through all the wide world to bee ouer ſowen.
                     
                     
                        
                        And in ſo much ſhee might no lenger ſpeake
                        Nor throwes of death no lenger would delay,
                        She holds the cup till her hart gan to breake,
                        Yelding vp her ſpirit to God euer and aye▪
                        
                        There was but Alas, Alas and welaway,
                        Some wept & cryed and ſome fell in ſownd,
                        It was a piteous ſight and a piteous ſound.
                     
                     
                        The wofull fader ſo ſory in that ſtound
                        Seing his moſt ioy in this world ygon
                        He made a great ſhrike falling to the ground,
                        No moe wordes ſpake he, but dead as any ſtone;
                        Thus was there griefe on griefe, & mone vpō mone.
                        Wherefore it hath be ſpoken long agoe
                        That an haſty creature wanted neuer woe.
                     
                     
                        Vpon this Prince thus may be verifyed,
                        Which was too haſty and furious certaine,
                        Without iudgment cauſing the man that he dyed,
                        Whoſe cruell death hath his doughter ſlayne,
                        And for her death he tooke ſuch ſudden payne,
                        He dawed neuer good day, but he was dead,
                        And all the world wondreth at his folyhede.
                     
                     
                        
                        Enſample of this euery wiſe man take
                        What it is to be cruell in violence,
                        And of a ſecret thing a wonder to make
                        Through haſty ire wanting of prouidence:
                        Euery man remember his owne negligence,
                        And vice into vertue to plant or to root:
                        For truly againſt loue there is no manner boot.
                     
                     
                        For certes it is of true louers the guiſe,
                        When their vexation is moſt ſharpe and ſore
                        Then loue they each other in moſt hartie wiſe
                        An hundred fold more then they did before:
                        Youth will to youth, loue will to loue euermore,
                        And ſhortly in my minde this proceſſe to conclude,
                        Each thing will draw to his ſimilitude.
                     
                     
                        As betwixt theſe louers plainely did appeare,
                        Which were both young and in flowring age▪
                        
                        For their great trouble they loued better yfeare,
                        And paſſed of death the dreadfull viage:
                        Alas the letting of their mariage
                        Was cauſe of this miſcheefe and their fall:
                        Lo what it is to be agen ſpouſall!
                     
                     
                        
                        Wherefore that prince ſtandeth in great perill,
                        That to the law of wedlock nold incline▪
                        
                        But as a tirant ouer feirce and fell
                        Cauſed Guiſtard be put in mortall fine:
                        Of whoſe ſoule if I ſhould determine,
                        I truſt to God his faithfull intention
                        Hath furtherd him to his ſaluation.
                     
                     
                        For why? he thought none harme of earthly wight,
                        But to the will of Siſmond did aſſent,
                        Notwithſtonding that I truſt to God almight
                        Shall be to his ſoule none impediment;
                        For to haue bee maried was their intent:
                        Then recken the ſorrow ſhee had withall
                        And great contrition to her end finall.
                     
                     
                        That as I truſt ſhe is in bleſſe celeſtiall,
                        As of faith and troth all louers ſurmounting,
                        See was a mirrour vnto women all,
                        Example of true and ſtedfaſt loue giuing:
                        Wherefore I beſeech him that is of all thing▪
                        
                        Lord and gouernour, and comfort agen bale,
                        Graunt all louers ioy. And thus endeth my tale▪
                        
                     
                     
                     Explicit Guistard and Siſmond.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                  THE NORTHREN MOTHERS BLESSING.
The way of Thrift.
                  
                  VVritten nine yeares before the death of G. Chaucer.
                  
                     DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinſon for Robert Dexter. 1597.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  The Northren Mothers Bleſſing.
                  
                     GOD wold that euery wife that wonnyth in this land
                     Wold teach her doughter as ye ſhal vnderſtand,
                     As a good wife did of the North countré
                     How her doughter ſhould lere a good wife to bee:
                     For lack of the moders reaching
                     Makes the doughter of euill liuing,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     My doughter gif thou be a wife, wiſely thou werke,
                     Looke euer thou loue God and the holy Kirke,
                     Go to Kirke when thou may, and let for no rayne,
                     And then ſhall thou fare the bet, when thou God has ſayn:
                     Full well may they thriue
                     That ſeruen God in their liue,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     
                     Gladly giue thou thy tithes and thine offrings both
                     To the poore at thy gate, be thou neuer loath;
                     Gif hem of thy good, and be not ouer hard;
                     Seldom is that houſe poore there God is ſteward:
                     For that is beſt I ſpende,
                     That for Gods loue I lend.
                     My leeue deere childe.
                  
                  
                     When thou ſits in the Kirke thy Bedes ſhalt thou bid,
                     Therein make no iangling with friend ne ſib,
                     Laugh not to ſcorne no dir old ne young,
                     Be of good bering and haue a good tongue:
                     For after thy bering,
                     So ſhall thy name ſpring,
                     My leeue dere child.
                  
                  
                     
                     Gif any man with worſhip deſire to wed thee,
                     Wiſely him anſwere, ſcorne him not what he be,
                     And tell it to thy friends and hide thou it nought,
                     Sit not by him nor ſtād not that ſin mow be wrought:
                     For gif a ſlaunder be once rayſed,
                     It is not ſo ſone ſtilled,
                     My leeue dere child.
                  
                  
                     What man that ſhall wed the fore God with a ring,
                     Looke thou loue him beſt of any earthly thing,
                     And meekly him anſwere and not too ſnatching;
                     So may thou ſlake his yre and be his darling:
                     Faire Words ſlaken yre,
                     Suffer and haue thy deſire,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sweete of ſpech be thou and of milde moode,
                     True in word and dede, ſo bids our Lord God,
                     And keepe the euer doughter fro velony and ſhame
                     That men for thy doing ſpeake the no blame:
                     Good life ends wele,
                     Be true euer as the ſtele,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     Be of fayre ſembland and of good manere,
                     Change not thy coūtnance for ought thou can here,
                     Ne fare not as a giglot what euer thee betyde,
                     Laugh not too loud ne gape not too wide▪
                     
                     Maydens ſhould laugh ſoftlye
                     That men here not they bee.
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     
                     When thou goes by the gate go not too faſt,
                     Ne bridle not with thy head, ne thy ſhoulders caſt,
                     Be not of mony words ne ſweare not to gret,
                     All euill vices my doughter thou foryet:
                     For gif thou haue an euill name,
                     It will turne the to grame.
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     Goe not oft to the towne as it were a gaze
                     Fro one houſe to odir for to ſeeke the maze,
                     Ne go not to market thy barrell to fill,
                     Ne vſe not the Tauern thy worſhip to ſpill:
                     For who the Tauerne vſis
                     His thrift he refuſis,
                     My leue dere child:
                  
                  
                     
                     Gif thou be in place where good drinke is on loft,
                     Wheder that thou ſerue or thou ſit ſofte,
                     Meſurely take thou, and get the no blame;
                     Gif thou be drunken it turnes the to ſhame.
                     Who ſo loues meaſure and skill,
                     He ſhall ofte haue his will,
                     My leeue dere child.
                  
                  
                     Go not to the wraſtling, ne ſhoting the cock,
                     As it were a ſtrumpet or a giglot:
                     Be at home doughter and thy things tend,
                     For thine owne profit at the latter end:
                     Mery is owne thing to ſee,
                     My dere doughter I tell it thee,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     
                     Acquaint the not with euery man goes by the ſtrete,
                     When folks thee beſpeaken curteſly hem grete,
                     Let hem not by the wey, nor by hem doe not ſtond,
                     That they with velony make not thine hert bond:
                     For all men are not triſty,
                     Gif they ſpeake to thee gayly,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     Of lefe men doughter gift thou none take,
                     But thou wote wele how ſone it forſake:
                     Men with their gifts wemen oregone
                     Gif▪ they of herts be herd as ſtone:
                     Bounden is he or ſhee
                     That gifts takis ſecurely,
                     My leue dere child▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     In odur mens houſen make thee no maſtrye,
                     Ne blame thou nothing thou ſees with thine eye,
                     Doughter I the prey bere thee ſo wele
                     That all men may ſey thou art true as ſteele:
                     For wiſe men and old
                     Sayne good name is worth gold,
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Be thou no chider ne of wordis bold,
                     To miſſay thy neighburs neder young ne old,
                     Be thou not too proud ne too enuious▪
                     
                     For thing that may betyde in odir mens houſe:
                     For an enuious hert
                     Procures mickle ſmert,
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Gifthy neighburs haue rich inſtore or tyre
                     Therefore make thou no ſtrife ne bren not as fire,
                     But thanke God of goods he has thee yeuen,
                     And ſo ſhalt thou doughter good life liuen.
                     For oft at eaſe he is
                     That loues peace I wis,
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Huſwifely ſhall thou go on the werk-day,
                     Pride, reſt, and idlenes put hem cleane away,
                     And after on the holyday well clad ſhalt thou be
                     The haliday to worſhip, God will loue the,
                     More for worſhip of our lord
                     Than for pride of the world.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Mekill ſhame doughter ſhall that wife tyde
                     That maken poore their husbond with their great pride:
                     Therefore doughter be huſwife good,
                     After the wren has vaines men may let blood.
                     For their thrift wexis thin
                     That ſpend more than they win,
                     My leue dere child.
                  
                  
                     Wiſely looke thy houſhold thy meynye,
                     To bitter ne to boner with hem ne bee,
                     And looke what neede is beſt to be done
                     And thereto ſet thy meiney ſone:
                     Before done deede
                     Another may ſpeede
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Looke to thy meyny and let them not be ydell,
                     Thy husband out, looke who does much or litell
                     And he that does well quite him his meede
                     And gifhe doe amiſſe amend thou him bidde,
                     And gifthe work be great and the time ſtrait
                     Set to thy hond, and make a huſwifes brayd
                     For they will do better gifthou by them ſtond,
                     The worke is ſoner done there as is many hond
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     And looke what thy men doon, & about hem wēd,
                     At euery deede done be at the tone end
                     And gifthou finde any fault ſoone it amend,
                     Eft will they doe the better and thou be nere hand
                     Mikell him behoues to doe
                     A good houſe that will looke to.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Looke all thing be well when they worke leauen,
                     And take thy keyes to the when it is euen
                     Looke all thing be well, and let for no ſhame
                     And gifthou ſo do, thou gets thee the laſſe blame.
                     Truſt no man bett than thy ſelfe
                     Whileſt thou art in thy helth:
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Borrow not too gladly, ne take not to treſt
                     But the more neede it make or the more breſte
                     Make the not rich of oder mens thing
                     The bolder to ſpend the worſe thriuing
                     For at the ending
                     Home will the borrowed thing
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Giue thy meiney their hire at the terme-day
                     Wheder they abiden, or els gone away
                     Be wiſe euer doughter of their doing
                     That thy friende may haue ioy of thy prouing
                     Looſe not the loue of thy frind,
                     For a litle that thou mighſt ſpend.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Now haue I taught the doughter, ſo did my moder mee
                     And therfore do therafter gifthou think to the
                     Look or thou wed any mā, that he haue agood name
                     True of hand and tongue without any blame:
                     For better it is a childe to be vnborne,
                     Than for vnteaching to be forlorne.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sit not at euen too long at gaze with the cup
                     For to waſſell and drinke all vppe,
                     So to bed betimes, at morne riſe beliue
                     And ſo may thou better learne to thriue:
                     He that woll a good houſe keepe
                     Muſt ofte-times breake aſleepe.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Gif it betide doughter thy friend fro the fall
                     And god ſend the children that for bread will call,
                     And thou haue mickle neede, helpe litle or none,
                     Thou muſt then care and ſpare hard as the ſtone:
                     For euill that may betide,
                     A man before ſhould dread,
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of all thing doughter looke thou thinke,
                     Gif men wold for worſhip ſet thee on the benk
                     Be not too ſtatly doughter noder young ne old,
                     Forſome folk are now pore that ſomtime ware gold▪
                     
                     Many folk for pride
                     After weren a naked ſide.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Gifthou be a rich wife be not ouer hard
                     Welcome thy neighbours that come the toward,
                     Giue hem meat and drink, the more is thy meed
                     Each bodie to his ſtate ſhold giue the pore at need:
                     For thing that may thee betide
                     Loue well thy neighbour thee beſide
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Take heed to thy children which thou haſt born
                     And wait wel to thy doughters that they be not forlorne
                     And put hem betime to their mariage
                     And giue them of thy good when they be of age.
                     For maydens bene louely,
                     But they bin vntruſty.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     Gif thou loue thy children hold thou hem lowe
                     And gif any of hem miſdo banne hem not ne blow
                     But take a good ſmart rod and beat hem arowe
                     Till they cry mercy and their gilts bee know.
                     For gif thou loue thy children wele
                     Spare not the yard neuer a deale.
                     My leue &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Now looke thou do doughter as I haue taught thee
                     And thou ſhalt haue my bleſſing the better may thou the
                     And euery maiden that good wife wold bee
                     Do as I haue taught you for ſaint charity:
                     And all that ſo will do God giue hem his bleſſing
                     And ſend hem all heauen at her laſt ending.
                  
                  Explicit.
                  AMEN.
               
               
                  
                  
                  THE WAY TO Thrift.
                  
                  
                     LOrd God what is this worldes wele,
                     Riches, reuell and great aray?
                     Nothing to ſpare, and all day to ſpill,
                     Full ſone it waſtes and weares awey.
                  
                  
                     When plenty may no lenger paye
                     What wight with him wold then abide?
                     A carefull man both night and day
                     With heauie hart his head muſt hide,
                  
                  
                     And all is for default of grace,
                     That God grutches ayenſt our gouernaunce
                     When meaſure may not medle in place▪
                     
                     What is it to a man more grieuance,
                  
                  
                     Than ſodenly fro manhood for to fall
                     In pride his ſimple purueyance
                     There pouertie is ſtewardin hall:
                     But hee that can in ſome ſeaſon
                  
                  
                     Gedder and keepe or that hee grynde
                     In winter tyme by way of reaſon
                     Hee ſhall not be farre behinde.
                     For ther as meaſure is in mynde
                  
                  
                     
                     Good rule may not long faile,
                     Yet beware to bee ouer kinde
                     For ſkoring in the comiter tayle;
                     But wele and worſhip with welfare
                     Mickle waſtes with little winne
                     Full ſoone brings a houſholder bare,
                     With large ſpending both out and in,
                     Then bee aduiſed or thou beginne
                     That thou haue none need to plaine
                     Think what a ſtate thou ſtandeſt in
                     For Pouerty is a priuie payn,
                     And if thou haue hope of help and triſt
                     Of lords and ladies with her pleaſance
                     And yet beware of Had I wiſt
                     For old enuy makes new diſtaunce
                     In pride and pouerty is great penaunce
                     And yet is danger moſt diſeaſe
                     Here is a cumberrouſe acquaintance
                     When noder of hem oder pleaſe
                     For Had I wiſt comes euer too late
                     
                        When there lackes both lock and key,
                     What nede is then to ſpare the yat
                     When nothing is leaued in the way
                     With a pennyleſſe purſe for to pay
                     How can he then his people pleaſe
                     Many a man had a leue dye,
                     As long to liue in ſuch diſeaſe,
                     A bare beard may ſoon bee ſhauen
                     There as is none heyre about
                     It faireth as a man that mickle wold hauen
                     And is not elſe but pore and proud,
                     But euer ready in ilke rout
                     And lay to wed both pot and panne
                     When the fire clean is blowne out
                     Where ſhall wee go dyne than?
                     What need is it to delue deep,
                     There as is no ſeed to ſowe?
                     The pot is eaſie for to keep
                     When all the fat is ouerblowe,
                     Noder for the kyte ne for the crow.
                  
                  
                     
                     Incumber not thine owne neſt
                     Too mickle bend will breake thy bow
                     When the game is alder beſt
                     Enſample men may ſee all day.
                  
                  
                     Yet keep I no man to defend
                     Hie houſhold and great aray
                     Is Lords life and Ladies game,
                     When gladſhippe growes into grame
                  
                  
                     And for need muſt begge and borrowe,
                     Firſt comes pride and after ſhame,
                     And from ſolace turnes to ſuddain ſorrow.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   