
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A Godly lear
               ned and fruitfull Ser
               mon:
            
               Made vpon the fourteenth of Iohn in which is plainely ſet foorth the true looue of Chriſt, the markes whereby the Children of God are knovven and the commoditie vvhich that looue bringeth By D. S. 1584.
            
               Iohn, 15. 13.
¶Chriſt ſo deerely looued vs that he gaue his life for vs.
            AT LONDON ¶ Printed for Yarath Iames, and Thomas Lawe and, are to be ſolde in new gate market ouer againſt Chriſte Chvrch gate.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the right Woorſhip full Sir William Pelham Knight, Leiftenant of the Queenes Maieſties Ordenaunce, your ſeruant, Iohn Iordan wiſheth in this lyfe, health and proſperitie with eternall felicitie in Chriſt Ieſus▪
            
            
               AS it pleaſeth the Lord of his vnſearchable wiſdōe to plant in you the gliſtering beams of his goſpell, and ſo heaped vpon you, as wel his bleſſinges for your body in this lyfe, as alſo endewed you with his feare and loue, that your ſoule may attaine to the euerlaſing life. So it hath pleaſed him alſo to ordaine the meanes that the ſame may be continued in you to the end: namely by his ſecret gift of grace, by his loue poured in your hart, and by the pure preaching of his woord vnder ſo gracious a Prince, whoſe looue hath a long time ſhined, in this realme of peace of plenty, to the terror of the blinde thirſting Papiſts our dayly aduerſaries. So that you may ſay with the children of God. Bleſſed are that people,



which liue in his feare: Yea bleſſed are the people whoſe God is the Lord and liue in his looue: Of which loue this Sermon (heere Dedicated to your worſhip) largely and learnedly entreateth, the Author not knowen vnto mee, onely the excellencie thereof cauſed me to put it in print, that all that liue in the looue of God, might bee partakers of ſo good a worke. Heerein is ſet foorth the fruites of true faith, the vanitie of worldly wealth, the corruption of couetouſnes the greatnes of our ſinnes, the puniſhment due thereunto, and the meanes whereby wee may be deliuered from the ſome, beeing a loadeſtone to direct our dooings, from the rankor of couetouſnes, to bring vs to godlines. Wherfore Saint Paule, to withdrawe vs from it, ſaith, godlines is great ritches, wee brought nothing into this world, and certeinly wee shall carry nothing with vs, wherefore while we haue foode and raiment let vs be cōtent therwith: and Saint Mathew writeth that if all men will ſeeke the kingdome of God and the righteouſnes thereof, they shall not want, but shall haue all thinges caſt vnto them from aboue. For if wee haue to maintaine vs in this life and caſt



care on heauenly thinges, wee shall poſſes heauen, & raigne with Chriſt foreuer.
            Wherefore Maiſter Caluin, vpon Paule to Timothy, ſaith. They that meaſure their religion by riches are heere taught that onely religion is the true riches. Wherby it appeareth that there is nothing more neceſſarie and needfull vnto the Saluation of a Chriſtian then the knowledge, zeale, and looue of God and his religion. This bold attempt I doo offer vnto your worſhip as a true argumēt of my duetifull minde, & not as a meane to you (now earneſt in religion,) but vnto one of whoſe looue and godly zeale, in that behalfe I haue all ready had ſufficient triall. Beſeeching therfore that by your worſhips well accepting it at my hand (though out of another mans caſke) it may be the better, lyked, accepted and followed, of them that endeuour themſelues to liue in the looue of our onely Sauiour. In which looue the Lord of his great mercy, côtinue your good worſhip, my very good Lady & your whole famely: and that all which be partakers of his feare and looue may bee inheritours of his euerlaſting kingdome.
            
               Your worſhips humble Seruant alwaies to commaund Iohn Iordan.
            
         
         
            
            
               If any man loue me, hee vvil keep myIohn. 14. vvord and my Father vvil loue him, & vve vvil come vnto him, and vvill dvvell vvith him.
               Iohn. 14.
            
            I haue in this preſent text of holye Scripture, three neceſſary braunches to intreat of offred vnto me.
            Firſt I minde (God permitting) to entreat of that loue which the children of God dutifully owe vnto Jeſus Chriſte, their alone God and Sauiour.
            2 Secondly, my purpoſe is likewiſe to ſhew how, and by what meanes, the ſaid children of God may be knowne to loue Chriſt Jeſus, as they ought to doo namely in kéeping his woord.
            3 The third ſetteth forth the vtilitie, profit and commodity, which hapeneth vnto that man which rightly loueth Chriſt and kéepeth his word, namely, not onely, that God the Father will loue him, but alſo that the whole Trinity will come vnto him, and dwell with him.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Sermon
            
               
                  THe mindes of Gods choſē
                people, haue neuer any peace or quietnes in the which they may ſtay them ſelues vntil they féel them ſelues vnited vnto Chriſt, by meanes of a perfit and ſtayed faith, with a ful confidence in him and a burning loue towardꝭ him. Auguſtine therfore hath aptly ſaid,Auguſtine. that loue is a certain coupling of yt louer with the beloued, which ſaying of Auguſtine may be approued true, by the teſtimonie of S. Iohn in his firſt Epiſtle and1. Iohn 4. fourth chapter where he ſaith. That God is charity, and he that dwelleth in charity dwelleth in God, and God in him. Betwéen the which words, charity and loue in this place, and many more of the holy ſcriptures, I take to be no difference.
            Which loue of God is powred into the harts of Gods children, by the holy ſpirite of God, by the means of Chriſte, for the ſpirit of loue was louingly giuen vnto Chriſte vnto this end, that he ſhoulde powre it into his members.
            And although the ſame loue, in the children of God is vnperfit during this theyr



mortall life (becauſe of ſinne) yet is it acceptable vnto God, for that they by fayth are made members of Chriſte▪
            
            The manner and order of which loue, is explicated and ſet foorth, as wel by that ſeruant of God, Moyſes in ye Booke called Deutronomium, & ſixt Chapter in theſe woords:Deu. 6. Thou ſhalt loue the Lorde thy God, with all thy hart, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy might: as alſo the very ſame woords, reherſed or rather cōfirmed by our ſauiour Chriſte, in the 22. ChapterMath. 22 written by S. Mathewe.
            
            To loue God with all thine hart, is to take dilligent héed, that thine hart hée not inclined to the looue of any thinge, more then to the loue of thy God: To loue him with all thy ſoule, is to ſtay the truſt of thy ſaluation and ſafety of thy ſoule, onely on Jeſus Chriſte the ſonne of God To loue him with all thy might, is to apply all thy ſences, to the ſetting foorth of his honour and glory. For ſéeing wée bée wholy his, he will haue vs holy to loue him.
            I graunt there are things in this world that may kindle our minds and affectiōs to looue thē, for there be worldly honours,



the glittering golde, ſhe gliſtering precious ſtones; the beuty of mākinde, the excellent colours of Mettalls and cloth, the ſwéet odors of hearbs and perfumes, the delectable harmony of Inſtruments and Muſique, Beſides, our wiues, children parents and freends. But if man ſet his loue & affection to any one of theſe things, eyther his minde will quickly be changed to delight in ſome other thing, either els the thing which he loued, will ſoone fade away, and come to nothīg. And ſo in ouer much louing of any theſe thinges, make himſelfe vnfit to be loued of God: according to the ſaying of our Sauiour Chriſt Qui amat Patrem aut matrem pluſquamMath. 10. me, non eſt me dignus: et qui amat: ſiliū aut filiam ſupra me, non eſt me dignus.
            
            He that loueth father or mother (ſayth our Sauiour) more then mée, is not woorthy of mée. And hee that loueth Sonne or daughtermore then mée, is not woorthy of mée.
            If thou wilt therfore loue any of the creatures of GOD, O man loue them but as thinges ſubiecte vnto thée, as a gift of thy fréende, as a benefite of the LORD, as a pledge of thy ſpouſe



which ſpouſe of thine hath the moſt benty of all things, thou ſéeſt not his face, but hée ſéeth thée continually and although he hath not preſented himſelf vnto thée in viſible forme, yet hath he ſent thée ſundrye gifts as pledges of his loue towards thée hée hath not onely graunted thée thy béeing, but to bée, after this life is ended.
            Beholde alſo this whole world, and ſée if there be any thing in it, that is not created for thine vſe and ſeruice. The whole courſe of nature directeth it ſelf to this ēd that thou maiſt haue profit therby. This heauen, this earth, this ayre, this ſea with all that is therin, bend their force to thy commoditie. Wherof the Prophet Dauid witneſſech, confeſſing vnto God what he hath doone for man, ſaying in the eyght Pſalme. Thou madeſt him to haue dominionPſal. 8. of the workes of thy hands, and thou haſt put all thinges in ſubiection vnder his féet.
            If he had doone no more for vs thē theſe things, which I haue already ſpoken of, it were matter ſufficient to moone the stonieſt hart amongſt vs to loue him: but hée hath doon more for vs, for when wée were his enemies, and wholy corrupted



through ſinne, yet béeing immortal, for vs became mortall, took vpon him his paſſion, redéemed vs from ſinne, death and hel1. Pet. 1. as teſtifieth S. Peter in his firſt Epiſtle, and firſt Chapter ſaying. Yée were not redéemed with corruptible things (as ſiluer and golde) but with the precious blood of Chriſte. With his blood we are clenſed as witneſſeth S. Iohn in ye firſt of Thappocalips,Apoc. 1, ſaying: He hath waſhed vs from our ſinnes, in his owne blood. This was it that mooued S. Paule in ye fourth ChapterHebr. 4. to the Hebrewes to ſay. We haue not an high Préeſt which cannot haue compaſſion of our infirmities: But this is hée by whome and in whom we are adopted ſonnes of God, and made heyres together with him of his glorius kingdome. Héerof S. Iohn ſpeaketh in his firſt Epiſtle1. Iohn, 3. and third Chapter, in theſe words. Behold what loue ye father hath ſhewed vnto vs, that we ſhould be called and bée indéed the ſonnes of God, and of the ioyes that are layd vp in ſtore for vs in his bleſſed kingdome. S. Paule teatheth in his1. Cor. 2. firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians and secōd Chapter after this manner. The eye hath not séen, neither the eare heard, neither



haue entred into the hart of man▪ 
               
                  〈◊〉
                things which God hath prepar
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊◊〉
                that loue him.
            And ſurely amongſt 
                  〈◊◊〉
                ſundry benefits, which god ha
                  ••
                
               
                  •…
               ed vppon his people, wee for our partes within this little Realme of England, ought deeply to conſider what hée hath doone for vs yea in theſe our dayes, cōſider it wel when we were ignorant, blinde and not knowing the light, did hée not teache vs? and giue vs the light of his holy worde, which as the Prophet Dauid ſayth: Is a Lantarn to our feet, and a light vnto our pathes, when wee ſinned and woulde not embrace his word, nor regard his meſſengers the Preachers therof, did he not correct vs and ſharply ſcourge vs? when we fell from him and commited wicked Idolatry, did he not raiſe vs vp agayne? when wee erred and ſtrayed into the wildernes of mans doctrīe, did he not reduce vs into the plaine high way of his holye Goſpell? Nowe wée goe on forwarde therin, dooth hée not lead vs? When wée come vnto him lamenting our fall, dooth hée not receiue vs?
            And doutles this is alſo not to be reckoned



amōgſt the leaſt of all Gods benefits, which plentiouſly hée hath poured vppon this Realme: that he hath geuen vs ſuch a vertuous and godly Quéen, Quéene Elizabeth, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                whoſe godly and peaceable gouerment, not onely wée that are now liuing haue felt and yet doo, but alſo all thoſe that ſhall ſucſéede vs, ſhalbe pertakers of this wonderfull mercy of God, God graunt her a godly, peaceable, and long life in this her realme.
            Wherfore that ſaying of God, which hée ſpake by his Prophet Eſay, and fift Chapter,Iſai. 5. may wel be applyed vnto vs, what more coulde I haue doon for my vīniard of England, then I haue doon? theſe thinges well conſidered, it may be ſaid to England, as Moſes ſayde to the Iſralites.Deut. 10.
            
            And now England, what dooth the Lord thy God require of thée, but to feare the Lord thy God, and to walke in all his wayes, to loue him, and to ſerue ye Lord thy God with all thy hart, and with all thy ſoule, it is to be wiſhed that eache one of vs, euen from our harte rootes, woulde ſaye with the Prophette Dauid.


               
Praiſe the Lord O my ſoule, and forgetPſal 10. not his benefites, which forgetteth al thy ſinne, and healeth all thīe infirmities.
            Thus much touching the cauſes that ought to mooue vs to loue God, now (God permitting me) I will ſpeake ſomewhat of the effect and force of this loue, which is of ſuch effect, that it healeth the wounded conſcience, it plucketh vp all vice by the root, it lightneth the minde, it ioyeth the hart, it is not exalted with pride, or waſted with enuye, nor ouerwhelmed. with ſorrow, nor dryed vp with couetuouſnes, nor enflāed with exceſſe, nor ſpotted with vncleannes: it cauſeth the poſſeſſor therof to be quiet in aduerſitye, to be temperate in proſperitie. It paſſeth not for pouerty, it maketh no great acoūt of riches it glorieth not in honour, who ſo vnfaynedly loueth God, thinketh when he ſhal bée with God, when he ſhal leaue this wicked world, how he ſhall eſcape ſinne, when he ſhall finde true and perfect peace, if hée walke if he ſit, if he worke, if he reſt, if hée ſpeake, if hee helde his peace, his hart goeth not from the Lord.
            It is no meruayle therfore that the auncient writers haue ſo greatly lawded this



loue comparing it to golde, becauſe it is tryed in the fornace of aduerſitie: to the Arke of Noe, in the which who ſo is not found ſhall periſh: to giue, becauſe it ioyneth the hart of man vnto God: to a fountayne, for that it refreſhed the minde to a precious ſtone, becauſe it beautifieth the ſoule: to fire becauſe it warmeth the affection: to a garment for that it couereth the turpitude of offences: to oyntment for that it ſupplieth the inward partes.
            Experience of this loue hath béen ſeen in the death of many Marters, they dyīg for the zeale and loue which they did beare vnto God and his trueth: conſider what they left, what way they went, and what they looked for, what they left wée ſée what way they went wée haue heard, and perfectly ſéene, what they attayned vnto we ſée not, but béeleue, they left things tranſitory and vayn, they paſſed through torments & paines, they attained no dout vnto that which was promiſed them of God, namely euerlaſting ioy and endles felicitie.
            Beſides theſe there be many examples ſet foorth vnto vs in the holy Scriptures how ardently the holy men of God, haue



from time to time looued the Lord. Abraham ſhewed the zeale of his looue towardes God, when hée was ready to offer his ſonne Iſaack in ſacrifice, Ioſua béeing oldeIoſua. 23. called the people of Jeruſalem vnto him: and warning them of many thinges, aboue all other thinges hée ſaid take héede moſt diligently of this, that you loue your Lord God. It is written of Dauid thatEccleſia. 47. with his whole hart he did praiſe the Lord and looued God that made him. The Appoſtle Saint Peter, anſwered our ſauiour earneſtly, ſayīg, Lord thou knowſt I loueIohn. 21. thée Saint Paule had ſuch loue towardes God he that accoūted all things vile, that he might winne Chriſt.Philip. 3. Again how earneſtly dooth he encourage all men, to continue in this loue, ſaying: Who ſhall ſeperate vs from the loue of Chriſt, ſhal tribulation, or anguiſh, or perſecutiō or famine or nakednes, or perill or ſworde?Roma. 8.
            
            Thus I wil end this firſt braunche, with requeſt which the ſaid Saint Paule made to the Philippians▪ ſaying:Philip. 2. if therbe therfore any conſolation in Chriſt▪ if any comfort of loue if any fellowſhip of the ſpirit, if any compaſſiō and merry, fulfil my ioy that ye be like minded: hauing the ſāe



loue, béeing of one accord and of one iudgement, which thing if we doo not, wée ſhall ſhew our ſelues the vnthankfulleſt creatures that euer God created.
            
               
                  
                     The ſecond braunche ſetteth foorth hovv and by vvhat meanes, our looue tovvards our ſauiour Chriſte, may bee knovven, cheefly in keeping his vvord, for thus he ſaith if any man looue me, he vvill keep my vvord.
                  
               
               THe word of Chriſt in this place, is takē as well for ye doctrine which he hī
                  ſelfe taught with his owne mouth, Viua voce, as alſo for that which his miniſters haue ſet foorth, doo or ſhall teach, not only out of the newe: but alſo out of the olde Teſtament, as is manifeſtly ſhewed in ye
                  Luke. 16. xvi. Chapter, written by Saint Luke, in theſe woords. They haue Moyſes and the Prophets, let them heare them, againe, Chriſte ſpeaketh of the Scripturs of bothe Teſtaments, where he ſaith Iohn. 5. ScruIohn. 5. tamini ſcripturas, ſearch the Scriptures. And the rather to mooue all people to credit and embrace his word, he ſhewed yt it is not his word, in reſpect that hee is man but in reſpect yt he is God, for thus he ſaith



                  Mea doctrina non eſt mea, ſed eius qui Iohn, 7. miſit me. My doctrine is not mine, but his that ſent mée, again in the viij. of Iohn
                  Iohn 8. he ſayth, I doo nothing of my ſelf, but as the father hath taught me, euen ſo I ſpeake theſe things: which ſaying of Chriſt may not onely confirme the fayth of the godly knowing that ye doctrine which is taught them is the woord of God, but alſo it is a leſſon vnto all Preachers that they teach nothing to the people, but that which may be confirmed by Gods words: my doctrin is not mine, but his that ſent me, for they are the meſſengers and Legats of ye moſt high God, and of his ſonne Chriſt Jeſus not to teach the people what they lyſt but that which is ſpyed within their commiſſion of Gods worde, whoſoeuer therfore cannot rightly ſay of the doctrine which he teacheth, my doctrine is not mine, but his that ſent me, that man ſeduceth him ſelfe and the people which hée teacheth. But the Papiſts and other here tiques, cānot rightly ſay the ſaid words, but they teach the doctrine of men, and not the pure woord of God, it followeth therfore that they ſeduce themſelues and the people alſo.
               
                  It ſéemed good to our God and heauenly father, that the holy ſcripturs ſhould be ſette foorth to men, chéefly for that cauſe which is ſet down in the twenty Chapter written by S. Iohn where it is ſaydIohn, 20. 
                  Haec ſcripta ſunt vt creditis quia Ieſus eſt filius Dei et vt credētes vitam habeatis in nomine eius. Theſe things are written that ye might beléeue, that Jeſus is the ſonne of God, and that in beleeuing you might haue life through his name. Héere is plainly ſet downe the end why the holy Scriptures concerning Jeſus was giuē, namely that we might haue fayth in the ſonne of God, and the end of this fayth is to haue euerlaſting life.
               Sithence then that this woord is ſo profitable vnto vs, it behooneth vs to kéepe it not locked vp in cheſts and cloyeſters, as the papiſts kéept it, not in woords onely as the Phariſies kept it, but in faithfully hearing it, beléeuing it, and practyſing it, in our liues as the holy Vigin Mary kept it.
               We haue many examples in the book of God, how from time to time the word of God hath béen regarded with Gods people, The people ſayd vnto Moyſes, all the



wordes which the Lord hath ſaid: wée wil doo.Exod. 24. 
                  Hely taught Samuel right wel, that he ſhould ſay vnto the Lord that ſpake vn to him, ſpeak on Lord for thy ſeruāt hear reth.Reg. 3.
               
               When Eſdras redde the booke of the lawe from morning vnto midday,Eſdra. 8. it followed that all the people wept for ioye, when they heard the wordes of the law of their God, when the word of God came from Ionas to ye King of Niniuy withoutIonas. 3. delay he roſe out of his princely ſeate, did his apparell off, and ſat him downe in aſijes. After the lame mā was healed which is ſpoken of in the thirde Chapter of theAct. 3. 4. 
                  Actes of the Apoſtles, and Peters ſermon ended, many that heard his ſermon beléeved, as is ſhewed in the fourth Chapter of the Actes, thus wée ſée howe the word of God hath béen regarded in times paſt of Godlie people.
               And what is the cauſe that the worde of God, is not more regarded and followed in theſe our dayes, ſithence it is not ſo plentifully taught among vs, what bée the Biſhoppes and Miniſters onely in fault? or are the Maieſtrates and Rulers only to bée blamed? or bée the common



multitude alone culpable herein? no ſurely in mine opinion, no one ſociety of theſe are to be blamed alone, (but eache of them in this degrée are to bée touched in this matter, if therfore the Eiſhoppes, Prechers and miniſters of the word deſire to haue the doctrine which they teach to profit amongſt men.
               It behoueth them to take hée de, firſt yT they take not the office vpon them for ambition, and couetuouſnes ſake, entring therfo at the windowe like a théefe and murderer, but in at the doore, which doore is Chriſte as hée him ſelfe teſtifieth in the tenth of Saint Iohn, ſaying: I am the doore, by mée if any man enter in he ſhall bée ſaued.iohn, 10. He rightly may be ſaid to enter at the doore, that faithfully beleeueth in Chriſte, that feeleth in him ſelfe an aptnes and hability to teach Chriſts doctrine and is by Chriſtes Church (which is guided by the holy ghoſt) lawfully and orderly elected into that function. For as Saint Paule ſayeth,Hebru. 5. writing to the Hebrues & the fift Chapter. No man taketh this honour to himſelfe but hée that is called of God, as was Aron, would God experiēc had not taught vs in thes our days



that too too many haue ruſhed into that ſpirituall function by ſiniſter meanes and waies, ſome by freendſhip, ſome for hired ſake, and ſome for money and gaine. The reformation wherof, with the déep conſideration of the incōueniences that haue, doo, and are like to grow vnto the Church of Chriſte, by means héereof I reſerue vn to you that be in authoritie.
               Secondly if they deſire to haue the woord of God to bring forth frute, they muſt not liue in the miniſtery as ydle Drones; but execute their office in labouring and teaching of Gods trueth: for as God ſaith by his Prophet Malachie the ſecōd ChapterMalachi. 2. The Prieſts lips, ſhould haue ſuer knowledge that the people might vnderſtād the lawe from their mouth, for he is the meſſenger of the Lord of Hoſtes, vnto ſuch idle loyterers, wc will not teach Gods woord God ſpeaketh by his Prophet Ezechiel the xxxiiij. chapter ſaying: Woe vnto the ſhepherds of Iſraell, that féed thēſelues, ſhould not the ſhepherds feed ye flockes? ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with wull,Ezechi. 33. yée kill them that are fed, but you féede not the ſhéep. Again by his ſayd Prophet he threatneth vnpreaching prelats on this



manner. When I ſhall ſay vnto the wicked, O wicked man thou ſhalt dye ye death if thou dooſt not ſpeak and admoniſh the wicked of his way, that wicked man ſhal dye for his iniquitie, but his blood wil I require at thy hands. Neuertheleſſe if thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it, if he doo not turn from his way he ſhall dye for his iniquitie, but thou haſt de liuered thy ſoule.
               Thirdly, if the Prechers of the woord of God be deſirous to haue woord to take déep root in the harts of the hearers, they muſt neither preach the word for aduantage, lucre, or gaine, neither to vtter their eloquence, neither yet to obtain the praiſePeter. 3. of men. S, Peter in his firſt Epiſtle, and thyrd chapter ſtraightly, exhorteth thē ſaying: Féed yée ye flok of Chriſt, as much as lieth in you, taking the ouerſight of thē not as compelled ther vnto, but willingly after a godly ſorte, not for the deſire of filthie lucre. but of a good mīd: not as though yée were Lords of Gods heritage, but yt yée may bée examples vnto the flocke: again S. Paule in his firſt Epiſtle to Timothie, and firſt Chapter ſaith:Timothi, 1. That a Biſhop ſhould not be giuen to filthy lucre



and as hée would not haue them to bée couetuous, ſo he alſo would haue them in their teachings, to vſe a playne and orderly kinde of doctrine: In his firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians and firſt Chapter1 Cor. 1. hée ſaith, Chriſt ſent mée not to Preache the Goſpell with wiſedome of wordes, leaſt the croſſe of Chriſte ſhould haue been made of none effect: for God ſayth I wil deſtroy the wiſdome of the wiſe. Againe in the ſayd Epiſtle and ſecōd Chapter1. Cor. 2. he ſayth, my words and my preachinges was not in enticing words of mans wiſdome, but in playne euidence of the ſpirite and of power, that your fayth ſhould not bée in the wiſdome of men, but in the power of God.
               And as hée came not with intycing words of mans wiſdome, ſo did hée not preach to pleaſe men, for thus hée ſaith in the firſtGalath. 1. Chapter to the Galathians, doo I ſéek to pleaſe men? If I had hetherto ſtudied to pleaſe men, I were not the ſeruant of Chriſte.
               Fourthly if the Preachers of the woord of God deſire to haue the Doctrine which they teach to be accepted of men, they muſt frome their liues according to their



doctrine, which thing if they doo not, their hearers may ſay vnto thē as Iſaack ſayd vnto Iacob. Thy voice is Iacobs voiceGeneſis. 27. but thy handes, are the handes of Eſau: Of ſuch diſſemblers our Sauiour Chriſt ſpeaketh in the twenty thrée Chapter of Saint Mathew: They (ſayth hée) ſaye but doo not: Such builde the Temple of God with the right hand of good doctrine, but put it downe agayne with the lefte hande of their euill liues, well, hée that knoweth the Fathers will and dooth it not, is worthy to be beaten with many ſtripes▪
               
               So if the Miniſters and Preachers of the worde of God enter into that function by ſiniſter and corrupt meanes, as by fréendſhip, kinred or for money, if they ſléep & loyter in their office, if they preache for promotions and liuings, or to vtter their eloquence or to pleaſe men rather then to edefie the Church of Chriſt, or if they teach well and liue euill, they hinder the frée paſſage of the Goſpell, and ſhall make accounte therof before the Lorde God.
               Now as it is the office of the Biſhops and Miniſters to Preache the woorde:



So it is the ofice of ye Magiſtrats, Rulers and gouernours of this Realm to maintaine the ſame with the ſword, and to correct the offendor. For they rightly cannot be ſaid to be rulers, which rule not, which ſpeak of the Law but vſe it not. Such may be likened to S. George fighting with the Dragon, but ſtriketh not, to a man paīted on a wall, drawing a bow, with an arrow but ſhooteth not, ſuch haue the work of the Lord in hand but execute it not: cōſiderīg not what the Lord hath ſaid by his Prophet Ieremy, Curſed bée hée that dooth the worke of the Lord negligently.Ieremi, 48.
               
               The Rulers therfore ought not onely to make good Lawes for the ſetting forth of gods worde, but alſo diligently to ſee, that ſuch holeſome Lawes be obſerued, & kept, as did good Ezechias, Ioſias & others we haue in this land a law made, that euerie ſubiect that is able, ſhould cōe vnto the Church to hear Gods word read and preached, and to haue the Sacramēts miniſtred vnto them, but how it is kept of ſome people in ſome cûtries it is known. You wil peraduenture ſay, that ye biſhops be in fault, if this law be not kept, I grant there may bée ſome fault found in them,



touching this matter: but what and ye party be to mightye, for ye biſhop to deale wt, it ſéemeth that the papiſts wexe very bold wel it were good that the Magiſtrate and thoſe ye bée in authoritie, ſhold cōmād ſuch yea, if it were a noble man, vpō his alegeance to the Prince, to come to the Church. Auguſtine doth teſtifie that through the ſtraight cōmandement of Theodoſius the Emperor, his church of Hippo was deliuered frō the Donatiſts, & were brought vnto the trueth by ye preching of the word of God, for as S. Paule ſaith,Roma. 10. faith cōmeth by hearing: & ſurely this is not only a gret hindrance of the frée paſſage of ye Goſpel, when men ſée the magiſtrats negligēt in puniſhing of ſuch tranſgreſſors of Gods lawes, & the princes, but alſo if they ſée & vnderſtand that the rulers themſelues, their familie, and houſhold regard litle the word of God.
               The third ſorte of people that are to bée blamed, for that ye word of God is no more regarded in theſe our daies, be the cōmon multitude. In the which number I may include, euen the moſt excellent ſort of men vntil ſuch time as they faithfully embrace the word of God, and ſo be graffed into the



body of the Church.
               Of all the creatures that God hath created, man againſt his maker hath béene found moſt vnthankfull, obſtinate, rebellions and diſobedient, which hath béene ſéene not onely by the diſobedience of our firſt parents, but alſo in vs, ſo that wée hearing as it were Gods voyce by his woorde, yet harden our harts, caſt of his yoke, from vs, and forget the benefits that hée hath beſtowed vpon vs: of the which greeuous offence, I mean of ye contempt of his worde, the meſſēgers of God Patriarches, Prophets, Enāgeliſts, apoſtles and miniſters haue frō time to time complained. Moyſes the ſeruāt of God ſpeking of the peruerſe nature of ye people of his time, ſayth vnto God.Exod. 4. Lord they wil not beléeue nor harken to my voyce and yt which they did ſuſpect would cōe to paſſe others by experience found moſt true, forIſai. 25. Eſay ſayeth: Lord who hath giuen credēce vnto the things that we haue hard. Elyas complaineth vnto God yt the childrē of Iſraell had not onely forſaken his couenāt but alſo killed his Prophets, and that hée onely was left aliue▪ the Prophet Ieremy
                  Ieremi, 25. ſaith that he taught the people of Iuda the



worde of the Lord xxiij, yéers & that with great paines and trauel, for thus he ſaith vnto them, I haue riſen vp early, I haue giuē you warning in ſeaſō, but you would not hear me. And againe he ſaith though ye Lord hath ſent his ſeruants al ye prophets vnto you: yet would you not obay, you would not incline your eares to hear. After the prophets God ſent his only ſō in to the world: who was cōtemned of ye ritch hated of the mighty, & ſcorned of ye lerned notwithſtanding he gathered together ye poore, refuſed not ye blind, diſpiſed not the lame, forſaketh not ye ſinners, he abhorreth not ye penitent théefe, reiecteth not the mournīg adulter eſſe diſpiſed not ye hūble Cananite, refuſed not the cuſtōer, lothed not the Diſciple yt denied him: let therfor the miſerable wretch flée vnto the merciful the guilty to the fauorable the vnclean to the fountain, the wāderer to the way ye ſick to the phiſticiō, the loſt ſheep to the ſhepherd the ſinner to Jeſus, wc ſaueth people frō their ſins, wc Jeſus although in corporal preſēce he is abſent frō vs, yet hath hée not left vs deſtitute of prechers & techers which cal his people to ēbrace, kéep, & obay his word, wherby they may be knowen in



loue him as is ſaid in our text, if any man loue me, he wil kéep my word. But why do not theſe cormorāts ſay to thēſelues for whom doo I prepare theſe buildings lāds and farmes, with ye loſſe of mine own ſoul. I dout whether I ſhal poſſeſſe or they enioy thē to whom I bequeth them, or not & the rather may I ſo think, for that my cō
                  ſcience beareth me witneſſe, that they haue béen euil gotten and euil kept, and therefore it is very likly they ſhalbe euil ſpent. I know not whether mine heir wilbe awiſe man for a foole, whether he wil ſpend that riotouſly, which I haue gotten wickedly Why do they not acknowledg thē ſelues to be but men: and man is as graſſe, & as a flower of ye field, the graſſe ſhal wither & ye flower decay, to beſhort, you yt be godly minded pray you with the prophet Dauid and ſay, Encline my hart O Lord vnto thy teſtimonies & not vnto couetuoſnes. And ſurely this vice not onely draweth men from the loue of Chriſt, and obediēce to his word in theſe dayes, but there is ioyned with it, carnall pleſure, and fleſhly delights, which is ſuch a ſnare chat it holdeth men that (delight therī) ſo with captiuitie that their harts are with drawne from all



the ſeruice of God, and obedience of his word, and only ſet there vpō. Theſe vices are ſuch hurtful harmes & miſerable miſcheefes, to thoſe that lewdly loue them, & pleſantly practiſe them, that they drawe them into damnation, except bothe ſpéedely and earneſtly they repent. Will God think you ſuffer theſe vices long vnpuniſhed? no, let vs thinke therfore that God ſpeaketh vnto vs after this manner and faith. O you vnthankful ſonnes of Adam, how many things haue I to ſpeak & iudge of you? how often would I haue holpen you and you would not? you haue diſpiſed all my counſels and broken all my commandemēts, I haue therfore iuſt cauſe to be angry with you, and to condemne you, but I haue had compaſſiō vpō you I haue ſéen your miſery and decréed to help your I ſaw you wander in exile far from your owne countrey, and therfore I came in mine owne perſon from heauen to guide you into the right way. I ſaw you ſcattered in mountains, and lye in hedges, yet I ſent my ſeruāts to gather you together who haue ſhewed you that all things are prepared and made ready for you. This my goodnes and loue towards you ought



to alure you to come vnto mée & loue mée But héerin I haue to burden and accuſe you namely for your ingratitude, rebeliō and contempt of my woord, you wey not the benefits that I haue beſtowed vppon you, you kéep not my commaundementꝭ you regard not my word, nor my Sacraments, how you receue thē, nor feare not my wrath, you euill entreat my meſſengers, you ſtifnecked & vncircūſiſed harts and eares, ye haue alwaies reſiſted ye holy ghoſt, as your fathers did ſo doo you.
               Thus we may ſée that there is nothing that either ſooner moueth Gods wrath or draweth vs into damnatiō, then cōtempt of gods grace offered vnto vs by his holy word. We find in the holy ſcripturs, that when the Jews did forſake & contemne the grace of ye Goſpel firſt offred vnto thē by Chriſte, God powred out his indignation vpon them, ſaying vnto them▪ O Serpents,Math. 23. ye generation of Vipers, how ſhall ye eſcape the damnation of hel, again, our ſauiour biddeth his Diſciples ſhake their duſt of their féet as a witneſſe againſt thē it ſhalbe eaſier for thē of ye land of Sodom & Gomora, in the day of iudgment thē for them.Math. 10. After the ſame maner he ſpeketh in



other places, threatnig the Jewiſh people generally, & other Cities ſpecially for the ſayde offence, The men of Niniuie ſaith he ſhall riſe in iudgment with this generation & condemne it, for they repented at the preaching of Ionas, and beholde a greater then Ionas is héere. The Queene of the South ſhall riſe in iudgment with this generation & ſhall condemn it, for ſhe came from the vttermoſt parts of the earth to heare the wiſdome of Salomon, and behold a greater then Salamon is héere. Againe in another place he ſaith. woe bée to thee, Choraſin, woe be to thee Bethſaida, for if the works which haue béen doone in you, had béen doone in Tirus and Sydon, they had repented long agoe, in ſackcloth and aſhes. Neuertheleſſe I ſay vnto you, it ſhalbe eaſier for Tyre and Sidon at the day of iudgment then for you.
               By the which teſtimonies of holy ſcriptures and many others, we may not only perceiue Gods wrath againſt the contemners of his word, but alſo that he kéepeth our ſinnes ſtil in remembrance, if wée will not embrace and obey the ſame word in due ſeaſon, which if wée embrace worthely, and kéep obediētly, we ſhall declare



our ſelues accordīg to our text, louers of Chriſte, if not, we ſhal ſhew our ſelues to be but diſſembling Chriſtians, & ſo mooue him to take his precious Jewel of his holy word away from vs againe, & giue it to a nation which wil bring forth frute. God graūt that our ſinnes deſerue not any ſuch plague to fall vpon England.
            
            
               
                  The third braunche ſetteth forth the vtility profit and commoditye which hapneth vnto them that rightly loue Chriſte and keep his word, namely, not onely that God the Father will loue him. But alſo that the whole Trinitye wil come vnto him and wyll dwell with him.
               
               VVHat thing more happy, what thīg more pleſant, what thing more beautifull can happen vnto vs miſerable men then to bée ſo much in the fauour of God, yt we may be beloued of him which thing is not onely promiſed vnto vs if we loue him and kéep his word, but he alſo further promiſeth, ſaying: and we will come vnto him, in which words he ſpeaketh after the manner of men, he cōmeth vnto vs when he declareth and offreth his grace and fauour vnto vs, and he may be ſayd to goe from vs when he taketh his grace and fauour frō vs, ſo that it may be rightly ſaid, that God is wt his people by



power, by grace and by his holy ſpirit, by meanes wherof his people be not only in ſafety, from their bodely & ghoſtely enemies, but alſo are led dayly forwarde towards his euerlaſting kingdome. Laſtly he addeth theſe words, and we will dwell with him, in which words he promiſeth a continuāce of his grace, ſo that thoſe that are faithfull, may rightly be ſaid to be the Temple of God, according that ſaying of S. Paule, ſpeaking to the Godly, ye are the temple of the liuing God, what good thing can be wanting to them that haue God alwaies preſēt with them, and as it were to be their gift: for as S. Paule ſaithRom. 8. if God be with vs, who ſhall be againſt vs there we néed not feare the newe deuiſes and practiſes of the Romaniſts and that rabble which they dayly deuiſe againſte England. O how do men reioyce when it pleaſeth the prīce or gouernor of the countrey to cōe vnto them, to giue them good countenance, and to ſpeake cherefully vnto them? And contrariwiſe, how penſiue and ſorye are they when the Prince frowneth on them, then they goe like as they were halfe dead, but what is this ioy of the receiuing of a mortall Prince to be



compared with the receiuing of the imortall God? Or what is the frownig of ſuch a Prince to be compared with the anger of the Prince of princes. Let vs therfore prepare and make ready our mindes and inward parts with all kinde of ſpirituall furniture to the receiuing of this gueſt, he is receiued by faith, he is receiued & kept by obedience to his word by mortification of the fleſh and by vertuous liuing. But where ſhall wée haue ſuch to receiue and entertaīe ſuch a worthy preſonage, where is that noble man obedient vnto Gods word become wher is that Lady mortefication of the fleſh to be found? where is that woorthy Gentleman vſher, vertuous liuing to be ſought? what, be their none of all theſe to be found? yes, or els God forbid, but they are to fewe God he knoweth but think you that this Prince wil tarry in that place, or with that people or country where inſtéed of obediēce, he findeth diſ obedience, inſtéed of mortification of the fleſh he findeth carnal concupiſence. & inſtéed of vertuous liuing, hée findeth vice and wickednes, no, he wil away thence he wil not tary there, ſearche & examin your ſelues inwardly, you that feare God, whe



ther your inward parts be ſwept & clēſed from ſin and wickednes, fit to receiue the holy ghoſt, for the ſpirit is the ſeale wher with God marketh them that be his, this is the comforter which ſhall teache vs all things that Chriſt hath ſaid vnto vs, this is that ſpirit by the which we are addopted into the inheritance of the eternal life which certifieth our ſpirites that we are the ſones of God. This is the ioyful comforter of our harts and mindes, wherby we may cry Abba father, this is he that diſcended vpon Chriſt in liknes of a doue this is he by whom our minds are ſtirred vp to holy meditations, our bodies made the Temple of God, and our tungues fit inſtruments to ſet forth his praiſe, finally this is that ſpirit wherby we are mooued to loue Chriſt, to forſake this world to embrace and kéep Gods woord, and to craue to be in the euerlaſting kingdome of god purchaſed for vs by the only blood of chriſt to the which Jeſus Chriſt with the father and the ſaid holy ſpirit, be all loue, praiſe, honor, and glory for euer & euer. Amen.
               FINIS.
               
                  Virtus ſpirat in altum.
               
            
         
      
   